Alan Bollard: Coping with shocks – a New Zealand perspective 
A background paper by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and 
Dr Chris Hunt, Economics Department, for an address by Dr Alan Bollard to the Canterbury 
Employers’ Chamber of Commerce, Christchurch, 25 January 2008. 
 Introduction 
1.  
All economies face “shocks” – unexpected events provoking some sort of response. Shocks 
affect households and firms at the micro level, and the path of economic growth and inflation 
at the macro level. For a small and open economy like New Zealand, many of the shocks 
shaping economic activity have an international dimension, and this turbulence is part and 
parcel  of  the  economic  landscape.  New  Zealand’s  economic  institutions  and  policymaking 
frameworks recognise this volatility, and over time, they have responded in a manner which 
has improved the overall resilience of the New Zealand economy to most shocks. Indeed, the 
last ten years has been a period of relatively stable inflation outcomes both in New Zealand 
and  globally,  due  in  no  small  manner  to  the  efforts  of  monetary  policy  in  pursuing  the 
mandate of price stability. 
Fig 1: Price stability (5-year moving average of annual CPI inflation). 
 Source: Statistics NZ & IMF. 
However, the challenges confronting a central bank in maintaining price stability in the face 
of shocks should not be understated. Real-time policy decisions are made in the context of a 
great  deal  of  uncertainty  about  shocks.  Firstly,  shocks,  by  definition,  are  not  foreseen. 
Secondly, the likely magnitude and effects of emerging shocks on inflation are often unclear. 
Moreover, economies are complex and dynamic systems in which the transmission of shocks 
can change over time. 
This  is  particularly  relevant  to  international  shocks  and  their  effects  on  the  New  Zealand 
economy.  Over  the  past  decade  the  rapid  industrialisation  of  China  and  other  emerging 
markets has radically changed the structure of the global economy, as well as global inflation 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 1
and growth dynamics. China’s thirst for raw materials, for example, has underpinned higher 
prices  for  oil  and  a  number  of  non-fuel  commodities.  Moreover,  globalisation  –  the 
“annihilation” of geographic distance through increasing trade and financial integration – has 
affected  both  the  speed  and  strength  with  which  international  shocks hit  the  New  Zealand 
economy.  Recent  financial  market  instability  emanating  from  the  US  sub-prime  housing 
market and percolating through to a wider range of financial markets is testimony to how a 
shock in one economy can quickly feed through to the other parts of the global economy. 
To date, monetary policy in New Zealand has been able to manage the many shocks that 
have  occurred  reasonably  well.  Inflation  over  the  past  decade  has  averaged  2.2  percent. 
However, over the past three to four years, inflation has tended to track in the top half of the 
Reserve  Bank’s  target  range  of  1  to  3  percent.  This  result  reflects  accumulated  demand 
pressures in the late stages of an economic expansion, and also a number of supply-side 
cost shocks.1
This paper discusses a number of these important demand and cost-side price shocks that 
monetary policy has had to deal with over the  past five years, or that  will pose key policy 
challenges going forward:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
the surge in oil prices;  
the more generalised commodity price boom;  
the synchronised global housing market boom;  
the shock to personal consumption from the run-down in household savings across 
the advanced economies, and;  
efforts to mitigate the risks of climate change. 
• 
These  shocks  are  large.  They  also  share  an  important  international  dimension  –  they  are 
either sourced from abroad, or are local shocks experienced by a range of key economies 
across the globe. Before looking at these shocks individually, we will take a step back and 
examine how the macroeconomic impact of shocks has changed over time. This provides a 
useful backdrop to our consideration of the current crop of shocks. 
Some stylised facts about shocks and economic volatility 
2.  
So what exactly do we mean by “shocks”? For our purposes, in an important sense, “shocks” 
are the essence of economic activity – shocks define the course of prices and output. Shocks 
can increase or decrease price pressures; shocks can boost or depress economic growth. A 
shock  is  a  change  in  the  economic  environment  in  which  agents  –  firms,  households  and 
governments – make their decisions. Shocks continuously hit the economy.2  
Shocks  operate  at  many  different  levels.  Shocks  can  originate  from  the  actions  of  other 
economic  agents  or  from  the  physical  environment  (e.g  a  natural  disaster,  drought  etc). 
Some shocks may only have a marginal impact on economic behaviour in aggregate, while 
others  have  more  pervasive  macroeconomic  consequences.  Shocks  can  be  short,  sharp 
disturbances to economic activity which may dissipate quickly, while other shocks could be 
more  enduring  or  permanent.  The  frequency  of  shocks  can  range  from  things  that  affect 
                                                 
1  
Inflation would have been higher over the period, were it not for exchange rate appreciation which has helped 
ease  inflation  pressures  by  acting  to  lower  imported  inflation.  This  appreciation  is  itself  partly  a  function  of 
higher short term interest rates required to dampen domestic inflation pressures. Relatively high interest rates 
in New Zealand have attracted foreign capital and increased demand for the NZD. 
2   Note,  that  while  the  term  ‘shock’  is  a  useful  heuristic  to  discuss  the  multitude  of  influences  on  economic 
activity, it is often difficult to neatly demarcate cause and effect. Some shocks may be genuinely ‘out of the 
blue’, while others may be the result of a complex interaction of other shocks. 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2008
decision  making  on  a  daily  basis,  to  longer  term  shocks,  such  as  those  associated  with 
technological change.  
One way of looking at the impact of shocks to prices and output is through the volatility of 
inflation  and  economic  growth,  and  how  this  has  changed  over  time.  The  volatility  of  both 
inflation and growth has declined significantly since the 1970s – we now live it seems, in a 
more  stable  economic  environment.  This  has  been  labelled  the  “Great  Moderation”  by 
economists. 
There is however, a variety of explanations as to why we seem to be living in a more stable 
economic environment. It could be luck, in the sense that there may be fewer major shocks 
buffeting  the  global  economy  (Stock  and  Watson  2002).  However,  as  the  IMF  (2007)  has 
recently emphasised, the decline in volatility is likely to be a result of more flexible economic 
institutions  and  macroeconomic  policy,  which  now  tend  to  act  effectively  to  mitigate  the 
shocks to prices and output, rather than inadvertently accentuating these shocks as at times 
in the past.3  
The volatility of inflation: 
The average rate of inflation in the advanced economies has remained low and stable since 
the early 1990s at between 2 and 3 percent (IMF 2006 April, p. 98). This is a reflection of the 
recognition of the deleterious effects of high and unstable inflation in the 1970s and 1980s, 
and of subsequent efforts by central banks across the world to achieve and maintain price 
stability.  Central  banks  now  target  inflation  outcomes,  either  as  a  primary  objective  (in 
inflation-targeting regimes such as New Zealand’s), or alongside other objectives (as in the 
case  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve).  This  approach  has  been  successful  in  keeping  inflation 
outcomes within a narrow target range, resulting in lower inflation volatility (figure 2). 
Other  explanations  for  the  current  period  of  low  and  stable  inflation,  aside  from  monetary 
policy, include the role of China and other emerging market economies in exporting cheap 
manufactured goods, thereby lowering imported inflation; the associated heightened state of 
global  competition  which  has  helped  to  contain  cost  pressures;  and  institutional  and 
technological changes leading to greater flexibility in labour and product markets. 
                                                 
3   See  in  particular  chapter  5  of  the  IMF’s  2007  October  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO),  “The  changing 
dynamics of the global business cycle”, for a discussion of how the current global expansion compares with 
those in the past. 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 3
Fig 2: The decline in inflation volatility (rolling 5-year standard deviation of annual 
inflation). 
Source: RBNZ Calculations. 
 The volatility of output: 
In  New  Zealand  and  most  other  developed  countries,  the  volatility  of  output  has  declined 
from the 1970s onwards. That is, economic growth is more stable today than during the oil 
price  disruptions  and  stop-go  macroeconomic  policies  of  the  1970s.4  Economies  are  also 
spending less time in recessions, while expansions are longer. Indeed, the current economic 
expansion is New Zealand’s longest in the post-WWII period (figure 3). 
                                                 
4   Economic  growth  in  immediate  post-WWII  period  was  very  volatile  associated  with  the  boom-bust  of  the 
Korean war and the rapid post-war reconstruction of Europe and Japan. Economic growth was more stable in 
the 1960s, only for volatility to increase dramatically in the 1970s. 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2008
Fig 3: New Zealand’s Post-War economic expansions. 
 Source: RBNZ Calculations. 
Figure  4  shows  that  although  growth  in  New  Zealand  has  become  more  stable  over  time, 
output volatility remains higher in New Zealand than elsewhere, reflecting the small and open 
nature of our economy and the relative impact of shocks to economic activity.5  
The  IMF  (2007)  highlights  the  important  role  that  better  monetary  policy  has  played  in 
stabilising economic growth since the 1970s. Other factors contributing to this more stable 
growth outcome include improved fiscal policy, lower terms of trade shocks, and structural 
changes  associated  with  the  shift  to  a  service  sector  economy,  just-in-time  inventory 
management  techniques  and  more  flexible  labour  and  product  markets.  Some  of  these 
factors were, as noted above, also influential in reducing the volatility of inflation. 
                                                 
5   The  decline  in  country-level  output  volatility  shown  in  figure  4  has  been  greater  than  the  decline  in  output 
volatility measured at the aggregate global level. This is because globalisation – greater trade and financial 
openness  –  has  also  increased  the  ease  and  speed  with  which  shocks  are  typically  transmitted  between 
economies, increasing the co-movement of output across countries. In the 1960s, with growth outcomes less 
correlated  across  countries,  output  fluctuations  of  individual  countries  tended  to  offset  one  another  at  the 
aggregate level. 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 5
Fig 4: The decline in output volatility (rolling 10-year standard deviation of real GDP 
growth). 
Source: RBNZ Calculations; Datastream. 
 Why is this Great Moderation in both prices and output important? 
There is a well-developed body of literature arguing that low and stable rates of inflation are 
beneficial  for  economic  growth  since  such  an  environment  provides  greater  certainty  for 
households  and  firms  to  make  decisions.  There  are  also  reasons  why  lower  volatility  in 
output  may  have  positive  effects  on  the  underlying  trend  rate  of  growth  of  an  economy  – 
however,  the  evidence  here  is  somewhat  more  circumspect  than  in  the  literature  on  the 
linkages between inflation volatility and economic growth. 
The  reduced  volatility  in  both  prices  and  output  should  not  be  taken  for  granted.  New 
Zealand knows only too well what happens when the “golden weather” comes to an abrupt 
end, as it did in the early 1970s. Back then, a terms of trade driven economic boom came to 
a  halt  following  the  collapse  of  our  export  prices,  and  the  inflation  shock  associated  with 
higher  oil  prices  in  the  wake  of  the  Yom  Kippur  War  in  1973  and  the  formation  of  the  oil-
producing cartel OPEC. As a consequence, New Zealand entered a prolonged period of high 
inflation  and  low  growth,  which  eventually  precipitated  a  painful,  but  necessary  period  of 
major economic restructuring. 
The abrupt end to the price stability of the late 1960s and early 1970s provides a cautionary 
tale of “what can happen if policies do not respond to risks and new challenges in the global 
economic  system  as  they  arise”  (IMF  2007,  p.  67).  Policymakers  have  to  be  alert  to  the 
nature of emerging shocks to the economy, and how they might threaten price stability. One 
should note also at this point that policy itself can be a source of shocks, as was the case in 
the 1970s and early 1980s when an inappropriate approach to monetary policy exacerbated 
the effects of the supply-side oil shock and contributed to the high and volatile inflation of that 
period.  
The  present  challenges  to  monetary  policy  derive,  in  part,  from  structural  changes  in  the 
world economy and the concomitant role of emerging market economies in shaping global 
6 
 BIS Review 9/2008
price  dynamics.  Emerging  markets  are  also  implicated  in  what,  at  first  glance,  might  be 
thought  of  as  purely  domestic  shocks  such  as  the  rundown  in  household  savings  and  the 
housing boom in New Zealand. These shocks can be linked to “global excess liquidity” – or 
the easy credit conditions the global economy has enjoyed for much of the last five years. 
Emerging markets have helped sustain this excess liquidity via central bank reserve asset 
accumulation.  The  purchase  of  USD  assets  by  emerging  economies  has  helped  keep  US 
and  global  interest  rates  lower  than  otherwise  would  be  the  case.  Finally,  large,  rapidly 
industrialising  emerging  economies  such  as  China’s  and  India’s  will  be  the  dominant 
contributors  to  increases  in  greenhouse  gas  emissions  in the  near  future.  It  must  be  said, 
however, that much of the damage from climate change is likely to be due to the build up in 
emissions to date, primarily from the advanced economies. 
The oil shock 
3.  
The price of crude oil recently hit $100 a barrel in intraday trading, some $80 higher than at 
the start of 2002. This is close to the highest level ever recorded in real terms measured in 
US dollars (figure 5).6 Traditionally, oil price spikes of this magnitude have tended to augur 
economic downturns, if not recessions. Oil is a key input into the production process, while 
households  spend  a  significant  fraction  of  their  disposable  income  on  petrol.  Uncertainty 
about  the  future  price  of  oil  prompts  households  to  consider  delaying  consumption  on  a 
range  of  other  goods  and  services  and  firms  to  delay  investment  in  major  projects.  An  oil 
price spike therefore can have significant implications for both prices and economic activity. 
Fig 5: Real Oil Prices (West Texas Intermediate). 
Source: RBNZ Calculations; Datastream. 
                                                  
6  
In US dollars for West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil. The price of oil has eased back somewhat and is 
currently around $90 a barrel. 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 7
As Keith Sill of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia notes, five of the last seven US 
recessions have been preceded by an increase in the price of oil.7 However, he also notes 
the power of oil price shocks in explaining economic recessions diminishes dramatically from 
the mid-1980s onwards. And indeed the global economy has appeared relatively immune to 
the current run-up in oil prices. This is mainly attributed to the fact that the recent oil price 
rise originates in strong growth in the demand for oil, rather than in supply disruptions of the 
sort  underlying  previous  oil  price  spikes  in  1973  and  1979-82.8  Moreover,  the  world  has 
become more efficient in using energy. For example, primary energy consumption has fallen 
from 11.3 percent of GDP in 1980 to 8.3 percent in 2005 across the OECD, while the share 
of oil in primary energy consumption has fallen from 55 percent to 41 percent.9  
Nevertheless,  while  robust  global  economic  conditions  and  the  rapid  industrialisation  of 
China  and  other  emerging  markets,  together  with  a  weak  supply  response,  might  largely 
explain the run up in oil prices, for oil importing countries like New Zealand, the current oil 
spike still represents a cost shock to the economy. The challenge for monetary policy is how 
to respond to a cost shock of this nature. Cost shocks, unlike demand shocks, move output 
and  inflation  in  opposite  directions,  thus  posing  somewhat  of  a  dilemma  for  policy.  For 
example, policymakers could respond to an increase in headline inflation arising from higher 
oil prices by tightening policy firmly to slow the economy and reduce inflation. However, this 
strategy would also exacerbate the negative output effects of the shock itself. 
Another approach – the one adopted by the Reserve Bank – is to look through the first-round 
direct impacts of oil prices on CPI inflation (via retail petrol prices), but to respond to the risk 
of  more  generalised  inflation  pressures  arising  from  the  shock,  such  as  rising  inflation 
expectations.10  Expectations  effects  might  be  associated  with  higher  wage  claims  from 
workers in compensation for reduced real disposable income, or with a tendency for firms to 
build a margin for generalised inflation into their own prices.  
It  is  not  necessarily  a  straightforward  exercise  to  forecast  what  the  generalised  inflation 
pressures from any given cost shock might be. Reserve Bank calculations suggest that the 
direct effect on inflation from the oil price spike has so far been to add around 0.3 percentage 
points per annum to annual CPI inflation since 2004, when New Zealand petrol prices started 
to rise steeply. Indirect effects, for example through higher taxi charges, account for another 
0.2  percentage  points  per  annum.  Survey  measures  of  inflation  expectations  have  also 
increased over this period, suggesting there may be expectations dynamics at work, though 
it  is  difficult to  identify  the  specific oil  price  effects  as  distinct  from  the  effects  of  the  other 
shocks discussed below. 
The non-fuel commodities boom 
4.  
The robust global demand that has underpinned higher oil prices has also contributed to a 
more generalised boom in commodity prices. This has been starkly evident in metals prices, 
which have increased 200 percent in nominal terms since early 2002 (based on the IMF’s 
Primary  Commodity  Price  Index  up  to  December  2007).  Other  non-fuel  commodity  prices 
have  also  increased,  but  not  to  the  extent  of  metals  prices.  Food  commodity  prices  have 
                                                 
7  
Interestingly Sill notes that oil price shocks do not have strong effects on inflation, a reflection of the fact that 
past oil price spikes have tended to be fairly temporary in nature. 
8   However,  geopolitical  instability  and  associated  disruptions,  together  with  refining  capacity  pressures,  have 
certainly added a layer of supply-side concerns to the current spike. 
9   These  statistics  are  taken  from  data  from  the  US  Energy  Information  Administration  (EIA)  website 
[www.eia.doe.gov]. 
10   The  latter  approach  is  consistent  with  clause  4(b)  of  the  PTA,  which  cautions  the  Reserve  Bank  against 
inducing “unnecessary instability in output, interest rates and inflation”. 
8 
 BIS Review 9/2008
increased 86 percent, and prices of agricultural raw materials (including timber, cotton, wool, 
rubber and hides) have increased a more modest 36 percent.11  
In real terms, non-fuel commodity prices remain well below historical peaks. For the past five 
decades  most  non-fuel  commodity  prices  have  fallen  relative  to  consumer  prices  by  an 
average  of  1.6  percent  per  annum,  reflecting  large  productivity  gains  in  the  metals  and 
agricultural sectors relative to other parts of the economy (IMF 2006, October, p. 141). 
The driver of the current surge in nominal prices of non-fuel commodities has been increased 
demand from emerging markets, and in particular China, together with idiosyncratic supply 
side factors in particular commodity markets. According to the IMF (2006), China contributed 
78  percent  of  the  total  world  growth  in  metals  consumption  between  2002  and  2005.  This 
compares with a contribution of 35 percent between 1993 and 2002.12 China’s contribution to 
growth in demand for agricultural commodities has been no less impressive. Between 2002 
and 2005 China contributed 103 percent of the total increase in world consumption of beef; 
90 percent of growth in demand for cotton; and 26 percent of growth in sugar consumption. 
China’s demand for agricultural products has proven a boon for New Zealand’s dairy farmers 
in particular. Dairy prices, as measured by the ANZ Commodity Price Index, have increased 
290  percent  since  mid  2002  in  world  price  terms,  and  150  percent  in  New  Zealand  dollar 
terms.  Higher  dairy  prices  are  also  related  to  higher  fuel  costs,  as  the  development  of 
alternative energy sources such as biofuels has increased the demand for corn. Corn is a 
major food source for livestock in the Northern Hemisphere. Switching land use towards corn 
production has probably also driven up the prices of other food commodities. 
Higher export prices have outweighed any negative effect on New Zealand’s terms of trade 
from the run-up in oil prices. Since late 2002 New Zealand’s terms of trade have increased 
20 percent and are at their highest level since 1974. However, the current level of the terms 
of trade pales by comparison to the commodity price boom of the early 1970s, and the wool 
boom induced by the Korean War (figure 6). 
                                                 
11   Note  the  IMF  Commodities  Indices  obscure  the  impact  of  the  non-fuel  commodities  price  boom  on  New 
Zealand’s export prices, because the IMF Indices use a weight for dairy in their indices lower than the share of 
dairy in New Zealand’s commodity exports. 
12   See chapter 4 of the IMF’s 2006 September WEO, “The boom in nonfuel commodity prices: can it last?” for a 
discussion on the impact of Chinese demand on world prices. 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 9
Fig 6: New Zealand’s terms of trade. 
 Source: Statistics NZ. 
Nevertheless, the higher terms of trade are a significant development which brings with it an 
improvement  in  New  Zealand’s  economic  welfare.  However,  by  boosting  export  incomes, 
they  could  have  an  inflationary  downstream  effect,  depending  on  the  spending  impacts  of 
this  windfall.  Monetary  policy  will  take  into  account  the  pressures  on  food  price  inflation 
arising  from  the  boom  in  agricultural  commodities,  together  with  inflation  pressures  from 
other imported commodities.13 As with the oil price shock, the appropriate monetary policy 
response is generally to look through the first-round effects, but respond to the second-round 
expectations consequences. 
Reserve  Bank  calculations  suggest  that  the  recent  run-up  in  dairy  prices  and  food  prices 
more generally will add about 0.4 percentage points directly to the CPI over the next year. 
The inflationary effects from higher incomes (in the absence of a policy response) are likely 
to be at least three times the direct effects. 
The global housing boom 
5.  
Since the late 1990s housing markets around the world have gone from strength to strength 
in both advanced and developing economies (key exceptions among advanced economies 
being  Japan,  Germany  and  Switzerland).  Over  the  past  decade,  real  house  prices  have 
grown  5.3  percent  per  year  on  average  for  advanced  economies  (Fitch  Ratings,  2007).  In 
New Zealand average annual real house price growth since the start of 1997 has been 5.7 
percent.14  
                                                 
13   Since  food  constitutes  a  greater  share  of  the  CPI  basket  of  goods  in  emerging  market  and  developing 
countries, the 1st-round pressures on monetary policy are likely to be more acute in those countries. 
14   Based on the QV Ltd nominal house price index deflated by CPI inflation. 
10 
 BIS Review 9/2008
The  current  increase  in  global  house  prices  is  unprecedented  in  terms  of  its  strength, 
synchronicity and duration. The global boom in housing markets is largely explicable by fairly 
benign  financial  conditions  with  low  interest  rates  worldwide,  together  with  financial 
liberalisation  and  deregulation  which  have  increased  the  access  to  credit  for  most 
households (IMF 2007 October). Overlaying these common global drivers are factors specific 
to individual economies. 
In New Zealand’s case an important driver of the housing boom was the surge in immigration 
following  the  terrorist  attacks  of  September  11,  which  came  on  top  of  an  already 
strengthening  domestic  economy.  Since  2001,  nominal  house  prices  have  more  than 
doubled, while real house prices have increased 85 percent. Concomitant with the run-up in 
house prices since 2001, the ratio of house prices to disposable income has also increased 
sharply over this period. The 2001 immigration shock specific to New Zealand accentuated 
developments  common  to  other  countries  that  experienced  housing  booms,  such as  lower 
real  interest  rates  associated  with  lower  inflation  from  the  early  1990s  onwards,  financial 
deregulation that eased credit constraints for households, and sustained household income 
growth. In the New Zealand context, the specific tax treatment of rental housing may be an 
additional idiosyncratic factor influencing the demand for house and hence house prices. 
Fig 7: Real house prices in New Zealand. 
Source: Quotable Value Ltd. 
However,  the  increases  in  both  nominal  and  real  house  prices  seen  recently  are  not 
unprecedented in New Zealand’s history. House prices surged in both the early 1970s and 
early 1980s (figure 7). However, the current cycle does stand out in the context of broader 
price  stability  in  the  inflation  targeting  era.  Moreover,  a  key  feature  of  the  current  housing 
cycle has been the extent to which New Zealand households have leveraged up in order to 
purchase their major asset. Household debt as a percentage of disposable income climbed 
sharply from 2001 onwards and now stands at 160 percent. This increase in debt levels and 
 BIS Review 9/2008 
 11
run-down in household savings does raise questions about the sustainability of the current 
high level of house prices. 
The question of what central banks should do about asset prices in the event that a “bubble” 
develops is somewhat of a vexed issue. The standard approach is not to target asset price 
inflation per se, but to respond to the generalised inflation pressures from the wealth effects 
that are associated with revaluations in the asset. If the bubble should burst, the central bank 
should stand ready to clean up the mess, by easing monetary policy and thereby stimulating 
demand.  
House  prices  are  not  included  in  the  New  Zealand  CPI  regimen.  Rather,  it  is  construction 
costs of new dwellings that is directly measured in the CPI basket. Construction costs have 
increased  37%  since  2003,  adding  an  estimated  0.5  percentage  points  per  annum  since 
2003 to annual CPI inflation.15  
In  the  current  cycle  it  has  been  the  indirect  effects  of  increasing  house  prices  which  have 
also been an important driver of inflation. In effect, households have been able to withdraw 
the increase in the equity of their house to finance consumption, by banking the capital gains 
when  selling  a  house,  or  refinancing  their  mortgage.  It  is  difficult  to quantify  these  indirect 
wealth  effects  given  their  diffuse  nature.  However,  they  are  likely  to  have  been  very 
significant. 
While the Reserve Bank has been responding to housing related inflation pressures, among 
other  things,  with  increases  in  the  OCR,  monetary  policy  appears  to  have  worked  with  a 
longer  lag  than  usual,  reflecting  the  role  of  low  global  interest  rates  that  have  influenced 
mortgage  interest  rates  here  in  New  Zealand,  as  well  as  competition  among  mortgage 
lenders. This has prompted discussion of possible alternative tools specifically directed at the 
housing  market  as  a  means  to  dampen  inflation  pressure  from  that  source,  alleviating 
pressure on short-term interest rates and therefore the exchange rate.16  
The extent to which the current run-up in house prices in New Zealand reflects fundamental 
drivers,  versus  a  degree  of  irrational  exuberance  and  a  misperception  on  the  part  of 
households and investors about future house prices, will influence any subsequent downturn 
in the housing sector and have flow-on implications for economic activity. This concern is not 
limited  to  New  Zealand.  Traditional  valuation  metrics  such  as  the  ratio  of  house  prices  to 
income and of house prices to rents are looking increasingly stretched across a number of 
countries, raising fears of a possible sharp correction in house prices. Correction in the US 
housing market has been well underway for over a year now, while a number of European 
housing markets currently appear vulnerable to correction. 
The personal consumption boom 
6.  
New Zealand’s strong economic growth performance over the past decade has been driven 
by a boost in personal consumption, which has sustained domestic demand and generated 
underlying inflation pressures. This strong personal consumption growth can be attributed, in 
part, to the propensity of New Zealand households to consume more out of their income than 
in the past. Indeed, New Zealand households have been consuming more than their income 
for  many  years.  The  household saving  rate  has  been  negative  since  the  early  1990s,  and 
strongly negative since 2002.  
Why have New Zealand households been able to run down their saving rate to the point of 
substantial dissaving? The answers echo the reasons identified in the previous section: lower 
                                                 
15   Note the weight of construction costs in the CPI basket was reduced from 9 percent to 4.7 percent in the 2006 
CPI Review. 
16   See the Reserve Bank’s submission to the FEC inquiry into the Future Monetary Policy Framework. 
12 
 BIS Review 9/2008
interest  rates  which  have  enabled  households  to  service  a  higher  level  of  debt;  financial 
innovation  which  has  eased  credit  constraints;  and  generally  buoyant  employment 
conditions.17  In  terms  of  household  balance  sheets  however,  net  wealth  (the  difference 
between  assets  and  liabilities)  has  increased,  despite  the  negative  saving  rate.  This  is 
because  the  revaluation  on  the  asset  side  (the  gain  in  house  prices)  has  outweighed  the 
increased borrowing secured on housing (the increase in household liabilities). 
New Zealand households are not alone in consuming more than they earn. Both in Australia 
and the US household saving rates are negative (figure 8). Household savings rates in other 
advanced economies are also falling, but are not yet negative. However, at -14.6 percent, 
New Zealand is clearly an outlier. The decline in household saving also accounts for a large 
part  of  the  decline  in  total  national  saving  (household  +  corporate  +  government  savings) 
across the advanced economies.18  
Fig 8: Household saving rates (percent of disposable income). 
 Source: OECD; Statistics NZ. 
To what extent is this ability to consume more out of income and the associated decline in 
the  national  saving  rate  sustainable?  In  one  sense  lower  national  saving  implies  lower 
standards  of  living  in  the  future.  At  the  moment,  our  national  saving  is  lower  than  current 
investment,  and  the  shortfall  is  funded  by  borrowing  from  overseas.19  This  situation  is 
unlikely to persist indefinitely as the budget constraints on households will at some point start 
                                                 
17   Another factor that could be influencing New Zealand household’s savings decision is the fact that government 
savings is strongly positive – household’s may feel they do not have to save as much for their future if the 
government is doing it for them. 
18   Advanced economies in general are currently saving too little relative to their current levels of investment. The 
flip side of this macroeconomic imbalance is that emerging market and developing economies are saving too 
much relative to their current investment levels. China and other emerging markets are essentially funding the 
consumption of consumers in the advanced economies. 
19   This is manifest in New Zealand’s large current account at -8.3 percent of GDP. 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 13
to  become  binding,  or  if  the  terms  at  which  foreigners  lend  to  New  Zealand  become 
prohibitive.  
Monetary  policy  has  had  to  deal  with  the  inflation  consequences  of  debt-financed 
consumption  spending  over  the  last  decade.  Reserve  Bank  calculations  suggest  that  the 
increase in personal consumption could have contributed about 0.5 to 1 percentage points 
per annum to annual inflation from 2003. This includes the indirect wealth effects from house 
price gains mentioned in the previous section and the increased consumer spending from the 
run-down in household savings specifically, together with the healthy conditions in the labour 
market which have underpinned income growth. 
Looking ahead, as household spending growth moderates, demand-driven inflation pressure 
will abate. However, if this adjustment occurs abruptly, precipitated by a sharp fall in house 
prices  or  a  sharp  increase  in  unemployment  for  example,  there  may  be  financial  stability 
issues.  In  this  case  it  will  be  the  systemic  stability  remit  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  rather  than 
monetary policy which will come into focus. 
Climate change and the carbon emissions trading scheme 
7.  
Climate  change  arguably  poses  one  of  the  most  important  policy  challenges  in  the  years 
ahead.  There  is  now  an  emerging  consensus  that  man-made  climate  change  is  occurring 
although  its  magnitude  and  ramifications  are  much  debated.  The  emission  of  greenhouse 
gases is a global (negative) externality, where the cost of climate change is not borne fully by 
those  emitting  the  gas.  Being  global  in  scope,  there  are  major  coordination  challenges  in 
bringing together countries to combat climate change. In addition, the benefits of mitigation 
efforts directed towards climate change are likely to accrue far into the future, while the costs 
have to be borne by current generations. Moreover, much of the damage will occur from the 
already  accumulated  stock  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions  (mainly  from  the  advanced 
economies),  while  it  is  the  emerging  market  and  developing  countries  that  will  contribute 
most to emissions in the future (figure 7).  
14 
 BIS Review 9/2008
Fig 7: Carbon Emissions (millions of tonnes of carbon per year). 
 Source: IMF WEO October 2007 Dataset. 
There  are  two  broad  approaches  to  dealing  with  this  profound  shock  –  adaptation  and 
mitigation.  Adaptation  involves  changing  behaviour  to  reduce  the  economic  and  social 
impacts of climate change (e.g building flood defences, or planting more weather resistant 
crops). Mitigation involves actively reducing greenhouse gas emissions. And to overcome the 
free-rider problem implied by this negative externality there are two key policy approaches – 
taxes on greenhouse gas emissions, and emissions trading schemes. 
New Zealand, as part of its obligations under the Kyoto Protocol, has elected an emissions 
trading scheme. The scheme is designed to reduce annual greenhouse gas emissions from 
various sectors of the economy to 1990 levels over the 2008-2012 reference period. From 
2008 the scheme will be phased in gradually for different sectors. For any producer/sector 
which emits more than its greenhouse gas allocation, additional emission units will have to 
be purchased, either from other producers or from overseas. Much of the cost of purchasing 
additional units will initially be borne by government, with the amount of government support 
varying by sector. From 2013 the amount of government support will progressively decline 
with assistance to be completely phased out by 2025.  
The phased introduction of the scheme implies higher prices for liquid fuel (from 2009) and 
electricity (from 2010). The Reserve Bank estimates that both the direct and indirect effects 
of these higher energy prices will add 0.25 percentage points to inflation in 2009 and 0.35 
percentage  points  in  2010.20  In  addition  to  these  first-round  effects,  there  may  well  be 
second-round  inflation  expectations  effects  of  the  scheme.  As  with  other  cost  shocks  the 
Reserve Bank stands ready to respond to the more generalised inflation pressures from the 
scheme.  However,  the  implications  for  monetary  policy  are  somewhat  clouded  by  the 
                                                 
20   This assumes an emissions price of NZD 21 per tonne. See Box C in the December 2007 Monetary Policy 
Statement for details. 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 15
magnitude and speed of any second-round effects, the price of emission units and the effect 
on economic activity.  
Conclusion 
8.  
Over  the  past  half  decade  demand-side  inflation  pressures  in  New  Zealand  have  been 
significantly  influenced  by  the  shock  to  personal  consumption  from  the  run-down  in  the 
household saving rate, and the related increase in household net wealth from the housing 
boom.  This  has  helped  reinforce  the  underlying  strength  of  the  economy  and  associated 
pressure on resources. More recently, the increase in global dairy prices has added to these 
demand side pressures by boosting incomes at the farm gate. Increases in commodity prices 
such  as  oil  and  other  imported  raw  materials  have  also  added  to  inflation  pressure  by 
increasing  the  cost  structure  of  the  production  process.  The  New  Zealand  government’s 
decision to adopt an emissions trading scheme as part of its Kyoto Protocol obligations will 
add additional cost pressures onto the economy over the coming years. 
To date, New Zealand has weathered these shocks reasonably well. Inflation remains low by 
historical standards, and within the mandate to keep future inflation between 1 to 3 percent, 
on average, over the medium term. But this relative stability should not be taken for granted. 
Good policy today does not necessarily guarantee good policy tomorrow, particularly when 
there  is  considerable  uncertainty  when  confronting  new  shocks.  New  shocks  can  often 
necessitate new ways of confronting a dynamic economic landscape.  
Many of these new challenges and associated price pressures can be linked to the growing 
role  of  China  and  other  emerging  market  economies.  Globalisation  and  the  increased 
interconnectedness this entails also implies that shocks to inflation (and economic growth) 
can be more easily and rapidly transmitted from place to place.  
Indeed, the on-going financial market turbulence that began last August is a timely reminder 
of both the interconnected world we live in, and how quickly events can unfold. What began 
as difficulties in the US housing sector and the associated securitisation of mortgage-backed 
financial products, has developed into a re-pricing of risk more generally, increased global 
financial market volatility and tighter credit conditions. Since the December Monetary Policy 
Statement  there  has  been  ongoing  turbulence  in  international  financial  markets  and  a 
deterioration  in  the  outlook  for  the  United  States  and  European  economies.  We  will  be 
watching  these  developments  closely,  particularly  their  implications  for  the  Asian  and 
Australian economies and for world commodity prices. 
At  a  structural  level,  financial  globalisation  also  highlights  the  possible  limits  to  conducting 
monetary  policy  in  a  small  open  economy  such  as  ours  –  particularly  when  our  business 
cycle is out of synch with the rest of the world. Relatively low global interest rates over the 
past five years have impacted on the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, essentially 
acting to delay the effects of Reserve Bank policy changes on household and firm behaviour, 
and ultimately on inflation. 
Both current and longer-term factors act to test the limits of our monetary policy framework 
on  a  regular  basis.  Nevertheless,  New  Zealand’s  policy  framework  remains  well within  the 
norms  of  international  central  banking  practice.  Although  there  are,  as  always,  challenges 
facing the conduct of monetary policy as we move forward, we are well-placed to take them 
on. 
References 
Fitch  Ratings  (2007)  “House  prices  and  household  Debt  –  Where  are  the  risks?”  Special 
Report, 29 July. 
IMF (2007) World Economic Outlook, October. 
16 
 BIS Review 9/2008
IMF (2006) World Economic Outlook, October. 
IMF (2006) World Economic Outlook, April. 
RBNZ (2007) Finance and Expenditure Select Committee Inquiry into the Future Monetary 
Policy Framework – Submission by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, July. 
RBNZ (2007) Monetary Policy Statement, December. 
Sill, K. (2007) “The Macroeconomics of Oil Shocks” Philadelphia Federal Reserve Business 
Review Q1, p. 21-31. 
Stock, J. and M. Watson (2002) “Has the business cycle changed and why”, NBER Working 
Paper 9127. 
BIS Review 9/2008 
 17
