Nout Wellink: The interaction between economic science and policy 
making 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  on  receiving  an  Honorary  Doctorate  at  Tilburg 
University, Tilburg, 12 June 2008. 
 I  would  like  to  congratulate  CenTER  with  its  20th  Anniversary,  but  also  with  its  academic 
record.  I  consider  it  an  outstanding  achievement  that  you  are  in  the  top  three  economics 
faculties  in  Europe  and  number  24  in  the  world.  I  can  only  hope  that  you  achieve  your 
objective of entering the top 20 soon. 
As  for  me,  I  am  especially  grateful  to  receive  an  Honorary  Doctorate  from  this  renowned 
Catholic  University.  Being  a  Roman  Catholic  myself,  I  deem  it  appropriate  to  start  with  a 
confession. At the start of my professional career, I was asked to become an academic here 
at the Tilburg University. I hesitated for a while, but eventually I declined the job. At first, I 
therefore sensed a slight feeling of guilt concerning the honour that is being conferred upon 
me  today:  to  receive  academic  recognition  exactly  from  this  university,  where  with  a  little 
twist of fate I could have spent my working life, contributing to scientific knowledge. But then, 
on further reflection, I started to like the idea. Although I did not become a full time academic, 
I have always kept a strong interest in scientific research. In fact I believe that throughout the 
years  my  policy  work  has  benefited  greatly  from  scientific  input.  The  organisers  have 
interpreted  this  fact  the  other  way  around,  when  they  emphasize  my  contribution  to  the 
application of scientific insights in solving real world problems. I thank them for this. I accept 
my  Honorary  Doctorate  with  delight.  I  would  like  to  dedicate  it  to  the  interaction  between 
economic science and policy making. 
Tensions between economic science and policy? 
In my view, the interaction between science and policy has brought tremendous progress in 
both fields. We should be careful to maintain and improve this interaction when possible. 
Although  this  point  may  seem  to  be  self-evident  at  first  sight,  it  is  questioned  by  some. 
Several  observers  notice  an  increasing  gap  between  highly  formalised  theory  and  the 
practical needs of policy making. An illustration of such a perceived gap in my own field of 
monetary economics is given in a recent overview paper by Gregory Mankiw, who himself 
has  been  an  academic  as  well  as  Chairman  of  the  Council  of  Economic  Advisors  in 
Washington. On the basis of a thorough review in a highly-ranked journal, he concludes that 
recent  developments  in  macro  economic  modelling  have  had  “close  to  zero  impact  on 
practical policy making”. Another example has  been given by my British colleague Mervyn 
King with respect to modern communication strategies. He argues that the success of such 
strategies in stabilising inflation expectations at a low level is not yet fully understood from a 
scientific  perspective.  His  claim  is,  therefore,  that  monetary  policy  is  ahead  of  economic 
science in that respect. 
Let  me  be  clear  on  these  points.  There  are  indeed  limits  on  the  extent  to  which  policy 
judgement  can  be  based  on  science.  In  almost  any  policy  decision,  experience,  intuition, 
“Fingerspitzengefühl”, or whatever name we can put to it, plays a crucial role. Perhaps the 
role of these elements has even increased in recent times. The outside world has become 
increasingly international and the economic system has become more complex. Let me give 
you just one example. At DNB, it is our job to assess the pass-through of the credit market 
crisis of the past year onto the real economy. The scientific approach would be to rely on 
model  estimates.  But  unfortunately,  the  degree  of  uncertainty  that  always  surrounds  such 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 1
estimates  jumps  to  even  higher  levels  in  times  of  financial  stress.  This  illustrates  that  our 
judgement  cannot  be  based  on  science  alone.  But  does  this  imply  that  there  is  a  gap 
between  science  and  policy?  I  do  not  think  so.  After  all,  our  research  department  has 
responded  to  the  gap  in  our  knowledge  by  shifting  its  attention  to  economic  interactions 
under extreme events. I would therefore rather stress a natural interaction between science 
and policy than the existence of a gap. 
Fostering the interaction between science and policy 
On the interaction between science and policy, a first thing to note is that macro-economic 
science  actually  emerged  from  the  need  to  address  practical  policy  issues  related  to  the 
Great Depression in the 1930s. Science and policy perform complementary tasks. Without 
any understanding of how the real world operates, it would be rather difficult to influence it. 
Similarly, it seems less relevant to understand what is going on, if these insights are not used 
for better policies. Scientists and policy makers therefore need to make efforts to understand 
each  other.  Policy  makers  can  learn  from  structuring  their  thinking  and  ensuring  its 
consistency. Scientists can learn from incorporating the flexibility and practical relevance that 
is  needed  for  solving  real  world  problems  under  political  constraints.  I  therefore  do  not 
believe  in  a  model  in  which  universities  focus  exclusively  on  science  while  policy  making 
institutions abstain from any role in scientific research. The potential synergies between both 
functions are large, but it takes continuous efforts to realise those. 
In The Netherlands we have a strong tradition of basing policy on scientific insights, thanks to 
the  efforts  made  by  Tinbergen  and  the  Netherlands  Bureau  for  Economic  Policy  Analysis 
(CPB). As for central banks, I believe that the worldwide movement towards independence 
has been one of the driving factors of a greater orientation towards a scientific foundation of 
policies. Being free from political influence and preferences, our legitimacy partly depends on 
it.  As  such,  we  have  found  practical  ways  for  fostering  mutual  understanding  between 
science and policy. One is the direct way. Several central banks have appointed renowned 
academics  in  top  positions.  Ben  Bernanke  is  at  the  FED,  Mervyn  King  at  the  Bank  of 
England, Athanasios Orphanides at the central bank of Cyprus and Stanley Fischer at the 
Bank of Israel. It is not only that policy discussions benefit from contributions of these people; 
they also use their networks for bringing topical policy issues into the scientific debate. 
Another way for bringing science and policy closer is by hiring specialists in central banks 
who understand the language of a specific discipline. This is what we do at DNB. We employ 
researchers in all fields that relate to our core tasks. For example, research in recent years 
has focused on Mervyn King’s point about why modern monetary policy strategies may work 
in  stabilising  inflation  expectations.  But  it  has  also  dealt  with  decision-making  within 
committee  structures,  economic  modelling,  payment  systems,  behavioural  finance,  the 
efficiency of banks, financial conglomerates and so on. Researchers at DNB actually have a 
challenging job in bridging science and policy. They have to keep themselves up to date with 
scientific developments in their field; they work independently; on policy-relevant topics; and 
they  are  asked  to  translate  their  findings  into  practical  policy  advice.  This  last  element  is 
probably what distinguishes research at central banks from research at universities, where 
the incentives for specialising in a more fundamental type of research are stronger. 
Impact of economic science on policy 
I  have  argued  that  science  and  policy  perform  complementary  functions,  and  that  central 
banks  perform  a  key  function  in  fostering  mutual  understanding.  Let  me  now  address  the 
impact of science on policy. I very much believe in the maxim that “most of the fundamental 
ideas  of  science  are  essentially  simple,  and  may,  as  a  rule,  be  expressed  in  a  language 
comprehensible  to  everyone”.  This  is  not  something  that  I  have  made  up  myself,  but  is 
actually  a  quote  by  Einstein.  In  my  own  field  of  monetary  policy  the  fundamental  ideas  of 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2008
science  have  indeed  been  intuitive  and  simple.  They  have  had  a  tremendous  impact  on 
policy. I guess that most of you are familiar with many of the key insights. On the relevance 
of  price  stability;  on  the  costs  of  inflation;  on  the  inability  of  monetary  policy  to  raise  the 
structural growth rate of the economy; on the importance of central bank independence from 
political influence. 
The point here is that these essentially simple insights were distilled from a huge and often 
very complicated body of research. I am thinking here about contributions in the 1960s and 
1970s on the shape of the Phillips curve, research on time inconsistency that emerged from 
the  late  1970s  onwards,  research  on  central  bank  independence  in  the  1980s  and  1990s, 
and recent discussions on central bank accountability and communication. Perhaps current 
researchers  can  take  comfort  in  the  fact  that  one  day  the  outcomes  of  current  scientific 
debates  may  also  become  glaringly  obvious.  But  in  the  meantime  we  need  to  struggle  on 
before science reveals the answer to us. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude with a forward looking perspective. It seems obvious that globalisation and 
financial innovations will continue, so that complexity in the economic and financial system 
will  continue  to  increase.  Take  the  financial  turmoil  of  the  past  year,  to  which  I  referred 
already. Obviously there is a need to tailor our policies, for example financial supervision and 
monetary policy, to the dynamics that we have witnessed in the financial sector. But in order 
to do so we need a thorough understanding of what is going on. With a more complex and 
dynamic  financial  system,  our  demand  for  high  quality  analysis  and  research  can  only 
increase. 
At  the  same  time,  while  demands  are  increasing,  resources  are  under  pressure.  The 
efficiency operations of the current government that apply to the ministries and the CPB also 
apply  to  DNB.  While  I  fully  support  the  need  for  an  efficient  government  and  an  efficient 
central  bank,  I  also  see  a  risk  that  knowledge-intensive  functions  could  be  under 
disproportionate pressure. A key characteristic of research is that it requires relatively long 
time horizons, and that its pay-off emerges in the medium rather than in the short run. As a 
result,  it  can  easily  be  crowded  out  by  the  many  policy  issues  that  continue  to  require 
immediate attention. 
The  challenge  is  to  protect  key  research  areas  from  such  pressures,  and  to  maintain  the 
human  capital  base  in  our  institutions.  The  need  for  research  will  always  remain,  whether 
policy makers immediately like the answers or not. For each question that we answer, new 
ones  arise.  I  truly  believe  that  the  interaction  between  science  and  policy  has  brought 
tremendous  progress  in  both  fields.  We  should  continue  our  efforts  to  foster  mutual 
understanding. Let me once again show my gratitude for the honour that you have conferred 
upon me and thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 3
