Toshihiko Fukui: Islamic finance – developments, diversity and 
challenges 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Nikkei 
Islamic  Finance  Symposium  2008:  "Islamic  Finance:  Constant  Evolution  and  Emerging 
Opportunities", Tokyo, 23 February 2008.  
 Introduction 
It is a true honor and pleasure to be invited to the Nikkei Islamic Finance Symposium, and to 
have the opportunity to share my thoughts about Islamic finance along with Governor Zeti of 
Bank Negara Malaysia and distinguished guests.  
The Bank of Japan joined the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) as an observer last 
year. We believe that this will help us deepen our understanding of the latest developments 
in Islamic finance, which has rapidly evolved and come into the spotlight of global finance. 
Development of Islamic finance 
Islamic finance has developed phenomenally in recent years. There are no precise figures 
that show the market size of the Islamic finance industry, but according to an estimate by the 
IFSB and other Islamic institutes at the end of 2005, more than 300 financial institutions in 
more than 65 jurisdictions manage financial assets in a Shari'ah compatible manner, which 
total  between  US$700  billion  and  1  trillion.  From  this  figure,  Islamic  finance  represents  a 
modest  1% of  global  financial  assets,  but its  growth  in  recent  years  is  notably  impressive. 
Islamic  finance  related  assets  have  continued  to  grow  at  a  robust  10-15%  per  annum  on 
average since the mid-90s, and are expected to maintain this speed of expansion over the 
next few years.  
Among  others,  Asia  is  one  of  the  regions  characterized  by  the  dynamic  development  of 
Islamic finance. To give a few examples, Islamic finance products are estimated to comprise 
more than half of the financial services provided in the Gulf Cooperation Council region by 
2015. In Malaysia, more than half of private debt securities are Islamic bonds. The credit for 
this  must  go  to  the  leadership  of  Governor  Zeti,  who  has  adopted  a  variety  of  policy 
measures to make Malaysia an Islamic financial center.  
Islamic finance has a long history. As a place where the three continents of Asia, Africa and 
Europe  meet,  the  Middle  East  has  flourished  as  a  trading  center  since  antiquity.  In  those 
days, there were active financial transactions in funding and settlement for trade. It is said 
that bills and checks already circulated in the 11th century, and that the word "check" has its 
origin in Farsi.  
Islamic  finance  has  a  long-established  tradition,  yet,  it  is  only  rather  recently  that  Islamic 
finance  has  developed  in  a  global  context.  The  recent  rise  takes  place  against  the 
background of an increase in financial assets supported by Middle-East petrodollars and a 
growing number of Muslims seeking to have their assets managed under religious tenets. An 
equally  important  factor  that  propelled  growth  in  Islamic  finance  is  recent  advances  in 
financial  technologies,  namely,  structured  finance.  The  Islamic  finance  industry  has  been 
able to introduce a scheme of profit sharing instead of prohibited interest payments. This has 
led the way to the development of a range of financial products, including the Islamic bond, 
or sukuk. 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 1
Islamic finance brings greater diversity 
The  development  of  Islamic  finance  brings  diversity  to  financial  markets  and  financial 
transactions.  
When market players with different sets of values enter a market, they increase the variety of 
financial  transactions,  which  in  turn  promotes  financial  market  development  and  creates 
business opportunities. At the same time, it has a positive effect on the real economy through 
more efficient resource allocation.  
Against this backdrop, I have a keen interest in what kind of new financial services Islamic 
finance  will  provide  in  the  future.  To  date,  Islamic  finance  institutions  have  provided  many 
products that replicate those of conventional finance while respecting Islamic values, where 
interest, or riba, is prohibited. In other words, Islamic financial institutions have successfully 
provided conventional intermediary functions by utilizing the latest financial technology. I look 
forward  to  seeing  further  developments  which  will  enable  Islamic  finance  to  carry  out  new 
functions that conventional financial instruments can not serve. Such innovation will improve 
the allocation of resources, while operating in accordance with Islamic values.  
There  are  of  course  a  variety  of  conventional  transactions,  but  basically,  all  are  a 
combination  of  two  factors,  risk  and  return.  Islamic  finance  is  expected  to  offer  further 
possibilities to finance by adding a new dimension to risk and return, which is Islamic values. 
An example would be the development of microfinance under a framework that places great 
importance on Islamic values such as fairness and equality of social economy and business 
partnership.  
Islamic finance that offers a broad range of products and services is also important from the 
perspective of financial market and financial system stability. In principle, in a time of stress, 
a  market  with  diversified  participants  and  transactions  is  robust  compared  to  a  market  of 
homogeneous participants and limited types of transactions. Since the Asian currency crisis, 
Asian countries have been striving to create diversity in the source of funds, including bonds, 
instead  of  relying  heavily  on  banks.  I  believe  that  the  growth  of  Islamic  finance  will  also 
contribute to resolving these problems. 
Challenges ahead 
Islamic finance is making impressive growth and is expected to continue to do so in the years 
ahead. Still, there are many unknown factors in this financial sector, as new types of Islamic 
finance transactions have evolved relatively recently.  
For  instance,  how  does  arbitrage  between  Islamic  finance  transactions  and  conventional 
financial transactions take place? With greater presence in the global market, what kind of 
impact will Islamic finance have on the pricing mechanism in the global financial market?  
The  size  of cross-border  capital flows generated from Islamic finance products is growing. 
How will this impact the stability of the global financial system? I have expressed my view 
that  diversity  in  the  market  will  bring  about  stability.  However,  the  rapidly  growing  modern 
Islamic  finance  industry  has  never  been  exposed  to  serious  stress  in  the  global  financial 
market. Stress tolerance can only be acquired through the experience of riding out numerous 
crises in the financial market and financial system. In this regard, I would like to watch closely 
developments in Islamic finance in the coming years.  
One  of  the  potential  vulnerabilities  in  the  international  financial  system  is  the  global 
imbalance problem. There is a huge gap between the deficit in the US current account, and 
the surplus in the current accounts of Asian countries and oil producing countries. The gap 
has  been  filled  by  the  smooth  flow  of  a  significant  amount  of  capital.  In  this  context, 
understanding  the  flow  of  Islamic  finance  capital  originating  from  oil  money  has  certainly 
become the key when considering sustainability of the current state of the global economy.  
2 
 BIS Review 23/2008
On the regulatory front, there are ongoing discussions on how to develop risk management 
and a regulatory framework to match the rapid expansion of the Islamic finance industry in 
order to maintain stability of the financial system. The key to addressing this issue would be 
consistency with conventional risk management and regulatory frameworks. This is a matter 
of  great  importance  for  the  coexistence  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  with  conventional 
financial  markets  and  systems,  and  for  providing  beneficial  diversity  to  the  global  financial 
system.  
Islamic  financial  standard  setting  organizations  play  an  important  role  in  bridging  the  gap 
between  Islamic  standards  and  conventional  global  standards.  Such  organizations  include 
the IFSB, of which Governor Zeti served as Chairperson last year, and the Accounting and 
Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions, which sets accounting standards for 
Islamic finance. To give a few examples, the IFSB has issued the capital adequacy standard 
and guidance that complement existing global standards for Islamic banks. Exposure drafts 
of  guiding  principles  for  Islamic  collective  investment  scheme  and  Islamic  insurance,  or 
takaful, will follow. I look forward to the significant role that these Islamic financial standard 
setting organizations play in the provision of sound and stable Islamic finance services. 
Epilogue 
Islamic finance has grown into an industry that is indispensable in understanding the global 
financial system. The Bank of Japan will closely follow developments in the Islamic finance 
industry through its IFSB observer membership status.  
Japanese  financial  institutions  and  companies  have  just  stepped  into  the  world  of  Islamic 
finance.  We  hear  that  some  financial  institutions  are  already  actively  engaged  in  Islamic 
finance  business  by  cultivating  new  markets  and  setting  up  local  companies.  Some 
companies are already introducing the framework of Islamic finance to finance their projects. 
I am convinced that we will be seeing more in the near future.  
I  would  like  to  close  my  remarks  by  expressing  my  hopes  that  the  proceedings  of  this 
symposium  will  deepen  understanding  of  Islamic  finance  among  Japanese  financial 
institutions  and  companies,  and  that  it  presents  an  opportunity  for  the  creation  of  new 
financial services.  
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS Review 23/2008 
 3
