Savenaca Narube: Promoting investment in Fiji 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
opening of Westpac’s MHCC branch, Suva, 20 June 2008. 
 Mr. John Cashmore, Westpac Fiji Chief Manager 
Management and Staff  
Distinguished Guests 
Introductory comments 
Today marks yet another milestone in Westpac’s history as they open their 19th banking site. 
They have certainly come a long way since they opened in Fiji as the Bank of New South 
Wales on 12th August 1901. 
I am honored to be part of this milestone this evening. 
In the last ten months, Westpac has opened branches in Port Denarau (September 2007) 
and  Nakasi  (November  2007).  Westpac  now  has  the  second  largest  number  of  bank 
branches and agencies in Fiji. That is an impressive progress. 
I  congratulate  Westpac  for  their  commitment  to  Fiji  and  also  for  their  confidence  in  Fiji’s 
financial system. 
Investment 
And  confidence  is  a  special  thing.  True,  it  is  hard  to  build  and  very  quick  to  fall.  And 
generating your own confidence when the climate is hard is a tough thing to do. But it can 
also be self fulfilling. It can be contagious. 
It is always encouraging to see businesses growing. Look at this complex. It was completed 
about six months ago. It is now a modern meeting point in the City. As they say “business 
must go on” whatever is the environment. No one owes us a living. 
Investment  must  continue.  We  need  that  now  more  than  ever  before.  Investment  is  the 
locomotive  of  growth.  Without  it,  the  economy  will  lose  steam.  So  I  hope  that  Westpac’s 
confidence will rub off on many of us. 
We are doing what we can at the Reserve Bank to promote investment. At the end of April 
we  raised  the  local  borrowing  limits  of  non-resident  companies  in  light  of  the  stability  in 
foreign reserves. We listened to what the investors and the commercial banks were telling 
us. The change was welcomed and well received by lenders and investors. 
We  are  now  going  further  still.  We  have  just  completed  our  review  of  the  local  borrowing 
limits of non-resident individuals. We are relaxing their borrowing too and I wish to announce 
the major changes. Firstly, to build a new residence in Fiji, non-resident individuals do not 
have to bring in all their funding from offshore – they can now borrow locally up to 60 percent 
of the project cost. 
Secondly,  we  are  making  further  refinements  to  their  local  borrowing  under  an  integrated 
development  project.  We  do  not  want  to  inconvenience  projects  that  had  already  started 
when we implemented the policy at the beginning of this year. If your company can convince 
us that your project had substantially started before that, we will add your project to our so 
called “exempted list” which would allow non-resident individuals buying your properties to 
borrow even more locally. Details of these relaxations will be announced shortly. 
BIS Review 81/2008 
 1
These relaxations are positive signs. I would like to count them as proactive moves. They are 
intended  to  signal  that  we  should  focus  on  what  lies  ahead  of  us.  I  am  sure  that  these 
relaxations will provide much needed impetus to private sector investment. 
On  this  front,  let  me  take  the  opportunity  to  again  say  that  the  credit  ceiling  is  not 
constraining investment in this country. If a commercial bank wants to lend to your business 
for investment purposes, all it has to do is apply to us and we will give our approval in a very 
short period of time generally within two days. 
Moreover, the credit ceiling has allowed us to raise liquidity which has reduced interest rates. 
Interest  rates  are  generally  were  they  were  back  in  2005.  So  again  interest  rates  are  not 
constraining investments. 
Global prices 
The whole world is reeling from high food and fuel prices. These prices may stay with us for 
some time although some easing of food prices is expected toward the end of this year. But 
it’s  anybody’s  guess  where  the  fuel  prices  may  end  up  at!  For  Fiji,  this  has  come  a  very 
vulnerable time when the economy is recovering from a severe decline last year, the national 
debt is high and the foreign reserves are weak. 
Monetary policy is already tight with a credit ceiling in place. We cannot tighten any further to 
address inflation. Even if we could, this is not my preferred solution when prices are driven 
by  supply  constraints  abroad.  The  adjustment  burden  then  rests  with  the  national  budget. 
The question becomes: “How much load can the budget carry to mitigate rising?” My answer 
is that – “Perhaps not much given the high debt level!” We are somewhat caught between a 
rock  and  a  hard  place!  In  my  view,  we  need  to  concentrate  more  on  measures  that  will 
change our behaviours in how we do things – how we can reduce fuel consumption or be self 
sufficient in basic foods. 
To help in some small way, the Reserve Bank announced some relaxation to the Forward 
Foreign  Exchange  Cover  Facility.  Commercial  banks  can  now  enter  into  forward  foreign 
exchange contracts with local importers of rice, wheat, flour, edible oils and milk to hedge 
against future price increases. Previously, commercial banks could only match forward sales 
with forward purchases. We hope that this measure will reduce import costs on food items 
and this benefit will be passed onto the customers. 
Westpac at MHCC 
Let  me  get  back  to  MHCC  and  Westpac.  For  a  shopping  mall  that  opened  in  December 
2007, MHCC already looks like a place to be in Suva. It appears that John and his Westpac 
team won what may have been a scrabble to open a branch at MHCC. 
With the volume of foot traffic I see today, this branch may be a small point of representation 
for Westpac, but it is certainly going to be a busy one. I am also told that with more cruise 
ships calling into Suva, the traffic will become even more intense. 
Retail businesses are important users of financial services and I can say that Westpac has 
them  covered.  Westpac’s  presence  at  MHCC  will  compliment  its  branches  in  Cumming 
Street and Thomson Street. 
I  have  been  told  that  apart  from  personal  banking  services,  this  branch  will  offer  foreign 
exchange and international services like travelers’ cheques and telegraphic transfers. 
As you can see, this branch features an Internet and Telephone banking kiosk for customers 
wishing to do their banking online instead of standing in the queue. There is also an ATM 
that is accessible from 9.00am to 9.00pm – the opening hours of MHCC. 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2008
Shoppers and customers will be glad to know that this branch operates extended banking 
hours from 9.00am to 4.00pm daily and on Saturdays from 9.00am to 1.00pm. This branch 
will also open on Sundays when cruise liners are in port. 
I take this opportunity to thank Westpac for its leading role in servicing the business sector 
and  the  wider  Fiji  economy  through  its  expanding  outreach,  innovative  products  and  the 
latest banking technology. 
Official opening 
I  thank  Mr.  Cashmore  for  his  kind  invitation.  I  wish  him  and  his  team  at  Westpac  every 
success in their operations in Fiji. 
I now have much pleasure in declaring the Westpac MHCC branch open. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 81/2008 
 3
