Glenn Stevens: Bendigo Bank’s 150th anniversary – historical look at 
banking in Australia 
Remarks  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of 
to 
Commemorate the 150th Anniversary of Bendigo Bank, at an Invitation-only Dinner, Bendigo, 
9 July 2008. 
the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia, 
 The Premier, the Hon. John Brumby; The Right Reverend Bishop Ron Stone; the Mayor of 
the City of Greater Bendigo, David Jones; the Chief Executive Officer of the City of Greater 
Bendigo,  Craig  Niemann;  the  Chairman  of  Bendigo  and  Adelaide  Bank,  Robert  Johanson; 
the  Managing  Director  of  Bendigo  and  Adelaide  Bank,  Rob  Hunt;  Local  Members  of 
Parliament; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a pleasure to be here in Bendigo this evening as you celebrate the sesquicentenary of 
Bendigo  Bank.  Your  city  is  resplendent  for  the  occasion,  and  one  cannot  help  but  get  a 
sense of the history as one moves around here. 
And what a history it has been – from sheep paddocks, to gold rush, to prosperous modern 
city. You have much to show for the past century and a half. 
Like  so  many  of  our  fine  institutions,  the  beginnings  of  Bendigo  Bank  were  actually  rather 
humble. In the early days following the discovery of gold in 1851, the population of this town 
grew rapidly. People came in search of wealth and, as always in such a search, some had 
success and some didn’t. The population – one in fifty Australians lived here at one stage – 
was rather transient. Certainly many of them were far from well housed: thousands lived in 
tents. 
The prominent citizens who had decided to make Bendigo their home permanently wanted to 
encourage  a  more  stable,  home  owning  society.  The  building  society  movement  that  had 
earlier taken root in Britain provided a model of how to go about it. And so, on 9 July 1858, 
the  Bendigo  Land  and  Building  Society  was  established,  with  150  or  so  individuals 
subscribing 5 pounds each in capital. 
This  society,  eventually  re  constituted  as  a  permanent  building  society  became,  in 
combination  with  some  other  entities,  the  nucleus  of  the  entity  whose  anniversary  we 
celebrate today. It grew with its community and by merger and acquisition with other building 
societies  and  financial  institutions,  both  locally  and  further  afield.  In  1995,  then  Australia’s 
oldest and Victoria’s largest building society, it took a banking licence and developed further 
into  the institution  that we  know  today.  Following  the  merger  with  Adelaide  Bank,  the  new 
entity has assets of around $50 billion, and is Australia’s 11th largest bank.1 Though small in 
market share, its branch presence is considerably larger. 
If we were to compile a list of financial institutions of the second half of the 19th century, we 
would find that few of the names would be familiar ones. Not many entities of that time are 
still  in  existence  today.  Our  major  banks,  of  course,  have  a  long  history,  in  some  cases 
dating  back  to  the  early  convict  era.  But  a  great  many  financial  institutions  of  the  19th 
century, particularly Victorian building societies, succumbed to one or other of the busts that 
occurred in the 1890s, the 1930s and the 1990s. 
The 1890s episode was a particularly severe depression in Victoria, with a collapse in land 
values  and  widespread  closures  of  financial  institutions.  Nearly  half  the  building  societies 
                                                 
1   Ranking based on banks’ resident assets in Australia. 
BIS Review 88/2008 
 1
closed.  This,  as  always,  followed  a  period  of  extreme  euphoria.  Consider  the  way  the 
historian Michael Cannon describes the general scene in Melbourne in the 1880s:  
The land mania of the 1880s took two main forms. The first was based on a 
plethora of building societies, whose optimistic officials believed that every 
family  in  the  colony  could  simultaneously  build  their  own  house,  keep  up 
the  payments  through  good  times  and  bad,  and  support  an  army  of 
investors  who  were  being  paid  high  rates  of  interest  for  the  use  of  their 
money.  The  second  form  of  mania  was  the  deeply-held  belief  that  it  was 
impossible to lose money by “investing” in land – a belief which persists to 
the present day.2
Those words, penned in 1966 about an event a century ago, carry a more than faint echo of 
more recent times in other parts of the world. If we may paraphrase Cannon, too many of the 
world’s  major  financial  intermediaries  thought  that  loans  of  dubious  quality,  originated  by 
salespeople they knew little about, to borrowers whose credit standing, to the extent it was 
known,  was  very  poor,  could  be  sold  in  ever  increasing  quantities  to  investors  looking  for 
AAA security. One day the music stopped, as it always does, and they were left standing. 
The 1890s were tough for the city of Bendigo, as for most of Victoria. A number of banks in 
the city closed their doors. But its main building society remained sound. “The Bendigo” had 
not  ventured  as  far  into  Melbourne  real  estate  as  others,  nor  was  it  as  highly  leveraged. 
There are some lessons there. 
Moreover, the fact that “The Bendigo” has endured so long being based in a town “born of 
gold”, as Tim Hewat put it in his history,3 is perhaps all the more remarkable. Mining towns 
have their ups and downs with the inevitable cycles of discovery and depletion of ore bodies, 
booms  and  busts  in  commodity  prices  and  all  the  associated  exuberance,  risk  taking  and 
inevitable  subsequent  disappointment  for  some,  that  goes  with  them.  Bendigo  in  the  gold 
rush days was no different. 
For a locally based financial institution to ride through such cycles, without itself being too 
swept up in events, something must have been working well. It is surely not chance – 150 
years would be a rather long lucky streak. More likely, this success is remarkable testimony 
to generations of managers who had a good assessment of risk, plenty of common sense, a 
strong attachment to their core business and an ability to resist the temptation of exotic new 
opportunities. 
It sounds simple. Yet the managements and Boards of some of the world’s largest and most 
sophisticated financial institutions did not meet that standard during the past decade, and the 
fallout  is  now  upon  them  (and  the  rest  of  the  world).  Much  shareholder  wealth  has  been 
destroyed and reputations of some major institutions damaged. 
The  result  has  been  one  of  the  most  acute  withdrawals  in  confidence  between  major 
institutions  in  living  memory.  Inter-bank  borrowing  rates  at  term  shot  up,  as  global  banks, 
suddenly facing pressure on their own liquidity, became more cautious about extending it to 
others.  Because  financial  markets  are  globally  integrated,  these  pressures  were  quickly 
transmitted across national borders. The strains on liquidity have extended, in more muted 
fashion, even to parts of the world where local credit quality is much higher. Australia has 
suffered less than the United States, Europe or the United Kingdom, but nonetheless term 
funding spreads increased and remain today higher than they were before the onset of the 
sub-prime crisis last August. 
                                                 
2   Cannon, M.(1966), The Land Boomers, Melbourne University Press, Melbourne, p. 12. 
3   Hewat, T. (1992), Banking on the Bendigo, Wrightbooks Pty Ltd, Brighton, p. 1. 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2008
Recent  developments  exposed  the  risks  inherent  in  a  business  model  involving  heavy 
reliance on wholesale, short-term funding and securitisation of loans. For some institutions, 
events unfolded in devastating fashion. We saw a run on a significant British bank for the first 
time since the gold rush days in Bendigo. 
On  the  other  hand,  during  this  period,  the  virtues  of  a  well  run,  straightforward  business 
model, reliable retail funding, strong knowledge of the local market, and a suite of attractive 
retail banking services came once again to the fore. Soundly run institutions have seen a rise 
in their market positioning relative to more risky ones. 
Soundness,  however,  is  only  one  part  of  the  equation.  Of  course  we  need  the  financial 
system to be a safe repository for the savings of the population. But to play its full role in the 
economy,  the  financial  sector  needs  also  to  mobilise  those  savings,  putting  them  in  the 
hands  of  investors  who  are  in  a  position  to  make  effective  use  of  them.  Banks  are  in  the 
business  of  risk  management,  not  complete  risk  avoidance.  Their  job  is  to  offer  a  secure 
savings vehicle on the liability side of the balance sheet, but to take a measured degree of 
credit,  maturity  and  liquidity  risk  –  very  carefully  managed!  –  to  provide  finance  for  sound 
investment propositions. Those propositions range from housing, to small business, to large 
scale  investment  projects  such  as  the  ones  that  are  happening  apace  at  present  with  the 
commodity  price  boom.  With  capital  markets  struggling  at  present,  this  role  is  even  more 
important  than  it  normally  is.  In  addition,  the  transaction  services  that  banks  and  other 
authorised  deposit-taking  institutions  offer  their  customers  are  key  to  facilitating  the  huge 
volume of transactions which occur every day in the modern economy. 
Historians point out that this function of the financial system broadly defined – the efficient 
mobilisation  of  financial  capital  –  is  critical  for  economic  growth.  As  the  industrialised 
economy  took  shape,  markets  for  capital  grew  alongside.  Had  it  been  otherwise,  brilliant 
technological  innovations  would  have  remained  in  the  laboratory,  entrepreneurship  would 
have  been  stifled,  growth  would  have  been  slower  and  living  standards  lower.  Debt  and 
equity  markets,  together  with  banks  and  other  financial  intermediaries,  have  been,  and 
remain, key parts of the financial infrastructure. 
The history of Bendigo provides a good example of this general principle. In the early years, 
prospectors  sought  alluvial  gold,  which  was  found  in  or  around  streams  and  for  which  the 
requisite  capital  equipment  was  a  pan  and  a  shovel.  As  time  passed  and  prospectors 
increasingly turned their attention to quartz-gold deposits, in some places deep underground, 
more  physical  capital  was  required.  Steam-  and  air-driven  equipment  made  men  working 
deep underground productive enough that profit could be earned even when a great deal of 
rock had to be lifted to the surface and processed to find an ounce of gold. The formation of 
company structures, and the establishment of a local stock exchange in the 1860s, facilitated 
the provision of finance for all this activity. 
Now,  of  course,  this  was  not  without  risk.  Moreover,  one  could  hardly  claim  that  the 
exchange  was  not  given  to  occasional  bouts  of  “irrational  exuberance”.  Geoffrey  Blainey’s 
account of October 1871, with trading continuing on the streets into the early hours of the 
morning,  with  even  the  destitute  seen  “pencilling  [their]  own  share  transactions”,  gives  the 
flavour.4 Capital markets are prone to bouts of euphoria, which is why it is best if banks and 
other deposit-takers keep a polite distance from the riskier end of the spectrum, and avoid 
lending  against  the  more  speculative  assets.  Nonetheless,  for  all  their  occasional 
dislocations, the development of equity and debt markets has been important in the advance 
of the modern economy. Today, the Bendigo Stock Exchange, like Bendigo Bank, continues, 
even if in slightly less colourful fashion, providing an equity market for small- and medium-
sized firms. 
                                                 
4   Blainey, G. (1963), The Rush That Never Ended: A History of Australian Mining, Melbourne University Press, 
Melbourne, p. 75. 
BIS Review 88/2008 
 3
In  the  period  ahead,  at  the  global  level,  it  will  obviously  be  critical  to  restore  the  proper 
functioning  both  of  capital  markets  and  of  major  international  financial  institutions.  Losses 
need  to  be  recognised,  capital  structures  repaired  where  necessary,  risk  management 
processes re thought and managerial incentives more carefully structured. That process is 
under  way,  though  it  may  have  some  way  to  go  yet.  The  main  Australian  institutions  are 
generally  well  placed,  in  my  judgement,  to  prosper  in  this  environment,  if  they  continue  to 
manage their businesses well. 
At  the  local  and  regional  level,  meanwhile,  there  is  an  ongoing  role  for  the  provision  of 
financial  services.  Bendigo  Bank’s  community  banking  model,  which  seems  to  be  a  very 
successful one to date, is an innovative response to the demands of local communities for 
such services. The major banks tended to scale back their regional presence, in response to 
the cost pressures on them after the events of the early 1990s, and the changing economics 
of  branch  banking  which  became  apparent  as  financial  liberalisation  proceeded.  This 
withdrawal left an opportunity, but to take it, someone had to devise a business model that 
could cover costs at a price which the community could accept. The Bendigo model seems to 
meet this test. 
In short, though I do not say this as a supervisor of banks, this model seems to have worked 
pretty well. It shows that not only is there an important role for regional banks in the modern 
world,  but  that  well  run  institutions  can  successfully  fill  that  role.  As  we  are  constantly 
reminded, even in a globalised world, communities are still local in many important respects. 
So  in  conclusion,  to  the  shareholders  and  managers  of  Bendigo  Bank,  and  the  broader 
community of Bendigo: “Happy Birthday”. I wish you many more. I am sure John Laker, the 
Chairman of APRA who is here this evening, would join me in exhorting you to continue your 
wise  and  prudent  management  so  that  the  City  of  Bendigo,  its  bank  and  its  people  will 
prosper for another 150 years.  
4 
 BIS Review 88/2008
