Y V Reddy: Indian economy – prospects for growth with stability 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Institute of South 
Asian Studies, Singapore, 20 May 2008. 
 Mr. Gopinath Pillai, Chairman, Institute of South Asian Studies (ISAS); Mr. Heng Swee Keat, 
Managing Director, Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS); Dr. Jaishankar, Honorable High 
Commissioner; and distinguished friends. 
I  deeply  appreciate  the  invitation  from  the  ISAS  to  address  this  august  gathering  of  policy 
makers,  eminent  academics,  and  market  participants  of  Singapore.  Singapore  is  an 
important  financial  center  of  the  world  and  a  very  special  partner  for  India,  in  the  Asian 
region, in terms of economic co-operation. I am grateful to my counterpart, Mr. Heng Swee 
Keat, for encouraging me to accept the invitation. We meet often in connection with several 
international gatherings and exchange notes, concerns and comforts. We had the privilege of 
receiving him in the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in August 2007. He gave us an excellent 
account of the functioning of MAS and ASEAN. 
As a first step towards close collaboration between the RBI and the MAS, we have conveyed 
in March 2008, our approval to DBS Bank, Singapore to open eight branches. On the same 
day we also conveyed our approval to United Overseas Bank Ltd. to open its maiden branch 
in  Mumbai.  These  approvals  are  significant  in  view  of  the  freedom  that  accrues  to  the 
branches to undertake a full range of banking and related activities almost on par with full-
fledged domestic banks and also the fact that our W.T.O. obligations require us to approve 
twelve foreign bank branches in a year. We, in the RBI, deeply appreciate the consideration 
and understanding displayed by the MAS in giving new branch licenses for Indian banks and 
in particular for the approval to SBI for full bank license with QFB privileges with effect from 
April 25, 2008. This visit of mine is intended to further re-inforce a productive and mutually 
beneficial  relationship  between  the  two  monetary  authorities  and  also  the  two  economies, 
encompassing public and private sectors. I had called on Mr. Heng Swee Keat in his office in 
this  regard,  earlier  in  the  day.  I  will  be  shortly  making  a  courtesy  call  on  Mr.  Tharman 
Shanmugaratnam,  the  Honorable  Minister  for  Finance,  since,  among  other  things,  I  was  a 
witness to his erudition and eloquence in several fora – including the G30 conclaves. 
In my brief address today, I will make a few observations on India’s prospects for growth with 
stability in both short and medium terms, by highlighting a few important aspects. During the 
discussion that follows, we could interact on the major focus, as well as specifics, that is of 
interest to the gathering today. 
Short-term prospects 
For policy purposes, real GDP growth has been estimated to be in the range of 8 to 8.5% for 
the  year  2008-2009  (year  ending  March  2009).  There  are  several  reasons  why  this 
expectation  is  realistic.  Over  the  last  five  years,  the  Indian  economy  has  expanded  on  an 
average at 8.7 percent per annum. In fact, GDP growth was 9.6 percent in 2006-2007 and 
has  moderated  to  an  estimated  8.7  percent  in  2007-2008.  This  moderation  is  partly 
attributable to preemptive monetary policy actions that sought to dampen excessive demand 
pressures, while continuing with enabling environment to enhance supply-side responses in 
terms of investments. While there is a growing importance of global factors, India’s growth is 
mainly driven by domestic demand and supply factors. Gross Domestic Savings continue to 
be around 35% of GDP and available evidence points to continued increases in productivity. 
The realisation of the expected growth in the current year assumes normal monsoons and a 
slow-down in global growth by not more than what is currently assessed. 
BIS Review 64/2008 
 1
Monetary  policy  in  India  accords  appropriate  priority  for  price  stability  in  recognition  of  its 
significance  for  the  large  segment  of  the  poor  who  have  no  hedge.  Further,  the  policy 
recognizes  that  high  growth  benefits  the  poor  with  a  lag,  while  inflation  adversely  affects 
them instantly. Hence the current high-level of inflation is totally unacceptable, especially in 
terms  of  impact  on  inflation  expectations.  The  monetary  policy,  however,  reckons  the 
complexities of the current bout of inflation. Accordingly, the recent emphasis is on liquidity 
management  with  option  to  take  recourse  to  all  other  measures,  as  necessary,  so  that 
demand  pressures  are  contained  consistent  with  supply-side  responses  from  the  markets 
and from the central and the state Governments. 
The annual policy plans for a reduced rate of money supply in the range of 16.5 to 17% in 
2008-2009, while correspondingly placing growth of non-food credit at around 20%. As per 
indications,  the  currently  elevated  level  of  the  wholesale  price  index  may  start  moderating 
noticeably as monetary, fiscal, and administrative measures impact the economy, while other 
seasonal  as  well  as  global  factors  turn  favorable.  As  mentioned  in  the  annual  policy,  the 
policy endeavor is to bring headline inflation to around 5.5% in 2008-09 with a preference for 
bringing it as close to 5.0 per cent as soon as possible, recognising the evolving complexities 
in globally transmitted inflation. The resolve, going forward, would continue to be to condition 
policy and perceptions for inflation in the range of 4.0-4.5 per cent so that an inflation rate of 
around  3.0  per  cent  becomes  a  medium-term  objective  consistent  with  India's  broader 
integration into the global economy and with the goal of maintaining self-accelerating growth 
over the medium-term. In the event of new adversities emanating in the domestic and global 
economy at any point of time, RBI is in readiness to respond swiftly and appropriately. 
It is noteworthy that the domestic financial markets have not been seriously affected by the 
financial turbulence overseas, except for some increased volatility in the equity market, which 
is  relatively  more  open.  The  available  indications  point  to  continued  stability  in  the 
Government  securities  market;  the  forex  market  in  view  of  a  continued  strong  and 
sustainable  external  sector;  and  the  money  market,  duly  supported  by  focus  on  liquidity 
management. While the trade account may be impacted by elevated oil prices, the current 
account deficit is expected to continue to be modest, thanks to strong invisibles, and could 
be comfortably met by the anticipated net capital flows. 
As regards financial institutions, there are indications of continued improvements in efficiency 
and  enhancement  of  resilience.  India  has  a  bank  dominated  financial  sector,  and  every 
scheduled commercial bank in the country has  higher capital adequacy than the  minimum 
prescribed ratio of nine percent. In fact, provisioning and risk-weight requirements have been 
tightened  in  a  timely  manner  by  the  RBI  to  supplement  monetary  measures,  in  order  to 
moderate early signs of overheating. The RBI continues to accord a high priority to financial 
stability while emphasizing the interest of depositors, service to the common person, financial 
inclusion, and an enabling environment for growth through efficiency gains. 
In brief, the short-term prospects for an impressive growth with a reasonable assurance of 
stability  continues  to  be  bright,  though  somewhat  subdued  by  global  uncertainties.  The 
fundamentals of the Indian economy do not warrant exaggerated bearishness that is being 
witnessed  in  some  quarters  now,  just  as  exaggerated  bullishness  was  not  justified  during 
some  of  the  earlier  periods.  The  policy  will  continue  to  address  the  prevalent  issues  of 
containing the inflation expectations and sustaining the growth prospects. 
Medium-term prospects 
For a large and diverse economy with a low per capita income that is undergoing structural 
transformation  in  a  highly  uncertain  global  environment,  challenges  for  public  policy  are 
manifold. I would focus on a few, which we in the RBI consider to be crucial for enhancing 
medium term prospects for equitable growth. 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2008
First,  while  over  60  per  cent  of  the  workforce  is  dependent  on  agriculture,  the  sector 
accounts  for  less  than  20  per  cent  of  the  GDP.  Further,  the  GDP  growth  generated  from 
agriculture  is  only  marginally  above  the  rate  of  growth  of  the  population,  which  is  not 
adequate to ensure rapid poverty reduction. Volatility in agricultural production has not only 
implications for overall growth but also, as the recent experience has amply demonstrated, 
for maintaining low and stable inflation. Enhanced growth of the agricultural sector is vital for 
ensuring  food  security,  poverty  alleviation,  price  stability,  overall  inclusive  growth  and 
sustainability  of  growth  of  the  overall  economy.  Recently,  our  Honourable  Prime  Minister 
announced a major scheme to double the growth rate of agriculture to 4.0 per cent over the 
11th Plan period. A time-bound Food Security Mission was also announced to counter rising 
prices of food products and to ensure visible changes in their availability over three years. 
Second,  the  inadequate  availability  of  modern  infrastructure  and  shortage  of  skilled 
manpower  are  the  most  critical  barriers  to  the  growth  of  the  manufacturing  sector.  It  is 
essential to augment the existing infrastructure facilities, particularly roads, ports and power, 
to provide the enabling environment for industry to prosper. The most important issues here 
are regulatory framework and overall investment climate, which are being addressed by the 
Government. One other concern has been the cost recovery, which is expected to improve 
with enlightened public-private partnership. India has the design, construction, technological, 
organisational  and  financial  capabilities  domestically  to  bring  about  efficient  and  prompt 
improvements in physical infrastructure to meet the emerging demand pressures. 
Third,  a  salient  feature  of  the  fiscal  consolidation  process  in  recent  years,  even  after 
accounting for cyclical elements, has been significant reduction in the key deficit indicators. 
Our studies on State finances in the RBI give grounds for optimism in regard to their fiscal 
health. In fact, some state governments are buying back their debt from the market and a few 
others are reducing their planned market borrowings. We recognize two important areas that, 
if addressed, would result in fiscal empowerment both at the centre and the states. One is 
reduction in subsidies, by eliminating those which are inappropriate and not directly targeted 
to  the  poor,  and  the  other  is  withdrawal  of  most  of  the  tax  exemptions,  which  are 
distortionary.  The  delivery  of  essential  public  services  such  as  education  and  health  to  a 
large section of our population is a major challenge.  
Fourth, the unemployment rate based on periodical surveys increased both in the rural and 
urban areas over the last fifteen years, with sharper increase in the rural areas, reflecting a 
slowdown  in  agriculture.  A  positive  feature  has  been  a  significant  reduction  in  the  poverty 
ratio, but the number of poor is still unconscionably high. Naturally, the overarching priority 
for public policy is creating employment and reducing poverty. Some of the recently launched 
employment  guarantee  schemes  seek  to  address  some  of  these  issues  and  RBI  plays  a 
supporting role through a programme of financial inclusion in the banking sector. 
Finally,  there  is  a  growing  recognition  in  India  that  governance  reforms  are  critical  to 
strengthen state capacity and enable it to perform its core functions. The task of improving 
the  institutions  of  economic  governance  comprise,  among  others,  many  organizations  and 
actions essential for efficient functioning of markets. It is recognized that good governance 
can co-exist only when the public sector functions fairly and efficiently, which is achievable 
by  improving  it  and  not  by  undermining  it.  The  business  community  has,  therefore,  a  vital 
stake in improving and empowering public institutions. 
There  are  grounds  for  optimism  in  regard  to  growth  momentum  and  stability  over  the 
medium-term,  even  after  accounting  for  the  above-mentioned  challenges.  The  persistent 
increase in gross domestic savings and total factor productivity indicate increasing level of 
potential  output.  There  are  discernible  elements  of  self-sustaining  and  accelerating 
competitive strengths, as evident from increasing global presence of Indian corporates and 
interest of global companies in India. The savings and investments balance as well as the 
external  sector  reflect  the  strength  and  the  resilience  in  the  Indian  economy.  The  micro 
structural reforms undertaken in the real economy are bearing fruits in some states resulting 
BIS Review 64/2008 
 3
in double digit annual growth in their domestic product. Other states are trying to follow the 
example of these growth pioneers.  
There are certain “not easily quantifiable strengths” which the Indian economy possesses. A 
vast pool of science and technology graduates and the millions of people who are familiar 
with the English language are sources of strength. The familiarity with multiple languages in 
India prepares the people to adapt better to multi-cultural situations, making it easier for them 
to fit into international systems smoothly. The political climate is characterised by, what may 
be termed as, political system stability, despite the coalition cabinets and periodic elections 
both at the Centre and in several States. India will remain one of the youngest countries in 
the  world  in  the  next  few  decades.  This  “demographic  dividend”  is  seen  as  an  inevitable 
advantage provided pre-requisites such as skill-upgradation and sound governance to realize 
it  are  put  in  place.  In  terms  of  business  environment,  the  impressive  growth  coupled  with 
market orientation of the economy has been a bottom-up exercise with a very broad-based 
and growing entrepreneurial class. These tendencies are perhaps reflective of a penchant for 
innovation  among  already  large  and  growing  entrepreneurial  class  in  India,  imbued  with 
professionalism and seeking to be globally competitive. 
In brief, the medium term challenges are many, but all indications point to a sense of overall 
optimism for some acceleration in the already high rate of growth, with reasonable stability. 
Perhaps we should track not only the addition to the number of billionaires in India but also 
the depletion in the number of millions of poor and unemployed. For some, Indian economic 
progress signifies the beginnings of a major economic powerhouse in the world. But for many 
of  us,  the  optimism  over  the  medium-term  is  only  the  beginning  of  an  arduous  journey  to 
ensure basic nutrition, clean water, safer sanitation, minimal housing, personal security and 
individual dignity for millions in India. The prospects for growth and stability in India are great, 
but greater are the challenges in fulfilling the very basic objectives of public policy. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  by  choosing  some  quotes  from  Minister  Mentor,  Lee  Kuan  Yew’s 
Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Lecture on November 21, 2005, in New Delhi.  
Referring  to  the  unforgettable  opening  of  Nehru’s  broadcast  on  the  eve  of  independence, 
Minister  Mentor  Lee  Kuan  Yew  said,  “The  destiny  Nehru  envisaged  was  of  a  modern, 
industrialized,  democratic,  and  secular  India  that  would  take  its  place  in  the  larger  historic 
flows of the second half of the Twentieth Century.” 
“Nehru’s view of India’s place in the World and of India as a global player is within India’s 
grasp.” 
“At stake is the future of one billion Indians. India must make up for much time lost.” 
“The time has come for India’s next tryst with destiny.” 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2008
