Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press 
conference 
the  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update,  Ottawa, 
17 July 2008. 
the  release  of 
following 
 Good morning. We are pleased to be here with you today to discuss the July Monetary Policy 
Report Update, which we published this morning. 
In  the  Update,  the  Bank  described  three  major  developments  affecting  the  Canadian 
economy: protracted weakness in the U.S. economy, ongoing turbulence in global financial 
markets, and sharp increases in certain commodity prices, particularly energy. While the first 
two of these developments are evolving roughly in line with expectations, many commodity 
prices continue to outpace earlier expectations, which has altered the outlook for global and 
domestic inflation.  
Although economic growth in Canada in the first quarter of 2008 was weaker than expected, 
final domestic demand – supported by strong terms of trade – continued to expand at a solid 
pace.  The  Canadian  economy  is  judged  to  have  moved  into  slight  excess  supply  in  the 
second quarter of 2008, and this excess supply is expected to increase through the balance 
of the year. High terms of trade, accommodative monetary policy, and a gradual recovery in 
the U.S. economy are expected to generate above-potential economic growth starting early 
next year. This will bring the economy back to full capacity around mid-2010.  
Assuming energy prices follow current futures prices, total CPI inflation is projected to rise 
temporarily above 4 per cent, peaking in the first quarter of 2009. As energy prices stabilize, 
and  with  medium-term  inflation  expectations  remaining  well  anchored,  total  inflation  is 
projected to converge to the core rate of inflation, at the 2 per cent target, in the second half 
of 2009. Core inflation is projected to remain well contained. 
The three major developments affecting the Canadian economy pose significant upside and 
downside  risks  to  our  projection.  On  the  upside,  domestic  demand  could  be  greater  than 
projected, given the strength of Canada's terms of trade and the momentum of household 
credit  growth.  Potential  output  could  be  lower  than  assumed,  given  ongoing  weakness  in 
labour  productivity.  Global  inflationary  pressures  could  also  lead  to  higher-than-projected 
import  costs  for  Canada.  On  the  downside,  commodity  prices  could  be  weaker  than 
assumed. Growth in the U.S. economy could also be weaker than expected, particularly in 
those  sectors  that  are  most  relevant  for  Canadian  exports.  As  well,  continued  strains  in 
global financial markets could have a greater-than-projected impact on global growth and on 
the  cost  and  availability  of  credit  in  Canada.  Weighing  the  implications  of  these 
considerations, the Bank views the risks to its projection for inflation as balanced.  
Against this backdrop, the Bank judges that the current level of the target for the overnight 
rate – 3 per cent – remains appropriate. We will continue to monitor carefully the evolution of 
risks,  together  with  economic  and  financial  developments  in  the  Canadian  and  global 
economies, and set monetary policy consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target 
over the medium term. 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 1
