Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Management Accountants – focusing on the re-
positioning of the profession 
Special address by Mr Ajith Nivard Cabraal, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at 
the Global Summit, organised by The Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India on 
“Repositioning the Management Accountant”, New Delhi, 12 January 2008. 
 The theme of the Conference suggests that the Management Accountants of today are 
de  facto  doing  something  different  to  the  traditional  role  of  the  Management 
Accountant.  
The  new  de  facto  role  seems  to  be  more  of  that  of  a  strategist  and  a  performance 
management specialist, rather than a historical “information supplying” or even a “decision 
facilitating” role of an accountant. 
If one were to drill down, we may perhaps note that the education and training of those who 
have  become  strategists  and  performance  management  specialists  may  not  have 
necessarily been intended that way.  
But yet, it happened. How did this happen?  
• 
Perhaps the training, although intended to create management accountants, was 
appropriate to create a strategist.  
training,  coupled  with  business  developments  and  public 
Perhaps 
expectations,  shaped  management  accountants  to  become  strategists  or  the 
deliverers of outputs rather than contributors of inputs only.  
Perhaps  the  ability  of  the  management  accountant,  as  a  result  of  his  core 
disciplines, enabled him to respond effectively to unfolding developments and 
then  deliver  new  outputs,  and  such  abilities  were  recognized  by  the  business 
community in the course of time.  
  the 
in  that  role,  what 
If  all  this  happened  without  anyone  consciously  or  deliberately  “positioning”  the 
Management  Accountant 
is  the  need  to  “re-position”  the 
management  accountant  now?  Now  that  some  re-positioning  has  already  taken  place, 
albeit accidentally, need we do more? Should we let the status quo remain? Why should we 
tinker with the Management Accountant now? By the time we do that, would the goal posts 
have shifted due to the rapid developments that are always taking place? 
To  answer  these  questions,  we  may  need  to  take  a  long  hard  look  at  the  future  of  the 
global business environment over the next 10 years. 
What do we see? 
We see  
• 
• 
new developments: tremendous change and a rapid rate of changing;  
blurring of traditional roles: different people doing old jobs; new people doing new 
jobs;  
new skills and multi-disciplinary teams at work;  
status quo being challenged all the time and impermanence becoming a feature;  
volatility  becoming  a  given  fact  and  chaos  being  the  order  of  the  day;  eg:  sub-
primes, $100 per barrel of oil, Global terrorism, etc. etc.  
 BIS Review 10/2008 
 1
In that scenario, Management Accountants would need to be consciously trained to 
deal with, and manage emerging new issues and risks, in addition to the normal duties 
undertaken by the typical Accountant.  
How will all this affect the Management Accountant? It is likely that even in this turbulent 
scenario,  the  core-training  of  the  Management  Accountant  may  still  be  relevant.  However, 
supplementary  training  may  need  to  be  constantly  kept  up  to  date,  in  order  that  the 
Management Accountant has a meaningful impact on the organization. 
This  would  be  made  even  more  difficult  because  issues,  problems  and  responses  are  no 
longer of a local nature. In most cases, responses need to be regional or even international. 
If we act together we can pool our resources, learn from our experiences and be ready for 
the unknown. That is what we need to be doing. 
In that sense, the Management Accountants of the world, seem to be on the right track.  
We say, we wish to be seen as Strategists and as Performance Management Specialists. If 
so, what should we do?  
(a) 
As far as education and training is concerned, in addition to all what we learn now, a 
greater  focus  in  communication  and  human  resource  management  may  be 
necessary.  These  new  skills  would  be  the  tools  to;  (i)  manage  better,  (ii)  perform 
better, and (iii) deliver outputs better.  
Develop  skills  in  marketing  and  understand  the  importance  and  the  specialist 
nature of the subject.  
Develop  the  proper  managerial  attitude  which  focuses  on  outputs  rather  than 
inputs.  
(b) 
(c) 
If  a  person  is  to  focus  on  “outputs”  a  few  important  steps  would  need  to  enter  his 
work  and  life.  These  are  very  well  enunciated  in  the  2500  year  old  teachings  of  Lord 
Buddha. Usually, we seek the guidance of this Great Teacher in spiritual matters. But in this 
instance, we could benefit by His teaching which is very relevant, in my view, to the business 
attitude of the re-positioned Management Accountant.  
This specific teaching which even today could serve as a simple “to do list” for ourselves to 
deliver outputs, may be set out as 6 point doctrine –  
First,  Arambhaka  Dhathu.  That  is,  the  action  should  start.  Ideas,  proposals,  plans, 
strategies are of no use, unless they are converted into action. Discussions are of no value 
unless it leads to action. What is tangible would be action and without starting the action, our 
overall visions and missions would never be realized.  
Second, Nikkhama Dhathu. That is, the action should continue. There are many actions that 
we commence, but stop quickly. It is like the opening of a bottle of Soda; a lot of hiss; a lot of 
gas; a lot of noise, but becomes flat after some time. Very often, we do not have the energy, 
the  drive,  the  motivation  or  the  staying  power  to  continue  with  the  actions  that  we  start. 
Therefore,  we  need  to  ensure  that  actions  are  continued,  if  the  performance  is  to  be 
achieved. 
Thirdly, Parakkama Dhathu. That means, the action should not be affected by interruptions 
and challenges. In the performance of any action, we will definitely encounter resistance and 
opposition. Often, at the first whiff of opposition, we retreat. If we are to perform, we need to 
build in ourselves, the ability and the courage to meet with obstructions and move forward, in 
the face of challenges. Otherwise, our performance would not be realized.  
Fourth, Thithi Dhathu. That is, stay firm in the intended path. Even in the midst of opposition 
or challenges, we have to develop the ability to be focused and move with a clear vision and 
determination.  We  should  not  be  distracted.  We  should  not  dilute  the  impact  of  our 
performance.  
2 
 BIS Review 10/2008
Fifth, is the Thawara Dhathu. That is, the action should convey a strong stable message of 
commitment  and  dedication.  Such  a  strong  signal  is  often  infectious  and  when  the  leader 
shows such firm commitment, performance often improves.  
Sixth, Upakkama Dhathu. That is, being wise to cleverly steer the path and induce others to 
also support the performance of the particular action. That is not easy, but it is vital. Inducing 
all within the team to move towards a single goal is the best assurance of success. 
We are today living and working in an unforgiving world. In this unforgiving world, the 
business  sector  in  which  we  operate  is  intolerant  of  failure.  Failure  or  even  suggestion  of 
failure invokes harsh penalties and abrupt ends to promising careers. We show how many 
important heads rolled after the “sub-prime” issue hit the market. However high and mighty a 
person  may  be,  failure  or  non-performance  or  sub-performance  is  not  forgiven.  All  past 
victories  are  erased  with  a  single  failure.  A  single  failure  of  a  high  magnitude  eliminates 
massive and hard-earned gains made over many years. That is why performance is so vital 
and important. 
It is therefore timely that the Management Accountants are focusing on the re-positioning of 
the profession.  
It is wise that you are talking about how to project yourselves and promote yourselves in the 
future. It is refreshing that you are talking with your stakeholders and then planning your re-
positioning, because the relevance of your position is of paramount importance, if you are to 
survive  and  thrive.  My  learning  as  a  Chartered  Accountant  as  well  as  a  Management 
Accountant helped me a great deal in my activities and in my performance over the years. I 
believe  my  own  successes  can  be  traced  to  the  roots  of  such  learning,  education,  and 
training.  Like  me,  I  am  sure  we  have  all  benefited  immensely  by  the  initial  training  and 
guidance we have received from our respective institutes.  
Let us now build on those foundations and strengths and move forward with confidence and 
certainty  even  in  the  midst  of  tremendous  challenges  and  competition.  I  am  sure  our 
profession,  notwithstanding  the  numerous  changes  that  are  taking  place,  would  remain 
relevant to the business and commercial world. 
We owe it to our respective economies to keep it that way. I congratulate all of you for the 
interest you are taking and the contribution you are making. 
I wish you all success and prosperity.  
BIS Review 10/2008 
 3
