Jean-Claude Trichet: The handing over of the building permit for the new 
European Central Bank premises by the City of Frankfurt 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
at the press conference, Frankfurt, 6 May 2008. 
 Sehr geehrte Frau Oberbürgermeisterin Roth,  
sehr geehrte Damen und Herren, 
ich  freue  mich  sehr,  dass  Sie,  Frau  Oberbürgermeisterin,  mir  heute  persönlich  die 
Baugenehmigung  für  unseren  Neubau  auf  dem  Gelände  der  ehemaligen  Großmarkthalle 
überreichen. Für die EZB ist es ein besonderer Tag – die Erteilung der Baugenehmigung ist 
einer  der  wichtigsten  Meilensteine  auf  dem  Weg  zur  Errichtung  des  neuen  Sitzes  der 
Europäischen Zentralbank. 
This building permit provides us with formal approval for our architectural plans. We can now 
start implementing these plans, which have been under development for the past two years 
during  the  planning  phase.  The  ECB  sincerely  welcomes  the  issuing  of  the  permit,  as  it 
represents the culmination of all the hard work that has been done up to this point.  
We  are  very  excited  about  the  upcoming  phase,  that  is,  the  start  of  the  main  construction 
work. As stimulating as the previous design phases were, they cannot possibly compare to 
the next stage, in which we will see the new ECB premises rise from the ground. 
I  would  like  to  take  a  moment  now  to  reiterate  some  of  the  key  features  of  our  future 
premises.  
Let me start with the preservation of the Großmarkthalle. This important consideration has 
played  a  key  role  throughout  the  different  stages  of  the  project.  At  the  ECB,  we  take 
particular pride in the fact that our efforts will enable this remarkable building – designed by 
the architect Martin Elsässer – to be preserved. In the course of the construction process, the 
concrete structure of the hall and the brick facades will be entirely renovated, while of course 
due attention will be paid to the guidelines of the monument preservation authorities. Over 
the past two years preservation experts have spent literally thousands of hours assessing the 
exact state of the building’s structure and the best methods to use for its preservation. The 
Großmarkthalle  will  not  only  be  revitalised;  it  will  also  be  fully  integrated  into  our  new 
premises. The combination of old and new, the former market hall and the new office towers, 
will create a unique building that will be easily recognisable not only in Frankfurt, but all over 
Europe and beyond.  
Another  important  element  of  our  new  building’s  design  is  energy  efficiency.  The 
environmental  design  of  the  new  premises  is  based  on  the  EU  Directive  on  the  Energy 
Performance of Buildings. Our target for energy usage will be lower than the current German 
standards. Regenerative energies will be incorporated into the design wherever possible.  
Last, but not least, I would like to say a few words about the landscape design of the new 
premises.  On  completion,  the  landscaping  will  substantially  increase  the  amount  of  green 
space  in  the  area.  Close  cooperation  with  the  city  authorities  has  enabled  an  integrated 
design  on  the  eastern  boundary  of  the  site,  which  means  that  the  city’s  green  belt 
(Frankfurter GrünGürtel) can be extended from the Ruhrorter Werft on the river out towards 
the Ostpark.  
The site of the new ECB premises will be secured in line with the security requirements of a 
modern  central  bank.  Our  security  concept  foresees  physical  components  which  will  be 
integrated into the modulated landscape design and will not impair the view of the building. In 
BIS Review 56/2008 
 1
this  way,  the  Großmarkthalle  will  remain  visible  to  its  neighbours  and  those  visiting  the 
Ostend area. 
Let me now turn to the next steps to be taken in the construction of the new premises.  
As  you  know,  we  are  currently  carrying  out  the  preliminary  construction  work,  having 
received the required permit in February. In this context, the following work is currently being 
undertaken:  
• 
Excavation  work  has  begun  for  the  basement  of  the  office  towers  and  the 
underground staff car park in the south of the site.  
The remaining ramp in the old railway delivery area and the two four-storey annex 
buildings  at  both  ends  of  the  Großmarkthalle  are  being  removed.  You  may  have 
noticed that the bricks that made up the external facade of the annex buildings are 
being  removed  by  hand,  one  by  one,  since  some  of  them  will  be  reused  for  the 
renovation of the facade of the hall.  
 If all goes well, the ECB will announce the general contractor which will carry out the main 
construction  work  for  the  new  premises  in  autumn  of  this  year.  The  company  is  currently 
being selected within the framework of a Europe-wide tender procedure. 
In  January  2009,  following  the  construction  of  the  basement  slab,  the  foundation  stone  is 
scheduled to be laid. (Frau Roth – we hope you will have some space for us in your diary?) 
At  the  same  time,  the  renovation  of  the  Großmarkthalle  will  get  under  way.  If  all  goes  as 
planned, we expect the building work to last around three years, with the building complex 
being finalised by the end of 2011.  
I  would  like  to  finish  my  introductory  remarks  by  expressing  my  gratitude  to  the  various 
authorities involved in this project. In particular, I would like to thank Frau Roth and all the 
staff of the Frankfurt city planning department for their commitment and efficient collaboration 
in  this  project,  especially  during  the  application  process  for  this  building  permit.  I  can  only 
agree with what was mentioned a moment ago: that the guidelines we received were precise 
and timely and the communication with the relevant authorities was very well organised.  
The  speed  with  which  our  application  was  handled  is  further  testimony  to  the  excellent 
collaboration between our New ECB Premises project team and the city authorities. 
I thank you for your attention and am now at your disposal for questions.  
2 
 BIS Review 56/2008
