Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Implications of emerging global economy trends for 
Malaysia 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, on the occasion of 
the International Women's Day Forum, Kuala Lumpur, 1 April 2008. 
 Fundamental  changes  occurring  in  the  international  environment  have  dramatically  altered 
the  configuration  of  the  global  economy.  A  global  shift  is  taking  place  resulting  in  a 
rebalancing  of  economic  power.  Accompanying  these  changes  is  the  increase  in  the 
international  mobility  of  talent  and  capital  flows.  In  this  more  dynamic  environment, 
comparative  advantages  and  distinct  capabilities  are  also  shifting.  This  has  resulted  in  a 
rethinking  of  the  business  models  and  the  manner  in  which  we  operate  to  achieve 
performance. In addition, corporate cultures have needed to change. This reorientation has 
entailed reviews of the strategic focus, the strategies, approach and processes as well as the 
redeployment of resources.  
In conjunction with the International Women's Day that was on March 8, it is my honour to be 
here  today  to  speak  at  this  forum  organised  by  Accenture.  My  remarks  will  focus  on  the 
implications  of  these  newly  emerging  trends  in  the  global  economy  on  Malaysia.  More 
specifically,  to  discuss  the  new  future  that  is  emerging  before  us,  and  the  opportunities  it 
accords.  Equally  important,  is  the  ability  to  raise  the  level  of  our  flexibility  and  capacity  to 
adjust to these changing conditions. On the occasion of the celebration of the International 
Women's  Day,  it  is  important  for  us  to  reflect  on  the  implications  of  this  rapidly  changing 
environment  for  women.  Women  account  for  almost  half  of  the  world's  population.  The 
integration  and  full  deployment  of  women  in  the  workforce  is  therefore  a  vital  part  of  our 
quest for higher performance in this new era of the modern economy. 
Let  me  begin  with  some  brief  words  on  the  economic  and  financial  transformation  that  is 
occurring  in  Malaysia.  Indeed,  Malaysia  is  very  much  a  part  of  this  new  phase  of 
globalisation  in  which  the  concentration  of  economic  power  in  the  global  economy  is  now 
becoming  more  dispersed.  International  trade,  investment  and  financial  flows  have  now 
become increasingly a two-way process. In fact, it is these very changes that have increased 
the tolerance level and strengthened the resilience of the economy.  
The  Malaysian  economy  continues  to  be  transformed  in  several  ways.  Firstly,  domestic 
demand  has  become  an  important  driver  of  growth  compared  to  previously  being  export 
driven. Malaysia has thus become part of the massive cumulative market that is growing in 
Asia. Secondly, this has contributed to changing significantly the pattern of our international 
trade. Previously, our trade was predominantly with the major developed economies. Now, 
almost two-thirds of our trade is with Asia. As the Asian markets continue to expand and as 
the trade increases, it becomes a mutually reinforcing trend in the region.  
Thirdly, our economic structure has become increasingly more diversified with new areas of 
comparative  advantages  emerging.  As  this  occurs,  we  are  seeing  the  increased  two  way 
flows of investment, financial flows and talent. With full employment, activities requiring low 
labour  cost  are  no  longer  our  comparative  advantage.  Both  multi-nationals  and  domestic 
corporations in such activities have since the 1990s relocated to other parts of the region. 
Resources are now redeployed to new areas of comparative advantage which are generating 
new  areas  of  growth.  As  part  of  this  transformation,  the  services  sector  has  continued  to 
become an important driver of growth, reflecting the flexibility and agility of the economy to 
shift resources to new areas of growth. While Malaysia continues to be a recipient of foreign 
direct investment amounting to 7.2% of GNP, outward foreign direct investment by Malaysian 
corporations account for 6.9% of GNP.  
BIS Review 37/2008 
 1
The financial landscape has also been dramatically transformed to become more diversified, 
more  market  oriented  and  more  liberalised.  The  sector  has  also  evolved  from  being 
fragmented to becoming more consolidated, operating with higher levels of efficiency. There 
are also stronger international linkages not only in terms of increased foreign presence in our 
financial  system  but  also  our  financial  institutions  are  increasingly  venturing  abroad.  This 
trend  has  increased  our  international  inter-linkages  resulting  in  greater  economic  and 
financial integration with the global economy and international financial system. New areas of 
growth are also emerging in the financial system including in investment banking and Islamic 
finance.  The  development  of  our  domestic  financial  markets,  and  the  more  liberalised 
environment has contributed to increased two-way flow of funds. These two-way flows have 
promoted  the  orderly  functioning  of  our  foreign  exchange  market.  In  addition,  the  more 
diversified financial markets have in turn reduced our vulnerability to extreme volatility.  
These  transformations  have  brought  about  significant  payoffs  for  our  nation.  Today,  the 
income per capita exceeds USD7,000, double of what it was seven years ago in 2001. With 
the increased resilience, the future prospects remain positive with the economy on a steady 
growth path going forward. There is however, significant uncertainty in the global economy in 
the current environment, with some of the largest economies in the world bracing for slower 
growth  and  continued  turmoil  in  the  financial  markets.  In  addition,  rising  inflationary 
pressures in the global economy arising from high energy, commodity and food prices has 
resulted in the erosion of the purchasing power. Despite a slower performance in the external 
sector the continued expansion of the Asian economies is expected to be sustained. Growth 
is  predominantly  supported  by  strong  domestic  demand  and  the  increased  intra-regional 
trade and investment activities.  
A  more  recent  phenomenon  is  the increased  mobility  of  labour  in  the  region.  Increasingly, 
talent from our region have ventured beyond domestic borders. This trend is not limited to 
our immediate borders but also to more distant emerging and developed economies. Again, 
we are seeing the two-way flow of talent for the different areas of professional expertise and 
the  workforce  leading  to  an  increasingly  diversified  background  of  employment  in  different 
parts of the world. Malaysian professionals can be found in every continent in wide ranging 
areas of employment.  
Let  me  turn  to  the  participation  of  women  in  the  economy.  About  half  of  the  Malaysian 
population are women and they account for about 47% of the workforce. The representation 
of women at the professional, managerial and technical levels has increased from less than 
30%  in  1990  to  about  40%  currently.  Such  progress  has  been  achieved  given  the 
educational  opportunities  that  have  been  made  available  to  women.  Literacy  rates  among 
women is about 90% due to the countries comprehensive and inclusive education system. 
Female  primary  and  secondary  students  account  for  half  of  total  enrolment,  while  at  the 
public  universities,  female  students  account  for  55%  of  the  total  enrolment.  It  is  this 
educational foundation which has accorded equality to women in Malaysia . It has enabled 
women from all walks of life and backgrounds to contribute and participate fully in Malaysia's 
economic prosperity.  
Women in Malaysia have also participated significantly in the small and medium enterprise 
sector of the economy. A significant number  of women run family businesses makes up a 
large part of this sector. Another area in which there is significant participation of women is 
the services sector which has now become one of the most important sources of growth for 
the  Malaysian  economy  projected  to  expand  by  7.7%  in  2008.  Ninety  percent  of  women-
owned SMEs in Malaysia are in fact in the services sector. Some of these activities are also 
developing in the informal sector. As, the formal economy in Malaysia continues to prosper, 
there  is  significant  scope  to  integrate  the  informal  sectors  of  our  economy  with  the  formal 
sector. Deliberate actions to integrate the informal economy into the formal economy will give 
this  segment  of  society  increased  opportunities.  As  part  of  the  efforts  to  promote  greater 
engagement of women in the modern economy and their increased participation in the formal 
economy, significant initiatives have been taken to raise the level of financial literacy among 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2008
women.  Greater  empowerment  can  be  achieved  through  the  resulting  greater  financial 
independence.  
In many countries, the success of various national and international socio-economic reform 
programs  have  resulted  in  women  becoming  an  increasing  part  of  the  formal  economy. 
Through  the  concerted  efforts  of  women's  rights  movements,  economic  policy  intervention 
and  gradual  shifts  in  cultural  norms,  women  today  have  more  opportunities  for  education, 
careers  and  political  representation.  This  has  allowed  for  increased  participation  in  the 
economy. Bringing women into the economic mainstream would contribute to the economic 
potential of the nation. Women are now also part of the increased mobility of talent that is 
able to relocate to different parts of the country or to venture abroad. 
Increasingly,  women  are  now  rising  to  senior  and  key  top  management  positions  in  both 
private corporations and in government, although we are still less than where we should be. 
The changing corporate cultures, the shift away from hierarchical structures, in fact, are to 
the  advantage  for  women  professionals.  We  have  seen  these  changes  taking  place  in 
international  corporations,  where  the  previous  power  structures  have  resulted  in  limited 
opportunities for women. Changes in corporate cultures towards more collegial environment 
have  inculcated  organisational  values  and  behaviours  that  have  been  more  conducive  for 
increased opportunities for women.  
Let  me  turn  to  the  implications  of  an  environment  of  constant  change  and  transformation. 
Indeed, as we go forward, we can expect this pace of change to intensify. To succeed in this 
ever changing environment, there needs to be an awareness and an understanding of the 
nature  of  these  changes  and  its  radical  implications  and  consequences.  Survival  in  the 
modern economy requires the adoption of new approaches and strategies. Approaches that 
have  brought  previous  successes  will  no  longer  become  relevant.  It  will  require  radically 
different ways of doing things. Prospering on a short-term business trend without developing 
capabilities  and  competitive  positions  will  risk  the  future  of  any  business.  The  new 
environment requires strategies that aim to secure durability and sustainability.  
This new environment will be characterised by increasing competitive pressures. Thus, the 
ability to compete is no longer based on access to raw materials of land, capital and labour. It 
will  demand  much  more.  It  will  depend  on  how  these  resources  are  exploited.  The  new 
environment thus calls for greater focus on building capabilities. The new environment also 
presents  increased  uncertainty  affecting  the  level  of  preparedness.  In  addition,  under  an 
increasingly more uncertain environment, the traditional approach can no longer be applied. 
Making  sound  strategic  decisions  under  uncertainty  requires  a  different  approach.  In  this 
case,  understanding  the  range  of  possibilities  and  the  ability  to  perform  under  different 
circumstances becomes important.  
Knowledge and speed becomes the essence in this new environment. The speed of access 
to  knowledge  therefore  needs  to  be  continuously  enhanced.  Smart  partnerships  becomes 
highly  relevant  in  this  new  economic  order.  Tremendous  benefit  can  be  gained  from 
collaboration  and  partnerships.  Such  collaborations  in  this  new  economy  needs  to  extend 
across borders.  
Distinct efforts need to be made to prepare for this new economic age. The strategies have 
to be developmental. High fliers that do not develop capabilities will not be equipped for the 
long-term. Investment, therefore, has to be made for the future. Among the key strategies will 
be  the  continuous  investment  in  building  the  capabilities  and  capacity,  setting  the 
performance  standards  and  promoting  strategic  alliances.  This  has  to  be  achieved  with  a 
clarity  of  the  goals.  This  is  particularly  important  in  an  environment  of  intense  short-term 
pressures.  
The  rapid  changes  that  are  taking  place  in  our  environment  thus  demands  new  skills  and 
ability to manage new challenges and capitalise on the new opportunities. Indeed, the role of 
leadership has changed. Leaders not only must able to see the new emerging opportunities, 
but also to be able to deal with the high level of unpredictability. The industry leaders need to 
BIS Review 37/2008 
 3
be visionary and comprehend future trends, chart strategic directions and adapt to change. 
Effective  leaders  in  this  era,  will  be  those  who  are  continuous  learners,  who  are  on  the 
cutting  edge  of  excellence,  and  who  have  the  humility  to  recognise  the  need  to  reinvent 
themselves and inspire their organization to adapt to the new environment.  
The investment in human capital development is thus important for future survival. Human 
capital development has become of strategic importance and is integral to the success of an 
organisation. This needs to occur at all levels of the organisation. Senior executives need to 
take  the  lead  and  devote  a  considerable  amount  of  their  time  to  this  initiative.  Human 
resource  development  functions  is  integral  to  the  talent  management  process  and  in 
supporting the human capital management strategy.  
Let me conclude my remarks. The inclusion of women into mainstream economic activity is 
no  longer  an  option,  but  a  prerequisite  for  sustained  economic  development.  The  strive 
therefore has to be to provide the enabling environment and to set the standards so that the 
new multi-polar world will be a more inclusive one.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2008
