Radovan Jelašić: Corporate social responsibility and protection of the 
rights of the disabled 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the Conference 
on Corporate Social Responsibility and Protection of the Rights of the Disabled, Belgrade, 
9 June 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  true  honour  for  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  to  be  a  member  of  the  Serbian  Global 
Compact network and the UNDP’s local partner in promoting it. The Serbian Global Compact 
network already boasts 26 members, which will, no doubt, contribute to this initiative as much 
as  they  can.  One  of  the  key  principles  underlying  the  Global  Compact  is  the  protection  of 
human and labour rights.  
Disabled persons in Serbia live in an environment of discrimination and prejudice, for which 
we alone are to blame, not only as citizens, but as employers as well. I am absolutely sure 
that we can count on full cooperation of disabled persons and their organizations, and that 
the  ball  is  in  our  court  now  –  it  is  the  citizens  and  employers  who  should  provide  their 
undivided  support  to  the  disabled.  The  employers  attending  the  conference  have  made  a 
huge step forward in this respect by the sheer fact of coming here today. They did not turn a 
blind eye to the disabled persons’ issue or shelved it away as the “problem of the state” – we 
are the state.  
I sometimes have a feeling, and practice has confirmed it too, that foreign and private-owned 
companies tend to do a lot more in the area of corporate social responsibility and protection 
of the rights of the disabled than public enterprises. Although the problems that the disabled 
face  day  to  day  are  countless,  some  of  the  most  common  ones  include:  lack  of  social 
responsibility, prejudice, inadequacy or inadequate implementation of existing legislation and 
regulations, and lack of access to transportation. And while the state can and should solve a 
number of these issues, there is plenty of work for us, too.  
Let us begin from the basics: who is to blame for the inaccessibility of buildings and public 
institutions (the National Bank of Serbia being one of them) to the disabled? I will not even try 
to pin the blame on somebody else. I am to be blamed, I and my colleagues for not having 
done enough to put things right. Last week the National Bank of Serbia received from the 
Centre  for  the  Development  of  Inclusive  Society  the  results  of  an  expert  study  based  on 
which our office buildings will be entirely adjusted to the needs of the disabled. By the end of 
the  year,  our  buildings,  most  notably  the  one  in  the  Slavija  Square,  will  be  accessible  to 
everybody. In addition to this, the National Bank of Serbia organizes visits for the disabled to 
the money museum in our head office building (12 Kralja Petra Street). Therefore, I would 
like to use this opportunity to invite all of the people present here to give us a call and set up 
the time and date of their visit – and we are ready to cover a part of the costs involved. 
Today’s  conference  is  an  opportunity  for  me  and  my  colleagues  to  acquire  some  specific 
knowledge and to hear about the experience of other people in this area, which will hopefully 
help us all in performing our public functions better.  
In terms of hiring disabled persons, as the governor of the National Bank of Serbia, which is 
an  institution  of  public  significance,  I  can  only  say  that  I  see  no  reason  for  waiting  for  the 
adoption of the Law on the Employment of the Disabled. I am deeply convinced that public 
institutions  should  take  the  lead  in  this  respect  and  set  an  example  for  the  private 
businesses. The NBS will resort to affirmative action in its staff recruitment so as to give the 
disabled a chance to become equal members of the society, which they will never become 
without jobs or stable income. And now let us look at the socially responsible practices of the 
BIS Review 78/2008 
 1
NBS: this year, the National Bank will give three scholarships to final year students, who will 
be obligated to work for the NBS once they complete their studies. More information on this 
will be available on our website. Once the adaptation of our office buildings is completed, we 
will be able to increase the number of students doing their summer practice program in the 
NBS by five students with disabilities.  
Finally, I would like to invite all the interested participants to gather again in September to 
exchange ideas and consult on the drafting of a public strategy on the employment of people 
with  disabilities.  And  all  of  this  for  one  single  reason  –  to  MAKE  OUR  SERBIA  MORE 
BEAUTIFUL AND ITS PEOPLE HAPPIER. 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2008
