Paul Tucker: A protracted “peacetime” 
Remarks  by  Mr  Paul  Tucker,  Executive  Director  and  Member  of  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee of the Bank of England, at the Chatham House Conference on “The new financial 
frontiers”, London, 29 April 2008. 
 The turmoil and stress in the global financial system has now been going on for nine months 
or  more.  Much  has  been  said  about  the  “wartime”  conduct  of  the  authorities,  the  banking 
industry  and  asset  managers.  But  the  seeds  of  the  current  stresses,  and  many  of  the 
remaining risks, lie in the preceding period of “peacetime”. The main purpose of my remarks 
this morning is to underline that the community must not in the future lose sight of the need 
to head off the risks that can creep up during a prolonged period of “peace”. 
The recent period of peacetime was long enough for substantial macroeconomic imbalances 
to build up, globally and domestically. 
Long enough for innovations in financial intermediation to mask, from many, the degree of 
leverage in the system. 
Long enough for many to assume that funding structures could be chosen on the basis of 
deep liquidity being maintained in a range of new asset markets. 
Long enough for most with long memories to be tending their gardens. 
Long enough for the international authorities to think they would get time to fix problems in 
the regulatory capital regime before they gave rise to serious problems (such as the zero-
weighting of 364-day lines of credit, which underlay the profusion of bank-like conduits etc). 
Long enough for many to proceed on the basis that “it couldn’t happen” or, indeed even after 
it began, “wasn’t happening”. 
Long enough, crucially, for investors to get too used to elevated returns. Those returns came 
largely from two sources. The fall in risk-free rates, brought about by an ex ante imbalance of 
global  savings  and  investment;  and  the  fall  in  risk  premia,  which  may  in  part  have  flowed 
from improved monetary policy regimes around the world. The ensuing Search for Yield can 
be thought of as asset managers and bankers wanting to sustain into the future the fabulous 
ex post returns “achieved” as asset prices rose. Its main engines were leverage, and maturity 
transformation. A cocktail that not only raised private risks for asset managers and lenders, 
but also systemic risks. 
The upshot has been a protracted, and not yet concluded, period of deleveraging. That, in 
the great scheme of things, relatively small US subprime mortgage delinquencies could set 
this off shows just how fragile the system had become. 
Structural changes in the financial system really matter 
As commentators struggle to make sense of this, a lot has been said about the “originate and 
distribute” model of financial intermediation. Three comments on that. 
First, not enough was done to reflect changes in business models in disclosure regimes and 
practices. In some distant world, banks in, say, Germany were exposed largely to German 
companies  and  households;  and  similarly  Californian  banks  to  Californian  borrowers  and 
projects. So if conditions deteriorated in Germany, California or wherever, the markets would 
be alert to the need to scrutinise the “home” banks operating in those regions or sectors. In 
today’s world, the markets knew that risk really had been dispersed. But they did not know 
where it might be concentrated; and, crucially, did not know how or how far it might flow back 
to  the  banking  sector  and  so  towards  the  core  of  the  payments  system  that  supports  our 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 1
monetary economy. It is in the interests of banks themselves – and certainly in the interests 
of their creditors and shareholders – to make those risks clearer in future; and if they do so, 
they will face stronger incentives to avoid risk concentrations. 
But my second point is that talk of the shift to “Originate & Distribute” can be overdone. Many 
of  the  largest  global  banks  seem  to  have  occupied  a  half-way  house.  They  retained  large 
positions on what amounted to a view that macroeconomic conditions could never get so bad 
as to cause material impairment, but booked them to portfolios that were marked-to-market 
(or to models). That left them exposed to a deterioration in financial conditions, particularly in 
liquidity,  and  so  to  a  fall  in  “market”  prices  way  beyond  anything  they  contemplated,  or 
perhaps  still  contemplate,  for  fundamental  impairment.  This  is  the  mentality  of  traditional 
“banking book” risk assessment grafted on to post-Glass Steagall “trading book” valuations 
and financial accounting. As the regime currently works, mark-to-market is not – or, rather, 
cannot be – just an accounting convention; it needs to be a culture, or way of life, for those 
who  adopt  it.  The  dynamics  of  a  financial  system  in  which  the  vast  majority  employ  MTM 
accounting,  irrespective  of  their  declared  holding  periods,  are  fundamentally  different  from 
one in which just a few “market-makers” do so. 
Third, therefore, the rules and infrastructure supporting the financial system need to help it 
withstand  stress.  Accounting  and  valuation  policies  is  one  such  area,  now  being  debated. 
Another is the trading and clearing platforms themselves. The authorities must do what they 
can to encourage the industry to focus on whether more wholesale market activity could and 
should be conducted across central trading and clearing platforms rather than OTC. In the 
past, intermediaries have tended to be doubtful about this. But it is plausible that the system 
would  have  been  somewhat  more  resilient  if  “vanilla”  products  had  been  subjected  to  the 
minimum  standards,  greater  pre  and  post-trade  transparency,  and  centrally  set  margin 
requirements that accompany transacting across central infrastructure. The underlying point 
here is that the bodies providing such central infrastructure have a clear interest in effective 
system-wide risk management and stability, and can be monitored by the authorities. 
For the authorities internationally, the moral of the story is that they must take an interest, 
from  a  systemic  perspective,  in  the  regimes  which  govern,  and  drive  changes  in,  the 
structure and behaviour of the financial system. That means maintaining that interest during 
peacetime, not just a necessary rush of activity after crises occur. 
In setting the rules of the game, the authorities need to strike a trade off between risk and 
efficiency.  We  could  reduce  the  risk  in  the  system  by  stifling  innovation.  But  in  order  to 
choose  to  tilt  the  balance  towards  innovation  and  efficiency,  the  authorities  need  to  be 
confident that they have regimes that, amongst other things, (i) are effective in mopping up 
the mess, and (ii) do not create bad long-term incentives. 
Orthodoxy is to cut off incipient systemic stress at the pass: intervene early, and decisively, 
but leaving losses with the private sector and afterwards rejigging the structure of the system 
to  contain  the  implications  for  future  behaviour.  For  that,  tools  are  needed.  In  very  broad 
terms, this is precisely what the Special Resolution Regime for banks and improved deposit 
insurance proposed by the UK authorities are about. They are tools the authorities need to 
contain the disruption caused when bank failures occur and so to make such individual firm 
failures tolerable. 
But we also need policies for containing systemic stress more generally; and, if possible, for 
heading off the risk of systemic problems in the first place. Like others, in speeches I have 
identified three elements in that armoury: monetary policy; central bank liquidity policy; and 
policies towards bank capitalisation and liquidity. 
Monetary policy 
I have for some years openly queried the notion that it is enough to rely on monetary policy 
“mopping up” after the event. 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2008
The  “mopping  up”  doctrine  came  out  of  a  view  that  monetary  authorities  could  not  spot 
bubbles  but  that  policy  could  cushion  the  bursting  of  what  turned  out  to  be  a  bubble.  The 
doctrine effectively assumes that, faced with the possibility of systemic stress, the monetary 
authority  can  always  reduce  its  policy  rate  without  taking  risks  with  inflation.  The  current 
conjuncture tests that assumption. There is a nasty shock to demand from tightening credit 
conditions,  here  and  abroad.  And  that  may  get  worse  rather  than  better  in  the  coming 
months. So far, the financial system has faced a “trading book” problem; but we cannot rule 
out a “banking book” problem caused by rising defaults. We face a race involving whether 
the  deleveraging  process  can  be  sufficiently  advanced  for  financial  conditions  to  stabilise 
before macroeconomic slowdown, here and abroad, raises loan defaults and so brings a new 
dimension to the challenges in the banking sector and so to the supply of credit to the real 
economy. 
But, absolutely crucially, we also face a nasty shock to costs from rising commodity prices 
and sterling’s depreciation. That is going to push up UK inflation over the next few months, 
creating a risk of upward pressure on pay and higher inflation expectations. 
The MPC’s strategy to date has been clear: to offset part but not all of the shock to demand, 
consistent  with  an  overriding  determination  to  maintain  medium-term  inflation  expectations 
anchored to the 2% target. The path of rates will depend on judgments about the balance of 
those risks to the inflation outlook. And, in the context of my remarks today, that is different 
from a “mopping up” strategy involving simply reducing rates enough to offset estimates of 
the effect of the demand shock plus some insurance on top of that. 
Central bank liquidity policy: the Social Contract 
If  monetary  policy  has  been  constrained  in  alleviating  the  consequences  of  the  financial 
turmoil, so too, for different reasons, has central bank liquidity policy in many centres. 
For  over  a  century  –  coincident  with  the  development  of  central  banking  –  there  has 
effectively been a Social Contract between the banking system and the authorities. On one 
side  of  the  Contract,  commercial  banks  have  been  permitted  to  profit  from  maturity 
transformation, turning liquid savings into illiquid loans. Commercial banks’ ability to do this 
relies  on  their  deposit  liabilities  being  a  universally  acceptable  means  of  payment,  money. 
But maturity transformation – borrowing short to lend long – is risky; it relies on confidence. 
And if that confidence cracks, the costs are felt not just by the customers and shareholders of 
the banks concerned, but more widely in the economy given the potential disruption to the 
payments system. Our monetary economy relies on stability in the banking system. 
The other side of the Contract has, accordingly, had three elements designed to protect the 
economy  from  those  risks.  First,  prudential  regulation  of banks,  to  contain  their risk  taking 
and  so  reduce  the  likelihood  of  confidence  cracking.  Second,  deposit  insurance,  to  make 
retail  depositors  more  or  less  whole  in  the  event  of  failure  notwithstanding  that  regulation. 
And  thirdly,  central  bank  liquidity  policy.  Essentially,  central  banks  have  stood  ready  to 
provide unlimited amounts of liquidity against good collateral at a rate above the market rate 
prevailing during peacetime.1 2  
During the recent turmoil, that last part of the Contract broke down because borrowing from 
the central bank via premium-rate facilities became stigmatised. 
                                                 
1  
In Lombard Street (1873), Bagehot talks about high rates of interest rather than penalty rates as such. This is 
in part because he was writing in the context of the gold standard regime, in which systemic stress was often 
associated with an external flight of credit and so rising short-term interest rates (see pages 56 and 57); in part 
because Bagehot thought about the premium in terms of comparisons with normal conditions (page 197). 
2   This is to be distinguished from support operations for individual institutions. 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 3
This could not have been more important. It has made innovation in central banks’ liquidity 
provision  imperative  during  the  turmoil.  And,  when  we  regain  peacetime,  reforms  will  be 
needed to avoid a recurrence of this problem. Open-market operations (or auctions) against 
wider collateral, and the Bank’s Special Liquidity Scheme launched on 21 April, should both 
be seen in that light. Such measures need to be constructed so that they do not interfere with 
the implementation of monetary policy, which depends on the central bank’s net supply of 
reserves matching demand in the economy so as to stabilise (risk free, or secured) overnight 
money market interest rates broadly in line with the policy rate. 
The  monetary  part  of  central  banks’  market  operations  is  simply  the  injection  of  reserves. 
The  other  characteristics  –  counterparties,  maturity,  collateral  etc  –  are  essentially  non-
monetary interventions. In most circumstances, central banks want to make them as neutral 
as possible, so as not to interfere with relative asset prices in the economy. When markets 
break down, however, central banks may need to calibrate their interventions to contain the 
spillovers to the economy. Thus the SLS is designed to underpin the liquidity of the banking 
system, and so confidence in the system as a whole. 
Taming the credit cycle 
But can we, the authorities, do more to avoid the system getting into such a fragile state in 
the first place? We really must consider how to do that. 
At  the  level  of  the  system,  the  underlying  issue  is  not  that  bankers  are  wicked  or  stupid. 
There is, though, a nasty collective action problem. In the period leading up to the turmoil, 
many  market  participants  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  thought  financial  risk  was  under 
priced, especially in credit markets. But they did not know when the correction would come, 
or indeed that it would definitely come abruptly. Each feared that by “stepping off the bus” 
before  their  competitors,  they  would  crystallise  “business  risk”  as  customers  and  activity 
flowed away from them. This seems to point to the need for some kind of intervention by the 
authorities.  And,  perhaps  with  hindsight,  it  is  baffling  that  the  authorities  internationally 
contented themselves with issuing warnings. 
What  instruments  might  the  authorities  have?  There  are  already  welcome  exercises 
underway to make the Basel Capital Accord less procyclical. The accountancy world is also 
moving  towards  understanding  that  its  policies  affect  behaviour  and  so  system-wide 
conditions. On both these fronts, the design of micro measures affects macro outcomes. 
At  a  more  macro  level,  we  need  to  debate  whether  or  not  it  would  be  feasible  to  design 
discretionary  levers  that  the  authorities  could  employ  as  credit-cycle  circuit  breakers. 
Candidates include the authorities adjusting industry-wide benchmark capital requirements or 
margin requirements to slow commercial banks’ supply of leverage to the financial system 
during  the  upswing.  The  debate  needs  to  be  international,  as  capital  flows  freely  across 
borders and so the capability of national authorities to act alone is constrained. 
Conclusion 
Interest  in  the  issues  I  have  touched  on  this  morning  must  not  ebb  when  peacetime  is 
eventually regained. 
Parochially, there has been massively more public interest in the Bank of England’s financial 
stability role during the period of turmoil than over the preceding years. But what we all do in 
peacetime will affect how the next “war” plays out. We must not forget that. Central banks 
can  play  a  role  because  they  can  bring  together  and  synthesise  analytical  and  practical 
expertise  in  macroeconomic  conditions,  financial  markets  and  the  financial  infrastructure. 
That synthesis is rather special, and should be at the service of the system as a whole. 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2008
