Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Kyodo News, Nikkei, Nippon Hoso 
Kyokai and Yomiuri Shimbun 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  by 
Mr Shogo Akagawa (Nikkei), Mr Keiichi Hirose (Kyodo News), Mr Hiro Nakamura (Yomiuri 
Shimbun) and Mr Shuji Noguchi (Nippon Hoso Kyokai), conducted in Tokyo on 9 February 
2008 and published on 10 and 11 February 2008. 
 How do you assess the discussions at this G7 and the G7 statement? 
I think it was a very, very good discussion – a very important one too because the discussion 
took  place  at  the  moment  where  we  are  experiencing  the  market  correction,  which  is 
significant, which is ongoing and from that standpoint I think it was a very, very timely G7 
meeting.  And  very  stimulating,  very  interesting.  A  very  good  Presidency.  So  from  that 
standpoint, I am very happy.  
How  should  the  G7  behave  in  order  to  overcome  the  problems  caused  by  the  sub-
prime turmoil? And what are your opinions about financial supervision and regulation 
and about the transparency and efficiency of the new financial products? 
First  of  all  I  think  it  is  extremely  important  that  we  learn  all  the  lessons  from  the  present 
events, exactly as in the past we drew – in my opinion very wisely – a lot of lessons from the 
Asian crisis. In Japan, everybody knows, perhaps even better than in Europe, what the Asian 
crisis meant and I think a lot of lessons have been drawn and they are good ones. And now it 
is exactly the same. 
We are experiencing a market correction of great amplitude. We have the first stress-test in 
real  magnitude  of  the  new  global  finance  with  all  the  financial  innovations  and  new 
instruments.  Therefore  it  is  very  important  that  we  draw  all  the  lessons.  We  have  a 
provisional  report  that  was  made  by  the  FSF  –  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  –  which  was 
created after the Asian crisis, by the G7. 
And so we know that we have to improve in a large number of areas, they are mentioned in 
the communiqué and we will have a definitive report in the occasion of the April meetings of 
the  international  community  in  Washington.  So  it  is  a  work  in  progress.  We  have  a  full 
agreement in the G7 on the methodology that permits us to draw lessons from the present 
turbulences  and  we  know  already  that  we  will  have  to  make  very  important  progress  in  a 
large  number  of  areas.  Including  transparency;  including  better  implementation  of  the 
banking surveillance; including progress in valuation of sophisticated instruments; progress 
in the functioning of the credit rating agencies and so forth.  
What are your views on the prospects for EU / euro area economy? 
In  this  G7  meeting  I  have  mentioned  the  fact  that  as  regards  our  own  economy,  we  have 
economic  fundamentals  that  are  good.  I  mentioned  the  fact  that  we  have  no  domestic  or 
external  imbalances.  We  have  a  current  account,  which  is  balanced.  We  have  savings, 
domestic savings that are financing our domestic investments. And we are experiencing the 
ongoing growth.  
That being said, we have the influence of the financial turbulences and uncertainty has to be 
taken into consideration. The European Central Bank has a mandate which is to deliver price 
stability,  to  be  credible  in  delivering  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  to  solidly 
anchor  inflationary  expectations.  This  is  something  that  is  very  important  for  future 
sustainable  growth  and  job  creation  in  Europe  and  also  very  important  in  a  period  of 
turbulences,  because  in  solidly  anchoring  inflationary  expectations  we  contribute  to  the 
BIS Review 15/2008 
 1
stability  of  financial  markets,  of  European  financial  markets  and  we  diminish  the  potential 
volatility of these markets.  
With  regards  to  Japan:  compared  with  the  US  and  Europe,  Japan  is  not  so  much 
affected  by  the  sub-prime  issue,  at  least  so  far.  How  do  you  see  the  state  of  the 
Japanese economy and what kind of role did Japan play in the G7 meeting? 
I  would  say  that  the  Japanese  economy  has  an  enormous  potential,  in  my  own 
understanding:  human  recourses  are  absolutely  exceptional  and  you  have  a  level  of 
technology, of the capacity of innovation and of creativity, which is remarkable.  
That being said, there is a great problem, undoubtedly, which is the overall level of the public 
debt outstanding and the fiscal policy in general. So what I expect and what we all expect of 
course, is the Japanese economy to continue to make progress, to become more sound, and 
to have a capacity to contribute, progressively, more and more to global growth and global 
prosperity. But again I will insist very much on the potential on the Japanese economy, which 
should  not  be  underestimated  from  outside.  When  you  are  in  Japan,  you  see  what  the 
potential is. 
Your  colleague,  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui  participated  today  for  the  last  time  in  the  G7 
meeting  in  his  capacity  of  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  as  his  term  of  office 
comes to an end. How do you evaluate his last 5 years? And as regards the successor 
Mr Toshiro Muto is seen as a leading candidate. What do you think of him? 
I would say Toshihiko, because as you might know we use our first names when we discuss, 
Toshihiko has been, and is, a remarkable Governor of the Bank of Japan, in my opinion. I 
have  enormously  appreciated  cooperation  with  him  on  a  bilateral  basis  and  also  in  the 
occasion of the G10 meetings that we had in Basel as well as in the occasion of the global 
economy meetings that take place in this city. I have presently the privilege of being the chair 
of  these  meetings  and  I  can  say  that  we  all  appreciate  enormously  the  contribution  of 
Toshihiko Fukui.  
And I will certainly see him leaving us with a great deal of regret because he has given an 
enormous contribution. 
As regards his potential successor, I know him and I appreciate him enormously. 
Next question is about emerging market, you have often said, in a press conference in 
January,  that  the  slowdown  of  the  US  economy  will  be  offset  by  the  growth  in  the 
emerging markets. Has the sub-prime issue had any influence on China or India? And 
do we see decoupling effect here? 
I  think  that  it  is  very  important,  of  course,  at  the  global  level  that  when  one  economy  is 
slowing down it is offset by other economies that are picking up.  
I  have  always  said  that  it  was  very  important  to  see  how  and  to  which  extent  the  slowing 
down of the US economy, which is now very, very probable, would be offset by the Asian, 
particularly the emerging Asian economies.  
That being said, I have always been of a certain mind, that we are in a universe where we 
are all interdependent on one another. If the US slows down, it has an influence on all other 
economies. And I would equally say, if the US economy picks up, it has a positive effect on 
the rest of the world.  
And it is exactly the same for Europe. Europe, as you know, is a very important commercial 
power. We are more open than other big economies. We are more open, in terms of trade, 
than Japan or the US.  
So  we  are  all  influencing  the  other  partners  and  I  expect  and  I  hope  that  in  this  very 
globalised  world,  emerging  Asia,  which  has  an  immense  potential,  will  contribute  to  the 
global prosperity. And as I said, the question is to which extent it will offset the slowing down 
in the US, knowing that we are all interdependent.  
2 
 BIS Review 15/2008
I will not make use myself of the expression “decoupling”. I think that decoupling does not 
capture the fact that we are all interdependent. But decoupling, in a way, captures the fact 
that Asian emerging economies can partially offset the slowdown in the US.  
You used the word “unusually high uncertainty” in your introduction statement. What 
does  “unusually  high  uncertainty”  mean?  And  the  inflation  rate  in  the  Eurozone  is 
now above 3%. Will inflation expectations be more moderate in the medium term? 
Your question is very pertinent, because we only have one needle in our compass and the 
needle  in  our  compass  is  price  stability.  We  analyse  absolutely  all  parameters  and  all 
influences with this idea that we have one needle and that we have to deliver price stability in 
the medium term. And again that is very important, and as you see I take all occasions to 
utilise this message, which is very well known.  
We have this mandate of price stability that is clear. We trust that by delivering price stability 
in the medium term and by being credible in the delivery of price stability in the medium term 
we anchor inflationary expectations. By doing so, we are delivering a necessary condition for 
sustainable growth and job creation and also in a period of turbulences for markets to be as 
stable as possible.  
I mentioned, on behalf of the Governing Council, the fact that as regards the real economy, 
we were in an unusually high level of uncertainty and that is very explainable because of the 
financial market turbulence. This market correction of great amplitude, that we are observing, 
creates  an  additional  element  of  uncertainty  as  regards  the  future  evolution  of  the  real 
economy. But again, that being said, the needle in our compass is price stability.  
And it is not only our clear mandate but it is also what the people of Europe, our 320 million 
fellow citizens, are asking from us.  
Why don’t you use the instrument of hump? 
As regards the headline consumer price index I utilised the expression of a protracted period 
of high level of inflation, which will be progressively reduced, in the course of the year, to go 
down over the medium term to our definition of price stability. 
Would you like to explain how price stability in the medium term brings job creation 
and long-term economic growth in the Eurozone and not raising taxes? 
I have to say that this is something that is accepted now by the main stream of economists 
as a result of the past observations. You might remember that there has been a period of the 
so-called  stagflation  in  the  70s,  which  has  permitted  the  economic  analysis  to  make 
important  progress.  And  the  idea  that  we  could  have  a  medium  to  long  term  trade-off 
between inflation and growth is now rejected and that is the reason why you either have a 
monetary  policy  concept  of  our  own  kind  in  Europe  or  the  so-called  inflation  targeting 
concept,  which  is  very  much  generalised  around  the  world  and  which  is  underpinned  by 
exactly  the  same  idea:  by  giving  the  central  bank  the  task  of  delivering  price  stability,  we 
pave the way for sustainable growth and job creation.  
By the way, when I look at Europe, since the setting up of the euro and I examine the job 
creation  during  the  first  nine  years  of  the  euro,  I  have  to  tell  you  that  we  have  had  a 
remarkable  success  in  this  respect:  we  have  created  around  15  million  new  jobs,  in  net 
terms. And I say this not because we are always compared with the US but we have created 
in Net terms around 2 million more jobs than in the United States over this period of 9 years. 
So  again,  as  far  as  the  Euro  is  concerned,  it  has  experienced  a  period  precisely  of  price 
stability with very high level of job creation and we of course are happy about it.  
Is there no risk for the labour market in the Eurozone from this recent turbulence? 
Again, the evolution of the real economy depends on the fallout of the present turbulences 
with  their  unusually  high  uncertainty.  But  we  are  sure  of  one  thing:  we  are  there  as  an 
institution that is responsible for price stability in the medium term. If we are credible, then we 
BIS Review 15/2008 
 3
introduce in a period of turbulence an element of confidence, an element of stability, of trust, 
which  is  in  itself  contributing  to  alleviating  the  pressure  that  might  come  out  of  these 
turbulences and to be better off in terms of growth and job creation.  
Let me just follow up on this question on policies of the ECB. What about the opinions 
from the markets that it is very much the time for the ECB to cut rates because almost 
all of the indicators are getting weaker and weaker. How do you respond to the voices 
that the ECB should follow for example the Federal Reserve or the Bank of England to 
help support the economy? Because, as you say, it is very much interdependent.  
First observation, I said our economy fundamentals are sound and we think that we have an 
ongoing  growth,  which  is  significant.  Even  if  the  risks  for  the  real  economy  lie  on  the 
downside as I have said last Thursday and as I said today. But again, an ongoing growth is 
there and the economic fundamentals are sound.  
So we are all in our own environment, with our own responsibilities – the Bank of England 
has its responsibility; the US Fed has its responsibility. The European economy is not the US 
economy and both sides of the Atlantic are not in the same situation.  
Second observation, we had, as you said, some economic news in the euro area that are 
going  on  the  downside  in  a  number  of  cases  but  in  other  cases  –  I  shall  give  you  a  few 
examples – we see positive figures. Recently industrial production was a little bit better than 
before. We have seen the Ifo Institute of Germany releasing better index than was foreseen. 
When  I  look  at  credit,  despite  the  fact  that  we  have  a  banking  lending  survey  which  says 
there has been a tightening of the credit standards, nevertheless it is something that has to 
be noted that we have had a very dynamic outstanding credit to non-financial corporations. 
The figure is 14.4% on a yearly basis in our last observation. So these figures are there as 
well. 
And again, the Governing Council of the ECB, taking into account the situation as a whole, 
decided that 4% for our present interest rate was the right level. The level that would permit 
us, in this multidimensional situation, to deliver price stability in the medium term.  
As I said publicly, we have had inside the governing council, no call for an increase in rates, 
which has been noted with great attention. But equally no call for a decrease of rates, and we 
will  in  the  future  do  whatever  is  necessary  to  solidly  anchor  inflation  expectations  and  we 
know that in so doing we pave the way for sustainable growth and job creation. 
You  said  that  you  do  not  deny  that  all  the  subjects  were  discussed,  and  some 
participants interpreted that even if it was not the official call among the members of 
the Governing Council there was maybe an unofficial discussion about rate cut?  
No, that would be a wrong interpretation. We had a very thorough discussion because the 
situation 
is  complex  and  of  a  multidimensional  nature.  Perhaps  even  unusually 
multidimensional,  taking  all  elements  into  account.  As  I  said,  there  was  no  call  for  a  rate 
increase and no call for a rate cut.  
The French government has the problem of Société Générale while many banks will be 
announcing  results  later  this  month.  Do  you  expect  in  the  euro  area  that  financial 
situation is better than in the US and that there should be no huge problems from the 
sub-prime crisis? 
First of all I think that the case of Société Générale it is something that is very different from 
the  sub-prime  issue.  But  I  don’t  want  to  comment  on  this  particular  case  because  in  our 
system it is Banque de France that has responsibility for banking surveillance in France and 
the  Governor  of  Banque  de  France  Christian  Noyer  said  what  had  to  be  said  in  the 
circumstances.  
On the issue of the banking sector, I will say that in Europe in particular the message I would 
ship  is  exactly  the  message  that  we  agreed  at  the  level  of  the  international  community, 
namely  transparency  is  of  the  essence.  Transparency  as  regards  the  so-called  sub-prime 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2008
exposure,  transparency  as  regards  the  appropriate  valuation  of  the  various  instruments, 
transparency as regards the losses. In any case it seems to me that at the global level we 
are in the presence of a very small number of global accounting firms that will have to certify 
all the accounts of all the banks. And I am speaking on behalf of all banks on both sides of 
the Atlantic or on both sides of the Pacific and I expect that we will have the display of the 
right figures fully respecting the transparency principle which is certainly of the essence. 
About the euro, after Thursday’s press conference the value of the euro has somewhat 
changed. How do you see the current level of the euro, is it at the permissible level 
reflecting the current fundamentals? 
You  know  that  I  consider  verbal  discipline  to  be  absolutely  of  the  essence  as  regards  the 
exchange rates. I have just signed with my colleagues of the G7 the communiqué. It speaks 
by itself. And I will certainly not comment on the day-to-day basis of the ups and downs of 
the exchange market. But I would say that I have always appreciated the mention by the US 
Treasury Secretary and by Ben Bernanke that a strong dollar is in the interest of the US. 
In relation to the Europe – Japan relationship: because of the rise of China it seems 
that Japan has somehow eclipsed in the international arena. However, I observe that 
there should be much stronger relation between our two areas. So what would be your 
recommendation,  how  would  you  see  to  re-enhance  our  ties  between  Europe  and 
Japan? 
I  think  that  it  is  not  true  that  Japan  is  not  considered  a  major  industrial  power,  a  major 
economic  power.  And  as  far  as  we  are  concerned  in  the  ECB,  but  I  think  I  can  speak  on 
behalf  of  all  Europeans,  we  know  what  Japan  is,  what  its  importance  is  in  the  global 
economy and also what its potential is. In terms of GNP, in terms of economic influence in 
the  world,  Japan  is  of  considerable  importance.  The  G7  is  today  here  in  Tokyo  under  the 
chairmanship of Japan. And that is very important point.  
It is of course true that the emerging Asia is doing marvellous, I would say not only China, 
but  India  and  the  ASEAN  countries  which  are  also  representing,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  a 
population  of  500  million,  which  is  something  considerable.  What  we  see  is  a  fantastic 
change, for the best, at a global level. And I would say it is not only Japan, as an industrial 
power with those new economic powers coming in, it is all of us: it is Japan, plus Europe, 
plus the US. So, again, I would say, don’t trust for one minute that Japan is under-assessed 
by the Europeans. And perhaps, don’t trust either that it is under-assessed in the US. It is not 
the way we see the situation, I am sure. 
Is the euro already a key currency like the US dollar? 
I will let you have the responsibility of the question. I would only say that as far as the ECB is 
concerned,  my  predecessor  and  I  have  always  said  that  we  are  not  campaigning  for  the 
international use of the euro. We let market participants, investors, savers to make their own 
judgement. But, again, we are not campaigning for the international use of the euro. 
BIS Review 15/2008 
 5
