Amando M Tetangco, Jr: 15th anniversary of the Central Bank of the 
Philippines   
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the BSP 15th Anniversary, Manila, 3 July 2008. 
 Magandang umaga sa inyong lahat!  
Fellow  central  bankers,  on  behalf  of  the  Monetary  Board,  I  greet  all  of  you  a  happy  15th 
anniversary!  
By any measure, this is a milestone we should celebrate and be proud of. Why do I say this? 
Well,  you  and  I  know  that  the  first  15  years  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  has  been 
fraught with challenges. As an institution starting afresh, we had to reorganize and align our 
policies in accordance with the clear mandate given to the Bangko Sentral: to stabilize prices 
and ensure a sound banking system.  
Soon  after,  we  had  to  contend  with  the  fallout  from  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  political 
upheavals,  natural  calamities,  and  the  threats,  as  well  as  opportunities,  that  globalization 
brings.  
Nevertheless,  we  always  pulled  through  and  emerged  the  better  for  it.  In  the  process,  we 
have  been  able  to  provide  stability  to  the  economy  and  the  country  through  responsive 
monetary and banking policies. For this we thank all of you – ladies and gentlemen of the 
Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas.  Let  us  therefore  give  ourselves  a  well-deserved  round  of 
applause.  
Once  again,  let  us  acknowledge  the  contributions  of  former  MB  Members  Dr.  Vicente 
Valdepenas, Jr. and Atty. Raul Boncan by giving them a big hand.  
Let’s also give a round of applause for our present MB members: Secretary Romulo Neri; 
former Finance Secretary Juanita Amatong; Atty. Nelly Favis-Villafuerte; Mr. Alfredo Antonio; 
and our brand-new MB member Atty. Ignacio Bunye.  
Palakpakan din po natin ang dalawang na-unang gobernor ng Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas: si 
Governor Gabriel Singon at si Governor Rafael Buenaventura!  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  collective  efforts  of  central  bankers,  past  and  present,  have 
generated recognition for Governor Singson, Governor Buenaventura and myself and most 
of all, for our beloved institution – the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. These are well-deserved 
recognition that we should be proud of.  
In fact, 2007 was a banner year for the Bangko Sentral as we were able to tame inflation to 
2.8%, the lowest in 21 years, even as high global oil prices were hitting record high levels. 
That we achieved this low rate of inflation rate as the economy posted its best growth rate in 
three decades made for an ideal convergence of high growth and low inflation.  
We  also  ended  2007  with  record  high  gross  international  reserves,  balance  of  payments 
surplus,  higher  foreign  investments,  and  a  strong  peso  that  emerged  as  one  of  Asia’s  top 
performing currencies. 
And  even  as  a  strong  peso  had  an  adverse  effect  on  our  income  last  year,  we  remain 
financially  strong  and  solid.  Our  capital  base  is  now  roughly  15  times  the  P10  billion  we 
started out with 15 years ago. 
Thus, while imported inflation from record high food and oil prices has started to affect local 
prices this year, we are still able to anchor expectations.  
BIS Review 88/2008 
 1
We are take pride in the fact that we were able to nurture our banking system back to health 
from  the  depths  of  the  Asian  financial  crisis  without  the  massive  government  bailouts  that 
other countries in the region resorted to. Our solution: to improve the quality of supervision 
and  implement  far-reaching  structural  reforms  in  cooperation  with  the  Executive  and 
Legislative branches of government. Today, bank profits are better and capital base deeper, 
while NPA and NPL ratios are nearly back at pre-crisis levels. As a result, our banking sector 
is recognized as strong and able to withstand the fallout from the global financial turmoil.  
Furthermore,  banks  are  consolidating  into  stronger  institutions  even  as  their  delivery  of 
banking  services  and  new  financial  products  now  extend  well  beyond  urban  centers  and 
deep into the countryside and islands. 
A stable, secure and efficient payments and settlements system is another source of pride 
for us.  
In  addition,  we  are  happy  that  our  advocacy  in  sustainable  microfinance  has  energized 
smaller  banks,  especially  rural  banks,  into  bringing  in  more  people  within  the  banking 
system, not just for a working capital loan, but also for deposits and remittances. In fact, we 
are leading the way for central banks in product innovation for microfinance and garnering 
international recognition for it in the process.  
We  have  also  made  much  progress  in  broadening  available  alternatives  for  overseas 
Filipinos in sending remittances to their beneficiaries. Greater competition has led to lower 
remittance  cost,  better  accessibility,  quicker  delivery,  and  generally  better  services  that 
facilitates the inflow of remittances into the economy.  
We also continue to register gains in our economic and financial education program for the 
general  public.  Our  goal  is  to  provide  economic  empowerment  and  to  protect  them  from 
financial frauds.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  have  given  you  the  broad  picture  of  the  impact  of  the  Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas on our economy and on our people’s lives.  
No doubt about it: we have a crucial and critical role in improving the lives of Filipinos. And 
so  far,  we  have  been  doing  quite  well.  However,  the  challenges  ahead  are  increasingly 
complex. Oil price has breached $140 and central banks all over the world are concerned 
about  inflation.  We  do  need  to  exert  more  effort  to  be  even  better.  For  this,  we  need  to 
strengthen  cooperation  within  our  institution,  we  need  to  work  closer,  to  unite  as  One 
Dynamic Team! Tama ba? Very good!  
Now, let us ask the different sectors:  
MSS under DG Diwa Guinigundo, are we one dynamic team?  
RMS under DG Armando Suratos, are we one dynamic team? 
SES under DG Nestor Espenilla, are we one dynamic team?  
EMS, are we one dynamic team? 
May  video  streaming  nga  pala  na  ginawa  ang  ITSS  kaya  napapanuod  din  tayo  ng  live  sa 
SPC at sa regional offices and branches natin. Kumusta kayo?  
Tatanungin ko rin kayo ha at irereport ni Asst. Gov. Eve Avila at ni Managing Director Pete 
Tordilla kung malakas din ang sagot ninyo.  
SPC, are we one dynamic team? 
RMSS, are we one dynamic team? 
Now, everybody, is the BSP Family one dynamic team?!!! OK!  
Fellow  central  bankers,  we  need  to  continue  to  re-invent  ourselves  and  position  our 
personnel for all the challenges that may lie ahead. The first 15 years of our journey has led 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2008
us  to  reorganize  ourselves;  upgrade  employee  compensation  and  benefits;  strengthen  our 
strategic  planning  and  budgeting  process;  improve  our  facilities  and  equipment;  align  our 
training  programs  to  world-class  standards;  send  our  best  and  brightest  staff  to  the  best 
universities;  unveil  progressive  wellness  programs;  and  open  our  doors  to  recruitment  of 
fresh talents.  
Moving forward, you can be sure, we will continue to invest in our people. After all, at the end 
of  the  day,  good  central  banks  are  all  about  having  good  people.  And  you  –  ladies  and 
gentlemen of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas – you are our most valuable assets.  
Mabuhay ang Bangko Sentral! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas!  
Happy anniversary to all. 
BIS Review 88/2008 
 3
