Frederic S Mishkin: Central bank commitment and communication 
Speech  by  Mr  Frederic  S  Mishkin,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Princeton  University  Center  for  Economic  Policy  Studies  Dinner, 
New York, 3 April 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 One of the things I often tell my 25-year-old son is, "Keep your options open." In effect, this 
means that today he should make the best decision possible using the information he has at 
hand, and when tomorrow comes he should reconsider all of his options, and again the next 
day,  and  so  on.  In  the  terminology  of  economists,  this  strategy  is  usually  referred  to  as 
"dynamic  optimal  policy  under  discretion."  And  the  idea  of  complete  discretion  may  sound 
like  a  great  idea  –  after  all,  why  should  you  restrict  your  choices?  Nevertheless,  in  the 
context  of  central  banking,  the  modern  science  of  monetary  policy  indicates  that  a 
discretionary approach can lead to poor economic outcomes.1  
Therefore,  in  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  explain  how  a  commitment  to  keeping 
inflation low and stable can help foster the stability of economic activity as well as the stability 
of prices. After analyzing the pitfalls of discretion and the benefits of a firm commitment to a 
nominal  anchor,  I  will  discuss  the  role  of  central  bank  communication  in  promoting  this 
commitment. I will then illustrate these conceptual principles by considering the experiences 
of other central banks that have adopted explicit numerical inflation objectives. 
As usual, these remarks reflect only my own views and are not intended to reflect those of 
the Federal Open Market Committee or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve 
System.2  
Pitfalls of discretionary monetary policy  
Starting  in  the  1970s,  the  economics  profession  began  to  recognize  that  the  evolution  of 
economic activity and inflation – and hence the design of optimal monetary policy – depends 
crucially  on  how  households,  firms,  and  financial  market  investors  form  their  expectations 
regarding the future course of policy.3 This recognition of the central role of expectations in 
macroeconomic outcomes led to the discovery of the time-inconsistency problem, a concept 
that sounds highfalutin but is actually quite intuitive.4  
This  problem  arises  whenever  the  possibility  of  short-run  gains  creates  a  temptation  to 
renege on an existing plan, even though following that plan would produce a better outcome 
over the longer run. In essence, if a good long-run plan will not be followed consistently over 
time because the short-run gains of deviating from the plan are too tempting, then that plan is 
said  to  be  time-inconsistent.  In  such  a  setting,  the  time-consistent  policy  is  to  reoptimize 
                                                 
1   Mishkin (2007c) provides extensive discussion of the modern science of monetary policy and its implications 
for the design and communication of the policy framework. 
I  would  like  to  thank  Spencer  Dale,  Christopher  Erceg,  Etienne  Gagnon,  Linda  Kole,  Andrew  Levin,  and 
Ricardo Nunes for assistance and helpful comments in preparing this speech. 
2  
3   This  change  in  views  occurred  as  a  result  of  the  so-called  rational  expectations  revolution,  which  was 
launched by a series of remarkable papers by Nobel Prize-winner Robert Lucas (1972, 1973, 1976). 
4   The time-inconsistency problem was first outlined in papers by Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Calvo (1978). 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 1
every period, whereas the preferable alternative would be to establish a firm commitment to 
the optimal long-run plan.  
To  take  a  common  example  that  illustrates  the  time-inconsistency  problem,  someone  may 
make  a  New  Year’s  resolution  about  starting  a  diet.  At  some  point  thereafter,  however,  it 
becomes hard to resist having a little bit of Rocky Road ice cream, and then a bit more, and 
pretty soon the weight begins to pile back on.  
The time-inconsistency problem arises in the context of monetary policy, because there is a 
temptation  to  give  a  short-run  boost  to  economic  output  and  employment  by  pursuing  a 
course  of  policy  that  is  more  expansionary  than  firms  or  workers  had  initially  expected.5 
Nevertheless,  if  the  economy  is  already  at  full  employment,  then  this  boost  is  merely 
transitory: As economic activity rises above its sustainable level, wages and prices begin to 
rise,  and  the  private  sector's  inflation  expectations  start  to  pick  up.  Of  course,  the  central 
bank  must  eventually  remove  the  policy  stimulus  to  avoid  a  continuous  upward  spiral  of 
inflation. At that point, economic activity drops back to a sustainable level. However, inflation 
settles  in  at  a  permanently  higher  rate  because  prospects  of  future  monetary  expansions 
become  embedded  in  expectations,  and  hence  in  wage  and  price  adjustments,  and  the 
higher  average  inflation  rate  generates  undesirable  economic  distortions.6  Thus,  failing  to 
address the time-inconsistency problem poses the risk of ending up with a higher average 
inflation  rate,  with  detrimental  long-run  consequences  for  economic  efficiency  and  the 
general standard of living. 
As my mother often told me when I was growing up, "The road to hell is paved with good 
intentions." Similarly, discretionary monetary policy, even though well intended, can lead to 
poor economic outcomes. 
Benefits of a firm commitment to a nominal anchor 
How  can  a  central  bank  overcome  the  time-inconsistency  problem?  The  answer  is  to 
establish a firm commitment to a nominal anchor – that is, to ensure that inflation remains 
low  and  stable  over  time.  In  a  speech  that  I  gave  last  week,  I  highlighted  the  merits  of 
specifying  an  inflation  objective  in  terms  of  a  specific  numerical  value.7  With  an  explicit 
numerical  inflation  objective,  the  central  bank's  strategy  is  aimed  at  keeping  economic 
activity close to a sustainable growth path and at maintaining a low and stable inflation rate. 
Such a commitment ensures that the central bank resists the temptation to pursue short-run 
expansionary  policies  that  are  inconsistent  with  the  long-run  goals  of  price  stability  and 
maximum sustainable employment. 
A strong commitment to an explicit numerical inflation objective has other significant benefits. 
First,  the  long-run  inflation  expectations  of  households  and  firms  are  a  key  factor  in 
determining the actual behavior of inflation.8 In the absence of a firm nominal anchor, these 
expectations may wander over time as the private sector revises its assessment of the rate 
at  which  inflation  is  likely  to  settle  down,  and  those  movements  in  long-run  inflation 
expectations  can  generate  pressure  on  the  current  inflation  rate.  Thus,  by  establishing  a 
transparent and credible commitment to a specific numerical objective, monetary policy can 
                                                 
5   Barro and Gordon (1983) first described the time-inconsistency problem as it applied to monetary policy. 
6   As described in Mishkin (2008c), a higher average inflation rate tends to generate distortions in relative prices, 
a reduction in the level of investment in physical capital, and a decline in private-sector holdings of currency 
and other non-interest-bearing financial assets. 
7   Mishkin (2008c). 
8   Mishkin (2007a). 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2008
provide  a  firm  anchor  for  long-run  inflation  expectations,  avoiding  such  pressures  and 
thereby  directly  contributing  to  the  objective  of  low  and  stable  inflation.  Moreover,  such  a 
commitment can play an important role in minimizing the risk of “inflation scares” – that is, 
episodes  in  which  longer-term  inflation  expectations  jump  sharply  in  response  to  specific 
macroeconomic developments or monetary policy actions.9
Second, as I emphasized in a speech in late February, establishing a firm commitment to a 
nominal  anchor  can  help  stabilize  output  and  employment.10  Specifically,  to  counter  a 
contractionary demand shock, the monetary authorities need to reduce the short-run nominal 
interest rate; however, the effectiveness of such a policy action may be hindered if long-run 
inflation  expectations  are  not  firmly  anchored.  For  example,  if  the  private  sector  becomes 
less  certain  about  the  longer-run  inflation  outlook,  then  an  increase  in  the  inflation  risk 
premium  could  boost  longer-term  interest  rates  by  more  than  the  increase  in  expected 
inflation. The higher inflation risk premium would place upward pressure on the real costs of 
long-term financing for households and businesses (whose debt contracts are almost always 
expressed in nominal terms) and hence might partially offset the direct monetary stimulus. 
Thus,  a  central  bank  commitment  that  firmly  anchors  long-run  inflation  expectations  can 
make  an  important  contribution  to  the  effectiveness  of  the  central  bank’s  actions  aimed  at 
stabilizing economic activity in the face of adverse demand shocks.  
Third,  a  strong  commitment  to  an  explicit  inflation  objective  provides  the  central  bank  with 
greater flexibility to respond decisively to adverse demand shocks. Such a commitment helps 
ensure  that  an  aggressive  policy  easing  is  not  misinterpreted  as  signaling  a  shift  in  the 
central  bank's  inflation  objective,  and  thereby  minimizes  the  possibility  that  inflation 
expectations  could  move  upward  and  lead  to  a  rise  in  actual  inflation.  A  strong  nominal 
anchor can be especially valuable in periods of financial market stress; at such times, prompt 
and  decisive  policy  action  may  be  required  to  prevent  the  financial  market  disruption  from 
causing a severe contraction in economic activity that could further exacerbate uncertainty 
and financial market stress, leading to a further deterioration in macroeconomic activity, and 
so  on.11  Thus,  by  providing  the  central  bank  with  greater  flexibility  in  mitigating  the  risk  of 
such an adverse feedback loop, the strong commitment to an explicit inflation objective can 
play  an  important  role  in  promoting  financial  stability  as  well  as  the  stability  of  economic 
activity and inflation.  
Fourth,  a  strong  nominal  anchor  can  help  minimize  the  effects  of  an  adverse  cost  shock, 
such  as  a  persistent  rise  in  the  price  of  energy.  Generally  speaking,  such  shocks  tend  to 
result  in  weaker  economic  activity  as  well  as  higher  inflation.  However,  when  longer-term 
inflation  expectations  are  firmly  anchored,  an  adverse  cost  shock  is  likely  to  have  only 
transitory  effects  on  actual  inflation;  hence,  there  may  be  no  need  to  raise  interest  rates 
aggressively  to  keep  inflation  from  moving  upward.  Thus,  the  commitment  to  a  nominal 
anchor  can  help  reduce  output  and  employment  fluctuations  that  impose  unnecessary 
hardship on workers and, more broadly, the economy. 
The  bottom  line  is  that  a  transparent  and  credible  commitment  to  an  explicit  numerical 
inflation  objective  can  provide  significant  benefits  in  facilitating  the  central  bank's  task  of 
stabilizing both economic activity and inflation as well as fostering the stability of the financial 
system. 
                                                 
9   Goodfriend (1993). 
10   Mishkin (2008b). 
11   Mishkin (2008a). 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 3
The role of central bank communication 
Although  a  strong  commitment  to  a  nominal  anchor  is  associated  with  significant  benefits, 
establishing and maintaining such a commitment tends to be easier said than done. After all, 
my discussion of the time-inconsistency problem indicates that there are always pressures to 
renege on that commitment. Here I will argue that central bank communication to increase 
transparency  and  accountability  can  play  a  key  role  in  helping  central  banks  maintain  a 
strong commitment to a nominal anchor. 
The  public  announcement  of  an  explicit  numerical  inflation  objective  increases  the 
accountability of a central bank and therefore promotes the monetary authority's commitment 
to delivering low and stable inflation. As put by a former governor of the Bank of Canada, 
such objectives give the public a "precise yardstick for measuring how [the central bank] is 
doing."12  The  credibility  of  the  central  bank  may  rise  over  time  as  the  public  comes  to 
appreciate  its  success  in  delivering  inflation  outcomes  consistent  with  its  stated  numerical 
objective. Similarly, the temptation to pursue policy actions inconsistent with the objective – 
and  hence  renege  on  its  commitment  –  may  be  diminished,  because  large  or  persistent 
deviations of inflation from the stated goal would be observed by the public and thus would 
be more likely to be called into question. As I argued in a speech last week, accountability is 
further enhanced if the inflation objective is stated as a numerical value rather than a range 
or comfort zone.13
But couldn't a numerical inflation objective be easily changed at the whim of the central bank 
or the government? The time-inconsistency problem could then rear its ugly head, because 
raising the numerical inflation objective could be used to justify more expansionary monetary 
policy to generate higher employment and output in the short run. Although this temptation to 
renege  on  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable  might  be  present,  the  transparency  of  a  public 
change in the numerical inflation objective, which will subject it to public scrutiny and debate, 
makes it much harder to engage in such opportunistic behavior. Unless an adjustment of the 
explicit  inflation  objective  is  perceived  to  be  driven  by  analytical  considerations,  it  will  be 
viewed as violating the public's trust. The resulting loss of credibility on the part of the central 
bank  (or  the  government)  could  be  devastating;  hence,  there  are  strong  incentives  not  to 
change  the  inflation  objective  absent  sound  technical  reasons  for  doing  so.  Indeed, 
adjustments to the numerical inflation objective or the inflation measure have rarely occurred 
in practice, and those adjustments have been consistent with clear scientific reasoning.14
However, two important communication challenges arise in establishing a firm commitment 
to  an  explicit  numerical  inflation  objective.  First,  a  central  bank  must  make  clear  that  this 
commitment  should  not  be  regarded  as  implying  that  the  central  bank  will  continuously 
maintain inflation at the specified rate or even that the inflation rate will always return to that 
rate over a fixed time horizon, in the same way that one might pledge to lose 20 pounds in 
                                                 
12   Dodge (2002). 
13   Mishkin (2008c). 
14   Two cases are worth noting here. First, the New Zealand government raised the upper bound of the Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand's inflation band by 1 percentage point in 1996 (from 2 percent to 3 percent) and raised 
the lower bound by 1 percentage point in 2002 (from 0 percent to 1 percent); these changes were consistent 
with  the  science  of  monetary  policy,  which  had  reached  a  consensus  that  allowing  inflation  to  remain  very 
close to zero could have detrimental consequences for the economy (Mishkin, 2008c). Second, the Bank of 
England's  inflation  objective  was modified  in late 2003, establishing  a target  of 2 percent for the consumer 
price  index  (CPI)  that  replaced  the  previous  target  of  2-1/2  percent  for  the  retail  price  index  excluding 
mortgage  interest  (RPIX).  In  that  case,  as  noted  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  there  were 
significant conceptual reasons for switching to the RPIX as a measure of U.K. inflation, while the downward 
adjustment of 1/2 percentage point in the numerical objective reflected the average magnitude of deviations 
between CPI inflation and RPIX inflation over the previous decade or so (King, 2004). 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2008
the  next  six  or  nine  months.  Given  that  every  economy  is  constantly  buffeted  by  various 
shocks, it is generally neither feasible nor desirable to try to keep inflation constant at some 
specific level. Thus, a commitment to keep inflation low and stable should be interpreted in a 
probabilistic  sense  –  that  is,  policy  will  act  in  a  manner  that  keeps  inflation  close  to  the 
inflation  objective  on  average  over  time,  and  unusually  large  shocks  may  result  in  more 
persistent deviations from this objective.  
A second challenge stems from the fact that the optimal monetary policy under commitment 
to an inflation objective is oriented toward minimizing variability in the real economy as well 
as  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable.15  As  a  consequence,  when  a  given  shock  causes 
inflation  to  deviate  significantly  from  the  numerical  objective,  the  central  bank  must 
communicate how its policy strategy will bring inflation back to this rate within a reasonable 
timeframe  and  how  this  strategy  will  minimize  fluctuations  in  output  and  employment  over 
that horizon.16 For example, it is generally desirable to reduce inflation gradually following an 
adverse cost shock in order to alleviate the contractionary effects on the real economy. 
These challenges highlight the extent to which central bank projections for economic activity 
and  inflation  play  an  important  role  in  maintaining  a  strong  commitment  to  a  nominal 
anchor.17 The central bank must clarify how the economic outlook shapes its current policy 
actions as well as the anticipated path of policy. Moreover, as the economy deviates from 
those forecasts, as it inevitably does, the central bank must explain how policy will adapt to 
achieve the broad economic goals of price stability and maximum sustainable employment.  
Publicly announcing forecasts of inflation has the additional benefit of helping anchor inflation 
expectations,  thereby  enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  actions  to  stabilize 
economic  activity  and  lowering  the  economic  cost  of  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation. 
Another benefit of publishing such forecasts is that discussion of the forecast can be used to 
highlight the analysis and reasoning behind monetary policy decisions, which can help the 
public  to  better  understand  monetary  policy  actions  and  strengthen  the  central  bank’s 
credibility. 
Although  communication  is  a  crucial  element  in  establishing  and  maintaining  a  strong 
commitment  to  a  nominal  anchor,  with  its  attendant  benefits,  there  are,  of  course,  other 
elements as well. Even if a central bank recognizes that a policy geared solely toward near-
term economic activity will lead to poor outcomes – high inflation with lower economic growth 
–  it  still  may  not  be  able  to  commit  to  a  strong  nominal  anchor  and  avoid  the  time-
inconsistency  problem,  because  special  interests  may  try  to  apply  pressure  on  the  central 
bank  to  boost  employment  in  the  short  term  through  an  overly  expansionary  monetary 
policy.18
How  can  the  central  bank  be  insulated  from  short-run  pressures  to  pursue  expansionary 
policy  at  the  expense  of  high  inflation?  There  is  a  broad  international  consensus  that  the 
                                                 
15   Mishkin (2007b). 
16   Svensson (1997). 
17   Indeed, the Federal Reserve  has  published  quantitative forecasts for several key macroeconomic variables 
(output growth, unemployment, and inflation) as part of its semiannual reports to the Congress since 1979. 
Several months ago, the Federal Reserve enhanced its communications by publishing these forecasts on a 
quarterly basis, lengthening the horizon of the projections, and providing additional quantitative and qualitative 
information (Bernanke, 2007; Mishkin, 2007d). 
18   Almost two centuries ago, British economist David Ricardo summarized the argument for granting operational 
independence to the central bank: "It is said that Government could not be safely entrusted with the power of 
issuing paper money; that it would most certainly abuse it.…There would, I confess, be great danger of this if 
Government – that is to say, the Ministers – were themselves to be entrusted with the power of issuing paper 
money" (Ricardo, 1823). 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 5
central  bank  should  have  full  authority  to  determine  the  short-run  setting  of  its  policy 
instruments,  without  any  external  interference.19  In  addition,  I  believe  that  central  bank 
communication is crucial in promoting public support for maintaining low and stable inflation. 
Indeed, in a democratic society, every government agency is ultimately accountable to the 
public, and the establishment of transparent objectives and of a clear policy strategy plays an 
essential role in facilitating that accountability. 
The  old  adage  correctly  states  that  "Actions  speak  louder  than  words,"  and,  clearly,  just 
announcing  an  objective  for  inflation  does  not  mean  anything  unless  the  actual  policies 
pursued by the monetary authorities are consistent with the objective. Words, however, do 
matter  if  those  words  help  ensure  that  the  appropriate  policy  actions  will  be  taken  and 
strengthen  the  public's  confidence  that  the  central  bank  will  continue  to  act  in  a  manner 
consistent with its long-run objectives. As I have argued here, the increase in transparency 
and  accountability,  which  results  from  clear  communication  about  inflation  objectives  and 
about how monetary policy will be conducted to achieve these objectives, creates stronger 
incentives  for  central  banks  to  avoid  the  pursuit  of  short-run  overly  expansionary  policies. 
This  approach  also  helps  establish  a  credible  commitment  to  pursuing  policies  that  keep 
inflation under control and economic activity growing on a sustainable path. 
The international experience 
My  discussion  so  far  has  been  pretty  theoretical.  But  one  might  reasonably  ask  whether 
communication  about  inflation  objectives  and  about  how  monetary  policy  is  conducted  to 
achieve  these  objectives  actually  helps  strengthen  the  commitment  to  fostering  low  and 
stable  inflation,  and  thereby  produces  better  economic  outcomes.  More  specifically:  Does 
communication of inflation objectives lead to increased public support for the central bank? 
Improved inflation performance? More firmly anchored inflation expectations?  
Over  the  past  two  decades,  most  of  the  major  foreign  central  banks  have  adopted 
frameworks  which  have  the  overriding  objective  of  bolstering  public  confidence  that 
policymakers will act to keep inflation low and stable. While self-declared "inflation targeters" 
are  the  most  prominent  in  this  regard,  other  central  banks  also  have  introduced  explicit 
inflation  objectives  of  some  kind,  generally  in  the  form  of  a  preferred  inflation  point  or 
range.20  To  address  the  questions  that  I  listed  earlier,  I  will  draw  lessons  from  the 
international  experience  with  explicit  numerical  inflation  objectives,  while  deferring  further 
consideration of the United States until the conclusion of these remarks. 
Central  bank 
increased  central  bank 
independence helps support a commitment to a strong nominal anchor and thus should lead 
to  better  inflation  performance.  Evidence  supports  the  conjecture  that  macroeconomic 
performance  is  improved  when  central  banks  are  more  independent.  For  example,  when 
central  banks  in  industrialized  countries  are  ranked  according  to  the  degree  of  legal 
independence of the central bank, those countries with the highest degree of central bank 
independence are found to have the best inflation performance.21
I  have  already  noted 
independence. 
that 
                                                 
19   For an example of how the time-inconsistency problem can be modeled as resulting from political pressure, 
see  Mishkin  and  Westelius  (2006).  Independence  to  set  policy  instruments  also  insulates  the  central  bank 
from the myopia that can be a feature of the political process. Instrument independence thus makes it more 
likely that the central bank will be forward-looking and adequately allow for the long lags from monetary policy 
actions to inflation in setting its policy instruments. 
20   I discussed the relative merits of inflation objectives stated as points or ranges in Mishkin (2008c). 
21   Further analysis and discussion is given by Alesina and Summers (1993), Cukierman (1993), and Debelle and 
Fischer (1994); Forder (2000) and Cukierman (2006) have surveyed the more recent literature on central bank 
independence. 
6 
 BIS Review 40/2008
I have also argued that adopting an explicit objective can help strengthen the accountability 
of  monetary  policy  actions  and  hence  may  promote  public  support  for  the  operational 
independence  of  the  central  bank.  Although  there  has  been  a  pronounced  trend  toward 
increased  central  bank  independence  at  the  same  time  that  monetary  policy  frameworks 
have  adopted  explicit  inflation  objectives,  it  would  be  unwarranted  to  claim  that  this 
correlation  implies  causation  from  adoption  of  explicit  inflation  objectives  to  central  bank 
independence. However, this is where case studies can help us.  
One  example  that  illustrates  how  having  an  explicit  inflation  objective  encouraged  public 
support  for  stabilizing  inflation  and  for  the  independence  of  the  central  bank  occurred  in 
Canada in 1996. At that time, there was an important public debate about whether monetary 
policy  was  excessively  contractionary.22  In  this  case,  the  existence  of  an  explicit  inflation 
objective  channeled  that  debate  into  a  substantive  discussion  over  what  should  be  the 
appropriate target for inflation, with both the Bank of Canada and its critics obliged to make 
explicit  their  assumptions  and  estimates  of  the  costs  and  benefits  of  different  levels  of 
inflation. Indeed, the debate, as well as the Bank of Canada's record and responsiveness to 
that debate, led to increased support for the Bank, with the result that criticism of the Bank 
and its conduct of monetary policy became much less of a political issue.  
Another interesting example, which I do not have time to discuss in detail here, occurred with 
the granting of operational independence to the Bank of England in May 1997 after it had 
adopted  an  explicit  numerical  inflation  objective.23  In  explaining  the  decision  to  grant 
operational independence to the Bank of England, the government specifically pointed to the 
Bank's  successful  performance  in  providing  forecasts  and  clear  explanations  of  the  likely 
effects  of  a  range  of  policy  alternatives,  thereby  increasing  accountability  and  making  the 
central bank more responsive to political oversight.  
Inflation outcomes. The adoption of a monetary policy framework with an explicit inflation 
objective has hinged on the belief that such a framework ultimately delivers better inflation 
outcomes. Thus, it is legitimate to inquire whether inflation outcomes in the economies that 
have adopted such frameworks have been in line with the stated objectives.  
Chart  1  displays  the  inflation  objective  and  the  relevant  measure  of  realized  inflation  in  a 
sample  of  industrialized  economies.  Overall,  the  economies  that  adopted  explicit  inflation 
objectives have experienced substantial improvements in their inflation performance; indeed, 
in each case the central bank has been largely successful at keeping inflation in line with the 
stated objective, sometimes even more than might have been anticipated when establishing 
that  objective.24  Of  course,  inflation  has  occasionally  deviated  from  the  objective,  as  one 
would expect from the fact that every economy is continuously buffeted by various sorts of 
                                                 
22   This  debate  was  triggered  by  a  speech  given  by  the  president  of  the  Canadian  Economic  Association.  For 
further discussion of this episode, see Bernanke and others (1999). 
23   Until May 1997, the setting of the monetary policy instrument had been determined by the government, not by 
the  Bank  of  England.  At  that  point,  the  newly  appointed  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  Gordon  Brown, 
announced that the Bank of England would henceforth have the responsibility for setting both the base interest 
rate and short-term exchange-rate interventions. For more discussion of this episode, see Mishkin and Posen 
(1997) and Bernanke and others (1999). 
24  The  following  anecdote  provides  a  measure  of  the  extent  to  which  some  policymakers  were  pleasantly 
surprised  by  their  central  bank's  success  in  keeping  inflation  in  line  with  its  objective.  The  Governor  of  the 
Bank of England must write an open letter to the Chancellor of the Exchequer when inflation deviates from the 
official  target  by  more  than  1  percentage  point.  About  a  year  after  the  Bank  of  England  was  granted 
operational independence, the Bank's chief economist wrote that "[even] if inflation shocks were to disappear 
entirely,  the  continued  presence  of  demand  shocks  would  imply  that  [open  letters]  would  still  be  triggered 
more than 40 percent of the time" (Bean, 1998). A decade later, inflation has remained within 1 percentage 
point of the target in all but a single month, or less than 1 percent of the time. 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 7
shocks. Nonetheless, these inflation deviations have been relatively small and transitory by 
historical standards. Most important, there is little evidence of a systematic upward bias in 
inflation,  which  would  arise  if  the central  bank were  attempting  to  stimulate  output  beyond 
what would be consistent with maintaining low and stable inflation.  
I also want to emphasize that this improvement in inflation performance has not been at the 
expense of higher employment and output fluctuations; indeed, the variability of output and 
employment fluctuations has generally declined in those economies where the central bank 
has maintained an explicit inflation objective.25
Inflation  expectations.  Economies  with  explicit  numerical 
inflation  objectives  have 
(fortunately) not been alone in enjoying relatively low and stable inflation over the past couple 
of decades; indeed, in some cases, inflation was already low and stable prior to the adoption 
of the explicit objective. It is thus legitimate to investigate whether the establishment of an 
explicit  inflation  objective  has  had  other  measurable  effects,  particularly  with  regard  to  the 
anchoring of long-run inflation expectations.26
Chart  2  presents  realized  inflation  along  with  a  survey-based  measure  of  mean  inflation 
expectations  at  the  two-year-ahead  and  six-to-ten-year-ahead  horizons.  The  evidence 
supports  the  view  that  medium-  to  long-term  expectations  have  become  well  anchored 
around 
inflation 
expectations have converged toward the official inflation objective in all countries. This fact is 
consistent  with  central  banks  making  credible,  long-term  commitments  to  pursuing  their 
objectives, even in countries where the objective must be renewed on a regular basis.  
the  official  objectives.  First,  survey-based  measures  of 
long-term 
Moreover,  surveys  of  professional  forecasters  in  each  of  these  economies  reveal  that,  on 
average, forecasters expect deviations in realized inflation to disappear within two years or 
less. In effect, these forecasters anticipate that the central bank will take the policy actions 
necessary to ensure that inflation lines up with the explicit objective over a reasonable time 
horizon. Econometric analysis of financial market data also indicates that long-run inflation 
expectations are firmly anchored in each of the economies in which the central bank has an 
explicit numerical inflation objective.27
                                                 
25   See the empirical analysis and discussion of Fatás, Mihov, and Rose (2007) and Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel 
(2001, 2007). 
26   I will spare the audience a thorough discussion of the methodological issues involved in the measurement of 
inflation expectations. Some recent work on the topic was presented at the Conference on Price Measurement 
for Monetary Policy, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas on May 24-25, 2007. 
27   See  Castelnuovo,  Altimari,  and  Rodriguez-Palenzuela  (2003);  Levin,  Natalucci,  and  Piger  (2004);  and 
Gürkaynak,  Levin,  and  Swanson  (2006).  There  is  also  some  evidence  that  the  dispersion  of  inflation 
expectations  may  decrease  with  adoption  of  explicit  inflation  objectives.  Mankiw,  Reis,  and  Wolfers  (2003) 
have shown that simple survey statistics, such as the mean or median inflation expectations, can sometimes 
hide substantial cross-sectional dispersion in survey responses. If a central bank's credibility in meeting the 
inflation  objective  truly  increases  over  time,  one  should  then  observe  less  disagreement  among  inflation 
forecasters. The international evidence  on this aspect  is  unfortunately scant due to  limited data availability. 
Beechey,  Johannsen,  and  Levin  (2007)  recently  showed  that  the  cross-sectional  dispersion  of  long-run 
inflation expectations in the European Central Bank (ECB) Survey of Professional Forecasters, as measured 
by  the  standard  deviation,  has  more  than  halved  since  the  ECB,  with  its  explicit  inflation  objectives,  was 
launched in 1999. Although this evidence cannot be used directly to measure the impact that the adoption of 
an explicit inflation objective has on the dispersion of inflation expectations, it nevertheless suggests that there 
are additional benefits to increasing a central bank’s credibility. 
8 
 BIS Review 40/2008
Conclusion 
In  a  speech  last  week,  I  argued  that  the  science  of  monetary  policy  provides  a  strong 
rationale  for  framing  the  inflation  goal  in  terms  of  a  specific  point  objective  rather  than  a 
range  or  comfort  zone.28  My  remarks  today  provide  further  elaboration  about  how  the 
establishment of a firm commitment to an explicit numerical inflation objective contributes to 
better outcomes for both inflation and economic activity. First, I have explained the pitfalls of 
discretionary monetary policy and the benefits of a strong commitment to a nominal anchor. 
Second, I have considered how central bank communications promote such a commitment. 
Third,  I  have  highlighted  some  key  lessons  from  the  experiences  of  other  major  industrial 
economies that have adopted explicit inflation objectives.  
Finally,  you  may  have  noticed  that  I  haven’t  said  much  about  the  United  States  in  this 
speech.  Nevertheless,  the  principles  emphasized  in  my  remarks  today  and  in  last  week's 
speech have potentially important implications for the ongoing process of refining the Federal 
Reserve's  policy  framework  and  of  enhancing  our  communications.  Indeed,  as  Chairman 
Bernanke has recently indicated, our communication strategy is "a work in progress," and the 
Federal  Reserve  "will  continue  to  look  for  ways  to  improve  the  accountability  and  public 
understanding of U.S. monetary policy making."29 I hope that these remarks will be helpful in 
contributing to the continuation of that process. 
References 
Alesina,  Alberto,  and  Lawrence  H.  Summers  (1993).  "Central  Bank  Independence  and 
Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence", Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking, vol. 25 (May), pp. 151-62. 
Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon (1983). "A Positive Theory of  Monetary  Policy in a 
Natural Rate Model", Journal of Political Economy, vol. 91 (August), pp. 589-610. 
Beechey, Meredith, Benjamin Johannsen, and Andrew Levin (2007). "Are Long-Run Inflation 
Expectations Anchored More Firmly in the Euro Area than in the United States?", Centre for 
Economic  Policy  Research  Discussion  Paper  6536.  London:  Centre  for  Economic  Policy 
Research Discussion, October. 
Bean,  Charles  (1998).  "The  New  UK  Monetary  Arrangements:  A  View 
Literature", Economic Journal, vol. 108 (November), pp. 1795-809. 
from 
the 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). "Federal Reserve Communications", speech delivered at the Cato 
Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14.  
Bernanke,  Ben  S.,  Thomas  Laubach,  Frederic  S.  Mishkin,  and  Adam  S.  Posen  (1999). 
Inflation  Targeting:  Lessons  from  the  International  Experience.  Princeton:  Princeton 
University Press. 
Calvo,  Guillermo  A.  (1978).  "On  the  Time  Consistency  of  Optimal  Policy  in  a  Monetary 
Economy", Econometrica, vol. 46 (November), pp. 1411-28. 
Castelnuovo,  Efrem,  Sergio  Nicoletti  Altimari,  and  Diego  Rodríguez-Palenzuela  (2003). 
"Definition of Price Stability, Range and Point Inflation Targets, and the Anchoring of Long-
                                                 
28   Mishkin (2008c). 
29   Bernanke (2007). 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 9
Term Inflation Expectations," in O. Issing, ed., Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation 
of its Monetary Policy Strategy, Frankfurt: European Central Bank, pp. 43-90. 
Cukierman,  Alex 
Influence  and 
Macroeconomic Performance: A Survey of Recent Development", Cuadernos de Economía, 
vol. 30 (no. 91), pp. 271-92.  
Independence,  Political 
"Central  Bank 
(1993). 
_________  (2006).  "Central  Bank  Independence  and  Monetary  Policy  Making  Institutions: 
Past, Present, and Future", Journal Economía Chileña, vol. 9 (April), pp. 5-23. 
Debelle, Guy, and Stanley Fischer (1994). "How Independent Should a Central Bank Be?" in 
Jeffrey  C.  Fuhrer,  ed.,  Goals,  Guidelines,  and  Constraints  Facing  Monetary  Policymakers, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series No. 38. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank 
of Boston, pp. 195-221. 
Dodge, David (2002). "Trust, Transparency, and Financial Markets", speech delivered at the 
Greater Halifax Partnership, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, June 11. 
Fatás, Antonio, Ilian Mihov, and Andrew K. Rose (2007). "Quantitative Goals for Monetary 
Policy", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 39 (August), pp. 1163-76. 
Forder,  James  (2000).  "Central  Bank  Independence  and  Credibility:  Is  There  a  Shred  of 
Evidence?" International Finance, vol. 3 (April), pp. 167-85. 
Goodfriend, Marvin (1993). “Interest Rate Policy and the Inflation Scare Problem: 1979-1992 
(636 KB PDF)", Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Quarterly, vol. 79 (Winter), 
pp. 1-24. 
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Andrew Levin, and Eric T. Swanson (2006). "Does Inflation Targeting 
Anchor Long-Run Inflation Expectations? Evidence from Long-Term Bond Yields in the U.S., 
U.K., and Sweden", Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 5808. London: 
Centre for Economic Policy Research, August. 
King,  Mervyn  (2004).  "The  New  Inflation  Target", speech  delivered  at  the  Birmingham 
Forward/CBI Business Luncheon, Birmingham, United Kingdom, January 20.  
Kydland,  Finn  E.,  and  Edward  C.  Prescott  (1977).  "Rules  Rather  than  Discretion:  The 
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans", Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85 (June), pp. 473-92. 
Levin,  Andrew  T.,  Fabio  M.  Natalucci,  and  Jeremy  M.  Piger  (2004).  "The  Macroeconomic 
Effects of Inflation Targeting", Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Economic Review, vol. 86 
(July/August, Inflation Targeting: Prospects and Problems, Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth 
Annual Economic Policy Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis), pp. 51-80. 
Lucas,  Robert  E.,  Jr.  (1972).  "Expectations  and  the  Neutrality  of  Money", Journal  of 
Economic Theory, vol. 4 (April), pp. 103-24. 
_________  (1973).  "Some  International  Evidence  on  Output-Inflation  Tradeoffs", American 
Economic Review, vol. 63 (June), pp. 326-34. 
_________  (1976).  "Econometric  Policy  Evaluation:  A  Critique", Carnegie-Rochester 
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 1, pp. 19-46. 
Mankiw, N. Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers (2003). "Disagreement about Inflation 
Expectations" National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  Working  Paper  #  9796.  Cambridge, 
Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. 
10 
 BIS Review 40/2008
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2007a).  "Inflation  Dynamics",  speech  delivered  at  the  Annual  Macro 
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 23. 
__________  (2007b).  "Monetary  Policy  and  the  Dual  Mandate",  speech  delivered  at 
Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10. 
_________  (2007c).  "Will  Monetary  Policy  Become  More  of  a  Science?"  Finance  and 
Economics  Discussion  Series  2007-44.  Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, September. 
_________  (2007d).  "The  Federal  Reserve's  Enhanced  Communication  Strategy  and  the 
Science of Monetary Policy", speech delivered to the Undergraduate Economics Association 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., November 29. 
_________  (2008a).  "Monetary  Policy  Flexibility,  Risk  Management,  and  Financial 
Disruptions", speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, January 
11. 
_________ (2008b). "Does Stabilizing Inflation Contribute to Stabilizing Economic Activity?" 
speech delivered at East Carolina University, Greenville, N.C., February 25. 
_________  (2008c).  "Comfort  Zones,  Shmumfort  Zones",  speech  delivered  to  the  Virginia 
Association of Economists, Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Va., March. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.,  and  Adam  S.  Posen  (1997).  "Inflation  Targeting:  Lessons  from  Four 
Countries",  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Economic  Policy  Review,  vol.  3  (August), 
pp. 9-110. 
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (2001). "One Decade of Inflation Targeting 
in the World: What Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know?" in Norman Loayza and 
Raimundo  Soto,  eds.,  Inflation  Targeting:  Design,  Performance,  Challenges.  Santiago: 
Central Bank of Chile, pp. 117-219. 
_________ (2007). "Does Inflation Targeting Make a Difference?", NBER Working Paper No. 
W12876. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. 
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Niklas J. Westelius (2006). "Inflation Band Targeting and Optimal 
Inflation Contracts", NBER Working Paper No. 12384. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of 
Economic Research, July. 
Ricardo, David (1823). "Plan for the Establishment of a National Bank," reproduced in J.R. 
McCulloch, ed., The Works of David Ricardo – With a Notice of the Life and Writings of the 
Author (1888). London: John Murray. 
Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997). "Optimal Inflation Targets, “Conservative” Central Banks, and 
Linear Inflation Contracts", American Economic Review, vol. 87 (March), pp. 98-114. 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 11
12 
  BIS Review 40/2008
BIS Review 40/2008 
  13
