Jean-Claude Trichet: Toward the first decade of Economic and Monetary 
Union – experiences and perspectives 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  36th 
Economics  Conference  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  on  “Toward  the  First  Decade  of 
Economic and Monetary Union – Experiences and Perspectives”, Vienna, 28 April 2008. 
 Verehrter Herr Bundeskanzler, 
Ministers, Excellencies, 
Dear Klaus, 
Sehr geehrte Kollegen der Oesterreichischen Nationalbank,  
Dear colleagues of the Eurosystem,  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would first like to thank very warmly the Oesterreichische Nationalbank for inviting me to 
speak here today on the occasion of the forthcoming 10th anniversary of the Eurosystem. It 
is  both  a  privilege  and  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today  and  to  share  with  such  a 
distinguished audience my views on the track record of the Eurosystem and the challenges 
that lie ahead of us. 
Not too long ago, many prominent commentators thought a single currency in Europe was 
unfathomable.  Many  amongst  those  adept  to  the  politics  and  sociology  of  European 
integration made the point that national banknotes were more than just a means of payment 
or  the  embodiment  of  a  unit  of  exchange  for  the  citizens  of  Europe.  National  banknotes 
communicated  national  icons  that  resonated  deeply  with  homeland  feelings.  The  national 
central banks themselves were by and large seen as monuments to territorial sovereignty.  
Sceptics  were  numerous  among  economists.  Experts  in  international  macro-economics 
feared that a single monetary policy would not suit a group of countries deemed diverse in 
many respects. A single currency would be a hindrance for growth stars – which would suffer 
from chronic overheating – and laggards – no longer able to devalue their currency – alike. 
Scholars of political economy found the coexistence of sovereign national fiscal policies and 
a single monetary policy a precarious combination. A (sub-)optimal currency area would not 
work  in  the  face  of  widening  economic  gaps,  free-riding  policies  and  cross-national 
resentment.  
Close to completing its first decade of operations, the euro symbol appears as an icon of the 
decade-long quest for continental reconciliation. Sceptics of all persuasions and disciplines 
have  been  confounded  by  the  determination  and  ability  of  the  governments  of  Europe  to 
launch  a  new  single  currency.  Far  from  suppressing  growth  and  entrenching  divergences, 
the euro has spurred a spectacular drive of job creation virtually everywhere in the Union – a 
trend  to  which  I  shall  return  later  in  my  remarks.  By  fostering  a  long-due  redressing  of 
economic priorities and processes, the euro has helped rejuvenating some economies that 
had  been  written  off  as  too  ossified  and  self-complacent  to  successfully  compete  in  a 
monetary union. We see signs that this restructuring is spreading to other parts of the Union 
that have been less successful so far in taking up the challenge.  
Well-designed institutions and a strong sense of shared responsibility are the foundations of 
good collective performance. So, our institutional framework and the inner workings of the 
Eurosystem will be my principal theme. Examples will include the successful transition to the 
euro, both at the outset of monetary union – our first operational challenge – and as part of 
an ongoing process of continental integration and inclusion which the European System of 
Central bank has taken upon itself as a mission. I will then proceed to the impact that the 
euro is exercising on the deep economic structure of Europe. Finally, I will outline the ECB’s 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  through  difficult  and  sometimes  agitated  events.  The  recent 
BIS Review 52/2008 
 1
turbulences in global financial markets will offer the background against which our strategy 
can be recognised and understood. A strategy that reconciles flexibility of action and a firm, 
fundamental, concentration on our primary responsibilities. 
The ECB itself has very rapidly become a mature institution. Collegial thinking in monetary 
policy  deliberations  has  instilled  a  shared  strategic  view  and  common  goals.  The 
transformation was quick. Almost instantly, the Governing Council of the ECB shaped into a 
truly  collegial  body,  a  “team”,  rather  than  a  collection  of  individuals.  Not  only  has  this 
transformation  preserved  the  Governing  Council  from  the  emergence  of  national  biases.  It 
also has inspired in its members a profound sense of common ownership of decisions. This 
has been decisive for the critical task of active representation that Governors have: the task 
of  expounding  the  rationale  for  our  common  policy  course,  and  explaining  our  single 
monetary  policy  before  the  various  national  constituencies  in  their  own  languages.  And  I 
would  like  here  to  pay  homage  to  my  dear  friend  Klaus  Liebscher,  Gouverneur  of  the 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank, who is a fantastic member of our monetary team and whose 
wisdom has been and is priceless in the Governing Council.  
Interactions across staff at the ESCB level have also intensified virtually from day zero. In 
fulfilling our mandate we rely heavily on the close cooperation between ECB and NCB staff 
that  meet  regularly  in  various  technical  committees.  The  existence  in  the  Eurosystem  of 
these technical bodies offers an important first platform in the way toward the achievement of 
shared  decisions.  For  example,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  is  in  charge  of  the 
Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  which  represent  an  important  input  for  the 
monetary policy deliberations of the Governing Council. The discussions that take place in 
this committee in preparation of the Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections provide a 
forum  where  differences  of  assessment  across  the  NCBs  can  be  identified  and  reconciled 
into a common picture at an early stage. More generally, the Eurosystem’s culture of very 
close  and  intimate  cooperation  at  all  levels  of  staff  in  the  context  of  committees,  working 
groups and taskforces support decision making in the Governing Council. 
The successful transition to the euro 
Cooperation and a sense of camaraderie were critical in preparing for our big-bang. In spite 
of  the  extraordinary  operational  hazards  involved,  the  euro  changeover  in  January  1999 
passed without any incident affecting the orderly conditions of the monetary system. Large-
value  payment  systems  and  billions  of  electronic  records  were  adjusted  to  function  in  the 
new currency. At the same time, a new infrastructure for payments and securities settlement 
was launched. Three years later, the euro became a tangible reality and the euro banknotes 
and  coins  became  the  legal  tender  for,  at  that  time,  more  than  300  million  citizens.  The 
smooth  introduction  of  the  euro  in  1999  and  the  success  of  the  cash  changeover  in  2002 
were the result of years of thorough preparatory work involving the ECB, the NCBs and a 
large number of public and private institutions which represent the core of the financial sector 
in the euro area. This has been reflected in the open and positive way in which the general 
public and financial markets have received the euro.  
No  doubt  the  introduction  of  the  euro  and  the  realisation  of  stage  three  of  European 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) was a milestone in the long and multifaceted process 
of  European  integration.  A  completely  new  monetary  policy  framework  was  introduced  in 
Europe, with the ECB conducting a single monetary policy for the entire euro area consisting 
of eleven and soon twelve countries. But despite the uncertainty surrounding the transition to 
the  new  regime,  the  ECB  and  the  euro  have  been  credible  from  day  one.  Market  interest 
rates at all maturities converged to the lowest – not the average – interest rates prevailing 
prior to the euro. This caught by surprise those observers who had long anticipated that the 
yield curve after aggregation would translate into a sort of arithmetic average of the curves 
defined on the legacy currencies, rather than into the benchmark set by the most credible 
previous national currencies. In parallel, long-term inflation expectations aligned with the low 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2008
levels of the best performing economies that were merged into the euro. As a result, in some 
euro  area  countries,  short-,  medium-  and  long-term  market  interest  rates  fell  to levels  that 
had not been seen since the long-gone days of the gold standard. They have remained at 
those levels ever since.  
How  can  a  new  currency  with  no  historical  credentials  secure  such  trust  and  confidence? 
Preconditions  were  sound  institutions,  and  the  Community’s  determination  to  lay  the 
monetary  union  on  the  steady  foundations  provided  by  the  most  credible  national  central 
banks  and  the  best  public  policy  available  in  Europe.  In  two  words:  strong  monetary  and 
strong fiscal institutions.  
The  new  single  monetary  authority  was  to  be  indisputably  devoted  to  the  maintenance  of 
price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  Safeguarding  stable  prices  is  a  necessary  condition  for 
serving  the  other  Community  objectives,  such  as  non-inflationary  economic  growth,  job 
creation and social cohesion. In order to accomplish this goal, the new central bank was to 
be  guaranteed  full  independence,  in  close  continuity  with  its  forebears,  in  an  international 
Treaty.  
While the Treaty was very explicit about the primary objective of the new monetary authority, 
it  was  left  to  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  to  define  and  announce  the  strategy  that 
would support price stability. But at the time of our institutional design it could not be taken 
for  granted  that  previously  established  economic  relationships  and  regularities  would 
continue to hold after the transition to monetary union. This placed a premium on choosing a 
strategic framework that would prove robust to changing circumstances and would continue 
to stand the test of time in the face of new challenges. To devise the best possible monetary 
policy for the new currency, we built on the wisdom and the wealth of experience that had 
been accumulated in the preceding decades by central banks and the academia.  
By  formulating  and  publishing  the  definition  of  price  stability,  the  overriding  objective  of 
monetary  policy,  in  quantitative  terms,  in  total  continuity  with  the  definition  existing,  before 
the  euro,  in  the  countries  of  the  core  currencies,  namely  less  than  2 %,  the  ECB  has 
provided the basis for market participants to form expectations efficiently and to reduce the 
sensitivity  of  inflation  expectations  to  short-term  shocks.  Without  firm  guidance  on  the 
strategy and the objective of monetary policy,  a central bank risks that temporary adverse 
price shocks result in a reappraisal of the expected inflation rate by the public. Disorientation 
about the true intentions and determination of the monetary authorities can force upon the 
central bank an overly aggressive pattern of reaction to inflationary risks in order to state its 
intentions by the force of facts. This, in turn, can lead to unnecessary volatility in both output 
and  inflation.  We  thought  that  this  pattern  could  be  avoided  if  the  potential  disconnect 
between expectations formation and central bank priorities was addressed and solved in the 
founding act of our central bank, the act that defined its mission and the strategic means to 
accomplish its mission.  
A  transparent  monetary  policy  framework,  comprising  of  a  quantitative  definition  of  price 
stability, and of a candid display of our strategy based upon tow pillars, an economic analysis 
and  a  monetary  analysis,  provide  a  strong  anchor  for  inflation  expectations  and  facilitates 
markets’ understanding of the systematic responses of monetary policy to the evolution of 
macroeconomic conditions. There is compelling empirical evidence that the ECB’s open and 
timely  communication  on  its  objectives,  strategy  and  assessment  of  the  economic  outlook 
has been reflected in a high level of predictability for its monetary policy decisions. Reduced 
market volatility in recent years also supports the view that the understanding of the ECB’s 
monetary policy framework and its communication has improved over time. At the same time, 
the ECB’s quantitative definition of price stability provides a clear yardstick against which the 
public and its elected representatives can hold the ECB accountable.  
Moreover, research has shown that the inflation process becomes less persistent and more 
forward-looking  when  the  economy  internalises  the  central  bank’s  objective  firmly.  In  fact, 
this  is  what  we  observe  in  the  euro  area.  The  influence  of  the  ECB’s  quantified  inflation 
BIS Review 52/2008 
 3
objective  on  the  evolution  of  inflation  is  an  important  factor  that  expedites  the  process  by 
which the economy absorbs shocks that, otherwise, could have long-lasting implications for 
inflation. In a sense, the forward-lookingness that our quantitative definition of price stability 
introduces in price and wage setting makes the inflation process less inertial – that is, more 
forgetful of past adverse innovations – than it would be otherwise, if expectations internalised 
our  objective  less  firmly  and  past  inflation  were  the  only  guide  in  price  setting.  This  is  an 
important factor which, in Europe, helps compensate for the added inflation inertia that stems 
from  more  rigid  production  and  distribution  systems.  And  when  I  say  “more  rigid”  I  mean 
relative to the United States where the frequency of price changes is almost twice as high as 
in the euro area.  
Nevertheless, it is not the stability-oriented monetary policy framework of the ECB alone that 
has  made  the  successful  transition  to  the  euro  possible.  As  I  said  earlier,  monetary 
responsibility  is  difficult  to  exercise  if  economic  institutions  tolerate  unbridled  government 
borrowing. In the end, absent fiscal restraint, hard choices will be forced upon responsible 
monetary authorities. Over time, the risk that the central bank periodically might be forced to 
clamp down in the attempt to ensure price stability is capitalised in higher financing costs, 
making  the  job  of  the  central  bank  in  controlling  inflation  all  the  more  difficult.  Without  the 
clear  directions  and  the  constructive  goals  offered  by  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  the 
inbuilt  bias  in  favour  of  budget  deficits  could  undermine  a  stable  monetary  constitution, 
elevate real interest rates, crowd out capital spending and lower productivity growth.  
The ECB’s past track record 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  ECB’s  past  track  record.  Guiding  inflation  and  interest  rate 
expectations  requires  not  only  precise  and consistent communication of  the  central  bank’s 
ultimate objective and the strategy, but also consistency between words and deeds. In the 
end,  only  a  track  record  of  monetary  policy  decisions  can  support  the  central  bank’s 
credibility. Looking back in time, the ECB is also gradually building up its own track record – 
something which, as a new institution, simply did not exist when we started operations.  
Since its inception, the Eurosystem has been tested by a series of events and challenges, 
some of which we shared with the other major economic areas in the world, and some which 
were  characteristic  of  our  European  environment.  Thanks  to  a  well-defined  institutional 
framework  laying  down  the  conditions  for  a  sustainable  convergence  process,  the 
progressive  integration  of  a  number  of  catching-up  economies  is  an  enterprise, a  mission, 
which the euro area – unique among the great economic powers in the world – has set for 
itself and to which it has successfully worked. Euro adoption by Greece, Slovenia, Cyprus 
and Malta was smooth and technically flawless, despite the potential challenges that each 
enlargement round implicates in both operational and economic terms. Some of these events 
are charged with formidable symbolic implications. For example, Slovenia’s accession and 
rise  to  the  Union’s  presidency  has  been  only  the  most  recent  and  vivid  testimony  to  the 
notion that the trauma of the iron curtain – once gripping Europe – is definitely behind us.  
Some facts which punctuated our short history were less joyful events. My memory goes to 
the bursting of the dot-com bubble, the aftermath of the tragic terrorist attacks on 9/11, the 
persistence of sizeable global imbalances, the surge in global commodity and energy prices 
and, more recently, the surge of food prices and the financial turbulences that originated from 
the sub-prime crisis. These shocks were very significant and quite persistent, but the ECB 
has not hesitated to take firm and timely actions to pursue a monetary policy that best serves 
the ultimate objective of maintaining price stability, while at the same time trying to minimise 
unnecessary macroeconomic disruptions.  
As  a  result,  over  the  past  ten  years,  the  inflation  rate  in  the  euro  area  has  remained  on 
average in a tight vicinity of 2%, although it has occasionally risen above levels that the ECB 
considers consistent with conditions of price stability. It is remarkable that even amidst such 
adverse  and  potentially  unsettling  disturbances,  financial  markets  and  the  public  at  large 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2008
term.  Amidst 
turbulent  circumstances, 
the  ECB  has  purposely  chosen 
have  not  lost  faith  that,  in  line  with  our  strategy,  we  would  reaffirm  price  stability  over  the 
medium 
to 
communicate and enact a sense of direction. Adjustments to its policy stance were intended 
to preserve medium- and long term price stability in an environment of high uncertainty. A 
steady  monetary  policy  course  has  substantially  contributed  to  stabilising  medium  to  long-
term inflation expectations at a level consistent with our definition of price stability, while, at 
the  same  time,  protecting  our  economy  from  the  corrosive  influence  of  policy-induced 
volatility.  
As I mentioned earlier, growth and employment were undeterred by this. The euro and our 
monetary policy are providing a positive impetus for the euro area economy, vindicating the 
soundness of the institutional setting of EMU. Since the launch of the euro, most euro area 
countries  enjoy  much  more  favourable  financing  conditions  than  in  the  1990s,  supporting 
private and public investment as well as fiscal consolidation. Real gross capital formation in 
the euro area in the nine years after the introduction of the euro grew on average by 2.9% 
per  year,  as  compared  to  only  1.7%  during  the  nine-year  period  prior  to  the  euro.  A 
particularly noteworthy  development  is  the  marked  improvement  in  the  performance  of  the 
euro  area  labour  markets.  Since  the  start  of  EMU,  around  15.7  million  people  have  been 
added  to  the  number  of  employees  in  the  euro  area,  in  comparison  to  approximately  5.5 
million in the nine preceding years. At the same time, the euro area unemployment rate has 
fallen to its lowest level since the early 1980s. These are encouraging developments, which 
show that the structural reforms and the degree of wage moderation necessitated by the new 
economic  environment  have  helped  to  overcome  some  of  the  constraints  on  growth 
stemming, in particular, from still rigid and over-regulated markets in a number of economies.  
The euro is also supporting the deepening of trade and financial linkages across euro area 
countries.  There  is  clear  evidence  that  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency  and  the 
associated increase in price and cost transparency have promoted both intra- and extra-euro 
area trade in goods and services. Exports and imports of goods and services within the euro 
area  rose  from  about  31%  of  GDP  in  1998  to  around  40%  in  2007.  The  completion  of  a 
single market for services will further facilitate trade in services. The rate of increase in extra-
euro area exports and imports of goods and services even exceeded that in intra-euro area 
trade, rising from about 32% of GDP in 1998 to almost 44% in 2007. Extra-euro area trade 
has,  of  course,  also  benefited  from  a  period  of  strong  external  demand  and  increasing 
integration at a global and European level. All in all, this also proves that we did not build a 
fortress Europe and that regional integration can go hand in hand with increased openness 
and globalisation. 
Finally,  the  euro  is  acting  as  a  catalyst  towards  a  single  market  in  financial  services  as 
evidenced by a number of indicators. For instance, euro area cross border holdings of long-
term debt securities have risen markedly since the launch of the euro from around 10% in 
1997 to approximately “60%” in 2005. In a similar vein, between 1997 and 2005 euro area 
residents doubled their holdings of equity issued in another euro area country, while, at the 
same time, the share of euro area equity assets held outside the euro area remained much 
lower  and 
investment  opportunities 
enhances the allocation of resources to their best uses. Also, the diversification of national 
income  sources  will  improve  the  opportunities  for  smoothing  consumption  in  the  face  of 
localised shocks.  
But complacency would be off mark. The European leaders’ March 2000 meeting in Lisbon 
recognised  that  the  European  economic  model  was  in  need  of  a  competitive  fix.  They 
launched  what  came  to  be  known  as  the  Lisbon  Agenda,  which  set  a  fully  innovative  and 
competitive  Europe  as  a  ten-year  goal.  To  date,  progress  has  been  uneven.  Regulatory 
inhibitions  in  many  respects  still  hold  back  Europe’s  growth  potential.  Long-standing 
structural  rigidities  are,  in  my  view,  the  major  cause  of  the  remaining  difference  in  growth 
potential  in  Europe  as  compared  to  the  best  advanced  industrialised  economies.  Reforms 
are essential in order to raise factor productivity and potential output, to create new jobs, to 
increased  only  slightly.  Expanding  cross-border 
BIS Review 52/2008 
 5
achieve lower prices and higher real incomes, and to increase the resilience and flexibility of 
the  economy.  When  pushed  to  the  edge,  we  know,  Europeans  seem  to  regroup  and 
productively engage the global community. A major catch-up on the Lisbon Agenda will be 
our next frontier. 
The ECB’s policy response to the tensions in financial markets 
I left the recent financial turbulence as my last point. Well before the financial turmoil erupted 
in August last year, the ECB, as well as other central banks and institutions, have pointed out 
regularly in their communications that there was a significant underpricing of risks in a large 
array  of  markets.  On  the  basis  of  our  diagnosis,  we  explicitly  and  publicly  called  for 
institutions  and  markets  to  prepare  themselves  for  a  correction  that  was  unavoidable  and 
necessary to consolidate a smooth return to a normal assessment of risks in markets. When 
these risks materialised last summer and threatened to impair the orderly functioning of the 
euro  money  market,  the  ECB  reacted  immediately  and  provided  overnight  liquidity  to  the 
interbank  money  markets  in  a  sequence  of  fine-tuning  operations.  Subsequent  measures 
that were launched since August 2007 were designed to ensure that very short-term money 
market rates remained close to the ECB’s policy rate and to contain spreads in the longer-
term segment of the money market. During this turbulent period, the Eurosystem remained, 
as  usual,  in  close  contact  with  other  major  central  banks  and  joined  a  concerted  liquidity 
providing  measure  in  December  2007.  Overall,  the  ECB’s  timely  liquidity  operations  have 
contributed to ensure a smooth functioning of the short end of the money market without – of 
course – eliminating the causes of the tensions, originating outside the money market. 
In  this  context,  it  is  imperative  to  stress  that  the  ECB  conducted  these  money  market 
operations  without  changing  its  monetary  policy  stance,  which  the  Governing  Council 
determines on the basis of its economic and monetary analysis and in full accordance with 
the ECB’s primary objective of maintaining price stability over the medium term. In view of 
safeguarding its credibility and firmly anchoring long-term inflation expectations, it is crucial 
that the Governing Council sets the appropriate monetary policy stance on the basis of no 
other  considerations  than  the  delivery  of  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  Once  the 
appropriate level of the key ECB interest rates has been set, the Executive Board of the ECB 
implements monetary policy so that the effects of its interest rate decisions are transmitted to 
the  financial  markets  and  the  real  economy  effectively.  In  this  sense,  the  ECB  had  to  act 
swiftly and decisively to deviations of money market rates from its policy rate to support its 
monetary policy objective and to avoid that tensions in the money market would spill-over to 
other markets and adversely affect the real economy. 
But central banks’ liquidity operations cannot address the underlying causes of the financial 
turmoil. Careful reflection has taken place at the European and global level with regard to the 
policy lessons that need to be drawn on a co-ordinated basis by public authorities with regard 
to the measures necessary to avoid the recurrence of such major turbulent episodes in the 
future. In this respect the recent report released by the Financial Stability Forum embodies 
the  consensus  of  the  international  community  on  the  recommendations  that  we  consider 
among the immediate priorities for addressing the underlying causes of the financial turmoil.  
Let me briefly stress the essence of the diagnosis that has inspired the G7 recommendations 
of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum:  first,  and  most  importantly,  financial  markets  are  currently 
marked  by  a  lack  of  transparency.  The  absence  of  full  information  on  both  financial 
instruments and institutions is a trigger to contagion and herd behaviour at times of financial 
distress.  High  levels  of  transparency  are  an  important  feature  of  a  healthy  global  financial 
architecture  and  make  markets  more  efficient  by  reducing  irrational  behaviour.  Financial 
institutions should fully and promptly disclose their risk exposures, write-downs and fair value 
estimates  for  all  instruments.  Second,  there  is a  large  element  of  pro-cyclicality  present  in 
numerous  rules,  regulations  and  procedures  that  govern  global  financial  markets.  These 
elements  tend  to  amplify  the  booms  as  well  as  the  busts  and  encourage  imprudent 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2008
behaviour.  A  careful  reduction  –  without  any  prejudices  –  of  the  pro-cyclical  components 
present in the global financial system is therefore warranted.  
I kept the turmoil for my conclusions because it crystallises two principal tenets, two leading 
principles behind our strategy: flexible action guided by a steady and unwavering compass. 
We sprung into action as the seriousness of the hardships in markets and the need for the 
central bank support became evident. It did not take long – a few hours – for us to identify 
the degree of stress that was gripping the markets and to clearly state that the ECB intended 
to remain in command of the shortest-term interest rates in the money markets, close to our 
policy rate.  
We  did  not  let  our  medium-term  perspective  dwindle.  We  remained  committed  to  a  sober 
evaluation of the underlying factors that – beyond market jitters – impact economic decisions 
and price setting behaviour in the economy. We drew a clear line between the considerations 
that pertain to the right calibration of the monetary policy stance and actions that belong to 
the monetary policy implementation sphere. Liquidity interventions aimed at restoring orderly 
trade  conditions  in  money  markets  and  maintaining  short-term  interest  rates  close  to  our 
policy rate were not compromising in any respect the longer-term achievement of the price 
stability  or  being  complacent  with  imprudent  behaviour  by  market  participants.  This 
distinction is particularly important at the current juncture taking into account the upside risks 
to price stability over the medium term and observing that the adjustment of financial markets 
is an ongoing phenomenon.  
I trust that in all circumstances, but even more particularly in times of heightened uncertainty 
in  global  financial  markets,  our  strong  commitment  to  preserve  price  stability  over  the 
medium  term  is  of  the  essence.  In  preserving  a  solid  anchoring  of  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation expectations at levels consistent with our definition of price stability, it contributes to 
appeasing  tensions  and  volatility  in  the  financial  markets  whilst  paving  the  way  for  future 
sustainable growth and job creation in Europe. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude. The past ten years have been very challenging and demanding for all of 
us,  and  for the  euro  and  the  Eurosystem  in  particular.  When  the  euro  was  set  up  back  in 
1999,  it  was  born  as  a  credible  currency  thanks  to  the  provisions  governing  the  ECB’s 
mandate  and  its  full  independence  as  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  as  well  as  the 
wisdom and credibility of the ECB’s monetary policy framework. Thanks to the joint effort of 
all institutions forming the Eurosystem, we have lived up to our responsibility and delivered 
what we promised to deliver: a stable currency as credible and confidence-inspiring as the 
best  previous  national  currencies.  At  the  same  time,  the  euro  has  contributed  to  a  further 
integration  of  Europe’s  economies  and  it  protects  our  economies  more  effectively  from 
external  shocks  as  ever  before.  Yet,  there  is  no  reason  to  be  complacent:  the  present 
circumstances continue to be very demanding. I am confident that the Eurosystem, through 
its  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy,  will  stand  up  to  these  challenges  and  be 
successful  in  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  As  I  have  said  on  behalf  of  the 
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  we  believe  that  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  will 
contribute  to  achieving  our  objective  of  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  and  of  firm 
anchoring of medium- to long-term inflation expectations. I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 52/2008 
 7
