Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Ten years of European Monetary Union – 
what is the role of national central banks today? 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Austrian  National  Bank’s  High  Level  Evening  Panel  Discussion:  “Ten 
years  of  European  Monetary  Union:  what  is  the  role  of  national  central  banks  today?”, 
Brussels, 6 May 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank very much the Oesterreichische Nationalbank for inviting me and I am 
very pleased to be here today in Brussels to speak about “10 Years of European Monetary 
Union: What is the role of National Central Banks Today”. In less than one month’s time, the 
Eurosystem  will  celebrate  its  10-year  anniversary,  as  it  was  on  1  June  1998  that  the 
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  was  founded  and  with  it  the  Eurosystem.  As  many  of  you 
know,  I  have  had  the  opportunity  to  work  and  contribute  to  the  Eurosystem  activities  from 
both  sides:  from  the  perspective  of  a  NCB,  as  a  former  Board  Member  of  the 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank, and from that of the ECB, in my current position. Therefore, it 
is a particular pleasure to speak today about the achievement of EMU and the role of the 
NCBs in the success of European monetary policy over the last 10 years.  
The main achievements of EMU 
1.  
The introduction of the euro has undoubtedly been one of the most important steps towards 
European integration. We cannot stop if the whole world around us is in motion Jean Monnet 
wrote in his memoirs. However this is not to say that the path has been easy and without 
criticism  and  scepticism  on  the  part  of  some.  It  has  been  almost  40  years  since  the  first 
European consultations and discussions on a monetary union took place. The first attempt, 
under the chairmanship of the Luxemburg Prime  Minister Werner, to establish a monetary 
union failed as the discrepancies in the national policies appeared still too large. It was over 
15  years  later  that  the  Delors  group  started  working  on  a  report  that  culminated  in  the 
Maastricht  Treaty  in  1992  that  provided  a  three-stage  plan  for  the  establishment  of  a 
European  Monetary  Union.  However,  related  to  the  difficulties  faced  by  the  European 
Monetary System in the beginning of the 1990s the enthusiasm for a common currency at 
that time was still limited.  
Today the euro belongs to the everyday life of over 300 million people and right from its very 
first days, the euro has been a success. Despite what many sceptics expected, the ECB and 
the euro have been credible from day one. This credibility is based on the sound institutional 
setting for EMU enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty. The Treaty provides the ECB with a clear 
mandate  to  safeguard  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  and  the  Eurosystem  enjoys  full 
independence in the pursuit of this mandate. 
Over  the  past  ten  years  the  ECB’s  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy  has  made  a 
significant  contribution  to  the  delivery  of  price  stability  and  to  the  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations  in  line  with  this  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy.  Despite  the  fact  that  a 
large number of unforeseeable and adverse macroeconomic and geopolitical shocks have hit 
the euro area economy since 1998, inflation in the euro area has remained on average in the 
close  vicinity  of  2%.  It  is  –  therefore  –  remarkable  that  even  amidst  such  disturbances, 
inflation  expectations  have  remained  anchored at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability  over 
the medium term. And, it is undeniable that this is a significant improvement compared with 
the decades prior to the introduction of the euro.  
BIS Review 56/2008 
 1
Indeed, the euro has resulted in significant advantages for euro area citizens and companies, 
notably by creating an environment of monetary and financial stability. The euro has brought 
favourable financing conditions with market interest rates being much lower than in pre-EMU 
times, thereby supporting investment and sustainable economic growth. The citizens of the 
euro  area  ultimately  benefit  in  terms  of  more  competition,  favourable  prices  and  better 
employment prospects.  
Moreover,  the  euro  and  Eurosystem  institutions  have  contributed  to  a  more  efficient 
functioning of the financial system and to greater financial integration. The financial market 
participants benefit from lower costs of capital and a more efficient allocation of resources.  
The success of the euro has only been possible with a great team effort among the today 15 
NCBs  and  the  ECB.  It  is  a  great  success  that  the  Governing  Council  consisting  of  at  the 
beginning 11 and today 15 national central bank Governors with very different and diverse 
monetary policy experience and history and 6 ECB Executive Board members conducted a 
joint monetary policy for the euro area independently of national interests. In this context, let 
me reflect further on the role of the NCBs in the overall Eurosystem policy-making process.  
The role of NCBs in the Eurosystem 
2.  
The Eurosystem operates very much like any other large organisation with a decentralised 
structure. The different roles of the ECB and the NCBs can be characterized by the following 
analogy: the ECB is the “captain of the team”, and NCBs are team members.  
Turning  to  how  the  ECB  and  the  NCBs  share  the  tasks  in  the  regular  cycle  of  the 
Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  decision-making  process,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the 
following:1  
• 
First,  the  preparation  stage  involves  both  NCB  and  ECB  staff  as  well  as  the 
Eurosystem  committees.  The  aim  being  to  gather  information  and  agree  on 
technical  contributions  that  may  be  of  relevance  for  the  decision-making  process. 
The exchange of information within the Eurosystem has been crucial in this respect. 
In this context, Committees provide fora that allow best practices and expertise to be 
shared at the technical level, foster cooperation within the Eurosystem and ensure 
regular and fruitful interactions between the ECB and the NCB staff.  
Second, the decision stage involves the Executive Board and the Governing Council 
of the ECB. The Executive Board prepares the meetings of the Governing Council. 
This  includes  drawing-up  the  meeting  agendas  and  preparing  the  necessary 
documentation. The decisions on all euro area monetary policy related issues are 
then taken by the Governing Council.  
Third, the implementation stage, involves the NCBs implementing the decisions in a 
decentralised  manner  and  ensuring  that  the  Governing  Council’s  guidelines  are 
followed. In this context, NCBs have been fully involved in the development of the 
Eurosystem’s  infrastructure  and  in  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  thereby 
contributing their valuable expertise and experience in running the daily tasks and 
operations of a central bank.  
  In particular, NCBs play an important role in Eurosystem tasks that require a high degree of 
specialised expertise. Let me explain this in more detail using the area of payment systems 
as an illustration. For example, TARGET, the real-time gross settlement (RTGS) system for 
the euro, started operations in January 1999 at the same time as the launch of the euro. By 
                                                 
1   See  P.  Moutot,  A.  Jung  and  F.  P.  Mongelli  (2008),  “The  workings  of  the  Eurosystem,  monetary  policy 
preparations and decision-making – selected issues”, ECB Occasional Paper No 79. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2008
tradition, the NCBs have been actively involved in the operation of payment systems, each in 
their national environment.  
The central bank community soon realised that an enhanced TARGET system was needed 
to maximise efficiency and to satisfy the fast-evolving needs of the market. This is why the 
Eurosystem started to discuss the new generation of TARGET – what we call TARGET2 – 
when  the  first  generation  had  barely  started  to  operate.  After  years  of  careful  preparation, 
TARGET2 began live operations on 19 November 2007. Whereas all payments in TARGET 
were  processed  by  the  NCBs  through  their  local  RTGS  systems,  TARGET2  uses  a  single 
technical platform, provided jointly by three Eurosystem central banks – the Banca d’Italia, 
the  Banque  de  France  and  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  –  and  operated  on  behalf  of  the 
Eurosystem, the owner of the TARGET2 system. 
In that sense, TARGET2 is a perfect example of a joint-effort based on the experience and 
expertise  of  all  national  central  banks,  which  has  led  to  greater  financial  integration  in  the 
euro area, particularly in the area of payment services provision.  
Challenges for the governance of the Eurosystem  
3.  
The  unique  structure  of  the  Eurosystem,  comprising  15  NCBs  and  the  ECB,  poses 
challenges to its governance and organisation that need to be addressed.  
Overall, the close cooperation between ECB and NCB staff and the Eurosystem’s committee 
structure has significantly contributed to the fulfilment of the Eurosystem’s tasks by ensuring 
that  its  operations  run  smoothly.  The  federal  structure  of  the  Eurosystem  has  several 
advantages in addressing a number of challenges.  
First,  the  euro  area  enlargement  is  in  many  respects  an  important  challenge  for  the 
Eurosystem. An increase in the number of members of the Eurosystem could influence the 
Governing  Council’s  capacity  for  timely  and  effective  monetary  policy-making  in  a 
substantially  enlarged  euro  area.  In  view  of  this,  the  Governing  Council  took  the  initiative 
ahead of time and proposed a reform of its voting modalities, which was eventually ratified by 
all EU Member States. These new modalities will ensure continued efficient decision-making 
in an enlarged Governing Council.  
Second,  communication  in  a  multicultural  and  multilingual  currency  area  is  a  continuous 
challenge. The diversity across the euro area implies that the Governing Council needs to 
speak  many  languages  and  to  be  aware  of  different  cultural  traditions.  So  far,  our 
communication  has  been  one  of  the  key  success  factors  and  the  NCBs  have  made  an 
enormous  contribution  to  that  success.  In  the  presence  of  23  official  languages  in  the 
European Union and 13 official languages in the euro area, it is very important to ensure that 
the very same message is conveyed to citizens in all countries. Speaking with a single voice 
in many languages and respecting diversity in communication traditions have ensured that 
information regarding the decisions of the Governing Council reaches all citizens in a timely 
and comprehensive manner.  
Third,  it  remains  challenging  to  constantly  improve  existing  governance  structures,  and, 
where  possible,  to  minimise  efficiency  losses  that  may  result  from  an  unnecessary 
duplication of tasks. The announcement of the Eurosystem mission statement as well as the 
agreement on a set of common values and organisational principles were steps to promote a 
shared identity, a spirit of cooperation and teamwork among all members of the Eurosystem.  
Furthermore, new organisational models are emerging as the Eurosystem has embarked on 
a  number  of  initiatives  aimed  at  achieving  greater  efficiency  in  cost,  technical,  operational 
and organisational terms by exploiting synergies across Eurosystem participants. Similarly, 
NCBs have over the few last years also initiated a number of reforms and structural changes 
with a view to increasing efficiency. Many central banks have, in fact, reorganised internally, 
BIS Review 56/2008 
 3
reducing the number of branches and regional offices, streamlining their internal operations 
and restructuring their cash processing and services functions.  
Finally,  a  challenge,  of  course,  is  to  constantly  improve  the  interaction,  cooperation  and 
exchange of information between the ECB and the NCBs. Recent developments in financial 
markets have proven once again the importance of such cooperation and interaction.  
It  is  crucial  to  further  deepen  the  cooperation  on  these  matters  to  guarantee  a  smooth 
functioning and successful policy making of the Eurosystem.  
Conclusion  
4.  
A closer look at the first ten years of the euro shows how Europe and European citizens have 
benefited from the establishment of the Eurosystem, and the provision of a truly European 
public good, the euro. The euro has successfully turned out to be a stable currency, resulting 
from  the  sound  reputation  and  credibility  of  the  Eurosystem’s  policy  framework.  The 
Eurosystem’s federal structure has made it possible to integrate the expertise and knowledge 
of the NCBs. Today, NCBs play an important role in running the daily tasks and operations of 
the Eurosystem, in providing infrastructures and in communicating with national audiences. 
The Eurosystem´s joint effort and team spirit have been crucial in making the euro a truly 
European success story! 
When  asked  about  the  prospects  of  the  common  currency  in  1998,  a  famous  economist 
replied “I think it's a big gamble and I'm not optimistic.” I am both proud and happy to be able 
to say today that reality has proven his pessimism wrong! 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2008
