Joseph Yam: Competition and cooperation among global and regional 
financial centres 
Congratulatory  remarks  by  Mr  Joseph  Yam,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, at the ACI Asia – The Financial Markets Association, Hong Kong, 11 July 2008. 
 Mr Wiebogen, Mr Tan, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is with great pleasure that I join you this evening to mark the inauguration of ACI Asia – 
The Financial Markets Association. On behalf of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and the 
Hong  Kong  Special  Administrative  Region  Government,  I  would  like  first  to  offer  my 
congratulations  to  all  those  who  have  worked  hard  over  the  last  couple  of  months  on  the 
establishment of ACI Asia. Special congratulations are also appropriate to Mr Wiebogen and 
Mr Tan for the foresight and leadership they have demonstrated in this initiative. 
Financial markets in the developed economies have been experiencing considerable stress. 
At  the  risk  of  oversimplifying  it,  the  current  financial  turmoil  can  be  attributed  to  financial 
innovation creating distortions in the financial system, including the compensation schemes 
for the innovative lot, to such an extent as to lead to a serious erosion of credit standards. It 
is at a time like this that everybody should be reminded of the importance of professionalism 
in  finance,  at  all  stages  of  financial  intermediation.  With  its  long  history  and  impressive 
membership,  ACI  has  developed  very  much  into  an  icon  of  professionalism  in  finance, 
contributing  to  "market  development  through  education,  market  practices,  technical  advice 
and networking events for the financial practitioners of the world". The Association therefore 
has a very important role to play and faces in the coming years much greater challenge than 
before in promoting and upholding professional and ethical standards in finance. 
One  interesting,  perhaps  even  perplexing,  aspect  of  the  current  financial  turmoil  is  that 
emerging  markets,  particularly  those  in  Asia,  have  only  been  lightly  affected,  so  far.  One 
reason is that financial innovation, in the form of credit risk transfer through securitisation by 
the "originate and distribute" model, has not caught on in Asia to the same extent as in the 
United  States.  Indeed,  economies  in  different  stages  of  financial  sector  development  face 
different issues, notwithstanding the clear trend of globalisation in finance. Correspondingly, 
in  promoting  and  upholding  professionalism  in  finance,  there  may  be  a  need  for  different 
emphases and approaches, having regard to the different development stages that individual 
regions and economies are undergoing. But it is also important that these different emphases 
and approaches should be developed within the framework of global standards. I therefore 
wholeheartedly support regional outreach initiatives of international standard setting bodies 
such as the ACI. 
Asia, of course, is region of rising importance in the global context, particularly in terms of 
finance.  Whether  it  is  the  volume  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  or  the  growth  of  foreign 
exchange  turnover  or  the  amount  of  savings  that  needs  to  be  mobilised  for  promoting 
economic growth and development, Asia is likely to occupy top position in the world, if it is 
not already there. The prospects of a strong relative shift of financial market liquidity into Asia 
are clear, so is the need for upgrading professionalism in finance, hopefully at a pace that is 
commensurate with its increasing importance in global finance. It is therefore absolutely right 
for  the  first  regional  office  of  ACI  to  be  established  in  Asia  and,  if  I  may  add,  for  it  to  be 
established  in  Hong  Kong,  as  the  truly  international  financial  centre  in  the  region.  On  the 
choice of Hong Kong, we are of course grateful and feel honoured, and I as Chief Executive 
of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  and  as  Honorary  President  of  the  Treasury  Markets 
Association  offer  the  full  support  of  the  two  organisations  to  the  activities  of  ACI  and  ACI 
Asia. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 90/2008 
 1
