Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: EU priorities for investment funds and EU 
securities infrastructures 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the EUROFI Conference, Nice, 11 September 2008. 
 1st part of the Panel on “EU priorities for investment funds”: 
Question 1: Do you see a way in which the Target 2-Securities platform would impact on the 
fund industry?  
Answer  1:  As  we  have  heard  by  my  panel  colleagues,  several  regulatory  initiatives  are 
undertaken with the aim of creating a single market in financial services, including the current 
fund industry.  
The fund industry can benefit from new business opportunities which TARGET2-Securities 
will provide, as the fund industry will have access to a larger set of European securities, from 
deeper and more liquid markets.  
This will provide the fund industry with a new diversification perspective for their portfolio at a 
better and more transparent price of trading securities within a single European market. The 
fund industry will likewise benefit from the cost savings which has been identified as part of 
the T2S business case. These benefits will be passed through the wholesale sector – down 
the value chain – to the fund industry – all the way through to the retail market for the benefit 
of Europe. 
Furthermore,  as  the  characteristics  and  national  practices  of  the  European  fund  industry 
remains 
funds 
shares/units,  in  markets  where  these  are  dematerialised,  listed  in  a  CSD  and  where  the 
characteristics are closer to those of securities.  
Question 2: Will cost savings arise for Asset Managers? 
Answer 2: Asset managers, where the trading of investment funds shares/units are settled in 
Target 2-Securities, will benefit from the economies of scale and have similar advantages as 
other  market  participants  and  users  of  TARGET2-Securities.  Furthermore,  they  will  benefit 
from  streamlining  and  the  reduction  of  back  office  costs  for  cross  border  post-trading 
processing and obtain similar type of saving as found for custodians and banks using T2S – 
which are within the range of EUR 50-60 millions of cost savings per year – which shall be 
passed through to customers including among others assets managers.  
the  TARGET2-Securities  platform  can  settle 
fragmented, 
investment 
2nd part of the Panel on “EU priorities for EU securities infrastructures: 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would share with you  our priorities for securities infrastructures and, if I may, offer some 
ideas to stimulate the European debate on new initiatives.  
I welcome the various private and public initiatives and feel they need to be supplemented by 
securities infrastructure which embodies an integrated approach at the European level. The 
infrastructure gap is mainly in the post-trading sector as there seems to be no shortage of 
new trading platforms which aspire to operate at the European level.  
The  Eurosystem  operates  as  a  catalyst,  facilitator  and  operator  in  relation  to  Europe-wide 
infrastructures.  It  provides  a  borderless  and  neutral  infrastructure  for  settlement  in  central 
bank  money,  via  TARGET2.  Looking  forward,  the  Eurosystem  will  provide  the  next 
generation  of  “Collateral  Central  Bank  Management”  (CCBM2).  Still  more  significantly,  the 
BIS Review 108/2008 
 1
to 
those  of  other  systems.  While 
Eurosystem will deliver TARGET2-Securities (T2S) no later than 2013, to make settlement of 
securities  against  central  bank  money  at  least  as  secure,  efficient  and  cheap  as  domestic 
securities settlement are in any European market today.  
My  understanding  is  that  these  projects  need  to  work  in  harmony  with  other  integration 
projects,  especially  harmonisation.  I  expect  to  see  significant  progress  in  harmonisation 
throughout the securities life cycle, through the catalytic effect of the TARGET2-Securities. 
The Eurosystem will initiate work together with market participants to develop action plans for 
harmonising both settlement-related processes and processes related to corporate actions. 
We  expect  that  market  participants  will  constructively  contribute  to  this  work  and  the  key 
issue is to ensure that harmonisation solutions are implemented.  
The second area which I would like to address relates to the growing importance of cross 
border  banking  operations  and  the  internationalisation  of  the  wholesale  market,  which 
requires  changes  in  the  way  national  supervisory  authorities  operate. Since  systemic  risks 
extend beyond national borders, we need to strenghten effective co-operation arrangements 
among  national  authorities.  The  task  is  complex,  and  I  think  the  answer  requires  us  to 
develop  common  practices  for  consistent  supervisory  structures  in  financial  services, 
including common reporting and risk management standards. 
The  third  area  relates  to  the  greater  interdependencies  between  trading  and  post  trading 
partners.  In  consequence,  the  operational  processes,  risk  management  policies  and 
procedures  of  each  system  are  related 
these 
interdependencies between market users and systems generally improve the resilience and 
efficiency  of  markets  and  their  payments  and  settlement  processes,  they  may  also  allow 
financial disruption to pass,  
like a virus, across systems and their participants, with second round effects to other market 
activities.  I  feel  that  the  risks  inherent  in  these  growing  interdependencies  throughout  the 
European  and  cross-Atlantic  value  chain  require  systems,  market  users  and  service 
providers to reconsider their approach to risk – to look beyond their own direct operational 
exposures and their relationship to directly connected partners.  
A holistic and systemic global – or at least European – approach is needed, to the widening 
of risk assessment and coordination with other partners along the value chain, so that risk 
and crisis management procedures can be optimised.  
Fourthly, in a rapidly changing global financial market, innovative products are developed.  
These  new  products  may  have  an  impact  on  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  the  post  trading 
market  and  on  the  stability  of  financial  markets,  if  their  volumes  become  significant.  For 
instance,  total  global  OTC  derivative  contracts  have  doubled  within  the  last  two  years  to 
approximately  EUR  10  trillion  in  (gross)  market  values  (USD  14  trillion  –  more  than  the 
annual GDP of the euro area1 and similar to the total outstanding amount of debt securities 
issued by euro area residents in euro. The credit default swaps market has grown more than 
eight times in (gross) market value during the last two years. I suggest that monitoring and 
risk management measures needs to be intensified, to closely monitor the dynamics of the 
derivative  markets  and 
improving 
arrangements for clearing and settlement of OTC derivatives in order to reduce systematic 
risks.  
I am confident that we can find the right balance, so that Europe co-operates to harmonise, 
monitor and compete to deliver the economic benefits of the single financial market. 
Thank you very much.  
infrastructures  by 
to  strengthening 
financial 
the 
                                                 
1   Euro area GDP EUR 8.9 trillion. 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2008
