Masaaki Shirakawa: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  2008 
International Monetary Conference, Barcelona, (via satellite), 3 June 2008. 
 Thank  you,  Mr.  Chairman.  I  will  give  you  my  thought  on  Japan’s  economy  and  monetary 
policy in the present context. 
With  regard  to  the  global  economic  conjuncture,  I  don’t  have  much  to  add  to  the  views 
expressed  by  my  colleagues.  In  light  of  the  persistent  tensions  in  financial  markets  and 
slowing  growth  in  the  advanced  economies,  we  need  to  keep  a  close  watch  on  how  the 
negative  feedback  loop  between  financial  markets,  asset prices  and  the  real  economy  will 
play out going forward. Uncertainties surrounding this adverse dynamics are still substantial. 
Meanwhile,  the  global  economy  is  facing  greater  inflationary  pressures  with  commodity 
prices hitting all-time highs. Since the surge in commodity prices has continued for the past 
several years, strong demand from emerging market economies probably plays a substantial 
role  in  this  phenomenon.  In  these  circumstances,  both  developed  and  emerging  market 
economies are facing the difficult balancing act between maintaining sustainable economic 
growth on the one hand and anchoring longer-term inflationary expectations on the other. 
These global economic forces, both downside and upside, affect Japan’s economy through a 
variety  of  channels,  adding  to  uncertainty  for  policy-makers.  In  this  situation,  Japan’s 
economy is slowing because of the deterioration of the terms-of-trade associated with higher 
import prices. Corporate earnings are squeezed by soaring energy and raw material prices, 
and  industrial  production  and  capital  investment  are  losing  traction  somewhat.  Business 
sentiment  is  increasingly  on  the  cautious  side  with  greater  downside  risks  to  the  global 
economic outlook. 
As these headwinds are likely to stay for some while, Japan’s economy seems to slow for the 
time being. With regard to the baseline scenario for the next one to two years, however, I am 
of  the  view  that  Japan’s  economy  will  grow  near  potential.  To  be  more  specific,  Japan’s 
growth rate will pick up again after some hiatus to reach one-and-half percent in 2008 and 
somewhat higher in 2009, both of which are close to Japan’s potential growth rate. 
Let me elaborate on this from three perspectives. 
First, Japan’s exports have been and will continue to be robust. Exports to the United States 
have weakened in tandem with the U.S. economic slowdown, but this is more than offset by 
strong  growth  in  other  regions  –  major  emerging  market  economies  and  resource-rich 
countries in particular. Thus, Japan’s whole exports are growing briskly toward a wider range 
of  areas  and/or  countries.  In  a  nutshell,  strong  external  demand  is  counter-balancing  the 
negative terms-of-trade effects which I mentioned earlier. 
Second,  Japan’s  economy  has  improved  resilience  in  recent  years.  In  the  late  1990s,  for 
example, Japan’s economy accumulated excesses in a variety of forms which made it doubly 
vulnerable to various shocks. But now, the corporate sector is not under the burden of those 
excesses, and the aggregate business profits are close to record levels. Owing to improved 
resiliency of corporate borrowers, Japan’s financial sector is on a sounder footing as well. 
Third,  Japan’s  easy  monetary  conditions  will  continue  to  support  demand.  The  real  short-
term interest rate is in the neighborhood of zero. In addition, unlike in the United States and 
Europe, credit spreads are relatively compressed. 
On the inflation side, Japan’s core CPI inflation, which excludes fresh food, has edged up in 
recent months to hover around 1 percent, and the 1.2 percent increase for this March was 
the  highest  in  almost  15  years  except  in  1998,  when  Japan’s  consumption  tax  rate  was 
BIS Review 70/2008 
 1
raised. According to our April projections, our CPI inflation rate is expected to be around 1 
percent in both 2008 and 2009. But more recently, signs are emerging that upside risks on 
the inflation front increase gradually amid rising energy and food prices. Therefore, we are 
closely watching whether corporate pricing behavior will change and how general inflationary 
expectations will evolve going forward. This vigilance is important because higher input costs 
are  gradually  feeding  through  into  the  down-stream,  and  there  are  some  indications  that 
inflation sentiment among consumers might be slowly growing. 
Having said all this, I think the risk balance for growth is still slanted to the downside, while 
pressures  on  prices  are  on  the  upside.  At  the  same  time,  though,  it  is  true  that  Japan’s 
monetary conditions have been extremely accommodative for quite some time. In this light, 
we bear it in mind that if this monetary accommodation is maintained for long while downside 
risks  subside,  it  might  accentuate  future  cyclical  swings  in  the  economy  by,  for  instance, 
encouraging excessive risk-taking. 
With  respect  to  monetary  policy  stance  in  this  fairly  uncertain  environment,  the  Bank  of 
Japan  has  no  prejudgment  about  the  future  direction  of  policy  rates.  Examining  the  likely 
path of growth and inflation for the next one to two years while assessing the changing risk 
balance from a longer perspective, the Bank of Japan will make an appropriate judgment in a 
flexible manner in order to ensure sustainable economic growth with price stability. 
Lastly, let me finish up with a few remarks about Japan’s financial markets. 
On the whole, Japan’s financial markets function well. For example, because of the market 
turmoil over the past ten months, Japan’s TED spread, defined as the inter-bank offered rate 
minus the T-bill rate, has widened by 25 bps, while those spreads in the U.S. and European 
markets expanded by 100 bps and 70 bps respectively. 
The prime reason for this relative stability of Japan’s markets is that Japan’s financial firms 
have  smaller  exposures  to  structured  credit  markets  than  their  foreign  competitors.  In 
addition, I believe the flexible framework of our money market operations has contributed to 
preserving the stability of short-term funding market. The Bank of Japan has acquired this 
operational flexibility over time, including through its experience of the financial crisis in the 
last decade. Let me discuss this from three angles. 
First, the Bank of Japan sets the maturity of market operations quite flexibly, from O/N to one 
year, depending upon prevailing market conditions. Flexibility in liquidity-draining operations 
such  as  bill-selling  operations  also  makes  it  possible  to  provide  large  quantities  of  funds 
without worrying too much about excess reserves being left in the system. 
Second, the Bank of Japan executes market operations with a broad range of counterparties, 
banks, securities houses, and money market broker-dealers. 
Third, our collateral regime is efficient and user-friendly. Under the so-called pooled collateral 
scheme which covers not only regular market operations but also the standing lending facility 
and day-light overdraft, counterparties are able to pledge a variety of collateral in advance, 
ranging from government securities to private-label debts including asset-backed securities. 
When faced with increased stress in the money market over the past ten months, the Bank of 
Japan  responded  by  providing  ample  liquidity  or  supplying  longer-term  funds  earlier  than 
usual. These operations, conducted within the normal operational modalities, enabled us to 
control short-term interest rates without serious difficulties. 
In  short,  I  am  reminded  that  financial  market  stability  is  essential  for  effective  monetary 
policy. 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2008
