L Wilson Kamit: Financial sector improvements in Papua New Guinea 
Speech  by  Mr  L  Wilson  Kamit,  CBE,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  at  the 
official  opening  of  the  Nambawan  Super’  Member  Services  Centre,  Port  Moresby, 
11 July 2008. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  
I  am  pleased  to  be  able  to  address  you  this  afternoon,  on  this  special  occasion  for 
Nambawan Super.  
Since  the  commencement  of  the  financial  sector  Reforms  including  the  superannuation 
industry  through  the  Superannuation  (General  Provisions)  Act  2000,  we  have  seen  many 
improvements in the financial sector and within the Superannuation industry.  
Some of the significant changes include:  
• 
The  appointment  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  as  the  Regulator  of  the 
Superannuation Industry ,  
The  separation  of  functions  of  the  Authorised  Super  Funds  (ASFs)  from  the 
Trustees, Investment Managers and Fund Administrators; and  
The  introduction  of  Fit  and  Proper  Person’s  Test  requirements  for  the  Board  and 
Senior Management of the licence holders  
  Under  these  reforms  the  improved  performance  of  the  whole  financial  system  has  seen 
growth in assets of banks, finance companies, savings and loan societies and life insurance 
companies. The growth in the superannuation funds has been particularly remarkable, and 
this has translated to high rates of returns to the members over the last few years.  
For  example,  the  industry’s  total  assets  have  more  than  doubled  since  2002  from  K1,273 
million in 2002 to K4,086 million in 2007.  
 
Total Assets of the superannuation industry – K’million 
 Total 
2007  2006  2005  2004  2003  2002 
4,087 2,837 2,584 1,882 1,577 1,273 
 We  have  also  seen  significant  improvements  in  governance,  as  well  as  operational 
effectiveness in the delivery of superannuation services for the benefit of the members. While 
making  this  remark,  I  should  stress  that  there  lies  ahead  a  lot  of  challenges  to  further 
improve and enhance their operational capacities in order o provide the best superannuation 
service for all stakeholders.  
This reform process has however  brought with it other challenges and responsibilities that 
the ASFs will need to manage and address going forward. One challenge facing us in this 
reform process is the issue of financial inclusion and financial literacy (financial education). 
This  is  a  subject  many  Central  Bank  Governors  and  regulators  have  discussed  in  various 
forums. Let me elaborate:  
The high rates of return on members’ savings will have had the impact of raising members’ 
expectations  of  receiving  high  return  all  the  time  and  the  ASFs  have  a  duty  of  care  to 
educate  their  members  about  the  investments  realities  so  that  they  can  better  understand 
such issues.  
BIS Review 93/2008 
 1
I dare add that this is not the only subject of financial inclusion and financial education that 
has to be addressed.  
The matter also involves educating the non membership general public in financial matters 
including  the  dangers  and  pitfalls  of  fast  money  schemes  which  have  a  tendency  to  “play 
hide and seek”. They disappear and re‐emerge in one form or another. Your members can 
assist by spreading the word about the risks and pitfalls of fast money schemes.  
Through your various points of representation, such as this service centre, your membership 
can also assist with educating each other and others on other financial matters including the 
clean banknote Policy. For us to be aware when to return or exchange an old bank note for a 
new one and not wait for the note to be torn and faded. For the public to have and enjoy the 
benefit of using clean notes.  
The rate of growth of the major Super Fund’s also increases the scope and magnitude for the 
areas  of  responsibility  and  accountability  requiring  prudential  management  of  members’ 
funds. As such the ASFs Trustees must always ensure that their investment decisions are 
made in a sound and prudent fashion in accordance with the Act and prudential standards 
set by the Bank as the Trustee is entrusted with the responsibility of ensuring that members’ 
superannuation  savings  are  preserved  and  secured  at  all  times  for  their  future  retirement 
benefit.  
I see the new Nambawan Super’ Member Services Centre here in Port Moresby as another 
positive initiative in enhancing effective delivery of superannuation products and services to 
the members and I would like to encourage Nambawan Super and other ASFs to continue 
such enhancement exercises into other regions or provinces of the country in a commercially 
responsible manner where the members are also located so that the members can be better 
served.  
With  the  current  and  potential  growth  in  the  economy  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  this  will  see 
more  employment  opportunities  and 
finance  and 
superannuation products and services throughout the country. It is therefore good to see that 
the  superannuation  industry  is  moving  in  this  direction  to  better  serve  the  needs  of  its 
members throughout Papua New Guinea.  
I now have the pleasure of declaring this new Nambawan Super Member Services Centre 
officially opened.  
increased  demand 
for  banking, 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2008
