Axel A Weber: Financial market stability 
Speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the London 
School of Economics, London, 6 June 2008. 
 the 
lenders 
inherent 
to  overcome 
Introduction 
is  sufficiently  stable 
1  
Financial markets perform an indispensable task for economic well-being. They provide the 
services  and  products  by  which  the  intertemporal  allocation  of  savings  and  investments  is 
accomplished.  As  such,  financial  market  stability  is  a  precondition  for  macroeconomic 
stability and economic growth.  
An efficient allocation of funds presupposes that the necessary flow of information between 
borrowers  and 
information 
asymmetries between both parties. Risks to financial stability, on the other hand, imply also 
risks to the real economy and to overall economic stability.  
It  should  come  as  no  surprise  then,  that  central  banks  in  their  strive  for  macroeconomic 
stability  always  had  a  keen  eye  on  developments  in  financial  markets  and  an  interest  in 
preserving financial stability. And the abundance of published financial stability reports over 
the  recent  past  is  indicating  that  the  respective  resources  invested  by  central  banks  have 
been  increased  visibly  over  the  past  couple  of  years.  It  would  have  not  needed  the  most 
recent  financial  market  turbulences  that  started  last  summer  to  drive  home  that  point. 
However,  the  events  since  last  August  have  made  clear  for  even  distant  observers  that 
central  banks  have  a  natural  interest  and  responsibility  to  safeguard  developments  on 
financial markets. 
AAA, ABCP, ABS, CDO, CDS, SPV, SIV – until just under a year ago, these abbreviations 
could only be found in the financial press, if at all. This has radically changed in the past ten 
months or so. What was previously only of little interest to outsiders has thus moved into the 
limelight of public attention, within a very short time period. Much the same can be said of the 
regular  weekly  recurring  refinancing  operations  of  the  Eurosystem  central  banks,  through 
which the commercial banking sector is supplied with central bank money. While interest rate 
decisions  often  receive  public  attention,  such  money  market  operations  have  so  far  been 
regarded  largely  as  a  purely  technical  matter  and  have  very  rarely  been  covered  by  the 
financial press. In the meantime, however, the public interest in our operational framework 
has made clear that monetary policy involves more than just tweaking the interest rate. 
In my following remarks I would like to touch upon some issues in the context of financial 
markets and monetary policy. At first, I would like to explain the meaning and importance of 
financial  stability  for  central  banks.  Then  I  will  briefly  describe  the  causes  of  the  recent 
turmoil  on  financial  markets  and  some  of  the  lessons  learnt.  Thirdly,  I  would  like  to  say 
something in more detail about the liquidity operations we have been engaged in. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  take  up  a  more  general  aspect  in  discussing  the  potential  role  of 
financial market trends for changes in the monetary transmission process. 
The term "financial stability" and the role of the central bank 
2 
The  term  "financial  stability"  describes  a  financial  system's  ability  to  efficiently  allocate 
financial  resources,  reliably  assess  and  tackle  risks,  and  securely  settle  payments  and 
securities  transactions.  A  stable  financial  system  generally  fulfils  these  functions  also  in 
stress situations. Financial stability therefore also means resilience to shocks. 
The term "financial stability" describes the functioning of the financial system as a whole, not 
the skills of individual market participants. Or to put it bluntly: From a financial stability point 
BIS Review 72/2008 
 1
of view, the fates of individual institutions are of interest only if they could negatively affect 
the  system  as  a  whole.  Stable  financial  systems  reduce  uncertainty  and  thus  develop 
positive  external  effects  on  the  real  economy,  thereby  contributing  to  greater  economic 
prosperity.  However,  the  reverse  is  also  true:  Instability  in  the  financial  system  or  even 
financial  crises  can  have  negative  external  effects  and  thus  cause  high  economic  costs. 
Contributing  to  financial  stability  is  therefore  part  of  a  central  bank's  core  area  of 
responsibility,  in  order  to  ensure  price  stability  and  avert  negative  repercussions  of  the 
financial system on the real economy. 
However, an emphasis on central banks' (joint) responsibility for financial stability must not 
lead  to  false  conclusions:  Government  measures  should  generally  function  only  as  a 
subordinate security net when trying to ensure financial stability. The primary and essential 
task  is  to  underline  and  strengthen  the  responsibility  of  market  participants  not  only  for 
themselves but also indirectly for the system as a whole. 
After these more general thoughts, I will now come to some brief remarks on the dominating 
topic of the past few months: the subprime crisis and its effect. 
Subprime crisis: cocktail of causes and lessons learnt 
3  
What are the causes of the most recent tensions on financial markets? Here, I am extremely 
sceptical  about  monocausal  explanations.  Instead,  I  believe  that  a  cocktail  of  various 
ingredients triggered the shock waves for the financial system. 
A  cocktail  –  whose  individual  ingredients  would  have  been  some  cause  for  concern, 
however,  digested  more  or  less  smoothly  by  financial  markets,  but  whose  dynamic 
interaction when mixed proved to be a severe and ongoing stress test for the international 
financial system. The three main ingredients of this recipe are lending standards which have 
become  more  lax  and  less  risk-oriented,  especially  in  the  real  estate  sector  in  the  United 
States,  weaknesses  in  credit  risk  transfer,  especially  in  the  originate-and-distribute  model, 
and overly optimistic assessments of structured securities. 
Lax lending standards 
The notion of obtaining a real estate loan with almost no capital and with only a poor or no 
credit  rating  at  all,  is  quite  strange.  In  some  countries,  such  mortgage  loans,  however, 
became  a  major  feature  of  the  real  estate  market  in  the  two  to  three  years  preceding  its 
peak.  
Weaknesses in credit risk transfer 
The  almost  oblivious-to-risk  approach  of  lending  to  debtors  with  a  low  credit  rating  was 
fuelled by two factors, previous house price increases and innovative financial instruments 
which  permitted  the  credit  risk  to  be  passed  on  from  the  bank  to  yield-seeking  non-bank 
investors.  By  securitising  and  tranching,  it  appeared  for  a  while  to  be  possible  to  convert 
unstable individual loans to almost fail-safe securities. Some observers called this “financial 
chemistry”. In the corresponding passage in its last Annual Report, the German Council of 
Economic Experts wrote of transforming “vin de pays into a cru”, a bit like trying to make silk 
purses out of sows’ ears. 
Not to be misunderstood: In principle, the possibility of transferring credit risks increases the 
flexibility of financial market players and is an element of modern risk management.  
However, the disruptions of the previous few months have highlighted major weaknesses in 
this  process.  It  has  become  clear  that  the  tradability  and  fairly  broad  dispersion  of  credit 
risks, in particular, can actually improve the resilience of the financial system only if a high 
quality standard is maintained at all levels of the transfer process and no new concentrations 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2008
of risk arise. When transferring credit risks, one must always bear in mind that the transferred 
risks  themselves  do  not  vanish  into  thin  air  –  they  are  merely  elsewhere  and  the  danger 
remains that they could resurface, possibly even in concentrated form. It was precisely such 
new  concentrations  of  risk  that  led  to  the  distress  in  the  past  few  months  threatening  the 
existence of a number of financial institutions which were not themselves active players in 
the area of real estate lending. 
Overly optimistic assessment of structured securities 
The  previous  ten  months  have  shown  dramatically  the  limited  value  of  even  professional 
ratings.  The  assumption  held  by  many  around  12  months  ago  that  structured  securities 
backed by mortgages provided a premium over government bonds at a similar (low) level of 
risk has since proven to be a gross misperception. 
The effects of the US subprime crisis meant, that for a period, a general crisis of confidence 
spread  among  financial  market  participants.  This  crisis  of  confidence  also  restricted  the 
distribution of liquidity on the interbank money market, and still continues to do so.  
In a nutshell: New and complex instruments to transfer credit risks in combination with large 
banks  engaging  in  an  “originate  and  distribute”  business  model  have  amplified  the 
consequences  of  the  undeniable  credit  excesses  in  the  US  mortgage  market.  These  new 
instruments  exhibited  several  weaknesses  that  seriously  hampered  the  efficient  flow  of 
information between originators and investors. In the end, the new instruments of credit risk 
transfer “distributed fear instead of risks” (Borio 2008). Already stated by Walter Bagehot in 
his classical treatment “Lombard Street” in 1873, "credit means that a certain confidence is 
given,  and  a  certain  trust  reposed”.  Thus,  it  was  not  surprising  that,  in  the  end,  the 
turbulences on a special segment of the US mortgage market had the power to develop into 
a  general  turmoil  on  credit  markets  and  into  a  crisis  of  confidence  between  the  still  most 
important intermediaries on current financial markets, i.e. banks. 
A lot of effort by national and international institutions is currently put into the identification of 
lessons learnt and necessary reforms. In an international context, most notably, the analysis 
and reform proposals by the Financial Stability Forum deserve close attention. They are an 
important step forward to make the international financial system more resilient. Most of the 
reform  proposals  focuses  on  supervisory,  accounting,  and  risk  management  issues.  This 
focus is certainly justified, but as it is somewhat separated form the core business of central 
banks, I do not want to elaborate on them in greater detail. 
In my following remarks I will try to sketch out in somewhat more detail issues that are more 
central to monetary policy. In doing so, I will try not only to focus on the recent developments, 
but also stress some more general aspects of the issues involved. To be more concrete, I will 
discuss Eurosystem liquidity operations in the face of tensions on interbank markets. Here I 
will for comparative reasons also refer to the latest steps by the Bank of England. Finally, I 
would  like  to  elaborate  somewhat  on  the  more  general  implications  of  financial  market 
developments on the monetary transmission mechanism to make clear that it is not only in 
times  of  stress  when  financial  markets  are  of  interest  or  the  core  business  of  monetary 
policy.  
4 
Current money market distortions and measures against it 
The need of a well-functioning money market 
4.1  
Since  August  2007  financial  market  turbulences  have  had  a  strong  impact  on  the  money 
market – not only in the euro area but in nearly all important currency areas in the world. Due 
to  a  rapid  loss  in  confidence  among  banks  the  distribution  of  central  bank  money  on  the 
interbank money market was distorted massively. Two cumulative effects were at work: On 
BIS Review 72/2008 
 3
the  one  side,  banks’  willingness  to  lend  decreased  sharply  due  to  increased  counterparty 
risks. On the other side, banks’ demand for short-term financing went up significantly due to 
involuntary  re-intermediation  of  former  off-balance-sheet  activities  (SPVs,  conduits)  and  a 
higher liquidity preference due to the mounted uncertainty about future liquidity needs. The 
resulting increase in the spread between money market rates and central bank interest rates 
complicates monetary policy: The determination of the appropriate level of the central bank 
rates is aggravated and the signalling function of these rates becomes more limited. 
To counteract distortions in the money market, central banks all over the world took a wide 
range of different measures. Some central banks reacted earlier, some central banks later, 
some central banks had to change their operational framework more strongly, others less so. 
While  the  Eurosystem  reacted  promptly  but  left  its  toolbox  of  monetary  policy  instruments 
nearly unchanged, the Bank of England (BoE) stayed calm in the first turbulent phase, but 
implemented  some  more  extensive  changes  in  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy  after  having 
recognised  that  money  market  tensions  were  more  enduring  and  more  severe  than 
previously expected. 
then, 
liquidity  providing 
fine-tuning  operations  became 
The operational framework of the Eurosystem (and the Bank of England) 
4.2  
Since  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  market  turbulences  the  conduct  of  Eurosystem’s 
refinancing  operations  has  changed  only  slightly  –  but  not  dramatically.  All  modifications 
happened within the existing operational framework and without any change in Eurosystem’s 
key interest rates. Promptly after the financial market turmoil in August 2007 the Eurosystem 
sharply  increased  its  temporary  liquidity  provision  to  the  banking  sector.  It  announced 
liquidity  providing  fine-tuning  operations  with  favourable  conditions  and  the  banks  took  the 
additional  money  readily.  This  quickly  increased  confidence  of  market  participants  and 
brought  the  overnight  rate  roughly  back  to  the  minimum  bid  rate  for  main  refinancing 
operations.  Since 
largely 
unnecessary. 
However, despite a fostered liquidity provision at the beginning of the maintenance period, 
no additional liquidity has been provided on average because the Eurosystem withdraw the 
additional liquidity again at the end of the maintenance period with liquidity absorbing fine-
tuning operations. The resulting “front-loading” of the reserve requirements helped the banks 
in  their  liquidity  management.  The  same  objective  was  achieved  by  the  conduct  of  a  two-
week main refinancing operation for the last two weeks of December. This measure was also 
designed to increase banks’ planning reliability especially around the turn of the year. 
Furthermore, the Eurosystem participated in a co-ordinated action of five important central 
banks,  together  with  the  Bank  of  Canada,  the  BoE,  the  Federal  Reserve,  and  the  Swiss 
National Bank in mid-December. Namely the Eurosystem took part in the newly implemented 
Term Auction Facility of the Fed.  
Already  at  the  end  of  August  2007  the  ECB  Governing  Council  decided  to  introduce 
supplementary long-term refinancing operations. The maturity of these operations was three 
months  (as  for  the  regular  longer-term  refinancing  operations).  At  the  beginning  of  April 
2008,  for  the  first  time,  a  supplementary  longer-term  tender  with  six-month  maturity  was 
conducted. The announced six-months tender being allotted on 9 July will for the first time 
provide liquidity beyond the turn of the year.  
Despite  these  measures,  however,  especially  unsecured  longer-term  money  market  rates 
continued to entail significant default-risk and liquidity-risk premiums. 
As I said, money market tensions emerged in all industrial countries and created a challenge 
for  the  respective  central  banks.  Whilst  the  Eurosystem  kept  its  operational  framework 
largely unchanged, let me just for comparative purposes describe the decisions taken by the 
Bank of England in adjusting its operational framework. 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2008
During  the  financial  turmoil,  the  BoE  announced  that  it  allows  banks  to  hold  more 
remunerated reserves and that it will provide the additional funds to do so. Normally the BoE 
tolerates an on-average under- or overshooting of banks’ remunerated reserve holdings of 
±1% around banks’ own reserve targets. For the maintenance period starting in September 
2007 it widened the range to ±37.5%, and shortly later to ±60%, to increase the flexibility of 
the banks. Meanwhile, since last October, the range has been reduced again to ±30%.1
Within the above mentioned co-ordinated action of five central banks the BoE gave notice in 
mid-December  2007  that  it  has  expanded  the  amount  of  reserves  offered  at  the  3-month 
maturity longer-term repo open market operations (OMO) on 18 December and 15 January 
and,  more  importantly,  that  it  has  widened  the  range  of  collateral  accepted  for  these 
additional funds.  
Again within another co-ordinated action of the five central banks, the BoE announced on 11 
March  2008  a  continuation  of  its  expanded  3-month  OMO  against  the  wider  range  of 
collateral.  
On  21  April  2008  the  BoE  introduced  a  special  liquidity  scheme  to  swap  high  quality 
mortgage-backed and other securities for UK Treasury Bills – which are provided to the bank 
by  the  UK  treasury  for  this  purpose  –  for  a  given  period  of  time.  The  purpose  was  to 
temporarily  exchange  illiquid  assets  of  high  quality  against  very  liquid  securities  thereby 
stimulating  the  secured  inter-bank  money  market.  It  is  worth  to  note  that  the  asset  swaps 
exist for a period of one year with the opportunity of a renewal of up to three years. 
The developments in the operational frameworks of the Eurosystem and the Bank of England 
indicate a certain convergence in responding to the liquidity tensions. The same is true if one 
takes  the  actions  of  other  important  central  banks  into  account.  Most  notably,  all  relevant 
central  banks  have  responded  by  undertaking  exceptional  fine-tuning  operations  and  by 
lengthening the average maturity of their refinancing operations. Central banks with a more 
restrictive  pool  of  eligible  collateral  and/or  counterparties  before  the  current  turmoil  have 
broadened the range of accepted securities and counterparties. This is especially true for the 
Bank of England and the Federal Reserve. 
(Financial stability) implications of the operational measures 
4.3 
Although  it  is  always  difficult  to  draw  conclusions  from  a  cross-border  comparison  –  even 
more as we are right in the middle of a broad refurbishment of the causes and consequence 
of the current financial market turmoil – I try to derive some conclusions:  
From today’s perspective it was the right decision of the Eurosystem to act promptly and to 
inject  additional  funds  temporarily  into  the  money  market.  Confidence  was  re-established 
quite  fast  and  at  the  end  of  the  reserve  maintenance  period  there  was  no  on-average 
increase in central bank money.  
In this respect, the communication policy of the central bank is very important. Policy makers 
have  to  stress  the  separation  between  liquidity  operations  and  general  changes  of  the 
monetary  policy  stance.  To  avoid  “ex-post  insurance  of  risky  behaviour”  –  and  to  avoid 
negative implications for price stability, too – it is predominantly important to make clear that 
changes in the monetary policy stance are justified only when there is a risk to the primary 
mandate  of  the  central  bank,  i.e.  price  stability.  I  will  come  back  to  the  current  stance  of 
monetary  policy  in  the  Eurosystem,  but  let  me  first  devote  some  further  remarks  on  the 
refinancing framework. 
                                                 
1   The  liquidity  support  for  Northern  Rock  plc  in  mid-September  is  not  included  in  this  list  of  market-wide 
measures. 
BIS Review 72/2008 
 5
Central bank’s flexibility is important in order to suffocate upcoming money market tensions. 
A quick response to money market distortions will be supported by having a broad toolbox of 
monetary policy instruments. In times of distorted money markets, a broad access to central 
bank  money  undoubtedly  helps  banks  to  control  their  central  bank  liquidity.  Both  from  an 
implementation  perspective  as  well  as  from  a  monetary  policy  perspective  it  is  generally 
desirable  that  all  banks  have  access  to  central  bank  money.  This  broad  access  to  central 
bank money is even more important in the current environment. In normal times, however, 
usually only a subset of banks will actually use the direct access to central bank money on a 
regular basis.  
One of the main differences between the Eurosystem and the BoE frameworks concerns the 
range of accepted collateral. The Eurosystem did not and does not only accept government 
bonds as eligible collateral but also highly rated private issuances and even bank loans to 
the  private  sector  with  a  good  credit  quality  (according  to  Eurosystem  Credit  Assessment 
Framework; ECAF). It is exactly this feature of our framework, that provided us with a high 
degree of flexibility and allowed us to conduct our operations without changing the toolbox. 
In  general,  it  is  quite  difficult  to  assess  whether  a  narrow  or  a  broad  range  of  collateral  is 
preferable. All in all, however, at least for me the advantages of a broader range of collateral 
outbalance the potential disadvantages. In turbulent times a broad range of collateral helps 
to grant additional funds to the banks without being restricted by their available high liquidity 
range of securities. In this respect, a broad range may help to safeguard financial stability.  
However,  it  is  occasionally  pointed  out  that  the  acceptance  of  private  assets  could  create 
adverse 
the  central  bank. 
Counterparties have recently brought forward more than before less liquid collateral to the 
Eurosystem,  in  particular  asset-backed  securities  (ABS),  for  which  primary  and  secondary 
markets  have  basically  dried  up.  The  annual  average  share  of  ABS  pledged  as  collateral 
increased  to  16  percent  in  2007,  up  from  12  percent  in  2006  and  6  percent  in  2004.  This 
development may be promoted by the fact that, in terms of volume, nearly 60 percent of the 
European securitisation market is eligible for Eurosystem collateral purposes. As a measure 
of risk control the Eurosystem generally refers to market prices and deducts a haircut from 
that value. If a market price is stale or not available, the Eurosystem calculates a theoretical 
price itself. Therefore, the submitted collateral is at any time valuated with up-to-date prices. 
If the (daily) valuated collateral falls below a certain level, the Eurosystem makes a so-called 
margin  call,  requiring  additional  collateral  from  the  counterparty.  From  a  risk  management 
perspective,  time-varying  haircuts  may  also  mitigate,  among  other  adequate  measures, 
counterparty  risks  of  the  central  bank.  This  instrument  is  also  in  use  by  the  BoE  for 
evaluating  collateral.  It  requires  central  banks’  ability  to  assess  the  recoverability  of  the 
collateral appropriately. For this purpose the Eurosystem continuously monitors the quality of 
its collateral very carefully.  
We  should  keep  in  mind,  however,  that  in  light  of  the  financial  tensions  central  bank  repo 
transactions  as  such  can  only  mitigate  some  funding  tensions  for  banks.  They  do  not 
address  the  fundamental  cause  of  the  problems,  that  is  an  overhang  of  illiquid  assets  on 
banks balance sheets due to former credit excesses.  
incentive  problems  aggravating  counterparty 
risks  of 
The current monetary policy stance in the Eurosystem 
5  
For setting the Eurosystem monetary policy stance, however, the outlook on price stability is 
the magnetic needle of the Governing Council. It is only the possible repercussions of stress 
in financial markets on real economic developments and on the outlook for inflation that is of 
interest for monetary policy in that regard. Against this background the fallout of the financial 
market tensions – but also the effects of higher commodity prices – will be a more moderate, 
but still resilient, global growth.  
6 
 BIS Review 72/2008
The euro area remains on solid fundamentals with regard to real economic growth. This view 
is underlined by the Eurosystem staff projections published yesterday. And also the outlook 
on  Germany  as  laid  out  in  the  Bundesbank  forecast  published  today  supports  this 
assessment. While we will see a moderation in growth rates over the coming quarters, both 
in the euro area and also in Germany, already at the turn of the year we will have reached 
the through. Moreover, the moderation in growth rates in the quarters ahead have to be seen 
against the positive developments in Q1. Looking through the volatile quarterly figures, it is 
evident that the current cycle is resilient and robust.  
At the same time, current inflation rates as well as the medium-term outlook on consumer 
prices  leaves  us  in  a  state  of  heightened  alertness.  Even  under  the  optimistic  assumption 
that  recent  dynamics  in  commodity  prices  diminishes  over  the  projection  horizon  and  that 
there  will  be  no  broad-based  second-round  effects,  monthly  HICP  inflation  rates  will  stay 
above our definition of price stability far into 2009. And the risks to this outlook are clearly on 
the upside. 
Given our focus on price stability, the Governing Council has sent a clear signal to markets 
and to the broader public yesterday, which seems to have been well-understood, that such 
an  outlook  on  inflation  is  not  acceptable  for  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy.  The 
message  of  yesterday’s  Governing  Council  meeting  also  strongly  underlines  the  already 
mentioned  principle  to  keep  distinct  liquidity  operations  and  interest  rate  setting  in  the 
conduct of Eurosystem monetary policy.  
MTM and financial developments  
6  
The relationship between monetary policy and financial markets, however, is by no means 
one that is only of interest for policy makers in the face of a crisis. Developments on financial 
markets have the potential to modify core economic relationships and, thus, are of utmost 
interest for monetary policy. Let me therefore move away somewhat from the recent stress 
episode to discuss another more structural issue. 
The  recent  decade  has  seen  remarkable  financial  development,  leading  to  many  new 
financial  products,  more  competition,  a  tremendous  increase  of  securitization  activities, 
disintermediation, and a consolidation process in the banking sector. This alters the range of 
activities  of  financial  market  participants  and  it  possibly  also  changes  their  reaction  to 
monetary policy. In the following, I will briefly discuss how financial innovations could have 
modified  the  interest  rate  channel  and  the  bank  lending  channel  of  monetary  policy 
transmission 
Interest rate channel 
6.1 
Increased competition in banking together with an enhanced availability of alternative capital 
market-based  instruments  for  financial  investment  has  likely  amplified  and/or  sped-up  the 
effects  of  monetary  policy  changes  on  bank  interest  rates  (and,  ceteris  paribus,  on  output 
and inflation): Increased competition between banks, but also between banks and different 
other  financial  market  segments  led  to  a  closer  relationship  between  market  and  bank 
interest  rates.  Consolidation  in  the  banking  system  has  also  potentially  accelerated  the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  shocks  to  bank  lending  rates  as  well  as  to  other  financial 
variables if (fewer and) larger banks use improved arbitrage opportunities between different 
market  segments.  The  deepening  of  financial  markets  has  likely  fostered  the  role  of 
expectations and thereby increased the speed at which changes in short-term interest rates 
are transmitted to other financial variables and to the real economy.  
BIS Review 72/2008 
 7
In sum, the existing literature points to a faster interest rate pass-through caused by deeper, 
more  complete  and  more  competitive  financial  markets.  This  is  also  confirmed  by  the 
respective empirical literature.2
Impacts on credit channel 
6.2 
The credit channel consists of several sub-channels, with the bank lending and the balance 
sheet channel being the most prominent ones. The bank lending channel concentrates on 
the  effects  of  monetary  policy  on  bank  loan  supply  via  changes  in  the  banks’  funding 
possibilities. The balance sheet channel looks at the effects on the overall supply of funds via 
changes  in  the  borrowers’  balance  sheets  (esp.  value  of  collateral).  The  bank  lending 
channel is generally expected to have lost importance due to the financial development of 
the  recent  years:  Banks’  flexibility  to  react  to  an  interest  rate  hike  has  increased,  and  the 
dependency on bank loan supply has declined. With a higher flexibility on the banks’ side, 
caused,  e.g.,  by  increased  securitization  or  an  improved  risk  management,  banks  have 
become  able  to  better  isolate  their  loan  customers  from  monetary  policy  impulses.  In 
consequence,  European  banks  can  nowadays  react  more  flexibly  to  changes  in  market 
conditions than before.  
Empirical studies (e.g. Altunbas, Gambacorta and Marques (2007) point in this direction and 
suggest  that  asset  securitization  may  have  reduced  the  importance  of  the  bank  lending 
channel for monetary policy transmission. Further, it allows banks to transfer parts of their 
credit risk to other market participants such as institutional investors. Thus, those banks that 
use securitization more intensively are better sheltered against monetary policy. 
In a similar vein, with the increasing use of derivative instruments lending policies of banks 
might also have become less vulnerable to macroeconomic shocks – such as an unexpected 
monetary  policy  tightening.  In  addition,  derivative  instruments  potentially  facilitate banks  to 
raise non-reservable sources of funds, for instance, by improving a bank’s liquidity. Drawing 
on US data, the empirical results of Purnanandam (2007) show that the lending volumes of 
those banks that use derivatives are not sensitive to a Federal funds rate shock. On the other 
hand, those banks that do not use derivatives (even the very large one) significantly cut their 
lending  volume  when  the  Fed  tightens  the  monetary  policy.  This  suggests  that  derivatives 
help banks to shield themselves (at least partially) from a monetary policy shock. However, 
credit protection through credit derivatives may also be associated with an increase in bank 
credit supply, as has been found for other innovations like securitizations as well. Drawing on 
US  micro  data  Hirtle  (2007)  finds  that  greater  use  of  credit  derivatives  is  associated  with 
greater supply of bank credit for large term loans.  
Further, huge amounts of loan-backed instruments have been acquired by entities known as 
conduits/SIVs  which,  while  not  appearing  in  banks’  balance  sheets,  benefit  from  large 
contingent  credit  lines  granted  by  banks  that  set  them  up.  The  turbulences  starting  in  the 
second half of 2007 have just illustrated that, as structural investment vehicles draw on their 
credit  lines,  bank  balance  sheets  may  greatly  inflate  in  times  of  stress  (ECB,  November 
2007).  
                                                 
2   Bondt,  G.  de  (2005),  “Interest  Rate  Pass-through:  Empirical  Results  for  the  Euro  Area”,  German  Economic 
Review, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 37-78. 
  Bondt,  G.  de,  B.  Mojon  and  N.  Valla  (2005),  “Term  Structure  and  the  Sluggishness  of  Retail  Bank  Interest 
Rates in Euro Area Countries”, ECB Working Paper Series,No.518, September. 
  Gropp,  R.,  C.K.  Sørensen  and  J.D.  Lichtenberger  (2007),  “The  Dynamics  of  Bank  Spreads  and  Financial 
Structure”, ECB Working PapersNo.714, July. 
Leuvensteijn,  M.  van,  C.K.  Sørensen,  J.A.  Bikker  and  A.A.R.J.M.  van  Rixtel  (2008),  “Impact  of  bank 
competition  on  the  interest  rate  pass-through  in  the  euro  area”,  Tjalling  C.  Koopmans  Research  Institute, 
Discussion Paper Series, No. 08-08. 
BIS Review 72/2008
 8 
 Moreover,  financial  development  has  not  just  broadened  banks’  possibilities  to  react  to 
monetary  policy  and  thereby  reduce  the  effect  of  loan  supply  –  it  has  also  broadened 
borrowers’ financing opportunities, reducing their dependency on bank loans. The additional 
funding opportunities entail a larger share of market-based (instead of bank-based) products; 
due to the fact that these are more standardized and less idiosyncratic, collateral may play a 
more  important  role  now.  Therefore,  the  importance  of  the  balance  sheet  channel  which 
relies  on  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  on  the  supply  of  funds  via  wealth  and  collateral 
effects may gain importance due to financial development. 
Whether  the  credit  channel  as  a  whole  loses  or  gains  importance  due  to  financial 
development is an open issue, both theoretically and empirically.  
Since a good knowledge of the monetary transmission process, that is of the key variables 
and the lags involved, is key for monetary policy, it is necessary for central banks to closely 
monitor  the  developments  in  the  financial  markets  because  they  have  the  potential  to 
seriously  affect  the  monetary  transmission  process.  Factoring-in  the  influence  of  financial 
market developments underlines the fact that monetary policy has to be based on a broad 
range of different indicators in order not to run the risk of missing important information. 
Conclusion 
7  
I  have  tried  to  illustrate  some  aspects  of  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and 
financial markets. Developments on financial markets have repercussions on our operational 
and refinancing framework. In addition, they have the potential to alter the impact of interest 
rate  measures  on  the  rest  of  the  economy.  It  goes  without  saying  that  without  financial 
stability the task of monetary policy becomes more complicated.  
In  that  regard  we  should  remember  that  in  safeguarding  price  stability  monetary  policy 
supports financial stability. Thus, considering the influence of financial market developments 
on monetary policy does not lead to a change of the well-respected fundamental goals of a 
stability-oriented monetary policy.  
Literature 
Altunbas, Y., L. Gambacorta and D. Marqués (2007), “Securitisation and the Bank Lending 
Channel”, ECB conference on “The Implications of Changes in Banking and Financing on the 
Monetary Policy Transmission Mechanism”, 29-30 November, Frankfurt. 
Bondt, G. de  (2005),  “Interest  Rate  Pass-through:  Empirical  Results  for  the  Euro  Area”, 
German Economic Review, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 37-78. 
Bondt, G. de, B. Mojon and Natacha Valla (2005), “Term Structure and the Sluggishness of 
Retail  Bank  Interest  Rates  in  Euro  Area  Countries”,  ECB  Working  Paper  Series,  No.  518, 
September. 
Borio, C. (2008), “The financial turmoil of 2007: a prliminary assessment and some policy 
considerations”, BIS Working Papers, No. 251, March. 
European Central Bank (2007), “Corpoarte Finance in the Euro Area including Background 
Materia”, ECB Occasional Paper Series, No. 63, June. 
Gropp, R., C.K. Sørensen and J.D. Lichtenberger (2007), “The Dynamics of Bank Spreads 
and Financial Structure”, ECB Working Papers, July. 
Hirtle, B. (2007), “Credit Derivatives and Bank Credit Supply”, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York Staff Reports, February. 
BIS Review 72/2008 
 9
Leuvensteijn,  M.  van,  C.K. Sørensen,  J.A.  Bikker  and  A.A.R.J.M.  van  Rixtel  (2008), 
“Impact of bank competition on the interest rate pass-through in the euro area”, Tjalling C. 
Koopmans Research Institute, Discussion Paper Series, No. 08-08. 
Purnanandam, A.  (2007),  “Interest  Rate  Derivatives  at  Commercial  Banks:  An  Empirical 
Investigation”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 54, No. 6, pp. 1769-1808. 
10 
 BIS Review 72/2008
