Toshiro Muto: Bank of Japan's view regarding developments in 
economic activity and prices and the thinking behind its conduct of 
monetary policy 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshiro  Muto,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with business leaders, Sapporo, 10 January 2008. 
 Introduction 
Today, I would like to discuss the Bank of Japan's view regarding developments in economic 
activity and prices and the thinking behind its conduct of monetary policy.  
The current situation and the outlook for economic activity and prices 
I.  
I would first like to talk about the current situation and the outlook for economic activity and 
prices.  
The  pace  of  growth  in  Japan's  economy  is  currently  slowing,  mainly  due  to  the  drop  in 
housing investment. The economy, for the time being, is expected to continue slowing, but is 
likely to resume moderate expansion thereafter.  
The December Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) indicated that 
businesses have become somewhat more cautious. Factors behind this seem to include the 
following.  First,  small  firms,  in  particular,  are  still  unable  to  pass  on  higher  costs  to  sales 
prices  even  though  the  steep  rise  continues  in  prices  of  materials  such  as  crude  oil  and 
grains. Second, housing construction has decreased significantly, reflecting the coming into 
force of the revised Building Standard Law in June last year. And third, uncertainty regarding 
the future course of the world economy has increased due to subprime mortgage problems. 
However, overall, firms are maintaining their growth forecasts for income and profits for fiscal 
2007 and their capital investment plans remain solid.  
Production  has  started  increasing  again  after  staying  flat  during  the  first  half  of  2007.  The 
adjustment in inventories of IT-related goods, which had been rising, has more or less come 
to an end, and levels of production, shipments, and inventories, including in the IT-related 
sector, are essentially well in balance. Despite increased uncertainty regarding the course of 
the global economy and especially the U.S. economy, exports to a broad range of regions, 
including  the  oil  producing  countries  and  emerging  economies,  and  hence  overall,  are 
continuing  to  increase. In  the  December  Tankan,  large  firms'  annual  projections  for  export 
sales have been revised upward.  
Given these developments, it seems reasonable to conclude that the strength in corporate 
activity  remains  intact,  although  close  attention  should  be  paid  to  how  the  more  cautious 
business sentiment will affect corporate spending activity.  
Let me now turn to developments in the household sector. Nominal wages per worker have 
been somewhat weak. Labor cost restraint by firms is persistent, as they are facing greater 
exposure to global competition and capital market discipline. Recently, in particular, sluggish 
growth  in  corporate  profits  resulting  from  the  surge  in  materials  prices  has  been  leading 
firms, especially small ones, to restrain wages. Moreover, the change in the composition of 
the workforce, resulting from the fact that the high-salaried baby-boomer generation started 
to retire in 2006 and from increases in the share of part-time workers, has also contributed to 
the  weakness  in  wages.  However,  as  the  economic  expansion  continues,  albeit  at  a 
moderate  pace,  many  firms  are  feeling  a  shortage  of  labor,  as  suggested  by  the  Tankan 
reports,  and  the  number  of  employees  continues  to  rise.  If  labor  supply  and  demand 
conditions  continue  to  tighten,  it  is  likely  that  upward  pressure  on  wages  will  gradually 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 1
increase.  This  implies  that  employee  income,  which  is  the  product  of  the  number  of 
employees and wages, is likely to continue rising moderately.  
Against  this  background,  private  consumption  has  been  firm.  Although  weather  conditions 
have caused sales at department stores and at supermarkets to stay virtually flat, sales of 
digital appliances have been strong and the number of new passenger-car registrations has 
picked  up.  Meanwhile,  however,  various  survey  results  are  indicating  weaker  consumer 
sentiment. Factors behind this seem to include rises in prices of daily necessities such as 
gasoline,  kerosene,  and  food,  while  wages  remain  sluggish.  Developments  in  private 
consumption, which may be influenced by the weaker consumer sentiment, should continue 
to be monitored carefully.  
Meanwhile, housing investment has been showing substantial declines due to the delays in 
the confirmation of building applications after the revised Building Standard Law came into 
force. Going forward, it is expected that gradual recovery will take place as the delays in the 
confirmation process are resolved, but there are uncertainties regarding the pace and extent 
of the recovery because condominium sales are becoming sluggish due to the rise in real 
estate prices, especially in the Tokyo metropolitan area.  
Regarding prices, the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) has been rising mainly 
due  to  higher  international  commodity  prices.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the 
consumer  price  index  (CPI,  excluding  fresh  food),  which  had  remained  at  slightly  below  0 
percent,  posted  an  increase  of  0.1  percent  in  October  2007,  followed  by  a  0.4  percent 
increase in November. As prices of petroleum products and food are increasing, the rate of 
growth in the CPI is likely to rise further in the immediate future.  
As I noted earlier, the pace of economic growth seems to be decelerating at present. Given 
this, the overall supply and demand conditions seem unlikely to tighten for the time being. 
However, from a longer-term perspective, prices are likely to continue their upward trend due 
to tighter supply and demand conditions as the economic expansion continues.  
In sum, negative factors such as (1) the surge in materials prices, (2) the significant decline 
in  housing  investment,  and  (3)  increased  uncertainty  regarding  the  course  of  the  global 
economy  are  causing  a  deceleration  in  the  growth  of  Japan's  economy,  which  has  been 
moderate to begin with. For this reason, the virtuous circle of growth in production, income, 
and spending is temporarily weakening, but we do not expect that it will break. The current 
economic expansion is attributable to the continuing growth in overseas economies and the 
progress in the adjustment of various excesses at firms and financial institutions in Japan. 
Export  activity,  which  is  supported  by  overseas  economies,  and  production  at  present  are 
continuing  to  increase,  so  that  the  driving  force  of  the  virtuous  circle  remains  intact.  The 
extent  of  progress  in  corporate  restructuring  varies  depending  on  the  industry  and  size  of 
firms concerned, but looking at the corporate sector as a whole, firms are not under pressure 
to adjust production capacity, labor, and inventories. Under these circumstances, business 
fixed  investment  and  private  consumption  are  maintaining  their  upward  trend.  In  addition, 
going  forward,  housing  investment  seems  likely  to  gradually  recover,  since  the  sharp 
decrease in housing investment is mainly due to the procedural change following the coming 
into  force  of  the  new  law.  Given  these  circumstances,  our  current  view  is  that  Japan's 
economy will maintain its moderate upward trend. 
Developments in overseas economies 
II.  
It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  there  are  certain  risks  regarding  the  outlook  I  just 
mentioned. In particular, one important risk factor is whether the world economy will continue 
its sustained growth, since this is the basis for the virtuous circle driving Japan's economic 
expansion.  
2 
 BIS Review 4/2008
Since summer 2007, global financial markets have been volatile due to the U.S. subprime 
mortgage  problems,  and  uncertainty  regarding  the  future  of  the  world economy,  especially 
the U.S. economy, has been increasing.  
The  deceleration  in  the  growth  of  the  U.S.  economy  is  becoming  somewhat  more 
pronounced. Housing investment continues to decrease substantially, and the drop in home 
sales  and  accumulation  of  unsold  houses  are  becoming  increasingly  severe.  According  to 
survey results, banks are applying tighter terms and conditions not only on mortgage loans 
but also on real estate loans for business properties and on corporate and consumer loans. 
Recently released labor market statistics indicate that the pace of increase in employment 
has decelerated and the unemployment rate has risen.  
In  this  situation,  however,  private  consumption  and  business  fixed  investment  are  so  far 
continuing  their  moderate  upward  trend,  although  the  pace  of  increase  is  decelerating.  It 
seems likely that the U.S. economy will register relatively low growth rates in the short run 
but will gradually return to a path with growth rates close to the potential rate as the housing 
market correction progresses. However, the risk should be borne in mind that depending on 
future developments in the housing market correction and in global financial markets, private 
consumption  and  business  fixed  investment  may  fall  below  expectations  through  negative 
wealth  effects,  credit  tightening,  and  deterioration  in  business  and  consumer  sentiment, 
thereby leading to further deceleration in U.S. economic growth.  
The  European  economy  continues  to  expand,  with  business  fixed  investment  and  private 
consumption  maintaining  their  upward  trend.  However,  the  possible  adverse  effects  on 
financial  conditions  of  global  financial  market  disruptions  may  pose  a  downside  risk. 
Meanwhile, emerging economies and oil producing countries have been expanding robustly 
and are playing a more significant role as pillars of world economic growth.  
Thus, it seems reasonable to expect that thanks to the widening base of growth the world 
economy  will  continue  to  expand  robustly.  However,  downside  risks  to  this  outlook  are 
growing,  reflecting  intensified  adjustment  in  the  U.S.  economy  and  in  global  financial 
markets.  
At the same time, attention should also be paid to the risk of inflation. In the United States, 
inflationary pressures are remaining, reflecting continued high levels of resource utilization, 
namely  in  labor  and  production  capacity.  In  China,  the  economy  continues  to  expand 
strongly, and there are signs of overheating, especially in fixed investment, despite various 
measures  taken  by  the  authorities  to  cool  down  the  economy.  The  strong  growth  of  the 
global  economy  and  other  factors,  such  as  geopolitical  risks  and  the  speculative  inflow  of 
funds to commodity markets, are causing international commodity prices to remain elevated, 
as evidenced by the fact that crude oil prices temporarily rose above 100 dollars per barrel at 
the  beginning  of  the  year.  Thus,  countries  around  the  world  face  difficult  monetary  policy 
challenges in the presence of both downside risks to the economic outlook and upside risks 
to inflation. 
Developments in global financial markets 
III.  
Global financial markets remain unstable, reflecting the downgrading of securitized products 
and persistent concern about possible further losses at financial institutions. The functioning 
of  markets  for  securitized  products  has  remained  impaired  as  evidenced,  for  example,  by 
continued decreases in the amount outstanding of asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) 
issued and sluggish trading of collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). Corporate bonds have 
been  issued  at  a  reasonable  pace,  but  the  corporate  bond  market  is  still  undergoing 
adjustment  as  seen  in  increased  issuance  spreads.  Stock  markets  are  still  unstable,  and 
stock prices declined substantially around the turn of the year.  
The  volatility  in  global  financial  markets  seems  to  reflect  a  market  correction  following  the 
laxity in risk evaluation that had developed during the long period of benign economic and 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 3
financial conditions. This adjustment is therefore expected to require some time to work itself 
out, and during the process financial institutions will have to bear a certain amount of losses. 
Since summer 2007, organizations such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the 
Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD)  have  released  their 
estimates of the size of losses incurred from financial products related to subprime mortgage 
loans, but it is difficult to accurately grasp the amount of final losses, since the correction in 
the housing market is ongoing. Financial institutions in the United States and Europe have 
been  posting  considerable  losses,  and  many  have  announced  measures  to  boost  their 
capital  to  compensate  for  these  losses.  How  successful  these  measures  are  in  helping 
financial  institutions  and  the  financial  system  to  restore  their  credibility  will  need  to  be 
monitored closely.  
Short-term funding markets in the United States and Europe were under elevated pressures 
in  late  2007  as  financial  institutions  tried  to  secure  end-of-year  funds.  To  address  this 
situation, on December 12 central banks in the major economies announced joint measures 
to  ensure  the  stability  of  global  financial  markets.  The  Federal  Reserve  established  a 
temporary  Term  Auction  Facility.  Under  this  facility  program,  the  Federal  Reserve  can 
auction term funds against a wide variety of collateral, thereby providing funds with longer 
maturities to more financial institutions. Moreover, it established foreign exchange swap lines 
with the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank, and based on this, U.S. dollar 
auctions were carried out in Europe. The Bank of England and the Bank of Canada actively 
conducted operations to provide ample term funds with maturities beyond year-end.  
The  Bank  of  Japan  and  the  Swedish  Riksbank  welcomed  the  action  and  issued  a  press 
release stating that they would also appropriately provide liquidity to money markets in their 
respective  countries.  The  Bank  of  Japan  did  not  make  any  particular  changes  to  its 
framework of money market operations because we have been providing funds with various 
maturities  against  a  wide  variety  of  collateral  and  are  able  to  gauge  funding  needs  by 
monitoring market participants' daily financing activities, and we can thus fully address the 
situation under the current framework.  
The  joint  action  was  based  on  the  central  banks'  common  understanding  that,  given  the 
continued  volatility  in  global  financial  markets,  it  was  necessary  to  appropriately  address 
elevated  pressures  in  short-term  funding  markets  and  thereby  facilitate  the  market 
adjustments  in  an  orderly  manner.  Since  the  announcement  of  the  measures,  the  central 
banks  involved  have  been  implementing  market  operations  accordingly,  and  as  a  result 
interest rates on term instruments declined toward the end of 2007 in the United States and 
Europe.  I  believe  these  efforts  will  contribute  to  ensuring  the  stability  of  global  financial 
markets. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
IV.  
I  would  now  like  to  explain  the  Bank's  thinking  regarding  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy 
based on the outlook for economic activity and prices and risk factors I have described.  
As  I  have  often  noted  in  the  past,  the  Bank  has  been  taking  monetary  policy  actions  in 
accordance with changes in the economic and price situation and has no predetermined view 
regarding future actions. In making judgments on policy actions, we try to accurately forecast 
future developments in the economy and prices, taking account of the time lags until policy 
actions  actually  influence  the  economy  and  prices  –  the  so-called  transmission  lag  of 
monetary policy. This is the essence of a forward-looking monetary policy.  
Let  me  explain  this  in  the  context  of  the  current  economic  situation  in  Japan  where,  as  I 
mentioned, the economy for the time being is likely to decelerate while the year-on-year rate 
of increase in the CPI will gradually rise due to increases in the prices of petroleum products 
and  food.  In  conducting  monetary  policy,  it  is  necessary  to  anticipate  how  these 
developments  will  affect  future  economic  activity  and  prices.  For  example,  in  the  current 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2008
context,  monetary  policy  judgments  should  be  made  based  on  the  careful  analysis  of  the 
following  issues,  which  will  be  incorporated  in  the  future  assessment  of  the  economy  and 
prices: (1) whether the slowdown is temporary and the economy can be expected to return to 
its  growth  path,  or  whether  there  is  a  possibility  that  it  will  last  longer  than  expected;  (2) 
whether  price  rises  could  exert  a  negative  influence  on  the  economy,  leading  to  future 
downward deviations in the economy and prices; and (3) whether, on the contrary, price rises 
could push up future prices through their influence on households' inflation expectations or 
firms' price-setting behavior. It goes without saying that forecasts always entail uncertainty, 
making it all the more important to assess their likelihood as well as the risks of upward or 
downward  deviations.  We  are  determined  to  conduct  appropriate  monetary  policy  with  the 
aim  of  achieving  sustainable  growth  under  price  stability  while  carefully  assessing  our 
projections, their likelihood, and upside and downside risks.  
If,  as  a  result  of  such  assessment,  it  is  judged  that  Japan's  economy  will  continue  its 
sustained  expansion  under  price  stability,  interest  rates,  which  currently  are  extremely 
accommodative,  will  be  adjusted  gradually.  It  is  conceivable  that  if,  for  instance,  the 
expectation  takes  hold  that  interest  rates  will  remain  low  for  a  long  time  regardless  of 
developments in economic activity and prices, there is a medium- to long-term risk of larger 
swings  and  an  inefficient  allocation  of  resources  as  firms  and  financial  institutions  over-
extend themselves. However, with regard to specific policy actions, we would like to proceed 
with discretion based on an open-minded, forward-looking assessment of the economic and 
price situation. 
Closing remarks 
Thus far, I have explained the current situation and the outlook for Japan's economy as well 
as the Bank's thinking on the conduct of monetary policy. In closing, I would like to devote 
attention to the economy of Hokkaido.  
The most notable characteristic of Hokkaido is its rich and boundless natural environment. 
However, as a consequence, Hokkaido's economy relies to a large degree on public works 
such as road construction and flood prevention. The reduction in these works as a result of 
the financial difficulties of the central and the local government means that economic growth 
has been sluggish relative to other parts of Japan.  
However, promising initiatives that take advantage of Hokkaido's rich natural resources are 
currently underway. Primary industry accounts for a large share of Hokkaido's economy, and 
in  agriculture,  for  example,  the  promotion  of  organic  farming  and  the  introduction  of  a 
certification  system  for  "Hokkaido  Brand"  products  are  achieving  progress  against  the 
background  of  rising  concerns  about  food  safety.  Moreover,  with  numerous  colleges  and 
research institutions working on bio-technologies, there are moves to produce new products 
that combine Hokkaido's rich resources in agriculture, forestry, and fisheries with new bio-
technologies.  
Furthermore, the Hokkaido Toyako Summit will be held in July this year with environmental 
problems as one of the major themes. Hokkaido has already implemented a number of steps 
to  take  the  lead  in  addressing  environmental  issues.  For  example,  in  the  area  of  energy 
supply,  work  has  been  in  progress  in  fields  such  as  wind  and  solar  power  generation, 
biomass power generation in central Hokkaido – which has a large dairy farming industry – 
and the utilization of snow-ice cryogenic energy in regions with heavy snowfall, using snow 
and ice stored in winter for air-conditioning in summer. All of these efforts take full advantage 
of the region's distinguishing features and are friendly to the environment.  
The  summit  is  a  perfect  opportunity  to  showcase  Hokkaido's  industries  and  natural 
environment,  not  only  domestically  but  also  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  I  hope  this  will  bring 
about steady progress in the revitalization of the regional economy. 
BIS Review 4/2008 
 5
