Donald L Kohn: Money markets and financial stability 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Columbia Business School 
Conference on the Role of Money Markets, New York, 29 May 2008. 
 Market  participants,  scholars,  and  central  bankers  and  other  policymakers  have  long 
recognized that liquid money markets are critical to financial stability. Many banks and other 
financial market participants obtain a significant portion of their funding in the money markets 
and rely on rolling over such short-term debt. Developments in global financial markets since 
last  summer  have  underscored  that  if  market  participants  become  concerned  about  their 
access to money market funding, they can pull back from providing credit to other financial 
market  participants  and  to  businesses  and  households.  Furthermore,  certain  liquidity  tools 
traditionally  used  by  central  banks  may  not  be  fully  effective  in  restoring  liquidity  to  the 
money markets and containing the threats such money market disturbances pose to financial 
stability.  We  all  need  to  reflect  carefully  on  these  developments  and  draw  appropriate 
lessons regarding the management of liquidity risk and the design of central bank liquidity 
facilities.1  
The role of money markets in the recent and ongoing financial market turmoil 
The  financial  turmoil  that  we  have  been  experiencing  since  last  summer  clearly  did  not 
originate in the money markets. As everyone knows, the trigger was losses associated with 
soaring delinquencies on U.S. subprime mortgages that were originated from 2005 through 
early  2007,  a  period  during  which  underwriting  standards  for  such  mortgages  weakened 
dramatically.  But  the  loosening  of  standards  and  terms  on  subprime  mortgages  was  also 
symptomatic of a broader erosion of the underwriting of loans to households and businesses. 
Many of those loans had been packaged as asset-backed securities and sold to investors 
who relied on the credit ratings of the securities rather than thoroughly conducting their own 
due  diligence  on  the  securities'  risk  characteristics.  When  those  investors  experienced 
significant  losses  on  even  the  most  highly  rated  securities  backed  by  subprime  collateral, 
they lost confidence in the ratings and pulled back from markets for a range of asset-backed 
securities,  especially  those  with  more  complex  structures.  During  the  spring  and  early 
summer of 2007, the pullback by investors began to put pressure on the liquidity of banks 
and other financial institutions that had originated large volumes of loans with the expectation 
of distributing them. 
That  pressure  became  severe  and  widespread  when  the  liquidity  of  the  asset-backed 
commercial paper (ABCP) markets became impaired in early August 2007. Money markets, 
like  that  for  ABCP,  are  especially  vulnerable  to  a  decline  in  confidence  because  so  many 
investors  in  that  sector,  such  as  money  market  funds,  are  seeking  assured  safety  and 
liquidity. And well-functioning money markets are critical to the originate-to-distribute model 
of  financial  intermediation  that  has  become  an  increasingly  important  means  of  funneling 
savings into investment. Originators and packagers need the money markets to fund loans 
accumulated for later resale; and liquidity in securitization markets depends on dealers being 
able  to  borrow  in  money  markets  to  hold  inventories  acquired  in  the  process  of  making 
markets. An illustration of such dependency is that problems in money markets fed back on 
                                                 
1   Patrick Parkinson, of the Board's staff, contributed to the preparation of these remarks. The views expressed 
are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of other members of the Board or the Federal Open 
Market Committee. 
BIS Review 68/2008 
 1
mortgage markets last year because many securitized loans were being financed on a more 
permanent basis with short-term money market paper, such as ABCP.  
I  believe  that  the  depth,  scope,  and  persistence  of  the  financial  turmoil  we  have  been 
experiencing  is  in  significant  part  attributable  to  broader  concerns  about  the  liquidity  of 
money markets. A loss of liquidity in a money market generally has more serious effects than 
a  loss  of  liquidity  in  markets  for  longer-term  instruments  because  such  large  amounts  of 
money  market  instruments  become  due  each  day.  If  investors  pull  back  from  a  money 
market, the issuers come under substantial liquidity pressures very suddenly. In the case of 
ABCP, with the exception of paper issued by structured investment vehicles (SIVs) and so-
called  extendible  paper,  issuers  were  able  to  meet  those  liquidity  demands  by  drawing  on 
committed lines of credit from banks. But that simply transferred the liquidity pressure to the 
banking system. Banks generally were able to cope with that pressure, but the need to fund 
the draws on their backup lines ate substantially into their liquidity and capital buffers. Thus, 
credit problems in mortgage markets helped reduce the availability of credit across a wide 
variety of instruments and borrowers.  
The pressure on their liquidity and on their balance sheets, combined with heightened credit 
concerns, made banks reluctant to provide others with term funding – that is, money market 
loans  with  terms  longer  than  overnight.  Term  premiums  embodied  in  interbank  money 
markets  increased  markedly;  at  times  the  spreads  between  term  dollar  Libor  and 
comparable-maturity  overnight  index  swap  rates  exceeded  100  basis  points,  and  term 
premiums  of  comparable  magnitude  also  emerged  in  interbank  markets  for  sterling  and 
euros. Securities firms and hedge funds also found term funding considerably more costly 
and  difficult  to  obtain  after  the  strains  emerged  in  the  ABCP  markets.  Convinced  that  the 
illiquidity  of  money  markets  and  persistently  enlarged  term  premiums  were  a  significant 
impediment  to  restoring  the  effectiveness  of  financial  market  functioning,  the  Federal 
Reserve in late 2007 and early 2008 took steps to make borrowing at the discount window 
more attractive to banks and provided greater liquidity to primary dealers in U.S. government 
securities by extending the maturity of its open market operations. 
For  a  time  those  actions  seemed  to  be  reducing  the  pressures  in  term  funding  markets. 
However, in mid-March events once again demonstrated how disruptions to money markets 
can  threaten  financial  stability.  Growing  concerns  about  the  financial  condition  of  Bear 
Stearns  undermined  the  confidence  of  its  creditors  and  counterparties  and  in  a  few  days 
eroded what it and its regulator had judged to be an ample liquidity cushion. Although the 
demands on its liquidity took many forms, the principal drain resulted from the reluctance of 
creditors and counterparties to roll over the overnight secured transactions that Bear Stearns 
used  to  finance  a  substantial  portion  of  its  balance  sheet.  Unable  to  roll  over  those 
transactions,  Bear  Stearns  would  have  been  forced  to  file  for  bankruptcy  unless  other 
sources  of  financing  became  available.  A  bankruptcy  filing  would  have  forced  its  secured 
creditors  to  liquidate  the  underlying  collateral,  which  would  have  added  to  already  severe 
downward pressures on prices given the illiquidity of the markets for some of this collateral. 
Those  creditors  and  counterparties,  which  included  money  market  funds  and  other  highly 
risk-averse investors, might well have responded to the sharp and unexpected reduction in 
the liquidity of their portfolios, as well as to possible losses and a heightened risk of future 
losses, by pulling back from providing secured financing to other primary dealers.  
In  those  circumstances,  in  which  a  much  broader  and  less  containable  liquidity  crisis 
threatened  to  emerge,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  judged  that  it  needed  to  use  its 
emergency  liquidity  powers  to  avoid  a  bankruptcy  filing  by  Bear  Stearns.  Furthermore,  to 
reduce the potential for counterparties and creditors to make a run on other primary dealers, 
the  Federal  Reserve  used  its  emergency  lending  authority  to  create  a  new  facility  that 
provided  the  primary  dealers  with  a  liquidity  backstop  similar  to  the  discount  window 
available  to  banks  in  generally  sound  financial  condition.  These  actions  by  the  Federal 
Reserve and other central banks have contributed to some improvements in the liquidity of 
term money markets. But market functioning remains far from normal. In particular, although 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2008
spreads between Libor and comparable swap rates have receded from their recent peaks, 
they remain abnormally high.  
Until the market turmoil fully abates, we run some risk in trying to draw lessons from recent 
experience.  Nonetheless,  I  believe  experience  to  date  has  taught  some  lessons  regarding 
the  management  of  liquidity  risk  by  market  participants  and  the  design  of  central  bank 
liquidity facilities that will prove durable.  
Liquidity risk management 
Recent developments suggest that market participants must thoroughly reassess the market-
liquidity assumptions that underlie their existing risk-management practices. The scope and 
duration of disruptions to market liquidity that we have experienced since last summer have 
greatly exceeded what market participants, prudential supervisors, and central banks thought 
likely  or  even  possible.  The  implications  are  quite  broad  and  significant.  In  general,  in 
determining  the  appropriate  size  of  their  liquidity  buffers  (their  holdings  of  unencumbered 
liquid assets or their access to very stable sources of funding), market participants must plan 
for the possibility of more-severe liquidity shocks. For example, originators and distributors of 
securitized assets need to be prepared for the possibility that the securitization markets seize 
up  and  force  them  to  fund  loans  in  the  securitization  pipeline.  Banks  that  provide  liquidity 
backstops to the ABCP markets or to other issuers of short-term liabilities need to prepare for 
the possibility that broad disturbances to money market liquidity force many issuers to draw 
upon the backstop facilities at the same time. And sponsors of ABCP programs and other 
facilities  in  which  short-term  liabilities  fund  longer-term  assets  need  to  recognize  that 
reputational concerns may induce them to purchase paper that cannot otherwise be sold or 
to purchase the collateral that cannot be financed. 
Perhaps  most  important,  market  participants  must  reassess  their  assumptions  about  the 
stability  of  secured  funding  in  circumstances  in  which  the  liquidity  of  the  markets  for  the 
underlying collateral becomes impaired. That reassessment is especially important because 
in  recent  years  market  participants  have  been  funding  growing  volumes  of  relatively  less 
liquid  assets  though  secured  financings  in  the  money  markets.  In  the  ABCP  markets, 
collateral expanded beyond short-term corporate and consumer receivables to include large 
amounts  of  paper  that  SIVs  and  other  "securities  arbitrage"  programs  used  to  finance 
mortgage-backed  securities,  other  asset-backed  securities,  and  long-term  debt  issued  by 
financial institutions. In the even larger tri-party repo markets, broker-dealers finance not only 
Treasury  securities  but  also  very  substantial  amounts  of  agency  debt,  agency  mortgage-
backed securities, and various other types of privately-issued debt instruments. So long as 
the  markets  for  the  collateral  remain  liquid,  lenders  are  likely  to  remain  confident  that  the 
margin requirements applied to the collateral provide adequate protection against loss. But if 
liquidity  evaporates,  borrowers  whose  creditworthiness 
is  questioned  can  suddenly 
encounter difficulties financing now-illiquid collateral. 
The primary responsibility for reassessing and strengthening the management of liquidity risk 
appropriately rests with market participants themselves, but prudential supervisors, working 
with central banks, should carefully review the practices of regulated entities. In particular, 
the  public  authorities  must  address  a  difficult  yet  very  important  question:  To  what  degree 
should entities with access to central bank credit be permitted to rely on that access to meet 
potential liquidity demands? Central bank liquidity facilities are intended to permit those with 
access to hold smaller liquidity buffers, which allows them to fund more longer-term assets 
and thereby promotes capital formation and economic growth. At the same time, however, 
the  existence  of  central  bank  credit  facilities  can  so  undermine  incentives  for  maintaining 
liquidity buffers that institutions hold more longer-term assets than is socially desirable and 
thereby pose excessive risk to themselves and the financial system. 
In principle, prudential regulation of institutions with access to central bank credit can limit 
moral hazard and induce institutions to hold amounts of longer-term assets and liquid assets 
BIS Review 68/2008 
 3
that  are  socially  desirable.  In  practice,  however,  this  requires  difficult  and  necessarily 
somewhat  arbitrary  judgments  about  the  types  of  liquidity  stress  scenarios  that  institutions 
should  plan  to  confront  without  access  to  central  bank  credit  and,  correspondingly,  those 
scenarios in which institutions in sound financial condition can appropriately rely on central 
bank credit. For example, for what types of collateral can institutions appropriately assume 
that secured financing will always be available, because markets for that collateral ordinarily 
are highly liquid and because if they are not central banks can be expected to take actions to 
address the situation. Conversely, for what types of collateral should institutions prepare for a 
loss of secured funding and for how long a period? Although recent experience suggests that 
these are very important questions, it provides only limited insights regarding the answers. 
Central bank liquidity facilities 
I  have  already  mentioned  a  number  of  steps  the  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  to  address 
liquidity  problems  in  money  markets,  including  the  creation  of  new  or  expanded  auction 
facilities for discount window and securities lending and the opening of our lending facilities 
to more counterparties. Many other central banks also found that they needed to adapt their 
methods  of  providing  liquidity  to  the  unusual  pressures  associated  with  the  market  turmoil 
since last summer. Although specific actions varied according to the severity of the pressure 
and  the  characteristics  of  the  preexisting  operational  framework,  many  central  banks 
concentrated  operations  more  in  longer  maturities,  broadened  the  range  of  collateral 
accepted in various types of operations, and increased the utility of standing loan facilities; 
some made loans in other currencies by use of swaps with the Federal Reserve, enhanced 
securities  lending  operations,  and  engaged  in  auctions  or  other  new  methods  to  distribute 
some kinds of liquidity. In many cases, these innovations involved a degree of cooperation in 
timing or action across central banks.  
Normally, most central banks supply and absorb reserves primarily in the safest and most 
liquid parts of the money markets.2 In these segments of the markets they can operate in 
size without distorting prices, and without preferential treatment for certain private borrowers 
or forms of collateral. The private sector then distributes the reserves around the markets – 
across counterparties, maturities, and degrees of creditworthiness. The resulting transactions 
enhance  market  liquidity  and  allow  private  market  participants  to  allocate  credit  and 
determine the appropriate compensation for taking risk.  
However,  this  private-sector  intermediation  process  in  money  markets  became  severely 
impaired in the recent turmoil. As I already mentioned, uncertainty about the value of assets, 
about  the  creditworthiness  of  counterparties,  and  about  future  calls  on  the  liquidity  and 
capital of important market participants caused liquidity to dry up in many segments of the 
money  markets.  A  flight  to  liquidity  and  safety  is  not  unusual  when  uncertainty  rises  and 
markets  are  disturbed,  but  the  breadth  and  persistence  of  this  turmoil  and  its  spread  into 
money markets made it a substantial threat to financial and economic stability.  
To  ameliorate  the  threat  to  financial  and  economic  stability,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  a 
number  of  other  central  banks  in  effect  found  they  needed  to  provide  a  substitute  for  the 
arbitrage  and  trading  no  longer  being  undertaken  in  sufficient  size  by  the  private  sector. 
These central banks changed the composition of their balance sheets, selling or lending the 
assets  that  were  in  especially  strong  demand  and  lending  against  the  illiquid  assets  the 
private  sector  was  having  difficulty  financing.  The  purpose  of  those  moves  has  been  to 
forestall  fire  sales  of  assets  that  could  no  longer  be  financed,  to  facilitate  orderly 
deleveraging and reintermediation in the financial sector, and to encourage the reopening of 
                                                 
2   The Federal Reserve makes loans at the discount window against a wide range of collateral, but under most 
circumstances this facility is lightly used. 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2008
private markets for securitization products so that price discovery could proceed and credit 
flows resume.  
Those actions raise a number of difficult public policy questions for central banks and other 
public authorities. An important issue is how durable the changes should be; to what extent 
are they a desirable adaptation of central bank tools to the current structure of markets, and 
to what extent should the changes be phased out as market functions are restored?  
I start from the premise that central banks should not allocate credit or be market makers on 
a  permanent  basis.  That  should  be  left  to  the  market  –  or  if  externalities  or  other  market 
failures are important, to other governmental programs. The Federal Reserve should return 
to  adjusting  reserves  mainly  through  purchases  and  sales  of  the  safest  and  most  liquid 
assets  as  soon  as  that  would  be  consistent  with  stable,  well-functioning  markets.  In  fact, 
several  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  new  programs  are  designed  to  be  self-liquidating  as 
markets  improve.  Minimum  bid  rates  and  collateral  requirements  have  been  set  to  be 
effective  when  markets  are  disrupted  but  to  make  participation  uneconomic  when  markets 
are functioning well. Under current law, our facilities for investment banks that don't involve 
securities eligible for open market operations (OMO-eligible paper) will necessarily be wound 
down when circumstances are no longer "unusual and exigent"; I'll come back to questions 
about these facilities in a minute. 
However, the Federal Reserve's auction facilities have been an important innovation that we 
should  not  lose.  They  have  been  successful  at  reducing  the  stigma  that  can  impede 
borrowing at the discount window in a crisis environment and might be very useful in dealing 
with  future  episodes  of  illiquidity  in  money  markets.  The  new  auction  facilities  required 
planning  and  changes  in  existing  systems,  and  we  should  consider  retaining  the  new 
facilities for the purposes of bank discount window borrowing and securities lending against 
OMO-eligible paper, either on a standby basis or operating at a very low level when markets 
are functioning well in order to keep the new facilities in good working order. The latter might 
require that we allow the auction to set the price without a constraining minimum, but a small 
auction should not distort the allocation decisions of private participants. 
Our  experience  in  recent  months  has  underlined  the  global  interdependencies  of  financial 
markets.  Globally  active  banks  manage  their  positions  on  an  integrated  basis  around  the 
world,  and  pressures  originating  in  one  market  are  quickly  transmitted  elsewhere.  Central 
banks  should  consider  how  to  adapt  their  facilities  to  help  these  institutions  mobilize  their 
global liquidity in stressed market conditions and apply it to where it is most needed. That 
approach  will  require  the  consideration  of  arrangements  with  sound  institutions  in  which 
central  banks  would  accept  foreign  collateral  denominated  in  foreign  currencies.  Those 
arrangements  are  under  active  study  and  a  number  of  issues  need  to  be  resolved.  It  is 
possible that over time, major central banks could perhaps agree to accept a common pool 
of very safe collateral, facilitating the liquidity management of global banks. The stipulation 
that the institutions be sound is important: Decisions about lending to troubled banks should 
be made by home country authorities with knowledge and responsibility. 
Another instrument of liquidity provision that central banks are examining is currency swaps 
to  facilitate  granting  liquidity  in  other  currencies.  The  central  banks  found  currency  swaps 
useful  because  the  impediments  to  intermediation  in  money  markets  naturally  extended  to 
transactions  across  currencies  as  well  as  across  maturities  and  counterparties.  Supplying 
credit in dollars to banks in the euro area and Switzerland helped relieve pressure on those 
banks  and  in  our  markets.  In  recent  months,  the  Fed  was  able  to  make  currency  swap 
arrangements on short notice but our reaction time could be even shorter if we keep such 
arrangements  in  place or  on  standby.  Thinking  carefully  about  which  circumstances  in  the 
future would warrant the activation of such arrangements will be a useful form of contingency 
planning.  
For the United States, of course, perhaps the most difficult and important question involves 
access to central bank credit facilities by U.S. broker-dealers, including the primary dealers. 
BIS Review 68/2008 
 5
Over the past several decades, the growing importance of broker-dealers and the increasing 
interconnections  of  these  institutions  with  other  parts  of  the  financial  marketplace  have 
accompanied  the  shift  to  intermediation  through  securities  markets  rather  than  through 
commercial  banks.  Financial  markets  in  most  other  countries  are  dominated  by  universal 
banks; in those circumstances, securities activities are carried out in organizations that have 
access  to  the  discount  window  and  other  aspects  of  the  safety  net  we  associate  with 
commercial banks. As I have emphasized this evening, one of the things we learned over 
recent  months  is  that  broker-dealers,  like  banks,  are  subject  to  destructive  runs  when 
markets  aren't  functioning  well,  despite  the  fact  that  their  borrowing  in  money  markets  is 
mostly  secured  and  their  assets  mostly  marketable.  And,  in  the  case  of  Bear  Stearns,  we 
saw that a run on a major broker-dealer when markets were already disrupted by a flight to 
safety  and  liquidity  could,  through  a  chain  of  actions  and  reactions,  threaten  financial 
stability.  
We gave the primary dealers access to central bank credit under the unusual and exigent 
circumstances prevailing in mid-March. Their counterparties and creditors will presume that 
such access would again be granted if the health of the financial system is again threatened 
by  loss  of  liquidity  at  the  primary  dealers.  The  public  authorities  need  to  consider  several 
difficult  issues  with  respect  to  access  to  the  discount  window.  One  is  the  circumstances 
under which broker-dealers should be permitted to borrow in the future. One possibility would 
be to confine such borrowing to circumstances in which the Federal Reserve judges that the 
stability of the financial system is at risk – as we did in March. Another would be to grant 
broker-dealers the same sort of regular access enjoyed by commercial banks.  
The question has implications for the appropriate regulatory regime for broker-dealers and 
their parent companies. As I've already noted, the existence of liquidity facilities at the central 
bank  can  undermine  normal  incentives  for  maintaining  liquidity  buffers,  and  the  more 
extensive the access, the greater the degree to which market discipline will be loosened and 
prudential regulation will need to be tightened. Unquestionably, regulation needs to respond 
to what we have learned about the importance of primary dealers and their vulnerabilities to 
liquidity  pressures.  We  need  to  confront  the  difficult  questions  I  raised  earlier  about  the 
scenarios in which it is appropriate to rely on central bank liquidity and the scenarios in which 
such reliance is inappropriate. And we need to ensure that supervisory guidance regarding 
liquidity  risk  management  is  consistent  with  the  way  we  answer  those  questions.  Whether 
broader  regulatory  changes  for  broker-dealers  are  necessary  is  a  difficult  question  that 
deserves further study. 
In  the  interim  we  are  working  closely  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  to 
provide appropriate prudential oversight of primary dealers and their affiliates. We are also 
looking  at  ways  to  strengthen  the  infrastructure  of  financial  markets,  including  markets  for 
secured financing and over-the-counter derivatives markets. In terms of reducing the risk of 
money market disruptions, steps to strengthen market infrastructure complement supervisory 
efforts to strengthen the management of liquidity risk at individual firms. 
Conclusion 
As I noted at the outset, one important lesson from recent developments is that we need to 
devote  greater  attention  to  money  markets.  Disruptions  to  those  critical  markets  have  the 
potential  to  significantly  harm  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy.  Thus,  this 
conference, which brings together market participants, scholars, and policymakers, is quite 
timely.  I  have  no  doubt  that  it  will  yield  important  insights  into  the  issues  I  have  been 
discussing. 
6 
 BIS Review 68/2008
