Heng Swee Keat: Talent management strategies in Singapore 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Heng  Swee  Keat,  Managing  Director  of  the Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore and Chairman of the Institute of Banking & Finance (IBF), at the 2nd IBF Annual 
Conference, Singapore, 20 June 2008. 
 Welcome  to  the  2008  IBF  Annual  Conference  which  is  held  in  conjunction  with  our  33rd 
Annual General Meeting. 
When  we  held  our  last  AGM  and  Annual  Conference  in  May  last  year,  the  mood  among 
global  financial  institutions  was  buoyant.  The  outlook  for  the  global  economy  and  financial 
markets  was  positive.  The  main  concern  among  firms  was  the  severe  shortage  of  staff. 
Today, the mood is cautious. The credit crisis is still working its way through, inflation has 
become a major concern everywhere, and economic prospects are more uncertain. 
In Asia, investors and economists remain cautiously optimistic about the growth prospects of 
the  economies.  While  financial  institutions  had  limited  exposures  to  sub-prime  assets  and 
related credit derivatives, financial markets in Asia are not isolated from global markets. We 
are seeing a similar rise of risk aversion and tightening of credit conditions. The situation in 
the coming months will remain fluid and we must remain vigilant. 
Talent management – a strategic imperative 
The developments in global financial markets in the last one year have important implications 
on human resources strategy. For instance, among the many findings in the report released 
by the Senior Supervisors Group is that firms which weathered the recent crisis better have 
senior management members who have expertise in a range of risks. This underscores the 
need to attract and develop talent not only in the frontline, but across critical functions and at 
various levels of the organisation. Financial institutions planning to expand must treat talent 
development as a strategic priority, and such development has to be undertaken in a holistic 
way, across the entire organisation. 
But this is not an easy task. There is a Chinese saying that it takes ten years to grow a tree, 
and a hundred years to develop an individual. Talent development requires consistent focus 
and  commitment,  from  leaders  at  all  levels  of  the  organization.  The  efforts  need  to  be 
sustained  over  many  years,  through  good  times  and  difficult  times.  The  demographic 
changes in Asia coupled with rapid growth in the economies will make this task even more 
challenging in the coming years.  
Building a world class financial sector workforce 
IBF  is  committed  to  working  with  the  industry  to  drive  the  development  of  talent  in  the 
financial sector. Let me now turn to some of the key initiatives undertaken in the last twelve 
months. 
Last  year,  we  focused  on  increasing  the  industry’s  adoption  of  the  Financial  Industry 
Competency  Standards  (FICS).  The  FICS  is  a  comprehensive  framework  for  continual 
development of our financial professionals. 
We reached an important milestone in July 2007 with the appointment of 5 lead providers. 
Since  then,  over  35  programmes  covering  an  additional  17  job  families  have  been 
accredited. In the coming months, the accredited providers will roll out over 100 programmes 
covering 38 job families, including Compliance, Anti-money Laundering, Risk Management, 
Trade Finance, Product Control, Deal Processing & Settlement, Investment Advisory, Private 
BIS Review 81/2008 
 1
Equity  and  General  Insurance  Underwriting.  We  now  have  93  certified  competency-based 
assessors, who can provide the assessment of candidates.  
On the demand side, 470 individuals have undergone the FICS accredited programmes. A 
total  of  49  financial  institutions  have  benefited  from  the  FICS  accredited  training  or 
assessment programmes. Apart from sending staff or programmes run by the lead providers, 
I  am  pleased  that  several  financial  institutions  have  adopted  FICS  for  their  in-house 
programmes. I encourage more financial institutions to make use of the FICS framework and 
the grants available to step up their training. 
Last  year,  IBF  introduced  an  additional  set  of  standards  on  life  insurance–relationship 
management. IBF will continue to review and expand the scope of the standards when new 
needs are identified. Please let us have your suggestions. 
Another important milestone was also reached when we appointed the pioneer batch of 11 
Financial  Industry  Certified  Professionals  (FICPs)  in  October  2007.  Our  FICPs  are 
professionals  who  exhibit  high  standards.  I  am  delighted  that  so  many  of  our  top 
professionals have stepped forward for this accreditation. You will serve as role models for 
our young.  
Attracting talent into the financial sector 
To increase the flow of talent into the financial sector, IBF has also been reaching out to our 
institutions of higher learning. Under the financial sector seminar series, IBF and our industry 
partners have delivered a series of talks at our universities and polytechnics to highlight the 
dynamism and the diverse career opportunities in the financial sector. These talks attracted a 
total audience of over 1000 participants. 
To  increase  the  supply  of  job-ready  graduates,  IBF  spearheaded  intensive  finance 
preparatory programmes (FPP) for jobs in high demand. The first batch of students for the 
FPP in Global Banking and Securities Operations, which was introduced in July 2007, will be 
completing  their  programme  next  month.  IBF  is  currently  exploring  the  need  for  FPP  in 
Insurance.  These  programmes  will  continue  to  attract  70%  co-funding  support  from  the 
Financial Sector Development Fund 
Gaining international mindshare 
To  create  greater  international  mindshare,  IBF  launched  the  FinanceConnectSingapore 
website  to  profile  Singapore’s  financial  sector,  to  provide  more  information  on  the  career 
opportunities here and to promote Singapore as a choice location to live, work and play. To 
date,  the  website  has  registered  over  100,000  visits.  IBF  recently  partnered  with  Contact 
Singapore  to  provide  a  job  portal  for  financial  institutions  to  post  job  openings  targeted  at 
financial professionals from overseas. 
Bringing value to IBF members 
I have outlined some of the initiatives undertaken by IBF over the past year. Going forward, 
IBF will continue to take a proactive role in promoting best practices and thought leadership 
in talent management strategies. 
On thought leadership, I am delighted to warmly welcome our keynote presentation speaker 
Professor Ronald Collard for this year’s Annual Conference. Professor Collard will speak on 
the topic of “Talent Strategies for Sustained Profitable Growth”. I believe you will learn much 
from Professor Collard’s extensive experience and expertise in the area of talent strategies. I 
also wish to thank the panelists, David, Richard, Robert and Mark for their participation, and 
look forward to a lively discussion later. 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2008
As IBF management is quite confident that Professor Collard and our panel of speakers will 
whet your appetite for more learning, I am pleased to announce that we will be holding the 
Beacon  Series  for  HR  Professionals  in  October  and  the  Distinguished  Speaker  Series  for 
business leaders in November. 
The year ahead will be exciting. Many of you have contributed to IBF in various ways. I wish 
to thank my fellow Council members, the FICS Steering Committee, the FICS Working Group 
members, and FICPs for your contribution to promoting the FICS framework. 
Let  me  extend  my  appreciation  to  our  industry  associations  and  partners,  including  the 
Embassy  of  Switzerland  in  Singapore,  Swiss  House  Singapore  and  Swiss  Business  Hub 
ASEAN  for  partnering  IBF  in  its  organization  of  the  workshop  on  “Talent  Development  in 
Wealth  Management”  in  November  last  year;  and  PricewaterhouseCoopers  without  whom 
we would not have had the pleasure of listening to Professor Collard today. I also wish to 
thank  the  Singapore  Workforce  Development  Agency  and  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, for their close collaboration with IBF. I look forward to more of such collaboration 
between IBF and our industry associations and partners in the year ahead. 
I wish you a fruitful session ahead. 
BIS Review 81/2008 
 3
