Jürgen Stark: Economic perspectives and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board and the Governing Council of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  at  Fionia  Bank  Investment  Conference,  Nyborg,  Denmark, 
8 September 2008. 
 It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak today at this conference. I very much 
welcome the opportunity to explain the ECB’s  view on the economic perspectives and the 
challenges for monetary policy. 
I would like to structure my presentation along three points:  
First, I would like to devote a few minutes to reflecting on the 10th anniversary of the ECB. 
The creation of the euro has been one of the greatest endeavours in monetary history and an 
important step for Europe. I think it cannot be denied that our single currency has been a 
great success.  
Second,  I  would  like  to  turn  to  the  recent  economic  and  monetary  situation  and  outlook; 
globally and in the euro area.  
Third, I would like to close with some remarks on challenges to monetary policy-making and 
liquidity management in the current circumstances.  
10th anniversary of the ECB 
When it was founded on 1 June 1998, the ECB became the central bank for Europe’s single 
currency, the euro, which was launched in January 1999. The euro area originally consisted 
of  11  EU  Member  States.  Subsequently,  in  three  enlargement  rounds,  four  additional 
Member States have adopted the euro and on 1 January 2009 Slovakia will become the 16th 
member of the euro area. This shows that the euro area is not a closed shop. The euro is 
now the currency for 320 million European citizens.  
The inflation rate in the euro area has been slightly above 2% on average during the first 10 
years  following  the  creation  of  the  EMU,  an  unprecedentedly  low  level  in  historical  terms. 
This  is  a  remarkable  result;  all  the  more  so  taking  into  account  that  the  euro  area  was 
affected by a particularly challenging sequence of adverse shocks for monetary policy: the 
burst  of  the  “New  Economy”  bubble  and  the  terrorist  attacks  in  2001  as  well  as  several 
waves of strong global commodity price increases.  
Coping  with  these challenges  the ECB  has  been  able  to  build  an  impressive  track  record. 
Key to the success has been the high level of credibility of the ECB in safeguarding price 
stability in the euro area. This credibility is primarily rooted in the institutional framework of 
the ECB enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty and the ECB’s stability-oriented monetary policy 
strategy.  
As regards the institutional framework, the first cornerstone for the ECB’s monetary policy, 
there are, in particular, two noteworthy constituent features:  
1. 
The Treaty gives a clear mandate to the ECB to maintain price stability in the euro 
area. Article 105 of the Treaty clearly states that the primary objective of the ECB 
shall  be  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  This  specification  reflects  the 
fundamental  insight  that,  by  eliminating  a  large  number  of  inflation-related 
distortions, price stability is conducive to sustainable economic growth, job creation, 
prosperity and social stability.  
The  Treaty  grants  the  ECB  full  independence  in  pursuing  its  mandate.  Research 
and  past  experience  have  shown  that  central  bank  independence  is  a  necessary 
2. 
BIS Review 106/2008 
 1
precondition  for  monetary  policy  to  be  credibly  and  efficiently  geared  towards 
preserving price stability. 
A most important feature of the ECB’s institutional framework is that the mandate and the 
independence  of  the  ECB  are  particularly  well-protected  since  the  Treaty  can  only  be 
amended by unanimous decision of the Member States. 
The second cornerstone of the single monetary policy in the EMU is the ECB’s monetary 
strategy. The achievements of the past 10 years have been facilitated by the adoption and 
consistent pursuit of a clear monetary policy strategy, consisting basically of two elements:  
1. 
The Governing Council of the ECB has defined price stability in quantitative terms, 
as an anchor for inflation expectations and to  provide a  yardstick against which it 
can meaningfully be held accountable. The ECB defines its price stability objective 
as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for 
the  euro  are  of  below  but  close  to  2%  over  the  medium  term.  It  is  important  to 
highlight that we do not attempt to fine-tune the inflation rate in the short term. Our 
aim is to achieve price stability in the medium term. This is because monetary policy 
is not able to control price developments in the short-term. Due to transmission lags 
it can only ensure price stability in the medium term.  
The Governing Council has used a comprehensive and encompassing framework to 
assess  the  risks  to  price  stability  in  the  euro  area,  the  two-pillar  framework.  This 
framework  embodies  complementary,  yet  distinct,  economic  and  monetary 
analyses.  Thereby,  it  ensures  that  policy  decisions  are  based  on  a  broad  set  of 
relevant  information,  organised  in  a  structured  manner  which  promotes  effective, 
prompt and consistent decision-making across different analytical perspectives.  
2. 
This  sound institutional framework  and  a  clear  monetary  policy  strategy  have  underpinned 
what  I  think  can  be  considered  a  very  successful  experience  for  euro area  countries,  also 
largely shared by Denmark. 
Since 1999, Denmark has been close to the EMU but so far has not yet taken the final step. 
Since the very beginning it has been participating in the ERM II exchange-rate mechanism, 
linking its currency within a narrow (+/- 2.25%) band to the euro. And going back even earlier 
in history, Denmark has been participating in the ERM since the inception of this system in 
1979.  
The  success  of  the  current  agreement  on  Denmark’s  ERM  II  participation  is  based  on  the 
high level of convergence that has been achieved between Denmark and the euro area. 
The Danish Krone enjoys a high degree of stability and at this point in time it is the only ERM 
II participant with a mutually agreed fluctuation band that is (considerably) narrower than the 
standard +/- 15% band. 
the  result  of  sustained  stability-oriented 
This  remarkable 
level  of  convergence 
macroeconomic  policies  combined  with 
reforms.  Lasting 
convergence  of  economic  fundamentals  is  a  prerequisite  for  sustainable  exchange-rate 
stability and a smooth functioning of ERM II.  
The  existence  of  the  euro  is  certainly  to  the  benefit  of  the  euro  area  and  also  the  Danish 
economy.  In  the  past,  financial  turmoils  usually  went  hand  in  hand  with  significant  real 
economy  disruptions  and  currency  unrest  spilling  over  between  countries  in  Europe. 
However,  in  the  context  of  the  recent  financial  upheaval,  there  have  been  no  sizeable 
contagion effects across the euro area including those countries participating in ERM II. This 
can to some extent be attributed to the fact that the existence of the euro, by eliminating the 
contagion  via  the  exchange  rate  channel,  has  mitigated  the  risk  of  negative  economic 
impacts.  
But  in  spite  of  all  well-deserved  praise  for  Denmark’s  long  and  successful  participation  in 
ERM  I  and  ERM  II,  let  me  also  say  that  the  exchange-rate  mechanism  cannot  substitute 
is 
forward-looking  structural 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2008
membership  in  the  EMU.  In  particular,  Denmark  is  excluded  from  the  decision-making 
process  in  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council,  although  the  decisions  taken  in  the  Council 
obviously impact strongly on the Danish economy.  
Recent economic and monetary situation 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  second  part  of  my  speech:  reviewing  the  current  economic  and 
monetary situation.  
The global economy 
We  are  currently  facing  a  challenging  economic  environment.  The  outlook  for  the  world 
economy continues to be clouded by several developments: 
1. 
There is the sharp rise in commodity prices. Recent modest declines in oil and other 
commodity  prices  from  the  peaks  seen  in  mid-July  suggest  some  moderation  in 
external  pressures,  provided  that  these  declines  are  sustained.  However  oil  and 
food prices remain significantly high and above their average 2007 levels, being the 
main driving forces for inflation in most regions of the world. 
The persistent financial market turbulences and elevated systemic risk has led to 
tighter global financing standards as banks are unwinding excessive leverage built 
up  during  the  credit  bubble.  While  financial  market  conditions  seemed  to  stabilise 
somewhat  in  the  second  quarter,  doubts  about  the  health  of  some  big  institutions 
together with further write-downs by banks and the failure of a mortgage lender led 
to a renewed rise in global risk aversion.  
The  adjustments  in  the  housing  markets  of  several  advanced  economies  are 
ongoing and weigh on wealth. There is also the risk of housing downturns becoming 
more protracted and spreading to further countries.  
Finally, the suspension of the Doha round poses downside risks to global trade and 
economic activity. 
2. 
3. 
 All these factors have weighed on global growth for some time now. However, from a long-
term perspective global growth is still relatively contained compared with previous episodes. 
In particular, resilient growth in Asia and in the oil-exporting countries has bolstered global 
growth.  
For the second half of the year, however, retreating leading indicators and survey measures 
suggest  a  somewhat  more  pronounced  global  slowdown.  In  particular,  global  economic 
prospects  continue  to  be  shaped  by  the  US  economic  outlook,  which  is  subject  to  high 
uncertainty in view of the ongoing corrections in both the financial and housing markets.  
However, as already said, more worryingly, global inflationary pressures have intensified 
and  remain  a  cause  of  concern  for  the  world  economy.  While  the  recent  decline  in 
commodity prices might offer some relief, tight commodity market conditions pose price risks 
clearly to the upside. In July headline consumer price inflation in the advanced economies 
rose to 3.8%, which is the highest level since March 2000. Amid rising inflation expectations, 
signs  of second-round  effects  are  mounting  in  a  number  of  economies, which  constitute  a 
great  challenge  for  monetary  policy.  In  emerging  market  economies  the  inflation  rate  has 
increased to 8.4% in July. 
Euro area: economic analysis  
Turning to the euro area, GDP grew at a robust 0.7% in the first quarter of 2008. In part that 
reflected  temporary  factors,  notably  the  unusually  mild  winter  in  many  regions  of  the  euro 
area  which  boosted  construction  activity  early  in  the  year.  GDP  growth  weakened 
BIS Review 106/2008 
 3
considerably in the second quarter falling by 0.2%. For us this did not come as a surprise. 
We  indicated  already  early  this  year  that  the  result  of  the  second  quarter  would  to  some 
extent reflect a technical reaction to the high growth estimated in the previous period.  
But, setting aside the volatility in the quarterly profile of growth, which advises to focus the 
analysis  on  the  first  half  of  the  year  as  a  whole,  it  is  clear  that  we  are  witnessing  a 
continued slow underlying growth momentum of euro area economic activity in the third 
quarter.  The  indications  are  that  some  of  the  risks  that  had  previously  been  identified  – 
dampening effects from global and domestic factors, including direct and indirect effects from 
high commodity prices – have materialised. The euro area economy is passing through an 
episode  of weak  activity  in  mid  2008  characterised  by  high  commodity  prices  weighing  on 
consumer confidence and demand as well as on investment growth.  
However, looking ahead, I expect a gradual recovery in euro area activity in the course of 
2009. According to the September 2008 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro 
area annual average real GDP growth ranges between 1.1% and 1.7% in 2008 and between 
0.6% and 1.8% in 2009.  
However,  the  apparent  decline  in  annual  growth  in  2009  is  somewhat  misleading.  It  is 
necessary to look at the quarterly profile of growth to understand the dynamics of activity in 
the euro area. In particular, the relative strength of growth in 2008 is partly a carry-over effect 
of  the  robust  quarterly  rates  of  growth  towards  the  end  of  2007  and  in  the  first  quarter  of 
2008. Along the same line, the weaker outlook in 2009 reflects a more modest growth at the 
end of 2008 and beginning of 2009. The underlying quarterly profile reflects expectations of a 
gradual  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  from  the  end  of  this  year  and  into  2009  and 
2010.  
Several factors underlie this economic outlook for the euro area: 
• 
Growth  in  the  world  economy  –  while  moderating,  as  I  have  mentioned  earlier  – 
should  nonetheless  remain  relatively  resilient  and  support  external  demand  for 
euro  area  goods  and  services  and  thereby  investment.  If  persistent,  the  fall  in  oil 
prices  from  their  peak  in  July  will  help  to  reduce  earlier  losses  in  real  disposable 
income.  
Domestic  developments  should  also  support  the  recovery.  In  a  medium-term 
perspective, the fundamentals of the euro area are sound and the economy does 
not suffer from major imbalances. Although employment expectations have declined 
in  recent  months,  labour  market  conditions  are  still  broadly  favourable  and  labour 
markets at least in some countries have become more flexible.  
 However,  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  remains  high  and, 
generally, downward risks prevail. Risks stem in particular from renewed increases in energy 
and  food  prices,  which  could  dampen  consumption  and  investment.  Risks  also  stem  from 
potential  additional  financial  market  tensions  that  could  affect  the  real  economy  more 
adversely.  
Let me now turn to recent euro area price and cost developments.  
Recent  inflation  figures have  been  worrying.  Over  the  last  year,  annual  HICP  inflation  has 
risen  steadily  and  markedly  –  from  1.7%  August  2007  to  4.0%  in  July  2008.  According  to 
Eurostat’s flash estimate it stood at 3.8% this August. The annual rate of HICP inflation has 
remained considerably above the level consistent with price stability since last autumn.  
This high level of inflation is largely due to effects of past surges in several commodity prices 
– notably those of energy and food.  
• 
These developments in global commodity prices have involved an immediate and 
direct  pass-through  into  the  food  and  energy  components  (heating  oil  and 
gasoline) of HICP inflation in the euro area.  
4 
 BIS Review 106/2008
 However, the direct impact of global commodity prices on HICP inflation is not the 
end of the story. Energy and agricultural products are needed for the production of 
other goods and services. Therefore, commodity price increases also have indirect 
impacts on inflation through cost pressures in the production chain. 
But, these indirect effects may take some time until they become visible. We have already 
seen strong producer price pressures in recent months. In July the industrial producer prices 
rose by 9%, the highest rate since the early 1980s. The extent to which these pressures at 
earlier stages of production feed into later stages depends crucially on the pricing behaviour 
of  firms.  Competitive  markets  are  key  to  limiting  the  extent  of  such  price  increases  further 
along  the  production chain.  Indirect  effects  are  also  visible  in  other  segments  of  the  HICP 
basket, in particular in the services sector.  
There is little the ECB can do to offset the direct and indirect effects of these price increases. 
However, monetary policy can and must play a role in preventing second-round effects that 
go beyond the direct and indirect influences of raw materials on HICP inflation.  
Because such second-round effects might significantly add to inflationary pressures, this is a 
matter of particular concern for us. Second-round effects would materialise if consumers or 
firms  tried  to  compensate  their  losses  in  purchasing  power  stemming  from  the  increase  in 
commodity  prices  by  enforcing  higher  prices  and  wages.  Such  behaviour  would  lead  to  a 
dangerous wage-price or price-wage spiral. However, thereby it will not be possible to avoid 
the  income  transfer  from  the  commodity-importing  countries  to  the  commodity-exporting 
countries. In any case, we have to settle the higher oil bills. And we must also be aware that 
this change in relative prices limits our leeway for internal income redistribution. Companies 
and households have to adjust their behaviour accordingly.  
Recently,  we  have  been  witnessing  rising  labour  cost  growth  at  annual  rates  not  seen 
since the mid 1990ies. To some extent, this rise in wage pressure can be attributed to tighter 
labour  markets  and  continued  high  capacity  utilisation  in  parts  of  the  euro  area.  However, 
wage  increases  are  also  attributable  to  the  materialisation  of  second  round  effects  where 
nominal wage indexation schemes are linking wages to past price developments. 
The Governing Council of the ECB has repeatedly expressed its concern about the existence 
of such schemes and called last week for these schemes to be abolished. They basically set 
in  motion  second-round  effects  potentially  leading  to  a  wage-price  spiral  which  would  be 
detrimental to employment and competitiveness.  
Let me re-assert that the ECB is monitoring price-setting behaviour and wage negotiations 
very  carefully.  Broad-based  second-round  effects  must  be  avoided  and  medium  to  longer-
term  inflation  expectations  must  remain  firmly  anchored  at  levels  below  but  close  to  2%. 
These were reasons why we raised interest rates by 25 basispoints in July this year. 
Looking  ahead,  in  particular  due  to  the  direct  and  indirect  effects  of  commodity  price 
increases, the annual HICP inflation rate is likely to remain well above a level consistent with 
price stability for quite some time, moderating only gradually in 2009. The ECB staff projects 
average annual HICP inflation between 3.4% and 3.6% in 2008 and between 2.3% and 2.9% 
in 2009.  
I  would  also  like  to  stress  that  risks  to  price  stability  at  the  policy-relevant  medium-term 
horizon continue to remain clearly on the upside.  
Monetary analysis 
As  you  know  a  particular  feature  of  our  analytical  framework  is  the  monetary  analysis.  It 
focuses on a broad range of monetary indicators and measures of excess liquidity as well as 
credit developments. It serves as a means of cross-checking the indicators of the economic 
analysis. While the economic analysis points to risks to price stability in the short- to medium-
BIS Review 106/2008 
 5
term,  the  monetary  analysis  highlights  concerns  about  the  prevailing  upside  risks  to  price 
stability at the medium to longer-term horizons.  
Over the past years, the underlying strength of monetary and credit expansion in the euro 
area  has  created  upside  risks  to  price  stability  that  appear  to  have  become  manifest  as 
inflation has trended upwards. This confirms ex post the prominent role our strategy assigns 
to money. 
After  we  have  gradually  increased  the  ECB  key  interest  rates  from  the  end  of  2005,  the 
underlying money and credit developments now show some first signs of moderation. But all 
available measures for underlying money growth that are assumed to have leading indicator 
properties for the development in consumer price inflation are still strong and point to upside 
risks to price stability in the medium to longer term.  
M3  growth  remains  vigorous,  although  it  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  the  current  headline 
growth  rate  of  M3  tends  to  overstate  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion.  The  flat 
euro yield curve at present encourages substitution from longer maturity assets outside M3 
into monetary instruments, thereby raising M3 growth.  
In the context of the financial tensions it turned out that the monetary analysis – by trying to 
identify the policy-relevant signal in money contained in its lower-frequency developments – 
offers also important insights into the behaviour of the banking sector and how tensions in 
the money market have influenced the financial system.  
For instance, as regards bank loans the conclusion emerged that the availability of funding to 
the  euro  area  non-financial  sector  had  not  been  significantly  impaired  as  a  result  of  the 
financial market tensions. This assessment was a valuable input into the policy discussion, in 
a context where the existence of a “credit crunch” was widely perceived to be established.  
Nevertheless, it is of course true that the growth in loans to the non-financial private sector 
has moderated recently, and indeed is expected to continue to do so. However, this largely 
reflects the regular impact of developments in economic activity and tighter credit conditions, 
with no signs so far of an additional effect coming from the financial tensions. 
Thus, the thorough monetary analysis undertaken by the ECB has informed the shorter-term 
evaluation of the impact of tensions on the financial sector, on financing conditions and credit 
availability.  
This  is  not  to  deny,  of  course,  that  the  prominent  role  of  our  monetary  analysis  is 
instrumental to maintain our focus on the medium-term horizon, when the effect of monetary 
policy on our primary objective – price stability – will materialise in full. In the current turmoil 
the focus on the underlying monetary trend has been of great help to look through the impact 
of many temporary shocks that affect the economy and to act in a consistent manner over 
time, thereby supporting the focus of policy discussions on our mandate.  
Challenges for monetary policy  
The past thirteen months have been the most challenging of the ECB’s ten-year history. We 
have  experienced  significant,  multiple  and  coincident  shocks,  notably  the  emergence  of 
financial tensions and sustained significant increases in commodity prices. The latter has led 
to worryingly high rates of inflation. These shocks have created an extremely complex and 
challenging  environment  for  central  banks.  Many  observers  and  commentators  have 
characterised us and our monetary policy as facing a dilemma – or even a trilemma – as we 
simultaneously  confront  high  inflation,  a  slowdown  of  economic  activity  and  threats  to 
financial stability.  
How have we addressed these challenges at the ECB? Has the ECB ever been in a dilemma 
– or trilemma – situation? My answer to the second question is a clear “No”. For the ECB 
6 
 BIS Review 106/2008
such  a  characterisation  is  totally  misleading  and  irrelevant.  Trading-off  the  achievement  of 
price stability against other ambitions is not permissible, desirable or even feasible.  
The  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  the  economy  is  to  deliver  price 
stability.  In  doing  so,  monetary  policy  also  contributes,  in  the  most  efficient  manner,  to 
economic  conditions  that  foster  growth,  employment  and  financial  stability.  A  central  bank 
that is endowed with one policy instrument can only pursue one goal. Hence, it is not within 
the power of monetary policy to ensure the attainment of financial stability. Responsibility for 
financial stability lies primarily with market participants themselves, as well as with regulators 
and supervisors. In this respect, a central bank is only able to contribute to financial stability. 
And related to this, safeguarding the credibility of the central bank’s commitment to deliver 
price stability is of the essence, particularly in a context where shocks, such as the increase 
in commodity prices, threaten to unhinge inflation expectations. To achieve this, the ECB has 
to be credible to deliver its objective.  
Liquidity management 
While the ECB has maintained a steady hand in its monetary policy decisions, we have not 
been passive in the face of the financial tensions. Rather – and contrary to the expectations 
of some observers – we have proved able to act rapidly and, when necessary, significantly, 
to  support  the  functioning  of  the  money  market  that  is  central  to  the  implementation  and 
transmission of monetary policy.  
During  this  period  of  heightened  stress  and  uncertainty,  the  ECB  has  used  its  liquidity 
operations in a pragmatic manner, consistent with both the monetary policy stance decided 
by the Governing Council and the market-oriented approach that has always characterised 
our liquidity management. Although the frequency of liquidity operations has increased when 
necessary  and  the  timing  and  maturity  of  liquidity  provision  has  evolved  over  time,  such 
actions aimed at reassuring market participants about the continuation of transactions in the 
money market and have neither involved substantial changes to the operational framework 
nor impinged on the monetary policy decisions and the primary objective of price stability. 
This  means  that  we  adhered  from  the  very  outset  of  the  turmoil  to  the  clear  separation 
between the determination of the monetary policy stance, on the one hand, and the steering 
of short-term market interest rates via the operational framework, on the other.  
This  has  ensured  the  “neutrality”  of  liquidity  operations:  allotment  decisions  and  other 
operational matters have neither signalled nor been interpreted as offering signals about the 
future  stance  of  monetary  policy.  In  view  of  the  upside  risks  to  price  stability  I  have 
mentioned  before,  it  was  crucial  that  liquidity  operations  were  not  interpreted  by  market 
participants as having a monetary policy content, in particular regarding future changes in the 
stance.  If  the  liquidity  operations  had  been  seen  as  a  signal  of  the  intention  to  ease  the 
stance of monetary policy, the credibility of the ECB’s commitment to its primary objective of 
price stability could have been put at risk. In turn, this may have triggered the emergence of 
the inflationary psychology that we are determined to prevent. 
It is also important to emphasise that our money market operations could not guarantee the 
re-establishment of normal conditions in the money market – this depended largely on the 
behaviour of private sector participants themselves, supported by the appropriate regulatory 
and supervisory authorities. Nonetheless, given the crucial role of the money market in the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy,  the  ECB  felt  and  acted  on  its  responsibility  to  provide 
support for market functioning as the tensions emerged. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude.  
BIS Review 106/2008 
 7
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
The creation of the EMU has been a great success. The inflation rate in the euro 
area has been at an unprecedented low level by historical terms in the first 10 years. 
Key to the success of the ECB has been its high level of credibility in safeguarding 
price stability in the euro area. This credibility is primarily rooted in the institutional 
setting  of  the  ECB  enshrined  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  the  ECB’s  stability-
oriented monetary policy strategy.  
The  euro  area  is  currently  passing  through  an  episode  of  weak  economic  activity 
characterised  by  high  commodity  prices  weighing  on  consumer  confidence  and 
demand  and  by  dampened  investment  growth.  However,  the  deterioration  in  real 
economic  activity  is  unlikely  to  have  a  pronounced  effect  on  inflation  in  the  near 
term. This is hardly surprising given the price and wage rigidities in the euro area. 
This episode of weak activity will be followed by gradual recovery. We think that the 
conditions  for  domestic  and  external  demand  and  investment  to  recover  in  2009 
remain in place and economic growth will again approach potential in the course of 
next year. Risks to real GDP growth remain on the downside. In particular, renewed 
commodity price increases and a stronger than currently expected impact from the 
financial turmoil could hurt domestic demand. On the external side, downside risks 
are related to the global outlook. 
Both the economic and the monetary analysis point to risks to price stability in the 
medium term. The emergence of second-round effects in wage and price setting has 
to be avoided in order to ensure that inflation expectations remain anchored in line 
with  price  stability.  In  our  assessment  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  will 
contribute  to  achieving  price  stability.  However,  we  will  monitor  very  closely  all 
developments over the period ahead. 
8 
 BIS Review 106/2008
