Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Extract from a speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, to the Bank of 
Israel, Jerusalem, 31 March 2008. 
 Central  banks,  along  with  the  rest  of  the  financial  world,  have  changed  markedly  over  the 
past 20 years. More open and competitive financial systems have developed hand in hand 
with a recognition that the prime responsibility of central banks is to maintain price stability. 
To help them achieve that, more and more central banks around the world have been made 
independent of Government. The nature and extent of that independence varies from country 
to country, but in essence it is the freedom of either an individual Governor or a Monetary 
Policy Committee within the central bank to set interest rates free from political interference. 
That policy independence needs to be backed by organisational and financial independence 
which, in the case of the Bank of England, is entrusted to a Court of Directors of the Bank 
which decides on the budget and other relevant financial matters. 
For those central banks with a long tradition of independence, their pre-existing frameworks 
of  monetary  policy  have  proved  sufficient  to  enable  them  to  bring  inflation  down  and 
contribute  to  what  has  become  known  as  the  Great  Stability.  But  in  most  of  the  countries 
whose central banks have been made independent more recently, policy has been based on 
an explicit inflation target. Inflation targeting has been the framework of choice for the past 20 
years. It most clearly represents an explicit commitment by the central bank to the objective 
of  price  stability.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  that  commitment  is  in  the  form  of  a  target  for 
inflation that is defined as 2% a year, as measured by the consumer price index. 
In  the  medium  term,  a  central  bank  can  affect  only  monetary  values  –  the  price  level.  It 
cannot change the amount of goods and services an economy is able to produce. Over time, 
there is no trade off between inflation and output, as recent UK history illustrates. Between 
1950 and 1997, UK inflation averaged nearly 6%. In contrast, since 1997, inflation has been 
close to target and much more stable, but annual output growth has averaged a little above 
its post-World War II average of 2.5%. In the medium term, low and stable inflation does not 
imply lower output. Moreover, even in the short term, meeting an inflation target is in many 
cases  fully  consistent with  maintaining  steady  growth  of  activity.  If  demand  falls  below  the 
supply capacity of the economy, inflation will tend to fall. If demand rises too quickly, putting 
pressure on capacity, inflation will tend to rise. 
Inflation-targeting  central  banks  can,  however,  face  an  apparent  dilemma  when  inflation 
moves away from the target not as the result of fluctuations in demand, but in response to 
commodity  price  changes.  Following  increases  in  gas  and  electricity  bills,  consumer  price 
inflation in the UK has risen. The central projection in our February Inflation Report is for it to 
rise  further,  to  around  3%.  That  pronounced  pickup  stems  from  sharp  rises  in  commodity 
prices around the world. Food prices on world markets are more than 50% higher, and oil 
prices two-thirds higher, than they were a year ago. 
To  some  it  might  seem  odd  that  an  inflation  targeting  central  bank  has  not  tried  to  offset 
those inflationary pressures. That is because we operate “flexible” inflation targeting within a 
framework  that  recognises  that  it  is  not,  in  practice,  always  possible  to  keep  inflation  at 
target. The remit for our Monetary Policy Committee states that: 
“The framework takes into account that any economy at some point can suffer from external 
events  or  temporary  difficulties,  often  beyond  its  control.  The  framework  is  based  on  the 
recognition that the actual inflation rate will on occasions depart from its target as a result of 
shocks  and  disturbances.  Attempts  to  keep  inflation  at  the  inflation  target  in  these 
circumstances may cause undesirable volatility in output”. 
BIS Review 36/2008 
 1
The time lag between changes in interest rates and their impact on inflation means that the 
MPC can have little effect on the short-term path of inflation. What is crucial is that the pickup 
proves  to  be  temporary,  just  as  the  rise  in  inflation  last  year  was.  As  commodity  prices 
stabilise, inflation will fall back towards our target next year. But that does not mean we can 
ignore the pickup in inflation that is now underway. In judging how far inflation is likely to fall 
back next year, we have to gauge the extent to which high inflation in the short term will enter 
the expectations of those setting prices and pay. If it does so, then without some margin of 
spare capacity, inflation will have some tendency to persist above the target. 
Our  inflation  target  is  symmetric.  We  are  not  aiming  for  inflation  below  2%,  but  at  2%.  So 
even though some slowdown in the growth rate of economic activity is likely to be necessary 
to  ensure  that  inflation  returns  to  the  target,  we  cannot  allow  the  economy  to  slow  too 
sharply, lest a margin of spare capacity is produced that pulls inflation down below the target 
next year. We face a difficult balancing act. 
Why should we not focus on growth for a while and forget about inflation? The answer is that 
once higher inflation becomes entrenched, it may be costly to dislodge. Past UK recessions 
were  associated  not  with  slowdowns  in  the  world  economy,  but  with  attempts  to  squeeze 
inflation out of the UK economy. The best thing that we can do to promote economic stability 
is to avoid inflation, and inflation expectations, from becoming dislodged from the target in 
the first place. 
The  most  important  function  of  an  independent  central  bank  is  its  role  in  monetary  policy. 
Price  stability  is  a  necessary  foundation  of  economic  stability  more  generally.  But  central 
banks around the world are also called upon to engage, to a greater or lesser extent, in the 
supervision  of  financial  institutions.  Unlike  monetary  policy,  where  in  large  part  a  common 
framework  prevails  around  the  world,  there  is  no  uniformity  in  the  roles  played  by  central 
banks in the supervision of the financial system. 
The supervision of financial institutions is sometimes regarded as part of the functions of a 
central bank and sometimes given to one or more other regulatory bodies. It is striking how 
varied  are  the  arrangements  in  different  countries.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  an  important 
ingredient  in  the  1997  reforms  which  took  banking  supervision  away  from  the  Bank  of 
England and handed it to a single regulatory body, the Financial Services Authority, was the 
view that it was no longer sensible to try to distinguish commercial banks from investment 
banks, and banks from securities companies. A common regulatory framework was needed. 
There are, however, important differences between prudential supervision and “conduct” of 
business  regulation,  so  some  countries  have  adopted  a  “twin  peaks”  solution  in  which  the 
central bank is responsible for prudential supervision and conduct of business regulation is 
given to a different body. 
This  is  evidence  that  the  appropriate  division  of  responsibilities  will  depend  on  local 
circumstances. One of the most important of those is the number of institutions which merit 
supervision.  In  a  country  with  a  limited  number  of  banks  it  is  less  clear  that  a  separate 
supervisor  is  needed  and  the  central  bank  may  well  be  able  to  take  this  responsibility  on 
without  risk  to  its  reputation  or  of  other  contagion  to  its  primary  monetary  policy 
responsibilities. In contrast to monetary policy, where the appropriate institutional framework 
is common  to all countries, there is unlikely to be uniformity in the roles played by central 
banks in the supervision of the financial system. 
Regardless of where responsibility for regulation lies, it is hard to imagine taking steps either 
to  prevent,  or  to  deal  with,  the  consequences  of  a  financial  crisis  without  the  active 
involvement of the central bank. Central banks are currently at the heart of efforts to restore 
confidence  in  the  banking  system  by  the  provision  of  liquidity  against  assets  which  have 
proved  to  be  highly  illiquid.  But  the  recent  challenges  presented  by  the  latest  episode  of 
financial turmoil suggest that much hard thought will need to be given to the structure and 
nature of banking regulation in the future. In the longer-term, it seems extremely likely that 
banks and other “near” banks, especially those that have been regarded as similar to banks 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2008
in terms of their eligibility for financial assistance, will be called upon to hold more capital and 
a greater quantity of liquid assets than hitherto. It is too early to foresee clearly where the 
long-term  direction  will  go.  But  serious  thinking  and  a  willingness  to  contemplate  radical 
change will be necessary. 
BIS Review 36/2008 
 3
