Caleb M Fundanga: Develpments between the Bank of Zambia and the 
Lusaka Stock Exchange 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the 
LUSE/BESA/BOZ  workshop 
trading  of  government  bonds,  Lusaka, 
3 March 2008. 
for  secondary 
 The Chairperson, 
Resource Persons, 
Workshop Participants, 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am honoured for the invitation extended to me this morning to officially open this important 
workshop on secondary market trading for Government securities. To begin with, I wish to 
commend  the  Lusaka  Stock  Exchange  (LUSE),  the  organizers,  on  the  timeliness  of  this 
workshop.  I  have  little  doubt  most  of  you  will  agree  with  me  that  this  discussion  on  the 
secondary  market  is  long  overdue  and  therefore  could  not  have  come  at  a  better  time. 
Dialogue  among  key  stakeholders  is  invaluable  to  the  success  of  market  development 
efforts. This is particularly so because this allows each participant to share and learn from 
their diverse experiences in this area. I must say that this workshop addresses a subject in 
which  I  personally  take  keen  interest.  This  is  because  I  have,  over  the  recent  past, 
participated  in  a  number  of  meetings  with  key  investors  in  our  securities  market.  At  these 
meetings, issues surrounding the development of the secondary market have always been at 
the  centre  of  our  deliberations.  I  am  glad  that  we  have  now  began  to  address  those  very 
issues.  This  workshop  also  demonstrates  the  stakeholders’  commitment  to  support  the 
market development efforts as outlined in the Financial Sector Development Plan. 
Chairperson,  over  the  recent  past,  the  Zambian  economy  has  performed  well.  This  is 
reflected in a number of the key macroeconomic indicators. To mention but a few; the growth 
rate  in  real  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  has  remained  positive  and  above  5%,  we 
attained  single-digit  inflation,  relative  stability  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Kwacha  against 
major currencies, stable financial sector and improved banking services. These impressive 
economic trends suggest that the reform programmes that have been implemented are now 
bearing fruit. The reforms have focused on the restructuring of the economy, to let markets 
determine  key  decisions  so  as  to  allow  the  private  sector  lead,  which  has  provided  for 
increased  investment  in  the  economy.  It  is  the  contention  of  many  financial  analysts  that 
there is no better market to determine prices than the secondary market. In that regard, this 
workshop is vital. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the importance of a secondary market cannot be overemphasized. By 
facilitating a ready mechanism through which financial claims can be transferred from one 
holder  to  another,  a  secondary  market  provides  wide  possibilities  for  issuers  of  long  term 
securities to match their cash flows in a stable and cost effective manner. Investors with their 
diverse liquidity needs are assured that they can convert their investments into cash at any 
time  and  at  a  fair  market  price.  At  the  same  time,  issuers  are  assured  that  their  financing 
needs, especially the long term ones, will be met in an orderly and timely way. By providing 
such an assurance, a secondary market ensures that savings are pooled and invested in the 
economy in a cost efficient manner. In this respect, a vibrant secondary market is therefore 
an important aspect of the price discovery process. 
Chairperson,  an  active  secondary  market  is  important  to  central  banks  as  it  facilitates  the 
efficient  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  This  is  because,  to  effectively  implement  monetary 
policy, central banks depend largely on the ability to influence financial markets. Therefore, 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 1
with  a  vibrant  secondary  market,  monetary  policy  effects  are  transmitted  to  the  rest  of  the 
economy in a more transparent manner, which in itself contributes to price stability. 
At this point in time, it is opportune for me to outline briefly the efforts Government has made 
towards  developing  our  secondary  markets.  Since  the  early  1990s,  the  government  has 
taken steps to develop the securities market. There has been good progress made on the 
developing the primary market, though further refinements can be made to the structure. As 
for the secondary market, it has barely evolved beyond the elementary levels. 
Let me quickly go over some of the most important changes to the primary market: 
• 
Following the liberalization of interest rates in 1992 the auction system for Treasury 
bills was introduced to create a more transparent and market-based system of price 
determination that would encourage broader investor participation. 
Alongside  the  introduction  of  the  auction  system,  the  maturity  structure  was 
extended from the only existing term of 91 days to include 28 and 182 days in order 
to meet the various liquidity needs of investors. 
In 1995, Government bonds with a maturity term of 12 month and 18 months were 
added to the list of securities. 
Following the increased depth of the market, the structure of Government securities 
was streamlined with the termination of the 28 day Treasury bill issuance and the 
subsequent introduction of the 273 days maturity term. 
In 2005, reforms of the Government securities market continued with the cessation 
of  the  12  months  and  18  months  Government  bonds.  In  their  place,  a  364  day 
Treasury bill was introduced alongside the 3 and 5 years bonds. 
More recently, in August 2007, a portfolio of Government bond maturity terms was 
further increased to include the 7, 10, and 15 years. 
Since that period, the size of the outstanding issues has grown from 7% of GDP in 1994 to 
17% by the end of 2007. 
With regard to secondary market, policy efforts have been initiated at different stages in the 
development of our market. 
• 
In  1996,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  attempted  to  jumpstart  secondary  market  trading  in 
Government securities by restricting the primary issues of Government securities to 
commercial banks. It was expected that commercial banks would take up the role of 
market-making.  This  did  not  materialize  with  most  commercial  banks  preferring  to 
buy and hold the securities until maturity. Consequently, authorities were obliged to 
re-open the primary market to other non-bank investors. 
Further, since 1998, Government bonds have been listed for trading at the Lusaka 
Stock Exchange. The benefits have not been realised despite the fact that all banks 
are registered as brokers in this respect. I am sure the LUSE will provide you with 
more detail on this as you deliberate. 
More recently, the Government and the Bank of Zambia in 2006, with the support of 
DIFID and the World Bank undertook a study tour of selected emerging markets in 
Africa  and  Asia.  The  aim  of  this  tour  was  to  learn  the  actual  workings  of  well 
functioning government securities markets. Technical information was collected and 
a report prepared. Once the recommendations in that report have been adopted, I 
expect  that  these  will  complement  your  own  efforts  to  activate  secondary  market 
trading. 
I  am  aware  that  the  successful  development  of  a  secondary  market  needs  a  reliable  and 
efficient  settlement  infrastructure.  This  is  important  for  it  addresses  the  concern  that  is 
normally raised on the possibilities of settlement risk. You may wish to know that the Bank of 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2008
       Zambia  and  the  Lusaka  Stock  Exchange  are  already  engaged  to  develop  an  efficient 
settlement stream within the RTGS payments system. It is my belief that once this initiative 
has been fully developed, settlement risk will be reduced and more credibility will be added to 
securities trading. 
Chairperson,  I  know  there  are  still  formidable  challenges  in  building  a  vibrant  secondary 
market. Hence, in my concluding remarks, let me reiterate what I said earlier; that setting the 
primary market off the ground has been a challenging task. To set up secondary markets is 
even a more challenging task. Yet it is not an impossible one. With the participation of every 
stakeholder, the challenges that seemingly look insurmountable can easily be overcome. We 
all know that the development of a vibrant secondary market for securities is necessary. 
When I look at all of you gathered here this morning, I see a determined optimism that we 
can  get  there.  Each  and  every  one  of  us  has  a  role  to  play,  be  it  Government,  corporate 
institutions, or indeed a small investor. On our part as Bank of Zambia, you can rest assured 
that we will continue doing our part in facilitating the development of this market. 
Thank you very much and I wish you a very successful workshop. 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 3
