Radovan Jelašić: 125th anniversary of the enactment of the first law on 
the National Bank of Serbia 
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelašić,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  on  the  125th 
anniversary of the enactment of the first law on the National Bank of Serbia, Belgrade, 31 
January 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Institutional anniversaries such as the one today are the right time to look back at what has 
been achieved and to ask ourselves if we have managed to preserve the fundamental values 
of our society and state. Today, we are celebrating 125th anniversary of enactment of the 
first  Law  on  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  which  laid  the  cornerstone  of  one  of  the  most 
important institutions of the Serbian state. Preparations for the enactment of this law lasted 
for about a decade, as can be seen from a document dating from as far back as 1873. The 
leading people of that time understood the need for the young Serbian state to pursue the 
most  advanced  European  standards  and  visited  almost  a  half  of  European  countries, 
including  Germany,  Switzerland  and  Belgium,  to  learn  more  about  modern  central  bank 
organization and operations and to apply this knowledge in formulating the law on the central 
bank. At that time, there was no Brussels administration and Serbia was offered no technical 
or any other assistance, but the makers of the first law on the National Bank of the Kingdom 
of Serbia had a clear vision of the country’s future and of what needed to be done for Serbia 
to catch up and keep pace with the best European practice. 
Anniversaries are also an occasion to remind ourselves of the fundamental ideas, aims and 
visions, and to see how close we are to achieving them! For the National Bank of Serbia, 
entering the 21st century meant a return to the main ideals and spirit of the law enacted in 
1883  –  to  build  an  independent  and  professional  institution,  which  is  just  and  fair  in  the 
distribution of money. It is misleading to portray Serbia as being on a crossroads between 
the  East  and  the  West,  dithering  between  European  integrations  or  their  opposite.  Europe 
has both an “east” and a “west”, a “north” and a “south” – in this Europe, we all are equal but 
different! In practice, such “Europe”, the Europe woven into the law of 125 years ago, means 
simply that we must work harder, better and more responsibly; that we must renounce daily 
populism, sycophantism and politicizing; that we must think over the long run only, however 
impossible it may sound today; and that we must tell the public exactly what awaits us on our 
road back to Europe, however difficult it is, and what the consequences would be of Serbia’s 
decision to take a different course.  
By  incorporating  the  best  European  practice  into  the  Law  on  the  National  Bank  125  years 
ago,  the  creators  of  the  law  wanted  to  bring  Europe  into  Serbia  and  to  change  –  or,  in 
modern terms – harmonize our legislation with the European one. Serbia, now as then, can 
only be changed by collective effort of us all, of both you and me! And it has always been 
difficult to garner majority support for reform efforts – both 125 days ago and today. Still, all 
who are present here today have not only the possibility but indeed a binding obligation to 
improve our society, quickly and efficiently, and there is no excuse for failing to do so. For, in 
the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  I  am  not  only  supervised  by  auditors,  the  Council  and  the 
Parliament, but also by the makers of this law. I feel their spirit in the halls of this building and 
every day they ask the same question: “And what did you, Radovan Jelasic, do today?” This 
question is not always easy to answer, but after 7 years in the National Bank it is my daily 
obligation, and I am deeply convinced that you feel the same way. 
The fact that we knew that reverting to the key principles of the law drafted 125 years ago 
would not be smooth sailing did not help us much in facing day-to-day challenges. What I 
wish to say is simple – although we were aware of the job ahead of us, we embarked upon it, 
BIS Review 14/2008 
 1
and there was absolutely no excuse for not doing so! Curiously enough, except in the initial 
phase of implementing reforms when the people are still buoyant with enthusiasm, you will 
hardly  ever  enjoy  the  support  of  the  majority,  unless  you take  up  the  trouble  of going  into 
great lengths explaining yourself, elaborating on your actions and backing them  with good 
arguments. Implementing changes is not easy, and the very paradox of transition is that the 
process should be stepped up at the time of greatest difficulty, because if you stop even for a 
second, everything will be lost. 
I should not be the one to speak about the National Bank of Serbia’s performance over these 
125  years  and  its  achievements  in  the  21st  century;  you  are  the  only  valid  judges  of  our 
work. By preserving stability in prices and ensuring a sound and stable financial system, the 
National  Bank  of  Serbia  is  creating  conditions  for  the  country’s  macroeconomic  stability  in 
general. Our greatest contribution lies in preventing political and economic challenges, which 
are  not  at  all  negligible,  from  halting  the  process  of  transition  and  turning  Serbia’s 
development clock far back in time.  
On this solemn occasion, the National Bank of Serbia wishes to announce the completion of 
a very important project. Aware that tradition and history should serve as a beacon of light in 
our relentless struggle for better future, the National Bank of Serbia has digitalized the 1883-
1919 issues of the official gazette of the Kingdom of Serbia titled Srpske novine and posted 
them  on  its  website.  It  is  in  Srpske  novine  that  the  first  law  on  the  National  Bank  was 
published on 19 January 1883 according to the Julian calendar, or 31 January according to 
the  new  calendar.  Similar  to  today’s  legally-mandated  practice  of  publishing  Statutes  and 
other regulations in the Official Gazette, at the time, the National Bank published in Srpske 
novine 
statements,  announcements  of 
placing/withdrawing banknotes in/from circulation and daily exchange rate lists. 
Making one of Serbia’s cultural treasures available to the public is yet another proof of the 
National  Bank  of  Serbia’s  social  responsibility.  We  will  continue  to  digitalize  old  and  rare 
books constituting part of the NBS Library and Archives so as to protect them and save them 
for  future  generations.  Tradition  helps  us  learn,  deepens  our  understanding  of  the 
significance of the development of key institutions the National Bank of Serbia undoubtedly 
is, and teaches us of the enduring values and crucial importance of preserving them! 
I  wish  to  thank  all  of  the  assembled  once  again  for  lending  solemnity  to  our  today’s 
celebration  in  hope  that  the  jubilant  atmosphere  and  recalling  our  tradition  and  history  will 
reinforce us in our determination to live up to the challenges the present moment puts before 
us and make Serbia, its legislation and social structure closer not only to the original ideas of 
more than a century ago, but to modern European ideas as well, as they are practically the 
same! 
revenue  and  expenditure 
its  annual 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2008
