Alan Bollard: Flexibility and the limits to inflation targeting 
Speech  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  at  a  private 
function, Auckland, 30 July 2008. 
 Introduction 
The  New  Zealand  economy,  like  many  others  around  the  world,  is  going  through  a  tough 
time. The cost of living is rising and there is a risk of persistent inflation emerging. However, 
there is also a broad and quite rapid slowing underway in retail spending and the housing 
market. The extraordinarily large and persistent rise in international oil prices has made New 
Zealand poorer – it now costs us more to produce and to consume, and the economy needs 
to adjust to that. This is a difficult combination of influences not seen since the oil shocks of 
the 1970s.  
On  the  positive  side,  food  commodity  prices  are  also  generally  going  up  and  this  has 
benefited our dairy sector in particular. There is some evidence that international meat prices 
are now on the move upwards also.  
To add complication, financial markets and banking systems around the world remain very 
unsettled. Credit markets worldwide began malfunctioning following the US subprime crisis, 
and  have  not  yet  returned  to  normal.  Risk  aversion  remains  widespread.  Indeed,  some 
people think the credit situation will get worse before it gets better.  
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate has fallen somewhat in response to these domestic 
and international pressures. On a trade-weighted basis, the exchange rate remains at high 
levels, but there are big differences in the level of the dollar against particular currencies. We 
are at historical highs against the US dollar and the Japanese yen, but well below average 
against the Australian dollar – and almost exactly historically “normal” against the euro and 
the British pound. 
These are strong influences, and they tug in many different directions. Through all this, the 
Reserve Bank’s task of maintaining price stability is a difficult one. Many other central banks 
are facing similar challenges. In New Zealand we are arguably starting from a relatively good 
position, in that interest rates have been at firm levels and restraining inflation pressure for 
some time, and have room to fall in response to the weakening economy and abatement of 
the  inflation  pressure.  For  some  other  countries,  growth  is  set  to  weaken  markedly  while 
inflation concerns remain, but real interest rates are already low or negative.  
In this speech, I would like to put current circumstances in the context of the internationally 
accepted  inflation-targeting  framework  for  monetary  policy,  as  applied  in  New  Zealand.  I 
want to ask the question: although the framework has stood the test of time – almost twenty 
years and counting – is it up to the challenges we face now? I will start by affirming that price 
stability  is  the  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  economic  growth  and 
prosperity.  Overall  macroeconomic  stability,  however,  also  depends  on  a  sound  overall 
government policy framework that does not itself contribute to economic fluctuations. It also 
depends strongly on what is happening beyond our borders, with foreign demand and foreign 
interest rates. 
And,  this  is  one  of  those  times  that  shows  that  the  New  Zealand  economy  is  subject  to 
powerful external forces. Monetary policy can only do so much. The challenge for us is to be 
flexible  in  buffering  these  forces  as  they  hit  the  economy,  without  undermining  public 
confidence in our commitment to price stability. In some cases – such as the rise in oil prices 
– we need to make difficult judgements about how best to look through unavoidable near-
term inflation spikes, while ensuring that inflation returns to target over the medium term. All 
of this is consistent with and envisaged by the Policy Targets Agreement. 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 1
I’m going to conclude that the framework does work relatively well, and is the best approach 
we  and  many  others  have  yet  found,  among  a  limited  number  of  viable  alternatives.  Of 
course, we continue to seek improvements to it. But overall, although current circumstances 
are indeed very difficult, the framework, and our interest rate decisions to date, position us 
well to take on the difficult challenges that we face in the years ahead.  
Back to basics: the role of price stability in macroeconomic policy 
It is now universally accepted that price stability is a cornerstone of modern, well-functioning 
economies.  Inflation  is  costly  in  a  social  justice  sense,  because  it  arbitrarily  redistributes 
wealth among different groups in society. Not only does inflation blunt the link between effort 
and reward, it typically hits hardest those who can least afford it. 
Inflation is also costly because it obscures the relative price signals that must come through 
clearly if the economy is to adapt to change and make the most of opportunities for growth. 
At  present,  high  oil  prices  should  be  encouraging  energy  efficiency  and  alternative  fuels 
development.  High  dairy  prices  should  shift  land  use  towards  dairy  production.  An 
environment of stability in the general level of prices helps these signals come through so 
that the right consumption, investment and other business decisions are made.  
It  is  also  generally  accepted  that  maintaining  price  stability  is  the  best  contribution  that 
monetary policy can make to help an economy realise its maximum sustainable growth rate. 
The maximum rate itself depends on the microeconomic decisions of individual households, 
businesses,  savers  and  investors  responding  to  myriad  price  signals  and  opportunities  for 
technological improvement. Good monetary policy is about promoting, through price stability, 
a  stable  background  for  these  decisions.  Other  elements  of  economic  policy  that  also 
contribute to good decision making and stability include fiscal prudence, the rule of law, and 
a regulatory framework that does not introduce economic distortions. 
Wide-ranging  evidence  and  research  in  New  Zealand  and  abroad  establishes  three  key 
lessons about the interaction of growth and inflation. First, that there are many determinants 
of the long-run level of economic growth. The level of inflation (let alone inflation targeting) is 
not  the  only  thing  that  matters.  Second,  to  try  persistently  to  promote  growth  with  loose 
monetary  policy  will  in  all  likelihood  simply  generate  a  higher  level  of  inflation,  which  will 
damage growth prospects in the long term. Third, a monetary policy that loses sight of the 
importance  of  price  stability  will  probably  contribute  to  large  economic  cycles,  as  inflation 
gets out of hand and then needs to be reined in with an economic crunch. 
Figures 1 and 2 show that New Zealand actually illustrates the second lesson most clearly, 
compared to many other countries. In our case, lower inflation has been associated with a 
higher  level  of  GDP  growth  per  capita.  We  should  not  forget  that  this  decade  we  have 
enjoyed the longest stretch of continuous growth since comparable records began.  
The figures show the experience of a number of other OECD countries in reducing inflation 
from the high levels of the 1970s and 1980s to the low levels of the past couple of decades. 
All except the US and Japan have followed New Zealand in becoming inflation targeters.  
That the determinants of growth are complex is illustrated by Australia, the UK and Sweden 
lowering  their  levels  of  inflation  without  much  difference  in  growth,  and  US  and  Canada 
having  lower  growth  in  the  low  inflation  period.  Japan  had  much  lower  growth  in  the  low 
inflation  period,  but  this  reflects  that  Japan’s  low  inflation  period  was  one  where  the 
Japanese central bank was persistently but unsuccessfully trying to stimulate the economy, 
rather than a deliberate effort to hold inflation very close to zero.  
2 
 BIS Review 95/2008
Figure 1. Inflation and average GDP growth per capita, selected OECD countries 
Sources: Statistics NZ, DataStream, Statistics Sweden, Government of Japan Cabinet Office. Country key: AU 
Australia, CAN Canada, JAP Japan, NZ New Zealand, UK United Kingdom, US United States, SWE Sweden. 
As for growth volatility, in all cases except Sweden, lower inflation has been associated with 
less  volatile  per  capita  growth  performance  –  though  the  difference  is  only  slight  in  New 
Zealand’s case (Figure 2).  
Figure 2. Inflation and volatility of GDP growth per capita, selected OECD countries 
 BIS Review 95/2008 
 3
 Sources: Statistics NZ, DataStream, Statistics Sweden, Government of Japan Cabinet Office. Country key: AU 
Australia, CAN Canada, JAP Japan, NZ New Zealand, UK United Kingdom, US United States, SWE Sweden. 
The international inflation-targeting framework, New Zealand style 
A  target  in  terms  of  the  rate  of  CPI  inflation  is  now  a  mainstream  way  of  expressing  a 
commitment to price stability in terms of a measurable statistic. In fact, inflation targeting is 
one  of  New  Zealand’s  successful  exports.  Since  New  Zealand’s  adoption  of  inflation 
targeting following the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989 (the Act), over 20 countries 
have  followed.1  Some  of  these  are shown  in  Figure  3.  Many  of  those  who  began  inflation 
targeting  relatively  early  are,  like  New  Zealand,  open  economies  with  floating  exchange 
rates. Quite a few of them are also, like us, small and strongly influenced by the prices of 
commodities  on  international  markets.  The  list  includes  both  developed  economies  and 
emerging economies, from the West and from the East. This long, growing and diverse list of 
economies  suggests  strongly  that  inflation  targeting  is  a  monetary  policy  strategy  that  can 
handle a wide range of circumstances and shocks.  
Figure 3. CPI inflation target ranges, selected countries with date of commencement of 
inflation targeting 
 
Sources: Roger and Stone (2005), ECB. The ECB’s target is specified as below, but close to, 2 percent. 
In our case, Parliament has defined in the Act the framework within which the Reserve Bank 
must target inflation. As is well known, the Act specifies that maintaining price stability is the 
Reserve  Bank’s  primary  function  (section  8).  The  Act  also  makes  the  Reserve  Bank 
operationally  independent,  but  accountable  to  Parliament  and  the  general  public  for  its 
operations in pursuit of price stability. Finally, the Act provides for the specific policy target to 
be  negotiated  between  the  Governor  and  the  Minister  of  Finance  (effectively  on  behalf  of 
Cabinet). This, of course, is the familiar Policy Targets Agreement (PTA). The Board of the 
Reserve Bank and Parliament’s Finance and Expenditure Select Committee have the formal 
                                                 
1   Roger and Stone (2005) provide a comprehensive review of the international experience of inflation targeting. 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2008
responsibility  for  regularly  monitoring  and  evaluating  the  Reserve  Bank’s  and  Governor’s 
monetary  policy  performance.  Of  course,  we  are  also  informally  evaluated  by  the  financial 
markets, and by everyone else with an interest in monetary policy, on a continuous basis. 
Although inflation-targeting countries differ somewhat in their implementation details, the key 
elements  of  an  inflation  target  plus  independence  plus  accountability  are  widely  accepted. 
Even non-inflation-targeting countries, such as the US and Japan, have independence and 
accountability arrangements that result in their central banks interacting with the public and 
financial  markets  in  much  the  same  way  as  in  New  Zealand.  We  all  regularly  review  and 
document  the  economic  outlook,  adjust  interest  rates  accordingly,  and  appear  before  our 
empowering legislatures to explain these interest rate decisions and how we intend to ensure 
that inflation evolves consistent with our targets.  
All of this activity reflects that inflation targeting in practice is not as simple as just a target 
number for CPI inflation, with interest rates going up when inflation goes up and down when 
inflation goes down. Considerable analysis is involved in deciding when and by how much to 
move interest rates in response to the forces influencing the economy. We make choices and 
judgements about the path of inflation we will aim for over the medium term, and what risks 
need  to  be  taken  into  account.  The  judgements  are  complicated  by  the  lags  with  which 
monetary policy acts on the economy, and the uncertainty involved in forecasting.  
All central banks are keenly aware  of the interaction between monetary policy and output, 
interest rate and exchange rate volatility. Good monetary policy means being flexible about 
responding to price and demand pressures in that light.  
We place a lot of importance on explaining how we intend to use this flexibility, setting out 
our analysis and assumptions so that others may evaluate our performance. This is for two 
reasons. First, they are what a public agency should do in a democratic society. Second, and 
just  as  importantly,  regular  explanation  and  clear  resolve  about  price  stability  help  ensure 
that the public’s inflation expectations remain “anchored” – that is, consistent with ongoing 
price stability. Anchored expectations make the job of monetary policy easier, and create the 
room  to  be  flexible  in  accepting  fluctuations  in  the  actual  inflation  rate.  With  anchored 
expectations, such fluctuations will not undermine public confidence that price stability will be 
maintained over the medium term. 
In our case, the numerical target itself, “future CPI inflation outcomes between 1 percent and 
3 percent on average over the medium term”, incorporates flexibility. The “medium term” is 
not formally defined, but we normally aim to ensure inflation is within the range in the second 
half of a three-year forecast horizon.  
Other PTA clauses reinforce the flexible approach. Clause 2(a) requires the Reserve Bank to 
monitor  a  range  of  prices.  This  explicitly  ensures  that  the  reference  to  the  CPI  does  not 
blinker our view of inflation pressure in the economy – we should “look at everything”. The 
use  of  the  CPI  reflects  that  it  is  readily  accessible  and  understood,  and  calculated  by  an 
independent agency (Statistics New Zealand).  
Clause  3(a)  recognises  that  specific  prices,  such  as  oil  and  food  currently,  will  sometimes 
move a lot, causing CPI inflation to move temporarily away from the target. However, Clause 
3(b) then says that these circumstances are not reasons to lose sight of the medium term 
inflation target.  
Finally,  Clause  4(b)  requires  that  in  pursuing  the  target  the  Reserve  Bank  should  avoid 
unnecessary volatility in output, interest rates and the exchange rate. 
Through  these  clauses,  the  PTA  provides  guidance  both  to  the  Reserve  Bank  and  to  the 
general public about what flexibility means. Among other things, it means that we should not 
be “trigger happy” in responding to new events, but should use the full width of the target 
range, in light of the particular shocks that arise. In the absence of a PTA we would take this 
approach anyway, because it is good monetary policy practice, but having the PTA express it 
explicitly is helpful from an expectations point of view. 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 5
As Figure 3 shows, all inflation-targeting central banks in developed countries tend to cluster 
around  a  fairly  narrow  range  of  target  numbers  very  similar  to  New  Zealand’s  (emerging 
economies  tend  to  have  slightly  higher  ranges).  The  lower  bound  of  1  percent  is  there 
because  of  the  danger  of  deflation,  while  the  upper  bound  reflects  the  evidence  that 
sustained  inflation  above  around  3  percent  hurts  growth.  Alan  Greenspan  said  that  price 
stability  exists  when  people  do  not  factor  inflation  into  their  decisionmaking,  and  research 
evidence suggests that a numerical target below 3 percent accords well with this idea. 
The  success  in  reducing  inflation  around  the  world  (using  inflation  targets  or  otherwise)  is 
probably not all due to better monetary policy, though the evidence suggests that monetary 
policy  played  no  small  part.  Beneficial  circumstances,  including  the  long  period  of  strong 
productivity  growth  in  Asia  and  resulting  falling  prices  of  Asia’s  exported  manufactured 
goods,  no  doubt  helped.  Institutional  features  such  as  the  exact  specification  of  targets 
probably  matter  much  less  than  the  good  conduct  of  monetary  policy  –  that  is,  the 
appropriate use of flexibility. 
Dealing with large shocks: flexible inflation targeting in practice 
Flexibility  requires  difficult,  but  unavoidable,  judgements  about  how  best  to  respond  to 
economic developments as they unfold, but without jeopardising medium-term price stability. 
Shocks  can  be  big  or  small,  and  of  a  variety  of  types  demanding  different  treatment.  The 
structure and behaviour of the economy changes, and people learn, over time. Some types 
of behaviour, such as housing and asset price cycles, can be quite destabilising, in that they 
tend to generate boom-crash dynamics.  
As a result, interest rates move, sometimes by a lot. This is true not just in New Zealand but 
in other developed economies (inflation targeters and otherwise). Different economies face 
different  pressures  at  different  times,  and  targets  are  specified  a  little  differently,  but  the 
swings in policy rates over time are similarly large across a diverse range of countries. For 
example,  over  this  decade  to  date,  the  US  policy  rate  fell  6½  percentage  points  between 
2000 and 2004, then rose more than 4 percentage points between 2004 and 2007, and fell 
again by more than 3 percentage points through to this year.  
Unpredicted and temporary price shocks are relatively easy for monetary policy to deal with. 
By definition, they happen too quickly to respond to anyway, and their short duration lessens 
the risk that they will destabilise the economy. An example is a sharp rise in fresh vegetable 
prices  due  to  bad  weather,  that  everyone  reasonably  expects  to  be  reversed  when  the 
weather  improves.  We  look  through  such  shocks,  consistent  with  the  PTA’s  focus  on  the 
medium term.  
When a shock is persistent, or forecast to evolve over a long period of time (say years), it is 
much  more  difficult  to  judge  the  appropriate  response.  A  very  good  current  example  is  oil 
prices.  Over  the  past  four  years  or  so,  international  oil  prices  in  US  dollar  terms  have 
quadrupled. Consensus forecasts have consistently failed over this time to give any hint this 
might happen, as can be seen in Figure 4. Though the rising New Zealand dollar over this 
period has offset the impact on local prices a bit, the impact of the oil price shock on CPI 
inflation over this time is clear, and it accounts for a large part of why CPI inflation is where it 
is today.  
6 
 BIS Review 95/2008
Figure 4. International oil prices and Consensus projections 
 Sources: Datastream, Consensus Economics Inc. Projections are as at June of the year indicated. 
In these circumstances, we have real choices about how to respond. We can either let any 
further anticipated direct inflation consequences of the shock come through, or try to offset 
them with tighter policy than otherwise.  
The PTA does not explicitly address long-lasting shocks, but as noted before, it does provide 
sufficient guidance and scope for the Reserve Bank to take a sensibly flexible approach. The 
basic approach of looking through  the near-term, unexpected inflation impact is the same. 
However,  the  key  judgement  with  this  kind  of  persistent,  high-profile  shock  is  about  the 
heightened  risk  that  the  period  of  elevated  headline  CPI  inflation  might  lead  the  public  to 
question the Reserve Bank’s commitment to the medium term inflation target, and plan and 
act on the basis of a higher expected inflation rate. Getting inflation expectations down again 
can be very costly, as shown by New Zealand’s own economic history – let alone the history 
of countries that have experienced hyperinflation such as the Weimar Republic in the 1920s, 
Argentina in the 1980s and Zimbabwe currently. 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 7
Figure 5. CPI inflation and inflation expectations 
 Sources: Statistics NZ, RBNZ. 
There is thus much less scope to be sanguine about long-lasting price shocks compared to 
sudden and ephemeral shocks, because the risk is greater that inflation expectations could 
drift away from the target range. Currently, inflation expectations appear to remain anchored 
at a level consistent with the target range, though there is a slight upward drift, apparently 
reflecting the sustained elevation of headline inflation (Figure 5). The key requirement in this 
sort of situation is that policy is kept tight enough to ensure that inflation expectations remain 
anchored. 
Sustained oil price inflation is just one stark example of a shock that might persist for some 
time.  There  are  actually  two  other  large  and  sustained  shocks  all  at  work  on  the  New 
Zealand  economy  at  the  moment:  a  retrenching  housing  market  after  the  biggest  housing 
boom  ever,  and  very  strong  dairy  prices.  Also,  very  large  increases  in  other  commodity 
prices such as steel and fertiliser, while having a smaller direct effect on CPI, have had a 
substantial impact on business costs in some sectors. 
The appropriate response to the housing market downturn is fairly straightforward, because it 
is a demand-driven shock. With weak domestic spending, loosening policy to bring demand 
closer  to  the  economy’s  supply  capacity  is  also  consistent  with  keeping  future  inflation  on 
target. 
The  dairy  price  shock  is  more  difficult,  as  it  combines  a  positive  stimulus  to  demand 
(increased income for dairy farmers and associated industries) with a negative stimulus (the 
reduction  in  real  household  disposable  income  due  to  rising  prices  of  dairy  products).  We 
need  to  judge  the  net  effect  on  demand,  and  account  for  the  upward  risk  to  inflation 
expectations from the price increase itself. A complication is that the exchange rate will tend 
to move in response to the terms of trade effects of the dairy price movement, and spread its 
impact further around the economy. 
The oil price shock is of the most difficult type. For a net oil importer such as New Zealand, it 
reduces disposable incomes and demand (suggesting looser policy is appropriate), but also 
has  a  direct  upward  impact  on  inflation  and  presents  upward  inflation  expectations  risks 
(suggesting  tighter  policy  is  appropriate).  The  exchange  rate  will  respond  to  the  terms  of 
trade movement in this case also.  
The overall impact of this mixture of large shocks of different types produces the complicated 
picture  we  have  at  present.  Demand  is  weak,  but  the  economy’s  supply  capacity  is  under 
8 
 BIS Review 95/2008
pressure from higher oil and other input prices. On top of these movements in the supply-
demand balance, prices are rising. The overall adverse movement in the terms of trade as oil 
prices have continued to rise, while dairy prices have at least paused, leaves New Zealand 
poorer.  Adjustment  to  the  relative  price  shock,  which  in  this  case  is  sourced  from  the 
fundamentals  of  supply  and  demand  in  international  markets,  has  to  occur  through  a 
combination of lower real wages and lower real profit margins.  
It does not make sense for the Reserve Bank to try to prevent this adjustment. Instead, the 
key  policy  requirement  in  this  situation  is  to  allow  the  initial  externally  driven  relative  price 
changes  to  occur,  but  keep  monetary  policy  sufficiently  firm  to  ensure  that  generalised 
second-round  inflation  effects  do  not  take  hold  –  in  other  words,  to  keep  inflation 
expectations anchored.  
We are already starting from a position of high real interest rates in New Zealand, reflecting 
the  need  to  restrain  inflation  pressure  that  has  built  up  in  recent  years.  Indeed,  current 
headline  inflation  remains  above  the  target  range  of  1  to  3  percent  (though  CPI  excluding 
food  and  energy  prices  is  rather  lower).  However,  our  judgement  at  this  stage  is  that  the 
contractionary effects of the housing downturn, high oil prices and the global credit crunch 
will substantially outweigh the stimulus from high export prices and projected expansionary 
fiscal  policy.  We  have  thus  adopted  an  easing  bias  in  our  monetary  policy  stance.  Our 
judgement  is  that  the  weakness  in  the  economy  will  be  sufficient  to  bring  inflation,  and 
inflation expectations, down over the medium term consistent with the target range. 
Our starting position is arguably more favourable than that of other economies, in the sense 
that there is plenty of room for our projected easing in interest rates as the economy and the 
existing inflation pressure weaken. Most developed economies are facing much the same, 
very  uncomfortable,  combination  of  slowing  growth  in  the  presence  of  rising  inflation 
pressure, but some are still running very low or negative real interest rates. For the year to 
June, the US reported 5 percent inflation, Australia 4.5 percent, the euro zone 4 percent, and 
the UK 3.8 percent. The Governor of the Bank of England recently had to write to the UK 
Chancellor  explaining  a  departure  from  the  Bank  of  England’s  target  range,  making  very 
similar arguments to the ones we have been using for treatment of oil and food price shocks, 
and warning that worse is to come. To make things worse, for this group of countries and 
some other developed countries, growth over the next couple of years looks likely to run one 
or two percentage points below where it has been in the past few years (Figure 6).  
BIS Review 95/2008 
 9
Figure 6. Inflation and growth outlook, selected developed countries 
Sources:  Statistics  NZ,  DataStream,  Statistics  Sweden,  Government  of  Japan  Cabinet  Office,  Consensus 
Economics Inc. Country key: AU Australia, CAN Canada, JAP Japan, NZ New Zealand, UK United Kingdom, US 
United States, SWE Sweden. 
In some Asian countries, the situation is very difficult indeed, where food in particular forms a 
much  larger  proportion  of  the  consumption  basket.  Singapore’s  and  China’s  inflation  rates 
are both above 7 percent, and their real interest rates are negative – but monetary tightening 
is  constrained  by  exchange  rate  considerations.  For  the  countries  shown  in  Figure  7,  the 
movement towards high inflation with low growth is quite marked. 
 Figure 7. Inflation and growth outlook, selected Asian countries 
Sources:  Datastream,  Consensus  Economics  Inc.  Country  key:  CH  China,  HK  Hong  Kong,  KR  Korea,  MLY 
Malaysia, SNG Singapore. 
 10 
 BIS Review 95/2008
The challenges for inflation targeting  
Independence  and  accountability  arrangements  for  central  banking  have  an  unattractive 
flipside in that they can lead to heightened expectations of what monetary policy is actually 
able to achieve. Inflation targeting is not an elixir for stabilisation.  
The current very large international forces remind us that small economies like New Zealand 
are  especially  dependent  on  developments  offshore.  This decade,  the  New  Zealand  dollar 
has been very strong, materially complicating monetary policy – due partly to the sizeable 
gaps that opened up at various times between our interest rates and those in some other 
countries,  including  Japan,  the  US  and  Switzerland.  Rising  commodity  export  prices  have 
also  played  a  role.  There  is  little  we  can  do  about  other  countries’  interest  rates  or 
international  commodity  markets.  To  state  the  obvious,  we  run  New  Zealand’s  monetary 
policy  according  to  New  Zealand  economic  conditions,  and  other  central  banks  run  their 
monetary policies according to their own economic conditions. The Australian dollar has also 
strengthened markedly in the past two or three years, largely reflecting similar factors.  
Dealing  with  asset  price  cycles  and  their  consequences  for  price  stability  is  another  issue 
that  central  bankers  across  the  world  are  grappling  with.  Housing  market  booms  occurred 
this decade not only in New Zealand, but also the UK, Australia and the US. The aftermath of 
these booms is still playing out currently in New Zealand, the UK and the US at least.  
On the positive side, there are things that can be done to enhance the environment within 
which monetary policy operates. These include a wider government policy framework that at 
least does not contribute to the cyclicality of the economy, and to the tendency for inflation 
shocks to become entrenched. Even better are government policies that reduce cyclicality – 
such  as  the  well-known  “automatic  stabiliser”  features  of  well-designed  fiscal  policy 
frameworks.  Although  economic  stabilisation  is  not  the  primary  motivation  for  these  other 
policy areas, we do work with other government agencies to try to enhance the stabilisation 
properties of government policy where possible, including reducing structural distortions that 
tend to generate economic cycles.  
These  issues  motivate  us  to  continue  to  look  for  other  instruments  that  might  support  the 
OCR as tools to promote macroeconomic stability. We also look forward to the findings of the 
Finance  and  Expenditure  Select  Committee’s  Inquiry  into  the  Future  Monetary  Policy 
Framework. In both the Supplementary Stabilisation Instruments work we did in 2006 and in 
our submission to the FEC’s Inquiry, we reported that there did not appear to be any magic 
bullets among the range of potential instruments considered. Having said that, we did find 
that certain adjustments to tax and other regulatory structures might reduce their contribution 
to  the  cyclicality  of  the  economy.  Analysis  of  the  other  instruments  and  approaches 
suggested they would be either ineffective in the long run, or would introduce large economic 
distortions. 
As noted earlier, the differences in central bank mandates, inflation targeting frameworks and 
monetary policy conduct across countries are not large enough to explain the differences in 
long-run  growth  performance  we  observe.  Savings,  investment  and  average  interest  rate 
patterns  reflect  the  long-running  fact  that  New  Zealanders  remain  willing  to  borrow  and 
spend  at  much  higher  interest  rates  than  those  prevailing  in  other  countries.  Conducive 
policy  frameworks,  including  sound  monetary  policy,  help  maximise  long  run  growth 
performance  and  prosperity  –  however,  what  is  also  needed  is  savings  and  investment 
behaviour geared towards growth.  
Despite spending time looking, we have found no clearly superior alternatives to the flexible 
inflation targeting approach to maintaining price stability. Such things as monetary targeting 
and fixed exchange rates have been tried before in New Zealand, as in other countries that 
are now inflation targeters. Both monetary and exchange rate targeting regimes tend to be 
very inflexible. They require the burden of many types of shocks to be forced through output, 
rather  than  absorbed  by  the  policy  instrument  itself,  and  tend  to  be  most  suitable  for 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 11
situations  where  inflation  expectations  are  poorly  anchored  and  the  commitment  of  the 
central bank to price stability is doubted by the public.  
Another alternative that could appear superficially attractive is to require monetary policy to 
target multiple objectives such as growth, employment, export and the balance of payments. 
This  was  the  approach  taken  in  New  Zealand  and  many  other  countries  in  the  post-war 
period  up  to  the  early  1980s.  It  inevitably  had  a  short-term  focus,  and  resulted  in  stop-go 
policies and high inflation. We now know that one instrument cannot succeed in achieving 
multiple  objectives  over  the  cycle.  The  move  to  inflation  targeting,  with  its  single,  clear 
objective, resulted from the lessons learned in that period. We do not want to re-learn those 
lessons. 
Conclusions 
Monetary  policy  –  day  to  day,  month  to  month  and  year  to  year  –  is  about  balancing 
judgements  in  an  uncertain  world.  It  is  not  a  precise  tool.  Times  like  the  present  are 
particularly challenging, when there are large and persistent shocks on both the demand and 
the supply sides of the economy.  
Nevertheless, we believe the inflation targeting framework provides us sufficient flexibility to 
deal  with  the  short-term  consequences  of  shocks,  without  losing  sight  of  the  essential 
medium-term  inflation  objective.  The  New  Zealand  framework  and  approach  is  very  much 
like that used in other economies. The next few years will not be easy, but I believe that the 
framework is the best available, and that the Reserve Bank is up to the challenge of applying 
it flexibly. 
Overall,  the  framework  has  been  relatively  successful.  Despite  the  current  shocks  we  are 
going  through,  we  expect  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  over  the  medium  term  to  be 
within  the  target  band.  The  public  expects  us  to  meet  our  target,  and  this  helps  to  keep 
expectations anchored.  
Very few of the countries who have adopted inflation targeting have given it up. Alternatives 
that dilute the focus on medium term inflation and price stability could seriously threaten the 
anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  and  damage  the  credibility  of  the  New  Zealand 
macroeconomic  policy  framework,  especially  in  the  current  environment  of  high  rates  of 
headline inflation and strong forces on the economy.  
References 
Roger,  S  and  M  Stone  (2005)  “On  target?  The  international  experience  with  achieving 
inflation targets”, IMF Working Paper WP/05/163. 
12 
 BIS Review 95/2008
