Amando M Tetangco, Jr: On the road to sustaining economic stability 
and growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Management Association of the Philippines’ Economic 
Briefing, Manila, 27 February 2008. 
 MAP  President  Edgar  Chua,  MBC,  other  distinguished  officers  and  members  of  the 
Management  Association  of  the  Philippines  and  the  Makati  Business  Club,  friends,  ladies 
and gentlemen, good afternoon. It is a pleasure to join you on the occasion of the induction 
of MAP’s new members and Joint Economic Briefing.  
To the newly inducted members of MAP, congratulations! While you look forward to breaking 
new ground within this organization, the Philippine economy appears to be moving toward a 
more challenging environment – One, which on several occasions, I have characterized as 
fraught  with  headwinds.  The  rough  patches  that  surfaced  in  the  second  half  of  last  year, 
appear to have intensified.  
You may have heard it asked: “Can the Philippines ride out these rough patches and push 
past the headwinds?” Our assessment at the BSP is that, NOW more than at any other time 
in  at  least  a  decade,  the  Philippine  economy  COULD.  Quite  a  number  of  analysts,  rating 
agencies, market players even Ciel himself (or shall I say, ALSO Ciel) agree with the BSP on 
this.  
2007 was a remarkable year for the Philippines. Can we do a repeat? With the patchy road 
ahead, we may not see the same “highs” (and “lows”), but we certainly have built up “buffers” 
that would allow us to press on the road ahead of us. 
Let me quickly run through some of the “patches” or challenges that I see ahead of us. 
First, further turbulence in global financial markets. SUBPRIME. There is probably none here 
in  this  room  who  hasn’t  yet  heard  of  the  term.  You  were  all  witnesses  to  the  volatilities  it 
created in the second half of 2007. I won’t go into the genesis of the problem, but clearly, 
what began as a home-grown housing mortgage market problem in the US has become a 
global problem and what was first manifested as difficulties in the financial market is starting 
to seep into the real economy. The coordinated credit operations by the major central banks 
and  policy  rate  cuts  have  helped  ease  credit  tensions,  but  wider  problems  in  the  financial 
system still persist.  
At the heart of this problem is uncertainty. First, there is continued uncertainty about the size 
of  losses  from  defaults  on  US  subprime  mortgages  that  the  global  financial  system  will 
eventually  have  to  absorb.  Second,  there  is  uncertainty  about  where  these  exposures  will 
end up. Third, this lack of information breeds fear of ratings downgrades, of steep sell-offs 
and of other unknown consequences.  
In sum, the global financial turbulence stoked by the subprime mortgage problem in the US 
has intensified and is expected to be protracted. 
While  the  Philippines  has  limited  direct  exposure  to  CDOs,  none  of  which  have  subprime 
mortgages  as  underlying  assets,  we  do  not  expect  a  significant  direct  impact  on  the  local 
financial system. However, the ongoing global financial volatility could affect the market via a 
rise in risk aversion.  
A general retreat from risks by global investors could affect the direction of capital flows.  
The second challenge is the slowdown in the US economy. 
BIS Review 24/2008 
 1
The  current  tightening  of  credit  conditions  in  the  US  due  to  risk  reassessment  in  financial 
markets  and  the  sharp  decline  in  the  US  real  estate  market  threaten  to  exert  further 
downward pressure on investment, consumption, and, consequently, output growth.  
Many economists have adjusted their US growth forecasts for 2008 downward. Some have 
made  downward  adjustments  by  as  little  as  0.4  percentage  point  or  as  much  as  2.4 
percentage points. What is unknown, really, is the length and depth of this slowdown. Some 
have characterized this is possibly SHORT and SHALLOW, others SHORT and SHARP.  
Nonetheless,  we  continue  to  monitor  developments  in  the  global  growth  picture  as  the 
weakening  of  domestic  demand  in  the  US  and  other  advanced  economies  could  create 
significant spillovers into developing and emerging economies such as the Philippines.  
There are at least two channels through which a sharper-than-expected slowdown in the US 
could directly affect the domestic economy. 
One, through the trade channel.  
The prospect of decoupling from the US is not clear cut. Even as our dependence on the US 
has diminished as shown by the drop in our direct exports to the US in recent years, and that 
trade with China, India and other emerging markets has increased, we must remember that 
portion of our increased exports to these new markets is really re-exported to the US. Thus, 
as economic activity slows in the US, our exports would possibly show a decline also.  
One significant mitigant, however, is if, indeed, as expected by many analysts, the domestic 
demand in emerging markets holds up. This situation could result in the country maintaining 
or even increasing the level of our exports to these markets. Such could thus prop up the 
overall exports.  
Remittances is a second important channel through which a slowdown in the US economy 
could impact on the domestic economy.  
Latest  data  show  that  1/3  of  our  land-based  overseas  Filipinos  are  in  the  US.  The 
diversification  in  deployment  in  terms  of  destination  and  quality  of  skills  could,  however, 
temper any slowdown in remittances.  
Let me now turn to the third major risk that we face: the rise in global food and energy prices.  
Food  prices  have  gone  up  as  a  result  of  strong  demand  from  China,  India,  and  other 
emerging  market  economies  that  are  experiencing  rising  incomes.  Poor  harvests  due  to 
adverse  weather  conditions  and  increased  biofuel  production  have  also  ratcheted  demand 
for certain related food items. 
Furthermore,  just  recently  we  saw  oil  price  breach  the  $100-a-barrel  level.  Geopolitical 
tensions  in  the  Middle  East,  refinery  bottlenecks,  speculative  activity,  the  weak  US  dollar, 
and the continued strong demand for crude oil all exerted an upward pressure on global oil 
prices.  
However,  as  global  growth  slows,  we  may  see  commodity  price  volatilities  abate  in  the 
second half of the year.  
With  these  risks  that  I  have  just  described  being  primarily  global  and  largely  not  directly 
within  our  control,  why  do  we  believe  that  the  Philippine  economy  will  be  able  to  ride  out 
these patches?  
The short answer is we have built up domestic buffers. 
What are these? 
One, we have built up buffers in our domestic financial system.  
The Philippine banking system’s asset base has grown steadily over the last 6-7 years.  
2 
 BIS Review 24/2008
The  overall  asset  quality  of  banks  continued  to  improve  as  well,  with  the  NPL  ratio  now 
moving closer to the pre-crisis level of around 4 percent. 
Banks’  overall  capital  adequacy  ratio  was  also  maintained  well  above  regulatory  and 
international standards, shored up by the increased issuance of hybrid financial instruments 
to strengthen their capital base.  
Last  year,  we  rolled  out  two  reform  packages  aimed  at  improving  the  system’s  ability  to 
manage risks and competitiveness in a more globally integrated market environment – here I 
refer to the further liberalization of our FX market and the new derivatives circular.  
Amid the heightened risks in the global financial markets last year, the banking sector has 
showed resilience. 
Two, the fiscal picture has improved considerably.  
The National Government posted a P9.4 billion budget deficit in 2007 equivalent to less than 
1 percent of GDP, its lowest in ten years. Moreover, for the first time in more than a decade, 
the  consolidated  public  sector  financial  position  registered  a  surplus  in  2006.  This  has 
continued on in the first three quarters of 2007 with the surplus reaching P52.7 billion.  
Gains brought about by the government’s fiscal consolidation efforts were also evident in the 
material reduction in the public debt burden.  
Three, our external position is strong, making us less vulnerable to external shocks.  
The country’s balance of payments posted a record surplus of US$8.6 billion in 2007, buoyed 
by  strong  inflows  of  overseas  remittances,  higher  net  services  receipts,  and  direct  and 
portfolio investments.  
This  has  allowed  us  to build  up  the  country’s  gross  international  reserves  to  record  highs. 
Consequently, we were able to prepay external debt. In fact, in the BSP, we have prepaid all 
that we could. The NG, other GOCCs and the private sector have all taken advantage of our 
strong BOP and prepaid external debt.  
Thus, the country‘s external debt and debt service burden have also gone down.  
At  the  same  time,  the  steady  inflow  of  foreign  exchange  has  kept  the  peso  firm,  broadly 
maintaining  its  competitiveness  in  real  effective  terms  over  this  period,  and  providing  a 
mitigating effect on inflation. 
Finally, the sturdier policy framework and broad-based structural reform that we have put in 
place, have helped promote a more coordinated and productive economic environment.  
This is evidenced by the economy achieving in 2007 the highest GDP growth rate in 31 years 
of  7.3  percent  against  a  backdrop  of  low  and  stable  inflation.  The  2007  full  year  average 
inflation of 2.8 percent was the lowest in 21 years.  
This combination has allowed market interest rates to generally trend downward. 
Those,  in  brief,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  are  our  buffers.  How  can  we  further  build  these  to 
ensure that we can ride out any unforeseen bumps in the road?  
Well, my friends, like any good driver, we must keep our eyes on the road and follow the map 
that we have set out on.  
This brings me to the BSP’s policy thrust for 2008.  
The BSP’s monetary policy thrust will involve a balancing act between managing the risks to 
inflation  and  inflation  expectations, and  seeing  to  it  that  the  economy’s  growth  momentum 
continues  over  the  policy  horizon.  We  will  continue  to  focus  on  our  core  mandate  of 
promoting price stability. This will require intensified environmental scanning and continuous 
surveillance of key macroeconomic developments, particularly those that indicate emerging 
risks to the inflation outlook.  
BIS Review 24/2008 
 3
Relative the external sector, our policies will be geared toward: ensuring the sustainability of 
the country’s external debt; maintaining a market-determined exchange rate, with scope for 
occasional action to keep orderly market conditions; and maintaining a comfortable level of 
reserves as market opportunities will allow. 
Reforms in the financial sector will be aimed at maintaining a strong banking system and a 
vibrant  capital  market.  Specifically,  we  will  focus  on:  further  enhancing  the  regulatory 
framework  through  the  implementation  of  the  BASEL  II  roadmap;  improving  corporate 
governance  by  promoting  compliance  with  international  accounting  and  financial  reporting 
standards;  accelerating  the  implementation  of  risk-based  supervision  technology;  and 
continuing support for the development of a deep and efficient capital market, including by 
supporting necessary legislative reforms.  
In sum, we will continue to be focused on our primary mandate. ”More of the same” is what 
you may have heard me say before. More of these which have served us well in the past.  
On the basis of these policy directions, the outlook for the macroeconomy continues to be 
favorable.  
Although  we  are  seeing  a  hump-shaped  inflation  path  in  the  first  half  of  2008,  whereby 
monthly  inflation  rates  are  expected  to  rise  to  around  the  top  end  of  the  target  range,  we 
forecast full year average inflation to be within target in both 2008 and 2009. The volatility in 
world  oil  prices  and  uptrend  in  non-commodity  prices  remain  the  key  risks  to  the  inflation 
outlook. Nevertheless, the emerging scenario is for commodity prices to taper towards the 
end  of  this  year.  This  within-target  outlook  will  allow  us  to  maintain  a  low  interest  rate 
environment.  
We expect the BOP to continue to be in surplus, although at a level that is smaller compared 
to  the  previous  year.  The  liquidity  impact  of  the  external  surplus  will  have  to  be  managed 
such that the amount of money in the system remains consistent with the inflation objective. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Philippine economy has travelled a remarkable distance in recent 
years.  Responsible  economic  policies  and  purposeful  reforms  have  resulted  in  significant 
economic dividends for the country.  
But equally significant patches are now threatening the sustainability of the gains we have 
achieved thus far.  
Yes, we have built up “buffers”, but we cannot afford to be complacent. Much is yet to be 
known about the size and depth of the patches that lie on the road ahead.  
The  critical  task  for  us  now  is  to  preserve  the  momentum  for  economic  reforms  so  as  to 
ensure sustained growth in the long run. Just as important to sustaining growth is delivering 
growth that casts a wider net.  
These  require  focus  as well  as  commitment.  To  this  end,  it  is  my  hope  that  the  MAP  and 
MBC community will continue to be our partner in the thrusts and the reform agenda that I 
had  outlined.  I  look  forward  to  your  support  as  together  we  tread  the  road  to  sustained 
economic growth. 
Thank you and good day to all! 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2008
