Lucas Papademos: The international role of the euro – trends, 
determinants and prospects 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Brussels Economic Forum 2008, at the panel on “The euro in a rapidly changing international 
environment”, organised by the European Commission, Brussels, 15 May 2008. 
 I.  
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  first  like  to  thank  the  European  Commission  and  the  organisers  of  the  Brussels 
Economic Forum for inviting me to this important celebration of the 10th anniversary of the 
launch of the euro. It is indeed a privilege and a pleasure for me to participate in this very 
special event. 
Many of us here remember vividly the famous words – spoken almost 40 years ago – that 
“one small step for (a) man” can be “one giant leap for mankind” (Neil Armstrong, Apollo 11 
mission,  20 July 1969).  The  same  event  can  have  a  varying  degree  of  significance  for 
different  people,  depending  on  their  viewpoint.  Anniversaries  are  occasions  to  take  a  step 
back  and  assess  matters  from  a  broader  perspective  and  over  an  extended  time  horizon. 
They are occasions for celebrating the accomplishments of the past, as well as for reflecting 
on perspectives and objectives for the future. Allow me to make an analogy with the words of 
Neil Armstrong and say that the ten years since the introduction of the euro may seem like a 
small  step  in  the  long  history  of  the  global  economy  to  some  people,  but  they  certainly 
represent a significant leap of progress for Europe. Over the past ten years, the  euro has 
become an important pole of stability in the world economy. 
The  significance  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  to  be  assessed  first  and  foremost  in 
terms of its contribution to the stability and growth of the euro area economy. And the euro’s 
performance  as  a  currency  must  be  fundamentally  judged  by  its  internal  stability  and 
credibility. At the same time, the single currency of a large economic area inevitably has a 
significant global role. Our task today is to assess the euro’s international role in a rapidly 
changing and integrating global economy. 
My remarks will address a number of pertinent issues: 
• 
• 
• 
the evolution of the international use of the euro over the past ten years; 
and the euro’s current status as an international currency; 
the  key  determinants  of  a  currency’s  international  role  and  the  prospects  for  the 
further internationalisation of the euro; and; 
the ECB’s position and the effects of macroeconomic and structural policies on the 
global role of the euro. 
 The evolving international use of the euro  
II.  
The international importance of the euro can be measured and assessed by the role it plays 
in global financial markets and international trade, the extent of its use by authorities (and 
official institutions) as a reserve, intervention and anchor currency, and its possible use by 
the public or firms outside the euro area as a parallel currency. 
A bird’s eye view of the evolution of the international use of the euro over the past ten years 
is presented in Chart 1 (Slide 3), which shows the share of the euro in international trade and 
in  a  number  of  financial  markets  for  debt  securities,  derivatives,  official  foreign  exchange 
BIS Review 62/2008 
 1
reserves, foreign exchange, and bank loans and deposits. In all of these markets, except for 
the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  use  of  the  euro  has  increased  over  the  past  ten  years, 
particularly  in  international  debt  security  markets,  global  official  foreign  exchange  reserves 
and as a trade invoicing and settlement currency. 
An examination of how the international use of the euro has evolved over time complements 
the  abovementioned  conclusions.  This  involves  assessing  the  implications  of  valuation 
effects resulting from exchange rate movements on the measurement of its international use 
and identifying the geographic or regional character of the euro’s international use. 
Chart  2  shows  that  the  euro’s  share  in  global  official  foreign  reserves  (the  currency 
composition of which is known) reached around 25% at the end of December 2007. This was 
considerably higher than the corresponding share of the sum of all legacy currencies at the 
end of 1998, which accounted for about 18%. Overall, the evolution has been gradual: the 
share of the euro increased during the first five years following the introduction of the euro 
and  has  since  remained  relatively  stable.  If  we  adjust  for  valuation  effects  stemming  from 
exchange rate movements (notably the significant depreciation of the US dollar against the 
euro), we see that the overall increase in the euro’s share over the past ten years has been 
smaller, and its time profile smoother.1 When interpreting these figures, it should be borne in 
mind that no official statistics are available on the currency composition of about one-third of 
global  foreign  exchange  reserves,  since  a  number  of  countries  with  large  holdings  of 
reserves – mostly in Asia – do not disclose their composition by currency. It is interesting to 
note  that  the  share  of  the  euro  in  the  total  official  foreign  exchange  reserves  held  by  the 
emerging  market  economies  that  provide  the  relevant  statistics  rose  from  around  18%  in 
1999 to about 28% at the end of 2007. 
Similar  conclusions  are  reached  with  regard  to  the  evolution  of  the  share  of  the  euro  in 
international debt security markets, as shown in Chart 3. The share of the euro in the “narrow 
measure” of international debt securities (which excludes debt securities issued in the home 
currency) increased to about 32% at the end of 2007 from around 19% at the end of 1998. 
The  increase  in  this  share  is  less  pronounced,  although  still  significant,  after  adjusting  for 
valuation effects. 
One  special  characteristic  of  the  international  use  of  the  euro  is  that,  so  far,  it  has  been 
concentrated  in  regions  that  are  geographically  close  to  the  euro  area.  This  fact  reflects 
political,  institutional  and  economic  factors.  It  is  not  surprising  that  non-euro  area  EU 
countries account for a significant part of euro-denominated debt by non-residents or that the 
degree  of  currency  substitution  is  high  in  the  new  EU  Member  States  that  have  not  yet 
adopted the euro or in the EU candidate and potential candidate countries. Moreover, some 
29 countries2 that use the euro as a reference currency for their exchange rate policies are 
close to the euro area. Chart 4 illustrates the regional dimension of the international role of 
the euro. The share of the euro in cross-border loans increased among the “old” non-euro 
area EU countries (UK, Denmark Sweden), but decreased in other parts of the world. At the 
same  time,  the  rise  in  the  share  of  the  euro  in  international  debt  securities  has also  been 
most pronounced in the new EU Member States and the other non-euro area EU countries. 
To  sum  up,  over  the  past  ten  years,  the  euro  has  established  itself  as  the  second  most 
important international currency after the US dollar. Its global role in international trade and 
global  financial  markets  is  greater  than  that  of  its  legacy  currencies  combined.  Its 
international use has gradually increased over time in most market segments but, in certain 
markets, it has remained relatively stable in recent years, when adjusted for valuation effects. 
                                                 
1   Constant exchange rate figures are expressed in exchange rates prevailing at the end  of the last available 
observation. As a result, current and constant exchange rate figures are by construction the same for the last 
observation. 
2   40 countries, if we include the countries of the CFA Frank Zone in Western Africa. 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2008
The  international  role  of  the  euro  area  is  especially  strong  in  neighbouring  regions  with 
special political and economic ties to the European Union. 
Determinants of and prospects for the international role of the euro  
III.  
What are the prospects for the euro’s international role in the coming years? To address this 
question  it  is  useful  to  recall  the  key  determining  factors  that  are  likely  to  influence  the 
demand  for  the  euro  by  non-euro  area  market  participants  and  authorities  over  time,  also 
taking into account the potential effects of the ongoing and growing economic and financial 
integration of the global economy. These key determinants include, first, the size, growth and 
degree of openness of the euro area economy relative to the rest of the world; second, the 
size, depth and degree of development of the euro area financial markets, again relative to 
the  markets  of  countries  with  international  currencies;  and,  lastly  and  fundamentally,  the 
attractiveness of the single European currency to non-euro area residents, as determined by 
its expected internal and external stability over the medium and long term. 
The  relative  size  of  the  euro  area  economy  and  its  degree  of  openness  are  factors  that 
support  the  international  role  of  the  euro.  Chart  5  compares  the  size  of  the  euro  area 
economy as measured by its GDP and its population with that of the United States in 1999 
and 2007. It shows that the ratio of the euro area’s nominal GDP to that of the United States 
when  measured  in  US  dollar  terms  increased  by  14  percentage  points  over  that  period  to 
reach about 88% in 2007. With the expected enlargement of the euro area in coming years, 
the euro area’s GDP will approach that of the United States. The chart also shows that the 
euro area economy’s degree of openness is significantly higher than that of the United States 
and has risen over the past eight years, contrary to earlier expectations that the euro area 
would become an “isolated” trading bloc. Indeed, the euro area is the largest trading bloc in 
the world, accounting for over 13% of world trade in goods and services in 2006. 
The potential growth of the euro area has been lower than that of the United States over the 
past decade, but the relative economic growth prospects seem more favourable as a result 
of  the  positive  impact  of  reforms  in  Europe  that  have  positively  and  significantly  affected 
employment  growth,  and  the  rate  of  labour  utilisation  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  productivity 
growth. Clearly, the implementation of further reforms will be crucial for enhancing the growth 
potential and economic dynamism of the euro area economy in the future. 
The overall size of the euro area’s financial system in nominal terms is comparable to that of 
the United States. Nevertheless, it less well developed, as measured by several indicators of 
financial  developments,  for  example  the  ratio  of  total  market  capitalisation  (including  bank 
assets) to GDP. Chart 5 shows that the size of the equity and debt securities markets in the 
euro area was about 56% of that of the United States, reflecting the greater reliance of euro 
area firms on bank financing. Other indicators confirm that the depth and liquidity of the US 
financial markets are greater than that of the euro area. 
At the same time, the efficiency of the euro area’s financial system has improved significantly 
since the adoption of the euro. Indeed, the euro has contributed to the integration of financial 
markets  in  the  euro  area,  which  has  increased  their liquidity  and  efficiency,  and made  the 
euro more attractive to international investors. Policy initiatives by the European Commission 
and  the  ECB  aim  at  fostering  further  integration  and  the  development  of  the  euro  area’s 
financial system, which will support the international use of the euro and will have positive 
feedback  effects  on  the  development  and  efficiency  of  the  euro  area’s  financial  markets. 
Thus,  the  further  integration  and  development  of  the  euro  area  financial  system  and  the 
internationalisation  of  the  euro  are  processes  that  can  be  expected  to  be  mutually 
reinforcing. 
The process of financial globalisation and the rapid integration of emerging markets into the 
world economy, as illustrated in Chart 6, can also be expected to foster the development of 
BIS Review 62/2008 
 3
European financial markets and, other things being equal, could support the international use 
of the euro. 
The abovementioned arguments should not lead to the conclusion that the expected positive 
effects  of  a  number  of  determinants  of  the  euro’s  international  role  are  likely  to  lead  to  a 
significant and abrupt increase in the euro’s relative importance as an international currency. 
There are other determining factors, and the effects of some of them imply that changes in 
the international use of a currency  are likely to be very gradual. Let me point to two such 
factors. 
First, as historical experience suggests, inertia and the advantages of incumbency in various 
markets imply that change in the international role of a currency is likely to be very gradual. 
Network  externalities  favour  the  use  of  one  currency  for  certain  financial  and  real  sector 
transactions. For example, the US dollar serves as a vehicle currency in foreign exchange 
markets,  with  most  trades  executed  via  the  US  dollar,  even  when  neither  of  the  two 
currencies exchanged  is  the  US  dollar,  mainly  due  to  the  superior  liquidity  and  thus  lower 
costs involved in trading against the US dollar than for other currency pairs. Similarly, prices 
in  international  commodity  markets  are  quoted  in  US  dollars,  ensuring  transparency  on  a 
global scale and omitting costly pricing in two or more currencies. 
Second, in the absence of a significant shock triggering an abrupt change in the international 
use of one currency, the sheer size of stocks relative to flows or turnover is likely to mean a 
gradual adjustment. Thus, changes in the currency composition in major market segments 
are likely to be gradual, because the respective stocks tend to be large, at least if we assume 
that such changes will occur only through a currency diversification of the respective flows. 
For example, the stock of global foreign exchange reserves at the end of 2007 amounted to 
USD 6.4 trillion. The respective average quarterly flow, i.e. additional reserve accumulation 
by  central  banks  in  2007  was  around  USD  340  billion.  Even  if  we  assumed  for  illustrative 
purposes that from now on 50% of newly accumulated reserves would be invested in euro-
denominated assets (which is unlikely to materialise in reality), the share of the euro in the 
stock of global foreign exchange reserves would rise only gradually, as illustrated in Chart 7. 
A  similar  hypothetical  computation  can  be  made  for  the  international  debt  security  market 
(see also Chart 7). 
What  role  do  macroeconomic  and  structural  policies  play  in  determining  the  euro’s 
international potential and prospects? And, more specifically, what is the likely impact of the 
ECB’s monetary policy and the performance of its other tasks on the attractiveness of the 
euro as an international currency? The position of the ECB on the international role of the 
euro has been clearly stated from the start. The ECB considers the global use of the euro as 
the outcome of a market-driven process that reflects all the factors influencing the demand 
by global market participants and non-euro area public authorities for the functions the euro 
performs. Therefore, the ECB takes a neutral stance and does not directly promote or hinder 
the international use of the euro. At the same time, the ECB may indirectly support the euro’s 
international role by preserving price stability in the euro area and by performing other tasks 
that  contribute  to  the  integration,  development  and  the  safeguarding  of  the  stability  of  the 
euro  area’s  financial  system.  When  international  investors  and  savers  choose  the  euro  as 
their  preferred  international  currency,  they  express  their  confidence  in  the  ECB’s  ability  to 
preserve the purchasing power of the single currency and in the ECB’s credible commitment 
to maintain price stability. 
The  pursuit  of  sound  fiscal  policies  by  the  euro  area  countries,  and  the  implementation  of 
reforms  that  enhance  the  growth  potential  and  dynamism  of  the  euro  area  economy,  and 
foster  the  further  integration  and  development  of  Europe’s  financial  markets  are  also 
important for supporting the euro’s international attractiveness and preserving confidence in 
its  external  value  over  the  longer  run.  The  EU’s  fiscal  policy  framework  contributes  to  the 
conduct of sound budgetary policies that support the stability-oriented single monetary policy 
and  help  establish  favourable  conditions  for  sustained  growth.  International  market 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2008
participants  are  aware  of  the  importance  of  the  effective  functioning  of  the  fiscal  policy 
framework for the long-term stability and growth of the euro area’s economy, which underpin 
the  relative  international  attractiveness  of  its  currency.  Moreover,  the  implementation  of 
structural  reforms  is  essential  to  reduce  the  gap  between  the  euro  area  and  the  United 
States  with  regard  to  productivity  growth,  the  level  of  labour  utilisation  and  the  degree  of 
financial development. In this way, the relative potential growth performance of the euro area 
economy  will  be  strengthened.  As  the  recent  experience  in  European  countries  has 
demonstrated, reforms are paying off by contributing to significant employment growth and 
productivity gains, and there is growing acceptance by the public of such structural reforms. 
Concluding remarks  
IV.  
In conclusion, I would like to make two final points. First, the longer-term potential of the euro 
as  an  international  currency  will  depend  on  the  relative  performance  of  the  euro  area 
economy and the euro’s stability and credibility. The ECB is committed to preserving price 
stability and the prospects for enhanced efficiency and higher longer-term growth in the euro 
area  are  improving.  The  policies  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  the  US  economic 
authorities also aim at price stability and strong sustained growth. It is therefore difficult to 
assess the longer-term effects of economic policies and performances on the relative role of 
the  euro  and  the  US  dollar  as  international  currencies.  Other  determining  factors  will  also 
play a role. The likely outcome is the coexistence of two strong international currencies in the 
longer run.  
Second,  a  further  expansion  of  the  euro’s  international  role  and  greater  integration  and 
development of the euro area’s financial markets can be expected to positively contribute to 
global  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability,  as  a  result  of  the  impact  of  the  euro  area’s 
stability-oriented  monetary  policy  and  increased  international  risk  diversification.  These 
observations  highlight  the  importance  of  strengthening  the  cooperation  between  the 
Eurosystem and major central banks in the world. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 BIS Review 62/2008 
 5
    6 
 BIS Review 62/2008
    7
BIS Review 62/2008 
   8 
     BIS Review 62/2008
     BIS Review 62/2008 
 9
