Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy from a historical perspective 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
conference to mark the 100th anniversary of the Association of Norwegian Economists, Oslo, 
16 September 2008. 
The text may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Introduction 
Let me begin by offering my congratulations to the Association of Norwegian Economists on 
its  100th  anniversary.  One  hundred  is  a  respectable  age.  In  Norway,  the  introduction  of  a 
university degree in economics was certainly an important stimulus in the first part of the last 
century. In the period since the Second World War, major changes in society have increased 
the demand for expertise in the field of economics.  
And economists are constantly gaining new insights. This also applies to the field of central 
banking, even though one of the fundamental central bank responsibilities – to safeguard the 
value of money – was as important 100 years ago as it is today. Monetary policy in Norway 
has changed considerably over the past 100 years. The government, with the support of the 
Storting, has now defined an objective for monetary policy of low and stable inflation. Norges 
Bank sets its interest rate with a view to achieving price stability. This has not always been 
the case.  
Monetary policy in Norway 
Norges Bank was established in 1816 and was placed directly under the Storting (Norwegian 
parliament). The government had no control or influence. The Bank was authorised to issue 
banknotes that were to serve as legal tender. To ensure stability in the value of money, the 
banknotes were to be redeemable in silver, although this was not achieved until 1842. Later 
– in 1874 – the basis for the monetary system was changed from silver to gold. One year 
 BIS Review 111/2008 
 1
later, in 1875, Norway entered the Scandinavian Currency Union with Sweden and Denmark. 
Norway was a member of the currency union until around the mid-1920s, but after 1914 the 
union lost its practical significance.1  
The  latter  half  of  the  1800s  was  generally  marked  by  stable  prices.  Hence,  when  the  first 
students completed their degree in economics in 1908, price stability was perhaps not the 
main concern of economists.  
  
When the First World War broke out in 1914, confidence in the monetary system faltered. 
The obligation to convert banknotes into gold was suspended. The money supply was out of 
control and inflation rose sharply. It reached 40 per cent in 1918. When Nicolai Rygg took 
office as chairman of the board of Norges Bank in 1920, he regarded it as an obligation to 
restore the gold value of the krone to previous values, i.e. parity policy.2 This was considered 
a pre-condition for restoring confidence in the monetary system and in money as a means of 
payment and saving vehicle.3
                                                  
1   See Jonung (2005) for a more detailed description of the Scandinavian currency union. See also Qvigstad and 
Skjæveland (1994). 
2   As  used  in  the  Norwegian  debate,  “parity  policy”  refers  to  the  monetary  policy  of  the  1920s,  when  the 
Norwegian krone was forced back to its former gold parity by means of highly deflationary policies. (Footnote 
not included in Norwegian text.) 
3   See Ecklund (2008), p.43-44. 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2008
   
The crisis in the 1930s, which severely affected the Norwegian economy, led to changes in 
views  regarding  economic  policy.  The  parity  policy  experience  was  probably  an  important 
reason for this change. As a result, there were few objections when after liberation in 1945, 
the  government  with  the  Storting’s  support  made  decisions  that  under  the  law  were  the 
responsibilities of the central bank. This was the start of a new era of reduced independence 
for  the  central  bank.  The  discount  rate,  for  example,  was  reduced  to  2.5  per  cent  on  the 
recommendation of the government in January 1946. The Bank's task was to implement the 
government's  decisions.  Norges  Bank  nonetheless  played  an  important  role  in  shaping 
monetary policy, for example serving as an interface with international financial community 
and acting as adviser and facilitator.4
In  the  first  decades  after  the  Second  World  War,  it  was  firmly  believed  that  the  economy 
could be fine-tuned in the desired direction by coordinating instruments established by the 
central authorities. In Norway, this resulted in a period of low nominal interest rates set by the 
government authorities, direct regulation of credit through quotas set out in a separate credit 
budget, channelling of loans for special purposes via state banks, regulation of cross-border 
capital movements, a fixed but adjustable krone and occasionally the use of price and wage 
regulation. For a period, regulation and fine-tuning seemed to be having the intended effect. 
But in the 1970s, inflation got out of control in Norway and in a number of other countries. 
The Norwegian economy experienced a price/wage spiral. Although the krone was devalued 
several  times  in  the  10-year  period  from  1976  to  1986  in  pace  with  high  price  and  wage 
inflation, this was nonetheless not sufficient to prevent a decline in the manufacturing sector.  
In  1980,  Odd  Aukrust,  Head  of  Research  in  Statistics  Norway,  stated  the  following  with 
regard to developments in the Norwegian economy: "Unfortunately there is even less reason 
for  optimism  this  time.  It  seems  that  competitiveness  in  Norwegian  manufacturing  will 
deteriorate  in  the  year  ahead.  The  main  problem  is  that  no  one  can  control  price 
                                                 
4   See Ecklund (2008), p.120. 
BIS Review 111/2008 
 3
developments. With annual inflation at approximately 10 per cent, no one dares to invest in 
measures that could stop this price carousel.”5  
High inflation showed that the economic policy framework was not functioning as intended, 
and the importance of providing the economy with a nominal anchor became evident. In the 
light of experience, it became clear that unemployment could not be permanently reduced by 
merely accepting higher inflation.6
One of the first to formulate this clearly in the debate in Norway was then Director General at 
the Ministry of Finance Per Schreiner, who wrote in 1982 that:7
"It has long been a commonly held view in the Nordic countries that a policy choice can be 
made  between  price  stability  and  full  employment.  There  are  strong  indications  that  this 
choice  does  not  exist  […]  Personally,  I  am  no  longer  in  doubt  that  controlling  inflation  is 
essential to achieving other social objectives."  
In  line  with  developments  in  other  countries,  a  shift  in  monetary  policy  also  took  place  in 
Norway. In 1985, legislation was adopted which gave Norges Bank greater independence. 
After the last devaluation in 1986, monetary policy was oriented towards a fixed exchange 
rate. The fixed exchange rate was to be our nominal anchor.  
The fixed exchange rate regime was abandoned in December 1992 in the wake of the crisis 
in  the  European  Monetary  System  (EMS).  The  UK  withdrew  from  the  EMS  and  our 
neighbours  Sweden  and  Finland  also  had  to  accept  a  floating  exchange  rate.  The  crisis 
revealed the built-in weaknesses of a fixed exchange rate regime in a world of free capital 
flows and deep financial markets. And it did indeed finally spread to the Norwegian krone. 
When the fixed exchange rate policy was abandoned, there was a risk that the Norwegian 
economy  might  again  lose  its  nominal  anchor.  But  the  krone  exchange  rate  showed  little 
change, and rapidly found a new range. 
From  1996  the  conditions  necessary  for  exchange-rate  stability  deteriorated.  With  a 
strengthening  of  central  government  finances,  the  minority  government  was  not  able  to 
contribute  sufficiently  to  restraining  growth  in  government  spending.  Wage  growth  was 
substantially higher than in other countries. Moreover, petroleum revenues fluctuated widely 
from  year  to  year  and  turbulence  in  international  financial  markets  spilled  over  to  our 
currency.  The  krone  exchange  rate  fluctuated  in  spite  of  the  active  use  of  Norges  Bank's 
instruments.  Volatility  increased  further  in  1998.  The  Norwegian  krone  fell  in  value.  In 
response to this the interest rate was raised on several occasions through 1998.  
The years between 1996 and 1998 showed that it was difficult to use the interest rate to fine-
tune  the  exchange  rate.  Norges  Bank  Governor  Kjell  Storvik  discussed  the  situation  in  a 
speech  he  gave  in  August  1998:  “Let  us  be  mindful  of  the  well  known  fact  that  a  lower 
exchange-rate  can  amplify  inflation  expectations  and  that  these  expectations  can  in  turn 
contribute  to  expectations  of  a  weaker  exchange  rate,  and  in  themselves  amplify  the 
depreciation tendency. Price expectations would then be self-fulfilling. The interest-rate level 
                                                 
5   Translation of an interview published in the Norwegian newspaper Adresseavisen 27 December 1980. 
6   A  key  element  in  the  Keynesian  way  of  thinking  in  the  1960s  and  1970s  was  that  employment  could  be 
reduced in the long term merely  by  accepting higher inflation. This  was  demonstrated  by the Phillips curve 
(named  after  the  economist  A.W.  Phillips),  which  showed  that  low  unemployment  has  historically 
accompanied high wage growth. In the 1960s, Milton Friedman and Edmund Phelps rejected the idea that this 
empirical  relationship  could  be  used  to  reduce  unemployment  in  the  long  term.  Any  attempt  to  reduce 
unemployment would over time only result in higher inflation, without affecting employment and output. A more 
detailed  discussion  of  these  developments  in  macroeconomic  history  can  be  found  in  Snowdon  and  Vane 
(2005). 
7   See Schreiner (1982). 
4 
 BIS Review 111/2008
that  has  now  been  established  should,  in  addition  to  directly  contributing  to  stabilising  the 
krone exchange rate, also curb price expectations.”8  
In recognition of this fact, Norges Bank gradually gave greater weight to influencing inflation 
developments as a prerequisite for a more stable krone exchange rate over time. As stated 
in  an  article  in  the  Norwegian  daily  newspaper  Aftenposten  in  May  19999:  “In  the 
discretionary assessments on which monetary policy is based, Norges Bank gives weight to 
fundamental preconditions for exchange-rate stability over time. Price and cost inflation must 
be brought down towards the level aimed for by the euro area countries. At the same time 
the  situation  must  be  avoided  whereby  monetary  policy  in  itself  contributes  to  a  downturn 
with deflation.” 
The  division  of  responsibility  in  economic  policy  was  even  more  clearly  defined  when  the 
government presented new economic policy guidelines in March 2001. An inflation target for 
monetary  policy  was  introduced,  with  an  operational  target  for  annual  consumer  price 
inflation  of  close  to  2.5  per  cent  over  time.  The  fiscal  policy  rule  was  also  introduced. 
According  to  this  rule,  the  cyclically  adjusted  non-oil  government  budget  deficit  shall 
correspond  to  the  long-term  real  return  on  the  Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global.  The 
division of responsibility in economic policy has since been the following: 
• 
Monetary policy steers inflation in the medium and long term and can also contribute 
to smoothing swings in output and employment.  
The central government budget – growth in public spending – affects the real krone 
exchange  rate  and  the  size  of  the  internationally  exposed  business  sector  in  the 
long  term.  At  the  same  time,  developments  in  government  expenditure  and 
revenues must ensure a reasonable distribution across generations.  
Wage  formation,  the  structure  of  the  economy  and  incentives  determine  how  well 
and how efficiently we utilise labour and other real economic resources. 
  It is the government that defines the inflation target. Norges Bank sets the interest rate with 
the aim of reaching the inflation target. The Bank must account for its decisions. It does so 
through an annual report on the conduct of monetary policy. The report is submitted to the 
Ministry  of  Finance  to  be  presented  to  the  King  and  communicated  to  the  Storting.  The 
government’s assessment is presented in the annual credit reports. The governor of Norges 
Bank is also required once a year – first in 2003 – to appear at an open hearing on monetary 
policy of the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs.  
What can we learn from history? 
We can learn from history. The experience of the 1970s and 1980s was a costly one. After 
the last devaluation in 1986, a fixed exchange rate policy was introduced and the economy 
went through a period of extensive restructuring. Confidence in the krone had to be restored 
to prevent persistently high inflation. This required very high interest rates. The Norwegian 
economy entered into the deepest recession since the interwar period. Unemployment rose 
from around 2 per cent in 1987 to 6 per cent in the winter of 1992/1993. Many companies 
went  bankrupt  and  households  faced  debt  problems.  There  was  a  crisis  in  the  banking 
sector. Inflation only decreased to 2-3 per cent in the early 1990s. The years between 1986 
and  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  provide  a  realistic  picture  of  the  cost  of  bringing  down 
inflation from a high level.  
                                                 
8   See Storvik (1998). 
9   See Gjedrem ”Challenges in monetary policy”, Aftenposten, 4 May 1999. 
BIS Review 111/2008 
 5
Inflation  has  been  low  and  stable  since  the  mid-1990s  because  the  objective  of  monetary 
policy has been to provide the economy with a nominal anchor. Economic agents should be 
able to rely on the value of money remaining stable over time. High inflation and inflation that 
varies considerably over time result in random changes in the real value of assets and debt. 
This leads to unintended transfers between creditors and debtors. When inflation is high and 
variable over time, the function of prices as an information vehicle is also impaired. When 
inflation  is  low  and  stable,  changes  in  relative  prices  are  more  easily  discernible,  and  it  is 
easier for households and businesses to make decisions about consumption and investment. 
Low  and  stable  inflation  is  the  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  over  time  to 
employment, economic growth and welfare.  
The  central  banks  in  the  first  industrialised  countries  have  attained  a  more  independent 
status over the past 20 years. This is partly because Germany and its firm Bundesbank fared 
better during the period of high inflation in the 1970s and 1980s than many other countries. 
Arguments  in  favour  of  an  independent  central  bank  are  also  found  in  economic  theory. 
Studies by Finn Kydland of Norway and Edward Prescott of the US at the end of the 1970s 
on  economic  policy  rules  were  groundbreaking.10  The  insights  gained  from  these  studies 
provide  arguments  for  ensuring  central  bank  independence  and  deriving  monetary  policy 
objectives. 
History  and  theoretical  studies  have  taught  us  that  adverse  effects  may  occur  if  the 
authorities  do  not  take  into  account  that  households  and  enterprises  are  forward-looking 
when making decisions about consumption, investment, wages and prices. They base these 
decisions their expectations of economic policy in the future, not only on today’s policy. It is 
therefore important that the authorities do not sow doubt, but on the contrary pursue a long-
term and predictable policy. The authorities must be credible and inspire confidence. There 
must be consistency between the stated objectives of economic policy and what is actually 
done  to  achieve  these  objectives.  This  is  the  most  important  reason  why  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy has been delegated to the central bank in Norway, as is the case in other 
comparable countries.  
The question of central bank independence is not new. When Norges Bank was established 
almost  200  years  ago,  there  was  much  discussion  about  where  to  locate  the  head  office. 
Trondheim was chosen and one of the arguments in the debate was that locating the central 
bank  far  from  the  seat  of  government  would  prevent  the  central  bank  from  coming  under 
political pressure. It was not until 1896 that the Storting decided that the central bank should 
be  moved  to  Kristiania  (now  Oslo).  The  strongest  objection  to  relocating  the  central  bank 
from Trondheim to Kristiania was expressed by Director Karl Gether Bomhoff, who  was in 
fact also a friend of Henrik Ibsen from his Dresden period.11 Bomhoff was a member of the 
Bank’s  board  for  35  years,  from  1885  to  1920.  In  1893,  he  became  the  first  permanently 
employed  chairman  of  the  board  and  the  first  director  for  the  entire  central  bank.  He 
emphasised that Norges Bank had to be independent and free of pressure from the political 
authorities and civil servants He stated at the time:12
“As I have said before, I believe that the Bank can be managed just as well from Trondheim 
as  from  Kristiania,  and  I  believe,  better,  because  in  the  capital  city  it  will  be  subject  to 
pressure that it is impossible to know how long the board will be able to resist, since there 
are those in Kristiania, and perhaps also in the government, that  may seek to change the 
Bank’s  objectives.  Norges  Bank  should  be  maintained  as  an  independent  institution  under 
the control of the Storting.” 
                                                 
10   See Kydland and Prescott (1977). 
11   See Figueiredo (2007). 
12   See Borlaug (1999), pp 34-35. 
6 
 BIS Review 111/2008
Geographical distance to markets and government has no significance today, but it may well 
be  said  that  Bomhoff  expressed  thoughts  that  were  articulated  in  more  modern  terms  by 
Kydland and Prescott 70-80 years later. 
History has also taught us that fiscal policy has considerable bearing on the role monetary 
policy can play. If the government's debt is too high, the political authorities have an incentive 
to increase inflation in order to reduce the real value of the debt. It is then difficult to anchor 
inflation  expectations.  No  monetary  policy  can  secure  the  nominal  anchor  if  government 
spending  spins  out  of  control.  Monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  must  therefore  have  a 
common platform. 
The interaction between the political authorities and the central bank can be effective if the 
authorities  take  the  role  of  “leader”,  and  the  central  bank  the  role  of  “follower”.  Inflation 
targeting provides a clear indication as to how the central bank should respond in different 
situations. The political authorities are the “leader” in this interaction. They can internalise the 
central  bank’s  –  the  “follower’s”  –  pattern  of  response  in  their  actions.13  Government 
spending growth can then be decided knowing the effect it will have on interest rates.  
We have also learned from history that financial bubbles and crises occur from time to time. 
Even  though  financial  crises  may  seem  to  be  very  different,  they  usually  have  a  common 
feature. The US economist Hyman P. Minsky was of the view that this could be summed up 
in five stages: First a shock, often triggered by a technological breakthrough or changes in 
legislation and regulation of the business sector, followed by a period of growth – a boom – 
where new technology and opportunities are applied. This turns into euphoria – people get 
carried away. At some point some people wake up and take out their profits by selling. This 
triggers a fall in asset prices and equity prices and ultimately leads to panic and a crash.14 
This is referred to as the Minsky moment.  
We  are  now  in  the  midst  of  a  global  financial  crisis,  which  originated  in  the  US  housing 
market. Combined with new financial instruments that were intended to spread risk – but that 
did not prove to be viable – the US housing crisis has spread to many parts of the world and 
whose  outcome  is  still  unknown.  Seven  or  eight  years  ago,  we  experienced  a  similar 
situation, although not as severe, when the dotcom bubble burst. Many also recall the crises 
in the emerging market economies in Asia, Central Europe and South America ten years ago 
and  the  downturn  in  the  Japanese  economy  in  the  1990s.  Nor  will  we  forget  the  banking 
crises in the Scandinavian countries in the early 1990s. However, financial crises are nothing 
new.  We  also  find  parallels  to  today's  crisis  if  we  go  back  to  the  Great  Depression  in  the 
1930s. If we go much further back in history, to the 1600s, the same phenomenon occurred 
with speculation in the tulip trade. In Holland, they discovered at an early stage that a virus 
could  give  tulips  stripes  and  beautiful  colour.  A  forward  market  for  bulbs  developed  in  the 
1630s.  In  1636  market  prices  rose  sharply  and  in  a  short  time  that  winter  bulb  prices 
increased 25-fold. This did not last. The market collapsed in February 1637 and prices fell to 
5 per cent of earlier levels in the course of few days. Auction lists a hundred years after the 
crisis show prices from one per cent to 0.005 per cent of the level before the collapse.15
Moving  depictions  of  financial  crises  and  their  effect  on  people  can  also  be  found  in 
imaginative  literature.  The  Norwegian  author  Alexander  Kielland  depicts  the  local  financial 
bubble in Stavanger in the 1880s in his book Fortuna. There was a surge in credit growth 
and speculation in commercial bills that did not represent actual values. Speculation formed 
the basis for quick gains and it all ended in bankruptcies and banks that failed. One of the 
                                                 
13   See Borlaug (1999), pp 34-35 
14   For more details on the Minsky moment, see 
www.newyorker.com/talk/comment/2008/02/04/080204taco_talk_cassidy. 
15   For a further account of the tulip bubble in Holland, see NOU 1999:29 ”Commodity derivatives”, p 53. 
BIS Review 111/2008 
 7
climaxes in the book is a scene where Taraldsen – the old messenger from Norges Bank – 
realises that the financial bubble is about to burst: 
…  in  breathless  surprise  Taraldsen  asked  again:  "Aren't  your  bills  of 
exchange to be redeemed today?" 
"No." 
"Mr. Marcussen! People say that you are a jocular man; but this –" "I'm not 
joking – damn it!" 
Old  Taraldsen  straightened  up;  everyone  was  hunched  over  their  work; 
only young Rasmus' eyes met his. The boy was white as a sheet; he began 
to  understand.  It  also  started  to  become  clear  for  old  Taraldsen;  but 
immediately  afterwards,  he  became  very  confused  again;  because  he 
understood  the  entire  scope  of  this;  he  had  the  entire  town's  bills  of 
exchange in his head; and of course he had seen a lot of this kind of thing 
during  his  long  life  but  all  of  those  were  trifles  compared  to  what  would 
happen now. 
His voice shook as he almost ceremoniously asked: 
"Will Carsten Løvdahl's papers be protested?" 
"Yes," replied Marcussen without looking up. 
Old  Taraldsen  trotted  out  of  the  offices;  but  on  the  steps  he  met  the 
messenger from Aktiebanken: "Is it true? – Taraldsen!" 
"Now the entire town is going to collapse," answered the old man, throwing 
up his arms in despair. 
Kielland’s  description  of  a  financial  crisis  and  its  consequences  was  realistic.  There  was 
speculation then and there is speculation today, but in other kinds of financial instruments 
than at that time. We might find employees at Lehman Brothers today who have expressed 
themselves in the same way as old Taraldsen. 
It  seems  to  be  an  inherent  property  in  financial  markets  that  financial  bubbles  and  crises 
occur from time to time. A monetary policy that is oriented towards stabilising inflation and 
inflation  expectations  will  reduce  the  impact.  We  have  seen  that  when  the  interest  rate  is 
raised to restrain the rise in prices for goods and services, it also has the effect of stabilising 
house  and property  prices.  In  some  areas,  however,  regulations  and frameworks  –  cf.  the 
substantial  tax  subsidy  benefiting  homeowners  –  amplify  fluctuations  in  asset  prices  and 
lending. 
Conclusion 
The monetary system has changed through history. If we go far enough back in time, money 
consisted  of  coins  with  a  certain  quantity  of  silver  or  gold.  The  quantity  of  silver  and  gold 
therefore limited the volume of money that could be produced. This ensured that coins were 
attractive  as  a  means  of  exchange  and  as  a  means  of  storing  value.  On  the  other  hand, 
paper  money  cost  almost  nothing  to  produce  and  can  be  therefore  be  printed  in  unlimited 
quantities.  Over  the  past  100  years,  there  have  been  several  periods  when  paper  money 
could be redeemed for silver or gold. For example, this was for a long period the case in the 
Scandinavian  Currency  Union.  In  the  period  after  the  Second  World  War  and  up  to  the 
beginning of the 1970s, the US dollar had a fixed price against gold while other currencies 
had a fixed exchange rate against the US dollar. This was the basis for what was known as 
the Bretton Woods monetary system. Paper money had a value because the central bank 
was obligated to redeem it for gold.  
8 
 BIS Review 111/2008
A system whereby paper money can be redeemed for gold is nevertheless more fragile than 
a system whereby coins must contain a certain quantity of the precious metal. A central bank 
can quickly cease to redeem paper money for gold, or redeem notes at a lower gold price 
than  prevailing  earlier.  This  is  what  happened  when  the  Bretton  Woods  system  collapsed 
after the Federal Reserve was no longer obligated to redeem dollars for gold. 
Today’s  monetary  system  may  even  be  more  fragile.  Gold  and  silver  belong  to  the  past. 
Today  it  is  deposit  money  and  paper  money  that  prevail.  People  must  be  confident  that 
deposit money can be converted into paper money. The central bank must promise that the 
value of paper money is maintained. If people do not believe that the central bank will keep 
its promise, they will want neither deposit money nor paper money. Money will then lose its 
value.  Other  currencies  or  goods  with  direct  utility  value  will  take  over  as  a  means  of 
exchange  and  a  means  for  storing  value.  This  reduces  the  effectiveness  of  the  economic 
system. 
We  are  of  the  view  that  it  is  an  important  but  demanding  task  to  safeguard  the  value  of 
money.  It  is  our  own  economic  policy  that  determines  the  value  of  our  money  in  the  long 
term.  It  is  therefore  important  to  remember  that  price  stability  does  not  come  about  on  its 
own. 
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
• 
Ibsen: 
the  Mask)”, 
Ivo  (2007)  “Henrik 
Ibsen:  Masken  (Henrik 
Borlaug, E. (1999) “Noregs Bank: Grunntrekk i administrasjon, oppgåver og historie 
(Norges Bank: basic aspects of administration, tasks and history)”, Norges Bank.  
Ecklund,  G.  J.  (2008)  “Creating  a  new  role  for  an  old  central  bank:  The  Bank  of 
Norway  1945-1954”,  Series  of  Dissertations  2/2008,  BI  Norwegian  School  of 
Management, Oslo.  
Figueiredo, 
Aschehoug.  
Jonung, L. (2005) “Den skandinaviske myntunionen 1873-1924 – en översikt (The 
Scandinavian Currency Union 1873-1924 – an overview)”, in Eitrheim, Ø. and J. F. 
Qvigstad  (ed.)  “Tilbakeblikk  på  norsk  pengehistorie.  Konferanse  7.  juni  2005  på 
Bogstad gård (Norwegian monetary history in retrospect. Conference, 7 June 2005, 
Oslo)”, Norges Bank’s Occasional Papers No. 37, Norges Bank.  
Kydland,  F.  E.  and  E.  C.  Prescott  (1977)  “Rules  rather  than  discretion:  The 
inconsistency of optimal plans”, Journal of Political Economy, June 1977.  
Minsky, H.P. (1978) "The Financial Instability Hypothesis: A restatement”, Thames 
Papers on Political Economy 78.  
Qvigstad, J.F. and A. Skjæveland (1994) “Valutakursregimer – historiske erfaringer 
og fremtidige utfordringer (Exchange rate regimes – historical experience and future 
challenges)”,  in  Berg,  S.  A.,  J.  F.  Qvigstad  and  K.  Storvik  (ed.)  “Stabilitet  og 
langsiktighet: Festskrift til Hermod Skånland (Stability and a long-term perspective: 
Festschrift for Hermod Skånland)”, Aschehoug.  
Schreiner, P. (1982) "Er Ola Nordmann smart nok? Den fulle sysselsetningen i fare! 
(Is  the  average  Norwegian  smart  enough?  Full  employment  in  jeopardy!)", 
Universitetsforlaget.  
Snowdon,  B.  and  H.  R.  Vane  (2005)  “Modern  macroeconomics:  Its  origins, 
development and current stage”, Edward Elgar.  
        BIS Review 111/2008 
 9
  Steigum,  E.  (2000)  “Samspillet  mellom  pengepolitikken  og  finanspolitikken  ved  et 
inflasjonsmål  (The  interplay  between  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  under  an 
inflation targeting regime)", in Røisland, Ø. and J. F. Qvigstad (ed.) “Perspektiver på 
pengepolitikken (Perspectives on monetary policy)", Norges Bank.  
Storvik, K. (1998) ”Aktuelle økonomiske og pengepolitiske problemstillinger (Current 
economic  and  monetary  policy  issues)”,  address  at  the  43rd  Annual  General 
Meeting of FOREX Norway on 28 August 1998. 
10 
 BIS Review 111/2008
