Nicholas C Garganas: The Greek economy – developments, prospects 
and economic policy challenges  
Speech by Mr Nicholas C Garganas, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the presentation of 
the Bank of Greece Annual Report to the Annual General Meeting of Shareholders, Athens, 
22 April 2008. 
 The main features of economic developments and prospects 
The  main  features  of  economic  developments  during  2007  were  the  international  financial 
turmoil and the rise in food and oil prices. These phenomena marked the second half of 2007 
and  have  continued  into  2008,  leading  to  an  intensification  of  inflationary  pressures  and  a 
slowdown of economic activity. 
These events in the international economy have, not surprisingly, adversely affected inflation 
and  the  rate  of  growth  of  the  Greek  economy.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  GDP  showed  a 
significant deceleration during the second half of 2007. Lower growth is also expected to be 
a feature of 2008. High uncertainty internationally increases the downside risks to growth. At 
the  same  time,  inflation  has  accelerated  in  recent  months,  reflecting  mainly  increased 
imported inflation and, to a smaller degree, higher production costs. 
The consequences of the international financial turmoil for the Greek banking system during 
2007 were limited and, largely, indirect. Greek banks continued to have healthy profits and 
satisfactory  capital  adequacy  ratios 
for 
complacency. Continued turmoil in international financial markets, the fast pace of domestic 
credit  growth  and  the  increasing  penetration  of  Greek  banks  into  new  markets  in 
Southeastern  Europe  all  contribute  to  raising  banks’  risks.  Hence,  managing  these  risks 
effectively is of the essence. 
Macroeconomic imbalances continue to pose a problem for the Greek economy. The current 
account  deficit  widened  further  in  2007  and  reached  a  very  high  level  as  a  percentage  of 
GDP, as domestic savings (which are relatively low) fell well short of domestic investment 
(which is relatively high). Whilst the general government deficit remained for the second year 
in a row below 3% of GDP, imbalances remain high, as reflected in the debt-to-GDP ratio. 
If the negative consequences of the continuing crisis in international financial markets are to 
be minimised, efforts to make the Greek economy more resilient to external shocks have to 
be stepped up. This highlights the importance of continuing fiscal consolidation and efforts to 
raise national savings, increase productivity growth and contain production costs, in order to 
improve the international competitiveness of the economy. 
in  2007.  Nonetheless, 
little  room 
there 
is 
The international and European economic environment 
The  international  financial  turmoil  had  its  origins  in  the  sub-prime  mortgage  market  in  the 
United States. Rising delinquencies in that market disrupted various segments of the money 
markets, in particular the asset-backed commercial paper market. The drying up of liquidity in 
that market caused large losses and asset write-downs by a number of financial institutions 
which had significant exposures to complex structured finance products whose valuation was 
now very uncertain. More generally, international financial institutions are still reducing their 
leverage and the outlook for the international financial system continues to be uncertain. The 
process of significant market correction is still ongoing and has triggered a deep and candid 
review  of  practices,  rules  and  procedures  that  influence  the  functioning  of  international 
financial markets and the behaviour of market participants. 
BIS Review 53/2008 
 1
Whilst  the  world  economy  continued  to  grow  at  a  high  rate  in  2007,  the  fallout  from  this 
turmoil is expected to cause growth to slow to 3.7% in 2008, according to IMF forecasts, from 
4.9%  in  2007.  This  slowdown  is  also  expected  to  affect  the  euro  area,  where  growth  – 
according to the ECB staff projections made at the beginning of March – is expected to be 
between  1.3%  and  2.1%  in  2008,  compared  with  2.6%  in  2007.  The  risks  to  growth  are 
clearly on the downside internationally. Aside from the fact that financial turbulence has been 
spreading to other markets, uncertainty remains high. Rapid economic growth in recent years 
has  been  accompanied  by  a  build-up  of  global  imbalances,  as  low  US  interest  rates 
encouraged high consumer spending and lax lending standards. The problems in the sub-
prime market could be interpreted as merely a manifestation of the deeper problems of the 
world economy, which might jeopardise growth prospects over the medium term. 
At the same time, inflation has been accelerating, as oil and food prices rose sharply again in 
the first quarter of this year. Inflation in the euro area hit 3.6% in March and is expected to 
remain high in the coming months, falling back gradually later in the year. 
Macroeconomic developments in Greece in 2007 and the outlook for 2008 
Economic activity 
These international developments had a limited impact on the Greek economy in 2007. The 
rate of growth was 4.0% in 2007, down slightly from 4.2% in 2006. Thus, the Greek economy 
continued  to  grow  significantly  faster  than  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  in  2007,  with  growth 
driven  mainly,  as  in  previous  years,  by  the  increase  in  domestic  demand  (both  private 
consumption  and  investment);  however,  growth  decelerated  in  the  second  half  of  2007. 
According to Bank of Greece projections compiled at the beginning of the year and published 
in February, GDP growth was expected to be around 3.7% this year. However, the growth 
rate of the Greek economy will probably be lower, to the extent that the slowdown in world 
growth  and  external  demand  is  sharper  than  initially  assumed,  rises  in  oil  and  food  prices 
steeper and financing costs higher. That having been said, it is still expected that growth will 
be higher than in the euro area as a whole. 
Employment and unemployment 
The increase in economic activity in 2007 was accompanied by employment growth of 1.3% 
and  a  reduction  in  the  rate  of  unemployment  by  around  half  a  percentage  point  to  8.3%. 
Nonetheless, it seems that the Greek economy is still characterised by a smaller capacity to 
create  jobs  compared  with  other  countries  in  the  euro  area.  This  can  be  attributed  to  the 
continuing restructuring of the Greek economy (most notably, the decline in agriculture and 
the  ensuing  heavy  job  losses),  labour  market  rigidities  (e.g.  lower  use  of  part-time 
employment),  as  well  as  some  mismatches  between  supply  and  demand  in  the  labour 
market.  Because  of  these  factors,  employment  rates,  especially  for  women,  remain  much 
lower than the EU-15 average. 
Inflation and international price competitiveness 
Average  inflation  in  2007  fell  to  3.0%,  mainly  as  a  result  of  oil  price  developments,  which 
were  later  reversed,  as  well  as  a  slowing  of  the  annual  increase  in  processed  food  prices 
(until September). However, inflation picked up significantly in the last quarter of 2007 and 
the first quarter of 2008, reaching 4.4% in March of this year. It is expected that inflation will 
remain  at  high  levels  in  the  coming  months,  mainly  because  of  the  sharp  increase  in 
imported  inflation,  but  will  gradually  decline  thereafter.  According  to  Bank  of  Greece 
projections compiled at the beginning of the year and published in February, average annual 
inflation in 2008 was expected to be 3.4%. However, certain risks then highlighted now seem 
to  have  materialised,  mainly  as  regards  developments  in  oil  prices  internationally  and  unit 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2008
labour costs domestically; hence, average inflation will be higher than initially projected and 
is expected to be around 4%. There are significant elements of uncertainty surrounding these 
projections  as  regards  international  developments;  the  outcome  of  wage  negotiations  will 
also be of particular importance. It is worth noting that the new National Collective Labour 
Agreement provides for average annual increases in minimum wages of 6.2% in 2008 and 
5.7% in 2009, higher than under the previous two-year agreement (6.2% for 2006 and 5.4% 
for 2007). Therefore, the rise envisaged for this year is higher than the one in 2007. 
Inflation in Greece remains significantly higher than in the euro area as a whole; as a result, 
the  price  competitiveness  of  the  Greek  economy  continues  to  deteriorate.  The  persistent 
positive  inflation  differential  can  be  attributed  to  both  macroeconomic  factors,  related  to 
developments in aggregate demand and production costs, and the fact that certain markets 
do not operate efficiently due to unsatisfactory conditions of competition. 
External balance 
Deteriorating  price  competitiveness  and  low  structural  competitiveness  are  two  factors 
explaining the continuing increase in the current account deficit (from 11.1% of GDP in 2006 
to  14.1%  in  2007).  In  addition,  high  rates  of  growth  of  private  consumption,  which  is  the 
counterpart to low savings, have also contributed to the high and widening current account 
deficit.  The  impact  of  high  trade  deficits  on  the  net  foreign  debt  of  the  Greek  economy  is 
reflected  in  increased  net  interest  payments,  which  act  to  further  increase  the  current 
account  deficit.  Prospects  for  reducing  the  deficit  are  not  particularly  favourable  and  it  is 
expected  that  in  2008  it  will  remain  almost  unchanged  as  a  percentage  of  GDP,  if  not 
increase.  
Fiscal developments and prospects 
As regards fiscal aggregates, the general government deficit reached 2.8% of GDP in 2007, 
compared with 2.6% in 2006, mainly as a result of one-off factors. The consolidated general 
government  debt  fell  only  slightly  from  95.3%  to  94.5%  of  GDP  and  remains  the  second 
highest among the EU-27 countries. 
The Updated Stability and Growth Programme for the period 2007-2010 envisages a fiscal 
tightening in 2008, with the general government deficit projected to fall to 1.6% of GDP and 
debt to 91%. Nonetheless, the pace of debt reduction remains slow, especially in the context 
of  the  expected  increases  in  expenditure  in  the  coming  years  as  a  consequence  of 
population ageing. 
Monetary policy, interest rates and credit expansion 
In the euro area, the risks to the short-term inflation outlook are on the upside; the latest data 
on macroeconomic aggregates point to ongoing but moderating real GDP growth; uncertainty 
due to the financial turmoil remains high. In the light of these developments, the European 
Central Bank has kept its key interest rates unchanged since June 2007. In its last meeting 
on 10 April 2008, the Governing Council of the ECB confirmed, on the basis of an analysis of 
the latest data, its assessment of prevailing upside risks to price stability over the medium 
term.  As  price  stability  is  the  ECB’s  primary  objective  according  to  its  mandate,  the 
Governing Council judged that stabilising medium- and long-term inflation expectations is its 
highest priority; hence, it kept the interest rates unchanged. Thus, the minimum bid rate on 
the main refinancing operations remains at 4%. The Governing Council also underlined that 
the current monetary policy stance will help achieve this objective and reiterated its strong 
commitment  to  preventing  the  materialisation  of  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the 
medium term. 
BIS Review 53/2008 
 3
The hikes in the minimum bid rate on the main refinancing operations of the ECB, along with 
higher  money  market  rates,  had  an  upward  effect  on  interest  rates  on  both  deposits  and 
loans  in  Greece  (although  their  rise  was,  in  general,  smaller  than  in  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole).  However,  whilst  the  rate  of  growth  of  the  overall  financing  of  the  economy  slowed 
during  2007,  it  remained  at  the  relatively  high  level  of  13.1%  in  the  fourth  quarter.  This 
reflects the high rate of financing of the private sector (both firms and households), while the 
rate  of  financing  of  the  government  sector  was  negative  throughout  2007.  These  figures 
suggest that the international financial turmoil had no impact on the supply of bank financing 
to the domestic private sector until the end of 2007. 
Stability of the banking system 
In  spite  of  the  continuing  international  financial  turmoil,  the  stability  of  the  Greek  banking 
system has remained high, supported by – inter alia – satisfactory levels of profitability and 
capital  adequacy.  Greek  banking  groups’  capital  adequacy  ratio,  which  stood  at  11.2%  at 
end-2007, continues to provide satisfactory leeway for ensuring the stability of the banking 
system.  Greek  banks  had  very  little  exposure  to  instruments  associated  with  the  US  sub-
prime  mortgage  market  and  this  largely  explains  the  fact  that  the  impact  from  the 
international turbulence was limited and indirect. 
Nonetheless, one should not lose sight of the fact that the current turmoil in the international 
financial  system  has  acquired  a  dynamic  driven  by  self-feeding  and  interdependent  risks. 
Therefore, its impact does not regard only the degree of individual banks' direct exposure, 
but also the risk that the turmoil may take on a more systemic character. At the same time, 
competition in the domestic Greek banking market is becoming more intense and the cost of 
financing is increasing, leading to a small decline in net interest rate margins in 2007 over 
2006 (at bank level). It is important that banks do not try to make up for this decline by further 
credit  expansion,  especially  to  borrowers  of  low  credit  quality.  While  the  ratio  of  non-
performing loans to total loans fell further to 4.5% at end-2007, from 5.4% at end-2006, it is 
still considerably higher than the EU average. 
In the light of these developments, the points that the Bank of Greece has been stressing for 
some time have become even more relevant. In particular, banks need to further improve the 
quality of their loan portfolios by implementing stricter criteria when selecting borrowers. The 
implementation  of  the  new  supervisory  framework  (“Basel  II”)  should  help  in  this  respect. 
Also,  households  must  weigh  carefully  their  ability  to  service  a  loan  before  resorting  to 
lending. 
Growth prospects, structural weaknesses and macroeconomic imbalances 
The high levels of growth witnessed over the last 12 years have led to considerable progress 
in the real convergence of the Greek economy on the more advanced economies of the EU. 
However, Greece still lags behind in terms of levels of development and social welfare, as 
per capita GDP (in purchasing power parities) falls short of the EU-15 average by 11.6%, as 
a result of lower productivity (measured per hour of work) and lower employment rates. In 
addition, there are serious macroeconomic imbalances and structural weaknesses, which are 
reflected  in  relatively  high  inflation,  a  large  current  account  deficit,  which  has  pushed  up 
Greece’s  external  debt  considerably,  and  high  public  debt.  Finally,  challenges  such  as 
population  ageing,  globalisation  and,  more  immediately,  a  slowdown  in  world  growth  will 
make  it  difficult  for  such  growth  rates  to  be  maintained  in  the  future  without  more  intense 
efforts to tackle the structural weaknesses of the economy. 
The average growth rate of almost 4% achieved over the last 12 years was primarily driven 
by boosting domestic demand. Private sector consumption and investment were bolstered by 
the fall in interest rates following Greece’s euro area entry, as well as by rapid credit growth. 
Relatively  high  fiscal  deficits,  although  declining  in  recent  years,  also  helped  to  boost 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2008
aggregate  demand,  but  at  the  same  time  contributed  to  a  further  accumulation  of  public 
sector  debt.  Productive  capacity,  which  has  increased,  has  responded  to  the  growth  of 
demand, but not to a sufficient extent, thus resulting in an excess demand situation. 
Demand-led growth has its own natural limits. Based as it is on the build-up of debt (both 
private and public) to finance consumption, ultimately an increasing proportion of GDP will 
have to be devoted to its repayment. As a consequence, only through a transformation of the 
economy into a more productive and outward-looking one will it be possible to maintain such 
high growth rates. Such a transformation should focus on three areas: first, continuing fiscal 
consolidation; second, adopting wage and pricing policies consistent with price stability; and 
third, promoting structural reforms to improve productivity and the supply conditions of the 
economy and to strengthen competition. 
Correcting fiscal imbalances 
The demands that population ageing will place on government expenditure make the need 
for continued fiscal consolidation even more pressing. In particular, a reduction in public debt 
by 2015 (when the effects of population ageing on government spending will be first felt) to 
60% of GDP is of the essence. Hence, more intense efforts are needed, focused on both the 
revenue  and  the  expenditure  sides  of  the  budget.  It  is  not  in  the  interests  of  the  low 
competitiveness  of  the  Greek  economy  to  raise  tax  rates;  there  is,  however,  still  room  to 
reduce tax evasion as a means of raising revenue. However, crucial to achieving surpluses is 
the  control  of  expenditure,  in  particular  of  certain  categories  such  as  personnel  outlays, 
subsidies  or  guarantees  for  public  sector  companies,  which  account  for  a  large  part  of 
government expenditure and have been growing very fast. 
Wage increases, pricing policy and competition  
Wage  bargaining  should  take  into  account  productivity  developments,  the  implications  of 
wage increases for price competitiveness, as well as the level of unemployment. The rise in 
oil  prices  inevitably  represents  a  transfer  of  income  from  oil-importing  to  oil-exporting 
countries, which cannot be effectively offset by nominal wage increases, since these lead to 
higher inflation which erodes the purchasing power of domestic incomes. At the same time, 
competition  should  be  strengthened  in  markets  operating  inefficiently,  so  that  firms  can 
contribute, through their pricing policies, to an evolution of prices which is compatible with 
production  cost  developments  and  with  keeping  profit  margins  at  levels  that  do  not 
undermine price stability and competitiveness. 
Structural policies for increasing employment and improving productivity 
Structural  reforms  must  continue  in  order  to  improve  productivity  and  the  structural 
competitiveness of the Greek economy. 
Increasing employment  
Greece has lower employment rates and higher unemployment rates in comparison with the 
EU-15  averages.  Demographic  projections  suggest  that  Greece  will  experience  over  the 
coming years a decline in the working-age population. Growth will therefore depend, in part, 
on raising employment rates by increasing the flexibility of labour markets, bringing into the 
labour  market  sections  of  the  population  with  relatively  low  participation  rates  (especially 
women and older people) and continuously upgrading the skills of the labour force. 
BIS Review 53/2008 
 5
Improving productivity 
Growth  should  also  be  based  on  bolstering  labour  productivity.  Improving  productivity 
requires  first  and  foremost  a  modernisation  of  the  business  environment.  Policies  in  a 
number of areas could help here. 
The  strengthening  of  competition  in  product  markets  can  encourage  innovation  and  the 
implementation of measures to reduce production costs. Competition can be encouraged by 
removing  barriers  to  business  start-ups  and  reducing  the  complexity  of  the  regulatory 
environment surrounding firms. 
Productivity  levels  in  business  also  depend  on  the  efficiency  of  public  administration.  It  is 
commonly  agreed  that  inefficient  staff  allocation  and  the  operational  framework  of  public 
administration do not meet the requirements of the Greek society and economy in an efficient 
manner, while reform proceeds at a relatively slow pace. In order to reap the full benefits of 
the  introduction  of  information  and  communication  technologies  in  public  administration, 
training of personnel and upgrading administrative procedures are essential. 
Creating the conditions in which economies of scale can be exploited is also important for 
improving  productivity  levels.  In  the  past,  the  small  scale  of  Greek  enterprises  severely 
hindered their ability to exploit economies of scale. However, globalisation and the opening 
up  of  markets  in  the  region  have  weakened  this  constraint.  Additionally,  the  creation  of 
clusters  of  firms  with  similar  activities  can  also  help  smaller  companies  benefit  from 
economies of scale by cooperating in cost sharing, know-how transfer and specialisation of 
services and products. 
A  second  area  which  can  contribute  considerably  to  raising  productivity  is  that  of 
infrastructure.  Despite  the  progress  made,  there  is  ample  room  for  improvements  in  the 
areas  of  both  transport  (land,  sea  and  air)  and  network  industries  (energy,  water  and 
communications). 
Finally, investment in both human and physical capital has an important role to play. With the 
opening  up  of  new  markets  in  the  region,  investment  in  physical  capital  has  now  become 
more attractive. Of equal importance is investment in human capital through education and 
vocational training. Whilst in Greece the percentage of 20-24 year olds who have finished at 
least  high  school  education  is  higher  than  in  the  EU-15  countries  (84.1%,  compared  with 
76.4%), the results of the PISA exams designed by the OECD to test knowledge and skills 
showed  Greek  students  performing  much  worse  than  students  from  the  other  EU-15 
countries.  At  the  same  time,  although  technology  is  evolving  rapidly,  the  percentage  of 
companies in Greece offering on-the-job training for their employees is lower than in the EU-
15,  while  the  participation  of  the  population  in  life-long  training  programmes  is  low.  These 
observations suggest a need for closer cooperation between the education system, firms and 
research centres. 
Since  many  of  the  interventions  proposed  can  be  financed  by  the  Community  Support 
Frameworks, they will not place an undue burden on public finances. 
Conclusions  
The  best  way  to  minimise  the  negative  consequences  for  the  Greek  economy  from  the 
continued crisis in the international financial system, external inflationary pressures and the 
expected  slowdown  in  the  growth  of  world  economic  activity  is  to  continue  the  efforts  to 
improve the fundamentals of the economy. 
The aforementioned policies will bear fruit in terms of further raising living standards. In the 
last 12 years, real per capita GDP has risen by a cumulative 51%. However, despite strong 
growth, 13% of employed persons, 25% of pensioners and 33% of unemployed persons are 
still  below  the  poverty  line.  Moreover,  in  between  households  that  have  already  benefited 
from growth and enjoy increasingly high incomes, on the one hand, and poor households, on 
6 
 BIS Review 53/2008
the  other  hand,  there  is  also  a  considerable  number  of  households  living  on  the  verge  of 
economic and social insecurity. 
While the establishment of the National Fund for Social Cohesion is a positive step towards 
tackling  poverty  and  inequality,  in  itself  it  is  not  enough.  It is  also  necessary  to  implement 
policies for reducing unemployment, raising the percentage of skilled workers and facilitating 
labour market entry.  
To conclude, therefore, if living standards are to continue rising and the problems of poverty 
and  inequality  are  to  be  tackled,  it  is  necessary  to  place  much  greater  emphasis  on 
productivity-driven  growth.  Demand-driven  growth  which  is  not  accompanied  by  rising 
productivity has its own natural limits and cannot be expected to shelter the Greek economy 
from  the  impact  of  a  possible  slowdown  in  world  growth  and  a  rise  in  world  inflation.  By 
contrast,  policies  to  improve  productivity  can  better  insulate  the  economy  from  external 
shocks and lay more solid foundations for higher living standards in the future. 
BIS Review 53/2008 
 7
