Jean-Claude Trichet: Structural reforms for the European economy 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Forum 
ABC, Madrid, 15 February 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would first like to thank very warmly the organisers for inviting me to speak here today in the 
context  of  the  series  of  conferences  organised  by  the  “Forum  ABC”.  In  my  intervention  I 
would like to share with you my views on “Structural reforms for the European economy” and 
on the importance such reforms have for job creation and productivity growth. This is indeed 
a major policy issue and, I believe, a topic of great interest to everyone here too. After all, 
high employment and high productivity levels are the key preconditions for a high level of real 
income and living standards in our societies. 
If we look back over the last decade, employment growth has been strong in the euro area 
and  even  more  so  in  Spain.  However,  over  the  same  period,  labour  productivity  growth 
decelerated significantly in the euro area and in Spain in particular. A key challenge therefore 
is how to simultaneously achieve solid employment and productivity growth.  
It  is  well-established  in  the  economic  literature  that  structural  reforms  and  institutions  are 
among the main factors that explain the different performance of per capita income growth 
across countries over the medium to long term. By structural reforms and institutions I am 
here referring not only to the effective functioning of labour, product and financial markets, 
but  also  to  the  general  framework  configuring  the  environment  in  which  economic  agents 
make decisions regarding their investment in businesses, education, innovation, etc. 
Experience  shows  that,  it  is  not  easy  to  carry  through  some  structural  reforms  at  least. 
However,  it  is  particularly  important  to  resolutely  pursue  such  reforms  in  the  current 
environment, which includes a number of important challenges, such as rapid technological 
change,  accelerating  globalisation  and  ageing  populations.  This  applies  to  the  Spanish 
economy as well as to all other economies members of the euro area.  
I will first compare the economic growth performance of the euro area with that of the United 
States,  focusing  on  some  of  the  underlying  factors  of  potential  output  growth.  Then  I  will 
elaborate  on  the  structural  reforms,  which  I  consider  to  be  most  essential  to  increase  the 
potential growth rate of the European economies. 
The economic performance of the euro area since the mid-1990s. 
I.  
Since 1995, the annual growth rate of the euro area has averaged 2.2% per year compared 
with 3.1% in the United States. What are the fundamental causes of this lower trend growth 
in the euro area? The answers can be found by looking at the factors determining the trend 
in economic growth, namely employment growth, which in turn is related to labour utilisation 
and, demographic trends; and productivity growth.1  
As regards labour utilisation, defined as the total number of annual hours worked divided by 
total population, the euro area outperformed the United States. Over the period 1995-2007 it 
increased by 0.5% per year on average in the euro area compared with 0.2% in the United 
States. With a rise in labour utilisation of 2.0% on average per year over the same period, the 
Spain’s performance was even more impressive.  
                                                 
1   Source European Commission, AMECO database and OECD for hours worked for the US. Moreover, data for 
2007 are partly estimates. The last update of the AMECO database was November 2007. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 1
In the euro area, the improvement in labour utilisation mainly reflects the significant rise in 
the euro area overall employment rate from 58% in 1995 to 65.6% in 2007,2 which has been 
accompanied by a decline in the aggregate unemployment rate from 10.4% in 1995 to 7.2% 
in December 2007.3 The latest number is the lowest on record since the early 1990s.  
In fact, since the beginning of EMU in 1999 the euro area has witnessed an increase of more 
than 15 million in the number of people employed, while from 1990 to 1998, this number only 
increased by around 3 million. 
Spain’s  performance,  with  an  increase  of  more  than  5  million  in  the  number  of  people 
employed over the period 1999-2007, has been simply remarkable.  
These  are  encouraging  developments,  which  show  that  past  labour  market  reforms, 
immigration  and  wage  moderation  have  helped  to  overcome  some  of  the  constraints  on 
growth  stemming  from  rigid  and  over-regulated  labour  markets.  However,  despite  this 
progress, we are still a long way from having exhausted the potential for further increases in 
participation rates and employment. The overall employment rate in the euro area remains 
low  by  international  standards  [65.6%  in  the  euro  area  compared  with  72%  in  the  United 
States,4 and the unemployment rate is still clearly too high [7.2% compared with 5.0% in the 
United States at the end of 2007].5 More specifically, while the prime-age male employment 
rate  in  the  euro  area  is  comparable  to  that  observed  in  the  United  States,  considerable 
disparities remain when we look at youth, female and older worker employment rates. [For 
instance, in 2007 the female employment rate was 57.9% in the euro area compared with 
66.1% in the United States, the older workers employment rate was 43.6% compared with 
61.8%  in  the  United  States,  and  the  youth  employment  rate  was  38%  as  compared  with 
54.2% in the United States]. These features of the euro area, which incidentally – are broadly 
shared  by  the  Spanish  labour  market,  appear  to  be  consistent  with  an  “insider-outsider” 
characterisation of the European labour market, where structural impediments, triggered by 
the  legal  and  regulatory  environment,  high  taxes  on  labour  and  rigidities  associated  with 
wage regulations may prevent those groups “at the margin” from actively participating in the 
labour market.  
The  figures  I  have  just  mentioned  suggest  that,  overall,  structural  reforms  in  the  labour 
market still need to be high on the agenda. This appears even more urgent if we consider 
that  in  the  past  Europe’s  growth  performance  has  been,  and  will  be  in  the  future  (all  else 
equal),  increasingly  constrained  by  its  low  population  growth  rate  and  population  ageing. 
Indeed, since the mid 1990’s, population in the euro area has been growing at a yearly rate 
of just 0.4% compared to 1.1% in the US. However, what is worrisome is that at the same 
time, the gap in population growth has been even larger with regard to growth in the working 
age population. The working age population grew on average by 0.3% per year in the euro 
area over the period 1995-2007 compared to 1.2% in the US (1.1% in Spain). 
Finally, turning to labour productivity, while during the 1980s and the first half of the 1990s, 
hourly labour productivity in the euro area grew on average by 2.3%, it slowed down to 1.3% 
between 1995 and 2007. Similarly, over the same period hourly labour productivity growth in 
Spain  decelerated  very  significantly  from  2.5%  to  0.5%.  By  contrast,  US  hourly  labour 
productivity growth rose from 1.4% to 1.8%. 
The positive labour supply shock, reflected by the increase of employment particularly in the 
unskilled segment of the labour market experienced in the euro area as well as in Spain has, 
                                                 
2   Average to 2007Q3. 
3   Source Eurostat. 
4   Data related to employment rates for the euro are available to 2007Q3 and 2006 for the United States. 
5   Data refer to December 2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2008
to  a  certain  extent,  contributed  to  the  disappointing  productivity  growth.  However,  this 
slowdown in labour productivity growth can be largely attributed to a marked deceleration of 
total factor productivity growth. Indeed, in the euro area and Spain, TFP growth decelerated 
from 1.4% over the period from 1980 to 1995 to 0.7% and 0.1% respectively between 1995 
and 2007.  
There  are  many  potential  factors  explaining  the  decline  in  total  factor  productivity  growth. 
Among the most prominent causes are those structural features of the European economies 
that  are  undermining  incentives,  including  innovations,  to  invest  in  real  and  human  capital 
and  that  reduce  the  flexibility  of  firms  to  smoothly  and  quickly  adjust  to  their  new 
environment.  Some  empirical  evidence  has  shown  that  the  structural characteristics  of  the 
US  economy  –  a  more  flexible  labour  market,  a  higher  degree  of  competition  in  product 
markets and lower barriers to entry for new firms – were more conducive to exploiting the 
opportunities  provided  by  the  new  technologies.6  The  gap  in  labour  productivity  growth 
between  the  euro  area  and  the  United  States  has  been  driven  mainly  by  market  services 
sectors namely the “wholesale and retail trade” and the “financial” sectors, intensively using 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs),7 reflecting to some extent, the lack of 
competition in these particular sectors in Europe and the need to further deepen and extend 
the EU internal market. 
The need for further structural reforms in Europe 
II.  
Long-standing structural rigidities are, in my view, the major cause of the difference in the 
growth potential in Europe compared with the United States and with some other advanced 
industrialised  economies.  The  experience  of  European  countries,  which  have  undertaken 
some  courageous  and  successful  structural  reforms  as  well  as  increased  the  degree  of 
openness of their economies, is encouraging. In Spain for instance, several specific factors 
may  have  contributed  to  the  positive  labour  market  development,  I  mentioned  before.  The 
substantial  migration  flows  registered  over  that  period,  coupled  with  some  elements  of 
flexibility provided by short-term contracts, have supported job creation and allowed potential 
bottlenecks  in  a  number  of  fast-growing  segments  of  the  labour  market  (in  particular 
construction, tourism and services for households) to be contained.  
Coming  back  to  the  euro  area,  without  aiming  to  be  exhaustive,  I  should  like  to  highlight 
some of the key priorities for reform in three main areas, namely (i) getting more people into 
work; (ii) increasing competition; and (iii) supporting an innovative environment. 
Getting more people into work 
First  of  all,  well-functioning  labour  markets  are  indispensable  in  fostering  higher  economic 
growth in the euro area. The still relatively high unemployment rates in the euro area clearly 
suggest that there is a need to spur not only labour supply but also labour demand.  
                                                 
6   See,  for  example,  A.  Alesina,  S.  Ardagna,  G.  Nicoletti  and  F.  Schiantarelli  (2005),  “Regulation  and 
investment”,  Journal  of  the  European  Economic  Association  3,  pp.  791-825,  in  which  the  authors  find  that 
regulatory  reforms  have  had  a  significant  positive  impact  on  capital  accumulation  in  the  transport, 
communication  and  utilities  sectors,  especially  in  the  long  run.  In  G.  Nicoletti  and  S.  Scarpetta  (2003), 
“Regulation,  productivity  and  growth”,  Economic  Policy,  April,  the  authors  find  that  various  anti-competitive 
product market regulations significantly reduce total factor productivity growth at the industry level. J. Albert, 
G. Nicoletti and S. Scarpetta in their contribution to the conference provide a broad survey of the respective 
literature and some additional evidence. 
7   Over the period 1995-2005, hourly labour productivity in the euro area grew on average by 1.6% and 2.5%, in 
the  “wholesale  and  retail”  and  “financial”  sectors  respectively,  compared  with  3.6%  and  3.4%  in  the  United 
States. Source EUKLEMS database. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 3
As regards labour demand, there is a need to reduce labour market rigidities that currently 
restrict wage differentiation and flexibility and thus tend to hinder the hiring of younger and 
older  workers  in  particular.  Moreover,  in  those  European  countries  and  regions  where 
competitiveness has been lost in the past and/or the unemployment rate remains too high, it 
is important that wage increases do not fully exhaust productivity gains in order to provide 
incentives for firms to create additional jobs. In this respect, sufficient wage differentiation is 
also required to improve the employment opportunities for less skilled-workers where there is 
high unemployment for this category of employees.  
The  extent  to  which  an  increase  in  nominal  wage  growth  leads  to  upward  pressure  on 
inflation depends crucially on trend labour productivity growth. Under normal circumstances, 
stronger labour productivity growth would justify an increase in nominal wage growth, thus 
allowing  wage  earners  to  participate  in  economic  growth  without  adding  to  inflationary 
pressures. But, for the same reason, without sustained improvements in labour productivity, 
higher  nominal  wages  would  not  lead  to  improvements  in  real  purchasing  power,  but 
undermine job creation and fuel inflationary pressures. Against this background, the ECB’s 
Governing  Council  considers  that,  features  enforcing  wage  rigidities  and  leading  to  non-
optimal wage setting – in particular indexation of nominal wages to the consumer price index 
– should be avoided. This is particularly accurate in this period where the euro area economy 
is  currently  in  a  juncture  which  is  dominated  by  exogenous  price  shocks  and  uncertainty 
about  the  outlook  of  the  real  economy.  Headline  inflation  which  has  been  pushed  up  by 
external  pressures  on  energy  and  food  prices,  is  today  significantly  above  2%  in  the  euro 
area and even higher in Spain. We must absolutely avoid the second round effects, namely 
that  these  price  developments  lead  to  futures  increases  of  prices  and  wages  and  thereby 
prolong the period of high inflation and disanchor inflation expectations. 
Finally, as regards labour supply, further reforms in income tax and benefit systems would 
help to increase people’s incentives to work. Reducing disincentives to work, such as high 
marginal tax rates, high unemployment benefits, and encouraging people to work longer as it 
has been done in Spain,8 can stimulate the labour supply and employment of all workers, but 
particularly those with a generally more tenuous attachment to the labour market, such as 
women and older workers. Furthermore, facilitating the use of flexible forms of work, such as 
part-time  and  temporary  arrangements,  may  also  contribute  to  the  incorporation  of  certain 
segments (e.g. the young, females) into the labour market, hence increasing labour supply.9  
In this respect, the experience of some EU Member States is telling. For instance, Ireland 
and the Netherlands – both euro area countries – as well as Denmark, whose currency has 
been pegged to the euro within the ERM since the beginning – have achieved success in 
reducing unemployment and stimulating job creation, despite significantly different economic 
conditions.10  In  December  2007  the  unemployment  rate  in  these  countries  was  close  or 
below 4.5%, while their overall employment rate was well above the euro area average. To 
achieve such remarkable success, these countries reformed their tax and benefit systems by 
reducing,  for  example,  the  tax  wedge  on  labour  income  and  by  enforcing  job search  rules 
more  strictly  and  a  better  monitoring  of  eligibility  for  unemployment  benefits.  They  also 
increased the flexibility of their labour markets.  
What all these countries also have also in common is that they have significantly reduced 
product market regulation. This leads to the second prerequisite for higher potential growth: 
increasing competition in order to establish efficient and well-functioning product markets. 
                                                 
8   Work beyond 65 years of age is being encouraged through a 2% increase per annum in the final pension. 
9   See, for example, V. Genre, R. Gomez-Salvador and A. Lamo (2005): “European Women: Why do (n’t) they 
work?” ECB Working Paper Series, No 454, March 2005. 
10   See A. Annett (2006) “Lessons from successful labour market reformers in Europe” IMF euro area policies: 
selected issues, August 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2008
Increasing competition 
Many studies point to the potential that increasing competition has to increase employment 
and  to  boost  productivity  trends  by  improving  production  efficiency  and  by  enhancing  the 
incentive to invest and innovate.11  
In the European Union, significant progress has been made in strengthening competition and 
increasing economic integration over the last two decades. The initiative of the single market 
has  brought  sizable  benefits  for  the  EU’s  economy.  The  European  Commission  recently 
estimated that the single market has brought about an increase of 2.75 million extra jobs and 
an extra increase in welfare of €518 per head in 2006, corresponding to a 2.15% increase of 
the EU’s GDP over the period 1992-2006.12  
However,  much  remains  to  be  done,  in  particular  in  some  market  services  sectors.  The 
extension  and  deepening  of  the  EU  internal  market  remains  clearly  a  priority  as  regards 
further financial market integration, the pursuit of effective competition in the energy market 
and  the  implementation  of  the  Services  Directive.  The  growing  economic  importance  of 
services13  suggests  that  improvements  in  European  living  standards  are  likely  to  depend 
especially on a high degree of competition and on productivity improvements in the services 
sector.  
Let me now focus more specifically on the financial sectors. Financial integration is indeed of 
key  importance  for  the  ECB,  given  the  relevance  for  the  conduct  of  the  single  monetary 
policy.  The  process  of  European  financial  integration  is  gradually  taking  place  and 
considerable  progress  has  been  made  for  instance  in  capital  markets  and  wholesale 
banking.  However,  the  retail  banking  sector  appears  to  have  not  yet  reached  its  potential, 
and competition seems insufficient in this area leaving European consumers unable to take 
full advantage of the benefits of the EMU and the Single Market.14 This seems also to have 
constrained, to some extent, the economic performance and development of these sectors in 
the euro area. 
More generally speaking, the evidence suggests that the reallocation of capital from declining 
industries  to  industries with  high  investment  opportunities  and  high  productivity  is  faster  in 
countries with developed financial markets. These findings suggest that countries with more 
liquid capital markets and a developed banking system are growing faster on average.15  
Increasing product market competition – at the EU and national levels – would enable more 
efficient production structures. The benefits of opening network industries to competition can 
be  seen  in  the  telecommunications  sector.  The  hourly  labour  productivity  in  this  particular 
sector saw a significant acceleration from 4.5% to 7.3% from the periods 1980-1995 to 1995-
                                                 
11   See the ECB Occasional Paper Series No 44 “Competition, productivity and prices in the euro area services 
sector”, by the Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the ESCB, April 2006. 
12   European Commission, “The single market: review of achievements”, November 2007. 
13   Today, the services sector accounts for 70% of GDP, 68% of employment and 96% of the new jobs created, 
but  only  20%  of  intra-EU  trade.  This  discrepancy  reflects  not  only  the  fact  that  services  often  have  an 
intrinsically  local  character,  but  also  the  many  barriers  and  obstacles  still  hindering  the  free  movement  of 
services within the European Union. 
14   See  P.  Hartmann,  F.  Heider,  E.  Papaioannou  and  M.  Lo  Duca  (2007),  “The  role  of  financial  markets  and 
innovation in productivity and growth in Europe”, ECB Occasional Paper Series, September, as well as ECB 
(2007) “Financial integration in Europe”, Frankfurt a.M: ECB. 
15   Some authors have calculated that if the average size of capital markets in the European Union was bigger - 
in the United States for instance, it is around 450% of GDP instead of 220% as in the European Union (based 
on  an  overall  indicator  measuring  total  financing  in  the  economy  by  aggregating  bank  credit  to  the  private 
sector,  stock  market  capitalisation  and  the  outstanding  amount  of  domestic  debt  securities  issued  by  the 
private sector) - then annual GDP per capita growth in the European Union could be positively influenced (see 
G. Favara (2006), “An empirical reassessment of the relationship between finance and growth”, mimeo). 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 5
2005, and telephone prices charged by the former monopolies for national and international 
calls for instance, fell by more than 40% on average in Europe between 2000 and 2006. This 
supported the purchasing power of consumers, who have now more of their income available 
to spend on goods and services. 
Supporting an innovative environment 
To fully exploit productivity potential, the product market reforms I have just mentioned need 
to  be  accompanied  by  policies  that  support  innovation  and  technological  changes.  These 
include, inter alia, the unlocking of business potential by creating an entrepreneurial-friendly 
economic  environment,  measures  to  support  innovation  through  higher  investment  in 
research and development (R&D) and policies aimed at improving human capital.  
First of all, Europe needs more new and thriving firms willing to reap the benefits of opening 
markets and to embark on creative or innovative ventures for commercial exploitation on a 
larger  scale.  It  is  increasingly  new  and  smaller  firms,  rather  than  large  ones,  that  are  the 
major providers of new jobs. An entrepreneurial-friendly economic environment would imply 
less  red  tape  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  to  help  them  develop  at  home  and 
across borders, as well as positive action to ease access to the finance they need. Europe is 
significantly  lagging  behind  in  this  field.  For  instance,  venture  capital  financing  in  Europe 
remains only a fraction of what it is in the United States relative to the size of each economy.  
Second,  promoting  R&D  investment  is  also  a  major  issue.  While  many  Member  States 
expect to increase their R&D spending, Europe will fall short of the 2010 overall EU target of 
achieving 3% of GDP. In 2005, R&D investment relative to GDP was 1.9% in the euro area 
compared to 2.7% in the US. The efforts of European countries to increase R&D investment 
are still insufficient.16
Finally, to make these measures most effective, they need to be accompanied by efforts to 
improve  the  labour  force’s  level  of  education  and  expertise.  Meeting  the  challenges  of 
innovation  and  its  dissemination  as  well  as  ensuring  the  labour  force’s  employability  and 
flexibility,  requires  that  human  capital  is  continuously  adjusted  to  labour  market  needs 
through improved education and training, as well as lifelong learning. Europe is still badly in 
need in Europe to enhance the quality and efficiency of our schools and universities as well 
as  to  increase  incentives  for  all  relevant  parties,  including  firms  and  workers  to  invest  in 
human capital. 
Before concluding, let me insist on the importance of sound fiscal management in line with 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Sound  public  finances  are  a  prerequisite  to  support  long-
lasting growth of output and employment, as the Spanish experience over the last decade 
has clearly shown. A complacent attitude related to current buoyant tax revenue that might 
result  in  higher  expenditure  could  lead  to  negative  surprises,  should  the  macroeconomic 
environment turn less favourable.  
Beyond that, the “quality” of public finances also matters for growth. It is essential to increase 
public spending efficiency in order to facilitate the reorientation of public expenditure towards 
productivity-enhancing physical and human capital accumulation. 
And  finally,  let  me  remind  you  that  within  our  currency  union,  regional  monetary  and 
exchange  rate  policies  are  no  longer  viable  options.  Flexible  and  integrated  labour  and 
product markets are prerequisites of the utmost importance for the smooth functioning of the 
                                                 
16   In the spring 2006 European Council, Member States announced country-specific targets for R&D expenditure 
amounting to 2.7% of EU25 GDP by 2010, up from 1.9% in 2006. The European Commission estimated that if 
Member  States  achieve  their  targets,  R&D  activities  will  rise  by  50%  in  2025,  generating  an  increase  of 
between  2.6%  and  4.4%  in  GDP  on  the  basis  of  conservative  assumptions  (see  report  from  European 
Commission “Implementing the renewed Lisbon strategy for growth and jobs: A year of delivery” (2007)). 
6 
 BIS Review 18/2008
euro area, and are crucial to maintaining and ensuring the competitiveness of the individual 
European companies over the medium to long run. We should keep in mind that in a context 
of monetary union, not only fiscal policies, but also price competitiveness and unit labour cost 
developments across countries should be continuously and closely monitored. 
Conclusions 
III.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to conclude by stressing a few points.  
Europe  is  in  the  process  of  reforming  its  economy  so  as  to  adapt  to  the  challenges  of 
globalisation,  technological  change  and  an  ageing  population.  Significant  progress  has 
already  been  made  as  reflected  by  the  notable  rise  in  employment  growth  over  the  last 
decade.  
Monetary Union has been effective – and hugely successful – in supporting growth through a 
credible monetary policy that delivers price stability in the medium run, hence contributing to 
lower financing costs in the euro area through a reduction of risk premia. It has also given a 
further impetus to resolute European integration, particularly in financial markets. 
The challenges ahead are a reminder that European integration is a dynamic process and 
that it will bring about deeper structural transformations. The historical process of European 
integration  is  moving  forward  steadily  and  will  require  all  our  efforts  and  commitment  for 
years to come. I am personally convinced that Europe can meet the challenges I mentioned 
and I am therefore thoroughly optimistic for the future of Europe. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 7
