European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
5 June 2008. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press  conference.  This week  we  celebrated  the  tenth  anniversary  of  the  ECB,  marking  an 
important milestone in the development of this institution and of the single monetary policy. 
On that occasion I expressed my sincere thanks to all those who have helped to build a solid 
foundation for the euro. Let me also extend these thanks to you who play such an important 
role in transmitting our decisions and explanations to the financial markets and to the public 
at large.  
We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council, which was 
also attended by the President of the Eurogroup, Prime Minister Juncker.  
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. At the same time, we noted that risks to 
price  stability  over  the  medium  term  have  increased  further.  Inflation  rates  have  risen 
significantly since the autumn of last year, owing mainly to strong increases in energy and 
food prices. HICP inflation is now expected to remain high for a more protracted period than 
previously thought. Upside risks to price stability over the medium term are also confirmed by 
the  continuing  very  vigorous  money  and  credit  growth  and  the  absence  of  significant 
constraints on bank loan supply up to now. At the same time, the economic fundamentals of 
the  euro  area  are  sound.  Against  this  background,  we  emphasise  that  maintaining  price 
stability in the medium term is our primary objective in accordance with our mandate. The 
Governing Council is monitoring very closely all developments. It is in a state of heightened 
alertness . By acting in a firm and timely manner, we will prevent second-round effects and 
ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise. It is our strong 
determination to secure a firm anchoring of medium and long-term inflation expectations in 
line with price stability.  
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis.  
At a quarter-on-quarter rate of 0.8%, real GDP growth in the first quarter of 2008 was well 
above expectations. In part, this strength reflected temporary factors, notably the unusually 
mild  winter  in  many  parts  of  Europe,  which  appears  to  have  boosted  construction  activity. 
However, the high growth rate in the first quarter might be partly offset in the second. It is 
therefore  more  appropriate,  in  order  to  avoid  being  misguided  by  highly  volatile  quarterly 
results, to evaluate the first two quarters of 2008 together.  
In line with available forecasts, both domestic and foreign demand are expected to support 
ongoing real GDP growth in the euro area in 2008, albeit to a lesser extent than during 2007. 
While moderating, growth in the world economy is expected to remain resilient, benefiting in 
particular  from  continued  robust  growth  in  emerging  economies.  This  should  support  euro 
area external demand. The fundamentals of the euro area economy remain sound, and the 
euro  area  does  not  suffer  from  major  imbalances.  Against  this  background,  we  expect 
investment  growth  in  the  euro  area  to  provide  ongoing  support  to  economic  activity,  as 
capacity  utilisation  remains  solid  and  profitability  in  the  non-financial  corporate  sector  has 
been  sustained.  Moreover,  employment  and  labour  force  participation  have  increased 
significantly,  and  unemployment  rates  have  fallen  to  levels  not  seen  for  25  years.  These 
developments support disposable income, although purchasing power is being dampened by 
the impact of higher energy and food prices.  
BIS Review 72/2008 
 1
This outlook is also reflected in the June 2008 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections. 
The projections foresee average annual real GDP growth in a range between 1.5% and 2.1% 
in  2008  and  between  1.0%  and  2.0%  in  2009.  In  comparison  with  the  March  ECB  staff 
projections, the current range projected for real GDP growth in 2008 is within the upper part 
of the range published in March 2008, mainly as a consequence of the better than expected 
outcome in the first quarter. For 2009, the range has been adjusted downwards, following the 
increase  in  commodity  prices  over  recent  months.  The  year-on-year  growth  rates  which  I 
have just mentioned need to be interpreted with particular caution on this occasion. While the 
annual rates suggest that growth may be weaker in 2009 than in 2008, they mask the fact 
that  on  a  quarterly  basis  real  GDP  growth  is  projected  to  reach  a  trough  in  2008,  before 
gradually recovering thereafter. In order not to draw the wrong conclusions about the growth 
dynamics implied in the staff projections it is important to keep this distinction in mind.  
In  the  Governing  Council’s  view,  the  uncertainty  surrounding  this  outlook  for  economic 
growth remains high, and downside risks prevail. In particular, risks continue to relate to the 
potential  for  the  financial  market  turbulence  to  have  a  more  negative  impact  on  the  real 
economy  than  anticipated.  Moreover,  downside  risks  stem  from  the  dampening  impact  on 
consumption  and  investment  of  further  unanticipated  increases  in  energy  and  food  prices. 
Risks  also  arise  from  concerns  about  the  emergence  of  protectionist  pressures  and  the 
possibility of disorderly developments owing to global imbalances. 
With  regard  to  price  developments,  annual  HICP  inflation  has  remained  above  3%  for  the 
past seven months. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, it was 3.6% in May 2008. This 
confirms  the  more  persistent  current  upward  pressures  on  euro  area  inflation,  resulting 
largely from sharp increases in energy and food prices at the global level in recent months.  
Looking  ahead,  on  the  basis  of  current  futures  prices  for  these  commodities,  the  annual 
HICP inflation rate is likely to remain above 3% for some time to come, before moderating 
only gradually in 2009. We are thus currently experiencing a protracted period of high annual 
rates of inflation, which is likely to be more persistent than previously anticipated.  
Consistent  with  this  view,  the  Eurosystem  staff  projections  foresee  average  annual  HICP 
inflation at between 3.2% and 3.6% in 2008 and between 1.8% and 3.0% in 2009. Compared 
with  the  March  2008  ECB  staff  projections,  the  ranges  projected  for  inflation  in  2008  and 
2009  are  markedly  higher,  reflecting  mainly  higher  oil  and  food  prices  and  increasingly 
inflationary pressures in the services sector.  
In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  recall  the  conditional  nature  of  the  Eurosystem  staff 
projections.  They  are  based  on  a  number  of  assumptions  which  are  of  a  purely  technical 
nature and unrelated to policy intentions. In particular, the technical assumptions for short-
term interest rates are taken from market expectations as at mid-May. Moreover, it should be 
noted that the projections are based on the assumption that the recent dynamism in oil and 
non-oil commodity prices will diminish over the projection horizon, in line with futures prices. 
A  further  crucial  assumption  is  that  there  will  be  no  broad-based  second-round  effects  on 
wages.  
In  the  Governing  Council’s  view,  at  the  policy-relevant  medium-term  horizon  risks  to  the 
outlook  for  prices  remain  clearly  on  the  upside  and  have  increased  further  .  These  risks 
include notably the possibility of further increases in energy and food prices, as well as of 
increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those foreseen thus far. It is also 
a strong concern that price and wage-setting behaviour could add to inflationary pressures. 
The  pricing  power  of  firms,  particularly  in  market  segments  with  low  competition,  such  as 
parts of the services sector, may prove stronger than currently expected. Moreover, higher 
than expected wage growth may emerge, taking into account high capacity utilisation, tight 
labour  market  conditions  and  the  risk  of  second-round  effects.  The  Governing  Council  is 
monitoring  wage  negotiations  and  price-setting  behaviour  in  the  euro  area  with  particular 
attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2008
Against  this  background,  it  is  imperative  to  secure  that  medium  to  longer-term  inflation 
expectations remain firmly anchored in line with price stability. All parties concerned, in both 
the private and the public sector, must meet their responsibilities. Wage-setting needs to take 
into  account  productivity  developments,  the  still  high  level  of  unemployment  in  many 
economies,  and  price  competitiveness  positions.  Moderate  labour  cost  increases  are 
particularly  necessary  in  countries  which  have  lost  price  competitiveness  in  recent  years. 
Broadly  based  second-round  effects  stemming  from  the  impact  of  higher  energy  and  food 
prices on price and wage-setting behaviour must be avoided. In this context, the Governing 
Council is concerned about the existence of schemes in which nominal wages are indexed to 
consumer prices. Such schemes involve the risk of upward shocks in inflation leading to a 
wage-price  spiral,  which  would  be  detrimental  to  employment  and  competitiveness  in  the 
countries concerned. The Governing Council therefore calls for such schemes to be avoided.  
The monetary analysis confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer-term horizons. Annual M3 growth remained very vigorous in April, supported by the 
continued strong growth of MFI loans to the private sector. While the impact of the flat yield 
curve and other temporary factors suggest that annual M3 growth continues to overstate the 
underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion,  nonetheless,  even  after  taking  such  effects  into 
account,  a broad-based  assessment  of  the  latest  data  confirms  that  the  underlying  rate  of 
money and credit growth remains strong. 
Annual M1 growth has continued to moderate in recent months, reflecting higher short-term 
interest  rates  which  have  encouraged  further  shifts  from  overnight  into  time  deposits.  The 
moderation  in  the  growth  of  household  borrowing  also  reflects  the  dampening  impact  of 
higher short-term interest rates, as well as cooling housing markets in several parts of the 
euro  area.  However,  the  growth  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  has  remained  very 
robust.  While  some  moderation  can  be  expected  in  the  future  in  the  light  of  tightening 
financing conditions and slower economic growth, bank borrowing by euro area non-financial 
corporations grew at an annual rate of 14.9% in April 2008, and the flow of loans in recent 
months has been strong.  
The  monetary  analysis  has  helped  to  support  the  necessary  medium-term  orientation  of 
monetary  policy  in  the  face  of  the  ongoing  financial  turmoil.  From  this  perspective,  the 
monetary  analysis  points  to  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  longer  horizons.  Moreover,  a 
thorough assessment of the monetary counterparts suggests that, as yet, the availability of 
bank credit to households and non-financial corporations has not been significantly affected 
by the turmoil. 
To  sum  up,  a  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary analysis clearly confirms the assessment that upside risks to price stability prevail 
over  the  medium  term,  in  a  context  of  very  vigorous  money  and  credit  growth  and  the 
absence of significant constraints on bank loan supply up to now. In fact, we noted that risks 
to price stability over the medium term have increased further. The economic fundamentals 
of the euro area are sound, and incoming macroeconomic data continue to point to moderate 
but ongoing real GDP growth. Against this background, the Governing Council is monitoring 
very closely all developments. It is in a state of heightened alertness. By acting in a firm and 
timely manner, we will prevent second-round effects and ensure that risks to price stability 
over  the  medium  term  do  not  materialise.  Securing  a  firm  anchoring  of  medium  and  long-
term inflation expectations in line with price stability is of the essence. 
Regarding fiscal policy, the Governing Council welcomes the spring 2008 orientations for 
euro area fiscal policies agreed by the Eurogroup ministers on 13 May 2008. Many euro area 
governments  still  need  to  implement  much  more  ambitious  policies  to  ensure  that  their 
country-specific  medium-term  budgetary  objectives  are  attained  by  2010  at  the  latest,  as 
agreed in Berlin in April 2007. Achieving and maintaining sound structural fiscal positions is 
imperative  to  create  scope  for  the  free  working  of  automatic  stabilisers  in  all  euro  area 
countries and will help to prepare for the budgetary costs of population ageing. The steady 
BIS Review 72/2008 
 3
pursuit  of  prudent  and  efficient  fiscal  policies  would  also  help  to  limit  current  inflationary 
pressures and would increase potential growth and employment.  
As regards structural reforms, the Governing Council reiterates its full support for all efforts 
to  enhance  competition,  increase  productivity  and  foster  market  flexibility.  Against  the 
background  of  a  marked  increase  in  international  food  commodity  prices,  removing 
impediments to competition at the various stages of the food supply chain in the retail and 
distribution  sectors  would  benefit  European  consumers  through  lower  prices.  The  ongoing 
“health check” of the EU common agricultural policy is welcomed, as are the efforts to limit 
upward pressure on agricultural prices through biofuels policies. A successful conclusion of 
the  Doha  round  of  world  trade  negotiations  should  also  help  to  improve  the  functioning  of 
global trade in general and of agricultural markets in Europe and worldwide in particular. Tax 
policies are not an appropriate means to counter commodity price increases, be it oil or non-
oil  commodities,  as  this  would  send  wrong  signals  to  producers  and  consumers  alike  and 
would distort markets.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2008
