Svein Gjedrem: Asset prices and economic policy 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
Centre  for  Monetary  Economics  (CME)/BI  Norwegian  School  of  Management,  Oslo, 
12 September 2008.  
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Inflation targeting 
Inflation  targeting  was  introduced  in  Norway  by  Royal  Decree  in  March  2001,  after  it  had 
been  applied  for  a  period  in  many  other  countries.  Our  experience  so  far  has  been  that 
inflation  targeting  has  provided  a  sound  basis  for  stabilising  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations. 
In the period from 2003 to the beginning of 2008, inflation was below target. Ever-cheaper 
goods  flowed  into  Norway  from  Asia,  and  with  solid  productivity  growth  in  Norwegian 
enterprises,  the  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and  services  was  also 
subdued. In an environment of low inflation, the interest rate was also low. At the same time, 
it  was  stated  that  when  inflation  picked  up,  the  interest  rate  level  would  again  return  to  a 
normal level. 
Solid  growth  in  output  and  demand  for  goods  and  services  gradually  led  to  prospects  for 
higher  inflation.  Since  summer  2005,  the  interest  rate  has  gradually  been  raised  again  to 
prevent inflation from becoming too high. The interest rate was raised well before inflation 
moved close to 2.5 per cent. In 2007, the key policy rate reached what we consider to be a 
normal level. 
From  2003  and  up  to  the  end  of  2007,  growth  in  the  Norwegian  economy  was  high  and 
gathered  momentum  both  more  quickly  and more  markedly  than  in  the  business  cycles  in 
the1980s and 1990s. The interest rate has by and large curbed the effects. The interest rate 
was  low  in  the  years  between  2003  and  2005  while  activity  in  the  economy  was  still 
moderate, and has gradually been raised since then. Because inflation was low, the interest 
rate was kept low in a period of high growth and increasing capacity utilisation. Three factors 
were important: 
First, labour has flowed into Norway from other countries. The opening of the labour market 
to the new EU countries has provided us with access to a reserve of labour. Inward labour 
migration rose towards the end of the cyclical upturn and has contributed to sustaining the 
high  level  of  growth.  In  2007,  the  population  expanded  by  more  than  56  000,  with  net 
immigration at 40 000. This is the highest population growth ever recorded in Norway. 
Second, businesses in Norway have become increasingly efficient, resulting in lower costs. It 
has  been  profitable  to  hire  more  employees  despite  the  high  wage  level  in  Norway.  The 
business sector has made use of new technology and businesses have been restructured. 
The  many  sweeping  reforms  of  the  1980s  and  1990s  –  the  fundamental  shift  in  the 
Norwegian economy1 – resulted in more efficient markets. Over the past few years, we have 
reaped the benefits of the measures implemented then.  
Third, Norway’s terms of trade have improved. Sales of Norwegian exports have been high, 
and we can import more goods in exchange for the goods and services sold by the business 
sector. Lower import prices have led to low inflation and a strong increase in employees’ real 
                                                 
1   Jon  E.  Dølvik,  T.  Fløtten,  G.  Hernes  and  J.M.  Hippe  (2007):  Hamskifte  –  den  norske  modellen  i  endring 
(Fundamental shift – the Norwegian model in flux), p 15, Gyldendal Norsk Forlag A/S. Norwegian only. 
BIS Review 110/2008 
 1
wages.  High  export  prices  have  resulted  in  solid  corporate  earnings.  Norway’s  disposable 
income increased in real terms by more than 35 per cent in the five years to 2007. 
Owing to the growth in productivity and improved terms of trade, enterprises have been able 
to increase their share of value added in spite of higher real wages for employees. At the 
same time,  employment rose sharply and unemployment fell to the lowest levels recorded 
since the beginning of the 1980s. 
These  factors  are  now  becoming  less  prominent.  It  is  not  likely  that  developments  in 
Norway's terms of trade will be as positive in the years ahead. Productivity growth seems to 
be declining – at least cyclical. Wage-earners’ share of value added is rising again, and this 
restrains labour demand. At the same time, inflation has quickened. 
High energy and commodity prices are fuelling global inflation. Food and energy prices are 
also rising in Norway, even though the import share is low. The shift towards imports from 
low-cost countries has moderated. After falling for several years, prices for imported goods 
are now beginning to rise.  
Looking back, inflation has varied somewhat. The three supply-side shocks reduced inflation 
while  boosting  production  capacity.  Low  interest  rates,  favourable  economic  conditions 
internationally  and  substantial  investment  in  the  petroleum  sector  increased  demand  for 
goods and services. High capacity utilisation gradually pushed up inflation. Now that interest 
rates have risen to a more normal level and the global economic situation is deteriorating, 
growth is slowing and capacity utilisation may again seem to be approaching levels that are 
more  sustainable.  The  impact  of  the  downturn  abroad  on  the  Norwegian  economy  is 
uncertain, but on balance it now seems that inflation will gradually stabilise near 2.5 per cent 
without unnecessary wide fluctuations in output and employment.   
By and large, we must then be able to assert that inflation targeting has served us well during 
these years.  
There have been surprises. The growth potential of the Norwegian economy has been very 
high. It took a long time for employment to rise after the recovery started, and in 2006 – well 
into  the  upturn  –  inflation  fell  markedly.  Over  the  past  year,  import  prices  and  food  prices 
have  increased,  and  against  this  background  the  monetary  stance  may  have  to  be  on  the 
tight side for a period. 
Prevention of systemic risk  
At  the  same  time,  developments  in  other  countries,  and  probably  also  in  Norway,  have 
shown that financial and property markets can be a source of instability in prices, output and 
employment. The US is facing a deep crisis in its financial system. Extensive intervention on 
the part of the government authorities and the central bank, most recently by placing Fannie 
Mae and Freddie Mac in conservatorship, has probably mitigated the effects, but confidence 
in banks and financial undertakings has not been restored. European financial markets are 
also marked by turbulence and uncertainty. Even in Denmark – after nearly 25 years of a 
highly successful economic policy – a medium-sized bank has failed.2
These problems have prompted many countries to review regulations and the functioning of 
financial and credit markets. 
Financial  and  credit  markets  in  Norway  have  changed  considerably  over  the  past  10-20 
years, resulting in substantial welfare gains. Enterprises now have access to credit at a more 
correct  interest  rate.  Households  have  greater  opportunities  to  smooth  saving  and 
                                                 
2   See statement by Governor Nils Bernstein, Danmarks Nationalbank, at the press conference about Roskilde 
Bank, 25 August 2008. (www.danmarksnationalbank.dk). 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2008
consumption  over  a  lifetime.  Less  rationing  and  higher  required  returns  have  boosted  the 
growth potential of our economy. 
Since  the  end  of  June  2007,  money  and  credit  markets  in  other  countries  have  been 
characterised  by  sharp  fluctuations,  tight  liquidity  and  reduced  risk  appetite.  The  problems 
started in the US mortgage market, but quickly spread to other financial market segments. 
Banks,  funds  and  financial  undertakings  had  to  bring  bonds  back  onto  their  own  balance 
sheets, they began to doubt the financial position of their counterparties and held on to their 
money. As a result, premiums on interbank loans rose markedly. 
Norwegian banks rely heavily on international markets for their funding. The rise in money 
market premiums in the US and Europe therefore rapidly spread to Norwegian interest rates, 
even  though  Norwegian  banks  are  profitable,  enjoy  confidence  and  have  limited  loss 
exposure. 
When banks would no longer lend to each other, many central banks provided liquidity with a 
longer  maturity  and  lower  collateral  requirements  than  usual.  Norges  Bank  has  also,  in 
periods, increased the volume of lending to Norwegian banks. We have provided extra short-
term liquidity, for example through currency swaps. We have also offered banks loans with 
longer maturities than earlier.  
We  have  not  changed  the  collateral  requirements  for  loans.  This  is  because  we  already 
accepted a broad range of collateral than those central banks. This is because – for reasons 
we appreciate – the Norwegian government bond market is very thin. For a long time, nor did 
we have a well developed market for other bonds. At the same time, bank demand for loans 
from Norges Bank is considerable in some periods of the year. In this decade, we have been 
able to tighten the collateral requirements somewhat, most recently in 2005, when we among 
other  things  restricted  access  to  using  bank  securities  as  collateral.  At  that  time,  we 
announced that we would later go a step further. This promise remains intact.   
Central bank measures have curbed the fluctuations in interbank interest rates, but only for 
loans with short maturities. 
For  longer  maturities,  premiums  have  continued  to  rise,  and  the  premium  on  12-month 
money market rates is now more than one percentage point.  
The  turbulence  has  particularly  affected  banks  with  low  deposits  and  considerable  money 
market  loans.  Both  Roskilde  Bank,  recently  taken  over  by  Denmark's  Nationalbank,  and 
Northern Rock, which had to be bailed out by the Bank of England last year, had fairly low 
deposit-to-loan  ratios.  Combined  with  large  exposures  in  the  property  and  construction 
sectors, this made them vulnerable. Norwegian banks generally have higher deposit-to-loan 
ratios, although there are differences. 
Banks  and  investors,  both  in  Norway  and  abroad,  are  now  charging  higher  premiums  and 
higher prices for providing capital for acquisitions, restructuring and investment, and highly 
leveraged enterprises must pay high risk premiums when they borrow. It has become more 
difficult  to  obtain  funding.  Norges  Bank’s  survey  of  bank  lending  indicates  that  banks  are 
gradually  tightening  their  lending  standards.  Household  debt  growth  has  recently  edged 
down. At the same time, consumption growth has slowed, but consumption is still higher than 
disposable income. Corporate credit growth remains high, at least for the time being.  
The experience of the financial crisis has prompted governments and others to put liquidity 
risk higher on the agenda. In June, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision published 
Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk Management and Supervision.3
                                                 
3   See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Bank for International Settlements, June 2008. 
BIS Review 110/2008 
 3
Norges Bank has a role as lender of last resort. This means that Norges Bank can provide an 
individual bank or the banking system with extraordinary liquidity when demand for liquidity 
cannot be satisfied by other sources.4 Our view is that the provision of extraordinary liquidity 
should  be  restricted  to  situations  when  financial  stability  may  be  threatened  without  such 
support.  
Experience  shows  that  the  seeds  of  financial  instability  are  sown  during  periods  of  rapidly 
rising debt and asset prices, including house prices. Over the past 15 years, house prices 
have  surged,  and  particularly  in  2006,  even  though  Norges  Bank  had  at  that  time  already 
raised  the  interest  rate  on  several  occasions.  High  household  income  growth  and  bank 
competition for lending and market shares are contributing factors. Nor can we disregard the 
possibility that in periods developments have been driven by the conviction that prices would 
only continue to rise.  
Unusually  low  long-term  interest  rates  have  probably  also  fuelled  house  price  inflation  in 
recent years. Norwegian households primarily finance home purchases with adjustable-rate 
mortgages.  Nonetheless,  long-term  interest  rates  are  important  because  they  provide 
information about developments in short-term rates that borrowers can expect over time. 
Now that the interest rate has moved up to a fairly normal level, the rise in house prices has 
come to a halt, and prices are now falling. We have seen that when the interest rate is raised 
to  curb  the  rise  in  prices  for  goods  and  services,  interest-rate  setting  also  contributes  to 
stabilising asset prices. Moreover, we believe that our communication, where we emphasise 
that the interest rate is set with view to stabilising inflation, and with forecasts for the interest 
rate ahead, has contributed to dampening fluctuations.   
It is nevertheless important to be aware that in a small open economy like Norway there is 
little room for setting the interest rate at a level that diverges from that of other countries with 
the aim of influencing property prices and credit growth. The task of steering inflation is in 
itself  demanding.  With  Norway’s  balance-of-payments  position,  the  effects  on  capital 
movements  and  the  krone  exchange  rate  may  be  considerable.  Pursuing  a  very  firm 
approach to steering property prices and credit will easily lead to a krone out of balance and 
result in adverse effects on inflation and inflation expectations.  
Monetary  policy  contributes  to  stabilising  developments  in  the  economy.  Nonetheless,  in 
some  areas,  the  framework  may  lead  to  a  situation  where  business  cycles  may  be  self-
amplifying. In the following, I will focus on aspects of the functioning and regulation of the 
housing market and banking activities.  
The  interplay  between  developments  in  the  housing  market  and  the  credit  market  is 
important for stability in our economy. Prices, investment and home sales show considerable 
swings. Homes are important forms of collateral and price developments influence household 
borrowing and give rise to credit cycles. Housing loans account for 40 per cent of Norwegian 
bank balance sheets.5 The framework conditions for the housing market are thus important 
for how wide fluctuations in output and employment are and for the risk of financial shocks 
and instability. The experience of the banking crisis in the early 1990s did admittedly entail 
limited bank losses on loans to households, and substantial losses on loans to business and 
corporate customers, which were affected by a fall in household consumption. Banks may 
certainly refer to this when they assess the credit risk of their loans, but they should perhaps 
not be as certain that people will stand by their creditors in the future as they did 15-20 years 
ago. Household debt is very high. Attitudes may change and debt servicing discipline may 
also  be  influenced  by  the  debt  settlement  scheme  that  has  gradually  become  less 
                                                 
4   See Financial Stability 2/2004, p 36, Norges Bank. 
5  
Including branches of foreign banks, subsidiaries and housing loans in mortgage companies. 
4 
 BIS Review 110/2008
restrictive.6 Banks should make ample allowance also for this risk in their loan disbursement 
and interest rate premiums.  
It is important for stability in the housing market that the supply of housing reacts rapidly to 
changes in demand. On this score, our experience has been fairly positive with a high level 
of residential construction in recent years.  
The  tax  system  should  treat  investment  in  residential  property  neutrally  and  on  a  par  with 
other  investments.  Several  official  studies  in  recent  decades7  –  from  Sekse  to  Skauge  – 
have  shown  that  the  tax  system  favours  residential  property  consumption  and  investment. 
This leads to overinvestment in residential property, displacing other types of investment. At 
the  same  time,  the  tax  system  makes  it  more  advantageous  to  own  a  home  instead  of 
renting.  
Through the years, the tax on the advantage of homeownership has been gradually reduced. 
In 2005, it was removed. Tax deductibility of debt interest was maintained. In practice, this 
implies  a  housing  investment  subsidy.  Homeowners  benefit  from  an  income  deduction  for 
expenses for income acquisition, but do not pay taxes on the income. In central areas where 
available sites are scarce, the tax advantage will result in a higher level of house prices.  
A  more  neutral  taxation  of  residential  property  –  for  example  as  proposed  by  the  Skauge 
Commission in 2003 – would also have a stabilising effect on the price level in the housing 
market. A tax that is based more on market values will increase when house values rise and 
fall when house values decline. This will curb the willingness to pay when purchasing homes 
during upturns and sustain it during downturns.  
The  exemption  for  residential  property  tax  is  a  source  of  more  unstable  house  prices  and 
credit cycles. Interest rate setting cannot remedy this.  
Banks primarily rely on lending funds that they have borrowed, either in money and securities 
markets or from depositors. Norwegian bank equity capital only accounts for about 6 per cent 
of bank balance sheets. By way of comparison, Norwegian limited companies have an equity 
ratio of close to 40 per cent. Since banks manage customer deposits and because they have 
low  equity  capital,  it  is  important  they  have  effective  risk  management  systems.  Banking 
activities  are  also  subject  to  regulation  and  supervision  by  the  authorities.  The  law 
establishes minimum levels of capital for banks.  
Banking  activity  is  pro-cyclical.  During  an  upturn,  the  value  of  assets increases  more  than 
debt. This strengthens bank earnings and solidity. Increased equity capital provides room for 
additional lending. During a downturn, securities values fall and loan losses rise. Banks will 
then tighten up. 
Banks  state  financial  assets  at  market  value.8  When  value  changes  rapidly  come  into 
evidence in the accounts, bank owners and creditors are provided with better insight into a 
bank’s financial position, and banks can then rapidly act to maintain their capital adequacy.   
The new capital adequacy rules – Basel II – are designed to strengthen the stability of the 
financial  system.  The  capital  requirements  seek  to  ensure  that  a  bank’s  capital  is 
commensurate with its risk profile. For Norwegian banks, which have a large proportion of 
                                                 
6   The Act relating to debt settlement (Act 99/1992), which came into force in 1993, shall provide individuals with 
serious debt problems with a possibility to regain control of their finances. The Act was amended in 2003. A 
new proposal to amend the act is now being circulated for comment. 
7   NOU 1973:3 Taxation of dwellings (headed by Tor Sekse) and NOU 2003:9 Tax Commission (headed by Arne 
Skauge). 
8   The IFRS, or a simplified application of the IFRS, applies to banks belonging to a listed company. Under the 
regulation, financial instruments are to be stated at fair value, in practice at market value. See Act no. 56 of 17 
July 1998: Act relating to annual accounts, etc., (Accounting Act), Chapter 2. 
BIS Review 110/2008 
 5
housings  loans  in  their  loan  portfolios,  Basel  II  entails  a  substantial  reduction  in  capital 
requirements after a transitional period. This is because highly secured housing loans have a 
low  risk  profile.  Bank  equity  ratios  have  fallen  in  recent  years.  At  the  same  time,  Tier  1 
capital, which is a risk-weighted measure of financial strength, has been stable. This reflects 
a sharp increase in bank lending secured by mortgages on residential property in this period.  
The Basel II framework offers limited experience so far. It presupposes that risk assessments 
consider  the  prevailing  macroeconomic  environment.  There  is  still  a  risk  that  banks  give 
excessive  weight  to  recent  years’  experiences  in  their  assessments  and  models.  The 
supervisory authorities can help remedy this by ensuring that banks’ assessment of risk in 
internal models is based on data from at least on complete business cycle. The supervisory 
authorities also have the possibility of imposing an extra capital requirement on a bank if the 
bank  has  large  risk  exposures.  Banks  must  therefore  perform  stress  tests  to  demonstrate 
that they have sufficient capital to weather a downturn.  
Regulatory  changes  can  probably  reduce  fluctuations  in  banks’  eagerness  to  lend.  Banks 
could  be  required  to  accumulate  additional  reserves.  One  example  is  that  in  a  favourable 
economic situation banks could be required to make additional provisions for future losses, 
as is the case in Spain.9 Another proposal10 is that the capital requirement should be raised 
when lending growth increases. 
Banks  may  be  forced  to  sell  large  volumes  of  assets  in  a  crisis  situation.  Three  US 
academics11  have  recently  proposed  a  supplement  to  the  capital  requirements  in  order  to 
reduce  this  selling  pressure.  They  propose  that  banks  acquire  a  form  of  insurance  that  is 
paid out when the banking sector as a whole has losses over a certain level. When a crisis 
occurs, banks will then be assured of a supply of fresh capital.  
Foreign-owned branches and subsidiaries have a market share in Norway of close to 35 per 
cent in terms of total assets. Most of them are chartered in the other Nordic countries. Rules 
or practices in Norway that diverge from other countries will influence the competitiveness of 
Norwegian-owned  bank  and  is  in  practice  hardly  feasible.12  Other  countries  will  be  of  the 
same mind. It is therefore easy, particularly in an upturn, to be drawn into a negative spiral 
that culminates in a least common multiplier for capital requirements. It is my view that it is 
important  to  strengthen  cooperation  in  this  area,  particularly  between  Nordic  finance 
ministries  and  supervisory  authorities.  We  must  aim  at  a  common  approach  to  preventing 
systemic risk.13
Nordic  cooperation  is  already  extensive,  but  primarily  focuses  on  crisis  management  of  a 
potential  crisis  in  cross-border  banks.  Crisis  simulation  exercises  with  the  participation  of 
finance  ministries,  supervisory  authorities  and  central  banks  –  15  participants  from  5 
countries14  –  illustrate  that  interests  may  easily  conflict  and  that  coordination  is  very 
                                                 
9   See  Ordonez,  M.F.  “Speech  by  the  Governor.  2008  International  Monetary  Conference  –  Central  bankers 
panel, Banco de Espana, 2008. 
10   See article in Financial Times, 4 June 2008, “ A party pooper’s guide to financial stability”. 
11   See Kashyap, A.K., R. Rajan and J.C. Stein, “Rethinking Capital Regulation”, 2008. www.kansascityfed.org. 
12   In 2006, the Financial Supervisory Authority of Norway recommended that the highest loan-to-value ratio for 
home mortgages with the lowest risk weight using the standardised approach under Basel II be lowered from 
80  to  75  per  cent  of  sound  mortgage  lending  value.  The  Ministry  of  Finance  did  not  follow  the 
recommendation. Norges Bank agreed with the Ministry of Finance, referring to the effect on competition. 
13   See “Can the  authorities manage crises in the financial system?” by the Governor Stefan Ingves, Sveriges 
Riksbank, www.riksbank.se. 
14   In the crisis simulation exercise in autumn 2007, all the Nordic countries participated. In addition, the Baltic 
central banks were observers. 
6 
 BIS Review 110/2008
demanding.  Perhaps  above  all,  the  exercises  show  that  we  must  double  our  efforts  to 
prevent any further crises in the Nordic banking system. 
It is also possible that the authorities' hands are tied to a further extent that during the Nordic 
banking crisis under the EU rules on state aid. It is my impression that the rules are practiced 
in  a  way  that  limits  the  scope  for  recovering  government  funds.  If  this  is  the  case, 
government will be more reluctant to intervene in the event of a crisis. 
Norway has a generous guarantee scheme. Deposits are guaranteed up to NOK 2 million 
per depositor per bank – an amount that is substantially higher than the statutory minimum of 
EUR 20 000 in the EU, i.e. about NOK 160 000. Of the other Nordic countries, Denmark has 
the highest amount at around NOK 325 000. In the UK, the amount has recently been raised 
to a good NOK 350 000, and a further increase to about NOK 500 000 has been proposed. 
Other EU countries generally have lower guaranteed amounts.  
Since  2007,  many  branches  of  foreign  banks  have  become  members  of  the  Norwegian 
scheme to increase their deposit to loan ratio. This is not purely coincidental. The Norwegian 
scheme is probably slightly naïve in its design. As mentioned, the amount guaranteed is very 
high, and there has been a period without fee payments. At the same time, the competition 
for deposits has intensified at home and abroad.  
There  is  an  element  of  moral  hazard  associated  with  any  insurance  scheme.  In  Norway, 
even depositors with very large deposits do not have to assess the financial strength of a 
bank. Our deposit guarantee scheme has a flypaper effect, and under the protection of the 
scheme the banks have bid up deposit rates to strengthen their liquidity. This will eventually 
have an effect on lending rates as well.   
Norges  Bank  has  reviewed  the  Norwegian  guarantee  scheme  and  in  a  submission  to  the 
Ministry of Finance recommends the following revisions15: 
• 
• 
Member banks must always pay a fee  
The  membership  fee  is  differentiated  more  clearly  according  to  the  banks’  risk 
exposure  
…  and  thus  becomes  counter-cyclical  by  using  growth  in  banks’  activities  as  a 
supplementary measure of risk exposure  
A reduction in the guaranteed amount per customer  
An  increase  in  the  notice  of  withdrawal  for  voluntary  members  of  the  Norwegian 
Banks' Guarantee Fund from one to two years  
Branches of foreign banks pay to the extent possible a membership fee according to 
the same rules that apply to Norwegian banks 
   We have constructed a simple example of how such a fee system could be designed. Our 
example shows what banks’ total fee payments would have been since 1993 compared with 
actual payments. The fee rates depend on both the banks’ lending growth and bank’s core 
capital ratio. The chart also shows actual payments of membership fees. 
In our example, the fee payments would have been considerably lower early in the 1990s 
and large in recent years when lending growth has been high. This provides a better profile 
with  small  payments  in  periods  of  low  growth  in  bank  activities  and  high  payments  when 
growth is strong.  
                                                 
15   In a letter of 27 June 2008, the Ministry of Finance has asked the Financial Supervisory Authority of Norway to 
assess the need for regulatory revisions to the Norwegian Banks’ Guarantee Fund. 
BIS Review 110/2008 
 7
Conclusion 
The  experience  so  far  is  that  inflation  targeting  has  provided  a  good  basis  for  stabilising 
inflation and inflation expectations. Interest rate setting and interest rate forecasts have also 
contributed to stabilising output and employment and prices in property markets.  
In  some  areas,  regulations  and  frameworks  can  result  in  amplifications  of  fluctuations  in 
asset  prices  and  credit  flows.  For  example,  tax  subsidisation  of  homeownership  can  be  a 
source of recurrent instability in house prices and credit. 
The turbulence in financial markets has prompted many countries to consider measures to 
improve  regulation  and  the  functioning  of  markets.  In  Norway,  the  authorities  can  also 
strengthen  the  work  on  preventing  systemic  risk.  With  our  cross-border  banks,  broader 
Nordic  cooperation,  particularly  between  finance  ministries  and  supervisory  authorities, 
would be appropriate. But there is also work to be done at home. Norges Bank is proposing, 
for  example,  revisions  to  the  Norwegian  Banks’  Guarantee  Fund  with  a  view  to  reducing 
moral hazard.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 
  8 
 BIS Review 110/2008
    BIS Review 110/2008 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 110/2008
    BIS Review 110/2008 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 110/2008
    BIS Review 110/2008 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 110/2008
    BIS Review 110/2008 
 15
 16 
 BIS Review 110/2008
