Savenaca Narube: A brief overview of developments in Fiji’s financial 
system and economy 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
official opening of Bank of South Pacific Limited’s new Nadi office, Nadi, 19 February 2008. 
 Your Excellency, the Papua New Guinea High Commissioner to Fiji, Mr. Peter Eafeare; 
Mr Garth McIlwain, Managing Director, Bank of South Pacific; 
Mr Kevin McCarthy, General Manager, Branch Network; 
Mr. Greg Watson, General Manager, BSP Fiji; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Introductory remarks  
Good morning to you all.  
It  seems  just  like  a  few  months  ago  when  I  had  the  pleasure  to  welcome  Bank  of  South 
Pacific into Fiji at their Renwick Road branch in Suva. I remember that opening very well. It is 
not  often  that  you  are  offered  a  full  bowl  of  kava  first  thing  on  a  Monday  morning.  But  I 
remember that occasion well because of what was happening in the country at that time. The 
Military had taken over government only two weeks before that. The situation in Suva was 
still tense and no one was really sure what was going to unfold. It was therefore remarkable 
that BSP made the decision to open its first branch irrespective of what was happening in 
Fiji. It was a bold but right decision. 
It clearly reflects three things. 
First, BSP likes to have their official openings in the morning. I have been to many openings 
of  bank  branches  and  agencies.  I  believe  that  they  were  all  in  the  evenings.  Somehow, 
morning  works  for  BSP.  Perhaps  morning  openings  signal  the  new  dawn  or  the  new 
beginning. So, I am pleased to be here in this new dawn to open BSP’s first Western branch 
here on Main Street in the jet-set town of Nadi. 
Secondly and on a serious note, this expansion after only one year of setting up shop in Fiji 
clearly  signals  BSP’s  commitment  to  the  country.  They  have  made  their  intentions  clear. 
They are obviously here to stay. They have a long term view of their presence in Fiji. And I 
warmly welcome that and congratulate them on their commitment and determination. It’s a 
Vision that we can all embrace. Nothing much is gained from being short term. Visions are 
realised with courage and by looking far beyond the horizon. 
Thirdly, this expansion reflects BSP’s continuing confidence in the economic fortunes of this 
country. We are faced with many challenges at this time. Of course, we must do all we can to 
overcome them. And I am optimistic that we will. I firmly believe that Fiji has a huge potential 
and this sentiment has been echoed by many visitors to our country. Just last Wednesday, 
the CEO of ANZ, Mr. Mike Smith echoed the same view. But unfortunately, we are drifting far 
behind our potential. It is really up to us in this generation today to rally behind a common 
Vision and work together to realise that potential. And that common vision should be to build 
a prosperous economy. Mike Smith also said to me last week that prosperity solves many 
problems.  When  a  country  is  prosperous,  the  differences  and  the  problems  seem  to  melt 
away. 
Greg has been talking to me about this opening for quite  some time.  I am sure that Greg 
would  not  mind  me  saying  that.  Obviously,  there  had  been  hurdles  in  opening  this  Nadi 
office. I was also told that even this opening was in jeopardy, when just two weeks ago, rain 
BIS Review 20/2008 
 1
from  Cyclone  Gene  threatened  to  flood  this  building.  This  kind  of  situation  is  somewhat 
similar to when they set foot on Fiji. So BSP has taught us that universal lesson: “Where 
there  is  a  will  there  is  a  way”.  They  have  demonstrated  to  us  that  they  have  the  will.  It 
seems to me that when the going gets tough, BSP opens a new office! 
Bank South Pacific 
In its short presence in Fiji, BSP has clearly demonstrated to us that they will not be content 
at where they are in the market place. They are serious of becoming a major player. They 
are steadily expanding their customer base. I know that this is not easy to achieve in normal 
times but more so at a time when a credit ceiling is in place and the economy is struggling. 
And  I  think  that  they  deserve  our  applause  and  full  support.  The  entry  of  another  serious 
player into the banking system will level the playing field a lot more and should be good news 
for us the customers. 
I am also pleased of BSP’s support of the Reserve Bank’s policies. In these difficult times we 
have had to introduce policies that we would not have done in normal times. These include 
the credit ceiling, tighter exchange controls and very high levels of liquidity. I know that these 
policies complicate commercial banking operations. I am however glad to see that BSP has 
taken all that in its stride. They have wasted no time in integrating fully into all aspects of the 
banking  market  in  Fiji.  I  was  particularly  pleased  to  see  how  readily  BSP  embraced  the 
FIJICLEAR payment system even though they were the newest boy on the block. They are 
also  not  holding  back  on  introducing  new  banking  technology.  BSP  is  in  the  process  of 
installing two ATMs in Suva and another two have been installed here at this branch. 
It is also extremely encouraging to see a regional bank like BSP making waves in Fiji. We all 
know that BSP is a strong regional bank with a history going back as far as 1957. BSP is 
listed on the Port Moresby Stock Exchange and is the largest bank in Papua New Guinea. 
BSP is expanding its regional footprint with one branch in Niue, one in the Solomon Islands 
and now two in Fiji. From the Reserve Bank’s viewpoint, well-established and well-capitalised 
banks like BSP provide greater choice, competition and innovation in the Fiji market. That is 
a good thing for business and the public, and is therefore good for Fiji. 
Every business seems to be heading down the Queens Highway to Nadi. It was a matter of 
time  before  BSP  took  to  the  highway.  It  makes  good  business  sense.  Nadi  town  is  an 
excellent location. The town will continue to grow feeding off its tourism base. 
Banking industry 
Let me say a few more words about the banking sector in Fiji. We have 5 commercial banks 
right now. Over the years, the number has hovered around this level – it has gone up and 
come down. Some banks have come and left for one reason or another. Fortunately, their 
departures have been handled smoothly. Unfortunately, we had to restructure one bank but 
again that complex operation was well managed. All in all, I believe that our banking system 
has  matured  in  the  last  ten  years.  With  that  maturity  has  come  greater  stability  and 
soundness. And that augurs well for the economy. 
And  talking  about  the  economy,  it  appears  from  some  of  the  comments  in  the  media  that 
many  of  us  do  not  fully  grasp  the  contribution  that  the  financial  system  makes  to  the 
economy. In 2006, the banking sector in Fiji employed over 1,500 people (and rising) and 
contributed  close  to  $40  million  in  taxes.  Clearly,  this  is  a  serious  and  important  business 
sector  for  Fiji.  The  banking  sector  plays  a  key  role  in  the  economic  development  of  this 
country. 
I am sure if you ask BSP, they would tell you that banking business here is hard, not easy. 
Competition is there. Market share is aggressively contested and hard to secure. Investment 
is a major input, and advanced technology is a key feature (and expense) of the business. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2008
Fees and charges 
Much  has  also  been  said  about  fees  and  charges.  I  do  not  need  to  defend  commercial 
banks. I, myself sometime wonder the basis of the fees that my bank charges me. What we 
have not done in the Reserve Bank is to try to regulate fees and charges simply because we 
do  not  have  the  legal  authority.  But  even  if  we  do,  we  would  still  need  to  assess  very 
thoroughly the flow-on implications of such a control on the efficiency of intermediation and 
other related areas of the commercial banking. 
What we have done at the Reserve Bank and will continue to do is to ensure that these fees 
are clearly disclosed to customers and there are no surprises. 
FIJICLEAR 
I  am  glad  to  say  here  this  morning  that  our  new  electronic  payment  system  called 
FIJICLEAR is working well and the number of transactions going through it rising. I would 
encourage businesses to use this system whenever they can because it is very efficient. You 
get your funds the same day. The charges levied by commercial banks on using FIJICLEAR 
are obviously critical in promoting its usage. We are therefore monitoring closely the charges 
that banks are imposing on the use of FIJICLEAR and we plan to engage them on this issue 
in the near future. 
Ombudsman and Financial Services Commission 
Finally on the financial system, we are working with the Ministry of Finance on implementing 
Cabinet’s  decision  to  establish  a  Financial  Services  Ombudsman  Scheme  and  Financial 
Services  Commission.  Some  of  the  issues  that  we  will  need  to  consider  are  the  need  to 
clearly  identify  their  roles,  their  independence,  their  funding,  the  key  regulatory  processes 
and their structure. Overall, given the small size of the market, I think that it is also important 
that we ensure that any new agencies will be effective and will make the best use of their 
resources.  In  this  regard,  we  will  need  to  learn  from  our  past  experiences  and  from  other 
countries.  Moreover,  consultations  with  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  will  be 
necessary. 
The Fiji economy 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  economy.  The  Fiji  economy  is  provisionally  estimated  to  have 
declined by 4 percent in 2007. Visitor arrivals dropped by only 1 percent much lower than the 
8  percent  that  we  had  projected  and  this  is  encouraging. However,  tourism  earnings  were 
lower  not  only  as  a  result  of  lower  tourist  arrivals  but  more  so  of  the  discounts  offered  by 
hotels and the reduction in the length of stay. Most other economic sectors declined in 2007. 
There  was  a  small  growth  in  exports  while  imports  in  the  January  to  November  period  of 
2007 declined due to the depressed state of the economy and the restrictive policies that we 
had put in place. 
Foreign reserves 
Foreign reserves increased in the second half of 2007 rising to 4.3 months of imports at the 
end of the year and this is encouraging. However, the major reasons for this performance 
were the decline in the economy particularly in investment and the credit ceiling which has 
slowed  down  credit  considerably.  We  still  need  to  do  a  whole  lot  more  to  get  our  exports 
increasing at a respectable rate. But unfortunately we are still not doing enough at this time 
on this important front. Our balance of payments will continue to come under pressure. Time 
is clearly not on our side. We must move immediately. 
BIS Review 20/2008 
 3
In 2008, the economy is expected to grow by 2.2 percent. But that was before Cyclone Gene. 
We are still evaluating the impact of the cyclone and flooding on the economy. But based on 
past  natural  disasters,  we  can  expect  a  reduction  in  the  modest  growth  rate  projected  for 
2008  unless  there  are  other  offsetting  developments.  This  obviously  would  frustrate  our 
efforts to restore growth this year. 
There is also a real fear that the world economy will enter a recession or even a depression 
this year. The impact of the sub prime loan in the US is spreading into Europe and is coming 
down to Asia. How these global developments impact Fiji will depend on how they affect our 
major  markets.  Tourism  numbers  and  remittances  may  be  affected.  There  is  also  the 
possible impact of the movements in exchange rate. 
Inflation 
Inflation is becoming a bit of a worry. Inflation jumped to over 7 percent at the end of last 
month  –  the  highest  since  1998.  This  was  due  to  the  higher  oil  prices,  some  increase  in 
duties  from  the  national  budget  and  some  disruptions  in  local  supply  of  vegetables. 
Furthermore, the disruptions in supply of market items caused by Cyclone Gene are bound 
to  push  inflation  higher  in  the  next  few  months.  We  are  therefore  revising  our  inflation 
projection for the end of this year. We are caught in what economist term “stagflation” where 
the Fiji economy has declined but inflation is rising. It’s not a good place to be. However, in 
our view, the fundamental causes of this flare up in inflation should be temporary. 
The future path of oil prices will largely determine inflation in the medium term. So if oil prices 
stay  where  they  are  now  (and  I  hope  they  do),  inflation  should  track  back  down  to  a 
moderate level before year end. What we should firmly avoid though is the vicious cycle of 
inflation  to  wages  and  in  turn  more  inflation.  If  this  happens,  prices  will  permanently  rise 
without any real improvements to the economy – purchasing power will decline, asset prices 
will erode, investment will suffer and growth will be even more difficult to achieve. 
How does one formulate monetary policy at a time like this when the economy is struggling 
to  get  up  after  a  sizeable  decline,  inflation  is  rising  and  foreign  reserves  is  still  under 
pressure? If you were in our shoes, what  would you do?  Wherever you turn, there will be 
conflict  of  objectives.  You  can  therefore  understand  our  dilemma.  But  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
mandate is clear and that is inflation and foreign reserves come first and growth later. If we 
cannot safeguard the first two, growth will virtually be impossible. We are now reviewing our 
entire monetary policy package which will take into account this difficult balancing act. 
Remittances 
Let me talk about remittances for a minute. Remittances have generated a lot of interest in 
Fiji recently. They had shot up since 2001 to a peak of $320 million in 2006 to become the 
second biggest foreign exchange earner next to tourism. But last year they declined by about 
20 percent. We have identified four possible reasons for this big drop. First, the number of 
our  security  personnel  in  the  Middle  East  has  tumbled  significantly.  Second,  families  that 
were receiving remittances may have also migrated. Thirdly, due to high transaction costs, 
many  are  resorting  to  sending  money  through  the  mail  and  friends  and  these  are  not 
captured in the official statistics. Lastly, the exchange rate may also be a contributing factor 
as the US dollar has weakened against the Fiji dollar. All these reasons however may still not 
fully account for the $64 million drop in remittances last year. There may be other technical 
reasons which we are examining. 
The Reserve Bank would really like to see lower remittances charges. These charges to do 
not  appear  to  reflect  the  actual  cost  of  remitting  funds.  The  sender  pays  a  lot  of  these 
charges  which  ultimately  result  in  the  receiver  getting  less  Fiji  dollars.  And  then  at  some 
outlets here in Fiji, the receiver gets slammed by another receiving charge. In some cases, 
the  charges  amount  to  50  percent  of  the  amount  sent.  Comparison  of  the  charges 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2008
internationally shows that it cost US$10 to send money from the US to Philippines but cost 
US$30 to send the same money to the Pacific. In my view, there is no basis of these high 
charges. We are in the process of collecting information on these charges and we intend to 
publish  them  for  general  information.  We  are  also  exploring  alternative  ways  of  sending 
money  to  Fiji  at  a  more  reasonable  charge.  We  are  also  keen  to  mount  an  awareness 
program  to  educate  our  people  that  are  leaving  for  work  overseas  and  also  the  Fiji 
communities abroad on cheaper ways to send money to Fiji. 
Conclusion 
Let me end by getting back to the business at hand.  
It is always pleasing to witness another branch of a bank opening for business in Fiji. It is an 
impressive achievement for BSP to open a second branch in Nadi today after opening their 
first  branch  in  Suva  in  December  2006.  I  congratulate  Greg  and  the  BSP  Team  on  the 
opening of the Nadi branch and wish them all the best in their future endeavours. 
I would like to thank Greg for his kind invitation today. 
Official opening 
I now have much pleasure in declaring this Nadi branch of Bank South Pacific open. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 20/2008 
 5
