Tarisa Watanagase: The global economy, policy challenges, and the role 
of the IMF 
Statement by Mrs Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Seventeenth 
Meeting  of  the  International  Monetary  and  Financial  Committee  (IMFC),  Washington  DC, 
12 April 2008. 
Mrs Watanagase is representing the constituency of Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Indonesia, Lao P.D.R., 
Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal, Singapore, Thailand, Tonga, and Vietnam. 
 1. We are meeting at a time of unprecedented challenges and risks. The financial turbulence 
that  started  last  summer  has  gathered  steam  and  spread  across  markets  and  economies. 
Global growth prospects for this year have indeed deteriorated markedly since the last IMFC 
meeting  in  October,  owing  to  tightening  credit  conditions  and  continued  deleveraging.  The 
US  growth  outlook  has  been  revised  down  sharply  and  growth  in  the  other  advanced 
economies is also much weaker. So far emerging markets have remained relatively resilient, 
but going forward, this will depend on the severity and length of the US slowdown. Much will 
also  depend  on  the  depth  of  the  shock  to  the  financial  system,  the  breadth  of  spillovers 
across countries and markets, and the effectiveness of policy responses. 
2.  We  note  that  while  growth  forecasts  have  been  marked  down  significantly,  there  is  no 
sense yet that a global recession is the most likely scenario. Nevertheless, we concur with 
the message of the Fund that risks are clearly tilted to the downside, and agree that it will be 
prudent  for  policymakers  to  prepare  for  more  adverse  outcomes,  though  we  hope  such 
outcomes will not come to pass. It is telling that emerging markets, which have already been 
responsible  for  the  greatest  part  of  the  world’s  economic  growth,  will  play  even  more 
significant  role  in  cushioning  this  downturn.  We  note  that  even  at  the  slower  growth  rates 
projected, emerging markets are still expected to expand at a healthy 6.7 percent this year, 
and will sustain that pace in 2009. Developing Asia can be expected to see even more robust 
growth,  in  excess  of  8  percent,  led  by  China’s  near  double-digit  rate  of  expansion.  It  is 
heartening to note that self-sustaining domestic demand is expected to be a greater feature 
of the expansion of individual Asian economies, along with greater intra-regional trade. 
3. We welcome the ongoing correction of global imbalances we have experienced thus far. 
While recognizing that there is still a risk of disorderly unwinding of these balances, we are 
cautiously optimistic that responsible actions by all parties will prevent such an event. In our 
region,  we  have  significant  adjustments  in  domestic  demand,  underpinned  by  improved 
economic  fundamentals.  As  a  result,  the  surplus  countries  in  our  region  continue  to 
experience a gradual but significant decline in their current account balances, partly due to 
the acceleration in the rate of exchange rate appreciation in the region. Importantly, some 
members  of  our  constituency  have  been  able  to  utilize  the  fiscal  space  arising  from  past 
reforms,  which  is  a  contributing  factor  behind  the  stronger  demand  in  these  countries. 
Nonetheless, the concurrent challenge is to keep inflationary pressures under control while 
ensuring that strong domestic demand does not lead to a build-up of imbalances. 
4.  Notwithstanding  the  baseline  scenario,  it  is  clear  to  us  that  the  Fund  is  correct  in 
identifying the financial turmoil as the single greatest risk to growth. In the US, given the loss 
of confidence, the immediate priority for the authorities was to limit the financial contagion 
and  counter  the  downside  risks  to  growth.  Following  that,  the  first  line  of  defense  was 
monetary  policy  and  monetary  operations  to  inject  liquidity.  The  second  line  was  fiscal 
stimulus.  We  view  these  actions  as  steps  in  the  right  direction,  although  one  should  also 
recognize the limitations of such policies at a time of impaired balance sheets and ebbing 
sentiments. The third line of defense was using public money to safeguard the stability of the 
financial system. In view of the systemic nature of the crisis and the potential for spillovers 
we  appreciate  the  need  for  decisive  policy  actions  and  the  drastic  unorthodox  measures. 
BIS Review 51/2008 
 1
Indeed, our own experience during the Asian crisis was that adherence to a market-centric 
philosophy in an environment where markets have seized up is simply not tenable. At that 
time,  we  advocated  a  more  pragmatic  approach  that  prioritizes  the  resumption  of  credit 
activities in the financial markets. While welcoming the newly-apparent pragmatism shown by 
national authorities in advanced countries and international bodies like the IMF, we caution 
that actions must be carefully designed to return the system to stability without unduly giving 
rise to moral hazard concerns. 
5. Admittedly, any attempt to draw lessons now will be tentative as the crisis has yet to run its 
full  course,  notwithstanding  the  recent  collapse  of  one  of  the  biggest  investment  banks, 
which many have taken as a nadir in this crisis. Our own  view is that until a full extent of 
exposure to these markets is tallied up, an early conclusion to this episode is probably not 
imminent. From an Asian perspective, there’s a sense of déjà vu when we look at this crisis. 
While  the  form  of  various  crises  may  change,  the  underlying  root  causes  are  similar: 
imprudent  lending  and  borrowing  by  poorly  or  unregulated  agents,  inability  of  existing 
regulation  to  catch  up  with  financial  innovation,  over-extended  balance  sheets,  easy 
monetary conditions, and asset price bubbles. In addition, there are obvious questions as to 
the over-reliance on inadequate statistical models and the central role played by credit rating 
agencies in assigning high credit ratings on papers built on less credit-worthy assets that will 
need to be answered. 
6. From our perspective, a number of important lessons ought to be drawn from the turmoil. 
First,  macroeconomic  policies  need  to  be  adjusted  pragmatically  and  where  appropriate, 
swiftly. We do not simply mean that policy must be loosened but rather authorities ought to 
consider carefully their full range of options, giving due regard to the circumstances they find 
themselves  in.  For  instance,  in  an  environment  where  credit  markets  have  ceased  to 
function,  monetary  policy  alone  cannot  do  the  heavy  lifting  needed  to  stabilize  economic 
conditions. Second, swift action to clean up the balance sheets of financial institutions is very 
important to allow the financial system to resume its key intermediation role. Third, reforms, 
be  they  structural,  legal,  regulatory  or  accounting,  should  be  an  important  part  of  the 
medium-term agenda,  as they would serve affected countries well going forward.  Not only 
should regulators be alert and vigilant in systemically important markets, they also need to 
keep up with the rapid pace of innovation. Finally, there needs to be a multilateral effort to 
improve transparency, standards and the quality of regulation. We welcome the work being 
undertaken by all parties in the Financial Stability Forum, of which the Fund is a key member, 
and expect the results will prove illuminating. 
7.  In  drawing  these  conclusions,  we  must  remember  that  we  cannot  entirely  exempt 
ourselves  from  the  booms  and  busts  in  credit  markets,  but  instead  recognize  that  sound 
regulations and prudent capital market practices can play a role in alleviating these cycles. 
However, putting too much emphasis on regulations can also become a double-edged sword 
and hinder innovation and further development, should the pendulum swing the other way. 
To this end, it is rather pragmatic and sound policies that remain alert to developments in 
financial  and  asset  markets,  and  strong  macroeconomic  fundamentals  that  are  our  best 
buffers. 
8. It is trying times like these that remind us of how interconnected we are and how important 
it is for the IMF to continue to play its role effectively as the guardian of global economic and 
financial stability. In our view, the Fund’s role is determined by its mandate. The Fund cannot 
do what it was not built to do. For example, it is neither a regulator nor a central bank. As we 
see  it,  the  Fund’s  role  is  in  analyzing  and  evaluating  policies  and  its  impact,  facilitating 
dialogue  and  disseminating,  both  the  warning  signs  and  the  lessons  learnt,  providing 
guidance  and  lessons  learnt,  forcefully  where  necessary.  To  this  end,  we  see  three  areas 
where the Fund can be useful: 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2008
   The first is in providing policy guidance to individual members. Within its surveillance 
mandate,  the  Fund  should  be  advising  members  what  to  do  and  how  best  to 
respond to the fallout from the crisis. 
The second is in the provision of appropriate financing instruments to ensure that 
members  are  able  to  ride  out  the  turmoil.  The  recent  market  jitters  are  clear 
reminders of a still-fragile global financial system. Another crisis is inevitable – it is 
just a matter of time – and the Fund must stand ready to support its members when 
that happen. In this regard, the review of access limits and the development of crisis 
prevention  instrument,  such  as  the  Rapid  Access  Line  (RAL)  and  the  Financial 
Stability Line (FSL), are critical and should be given priority. 
The third is in facilitating a global dialogue such as the IMFC meetings. It is probably 
wishful  thinking  to  expect  a  large  diverse  group  such  as  this  to  agree  on  policy 
coordination strategies. Nevertheless, even the more modest goal of learning from 
one another has great value by serving to deepen our understanding of the issues, 
which should not be underestimated. 
The Fund’s governance reform 
9. In an increasingly integrated global economy, the distribution power within the Fund must 
adapt to reflect the growing weight of developing and emerging market economies in order to 
make  the  Fund  more  effective  as  an  institution.  Giving  voice  and  ownership  to  member 
countries will increase the legitimacy and efficacy of the IMF. In this regard, we have indeed 
come a long way from where we started two years ago. We thus would like to thank the IMF 
Executive Board, management, and the staff for their dedication and hard work in delivering 
the current quota and voice reform package before us. 
10.  We  welcome  the  flexibility  and  compromise  shown  by  the  members  of  the  Executive 
Board in agreeing to the package we have at these Spring Meetings. It is indeed a delicate 
balancing  act,  having  to  take  into  account  the  differing  views  and  interests  of  all  member 
countries. We particularly underscore important progress that we made to agree to a more 
transparent quota formula. With the inclusion of GDP at purchasing power parity in the GDP 
variable,  and  the  tripling  of  basic  votes,  the  quota  reform  could  better  account  for  the 
dynamism  of  emerging  economies,  while  improving  the  representation  of  low-income 
countries. While no quota reform package is perfect, it is broadly in line with the objectives 
set out in the Singapore Resolution. Like many others, however, we are disappointed that the 
headline shift of quota shares from advanced countries to emerging market and low-income 
countries – which will be the public’s point of focus – is a meager 1.1 percentage points. 
11.  Difficult  compromises  have  been  made,  and  we  believe  it  is  now  time  to  bring  this 
important  issue  to  a  close.  Agreement  on  the  package  by  the  Fund’s  membership  will  be 
critical to restore the Fund’s credibility and legitimacy. Within our constituency, many of us 
will  still  be  highly  under-represented  after  the  second  round  of  ad  hoc  quota  increase. 
However, in the spirit of compromise and flexibility, we are prepared to support this package 
on  the  understanding  that  this  is  the  first  of  many  steps  in  a  reform  process  which  will 
eventually  see  all  countries  close  their  under-representation.  In  this  connection,  we 
underscore  the  importance  of  future  realignment  of  quota  shares  on  a  periodic  basis, 
beginning  with  the  Fourteenth  General  Review  of  quotas,  as  is  currently  proposed  in  the 
package. We maintain that PPP GDP and compression factor should remain in the formula 
for it to credibly capture the dynamic contribution and relative economic size of countries in 
the  world  economy.  We  also  support  the  future  work  program,  in  particular  further 
refinements to the definitions of openness and variability to guide future realignment of quota 
shares. 
12. The New Income Model is also a critical element of the Reform Package, without which 
the  Fund  cannot  discharge  its  functions  properly.  We  are  pleased  to  note  the  broad 
BIS Review 51/2008 
 3
consensus on the core elements of the proposed new income model for the Fund and are 
prepared  to  give  our  support  to  the  emerging  package.  We  would  simply  underline  the 
importance of establishing the necessary governance arrangements that allow the Board and 
the  Management  to  deal  effectively  with  the  risks  that  broadening  the  Fund’s  investment 
mandate will undoubtedly bring. We are also pleased to support the limited sale of Fund gold 
to establish an endowment to generate income. In fact, we see this as a critical component of 
the  new  income  model,  without  which  it  may  be  difficult  for  the  Fund  to  close  its  budget 
deficit.  We  look  forward  to  a  prompt  resolution  on  this  issue,  particularly  from  the  major 
shareholder. 
Strategic directions 
13. As we said in our IMFC statement last October, reform must go beyond quota and voice. 
The Fund should rethink the areas where it has a comparative advantage and where it does 
not. We are glad to note that the Managing Director has taken up the suggestion and made 
this the focus of the refocusing. Thus, we support the shift in focus in the three broad areas: 
strengthen  analysis  on  macro-financial  linkages,  integrating  multilateral  perspectives  in 
bilateral surveillance, and sharpening the work in financial markets. 
14.  We  welcome  the  use  of  these  same  yardsticks  in  guiding  the  ambitious  expenditure 
savings  that  the  Managing  Director  has  proposed.  When  the  IMFC  asked  for  significant 
expenditure reductions last October, we are aware that some of these reductions have been 
painful,  particularly  those  arising  from  the  difficult  decision  to  reduce  staffing  levels  at  the 
Fund. It is critical that in managing this process, the Fund does not lose the capacity to deal 
with  emerging  issues  effectively  and  with  the  high  level  of  professionalism  that  we  have 
come  to  expect.  In  that  regard,  we  consider  the  diversity  of  the  Fund’s  staff  an  important 
asset  that  ought  to  be  preserved  in  the  restructuring  process.  As  an  international 
organization,  we  believe  that  the  face  of  the  Fund  ought  to  reflect  that  of  its  membership. 
More importantly, diversity in terms of expertise, experience, linguistic abilities and cultural 
backgrounds, helps the Fund leverage on a wider base of knowledge, understand country 
circumstances  and  navigate  the  subtleties  of  dealing  with  a  diverse  membership  more 
effectively. 
15. We see the Managing Director’s statement as a good basis for the Fund to move forward 
and appreciate the urgency with which he has sought to implement the strategy. In particular, 
we  welcome  the  budgetary  savings  projected  under  the  medium-term  budget  and  the 
envisaged  implementation  of  reforms  in  the  other  organizational  aspects.  We  would  only 
urge  more  careful  consideration  to  be  given  before  agreeing  to  the  proposal  to  charge  for 
technical assistance. Technical assistance is a key public good of the Fund and is critical to 
improving surveillance and the capacity to design and implement macroeconomic policy in 
many developing and low-income countries. As such, we should ensure that countries who 
need technical assistance will continue to receive it, regardless of their ability to pay. 
16.  We  also  welcome  the  Fund’s  proposed  program  of  work  on  sovereign  wealth  funds 
(SWFs). These funds play a positive role in the global financial market by adding both depth 
and breadth to them, allowing for the efficient distribution of funds, and lowering the cost of 
capital  in  recipient  countries.  The  established  SWFs  are  professionally-run,  long-term 
investors,  with  little  leverage.  Their  ability  to  accommodate  short-term  volatility  has 
contributed to liquidity and stability during periods of market stress, as illustrated in the recent 
crisis. For countries that operate SWFs, they are a useful tool in managing intergenerational 
savings in a manner that preserves macroeconomic and external stability. They help build a 
buffer  against  future  liabilities  arising  from  population  aging  or  other  concerns.  In  other 
words, their use has been driven by purely economic and commercial motives. 
17. The growing concerns over SWFs and various proposals to restrict either the mode of 
their investments or areas in which they might invest are signs of a worrying trend of rising 
investment  protectionism,  and  pose  a  risk  to  international  financial  stability.  We  are 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2008
sympathetic  to  concerns  in  recipient  countries  and  acknowledge  that  these  worries,  if  left 
unaddressed,  would  only  increase  protectionist  sentiments.  In  our  last  meeting,  the  IMFC 
called on the IMF to play a role in identifying best practices for SWFs. We share the view that 
as a multilateral platform, the Fund could play a useful role in this area, by allowing issues to 
be discussed in an open and neutral manner. We welcome the inclusive, collaborative, and 
voluntary  approach  taken  by  the  Fund.  The  principles  should  focus  on  governance, 
institutional  arrangement,  and  transparency  and  be  co-written  by  the  SWFs  and  for  the 
SWFs,  hence  would  help  increase  ownership  of  the  best  practices,  which  is  critical  to  its 
successful adoption. We also welcome the parallel work undertaken by the OECD in drawing 
up a similar set of guidelines for recipient countries to forestall the risk of protectionism. It is 
highly important that in drafting such guidelines, the standards for SWFs should not be more 
onerous than for other large institutional investors. 
Conclusion 
18. In a challenging global economic and financial environment, the IMF has crucial role to 
play to safeguard global financial stability and growth. The Fund’s value lies in its truly global 
perspective which should be leveraged on to produce much needed analysis and guidance 
for  its  members.  As  recent  events  have  shown,  no  country  big  or  small,  advanced  or 
developing  is  immune  to  bouts  of  financial instability  and its  spillovers.  It  is  the  deepening 
inter-dependence that calls for a global response and analysis at the regional and multilateral 
level. We believe that the Fund has the expertise and talent to do this job well. 
19. However, it can do so effectively only with the full cooperation of the membership. The 
current quota and voice reform is an important step towards this end. But this is not enough. 
Further reforms are needed to strengthen its role as a global institution that facilitates global 
monetary and financial cooperation. This can only be achieved by refocusing the Fund’s role 
in line with its mandates and comparative advantage. 
BIS Review 51/2008 
 5
