Ferenc Karvalits: The impact of financial turmoil on the Hungarian 
economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Ferenc  Karvalits,  Deputy  Governor  of  Magyar  Nemzeti  Bank  (Hungary’s 
central  bank),  at  the  Reuters  Central  European  Investment  Summit,  Vienna,  21  October 
2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
A few months ago, I was asked by the organisers of the Reuters Summit to talk about some 
current  issues  in  Hungarian  monetary  policy.  Unfortunately,  over  the  course  of  the  recent 
weeks  the  turmoil  in  international  money  and  capital  markets  have  escalated  to  such  a 
degree that it inevitably calls for an analysis of the current situation engendered by the global 
financial crisis.  
While at this stage it is probably too early to tell how and how much we will be affected by the 
crisis, I will take this opportunity to discuss the major challenges and issues the Hungarian 
economy  currently  faces,  and  how  they  will  affect  monetary  policy-makers’  room  for 
manoeuvre and their mandate to meet the inflation target and ensure financial stability.  
Without  going  into  details  of  the  drivers  that  have  led  to  the  turmoil  in  financial  markets,  I 
would  like  to  briefly  summarise  the  channels  through  which  this  financial  crisis  is  causing 
difficulties in the conduct of our monetary policy. 
The global environment is now characterized by (1) increased risk aversion as investors are 
trying  to  de-leverage  their  balance  sheets,  and  (2)  a  shortage  of  liquidity  as  mutual  trust 
within the financial sector has not yet recovered. 
At the moment, Hungary is negatively affected by both these global phenomena. First, being 
an  emerging  economy,  Hungarian  assets  are  subject  to  the  process  of  de-leveraging. 
Demand for these assets has decreased, and their prices have fallen. Second, as it is natural 
for an economy that is in the phase of catching up with its more developed peers, Hungary 
has been running a current account deficit, and is highly dependent on external financing. 
Concerns  have  emerged  recently  about  how  Hungary  will  be  able  to  finance  this  deficit. 
Indeed, the global liquidity shortage and the resulting reversion of cross-border capital flows 
may make this financing more difficult.  
We  anticipate  that  the  fall  in  global  risk  appetite  and  the  slowdown  in  the  world’s  major 
economic  regions  will  have  repercussions  for  the  Hungarian  economy.  In  the  more 
vulnerable emerging regions, where external debt levels are high and/or the economy has 
shown  signs  of  overheating  through  credit  expansion,  risk  premia  have  risen  sharply  and 
capital outflows have been substantial.  
Hungary’s  vulnerability  indicators  improved  as  a  result  of  the  fiscal  adjustment  measures. 
However,  markets  responded  to  the  changes  in  external  financing  conditions  with  an 
increase in the expected return on Hungarian assets, instead of appreciating the results of 
fiscal  consolidation  by  reducing  risk  premia.  We  were  not  surprised  at  this  move  for  two 
reasons.  First,  although  the  general  government  deficit  fell  significantly,  contributing  to  an 
improvement in external balance, the continued growth in household debt had an offsetting 
effect. Second, the pattern of external financing deteriorated, leading to an increase in the 
ratio of debt liabilities to the total.  
The domestic financial sector is heavily integrated into the European system and, therefore, 
problems  in  Europe  may  spill  over  to  Hungary.  Domestic  banks  have  significant  levels  of 
capital reserves and high profitability. Unfortunately, some of the measures that were taken 
my the European authorities to ease the liquidity problems of financial institutions within the 
BIS Review 151/2008 
 1
euro-zone  have  some  unintended,  but  dramatic  and  detrimental  consequences  for  the 
systems  of  financial  intermediation  within  the  member  states  outside  the  euro-zone,  like 
Hungary.  
First, the ECB’s steps to alleviate the tensions on the different segments of the inter-bank 
market for liquidity resulted in a situation where the ECB’s instruments increasingly take over 
the  allocative  role  of  inter-bank  markets.  These  facilities  provide  riskless  and  convenient 
means to manage liquidity across a range of currencies for the institutions that operate within 
the  euro-zone.  Under  the  current,  turbulent  circumstances  these  institutions  are  not 
motivated  to  return  to  the  market.  However,  financial  intermediaries  outside  the  euro-zone 
are hit two-fold at the same time: not only they have no access to the ECB facilities, but they 
also  have  to  manage  their  liquidity  needs  on  increasingly  thin  inter-bank  markets,  as  their 
traditional euro-zone counterparties opt to resort to the central bank instruments instead. 
The lack of motivation is further exacerbated by the guarantee schemes for bank liabilities. 
As a consequence of these safety nets, the non-euro area institutions, who do not fall under 
their coverage, has become excluded from certain trades due to a shift in perceived riskiness 
relative  to  those  who  are  covered  by  these  schemes.  These  effects  are  not  exclusive  to 
unrelated  entities:  they  even  hinder  trading  relations  between  parent  banks  and  their 
subsidiaries outside the EMU. 
All  in  all,  the  liquidity-inducing  measures  by  the  ECB  and  the  European  authorities,  which 
help to reduce the burden of the banks within the euro-zone, create a greatly uneven playing 
field and additional liquidity pressures for these banks “extra muros”.  
Second, the broadening of the range of eligible collateral for ECB operations have a similar, 
back-lashing  impact  on  the  Member  States’  financial  markets  outside  the  euro  area. 
Financial institutions across Europe that rely increasingly on collateralised ECB operations, 
need  eligible  collateral  more  than  ever.  The  unintended  by-product  is  that  markets,  rather 
than  considering  risk  and  return  when  valuing  assets,  has  begun  to  differentiate  between 
securities to a greater extent on the basis of ECB eligibility, creating excess demand for the 
eligible instruments, and reducing the holdings of those assets that are not in the acceptable 
collateral pool. As securities denominated in the currencies of the Member States outside the 
EMU,  including  government  bonds,  are  not  part  of  the  eligible  set,  markets  for  these 
securities now suffer from illiquidity and excess supply. 
The consequences are unusually high yields, a general lack of demand, and severe frictions 
on  both  the  primary  and  the  secondary  markets  for  government  paper  issued  in  local 
currency.  Again,  the  measures  attempting  to  alleviate  the  problems  within  the  Euro  area 
leads to deteriorating market conditions outside the eurozone. 
All  these  factors,  market-driven  and  regulatory  alike,  led  to  a  rise  in  Hungary’s  external 
financing cost and in the expected return on forint-denominated assets. The financial sector 
has been adjusting to the increasing financing costs of forint and foreign currency assets by 
tightening credit standards, which, in turn, has led to a deterioration in the prospects for the 
real economy. As a result, credit quality may decline, but the ratio of non-performing loans to 
the  total  portfolio  remains  low.  Difficulties  with  raising  funds  may  enforce  a  degree  of 
adjustment which may ultimately lead to tighter domestic credit supply.  
Having listed all these problems, I still believe that the current risk perception of the markets 
regarding  Hungary  is  overplayed.  First  of  all,  I  believe  that  by  now  the  commitment  of 
policymakers both in Europe and the US is very clear: they are willing to do everything to 
unfreeze the credit markets and solve the liquidity shortage. I think that it is only a question of 
time before these efforts will bear fruit and the global liquidity situation will ease. That would 
mean  that  the  single  most  important  factor  factor  that  makes  our  position  difficult  at  the 
moment will disappear, or at least become less pronounced. 
This does not mean that Hungary on its own should sit and wait until the problems are solved 
by the authorities elsewhere. My impression is that the Hungarian government has realised 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2008
the importance of a prompt action. It seems to be committed to bring further improvements in 
the  budget  deficit,  potentially  to  introduce  spending  caps  and  to  increase  the  size  of 
emergency reserves. These measures come on top of the fiscal consolidation process that 
has been going on for two years now quite successfully, as the fiscal targets have been met 
and usually overperformed. Chances are that Hungary will meet the Maastricht fiscal criterion 
as early as this year. This means that the Excessive Deficit Procedure against Hungary will 
be terminated earlier than previously envisaged in the Convergence Programme. The bottom 
line is that reducing the budget deficit will decrease the external financing needs and will help 
to keep the economy on a sustainable path in the face of the recent increase in financing 
costs for emerging economies. 
In the first half of 2008, Hungary’s external financing requirement stabilized between 4 to 4.5 
per cent of GDP. The economic slowdown in Europe and the increasing financing costs have 
already had some influence on the balance of payments, as the improvement in the trade 
balance has stopped, and the income payments on debt slightly increased. In spite of these 
developments  we  still  believe  that  the  external  vulnerability  of  the  country  will  gradually 
diminish as the net external financing requirement is expected to decline further.  
Why?  First,  the  probable  decrease  in  the  foreign  currency  lending  is  likely  to  diminish  the 
households’ consumption, and improve the trade balance. In other words, we expect a sharp 
rise in household savings as the credit to the sector will be cut back. Second, the ongoing 
fiscal  measures  will  have  also  improve  the  external  balance.  Finally,  according  to  our 
projections, the significantly increasing EU-transfers induce lower external financing needs. 
As a consequence, Hungary’s external financing requirement is likely to decrease to close to 
3 per cent of the GDP in 2009. 
As to the measures implemented by the central bank, we have introduced new instruments 
aimed at kick-starting the government securities market and the FX swap market. We try to 
use every tool at our disposal to increase liquidity on these markets. It is important to see 
that the domestic currency interbank market does not show signs of a liquidity problem. It is 
the allocation of foreign currency liquidity where we have experienced frictions. The situation 
in this respect is very similar to the money markets in the euro-zone, where one of the most 
acute problems were also related to foreign currency liquidity, mainly US dollar and Swiss 
franc. It is important to note that in our effort to ease the liquidity squeeze in the domestic FX-
swap  market,  we  are  backed  by  the  ECB,  based  on  a  bilateral  agreement  that  we  jointly 
announced last Thursday. 
The  MNB  constantly  monitors  the  functioning  of  financial  markets  and  the  banking  sector. 
The domestic financial sector continues to be stable. Nevertheless, the MNB is prepared to 
take  further  measures  if  necessary  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  domestic  financial 
infrastructure, consistent with its mandate.  
While at the moment financial markets and the banking sector are in focus, the ultimate goal 
of  monetary  policy  is  the  achievement  and  maintenance  of  price  stability.  The  Monetary 
Council  of  the  Magyar  Nemzeti  Bank  must  consider  the  constant  changes  in  the  external 
environment, which influence the outlook for both economic growth and inflation. The current 
situation  is  aggravated  by  the  fact  that,  albeit  growth  continues  to  be  low,  and  domestic 
demand remains subdued, our external equilibrium have not yet improved to the extent that 
we could leave behind our vulnerability that we have built up in the past.  
According  to  the  forecast  published  in  our  August  Inflation  Report,  the  3  per  cent  inflation 
target will be met by 2010. This baseline forecast is a conditional one. Needless to say, the 
conditions changed significantly since August; most notably the price of crude oil, which was 
above 130 US dollar per barrel, and the forint’s exchange rate, which was more than 10% 
stronger back then.  
This sizeable drop in the oil price is of course good news to the inflation outlook. In addition, 
the  latest  incoming  data,  and  the  dramatic  downward  revisions  of  the  macro-economic 
BIS Review 151/2008 
 3
projections for Europe highlighted the downside risks of a domestic economic growth lower 
than the baseline. This should also help us to bring down the rate of inflation. 
On  the  flipside  of  the  coin  is  the  sharp  increase  in  the  risk  premia,  and  the  forint’s 
subsequent  depreciation.  Due  to  the  quick  pass-through  from  the  exchange  rate  to  import 
prices, this is of course bad news for the inflation outlook.   
We are facing significant uncertainty, and both downside and upside risks are recognised. 
We will assess the balance and come up with a baseline forecast in our November inflation 
report. As usual, risk scenarios will also be presented in our Inflation Report. In the current 
situation of heightened uncertainty, these may receive more attention than usual. 
I  am  convinced  that  we  will  have  the  best  chance  to  steer  the  economy  through  the 
challenging times ahead, if we act consistently and stick to our fundamental principles that 
we laid down at the time of developing our in inflation-targeting regime:  
achieving price stability shall be in the focus of monetary policy,  
• 
our  decisions  shall  be  based  on  a  balanced  assessment  of 
• 
developments, and 
we  shall  adopt  a  medium-term,  forward-looking  approach  to  developing  our 
monetary policy.  
fundamental 
 We are convinced that monetary policy can best contribute to long-term balanced growth by 
ensuring price stability, as this is how we can best preserve investor confidence and allocate 
resources available for the economy most efficiently. However, the smooth functioning of the 
system of financial intermediation is a necessary condition for efficient resource allocation. 
The central bank, therefore, will make every effort to detect and prevent the disturbances to 
the banking sector as early as possible. 
4 
 BIS Review 151/2008
