Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Careful with (the D) words! 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the European Colloquia Series, Venice, 25 November 2008. 
 Introduction1
1.  
I would like to thank the organisers for having invited me here today to share with you my 
views on the economy, in Europe and worldwide, as the title of this session states.  
I  would  first  like  to  share  with  you  the  caution  that  policy-makers  must  have  in  uncertain 
times  like  those  we  are  living  in.  Our  words  are  carefully  listened  and  read  by  economic 
agents  and  market  participants,  who  try  to  get  a  better  understanding  of  economic 
developments  and  possibly  anticipate  policy  decisions.  In  these  circumstances  the  safest 
thing would be to keep quiet, thus avoiding creating misunderstandings, with potential market 
impact. On the other hand, it is our responsibility to intervene in the policy discussions that 
are  taking  place  in  the  current  conjuncture,  especially  if  these  discussions  take  the  wrong 
track.  
The issue that I would like to address today has been raised in several quarters over the last 
few weeks. I do not intend with this speech to attract attention to it, but rather to react to what 
in  my  view  has  been  an  imperfectly  informed  discussion.  It’s  important  to  make  this 
clarification.  When  a  policy-maker  discusses  an  issue  like  deflation,  which  –  rightly  so  – 
raises emotional feelings, the reaction might be to ask: “why did he discuss such an issue?” 
Indeed, when the issue of deflation started to be discussed, in late 2002, markets reacted 
negatively. They probably thought that policymakers were talking about deflation in order to 
prepare economic agents to such an event.  
My  motivation  is  different.  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  phenomenon  of  deflation  because 
several  observers,  journalists,  analysts,  academics,  have  started  to  talk  about  it  in  a  way 
which, in my view, is imprecise. Calling things in the right way, using the appropriate words 
should be the start of any sound analysis. This is what I would like to do today. The intent is 
not  to  influence  market  expectations  about  future  interest  rate  policy  but  to  explain  how 
central banks analyse the economic situation and interpret data with a view to detecting risks 
of deflation. As I already said in the past, it is way more useful for market participants to have 
a good understanding of the analytical framework supporting policy decisions than trying to 
dissect each and every speech of the various members of the policy making body to detect 
any indication about the next policy move. 
One thing that I would like to anticipate from the start is that economic history has thought 
that  deflation  risks  should  be  considered  objectively,  rather  than  emotionally.  On  the  one 
hand, the underestimation of deflation risks might ultimately lead to deflation. On the other 
hand, the overestimation of deflation risks might sow the seeds of the next crisis.  
What is deflation? 
2.  
Deflation is defined as a decline in the price level, such as the consumer price index, which 
has three main characteristics. It is: i) generalised, i.e. it affects all prices; ii) persistent, i.e. it 
lasts  for  some  time,  over  several  years;  and  iii)  expected  by  economic  agents.  It  is  often 
associated with a reduction in aggregate demand. An important sign of a deflation is the self-
                                                 
1  
I thank L. Dedola, K. Forster, C. Kamps and M. Rostagno for their input in the preparation of these remarks. 
BIS Review 146/2008 
 1
perpetuating nature of the process.2 The expectation of price reductions induces households 
to postpone consumption and firms to reduce wage costs and to delay investment, also in 
view  of  the  higher  rate  of  return.  This  depresses  aggregate  demand  which  puts  further 
downward  pressure  on  prices.  The  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  might  further 
exacerbate  this  tendency.  A  well-known  example  of  a  self  reinforcing  price-income 
mechanism is Japan’s experience in the 1990s – also referred to as the “lost decade”. 
A  deflation  triggered  by  a  sharp  fall  in  aggregate  demand,  possibly  accompanied  by 
unpredictable  changes  in  economic  sentiment  (the  Keynesian  “animal  spirits”)  which  leads 
producers to cut prices on an ongoing basis, poses a serious cause of concern, in particular 
if  it  manifests  itself  in  conjunction  with  a  protracted  economic  slowdown  and  with  risks  of 
financial  stability.  This  can  result  in  a  self-perpetuating  downward  spiral,  in  which 
conventional economic policy options are severely restricted. The system may find itself in a 
situation  not  very  different  from  the  Keynesian  “liquidity  trap”,  where  private  sector 
expectations  of  falling  nominal  and  real  values  of  financial  and  real  assets  lead  agents  to 
cling to any liquid and safe asset as much as possible.  
Those  self-perpetuating  effects  may  arise  through  various  channels,  via  onerous  debt 
burden,  personal  and  corporate  bankruptcies,  financial  crises  or  other  adverse  conditions. 
According to the “debt-deflation-hypothesis”, first mentioned by Irving Fisher in 1933, falling 
prices increase the real debt burden and adversely affect firms’ balance sheets, which may 
result  in  a  rising  number  of  insolvencies  and  make  banks  more  reluctant  to  grant  loans, 
leading  to  a  further  slowdown  in  investment,  creating  additional  deflationary  pressures. 
Furthermore, if consumers expect a further decline in prices and face inefficiently high and 
positive  real  interest  rates,  this  may  lead  to  a  general  reluctance  to  purchase,  causing  a 
further decrease in aggregate demand and a further downward movement of the price level. 
In addition, in all cases on record, a sudden and sharp drop of asset prices which resulted in 
significant losses of wealth have been a crucial factor in amplifying and propagating the initial 
disturbance. All these factors, sometimes paired together with policy failures, may add to the 
severity and the length of the downturn. 
What is not deflation? 
3.  
Not all declines in the price level are deflation. First, individual prices can and do fall. In the 
euro  area,  for  example,  price  of  computers  have  fallen  substantially  and  nobody  has 
complained.  Even  the  overall  consumer  price  index,  such  as  the  euro  area  HICP,  can  fall 
from time to time on account of seasonal factors as well as in the wake of large changes in 
import or energy prices. The consumer price index might also fall if, following an exogenous 
shock, the equilibrium price level is lowered and the economy is flexible enough to achieve 
the  adjustment  quite  rapidly.  I  would  call  this  adjustment  disinflation,  which  can  entail  a 
temporary negative inflation in order for the price level to achieve its new equilibrium level. 
Disinflation  can  also  be  associated  with  a  negative  growth  of  aggregate  demand,  at  least 
temporarily. However, the quicker the adjustment in prices takes place, the lesser will be the 
output cost of the adjustment.  
The difference between deflation and disinflation is neither the possibility of a negative price 
change,  nor  the  association  with  a  fall  in  output.  The  difference  is  that,  in  a  deflation 
                                                 
2   A mere decrease of prices of some categories of goods, in individual sectors or in certain regions should also 
not be termed deflation. In a market economy, such relative price adjustments are a response to changes in 
supply and demand – for example differences in sectoral productivity developments – and are essential for an 
efficient welfare-enhancing allocation of resources. Deflation per se only occurs when price declines are so 
widespread  that  broad-based  indices  of  prices  register  ongoing  declines.  This  is  particular  relevant  for  the 
euro area, as the consequences of deflation in the whole area would also be very different from a decline in 
prices in any individual euro area country (Issing, 2002). 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2008
scenario,  expectations  of  price  changes  turn  negative  and  induce  agents  to  postpone 
consumption  and  investment  decisions.  It’s  the  negative  inflation  expectations  that  pushes 
the (ex-ante) real interest rate up, even when the nominal interest rate is brought down to 
zero, above its equilibrium level.  
It  is  not  clear  what  could  push  agents  to  expect  negative  inflation,  and  thereby  enter  a 
deflation scenario, rather than a standard disinflation. One possibility is that agents are not 
fully  rational  and  form  adaptive  expectations.  As  they  observe  the  start  of  the  disinflation, 
with a negative inflation rate necessary to achieve the new equilibrium, they may think that 
the negative price change is likely to persist for some time. Negative inflation expectations 
might thus become entrenched. Given the zero bound on interest rates, the negative inflation 
pushes  real  rates  up,  thereby  adding  recessionary  forces  to  the  economy,  which  might 
further fuel price declines.  
Another  hypothesis  is  that  the  disinflation  process  is  not  sufficiently  quick  to  stabilise  the 
economy  at  the  new  equilibrium.  As  in  the  case  of  asset  markets  that  do  not  function 
properly,  when  the  equilibrium  price  is  not  achieved  rapidly  enough  and  the  adjustment 
process is slow, the price dynamics will take longer and might even overshoot, generating 
destabilising patterns. The same could occur for the real economy, as a lack of flexibility in 
markets delays the adjustment of the price level, which may take more time and generate 
negative  expectations.  This  scenario  might  be  aggravated  if  policies  aim  at  stabilizing  the 
economy at the “wrong” equilibrium, delaying the adjustment towards the new equilibrium. I 
would conjecture that the more the economy is kept away from its equilibrium, the more the 
adjustment,  in  terms  of  prices  and  output,  might  become  non-linear.  This  could  happen  in 
particular  if  the  classical  transmission  mechanisms  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  are 
impaired, for instance due to a loss of confidence in the financial system. More work needs to 
be done in this field, in particular in order to understand how price expectations are formed in 
the face of a negative demand shock. 
Detecting deflation 
4.  
Looking at history, although deflation experiences have occurred, they have been quite rare. 
Most  of  us  immediately  think  of  the  deflation  during  the  Great  Depression  and  the  recent 
experience  of  Japan.  The  sustained  deflationary  episodes  of  the  Great  Depression  in  the 
1930s and in Japan in the second half of the 1990s bear some common underlying factors. 
Both episodes followed long periods of exceptionally optimistic views on potential output and 
major  speculative  stock  price  and  asset  price  bubbles.  In  both  cases,  an  exchange  rate 
appreciation contributed to strengthening deflationary pressures. At the same time, there are 
also obvious differences between the two episodes. The role of monetary policy was clearly 
more  damaging  in  the US.  As  Friedman  and  Schwartz  (1963)  show  the  initial  downturn  in 
August  1929  and  the  following  Great  Depression  were  mostly  due  to  restrictive  monetary 
policy,  which  added  substantially  to  the  rapid and  strong decline  in  demand.  From  August 
1929 to March 1933, US real GDP fell by almost 30%, or 7.6% on a yearly average. Similar 
drastic declines in average annual output occurred in other countries (for example, Canada 
-8.4%,  Germany  -2.7%,  United  Kingdom  -1.0%  and  France  -2.2%).  The  contraction  was 
transmitted to the rest of the world via the fixed exchange rate linkages of the gold standard 
and by “golden fetters” which prevented the monetary authorities of gold standard adherents 
from following the expansionary policies needed to offset the collapsing demand and a rash 
of  banking  panics  across  the  world  (Bernanke  and  James,  1991),  without  triggering  a 
speculative attack on the gold parity (Eichengreen, 1992).  
Monetary conditions have played a role also in the case of Japan. With hindsight, it could be 
argued that monetary policy was overly accommodative during the run up of the bubble, and 
possibly  too  tight  as  the  recession  started,  in  1991.  In  any  case,  it  is  now  clear  that 
deflationary risks were obviously not recognised at the time. Furthermore, weakness in the 
supervisory system and ingrained practices in the banking sector hampered the ability of the 
BIS Review 146/2008 
 3
economy  to  resolve  the  non-performing  loans  problems,  with  lasting  implications  on  the 
recovery  of  output.  Leading  to  a  protracted  slump,  the  price  level  decline  in  Japan  was 
nevertheless considerably weaker than the fall in prices in most countries during the Great 
Depression.  Falling  below  zero  in  1995,  the  inflation  rate  remained  negative,  until  2005, 
averaging 0.1% p.a.. On the other hand, overall production did not suffer as much during this 
period. From its previous peak in 1990, of above 5%, GDP growth declined to a standstill in 
1992-1993. Between 1995 and 2007 Japan’s per capita GDP grew at an average yearly rate 
of only 1.2%, against 1.8% in the euro area and 1.9% in the US.  
Looking  at  the  current  situation,  inflation  reached  a  peak  only  a  few  months  ago.  In  July, 
inflation in the U.S. hit 5.6%, the highest rate since 1991. In the same month, inflation in the 
euro area surged to 4% and, in the UK, consumer price inflation hit 5.2% in September. This 
high inflation was mainly the result of the surge in commodity prices in the first half of the 
year.  Since  then,  global  economic  growth  slowed  down  sharply  and  the  commodity  boom 
turned to bust. The price of the barrel of crude oil dropped sharply, from a peak of 147 US-
dollar/barrel in July to below 50 US dollars prt barrel in recent days. Against this background, 
the  latest  releases  have  shown  a  significant  decline  in  inflation  rates,  though  in  most 
countries still remaining above the respective medium term-objective for price stability. The 
data clearly do not show any country in deflation right now.  
Looking ahead, the inflation outlook is bound to change substantially. If raw materials prices 
remain  at  current  levels,  the  year-on-year  change  in  the  energy  related  component  of  the 
consumer  price  indices  will  turn  sharply  negative  in  many  countries  in  2009.  As  a  result 
global inflation can be expected to drop quickly over the next months, but should remain in 
positive territory. For the euro area, the latest inflation forecasts for 2009 range as follows 
(see Table 1): 1.4% for the OECD, 1.6% for the IMF, 1.8% for Consensus Economics. For 
2010  many  forecasts  foresee  a  pick  up  in  inflation  in  the  euro  area,  except  for  the  OECD 
(1.3%); Consensus Forecast projects 2.0%. To my knowledge, no individual private sector 
analyst or forecast is projecting deflation in the euro area either; this is true, in particular, for 
the ECB’s Survey of Professional Forecasters. The longer term expectations, as measured 
by  the  5-year  break-even  inflation  rate  5  years  ahead  derived  from  inflation-linked  bonds 
hover  around  2%.  Moreover,  the  available  forecasts  and  expectations  do  not  foresee  any 
material risk of deflation in the United States either. 
Overall,  while  a  number  of  factors  suggest  that  inflationary  pressures  will  decline 
significantly,  there  are  currently  no  signs  of  deflationary  expectations.  As  long  as  inflation 
expectations remain firmly anchored, deflation will therefore remain a rather remote risk. 
Deflation and monetary policy: strategy and implementation 
5. 
In  recent  years,  we  have  acquired  considerable  knowledge  about  the  causes,  nature  and 
dynamics  of  deflation.  The  insights  we  have  gained,  including  recognition  of  our  imperfect 
knowledge,  provide  valuable  input  for  policymakers.  I  will  conclude  by  summarising  the 
pertinent issues for monetary policy.  
How  can  central  banks  prevent  or  at  least  minimise  deflation  risks  and  how  can  they 
effectively counter such risks if they materialise? By using an appropriate strategy to anchor 
expectations  and  to  take  robust  decisions,  by  employing  policy  instruments  in  an  effective 
and credible manner, and by ensuring that markets and the public at large are fully informed 
and understand the central bank’s intentions and actions. Of course, the conduct of monetary 
policy should always be characterised by these elements. But these become indispensable 
in preventing and counteracting the risk of deflation. Let me examine them in turn. 
The ability of the monetary authorities to anchor expectations to the price stability objective is 
crucial  –  and  can  be  thought  of  as  a  first  line  of  defence  against  deflation  risks.  The 
anchoring of inflation expectations can be greatly facilitated by a quantitative specification of 
the price stability objective. In choosing this quantitative objective, account should be taken, 
4 
 BIS Review 146/2008
among other things, of potential deflation risks. When the ECB evaluated its monetary policy 
strategy in 2003, it confirmed its quantitative definition of price stability; at the same time, it 
clarified that in the pursuit of price stability it will aim to maintain inflation rates close to but 
below 2% over the medium term. This clarification was partly meant to underline “the ECB’s 
commitment to provide a sufficient safety margin to guard against the risks of deflation” and 
also to “ address the issue of the possible presence of a measurement bias in the HICP and 
the  implications  of  inflation  differentials  within  the  euro  area”.  The  quantitative  definition  of 
the  monetary  policy  objective  can  help  make  expectations  of  future  price  developments 
“mean-reverting”,  thus  ensuring  that  they  do  not  depart  from  the  central  bank’s  stated 
objective. Needless to say, the ability of the central bank to anchor expectations ultimately 
depends on the effectiveness with which it achieves its goal. 
This  requires,  especially  in  an  environment  of  low  inflation  and  low  interest  rates,  that  the 
central  bank  uses  a  strategy  which  provides  a  robust  basis  for  decision-making  and  an 
effective framework for communicating policy decisions. A robust strategy is one that can be 
expected to work acceptably well under different assumptions concerning the channels and 
dynamics  of  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism,  including  alternative  hypotheses 
regarding the type and degree of nominal rigidities, the nature and formation of expectations. 
The ECB’s strategy combines economic and monetary analysis in assessing the outlook for 
price stability and the associated risks. It is suited for the conduct of monetary policy in an 
environment of low inflation. Monetary analysis does not only serve to “cross-check” from a 
longer-term  perspective,  the  assessment  based  on  the  economic  analysis,  which  focuses 
over a short to medium-term horizon. Monetary analysis can also provide useful information 
on the evolution of asset prices and help signal misalignments in asset markets that – if left 
unchecked –  may  unwind  in  disorderly  way.3  A  robust  approach  to the  assessment  of  the 
risks surrounding the economic outlook can insure against inaction or too hasty decisions, 
which can be both regretted with hindsight. In this respect, the historical evidence supports 
the conclusion that monetary aggregates can play an important role when inflation is low or 
negative and the nominal interest rate is constrained by the zero lower bound.4
With  regard  to  policy  implementation,  the  old  saying  “prevention  is  better  than  cure”  is 
applicable  also  when  deflation  risks  concretely  emerge.  The  potentially  complex  deflation 
dynamics suggest that the central bank should act promptly and, possibly, in a pre-emptive 
fashion. Acting decisively and early, the central bank can reduce the probability that the zero-
interest rate becomes a binding constraint and that conventional monetary policy becomes 
ineffective.  A  swift  policy  easing  may  further  help  to  stabilise  asset  prices,  counter  a 
disproportionate widening in the market risk premium and thus prevent a sharp decline in the 
provision of credit.  
However, such an approach, aimed at taking insurance against a possible deflation risk, also 
entails costs. First, it may contribute to, rather than obviate, a worsening of market sentiment, 
if it is interpreted as a signal that the central bank has a more pessimistic assessment of the 
economy  than  market  participants.  It  has  been  observed  at  times  that  sharp  reductions  of 
policy rates have led to a deterioration of market sentiment. A policy of ensuring against a 
deflation  risk,  without  clear  evidence  that  the  risk  is  materialising,  might  in  fact  coordinate 
agents’  expectations  of  negative  inflation,  thus  increasing  its  likelihood.  Second,  if  the 
transmission of monetary policy does not function properly, the lowering of policy rates is not 
transmitted  to  the  real  economy  and  is  thus  not  effective.  We  can  see  that  in  the  current 
environment rates to end users have fallen much less than policy rates. This undermines the 
confidence on the effectiveness of monetary policy, which might aggravate the problem. It is 
thus  preferable  to  devote  efforts  to  improve  the  transmission  mechanism,  in  particular  by 
                                                 
3   See O. Issing (2002) and C. Borio and P. Lowe (2002). 
4   See M. Bordo and A. Filardo (2005). 
BIS Review 146/2008 
 5
strengthening  the  solvency  situation  of  the  banking  system.  Third,  the  exhaustion  of  all 
ammunitions  earlier  in  the  process,  when  there  is  no  evidence  of  a  deflationary  shock, 
reduces  the  margin  of  manoeuvre  in  case  other  adverse  shocks  occur.  For  instance,  if 
foreign exchange markets do not display a major appreciation of the exchange rate, which in 
the past has always been associated with deflation, monetary policy should maintain some 
room  to  counter  such  undesired  development.  Finally,  if  deflation  risks  eventually  subside, 
too loose a monetary policy stance can fuel excessive risk taking, which would give rise to a 
new asset bubble that would lead down the road to even greater problems. Let me spend a 
few words on this objection. 
The counter argument is that the real problem of lowering rates would emerge if rates were 
kept at low levels for too long, something central banks have been reproached in the first half 
of this decade. To avoid this scenario, the solution is not to avoid cutting rates to a low level 
but to raise them quickly enough, when the deflation fears evaporate. However, this strategy 
is not time consistent. In order to be credible, a policy of low interest rates aimed at ensuring 
against a deflation risk must affect the whole yield curve. This requires that the central bank 
commits  to  maintain  low  rates  for  a  prolonged  period  of  time.5  Only  in  this  way  is  the 
incentive created to invest in risky assets rather than holding money.  However, the longer 
are interest rates held at a low level, below the equilibrium one, the greater is the need for a 
quick tightening, to reverse the course and bring back the policy in line. But such a tightening 
would induce a substantial re-pricing of risk and a potential downloading of these risky assets 
from  investors’  portfolios.  The  more  agents  have  accumulated  risky  assets  on  the 
expectation that rates will remain low, the more the decision to finally increase policy rates 
will produce some disruption in asset markets. The experience of 1994 is quite interesting in 
that respect. There is thus a natural tendency to postpone the decision to tighten until the 
evidence that the recovery is solidly taking place is clear cut. Raising rates too early would 
be  feared  as  jeopardising  the  recovery.  On  the  other  hand,  the  more  the  rate  increase  is 
delayed, the sharper it should be, to catch up with the lost ground.6 But a similar problem to 
the one just explained would emerge. To avoid creating turbulence, the tightening tends to 
be conducted at a measured pace, which inevitably leads policy to be behind the curve.  
To sum up, if interest rates are pushed very low on the fear of deflation, and deflation does 
not materialize, market participants will have sooner or later to shed the risky assets that they 
accumulated in their portfolios as a result of the low level of rates and to account for capital 
losses.  Monetary  policy  might  postpone  the  timing  of  such  portfolio  reallocation,  keeping 
rates  low  and  thus  maintaining  the  incentive  to  avoid  the  capital  loss,  but  the  time  of 
reckoning  will  come  at  a  certain  point.  The  incentive  could  be  to  postpone  it  as  long  as 
possible. The risk is that when the adjustment finally comes, on top of other adjustments in 
the economy, its effects are very disruptive. This story might sound familiar. It should call for 
prudence in conducting so-called “insurance” policies. They may sound costless in the short 
term, but the bill might come when least expected, and with a surcharge.  
Conclusions 
6.  
In my opinion the term "deflation" is often misused as a catch-all phrase describing all kinds 
of  negative  developments.  This  can  obviously  be  dangerous  as  it  could  lead  to  the  wrong 
policy advice, like a false diagnosis may lead to the prescription of overly aggressive medical 
treatment. The patient may think that this is harmless, and costless if he is insured. But as 
doctors know, there is no benign medicine and patients are always invited to carefully read 
the list of side effects and possible complications.  
                                                 
5   See Bernanke (2002). 
6   See L. Bini Smaghi (2006). 
6 
 BIS Review 146/2008
The best contribution that monetary policy can make to avoid the negative scenarios that I 
have described is to be implemented within a framework that ensures both a clear definition 
of  price  stability  and  a  medium  term  strategy  in  which  relevant  economic  and  financial 
indicators are taken into account. This is the way the ECB has conducted monetary policy, 
also  in  turbulent  times.  This  is  not  sufficient,  however.  It  is  essential  that  the  transmission 
mechanism  of  monetary  policy  is  improved,  so  that  the  monetary  impulse  is  transmitted 
effectively  to  the  real  economy.  This  requires  decisive  action,  in  particular  by  national 
governments, to ensure the solidity of the financial system and restore confidence in financial 
markets.  
* This refers to the first 2 quarters of 2010 as reported in the Survey in September 2008. 
 References 
L.  Benati  (2008),  “Investigating  Inflation  Persistence  Across  Monetary  Regimes”,  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 123(3), 1005-1060. 
B. Bernanke (2002), “Deflation: Making sure “it” Doesn’t Happen Here”, Remarks before the 
National Economist Club, Washington, DC, 21 November 2002. 
L. Bini Smaghi (2006), “Three questions on Monetary tightening”, Nomura Conference, 26-27 
October 2006 (www.ecb.int). 
M. Bordo, C. Erceg and C. Evans (2000), “Money, Sticky Wages and the Great Depression,” 
American Economic Review. 
M. Bordo and A. Filardo (2005), “Deflation and Monetary Policy in a Historical Perspective: 
Remembering  the  Past  or  Being  Condemned  to  Repeat  It”,  Economic  Policy  Vol.  20(44), 
799-844.  
M. Bordo, J. Landon Lane and A. Redish (2004): “Good versus Bad Deflation: Lessons from 
the Gold Standard Era,” NBER Working Paper No. 10329 (February). 
C. Borio and P. Lowe (2002): “Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability: Exploring the 
Nexus,” BIS Working Paper No. 114. 
J.  Bradford  De  Long  and  L.  Summers  (1986):  “Is  Increasing  Price  Flexibility  Stabilising?” 
American Economic Review No. 76, 5, pp. 1031-1044. 
L. Christiano, R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2003): “The Great Depression and the Friedman-
Schwartz Hypothesis,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 35(6, Part 2), December, 1119-
1197. 
C. Goodhart (2004): “Beyond Current Policy Frameworks,” BIS Working Paper 189. 
O. Issing (2002): “Central Bank Perspectives on Stabilization Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank 
of Kansas City Economic Review, Vol. 87, 4 (Fourth Quarter). 
J. M. Keynes (1936): “The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money”, London: Mc 
Millan.  
BIS Review 146/2008 
 7
S. Kuroda and I. Yamamoto (2003) “The Impact of Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity on the 
Unemployment  Rate:  Quantitative  Evidence 
IMES  Discussion  Paper 
No. 2003-E-12. 
for  Japan,” 
8 
 BIS Review 146/2008
