Henrique Meirelles: Bretton Woods II – on its way out? 
Speech  by  Mr  Henrique  Meirelles,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil,  at  the  18th 
Frankfurt European Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 21 November 2008. 
 In the last few weeks, much was talked about “Bretton Woods II” and even about “Bretton 
Woods III”, as we heard here this morning. To many, “Bretton Woods II” represents a new 
era of cooperation between economic and financial authorities worldwide, aimed at fighting 
the current global crisis, enhancing cross-border regulation and possibly reform the financial 
system  at  some  extent.  To  many  others,  it  is  a  full  redesign  of  the  global  financial 
architecture  and  of  the  role  of  the  multilateral  institutions.  To  a  few,  it  implies  a  sort  of 
arrangement to stabilize major exchange rates – or at least to reduce their fluctuation, not to 
say a new global exchange rate system, maybe as the one established in the aftermath of 
the Second World War. 
Yet,  five  quarters  after  the  beginning  of  the  financial  turmoil  in  the  US,  few  people  would 
envisage that we would go that far in terms of international cooperation and proposals, as 
indicated by the communiqué of the summit of head of states of the G20, held in Washington 
on Nov 15. The communiqué put forward not only a series of ambitious recommendations, 
but  also  a  plan  of  action  for  the  near  future  that  may  reshape  the  global  regulatory 
framework. Even controversial issues that were long blocking international negotiations, as 
the Doha agenda, received a new momentum in the G20 communiqué.  
So far, as you all know, significant progress has been achieved in terms of recognition of the 
causes  of  the  crises,  including  development  of  unsound  risk  management  practices  and 
excessive leverage, in a time regulators in many jurisdictions failed to perceive the build up 
of unbalances in individual institutions and financial markets in general. 
At the same time, each country in one way or another has taken actions to provide liquidity 
and unfreeze credit markets, and when necessary – particularly in mature economies – to 
stimulate  the  economy,  strengthen  the  capital  basis  of  financial  institutions  and  tackle 
regulatory deficiencies. 
That  said,  authorities  in  Washington  committed  to  implement  reforms  that  will  strengthen 
financial  markets  and  regulatory  regimes.  An  important  novelty  is  the  recognition  that 
financial  markets  are  global  in  scope,  so  that  enhanced  international  cooperation  among 
regulators is needed in a globalized world. 
Commitment  to  reform  the  multilateral  institutions  to  increase  their  legitimacy  and 
effectiveness  has  also  progressed,  granting  a  larger  weight  in  their  decision  bodies  to 
emerging economies, as well as expanding the representativeness of the Financial Stability 
Forum  and  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  The  IMF  and  the  expanded 
Financial Stability Forum are called to increase efforts in crisis prevention and responses.  
The  G20  communiqué  backed  the  calls  for  a  broader  international  cooperation  in  several 
fronts,  but  let  me  remind  you  that  the  international  community  of  central  bankers  and 
financial regulators have already developed strong cooperation ties. Institutions as the BIS 
with  its  regular  meetings  or  governors  and  of  senior  central  bank  officials  and  experts  or 
forums like the Basel Committees and the Financial Stability Forum have been providing for 
years the necessary dialogue, exchange of ideas and information between us. I understand 
that other forums of economic authorities can replicate our own model of cooperation.  
Regarding the IMF, the discussion currently concentrates around its role and legitimacy. Its 
role should focus on three main topics. The first is surveillance. It is very important that the 
IMF becomes a key and integral part of the financial early warning system. The IMF is vital 
not only in terms of forecasting, which is already regularly performed and published, but also 
BIS Review 147/2008 
 1
in terms of surveillance of each country’s policies and specific warning indicators, aimed at 
detecting  its  growing  unbalances.  One  of  the  points  that,  in  my  personal  opinion,  have 
complicated efforts to deal with the current financial crisis is that the whole focus of the IMF 
during decades was to prevent crises in emerging markets. There is a different picture now, 
and  is  paramount  that  the  surveillance  done  by  the  IMF  focus  on  every  relevant  economy 
and really works as an early warning system. 
The  second  topic,  evidently,  is  international  cooperation.  And  international  cooperation 
requires that the IMF and the Financial Stability Forum work together to propose a new set of 
regulations – some of them were already discussed here today, and particularly regulation 
and supervision of cross-border transactions, which are not directly restricted to one national 
supervisory authority. The Basel Committee will most likely continue to be the focal point of 
conducting the implementation of the process. 
The third topic is the IMF role in supporting emerging and developing countries, which have 
no  financial  conditions  to  address  the  effects  of  the  financial  turmoil  on  their  economies. 
Traditionally, the IMF has focused on crisis generated in one specific economy or group of 
economies and in proposing policies to restore that country’s soundness. The problem that 
we are facing today is that some countries might have a sound policy but were affected by 
the  global  systemic  crisis.  How  to  react  to  that?  If  the  crisis  is  “imported”  and  the  country 
cannot meet its financing needs, the IMF should provide liquidity and contribute to any kind 
of  anti-cyclical  adjustment.  In  that  regard,  the  authorities  of  leading  economies  should 
usefully consider to allow the IMF to issue bonds. In a moment of de-leveraging, when we 
are  talking  about  re-leveraging,  a  leveraged  IMF  would  have  increased  ability  to  meet  its 
rising challenges.  
In regard to the World Bank, it should focus on poor countries, the ones that not only require 
liquidity or loans, but effectively need financial support. And for both the IMF and the World 
Bank, a critical question today is legitimacy. And the way emerging market economies are 
playing a more important role in the global economy – not only they are representing a larger 
share of world output as compared to before, but also represent at this point a solution for 
the crisis – it is imperative that these countries have a proportional weight in the governance 
structure of the two Bretton Woods institutions. 
Another fundamental development these days is the increasing role played by the G20, for 
the very same reason of the growing participation of emerging markets economies in global 
output. It is clear today that the G7 alone or even the G10 are not able to address all relevant 
issues that affect the world economy, which are better dealt by a larger group as the G20. 
Evidently there is always a trade-off, the larger the group, the more difficult its effectiveness. 
But that is a challenge that we have to face. The first meeting of heads of states of the G20 
was an essential step towards making the G20 a more effective decision-making forum. 
The next topic is a global supervisory authority. The G20 suggested the creation of a college 
of  supervisors,  following  a  Financial  Stability  Forum  recommendation.  President  Köhler 
raised here the idea of having the IMF playing this role. We are in the very preliminary phase 
of this discussion and many challenges lay ahead in that regard, particularly deciding what 
should  be  subject  to  international  supervision  and  what  should  be  subject  to  national  or 
regional supervisory entities. 
Much of the discussion today evolves around crisis prevention. In terms of crisis resolution, 
the  recommendation  is  for  every  country  to  take  all  the  necessary  actions  to  restore  the 
regular  working  of  its  financial  system,  consumer  and  investor  confidence  and  the  level  of 
economic  activity.  But  every  country  must  act  according  to  its  needs  and  resources. 
Countries  were  financial  institutions  faced  severe  losses  require  capital  injections,  while 
some countries have to boost domestic demand to compensate for too much dependency on 
exports.  The  important  point  here  is  to  draw  a  clear  difference  between  fiscal  stimulus, 
liquidity management and monetary policy.  
2 
 BIS Review 147/2008
The  difference  between  liquidity  management  and  monetary  policy  is  not  clear  for  many 
observers nowadays, but it is nonetheless fundamental. In moments of market disfuntionality, 
for  instance,  monetary  easing  sometimes  does  not  work.  It  is  important  to  mention  that  in 
some  circumstances  liquidity  management  is  the  critical  issue.  Of  course,  we  should  not 
forget the need for price stability in order to have the basis to restore growth. 
In  this  regard  and  despite  recent  criticism,  inflation  targeting  continues  to  be  the  most 
appropriate  monetary  regime  to  coordinate  inflation  expectations  in  both  mature  and 
emerging  economies,  not  only  providing  transparency  but  also  taking due  consideration  of 
time  lags  and  uncertainties  in  the  process  of  monetary  policy  implementation.  In  fact,  the 
combination  of  short-term  flexibility  with  the  permanent  commitment  to  price  stability 
embedded in the framework makes it particularly suitable to the current environment.  
While disinflation will possibly be fast in mature economies, creating adequate conditions for 
monetary  counter-cyclical  actions  in  different  countries,  in  emerging  economies  disinflation 
will probably be slower, particularly where the authorities have not prevented inflation from 
escalating  recently,  or  where  they  did  not  retain  a  vigilant  attitude.  In  any  case,  inflation 
targeting  is  the  most  suited  framework  to  coordinate  the  public’s  inflation  expectations, 
particularly in an environment marked by growing uncertainty. 
BIS Review 147/2008 
 3
