Tarisa Watanagase: Financial policy and strategy in ASEAN countries 
Address  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  4th  National 
Conference of Economists, Chiang Mai, 24 October 2008. 
 Distinguished Speakers and Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be present at this year’s National Conference of Economists on the 
theme of “ASEAN Economic Development”. Today, my brief remark on this important topic 
will focus on two parts. First, I would like to highlight the economic strengths of ASEAN, and 
how financial policy and strategy have a role in enhancing such strengths. Second, I would 
like to share my view on the preparations that ASEAN together should make to weather the 
global financial storm. 
First, on the strengths of ASEAN, I would like underscore that ASEAN has always been an 
important economic and political force. In fact, the region is becoming an important source of 
growth for the global economy as several ASEAN members are the world’s fastest growing 
economies. 
ASEAN  has  always  been  active  trading  nations.  Its  external  trade  accounts  for  almost  5 
percent of the world’s exports and imports in 2006. This ratio is a big jump from less than 1 
percent two decades ago. It also represents a rate of growth over that period of average 34 
percent per annum, compared to less than 20 percent growth rate of world trade. 
ASEAN exports are not just raw materials and prime commodities. The last few decades saw 
probably the most rapid industrialization since the industrial revolution occurring in ASEAN. 
ASEAN became renowned for exports of consumer products of great values. We are now 
hubs for automobile and electronics production. 
Another  noteworthy  development  in  recent  times  also  includes  trade  expansion  among 
ASEAN  nations.  Intra-ASEAN  trade  used  to  represent  only  about  12  percent  of  its  overall 
trade in 1993, but today, that figure has increased to around 25 percent. Moreover, this trend 
is  set  to  accelerate,  resulting  in  trade  expansion  both  within  ASEAN  itself,  and  between 
ASEAN and the rest of the world. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Today,  the  importance  of  ASEAN  in  the  global  economy  cannot  be  denied.  Size-wise, 
ASEAN  population  amounts  to  565  million  with  growing  middle  class  population,  which 
means stronger demand for consumer products and financial services. Looking forward, for 
ASEAN growth to continue and able to avoid disruptive crises, the economic and financial 
infrastructure that underpins our economic activities must be strong. 
This brings me to the role of financial policy and strategy to enhance ASEAN strengths. For 
ASEAN  to  be  strong,  a  necessary  condition  is  that  its  financial  system  must  be  deep  and 
wide. And its financial institutions must function as intermediaries to allocate funds effectively 
and  efficiently.  In  the  past,  ASEAN  relied  on  external  source  of  funding,  mainly  from 
developed countries. At present, however, new polar source of funding has shifted towards 
Asia  as  well  as  ASEAN.  Having  well-developed  financial  system  would  enable  ASEAN  to 
better recycle its surplus capital among its members. 
For decades, ASEAN has used its banking system to manage resource allocation. Banking 
system worked fine in the past. However, in new and volatile financial environments, ASEAN 
needs  to  have  both  strong  banking  system  as  well  as  well-developed  capital  and  bond 
markets  to  better  service  consumers’  and  businesses’  financing  needs.  Having  well-
developed capital markets can allow financial risks in the economy to be spread out, shared, 
BIS Review 134/2008 
 1
and  more  efficiently  managed.  And,  the  efficient  allocation of  financial resources  would,  in 
turn, allow ASEAN to have better access to capital and for its goods and services to flow in 
greater quantity. 
At the centre of building strong ASEAN finance  is ensuring its continued systemic stability 
and ongoing market developments. In this regard, ASEAN central banks have a clear role in 
safeguarding  price  stability  and  financial  institutions  stability.  On  price  stability,  let  me  just 
say that ASEAN generally has a good track record of keeping inflation low. As for financial 
stability,  the  framework  of  policy  has  moved  toward  risk-based  supervision,  and  to  an 
adherence  to  international  standards.  Indeed,  many  ASEAN  countries  have  significantly 
advanced  efforts  in  implementing  Basel  II  and  FSAP,  which  have  fostered  a  stronger  and 
more balanced financial system with greater transparency. 
Maintaining  financial  stability  also  means  that  ASEAN  must  be  able  to  withstand  the  ebbs 
and flows of foreign capital. But, as small open economies, keeping balances over any length 
of  time  is  easier  said  than  done.  For  ASEAN,  avoiding  capital  account  crises  will  become 
increasingly  more  important  because  the  more  ASEAN  trade  with  each  other,  the  more 
closely  linked  our  economies  are.  Hence,  the  more  contagion  there  will  be,  and  the  faster 
and wider will crises spread. 
Fortunately, we have already seen a region-wide move toward a more flexible exchange rate 
regime, with a disciplined framework in the conduct of monetary and fiscal policies. Financial 
policy becomes more flexible, yet proactive, in dealing with changes in the market conditions 
and practices. When necessary, a traditional fiscal-monetary policy mix has been augmented 
by appropriate prudential measures of financial institutions, especially to preempt pockets of 
asset price bubbles developing in the economy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I turn now to the second part of my talk on the potential scope of regional cooperation as 
ASEAN faces yet another common challenge on how to manage the global contagion of the 
US financial crisis. 
Today’s global financial crisis is the world’s worst since the Great Depression in 1930s with 
an estimated credit loss of 1.4 trillion US dollars. Trillions of US dollars have been used to 
provide  liquidity  and  to  recapitalize  distressed  financial  institutions.  Deposit  guarantee  has 
been  introduced  in  a  large  number  of  countries  to  restore  investors’  confidence.  At  this 
juncture, I doubt if any one can predict with any good accuracy when this episode of financial 
market turbulence would come to an end. 
The current global financial crisis reminds us of the lessons we learnt from the Asian financial 
crisis just one decade back. Indeed, what have happened in advanced economies today are 
stark reminders of those lessons learnt in Asia. Just like Asia, investors took excessively high 
risks creating asset price bubbles in advanced economies. Lax prudential policy, along with 
fragility of the financial system, quickly brought on a crisis of confidence, starting with debt 
defaults. Credit underwriting behaviors of financial institutions and credit rating agencies are 
being questioned along with imprudent lending practices and the bloating real estate sector. 
Thus  far,  the  effects  on  emerging  market  economies  in  Asia  have  been  minimal. 
Nevertheless,  we  are  still  awaiting  final  moments  of  truth  as  there  will  be  a  number  of 
aftershocks following the financial tsunami. 
Clearly, having a resilient economy and financial sector that is stable, which I have discussed 
previously, is only a necessary condition for avoiding crisis. But, it is not sufficient to ensure 
non-occurrence of crisis. This is because the key pressure points that can lead to difficulties 
for us can be externally-induced, especially through capital account developments. 
We all know that sudden changes in global financial conditions and risk-appetite of investors 
can  create  difficulties  through  spillovers.  Mindful  of  this,  ASEAN  needs  to  come  up  with 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2008
cooperation strategy that best fit ASEAN objectives. Here, I wish to raise two key areas on 
regional cooperation strategy for your further exploration. 
First,  the  new  global  crisis  should  hasten  ASEAN  to  think  more  deeply  about  the 
effectiveness  of  regional  surveillance  that  can  detect  weakness  early  on.  Waiting  for  the 
global  community  through  international  financial  institutions  (IFIs)  for  regional  surveillance 
may  be  too  little  too  late  for  timely  policy  measures  that  can  safeguard  the  region  from 
contagion  from  other  parts  of  the  world.  While  IFIs  will  remain  useful  for  surveillance  and 
financing balance of payments need when necessary, regional surveillance capacity must be 
enhanced more quickly. This is one important area where central bank cooperation can be 
strengthened. 
Indeed,  it  is  very  important  for  policymakers  in  ASEAN  with  common  challenges  to  put 
greater  efforts  in  regional  cooperation  on  maintaining  financial  stability.  Having  close 
consultations and sharing experience can usefully avoid potential policy missteps and create 
policy  synergies  that  eventually  foster  confidence  of  investors  and  other  economic  agents 
within and outside ASEAN. 
Second, we have to consider making regional liquidity pool sufficient and effective enough in 
size  and  automaticity  of  disbursement  in  time  of  need.  In  the  past,  stakeholders  outside 
ASEAN  have  been  more  concerned  about  moral  hazard  problem  than  the  real  benefits  of 
regional liquidity pool in time of actual need. The present global situation has reconfirmed the 
vision set forth by the ASEAN Swap Agreement (ASA) and Chiangmai Initiative (CMI) that 
Asia needs to have its own liquidity pool to protect itself from contagion, be it caused within 
the region or from outside. 
On the whole, the current financial episode has taught us that, to restore confidence to the 
public,  the  authorities’  action  must  be  decisive  and  timely.  Coordination  and  cooperation 
among ASEAN countries must be further enhanced to ensure that prompt remedial actions 
can be put in place should a crisis occur. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In closing, I would like to reiterate that it is important for ASEAN’s economic and financial 
stability  that  ASEAN  central  banks  continue,  individually  and  collectively,  to  increase  the 
effectiveness of their policy instruments through domestic reforms of markets and financial 
systems as well as communication efforts with markets and one another. In this spirit, I am 
reminded  of  how  ASEAN  has  risen  over  the  years  to  common  challenges.  History  has 
recorded ASEAN as an exciting region second to none. While rich in diversity, ASEAN has 
always been united in bringing about successful solution to tackle our common challenges. 
ASEAN,  itself,  was  formed  forty  years  ago  against  the  backdrop  of  political  and  security 
threats to the region. In addition, ASEAN Free Trade Area, or better known as AFTA, was 
created sixteen years ago to ensure that ASEAN together reap benefits from greater trade 
liberalization under the WTO. 
Going forward, with sustainable growth and development of ASEAN at stake, I have no doubt 
that we will be able to jointly find ways to overcome the present difficult global environment 
and together continue to prosper. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 134/2008 
 3
