Donald L Kohn: Monetary policy and asset prices revisited 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Cato  Institute's  Twenty-Sixth  Annual  Monetary  Policy  Conference, 
Washington DC, 19 November 2008.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 the 
their 
lending. 
In  addition, 
As you know, we are in the midst of a global financial crisis that is now weighing heavily on 
economies  around  the  world.  Although  the  outlook  remains  extremely  uncertain,  both  the 
fragility of the financial system and the weakness in real activity seem likely to persist for a 
while.  To  promote  maximum  sustainable  economic  growth  and  price  stability,  the  Federal 
Reserve  has  responded  to  this  crisis  by  easing  monetary  policy  markedly,  and  we  have 
greatly  expanded  our  liquidity  facilities  to  keep  credit  flowing  when  private  lenders  have 
become  reluctant  or  unable  to  do  so.  Other  central  banks  have  also  cut  policy  rates 
significantly  and  expanded 
federal  government  and 
governments  around  the  world  have  taken  extraordinary  actions  to  strengthen  financial 
systems to preserve the ability of households and businesses to borrow and spend.1  
The current situation is so severe that it calls for careful review of how such a crisis evolved 
and  how  we  can  prevent  a  similar  situation  from  happening  again.  This  conference  is  a 
welcome step in that review, as it asks about the lessons we have learned, particularly for 
monetary  policy,  from  the  collapse  of  subprime  lending  and  the  preceding  house-price 
bubble – developments that contributed importantly to the present financial crisis. 
This morning I would like to reflect on some of what I, in my role as a monetary policymaker, 
have learned from recent developments in the housing sector and, more broadly, in financial 
markets as a whole. In doing so, I will revisit the remarks I made in 2006 in Frankfurt at a 
festschrift  for  Otmar  Issing.2  There  I  argued  that  a  central  bank  facing  a  possible  asset 
bubble would have to surmount some high hurdles before it would be justified in tightening 
policy  beyond  what  the  outlook  for  output  and  inflation  would  require,  after  taking  into 
account past and projected asset price developments. In the aftermath of the collapse of the 
housing  market  and  in  the  midst  of  the  ensuing  financial  and  economic  turmoil,  does  that 
conclusion still hold? More time and study will be needed before we can be confident about 
the lessons of the current crisis. But to foreshadow the remainder of these remarks, based 
on what we know today, I still have serious questions about whether trying to use monetary 
policy to check speculative activity on a regular, systematic basis would yield benefits that 
outweigh its costs. 
I  hasten  to  add  that  it  is  evident  from  the  current  crisis  that  much  has  to  change  on  the 
regulatory  front.  Governments  around  the  world  face  the  challenge  of  revamping  the 
regulatory  structure  governing  financial  markets.  And  changes  in  this  area,  I  believe,  will 
prove  to  be  the  most  necessary  and  effective  at  reducing  the  odds  on  another  severe 
financial crisis. Today, however, I will focus on some of the lessons of the current crisis for 
monetary policy per se.  
                                                 
1   The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board 
and the Federal Open Market Committee. Brian Doyle, Rochelle Edge, and David Reifschneider of the Board 
staff contributed to these remarks. 
2   See Kohn (2006). 
BIS Review 144/2008 
 1
Alternative strategies for addressing asset price bubbles  
In my 2006 speech, I discussed two different strategies for monetary policy to deal with a 
possible asset price bubble – the "conventional strategy" and "extra action." A central bank 
following the conventional strategy does not attempt to use monetary policy to influence the 
speculative component of asset prices, on the assumption that it has little ability to do so and 
that  any  attempt  will  only  result  in  sub-optimal  economic  performance  in  the  medium  run. 
Instead,  the  central  bank  responds  to  asset  price  movements,  whether  driven  by 
fundamentals or not, only to the degree that those movements have implications for future 
output  and  inflation.  This  conventional  strategy  conforms  to  the  Federal  Reserve's  dual 
mandate under the law and it has been our policy strategy; it also has been consistent with 
the practices of most inflation-targeting central banks. 
However, some observers have argued for a more activist policy than this one. Specifically, 
they have urged central banks, upon perceiving the development of an asset bubble, to take 
extra action by tightening policy beyond what the conventional strategy would suggest, with 
the  hope  of  limiting  the  size  of  the  bubble  and  thus  the  fallout  from  its  deflation.  Such  a 
strategy,  if  successful,  could  deliver  substantial  benefits,  and  a  number  of  central  bankers 
have  talked  about  the need  to  consider  a  policy  of  extra  action  on  occasion,  and  perhaps 
have  even  implemented  such  a  strategy.  However,  taking  extra  action  also  would  entail 
some  costs,  such  as  creating,  for  a  time,  higher  unemployment  and  lower  inflation  than 
would otherwise be desired.  
In assessing these two alternatives for monetary policy, in the 2006 speech I concluded that 
a  strategy  of  extra  action  might  be  justified  if  three  tough  conditions  were  met.  First, 
policymakers must be able to identify bubbles in a timely fashion with reasonable confidence. 
Second, a somewhat tighter monetary policy must have a high probability that it will help to 
check at least some of the speculative activity. And third, the expected improvement in future 
economic  performance  that  would  result  from  the  curtailment  of  the  bubble  must  be 
sufficiently  great.  Of  course,  we  live  in  an  uncertain  world,  and  accordingly  policymakers 
should  always  be  open  to  the  possibility  that  these  conditions  might  be  satisfied  and  that 
extra  action  would  be  appropriate.  But  my  thought  at  the  time  was  that,  in  practice,  the 
likelihood  of  ever  meeting  the  three  conditions  seemed  remote.  In  the  aftermath  of  the 
bursting of the housing bubble, however, the severity of the fallout might seem to call this 
judgment into question. So let's re-examine each of the three conditions and see what the 
current crisis has taught us.  
Potential gain from limiting bubbles 
Let me start with my third condition, the potential gain from limiting bubbles, because this is 
where  my  views  have  changed  the  most.  Although  I  was  concerned  about  the  potential 
fallout from a collapse of the housing market, I think it is fair to say that these costs have 
turned out to be much greater than I and many other observers imagined. In particular, I and 
other  observers  underestimated  the  potential  for  house  prices  to  decline  substantially,  the 
degree  to  which  such  a  decline  would  create  difficulties  for  homeowners,  and,  most 
important, the vulnerability of the broader financial system to these events.  
In retrospect, I may have been unduly comforted by the resilience of the U.S. economy to the 
collapse of the high-tech bubble, to the earlier Russian debt default and failure of Long-Term 
Capital Management, and even to the commercial and residential real estate debacles of the 
late 1980s and early 1990s (as difficult as that recovery was). But mopping up after this asset 
price  bubble  has  turned  out  to  be  much  harder  because  of  its  greater  magnitude,  the 
centrality of residential housing and finance to our economy and financial system, and the 
surprising ways obscure and complex financial transactions have exposed banks and other 
financial  institutions  to  heavy  losses.  In  addition,  financial  and  economic  linkages  across 
countries  have  made  this  crisis  truly  global  in  scope,  affecting  both  developed  and 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2008
developing  economies.  As  a  result  of  all  these  factors,  the  economic  disruption  here  and 
abroad is likely to be considerably more severe than in past episodes. 
The  severe  fallout  may  indicate  a  larger  potential  gain  than  I  had  anticipated  to  leaning 
against  excess  exuberance  in  asset  markets.  However,  realizing  that  potential  rests  on 
meeting  my  two  other  conditions  as  well  –  the  timely  identification  of  the  bubble,  and  the 
ability of a central bank to materially influence the trajectory of the speculative component of 
asset prices.  
Identifying bubbles in a timely manner 
As for the first of the three conditions, events of the past few years, coupled with advances in 
our understanding of how bubbles form and persist, have made me a little less dubious that 
policymakers  can  reliably  identify  a  serious  bubble  before  it  bursts.  However,  I  am  still 
skeptical about our ability to detect bubbles early enough to make a general policy of leaning 
against them successful on average. 
The  identification  of  bubbles  in  real  time  is  tricky  because  not  all  the  fundamental  factors 
driving  asset  prices  are  directly  observable;  thus,  any  judgment  by  a  central  bank  that  an 
asset  is  overpriced  is  by  nature  uncertain.  My  views  on  this  aspect  of  the  identification 
problem have been reinforced by my experience during the inflation of the housing bubble. 
Over the first half of the decade, we saw a sustained, rapid rise in both home values and 
mortgage debt. As this process continued, concern about its sustainability grew and many 
observers started speculating that a bubble was in place. During this period, staff throughout 
the Federal Reserve System examined whether house prices were overvalued and arrived at 
a wide range of answers. For example, one set of models that linked rental rates and house 
prices indicated as early as the start of 2004 that the market was significantly overvalued, 
while another set of models suggested, even as late as December 2005, that house prices 
could be justified by fundamentals.3 Thus, controversy over the existence of bubble persisted 
almost right up to the actual peak in the housing market. 
Because the economic consequences of mistakenly responding to a misidentified bubble are 
substantial,  central  bankers  may  be  reluctant  to  take  extra  action  in  the  face  of  such 
uncertainty,  especially  if  they  are  risk-averse.  Policymakers  may  also  be  reluctant  to  act 
because a bubble "call" might seem to require them to be more knowledgeable than market 
participants.  After  all,  if  at  least  some  market  participants  perceive  the  emergence  of  a 
bubble, wouldn't they arbitrage that mispricing away? Recent research, however, suggests 
reasons for why market participants who think they know that a bubble exists still may not 
trade to eliminate it. For example, if some market participants recognize the presence of a 
bubble but do not know how common their knowledge is, they might reasonably expect to 
make the most profits by riding the bubble for as long as possible, with the goal of trying to 
sell the asset just before it collapses.4 Other research emphasizes that certain institutional 
structures  –  such  as  secured  lending  and  delegated  portfolio  management  –  can  create 
substantial costs in trading against an asset price bubble, so that even market participants 
who are conscious of the bubble will not find it profitable to trade against it.5 Together, these 
studies  suggest  that  policymakers  may  be  able  to  detect  bubbles  that  will  not  be  quickly 
arbitraged away, thus strengthening the argument for considering extra action.6  
                                                 
3   For  a  contemporaneous  view  that  homes  were  overvalued,  see  Gallin  (2004);  for  an  opposing  view,  see 
McCarthy and Peach (2005). 
4   See Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003). 
5   See Lui and Longstaff (2004) and Stein (2005). 
6   Some  of  the  literature  in  this  area  would  seem  to  imply  that  small  policy  moves  explicitly  motivated  by  a 
potential bubble, or similarly motivated public statements and regulatory changes, could effectively signal or 
BIS Review 144/2008 
 3
Nonetheless, even if policymakers are confident that a bubble has emerged, the question of 
the timeliness of the call remains. The essential problem is the timing of the detection of the 
bubble  relative  to  the  timing  of  its  collapse.  The  risk  is  that  the  detection  and  subsequent 
policy  response  occurs  not  long  before  the  bubble  collapses  on  its  own.  Given  the  lags 
associated with monetary policy, the resulting contractionary effects on the economy of the 
monetary tightening would occur just when the adverse effects of the bubble's collapse are 
being realized, worsening rather than mitigating the effects of the bubble's collapse. And the 
inevitable lags in detecting bubbles increases the likelihood that, by the time action is taken, 
speculative activity will have progressed to the point that its collapse is not far off. Thus, even 
if  we  could  have  known  for  sure  that  a  housing  bubble  existed,  and  that  tighter  monetary 
policy would have significantly checked the unwarranted rise in home prices, policymakers 
would have had to make this call early on – at least a year and probably more before the 
peak in the real estate market in 2006 – for such an action to have been beneficial.  
leveraging,  and  a  marked 
Ability of monetary policy to influence bubbles 
This brings me to the remaining condition – the requirement that monetary policy be able to 
materially check expansions in asset bubbles. Clearly, interest rates play an important role in 
determining the fundamental value of corporate equity, houses, and other assets. However, I 
noted in my earlier speech that the influence of interest rates on the speculative component 
of asset prices is unclear from both a theoretical and empirical standpoint. 
My views on this issue have not changed much, largely because of the still-murky role that 
monetary policy played in promoting the surge in house prices and the accompanying run-up 
in  both  conventional  and  subprime  mortgage  debt.  Although  tighter  monetary  policy  might 
have succeeded in shifting down the path of house prices, it is still not clear to what extent 
small  or  even  moderate  policy  actions  would  have  discouraged  the  broader  speculative 
developments that have characterized the current episode: overly-optimistic expectations of 
price  appreciation,  excessive 
increase  in  risk-taking  by 
homeowners  and  investors.  Of  course,  a  substantial  tightening  of  policy,  leading  to  a 
significant  slowing  in  the  economy  and  rise  in  unemployment,  might  have  had  a  marked 
effect  on  housing  price  gains.  But  undertaking  such  a  policy  course  on  a  regular  basis 
whenever asset price misalignments are detected would likely prove to be a relatively poor 
strategy  on  average,  especially  given  the  possibility  of  false  positives  in  identifying  these 
misalignments,  and  the  existence  of  other  potential  remedies.  In  general,  taking  more-
targeted steps – for example, regulatory changes intended to strengthen the financial system 
– would seem a better course of action under such circumstances.  
To be sure, some observers contend that the low level of the federal funds rate in 2003 and 
2004  was  clearly  a  primary  cause  of  the  housing  bubble,  and  that  a  significantly  tighter 
stance  of  monetary  policy  would  have  been  warranted.  As  you  know,  the  Federal  Open 
Market  Committee  (FOMC),  after  having  sharply  lowered  its  policy  rate  during  the  2001 
recession,  further  lowered  the  federal  funds  rate  in  late  2002  and  2003  in  response  to  an 
outlook  for  continued  tepid  real  growth  and  a  possible  unwelcome  disinflation.  This 
accommodative  stance  helped  set  the  stage  for  a  more  robust  recovery,  and  as  the 
expansion  took  hold  in  2004,  the  FOMC  began  to  tighten  in  a  gradual  manner  that  was 
publicly signaled in advance. 
                                                                                                                                                         
induce market-participants who know about the bubble to trade against it. Whether such actions would be able 
to limit the expansion of asset-price bubbles merits further research. Kohn and Sack (2003) did not find that 
statements  by  then  Chairman  Greenspan  on  valuations  affected  misaligned  asset  prices,  but  the  many 
warnings  from  central  bankers  in  financial  stability  reports  and  speeches  about  mispriced  risk  and  even 
housing bubbles in some countries would seem to provide material for much needed further research on this 
topic. 
4 
 BIS Review 144/2008
How might these monetary policy actions have fueled speculation? Perhaps a low policy rate 
early in the decade, by stimulating housing demand and pushing up the level of home prices, 
incorrectly led households and lenders to extrapolate these price increases into the indefinite 
future.  Overly  optimistic  expectations  may  have  had  an  unusually  stimulative  effect  on  the 
housing market after 2003 because borrowing constraints were being eased by new financial 
developments, such as the growth of subprime lending and other nontraditional mortgages, 
fueled in part by investor demands for the higher yields on complex structured products.7 In 
addition,  the  increased  use  of  adjustable-rate  mortgages  –  which  are  more  closely  tied  to 
short-term policy rates – may have initially boosted the stimulus from a lower federal funds 
rate. 
These  stories  have  a  certain  plausibility,  but  a  closer  examination  raises  questions  about 
monetary policy and the housing and credit bubbles. Although low short-term interest rates 
probably supported housing demand and home prices for a time – an effect that helped to 
offset  the  negative  effects  on  economic  growth  and  employment  of  the  steep  decline  in 
business investment – the role of monetary policy in fueling the speculation in real estate is 
still not clear. Studies that have tried to address how much monetary policy contributed to the 
increase  in  house  prices  during  this  period  are  inconclusive.8  And  in  general,  the  channel 
from interest rates to house prices has not been strongly established empirically, suggesting 
it might take a very large hike in the federal funds rate to have a substantial effect on real 
estate  values.9  Moreover,  if  accommodative  monetary  policy  engendered  extrapolative 
expectations and speculation starting in 2003, why did it not restrain these factors after mid-
2004 as the federal funds rate was increased? Tightening should have limited the extent to 
which  households  (especially  those  using  variable-rate  mortgages)  were  able  to  borrow, 
thereby  slowing  the  pace  of  house  price  appreciation.  Furthermore,  many  of  the  worst 
subprime loans were made after the federal funds rate had normalized, and reflected a wide 
array of deficiencies in the financial markets. 
The contrasting movement of short-run and long-term interest rates over this period further 
complicates any assessment of the link between monetary policy and the housing market. 
Housing demand and home prices are, presumably, most closely linked to the 30-year fixed 
mortgage rate and the expected average borrowing rate to be paid over the life of adjustable-
rate  mortgages.  That  these  actual  and  expected  loan  rates  moved  sideways  even  as  the 
federal  funds  rate  rose  suggests  that  other  factors  beside  monetary  policy  were  at  work, 
especially  since  the  FOMC  clearly  signaled  that  it  would  be  returning  the  funds  rate  to  a 
normal level over time (albeit at a "measured pace"). 
A good portion of the appreciation in house prices probably owes to the structural changes 
that  were  taking  place  in  mortgage  financing  –  specifically,  the  opening  up  of  subprime 
lending  and  the  expansion  in  associated  securitization  markets  with  its  strong  demand  for 
mortgages  from  investors.  Gauging  the  effects  of  expanded  subprime  lending  on  house 
prices  is  complicated  by  two-way  causality  –  more  lending  can  drive  up  house  prices  but 
expected  house  price  increases  can  also  induce  more  lending.  Undoubtedly,  causality  did 
                                                 
7   For example, the International Monetary Fund (2008) found evidence that house prices have become more 
sensitive to monetary policy in countries with more mortgage deregulation. 
8   Del Negro and Otrok (2007) find little influence on the national component of house price appreciation from 
2001 to 2005. In contrast, Iacoviello and Neri (2008) contend that monetary policy accounted for more than a 
quarter of the run-up. However, both of these papers only look at the effects of the non-systematic component 
of monetary policy. In addition, Iacoviello and Neri include the Regulation Q period in their estimation sample, 
likely increasing the effect of monetary policy on the housing sector. 
9   Studies of the relationship between house prices, interest rates, and other factors find only a weak interest-
sensitivity  of  home  prices  to  both  short-term  and  long-term  interest  rates  when  estimated  using  aggregate 
time-series data over the past 25 years, as documented by Gallin (2004) and Campbell, Davis, Gallin, and 
Martin (2006). 
BIS Review 144/2008 
 5
indeed  run  both  directions.  But  studies  do  indicate  that  an  expansion  in  credit  leads  to 
increased  house  prices,  and  suggest  that  structural  changes  in  mortgage  finance  likely 
boosted the rate of house price appreciation.10
Another key observation that must be reconciled with any explanation of recent events is that 
the  run-up  and  subsequent  decline  in  house  prices  was  not  limited  to  the  United  States; 
indeed,  some  countries  have  experienced  even  larger  swings  in  house  prices.11  In  most 
countries  during  this  period,  long-term  interest  rates  were  low  despite  the  fact  that  their 
central banks did not ease as markedly as the Federal Reserve. A common factor behind 
these low rates, and perhaps in part behind the shared increase in house prices as well, is 
the  "global  saving  glut"  identified  by  Chairman  Bernanke  –  the  large  amounts  of  savings, 
both  official  and  private,  from  Asian  and  oil-exporting  nations  that  tended  to  lower  neutral 
interest rates globally.12
In  a  broader  sense,  perhaps  the  underlying  cause  of  the  current  crisis  was  complacency. 
With the onset of the "Great Moderation" back in the mid-1980s, households and firms in the 
United States and elsewhere have enjoyed a long period of reduced output volatility and low 
and  stable  inflation.  These  calm  conditions  may  have  led  many  private  agents  to  become 
less prudent and to underestimate the risks associated with their actions. While we cannot be 
sure about the ultimate sources of the moderation, many observers believe better monetary 
policy here and abroad was one factor; if so, central banks may have accidentally contributed 
to  the  current  crisis.  But  would  a  somewhat  tighter  stance  of  policy  in  recent  years  have 
reversed  this  complacency?  It  seems  doubtful.  Central  banks  would  likely  have  needed  to 
produce recessions of some consequence in order to force agents to reevaluate the costs of 
taking on risk – an outcome unlikely to improve societal welfare. Rather than using the blunt 
tool of monetary policy to induce prudence, we should examine more closely the possibility of 
using  regulation  and  prudential  supervision  to  address  concerns  about  overleveraging  and 
other risk-taking behavior. 
In short, we still do not fully know what caused the run-up in house prices and over-building. 
Short-term rates were low in 2002-04 as the Federal Reserve countered the risks it saw to 
good  economic  performance,  and  these  low  rates  probably  had  some  effect  on  housing 
markets at the time. But the problems largely built up after policy rates were well on their way 
to neutral, and other factors appear to have played major roles. We have learned little about 
the  likely  effect  that  a  somewhat  higher  funds  rate  would  have  had  on  the  speculative 
element of prices. Of course, it is important to keep an open mind about the relationship of 
short-term interest rates and speculative activity. If it becomes clear that monetary policy can 
predictably  influence  the  evolution  of  bubbles,  central  banks  should  take  that  ability  into 
                                                 
10   Mian and Sufi (2008) found that Zip code areas with high latent credit demand prior to the bubble's emergence 
experienced larger expansions in the supply of mortgage credit and larger increases in house prices, despite 
being  subject  to  weaker  economic  conditions;  this  result  also  held  for  Zip  codes  that,  because  of  inelastic 
housing supply, would not be expected to see price increases above the inflation rate for construction costs. 
Overall, this study attributed  40 percent of the national rise in  house  prices to increased subprime lending. 
Leamer (2007) noted that house price increases occurred in some of the lowest priced Zip codes. Wheaton 
and Nechayev (2008), using results obtained from time series regressions for a number of different housing 
markets over the period from 1975 to 1998, found that a correlation between measures of credit availability 
and unexplained movements in house prices, which suggests that structural changes in mortgage finance may 
have  contributed  to  the  increase  in  house  prices.  Finally,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (2008)  found 
evidence that countries with the most advanced housing finance systems are more exposed to housing sector 
shocks. 
11   In addition, housing credit in several other countries appears to have expanded beyond the traditional pool of 
households in recent years, although probably (comparable data are scarce) to a lesser degree than in the 
United States. 
12   See Bernanke (2005). 
6 
 BIS Review 144/2008
account  when  crafting  policies  intended  to  keep  output  rising  in  line  with  its  potential  and 
inflation low and stable. 
Summing up 
In  sum,  I  am  not  convinced  that  the  events  of  the  past  few  years  and  the  current  crisis 
demonstrate that central banks should switch to trying to check speculative activity through 
tighter  monetary  policy  whenever  they  perceive  a  bubble  forming.  The  recent  experience 
may have made us a bit more confident about detecting bubbles, but it has not resolved the 
problem of doing so in a timely manner. Nor has it shown that small-to-modest policy actions 
will reliably and materially damp speculation. For these reasons, the case for extra action still 
remains questionable, despite our having learned that the aftermath of a bubble can be far 
more painful than we imagined. 
Some  may  object  to  this  assessment,  arguing  that  the  current  crisis  is  so  bad  that,  in 
retrospect, monetary  policy  should  have  been  appreciably  tighter  to  deflate  or  forestall  the 
housing boom earlier in the decade, even if that meant a substantially weaker economy. This 
argument has two defects. First, monetary policy is made in real time, not with the benefit of 
hindsight,  and  any  evaluation  of  competing  strategies  for  the  systematic  conduct  of  policy 
must be grounded in that fact. Although we must learn from history, we cannot implement 
policy  strategies  that  assume  more  information  about  the  future  than  we  can  ever  have. 
Second, even if we ignore the fact that policymakers at the time could not have known what 
the  future  held  in  store  if  the  funds  rate  followed  the  path  it  actually  did,  we  also  need  to 
recognize that we cannot be sure what would have happened if policy had taken a different 
course. If policy had tightened appreciably at an early stage of the housing boom, say in mid-
2003,  it  would  have  done  so  when  the  unemployment  rate  was  still  rising  and  inflation 
seemed poised to move to an undesirably low level. Such a course of action might well have 
created its own unforeseen consequences that we might now be ruing.  
This assessment aside, recent events would seem to have some implications for the conduct 
of monetary policy. For example, in light of the demonstrated importance to the real economy 
of speculative booms and busts (which can take years to play out), central banks probably 
should always try to look out over a long horizon when evaluating the economic outlook and 
deliberating  about  the  appropriate  accompanying  path  of  the  policy  rate.  The  Federal 
Reserve  staff  has  for  sometime  regularly  provided  the  FOMC  with  this  sort  of  extended-
horizon analysis. In particular, the staff regularly generates likely paths for the economy over 
the next five years or so under different economic and policy assumptions; these scenarios 
often highlight different possibilities for the evolution of prices for homes and other assets. 
Note that the focus here is not a single baseline outlook; rather, the emphasis is on exploring 
the various ways events could play out and the implications for monetary policy. 
Another lesson of the current crisis is that central banks need to improve their understanding 
of the workings of the financial system, its vulnerabilities, and its links to the real economy. 
We must try to find ways to discern more quickly if financial innovation and other factors are 
leading to a buildup of destabilizing forces, such as rapidly rising asset prices or excessive 
leverage.  Moreover,  the  unexpectedly  rapid  resonance  of  financial  turmoil  through  global 
markets  signals  a  need  for  further  study  of  the  complex  cross-country  linkages  among 
lenders and borrowers, and the ways in which those linkages are influenced by such factors 
as  leverage,  interdependent  counterparty  relationships,  and  backup  liquidity  agreements. 
Finally, more effort needs to be spent on further investigation of the financial accelerator and 
other credit-channel effects, given the accumulating evidence that such effects can give rise 
to an adverse feedback loop between financial markets and the real economy. Overcoming 
these  deficiencies  in  our  knowledge  will  not  be  easy,  but  the  potential  benefits  could  be 
great. 
Finally, as I emphasized at the outset, we must thoroughly review the regulatory structure of 
the U.S. and global financial systems, with the objective of both identifying and implementing 
BIS Review 144/2008 
 7
the  comprehensive  changes  needed  to  reduce  the  odds  of  future  bubbles  arising,  and 
improving  the  ability  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  to  weather  the  fallout  from 
unexpected adverse changes in asset prices. Ultimately, this process should prove our best 
line of defense against the problems of the sort we now face.  
References 
Abreu,  Dilip,  and  Markus  K.  Brunnermeier  (2003),  "Bubbles  and  Crashes",  Econometrica, 
vol. 71(1), pp. 173-204. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2005). "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit", the 
Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, March 10. 
Campbell,  Sean,  Morris  Davis,  Joshua  Gallin,  and  Robert  Martin  (2006).  "A  Trend  and 
Variance  Decomposition  of  the  Rent-Price  Ratio  in  Housing  Markets",  Finance  and 
Economics  Discussion  Series  2006-29.  Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, April. 
Del  Negro,  Marco,  and  Christoher  Otrok  (2007).  "99  Luftballons:  Monetary  Policy  and  the 
House Price Boom Across U.S. States", Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 54, pp. 1962-
1985. 
Gallin,  Joshua  (2004).  "The  Long-Run  Relationship  between  House  Prices  and  Rents", 
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2004-50. Washington: Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, September. (Also, forthcoming in Real Estate Economics.) 
Iacoviello, Matteo, and Stefano Neri (2008). "Housing Market Spillovers: Evidence from an 
Estimated DSGE Model", photocopy. 
International Monetary Fund (2008). "The Changing Housing Cycle and the Implications for 
Monetary Policy", chapter 3 in the World Economic Outlook, April.  
Kohn, Donald L. (2006). "Monetary Policy and Asset Prices", speech delivered at Monetary 
Policy:  A  Journey  from  Theory  to  Practice,  a  European  Central  Bank  colloquium  held  in 
honor of Otmar Issing, Frankfurt, Germany, March 16. 
Kohn, Donald L., and Brian P. Sack (2003). "Central Bank Talk: Does It Matter and Why?", 
paper  presented  at 
the  Macroeconomics,  Monetary  Policy,  and  Financial  Stability 
Conference in honor of Charles Freedman, Bank of Canada, Ottawa, Canada, June 20.  
Leamer, Edward (2007). "Housing is the Business Cycle", in Housing, Housing Finance, and 
Monetary  Policy,  proceeding  of  a  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 30 to September 1, pp. 149-233. 
Lui,  Jun,  and  Francis  A.  Longstaff  (2004),  "Losing  Money  on  Arbitrage:  Optional  Dynamic 
Portfolio Choice in Markets with Arbitrage Opportunities", Review of Financial Studies, vol. 
17(3), pp. 611-641. 
McCarthy,  Jonathan,  and  Richard  W.  Peach  (2005).  "Is  There  a  'Bubble'  in  the  Housing 
Market Now?" working paper. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December.  
Mian,  Atif  R.,  and  Amir  Sufi  (2008).  "The  Consequences  of  Mortgage  Credit  Expansion: 
Evidence from the 2007 Mortgage Default Crisis," NBER working paper 13936, April.  
Stein,  Jeremy  C.  (2005),  "Why  Are  Most  Funds  Open-End?  Competition  and  the  Limits  of 
Arbitrage", Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 120(1), pp. 247-272. 
Wheaton, William C., and Gleb Nechayev (2008). "The 1998-2005 Housing 'Bubble' and the 
Current  'Correction':  What's  Different  This  Time?"  Journal  of  Real  Estate  Research,  vol. 
30(1), pp. 1-26. 
8 
 BIS Review 144/2008
