Irma Rosenberg: My time at the Riksbank – some final reflections on 
challenges along the way 
Speech  by  Ms  Irma  Rosenberg,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank, at  SEB, 
Stockholm, 8 December 2008. 
 On a chilly day in January 1976 I crossed the threshold of the newly-built Riksbank building 
for the first time. It was true that all employees were moving into the new building that day, 
which contributed to the more or less organised chaos of furniture gone adrift and employees 
trying to find their new offices. But for me it was probably an extra special day. It was my first 
day at work. And it was my first job outside of the university after taking my PhD. 
Almost 33 years have passed since that day in January. And as I leave the Riksbank at the 
end of the year one could say that I have come full circle. It was where I began my career. In 
1986  I  left  the  bank,  but  in  January  2003  I  once  again  crossed  the  threshold  at 
Brunkebergstorg 11, then as one of the six members of the Executive Board. This will now 
be my final full-time job. 
The years have been eventful ones, with more than a little drama from time to time. From the 
oil  crisis,  stagflation  and  repeated  devaluations  of  the  krona  during  my  first  period  at  the 
Riksbank, to the aftermath of the IT crash and terrorist actions on 11 September 2001, the 
invasion of Iraq and substantial fluctuations in energy and commodity prices during my time 
on  the  Executive  Board.  In  between  this  we  had  the  early  1990s  with  an  economic  crisis, 
severe problems in Swedish banks and the transition from a fixed exchange rate to a floating 
krona. The global financial crisis we are now in the midst of is the latest addition to the list. 
But  the  major  events  have  not  only  been  in  the  outside  world.  Partly  as  a  result  of  these 
“external” developments, the way we work at the Riksbank has also undergone a dramatic 
change. This applies to everything from the actual task we have and our working methods to 
our communication and degree of openness. 
There have been plenty of challenges, and there are probably plenty more waiting around 
the corner. At the moment we are in a much more difficult situation for the economy than we 
have  experienced  for  many  years,  with  a  worldwide  financial  crisis  and  a  period  of  weak 
growth ahead of us. But at the same time, we are much better equipped to manage this type 
of situation today than when I first started at the Riksbank. Both we and others have learnt a 
lot  along  the  way,  remedied  various  deficiencies  and  tried  to  create  something  that  works 
better. Of course, this process is never at an end, but I can nevertheless note that we have 
come a long way. As I now hold my final speech as member of the Executive Board, I would 
like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  give  my  own  perspective  on  parts  of  this  journey,  on  the 
challenges we have faced and on what may lie ahead of us. 
An organisation that is constantly developing 
A lot has changed since my first day at work in 1976, not only outside of, but also inside of 
the Riksbank’s walls. My workplace of the 1970s in practice has little more in common with 
today’s Riksbank than the building itself. It is quite simply a different world. 
Credibility and better conditions 
Today  economic  policy  has  a  different  credibility,  and  also  the  tools  needed  to  deal  with 
shocks to the economy in a flexible way. A long development process lies behind this much 
better starting point with "greater room for manoeuvre”. Something that has been a decisive 
factor  is  the  changes  in  the  economic  policy  framework  made  following  the  crisis  at  the 
BIS Review 155/2008 
 1
beginning of the 1990s. Sweden was then forced to get to grips with many problems that had 
been around for a long time. There was also broad support, not least from politicians, behind 
the demands for change. 
Both monetary and fiscal policy were transformed and with good results. The inflation target 
for monetary policy, the fact that the Riksbank now has statutory independence and the fact 
that we now have sound public finances, a budget ceiling and balance targets for fiscal policy 
–  all  of  this  has  contributed  to  much  greater  stability  in  the  economy  than  we  had  in  the 
1970s and 1980s. The current regulations mean that economic policy as a whole can never 
seriously clash with the monetary policy target in the way it actually sometimes did during the 
period with a fixed exchange rate regime. 
Both public authorities and banks also learned a lot about financial stability during the crisis 
in the 1990s. The Riksbank now has an organisation that continuously analyses the stability 
of  the  financial  system  and  maintains  a  preparedness  to  act  in  a  potential  crisis  situation. 
This gives us the opportunity to detect and counteract at any early stage any changes and 
vulnerabilities  that  could  lead  to  a  serious  crisis.  It  also  makes  it  easier  to  manage  the 
problems if a crisis were to occur. The experiences of both the Riksbank and others have 
definitely  given  us  better  resilience  to  the  current  global  financial  crisis  than  we  would 
otherwise have had. 
There are several reasons why we now have greater credibility and better conditions to do 
our job efficiently. One is most probably that openness and clarity have long been, and still 
are, of central importance. Our policy works much better and more efficiently when we are 
open and clear about our objectives and the reasons for our decisions. An important piece of 
the  puzzle  is  that  we  now  have  a  "direct”  and  clear  inflation  target.  Although  the  fixed 
exchange rate was aimed "indirectly” at providing low and stable inflation, this was not really 
as clear. But with a fixed exchange rate monetary policy is also governed by external events, 
which has both advantages and disadvantages. 
Up  to  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  the  Riksbank  was  on  the  whole  a  closed  and  rather 
secretive institution, just like most other central banks at that time. Today the situation is the 
opposite. We are now considered one of the world’s most open central banks. The fact that 
an independent authority must provide opportunities for insight and evaluation is natural in 
our society. Another aspect that may be of importance is that the openness puts a little extra 
pressure on us to develop and do our job as well and as efficiently as possible. And I can 
note that our methods have changed substantially. 
Willingness to change and rapid development in our working methods 
The fact that a lot has happened since the mid-1970s when we sat and drew diagrams and 
forecasts by hand on graph paper is not surprising. But even during my period in office the 
last six years our methods of working have shown a rapid development. One driving force is 
of  course  that  the  world  around  us  is  constantly  changing  –  and  often  very  quickly.  Quite 
simply, there are new demands made on us from outside, which we must deal with as best 
we  can.  Developments  during  the  financial  crisis  in  recent  months  are  a  good  example  of 
this. There are also demands from outside regarding our interaction with the general public, 
with other public authorities and with you who work in the financial markets. It is important 
that we communicate and work together efficiently, both to ensure monetary policy functions 
smoothly and to safeguard financial stability. 
But the pressure for changes does not only come from outside. We are constantly working 
on developing our working methods. It may not always be apparent to those who do not work 
at  the  Riksbank,  but  there  is  a  strong  will  among  our  employees  to  improve  our  ways  of 
thinking  and  working.  There  is  a  positive  driving  force  behind  the  changes  we  are 
implementing. I am convinced that this driving force has contributed to the fact that we now 
have much better working methods than before. Another positive driving force is the regular 
contacts we have with other central banks and with the academic world. 
2 
 BIS Review 155/2008
The  developments  cover  everything  from  new  methods  to  our  communication.  Something 
that constitutes an example of both of these things is the forecast for the repo rate path that 
we  now  publish  regularly.  Another  is  the  alternative  scenarios  for  the  development  of  the 
economy  that  we  describe  in  our  Monetary  Policy  Reports  to  highlight  the  most  important 
uncertainty factors we see ahead of us. These scenarios enable us to show in an easy-to-
understand and coherent manner how a particular development might affect monetary policy 
and  our  forecasts  in  general.  None  of  this  would  have  been  possible  without  the 
developments in working methods, particularly in the field of modelling, that have taken place 
in recent years. These have created an entirely new flexibility and new opportunities in our 
methods of working and communicating. 
Technological advances and better tools create new opportunities 
When  we  make  our  forecasts  for  developments  in  the  economy,  we  have  a  number  of 
different  tools  at  our  disposal.  We  have  the  assessments  made  by  experts  in  the different 
fields. We also have economic theories, past developments and various models on which to 
base our analysis. All of these components are important and they complement one another. 
Previously, we were often more or less forced to rely to a great extent on assessments rather 
on the more formal analysis. This provided some restraints. 
Now we have the technical possibility to make model-based forecasts for the economy that 
are  coherent  and  based  on  different  factors  and  markets  being  mutually  dependent.  If  a 
particular variable changes, the entire system is adapted in the model simultaneously with 
the  change.  Perhaps  our  most  important  tool  in  this  field  is  the  general  equilibrium  model 
known as RAMSES. We also use a number of other, simpler models as economic indicators. 
But  although  developments  in  this  field  have  made  huge  advances,  the  models  cannot 
entirely  capture  the  complex  reality  we  live  in.  They  have  their  limitations  and  deficiencies 
and it is important to be aware of these. And of course we do not base our forecasts and 
decisions solely on what the models show. Their results are supplemented to a large degree 
with expert analyses. This applies in particular to situations like the current one, when certain 
mechanisms in the economy are not functioning entirely as normal. 
But despite model-based analysis having certain deficiencies, the developments in this field 
mean we have obtained a much  more useful aid in our work. We can act work in a more 
systematic  manner  when  making  our  forecasts  than  was possible before  and  I  would  also 
claim that we have a better base for making our decisions. This has also made it possible to 
become even more open and clear with regard to our view of the future. There is a positive 
interaction here. As I mentioned earlier, the openness acts as an extra incentive with regard 
to developing our working methods. 
It  is  not  only  with  regard  to  monetary  policy  that  we  have  made  progress  in  our  working 
methods.  The  tools  for  analysing  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  have  also  been 
improved.  This  increases  the  chances  of  detecting  at  an  early  stage  changes  and 
vulnerabilities  that  could  lead  to  a  serious  crisis.  It  also  becomes  easier  to  work  on 
prevention and in various ways to counteract a serious crisis from arising. The developments 
include methods regarding what are known as stress tests, which analyse what happens to 
the  banks  during  various  sequences  of  events  and  crisis  scenarios.  Such  models  are  of 
course important tools when it comes to crisis exercises and to adapting our preparedness 
for managing real crisis situations efficiently. 
Challenges along the way 
A lot has changed, both compared with when I first began at the Riksbank and over the past 
six years. We have better conditions for managing various challenges so that we can attain 
our  inflation  target  and  safeguard  financial  stability  in  the  best  possible  manner.  It  is  also 
largely a case of learning by doing. I would therefore like to take up some of the challenges 
BIS Review 155/2008 
 3
that we and other central banks have had to deal with in recent years. These are challenges 
we have learnt from when we were forced to deal with them. They are also challenges that in 
one way or another will stimulate future developments. 
Rising commodity prices,… 
In May of this year I held a speech on the upward pressure on international commodity prices 
that had been exerted for some time. This applied to both traditional commodities, such as oil 
and metals, and to foodstuffs, such as grain. The boom in commodity prices had pushed up 
inflation both here and abroad, and inflation was clearly overshooting our target. I maintained 
that this inflationary impulse and the risk of contagion effects to other prices and wages were 
something that could become the first serious test for low-inflation targeting around the world. 
Seven months later, this prophecy does not seem so relevant any more. Commodity prices 
have fallen and inflation has begun to drop back from the high levels seen in the summer. 
The challenges now faced by central banks are of an entirely different nature than those of 
just a few months ago. Now the most important challenge is to safeguard the stability of the 
financial system and to try to limit the negative effects on production and employment. But I 
would  nevertheless  like  to  point  out  that  what  I  said  in  May  was  important,  although  the 
financial crisis has come in between and made the problem of rising commodity prices less 
relevant for the time being. 
There were several explanations as to why commodity prices rose so sharply. But the one I 
considered –  and  still  consider  –  to  be  most  important  was  that  emerging  economies  with 
large  populations,  such  as  China  and  India,  have  increasingly  begun  to  take  part  in  the 
competition for global resources – resources which in many cases are finite. 
This  is  probably  a  fairly  lasting  and  long-term  driving  force.  The  emerging  economies  are 
undergoing a structural transformation that will probably take some time. Their demand for 
commodities  will  probably  remain  high  in  the  future.  Although  the  upward  pressure  on 
commodity prices has taken a time-out with the slowdown in world growth, in a year or two it 
may very well be a problem that central banks will once again need to manage. 
At the same time, it is worth pointing out that this need not necessarily be a big problem. As I 
have observed, we now know a lot more about how monetary policy should be conducted 
than we did when I first arrived at the Riksbank in 1976 – in between the two oil crises. The 
problem  of  rising  commodity  prices  can  be  managed  within  the  prevailing  framework  for 
monetary policy. Essentially, it is a question of preventing what happened during the 1970s, 
namely  that  the  inflationary  impulses  that  the  oil  price  shocks  entailed  were  allowed  to 
become entrenched and to spread to wages and other prices. But it is also important that the 
policy is not so tight that there are overly negative effects on production and employment. Of 
course,  this  is  not  an  easy  balancing  act.  But  I  can  assure  you  that  such  deliberations  lie 
behind every individual interest rate decision taken by the Executive Board. 
…the debate on monetary policy and house prices,... 
Another  question  that  has  arisen  during  my  time  as  member  of  the  Executive  Board,  and 
which is also fairly controversial, is how monetary policy should react when house prices and 
household  indebtedness  increase  rapidly,  which  was  the  case  in  Sweden  and  many  other 
countries until quite recently. 
A common view has been that monetary policy should only react to a rapid credit expansion 
and price increase in the housing market if the forecasts made by the central bank indicate 
problems of, for instance, overheating and too high inflation in the coming period. If this is not 
the case, the central bank should wait and see, but be prepared to quickly ease monetary 
policy  if  the  housing  market  were  to  collapse  and  demand  in  the  economy  were  to  fall 
drastically. One should not, as the expression goes, “lean into the wind”, but make do with 
cleaning up afterwards if problems arise. 
4 
 BIS Review 155/2008
The main argument in favour of this way of acting is that the central bank is not better than 
others at assessing whether or not the price increase is due to over-optimistic calculations – 
if a bubble has arisen. If the bank makes the wrong assessment and raises the interest rate 
despite  the  events  being  justified  by  fundamental  factors,  demand  will  be  pushed  down 
unnecessarily.  And  even  if  the  central  bank  were  to  be  sure  that  the  problem  is  over-
valuation, the timing of the measures may be problematic. The hope is, of course, that tighter 
monetary policy will contribute to counteracting an imbalance. But if the central bank acts too 
late and, for example, raises the interest rate just before a bubble would nevertheless have 
burst  of  its  own  accord,  monetary  policy  may  instead  contribute  to  worsening  the  fall  in 
demand. 
The  view  that  the  central  bank  should  only  react  if  the  forecasts  indicate  problems  may 
appear reasonable, but there are some uncertainties in this, particularly with regard to how 
this should be translated into practical policy. In situations where house prices and lending 
are rising very quickly, the central bank can see risks in this development, even if it cannot 
be sure whether a bubble is building up. It may then be difficult and even inappropriate to 
remain completely passive, even if the main line of the forecasts is that developments will be 
balanced.  If  house  prices  were  then  to  plummet  and  pull  down  demand  and  inflation,  the 
consequences could be very severe, which is clearly illustrated by the current financial crisis. 
The  conclusion  the  Riksbank  has  reached  with  regard  to  monetary  policy  is  therefore  that 
this type of risk may need to be taken into consideration in a different way than the normal 
procedure,  via  the  forecasts  for  inflation  and  the  real  economy.  As  indicated  in  the  policy 
document "Monetary Policy in Sweden", this could be done by beginning a phase of interest 
rate increases slightly earlier than would otherwise have been the case, or by postponing a 
phase of interest rate increases. In addition, we highlight and warn against various types of 
risk, for instance in our speeches and reports. This was how we acted for instance in 2006. 
The  idea  is  that  by  cautiously  leaning  into  the  wind  and  in  connection  with  this  providing 
information about the risks, there will hopefully be less to clean up afterwards and in the best 
case scenario there will be no cleaning up to do at all. 
Here  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  Riksbank’s  development  work  has  been  made  it  easier  to 
counteract tendencies towards imbalances with the aid of information. In that we now publish 
a forecast of the future repo rate, instead of assuming that it will remain unchanged, as we 
did a few  years ago, it has become clearer to an outsider what we think of future interest 
rates. This information is important to those wanting to borrow money or to buy housing, for 
instance, if we foresee a series of interest rate increases ahead. The interest rate path also 
makes it possible to show in a simple, easy-to-understand manner how events may develop 
in  the  different  risk  scenarios.  This  could  involve  illustrating  what  would  happen  if,  for 
instance, the housing market were to develop differently than in our main scenario. 
Developments in the property market are also a very central part of the analysis of financial 
stability. This is natural, not least because property comprises a very large part of the banks' 
collateral  for  their  lending.  Here,  too,  information  is  perhaps  our  most  important  tool.  For 
instance, in our Financial Stability Report we analyse the financial situation of the household 
sector and describe our assessment of the situation and potential risks with regard to house 
prices and indebtedness. 
The way that monetary policy should manage risks linked to credit booms and rapidly-rising 
house prices is a difficult problem that will continue to be debated among central banks and 
in academia. We do not have a perfect solution to this problem. But I nevertheless think that 
it is a good example of how the  Riksbank really tries to find practically-applicable ways of 
managing difficult challenges. And these must be managed, sooner or later. 
...and of course – the financial crisis 
I  hardly  need  to  say  that  the  most  dramatic  thing  that  has  happened  during  my  period  in 
office  here  is  the  global  financial  crisis.  It  is  partly  connected  to  the  problems  with  house 
BIS Review 155/2008 
 5
prices and indebtedness that I have just mentioned. The crisis is to a large degree a case of 
an  imbalance  –  of  excessive  risks  in  lending  and  purely  structural  problems  regarding 
supervision and insight. 
After  just  over  a  year  the  crisis  entered  its  most  intensive  phase  in  mid-September,  in 
connection with the US investment bank Lehman Brothers suffering acute problems. Since 
then the Swedish financial system has been increasingly affected. The Riksbank and other 
authorities  have  taken  extensive  measures  to  counteract  the  effects  of  the  crisis.  These 
measures are still a necessary condition for maintaining satisfactory stability in the Swedish 
financial system. 
The  financial  crisis  has  made  the  link  between  the  Riksbank's  two  areas  of  activity  – 
conducting  monetary  policy  and  safeguarding  financial  stability  –  very  clear.  The  fact  that 
financial stability is a necessary condition for monetary policy to function efficiently is fairly 
self-evident,  but  it  is  not  perhaps  something  one  thinks  about  as  long  as  everything  is 
functioning normally. But now that the financial markets are no longer functioning efficiently, 
this  link  becomes  more  important.  As  a  result  of  the  uncertainty  and  distrust  prevailing 
between  the  banks  and  other  financial  institutions,  the  interest  rates  paid  by  the  general 
public  are  higher  than  normal,  seen  in  relation  to  the  repo  rate.  Access  to  credit  is  also 
declining. The economic situation is therefore tightening more than the current level of the 
repo  rate  would  normally  allow.  The  crisis  may  also,  if  it  is  not  counteracted,  have 
significantly negative effects on inflation and growth. It affects the banks’ loan losses to some 
extent, which in turn has significance for financial stability. 
We  need  measures  regarding  both  financial  stability  and  monetary  policy  to  resolve  the 
confidence crisis causing a gridlock in the credit markets and to alleviate the effects of the 
financial crisis on the Swedish economy. The most recent measure taken was the interest 
rate cut of 1.75 percentage points to 2 per cent last week, when we also brought forward the 
meeting  we  would  have  held  on  17  December.  We  have  seen  an  unexpectedly  rapid  and 
broad weakening in economic activity and it is clear that this will continue to be weak in the 
coming  period.  Despite  global  and  forceful  measures  to  resolve  the  financial  crisis  and  to 
alleviate  its  effects,  it  is  still  difficult  and  expensive  to  borrow,  both  for  households  and 
companies. The oil price and other commodity prices have continued to fall, which leads to 
lower  cost  pressures.  Inflation  will  fall  quickly  and  undershoot  the  target  next  year.  We 
considered that a much lower repo rate was necessary to attain the inflation target a couple 
of years ahead and at the same time contribute to ensuring economic developments are not 
too weak. Another reason why such a large cut was necessary is that the interest rates paid 
by the general public recently as a result of the financial crisis have been higher than normal 
in relation to the level of the repo rate, which in itself has a constraining effect. 
The  financial  crisis  makes  demands  on  us  to  be  flexible,  to  act  quickly  and  forcefully.  We 
have tried to work in this way so far, not least by means of new solutions and measures we 
would  not  normally  use.  The  fact  that  we  are  giving  the  banks  the  possibility  to  borrow  in 
Swedish krona from the Riksbank at longer maturities than normal and that we have supplied 
loans  in  US  dollars  are  examples  of  this.  Other  examples  are  the  fact  that  we  have 
scheduled an extra monetary policy meeting this autumn, that we brought forward our most 
recent interest rate decision and also the scope of the most recent interest rate cuts. Under 
the  circumstances  now  prevailing  in  the  global  financial  crisis,  we  six  members  of  the 
Executive Board must be able to quickly agree on various measures. One of the advantages 
of allowing a central bank to be governed by a group of decision-makers is that it leads to 
better decisions when different opinions and types of competence are combined. However, 
one risk is that different opinions could create difficulties in reaching agreement and lead to a 
slower decision-making process. But our experience so far is that when our ability to act has 
been put to the test, we have managed to "deliver". The fact that we are a group of policy-
makers who sometimes have different views of things has not been an obstacle. 
6 
 BIS Review 155/2008
Future challenges 
The financial crisis is one of the most difficult challenges we have faced during my time at the 
Riksbank and the problems of dealing with it largely remain ahead of us. This is to a great 
extent a question of issues that need to be resolved on an international level. This includes, 
for instance, a review of the regulatory framework, the opportunities for insight and the fact 
that investors must be able, and have stronger incentives, to assess the risks to which they 
are  actually  exposing  themselves.  The  broad  spread  of  fairly  complicated  constructions  of 
financial  instruments  that  has  contributed  to  the  current  confidence  crisis  in  the  financial 
markets is a clear example that risk awareness has been low. 
There  is  currently  a  process  under  way  where  various  authorities  around  the  world  are 
reviewing their regulations, supervision and general frameworks for crisis management. This 
applies not only on a national basis, but also at an international level. If, for instance, one 
does  not  harmonise  the  regulations  for  crisis  management,  one  country’s  measures  may 
create  problems  for  another  country.  These  are  not  merely  challenges  for  the  "external” 
systems.  There  are  also  challenges  for  our  analysis  framework.  It  is  difficult  to  take  credit 
markets and asset prices into account in a really good way in our forecasts. Some work still 
remains in this field, for instance, with regard to finding good ways to include asset prices 
and other financial variables in models of the whole economy. There is a lot of work going on 
in this field in many parts of the world, not least at the Riksbank. I also believe that there will 
be many developments in this area, too, over the coming years. 
Concluding remarks 
It has been incredibly interesting and stimulating to work at the Riksbank. And it is possibly 
even more stimulating today than when I first began here. I must confess that it feels a little 
strange  to  know  that  I  will  no  longer  be  ”on  the  inside”  and  involved  in  managing  the 
challenges we face. My period at the Riksbank is not ending in a quiet phasing out, but rather 
on  a  crescendo.  Being  involved  and  trying  to  contribute  to  ensuring  that  the  Swedish 
economy can cope with difficult periods as well as possible is one of the most challenging 
and stimulating parts of the job as member of the Executive Board of the Riksbank. This was 
one important reason why I returned to the Bank six years ago. But now I will nevertheless 
leave the Bank when my period of office comes to a close. 
There is much that I am already aware that I am going to miss. For instance, doing what I am 
doing right now, giving a speech to well-informed and interested listeners, and receiving their 
questions and comments on economic developments. I will also miss the more day-to-day 
work at the Bank. As I believe you will have noticed from my speech today, I consider there 
is a willingness to change at the Riksbank – positive driving force to develop and become 
better  at  what  we  do.  It  is  a  very  stimulating  environment  to  work  in.  It  is  this  corporate 
culture and all of the devoted employees who create it, that I will miss most of all. As I now 
leave my post as member of the Executive Board, it feels comforting to know that this driving 
force for development exists in our organisation. This, together with the changes that have 
been  made,  both  with  regard  to  the  framework  for  economic  policy  and  our  means  of 
working, convinces me that the Riksbank will be perfectly able to manage the challenges that 
await us in the future. 
BIS Review 155/2008 
 7
