Denny H Kalyalya: Zambian financial sector – responding to the needs of 
business 
Speech by Dr Denny H Kalyalya, Deputy Governor-Operations of the Bank of Zambia; at 
the opening of Standard Chartered Bank Zambia Solwezi Branch, Solwezi, 10 December 
2008. 
 The Minister of Commerce, Trade and Industry, Hon. Felix Mutati 
The Minister, North-Western Province, Hon. Joseph Mulyata 
The Chairman of the Board of Standard Chartered Bank Zambia, Mr. George Sokota 
His Worship the mayor of Solwezi 
The Managing Director of Standard Chartered Bank, Mrs. Mizinga Melu 
Distinguished guests 
Members of the press 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  at  the  official  opening  of  the  new  Solwezi  Branch  of  Standard 
Chartered Bank Zambia Limited. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  recent  times  have  shown  a  proliferation  of  commercial  bank 
branches  in  areas  which  had  previously  been  considered  unattractive  for  business.  Rural 
areas had even experienced closures where banks felt that they were unable to establish a 
case  for  business.  The  economic  environment  that  the  Government  created  through  the 
reforms instituted in the early 1990’s has given new confidence to investors and has provided 
an  opportunity  for  businesses  to  grow,  thereby  attracting  banks  to  the  areas  which  were 
deprived of basic financial services. The opening of this branch today, in a town which has 
attracted  major  investments,  is  a  demonstration  that  the  financial  sector  is  indeed,  now 
responding to the needs of business. 
The  world’s  financial  markets  have  been  plunged  into  turmoil  which  some  say  is 
unprecedented, or at least comparable to the levels experienced in the most severe financial 
crises of the last century. Notwithstanding this, our financial system has demonstrated a level 
of stability which to an extent has been derived from the strong capital positions that have 
characterised the Zambian banking industry in the past few years. However, this turbulence 
has  already  resulted  in  a  reduction  in  projected  global  economic  growth  and  a  decline  in 
demand  for  Africa’s  exports.  Notwithstanding  this,  we  remain  confident  that  the  banking 
sector  will  continue  to  show  resilience  and  expansion  through  branch  networks,  thereby 
acting as a channel through which services will be extended to the financially excluded. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  a  recent  survey  established  that  fewer  than  15%  of  the  Zambian 
adult  population  have  access  to  the  services  provided  by  commercial  banks.  The  key 
reasons for this low level of access were cited as the distance that needs to be overcome in 
order  to  access  the  services  and  the  cost  of  these  services.  It  is  therefore  a  welcome 
development  that  commercial  banks  have  responded  to  these  challenges  by  reaching  out 
through new branches. However, banks need to be mindful of the fact that the many of our 
people who need these services most of all are not able to bear the heavy charges that are 
sometimes levied, and the goal of inclusion will stand to be compromised if this matter is not 
addressed.  The  Bank  of  Zambia  is  in  the  process  of  engaging  the  banks  with  a  view  to 
finding a solution to the high cost of banking which is often cited as the main hindrance to 
access to finance. I therefore appeal to all the banks operating in Zambia to critically assess 
the level of their charges and to continue playing the supportive role to development that they 
have in the past. 
In this regard, I am particularly pleased to make mention of the spirited efforts that Standard 
Chartered Bank continues to make in financing SME’s and Micro-finance. The experiences of 
many economies show that these sub sectors have the capacity to create a middle class and 
BIS Review 163/2008 
1
to  emancipate  both  rural  and  urban  dwellers  from  their  poverty  trap.  Zambia  has  many 
promising  entrepreneurs  whose  only  constraint  is  affordable  funding.  As  you  explore  the 
opportunities that this new venture will bring you, I urge you to focus on the customers who 
may appear small today, but could grow with the bank if they are given the right support. 
I wish you every success as you embark on this journey into North Western Province. 
2 
 BIS Review 163/2008
