Donald L Kohn: Restoring financial intermediation by banks – the role of 
regulators  
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Office  of  Thrift  Supervision  National  Housing  Forum,  Washington 
DC, 8 December 2008.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 I  thought  I  might  use  these  brief  introductory  remarks  to  put  some  of  our  challenges  as 
regulators in the broad context of the tremendous shifts in the pattern of financial flows that 
we are witnessing. Traditionally, funds have been channeled from savers to borrowers in two 
ways:  through  financial  markets  and  through  financial  intermediaries,  such  as  banks  and 
savings institutions. The turmoil in the U.S. financial system during the past 16 months has 
put  both  channels  of  financial  intermediation  under  great  strain  and,  in  doing  so,  has 
produced  a  significant  financial  crisis.  Large  losses  taken  by  financial  institutions  and 
investors, mostly from mortgage-related assets, have increased uncertainty and undermined 
confidence;  these  events  have  caused  lenders  to  greatly  tighten  credit  conditions  for 
households and businesses, which, in turn, have contributed to a downturn in the economy 
that has reinforced the strains in the financial system.1  
One consequence of the distress in financial markets is that banks are being pushed to take 
a greater role in financial intermediation, which reverses, in part, a long-term trend away from 
bank-based  financial  intermediation  and  toward  market-based  intermediation.  And,  indeed, 
bank lending surged earlier in the fall following a lull over the summer. However, the degree 
to which the pickup represented deliberate choices by banks is unclear, as many households 
and businesses reportedly drew on previously committed lines of credit, and selling of loans 
in securitization markets was hampered by further deterioration in those markets. In recent 
weeks, bank lending appears to have dropped back, consistent with the significant tightening 
of  terms  and  standards  reported  by  bank  loan  officers  in  recent  quarters  as  well  as  the 
weakening of economic activity.  
The need for greater bank intermediation has occurred at a time when banks are managing 
losses  and  are  worried  about  meeting  their  funding  needs.  Concerns  about  banks' 
creditworthiness  have  made  it  costly  for  them  to  issue  long-term  debt.  Growth  in  bank 
deposits has been fairly strong this year, and the recognition that deposits can be a reliable 
source of funds protected by the federal safety net has perhaps helped to draw investment 
banks to convert to bank holding companies. But the competition for deposits has raised their 
relative  cost,  and  deposits  cannot  be  expected  to  make  up  fully  for  reduced  funding  from 
other sources. 
The challenge for regulators and other authorities is to create an environment that supports 
greater bank intermediation, which should help to restore the health of the financial system 
and the economy. We want banks to be willing to deploy capital and liquidity, but they must 
do so in a responsible way that avoids past mistakes and does not create new ones.  
Banks need access to funds to make loans – especially with securitzation markets impaired 
– and the authorities have taken several steps to enhance the supply of funds to banks. The 
Treasury, working with the regulators, has used its authority under the Emergency Economic 
                                                 
1   The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board 
and the Federal Open Market Committee. Karen Dynan, J. Nellie Liang, and Sabeth Siddique of the Board 
staff contributed to these remarks. 
BIS Review 155/2008 
 1
Stabilization  Act,  or  EESA,  to  inject  capital  into  banks  so  they  will  be  stronger  and  more 
stable. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has expanded its guarantee on deposits 
and  is  insuring  new  senior  debt  obligations  of  banking  firms.  The  Federal  Reserve  has 
reduced the cost of borrowing at the discount window and created a new facility to provide 
term credit to banks. 
The  Federal  Reserve  and  the  other  federal  banking  agencies  have  also  issued  regulatory 
guidance to promote greater lending by banks. This guidance encouraged banks to meet the 
needs  of  creditworthy  borrowers  in  a  manner  consistent  with  safety  and  soundness  – 
specifically,  by  taking  a  balanced  approach  in  assessing  borrowers'  ability  to  repay  and 
making realistic assessments of collateral valuations.2 Additional capital, liquidity backstops, 
and  regulatory  encouragement  should  all  reinforce  financial  stability  and  set  the  stage  for 
increased bank lending.  
As it is neither realistic nor desirable for banks to meet all financial intermediation needs, the 
Federal Reserve and other authorities are also making efforts to stabilize financial markets 
more  broadly.  In  this  regard,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  created  facilities  to  lend  to  primary 
dealers, to purchase highly rated commercial paper at a term of three months, and to provide 
backup liquidity for money market mutual funds. We are also creating a facility to support the 
issuance of asset-backed securities collateralized by student loans, auto loans, credit card 
loans, and loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration.  
In  related  actions,  policymakers  are  taking  steps  to  address  the  problems  in  housing  and 
mortgage  markets.  The  Federal  Reserve  supported  placing  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac 
into conservatorship to help stabilize an important source of housing finance. More recently, 
the Federal Reserve has announced that it will purchase $600billion in debt issued by the 
housing-related  government-sponsored  enterprises  and  in  mortgage-backed  securities 
backed by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae, which could reduce funding costs for 
mortgages.  It  also  is  supporting  foreclosure  prevention  and  neighborhood  stabilization 
efforts, which help reduce unnecessary foreclosures and their costs on communities. Limiting 
foreclosures will also help reduce the risk that house prices will sink significantly below the 
level justified by fundamentals.  
The events of the past year and a half have highlighted the need for changes in our financial 
system.  Presumably,  such  changes  may  include  a  different  balance  between  bank-based 
and market-based financial intermediation. As regulators of banks and thrifts, our job is not to 
determine  what  this  balance  should  be.  Rather,  our  job  is,  and  has  been,  to  create  an 
environment  in  which,  in  the  short  run,  banks  can  step  up  to  fill  as  much  of  the  gap  as 
possible  that  has  been  left  by  still-dysfunctional  markets,  consistent  with  a  strong,  stable 
banking system. Over time, of course, we will need to work with the Congress and the new 
Administration  to  construct  a  system  of  oversight  over  both  markets  and  institutions  that 
better protects the stability of the financial system and the U.S. economy.  
                                                 
2   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the 
Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers", joint press release, November 12. 
2 
 BIS Review 155/2008
