T T Mboweni: An annus horribilis?  
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Annual 
Dinner in honour of the Ambassadors and High Commissioners accredited to the Republic of 
South Africa, Pretoria, 27 November 2008. 
 Your Excellency, the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps 
Your Excellencies, Ambassadors and High Commissioners 
Your Excellency, the Chief of State Protocol 
Your Excellencies, Heads of International Organisations represented in the Republic of 
South Africa 
Deputy Governors of the South African Reserve Bank 
Senior officers of the South African National Defence Force 
Senior Management of the South African Reserve Bank and their spouses/partners 
Financial Editors and other media representatives 
Esteemed Ladies and Gentlemen 
This has been an eventful year. Some might even say it was an Annus Horribilis! The impact 
of  the  US  subprime  crisis,  which  became  evident  in  August  2007,  deepened  and  spread 
since then. At the time there was much speculation as to whether or not this crisis was going 
to remain confined within the financial sector, or spill over into the real sector. Initially, many 
analysts thought that the crisis would be relatively contained and there was also a view that 
there  would  be  limited  if  any  impact  on  the  emerging  market  economies,  the  so-called 
decoupling  hypothesis.  Here  again,  the  initial  dominant  view  was  that  decoupling  would 
occur and as such emerging or developing economies would emerge relatively unscathed. 
This view was predicated on the fact that China and India have emerged as new sources of 
global economic growth. Nothing could have been further from the truth. Maybe we should 
have thought this out better. 
Whatever  views  existed  on  these  decoupling  hypotheses  has  been  proven  to  be  horribly 
wrong.  The  financial  market  instability  has  spilled  over  into  the  real  economy,  and  the 
emerging market economies have not been spared. In fact, it is also probably true to say that 
many emerging markets are more vulnerable as they are less able to ameliorate the negative 
consequences of the current crisis. The previously optimistic forecasts for global economic 
growth  have  been  revised  downwards  in  the  most  dramatic  fashion.  More  and  more 
developed  economies  are  forecasting  imminent  and  prolonged  recessions,  with  downward 
growth revisions almost on a weekly basis. These include the UK, the forecasts of the Euro 
area, Japan and the US economies to name but a few. These are significant trading partners 
of  South  Africa.  These  countries  account  for  more  than  two  thirds  of  our  manufactured 
exports.  Even  the  previously  fastest  growing  emerging  market  economies  in  Asia  are 
expected to experience some significant moderation in economic growth. In the past days, 
for example, the World Bank has downgraded its forecast for the economic growth rate in 
China for 2009 to 7,5 per cent, compared to the current economic growth rate of around 9,4 
per cent. 
With  regards  to  the  financial  sector  crisis,  South  Africa  appears  to  have  reasonably 
weathered the storm, as our financial sector remains broadly robust and stable. The South 
African Reserve Bank has not been compelled to make any special liquidity provision, and 
the domestic interbank market remains fully functional.  
This does not mean that we have been spared the full impact of the fall-out from the slowing 
global economy. Apart  from the direct consequences on our equity market s and the rand 
exchange rate, we have also witnessed a dramatic decline in commodity prices. It is almost 
hard to believe that as recently as July this year, the price of North Sea Brent crude oil had 
BIS Review 152/2008 
 1
reached  a level  of  almost  US$150  per  barrel, whereas  today  it  is  trading  at  approximately 
US$50 a barrel, a level last seen in early 2005. The lower fuel costs and significantly lower 
volumes of world trade have resulted in a major decline of the Baltic Dry Index (an indicator 
of economic trends which tracks the cost of shipping goods such as coal, iron ore and grain). 
The index recorded a high of 11,793 points in May this year, but declined to 815 points last 
week. 
While these developments are good news for oil-importing countries such as South Africa, 
particularly in the developing world, it should not be forgotten that the decline in the price of 
oil is part of a general decline in commodity prices. South Africa, as a commodity exporter is 
experiencing the negative consequences of these developments. The price of platinum, one 
of our main export commodities, reached a level in excess of US$2,250 per ounce in early 
March  2008,  but  has  since  declined  to  the  current  levels  of  around  US$840  per  ounce. 
Platinum, which is used in the production of catalytic converters in motor vehicles, is highly 
sensitive  to  the  fortunes  of  the  global  automobile  industry  whose  fortunes  have  changed 
significantly due to the slowdown. Domestic steel prices have declined by 25 per cent in the 
past weeks, and at the same time a major South African steel company announced a one 
third reduction in steel production in South Africa. While the gold price has also moderated 
somewhat, the extent of the decline has so far been relatively limited. 
The  decline  in  commodity  prices  has  not  been  confined  to  industrial  commodities.  Global 
food prices, which along with oil prices were responsible for part of the inflation pressures 
experienced  in  the  recent  period,  have  also  declined  in  the  past  few  months.  Both  the 
Economist Food Price Index and the IMF Food Price Index have declined by about 30 per 
cent since July of this year. 
The unfavourable global economic growth and commodity price developments suggest that 
while South Africa has managed to escape any untoward impact on its banking system, the 
real economy will not be immune to global developments. The South African economy has 
experienced positive economic growth since 1999, and growth in excess of 5 per cent per 
annum was recorded in the four years from 2004 to 2007. However, in 2009 the economy 
showed signs of slowing down. The year started off in not such a good way, when capacity 
constraints  in  electricity  provision  resulted  in  the  period  of  load-shedding  and  electricity 
supply reductions to the major mining and manufacturing companies. This culminated in a 
revised annualised economic growth rate of 1,6 per cent in the first quarter of the year. The 
second quarter saw a rebound to a revised 5,1 per cent, but this was off the low base of the 
previous quarter. Third quarter annualised GDP growth measured 0,2 per cent, and reflected 
significant contractions in mining, manufacturing, and wholesale and retail trade. Agriculture 
and construction on the other han d remained buoyant. The South African Reserve Bank’s 
leading indicator of economic activity has continued its downward trend, and business and 
consumer confidence indicators also show that the outlook is not viewed as being particularly 
favourable. Despite an inevitable slowdown in GDP growth, we do not expect a recession in 
South Africa at this stage. 
During the past two years or so, there has been a rebalancing of the sources of economic 
growth from consumption to investment. The past few years has seen a significant increase 
in gross domestic fixed investment, from 15 per cent of GDP in 2002 to over 22 per cent of 
GDP in the second quarter of 2008. This has been a major achievement. The challenge will 
be to maintain investment at these levels in a world of heightened uncertainty. Part of this 
impetus has come from the strong infrastructural push from the public sector with respect to 
transport, telecommunications and electricity infrastructure to name a few. These projects will 
continue, but no doubt there will be challenges with respect to funding, in terms of both the 
availability  and  the  cost,  given  the  difficult  global  financial  market  conditions  we  are  going 
through. Private sector investment has played its part as well over the past few years, and 
the big question that will confront us will be whether or not private sector investment will be 
able to stay the course during the coming months. We certainly hope so. 
2 
 BIS Review 152/2008
The higher economic growth rate experienced over the past few years had resulted in some 
improvements in the employment picture in South African society. According to the official 
statistics as published by Statistics South Africa, employment growth has averaged almost 3 
per  cent  in  2006  and  2007,  and  measured  3,9  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2008.  The 
unemployment  rate  declined  to  23,2  per  cent  in  September  2008,  down  from  over  30  per 
cent in 2002. While this unemployment rate is still too high, the direction has been pleasing.  
Financial  stability  considerations  have  probably  increased  over  the  past  year.  Monetary 
policy  remains  focused  on  achieving  price  stability  whilst  taking  full  cognisance  of  the 
changed global situation. Inflation in South Africa has exceeded the upper limit of the inflation 
target  range  since  April  2007.  In  response  to  this,  the  monetary  policy  stance  has  been 
tightened, and between June 2006 and June 2008 the repurchase rate was increased by a 
cumulative  500  basis  points.  The  most  recent  measure,  published  yesterday,  showed  that 
CPIX inflation declined to 12,4 per cent in October compared to the recent peak of 13,6 per 
cent seen in August. We are hopeful that this is the start of a consistent downward trend. 
Currently our forecasts indicate that we should be back in the target range by the  second 
quarter of 2010.  
The  inflation  outlook  has  been  improved  to  some  extent  by  a  number  of  variables  that 
previously were seen as upside risk factors. As mentioned above, the international oil price 
has declined significantly and global food price inflation appears to be moderating although is 
yet  to  feed  through  to  domestic  consumer  prices.  Domestic  demand  pressures  have  also 
subsided as household consumption expenditure has responded to the less accommodative 
stance of monetary policy.  
Consumption expenditure has also been influenced by negative wealth effects, as housing 
and  equity  markets  have  weakened.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  equity  prices  on  the 
JSE  Limited  have  declined  by  30  per  cent,  house  prices  have  been  flat  or  negative,  and 
personal disposable incomes have also declined. The lower economic growth rate has meant 
that supply side cost pressures may also be subsiding. 
Unfortunately, while there have been improvements on these fronts, we have to contend with 
some  upside  risks  factors  to  the  inflation  outlook.  Inflation  expectations  are  an  important 
driver of inflation, and we have seen a successive deterioration of these over the past year in 
particular. These expectations may feed through to further inflationary pressures. Our hope is 
that inflation expectations will respond quickly to the expected reversal in the inflation trend. 
Despite  the  deterioration  however,  there  is  still  an  expectation  that  inflation  will  decline 
significantly over the next two years. 
A  major  risk  factor  is  the  exchange  rate  market  which  has  also  been  buffeted  by  global 
developments. The increased risk aversion in international financial markets has resulted in a 
reversal  of  capital  flows  to  emerging  market  economies  in  particular.  Investors,  fund 
managers and hedge funds are liquidating their positions in emerging markets and moving 
them  to  so-called  safe  havens.  Some  even  call  this  a  flight  to  quality.  This  is  somewhat 
ironical,  given  that  capital  is  moving  back  to  the  source  of  the  problems.  During  the  year 
there  has  been  a  significant  realignment  of  exchange  rates:  the  dollar  has  appreciated 
against most currencies apart from the yen; sterling has depreciated significantly and most 
emerging market currencies have also depreciated. Since the end of last year for example, 
sterling has depreciated by around 23 per cent against the US dollar; the Australian dollar by 
about 26 per cent; the Brazilian real by 19 per cent; and the Turkish lira by 26 per cent. At 
the same time the rand has depreciated by about 31 per cent against the dollar and about 24 
per cent on a trade-weighted basis. These are significant moves which clearly do not only 
reflect the underlying fundamentals of these economies.  
Part of the reason for the poor performance of the rand is related to the decline in commodity 
prices. Other factors include simple risk aversion, and the concern about the current account 
deficit  on  the  balance  of  payments,  which  to  date  has  been  adequately  financed  through 
capital  inflows.  In  recent  weeks,  following  the  latest  round  of  financial  market  turbulence, 
BIS Review 152/2008 
 3
particularly after the demise of Lehman Brothers, there have been significant sales of bonds 
and equities by non-residents.  
The ZAR and the domestic bond and equity markets were not the only casualties following 
the failed attempt by Barclays to acquire Lehman, subsequently resulting in the latter filing for 
bankruptcy on 15 September 2008. Emerging markets in general came under heavy selling 
pressure as risk aversion escalated. 
On  15  September,  Romanian  shares  fell  by  more  than  4  per  cent  to  their  lowest  levels  in 
over three years while Czech and Hungarian stocks dropped to their lowest levels in over two 
years,  falling  by  6  and  4  per  cent  respectively.  Russian  stocks  also  dropped  by  similar 
amounts  reaching  their  lowest  level  in  two  years,  resulting  in  the  authorities  in  Russia  to 
suspend  trading  on  17  and  18  September  2008.  For  that  entire  week,  the  stocks  of  most 
emerging  market  countries  showed  significant  declines.  Those  included  Israel  (-10,8  per 
cent); Romania (-7,3 per cent); Thailand (-4.5 per cent); South Africa (-2,9 per cent); Hungary 
(-2,1 per cent); Czech Republic (-2,0 per cent); Poland and Turkey (-1,9 per cent) and Korea 
(-1,5 per cent). 
Emerging Market Bond Indices (EMBI) spreads over US Treasuries widened sharply during 
the week under review. The widest spreads were recorded in Russia (52 bps); Argentina (42 
bps);  Venezuela  and  Ukraine  (30  bps)  and  China  (28  bps).  South  Africa  and  Poland 
registered the smallest movements with their spreads over US Treasuries widening by some 
5bps. 
The currencies of most emerging markets weakened considerably against the USD during 
the week starting on 15 September on the back of major equity and bond selling in these 
countries.  The  biggest  depreciations  were  registered  by  Chile  (-3,2  per  cent)  followed  by 
Brazil (-2,0 per cent) and Iceland (-1,5 per cent). 
In the year to date, non-residents have been net sellers of equities to the value of around 
R52 billion, while net bond sales have totalled almost R17 billion. However it is important to 
note that these sales do not necessarily translate into actual capital outflows.  
There is little doubt that the traditional source of foreign capital inflows, that is flows into the 
equity market, may remain under pressure in the coming months as a result of continued risk 
aversion.  Despite  the  global  turmoil,  the  financial  account in  South  Africa  has  remained  in 
positive territory. While the deficit on the current account of the balance of payments remains 
at elevated levels, some pressure on the import side will be taken off by growth,  lower oil 
prices  and  the  poor  performance  of  the  rand.  Unfortunately,  with  a  rapidly  slowing  global 
economy,  commodity  prices  are  expected  to  remain  subdued,  and  the  export  markets  for 
commodities and manufactured goods in the current climate will remain a challenge. 
Conclusion 
Your Excellencies 
Esteemed Ladies and Gentlemen 
Colleagues 
We  are  living  through  the  most  severe  economic  crisis  in  our  living  memory.  In  response, 
many  governments  and  central  banks  have  taken  extraordinary  measures  to  protect  their 
banking  systems  and  their  economies.  However  the  past  few  months  have  shown  that 
increased  global  economic  and  financial  integration  has  resulted  in  an  increasingly 
interdependent world.  
Over  the  last  three  years,  the  focus  has  increasingly  been  turned  to  the  G-20  to  provide 
leadership on international financial issues, and this was even more so the case during the 
current  financial  turmoil.  While  the  G-20  is  still  a  relatively  small  grouping,  it  nevertheless 
represents almost 90 percent of global trade and GDP respectively. On the other hand, the 
G-7 has proven itself to be an increasingly necessary albeit insufficient forum in the changing 
4 
 BIS Review 152/2008
to  come  up  with  action  plans  which  should  be 
economic environment of today. Hence, the current financial global crisis provides us with a 
fresh  and  unique  opportunity  to  review  what  the  role  of  global  institutions  and  other 
cooperative arrangements should be. 
It  is  clear  that  the  need  to  act  with  the  necessary  resolve  and  in  a  cooperative  fashion 
together with institutions such as the IMF, the BIS and the FSF and the G-20 is imperative in 
order 
implemented  urgently  and 
comprehensively. New global governance structures that are inclusive of all stakeholders are 
needed.  
Recently  the  G-20  Heads  of  states  met  in  Washington  DC  to  discuss  the  global  financial 
crisis.  At  this  G-20  Economic  Crisis  Summit,  the  Heads  of  States  resolved  that  countries 
should  work  together  to  restore  financial  stability  and  economic  growth.  The  key  issues 
agreed to at the summit were: the reform of the international financial institutions such as the 
World  Bank  and  IMF;  the  conclusion  of  the  global  free  trade  agreement;  improvement  in 
financial market transparency; changing incentives so that excessive risk taking is no longer 
rewarded; drawing up a list of financial institutions that could result in systematic failure; and 
strengthening financial market regulation.  
In  the  meantime,  strong  and  significant  actions  have  been  taken  in  both  advanced  and 
emerging market economies to stimulate economies, strengthen the financial sector, provide 
liquidity and working to ensure that international financial institutions can provide support for 
the global economy.  
In  addition,  the  leaders  endeavoured  at  this  summit  to  provide  further  assistance  and  to 
support the global environment by stating the following and I quote: 
“Against  this  background  of  deteriorating  economic  conditions  worldwide, 
we  agreed  that  a  broader  policy  response  is  needed,  based  on  closer 
macroeconomic  cooperation,  to  restore  growth,  avoid  negative  spillovers 
and  support  emerging  market  economies  and  developing  countries.  As 
immediate steps to achieve these objectives, as well as to address longer-
term challenges, we will: 
Continue  our  vigorous  efforts  and  take  whatever  further  actions  are 
necessary to stabilise the financial system. 
Recognise  the  importance  of  monetary  policy  support,  as  deemed 
appropriate to domestic conditions. 
Use  fiscal  measures  to  stimulate  domestic  demand  to  rapid  effect  as 
appropriate  while  maintaining  a  policy  framework  conducive  to  fiscal 
sustainability. 
Help emerging and developing economies gain access to finance in current 
difficult 
facilities  and 
programme  support.  We  stress  the  International  Monetary  Fund’s  (IMF) 
important  role  in  crisis  response,  welcome  its  new  short-term  liquidity 
facility  and  urge  the  ongoing  review  of  its  instruments  and  facilities  to 
ensure flexibility. 
Encourage  the  World  Bank  and  other  multilateral  development  banks 
(MDBs)  to  use  their  full  capacity  in  support  of  their  development  agenda 
and we welcome the recent introduction of new facilities by the World Bank 
in the areas of infrastructure and trade finance (and) 
Ensure that the IMF, World Bank and other MDBs have sufficient resources 
to continue playing their role in overcoming the crisis.” 
financial  conditions, 
including 
through 
liquidity 
The next G20 Head of State summit to review progress will be held by 30 April 2009. 
BIS Review 152/2008 
 5
Hopefully by the time we meet next year, we will be able to report on more promising global 
and domestic developments. 
Please enjoy the rest of the evening, and may you have , in the period ahead, a wonderful 
festive season and a prosperous New Year. 
‘Till we meet again! Adios Amigos! 
Thank you very much. 
6 
 BIS Review 152/2008
