Jens Thomsen: Government bond market in light of the recent turmoil 
Speech by Mr Jens Thomsen, Member of the Board of Governors of the National Bank of 
Denmark and Chairman of the Economic and Financial Committee, Sub-Committee on EU 
Government Bonds and Bills Market1, at the European Government Bond Summit, Brussels, 
24 October 2008. 
 Introduction 
I am delighted to be here today to offer my view on the ongoing turbulence in the financial 
markets. 
In the not so distant past the financial markets played a role by applying pressure on Member 
State governments to run sound public finances in Stage III of the EMU. Today the tables 
have been turned. A reasonable description of the present agenda is more along the lines of 
how the public finances can promote sound financial markets (see slide 2). 
Liquidity 
In turbulent times the price of liquidity increases. Since august of 2007 there has been four 
consecutive waves of illiquidity, during which the perceived default and liquidity risk of banks 
have risen and widened the spread between unsecured and secured lending and where the 
fourth and last spike following the default of Lehman Brothers has been the most severe (see 
slide 3). 
The decomposed TED spread shows how T-bills have become especially valuable in times 
of crises (see slide 4). During the four spikes the lending against US T-bill has driven down 
the T-bill rate. 
The same effect has not been quite as prominent in the European money market (see slide 
5).  The  most  recent  flare  up  of  the  turbulence  has  however  lead  to  significantly  increased 
demand for short term government securities leading to lower interest rates for the German 
T-bills. 
Prior to the recent turbulence in September the search for safety drove down both the T-bill 
and  the  highest  rated  commercial  paper  yield.  Lately  the  status  of  the  commercial  paper 
programs  as  a  safe  heaven  has  eroded,  as  the  CP-markets  have  frozen  (see  slide  6). 
Outstanding amounts of asset backed commercial papers took a significant dive at the outset 
of the turbulence in 2007 (see slide 7). Recently the outstandings of commercial papers for 
financial issuers have been declining. Note however that the latest data does not reflect the 
impact of the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) provided by the Federal Reserve. 
Credit risk and issuance terms 
The increased price of liquidity has been followed by an increase in of the price of credit. The 
recent announcements of bank recapitalisations and guarantee schemes have curtailed the 
upswing in the CDS spread in the financial sector. However spreads are still high compared 
to  pre-August  2007  levels  (see  slide  8).  Even  sovereigns  have  not  been  immune  to  the 
increased  credit  risk  valuations  (see  slide  9).  Following  the  announcement  of  the  rescue 
packages, the CDS-spreads for sovereigns seem to have stabilized. 
                                                 
1   The mandate of the Sub-Committee is to aim at promoting further the integration and better functioning of EU 
government bond markets thereby impacting positively on the financial markets as a whole. 
BIS Review 140/2008 
 1
In  relation  to  issuance  terms  in  this  volatile  market  the  bond  yields  have  been  declining 
compared to level in July 2008 (see slide 10). This movement has primarily been driven by a 
flight to safety. Nevertheless the demand for government securities can be quite volatile. The 
latest round of financial turmoil has indeed lead to pronounced increase in the volatility both 
in the stock and bond market (slide 11), which from an issuers standpoint makes it difficult to 
manoeuvre  in  terms  of  coming  out  with  timely  issuances  in  such  an  unpredictable  market 
environment. 
In addition increased credit risk and demand for liquidity have widened the yield spread to 
German government securities and thereby aggravating the relative issuance terms for other 
EMU-countries (see slide 12). Under the assumption that the yield spread between member 
states purely can be explained by differences in credit risk and liquidity, one may use prices 
on credit default swaps (CDS) as an approximation for the credit risk premium. The liquidity 
risk may then be defined as the residual of the yield spread after deducting the credit risk 
premium (see slide 13). The calculation shows that the widened yield vis-à-vis Germany in 
2008 compared to 2007 is predominately caused by increased credit risks. 
The financial turbulence has elucidated the role of the government securities as safe havens 
(see slide 14). Under normal market conditions the swap market may function as a substitute 
for government securities especially in terms of it's virtues in regards to pricing. However the 
increasing credit and liquidity premiums imply that this type of substitution is no longer valid. 
Market conditions 
In  general  banks  are  under  pressure.  They  experience  rising  funding  costs  and  declining 
market value (see slide 15). The capacity of the balance sheet is constrained making it more 
difficult to handle the intermediation phase between issuers and end-investors. In addition, 
the constrained balance sheets combined with increased volatility have lead to widened bid 
offer-spreads  in  the  secondary  government  bond  markets,  hence  the  efficiency  of  the 
European government bond market has temporarily gone down (see slide 16). 
The role of the DMOs 
After listing the areas in which the government debt management experiences the effect of 
the financial turbulence. I now turn to discuss in what role the DMOs may play in handling the 
crisis (see slide 17). 
• 
• 
Involvement in handling the stressed situation in the financial sector 
Help 
counterparties – and thaw up the frozen interbank market. 
Issue sufficient funds to perform the announced recapitalisations of banks. 
• 
It  has  been  stated  that  the  government  ownership  through  recapitalizations  should  be  a 
temporary solution. When it comes time to wind up the government ownership of the banks 
timing can be hard; should the government for instance sell its shares, when the share prices 
are  high,  i.e.  in  periods  of  high  growth  where  the  government  typically  does  not  have  a 
funding need? 
to  secure  confidence  between 
to  ensure  state  guarantees 
financial 
What lies ahead? 
Ahead  of  us  lies  a  period,  where  a  majority  of  the  governments  in  the  Euro  area  will 
experience an increased need for funding, hence higher issuance from sovereign issuers is 
to be expected (see slide 18 and 19). 
 2 
 BIS Review 140/2008
 BIS Review 140/2008 
   3
   4 
 BIS Review 140/2008
 BIS Review 140/2008 
   5
   6 
 BIS Review 140/2008
 BIS Review 140/2008 
   7
   8 
 BIS Review 140/2008
 BIS Review 140/2008 
   9
   10 
 BIS Review 140/2008
   11
BIS Review 140/2008 
 