Donald L Kohn: Economic outlook 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, at the Georgetown University Wall Street Alliance, New York, 15 October 
2008. 
 We gather in difficult times for our financial markets and our economy. Recent weeks have 
seen  a  sharp  intensification  of  the  turmoil  in  financial  markets:  There  has  been  a  broad-
based  pullback  in  risk-taking  and  a  virtual  seizing  up  of  term  lending  to  many  banks  and 
other financial institutions; interest rates have risen for many borrowers, and credit availability 
has  significantly  diminished;  and  equity  prices  have  fallen  sharply,  on  net.  The  authorities 
have  responded  with  a  series  of  forceful  and  innovative  measures  that  promise  to  rebuild 
confidence and free up lending. Tonight I will try to put these developments in the context of 
the recent course of our economy and its prospects for the future.1  
Before commenting on the current situation and its economic implications, I thought it might 
be useful to begin by giving you my perspective on where the economy stood prior to the 
recent  intensification  of  financial  turmoil.  Overall  economic  activity  –  as  measured  by  the 
growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) – held up surprisingly well over the first half of 
2008 given the ongoing stresses in broader financial markets and the further rise in oil prices. 
At the same time, however, a number of disquieting signs lay underneath the surface of the 
aggregate growth figures. Conditions in housing markets, as had been widely expected, were 
continuing to deteriorate, with further declines in home sales, new construction, and house 
prices  in  most  markets.  And,  while  consumer  spending  posted  moderate  gains  during  the 
spring,  it  seemed  likely  that  much  of  that  strength  stemmed  from  the  sizable  tax  rebate 
checks that began to go out to households at the end of April. Meanwhile, on the business 
side, employers had been reducing payrolls since the turn of the year, industrial production 
fell from February through May, and many corporations were seeing their profits squeezed 
by rising costs and weak demand. 
During the summer, it became increasingly clear that a downshifting in the pace of economic 
activity  was  in  train.  In  particular,  the  long  list  of  negative  factors  weighing  on  domestic 
demand – including high prices for oil and other commodities, tight credit conditions, and the 
housing downturn – were beginning to take a significant toll on the economy. 
The  deterioration  was  led  by  a  noticeable  retrenchment  in  consumer  spending.  Although 
rebate checks continued to provide a boost to incomes in June and July, households were 
facing  some  stiff  headwinds.  Ongoing  job  losses  and  sharp  increases  in  energy  and  food 
prices subtracted from household purchasing power, declining home prices and falling equity 
values  led  to  a  further  drop  in  household  wealth,  and  consumers  remained  extremely 
downbeat  about  prospects  for  jobs  and  income.  At  the  same  time,  credit  became  more 
difficult  to  obtain  as  lenders  became  increasingly  concerned  about  the  prospects  for  loan 
performance in a softening economy.  Many banks and other creditors tightened standards 
for credit cards and other consumer loans, and some lenders either reduced borrowing limits 
on or eliminated home equity lines of credit. As a result of all these influences, real consumer 
outlays fell from June through August, putting real consumer spending for the third quarter as 
a whole on track to decline for the first time since 1991.  
                                                 
1   The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of other members of the 
Board  or  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee.  William  Wascher,  of  the  Board’s  staff,  contributed  to 
these remarks. 
BIS Review 125/2008 
 1
Business investment also appears to have slowed over the summer. Orders and shipments 
for nondefense capital goods have weakened, on net, in recent months, pointing to a decline 
in real outlays for new business equipment. Similarly, outlays for nonresidential construction 
projects edged lower in July and August after rising at a robust pace over the first half of this 
year. Although the deteriorating sales outlook and increased uncertainty about the economy 
undoubtedly played a role, the softening in business outlays also appeared to reflect reduced 
credit availability from banks and other lenders. 
In addition, conditions in housing markets have remained on a downward trajectory. Sales 
and  construction  of  new  homes  continued  to  decline  over  the  summer,  and  while  existing 
home sales showed signs of stabilizing at low levels, many of the sales that did occur appear 
to have been stimulated by sharp price reductions for distressed properties. National indexes 
of house prices continued to post sizable declines. 
Unfortunately, our trading partners have proven not to be immune from financial turmoil and 
economic  weakness.  Incoming  data  indicate  that  the  pace  of  activity  in  many  foreign 
economies  slowed  in  recent  quarters,  reflecting  many  of  the  same  forces  of  credit 
contraction,  rising  energy  prices,  and  housing  market  decelerations  that  have  affected  the 
U.S.  economy.  This  weakening  in  foreign  activity  suggests  that  the  support  to  domestic 
production from net exports that was evident in the first half of this year is likely diminishing. 
We can see evidence of this in manufacturing production outside of motor vehicles, which 
had benefited from the earlier decline in the dollar and strong foreign growth; it fell for a third 
consecutive month in August, and indications  for September suggest a further decline last 
month, even after excluding the effects of the recent hurricanes and the strike at Boeing. 
Meanwhile, inflation remained uncomfortably high through much of the summer. The sharp 
increases  in  the  prices  of  oil  and  many  agricultural  commodities  showed  through  to 
consumer food and energy prices, and producers passed through some of their higher input 
costs into retail prices for "core" goods and services. More recently, however, the prices of oil 
and other commodities have posted substantial declines, non-oil import prices have edged 
down, and the prospect of greater slack in resource markets and weak demand seems likely 
to restrain labor cost pressures and pricing power. Reflecting these developments, inflation 
expectations appear to have eased a bit. 
The weakening U.S. economy and ongoing declines in house prices, with their implications 
for  credit  performance,  put  further  pressure  on  exposed  financial  institutions  over  the 
summer. Investors lost confidence in some of these institutions, which then saw their access 
to liquidity dry up, causing some to fail and others to require government assistance or to 
consolidate via their acquisition by healthier institutions. 
The  speed  with  which  these  developments  occurred,  along  with  worries  about  losses 
throughout  the  financial  system,  led  banks  and  other  lenders  to  pull  back  from  extending 
credit  except  at  the  very  shortest  maturities.  As  a  result,  conditions  in  funding  markets 
deteriorated  substantially  further  in  September  and  early  October,  with  interbank  lending 
rates  moving  up  sharply  from  already-high  levels  and  spreads  over  comparable-maturity 
overnight index swaps widening to unprecedented levels.  
In  addition,  the  commercial  paper  market  became  severely  disrupted  as  money  market 
mutual  funds,  the  largest  investors  in  that  market,  substantially  reduced  their  demand  in 
response to outflows and the difficulty of liquidating commercial paper in secondary markets. 
As a result, yields on commercial paper skyrocketed for most issuers, and funding became 
increasingly  concentrated  in  paper  with  overnight  maturities.  Similarly,  interest  rates  on 
longer-term  corporate  bonds  rose  sharply  even  for  investment-grade  firms,  and  bond 
markets were closed off to many issuers. These developments quickly led to sharp declines 
in  equity  prices  more  generally,  as  well  as  to  widespread  disruptions  in  other  markets, 
including the markets for municipal bonds. Market distress fed on itself, as efforts by lenders 
to protect themselves triggered calls for increased margins, sales of assets that accentuated 
price declines, large increases in volatility in an uncertain and unfamiliar environment, and a 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2008
sharp cutback in the willingness to extend credit. Financial stresses have intensified in major 
foreign economies as well, with many also experiencing a drying up of liquidity in financial 
markets, sharp increases in the cost of short-term credit, and steep declines in equity prices. 
The net result of the erosion of confidence, declines in asset prices, and freezing up of many 
financial markets has been a marked deterioration in the outlook for economic growth both 
here  and  abroad.  Already,  the  latest  readings  on  the  U.S.  economy  have  become  more 
downbeat.  In  the  labor  market,  private  payroll  employment  fell  170,000  in  September,  a 
faster  pace  of  decline  than  had  been  evident  in  preceding  months,  and  the  Institute  for 
Supply Management survey of conditions in the manufacturing sector turned down sharply. 
In addition, motor vehicle sales fell to a 12-1/2 million unit pace in September, and today's 
report  on  retail  sales  indicated  that  purchases  of  other  goods  also  dropped  sharply  last 
month.  Meanwhile,  pressures  in  financial  markets  have  undoubtedly  further  restricted  the 
availability  of  credit  to  households  and  businesses.  Indeed,  many  of  our  contacts  for  the 
Beige  Book,  which  was  published  today,  highlighted  tight  and  tightening  credit  conditions, 
and, in increasing numbers, indicated that a lack of credit availability is negatively affecting 
their customers' ability to spend or impairing their own ability to maintain the normal working 
capital they need to manage their day-to-day operations.  
To combat the increased stresses in financial markets and their effects on the economy, the 
U.S.  authorities,  as  well  as  those  of  many  foreign  governments,  have  taken  a  number  of 
forceful and innovative steps in recent weeks. Of greatest consequence was the passage of 
the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act (EESA)  with its authority for the government to 
use  up  to  $700  billion  to  support  financial  markets.  Importantly,  the  U.S.  Treasury  has 
indicated that a significant share of this authority will be used to inject capital into financial 
institutions. As the turmoil has persisted and deepened, it has become increasingly clear that 
the fear and uncertainty gripping markets stems from questions about the exposure of many 
financial  intermediaries  to  losses  on  mortgages  and  other  loans.  Banks  and  other  lenders 
need greater capital cushions to reassure their counterparties that they will be able to meet 
their  obligations,  and  they  need  it  soon.  The  capital  purchase  plan  announced  by  the 
Treasury  yesterday  is  a  start  on  building  capital  and  confidence,  and,  by  strengthening 
lenders,  should  make  it  easier  for  them  to  access  the  private  capital  they  also  require.  In 
addition,  the  troubled  asset  purchase  program  should  help  by  counteracting  the  effect  of 
forced sales and impaired market liquidity on asset prices.  
Although capital is the bedrock of confidence, it probably will take some time for enough to 
be  raised  to  completely  reassure  those  who  extend  funds  to  many  intermediaries.  In  the 
meantime,  the  inability  of  lenders  to  fund  themselves  beyond  the  very  near  term  creates 
vulnerability in the financial system and impedes their capacity to make loans to households 
and businesses to finance the purchases of cars, houses, and business capital. To bridge 
the  gap  to  stronger  capital,  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC)  is  offering 
banks  and  their  holding  companies  an  opportunity  to  issue  guaranteed  obligations  for  the 
next nine months. This guarantee covers the obligations most likely to be withdrawn when 
confidence erodes, but it is also structured to encourage banks to lengthen the maturity of 
their  borrowing  to  provide  stability,  rebuild  confidence,  and  stimulate  lending.  The  FDIC 
program  will  operate  alongside  the  earlier  Treasury  guarantee  of  money  market  fund 
balances designed to stabilize investments in those accounts and hence reduce the need for 
these funds to liquidate assets. 
For its part, the Federal Reserve has greatly expanded its provision of liquidity to banks here 
and abroad and to other borrowers. We could do so in part because the EESA accelerated 
the authority for the Federal Reserve to pay interest on reserves. With that power, we can 
expand our lending and still maintain the federal funds rate target established by the Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC). Under normal circumstances, we face no tension between 
supplying liquidity and achieving our interest rate objective, because we supply a relatively 
small amount of funds to the private sector through our open market operations with primary 
dealers  and  discount  window  lending  to  banks.  Over  the  past  15  months,  however,  as 
BIS Review 125/2008 
 3
lenders have become increasingly reluctant to lend to each other, the Federal Reserve has 
had  to  take  on  a  much  greater  role  in  the  financial  system  to  carry  out  its  public  policy 
responsibilities to provide a backstop source of liquidity. At first, we did this by expanding the 
amount  and  lengthening  the  maturity  of  our  lending  to  banks  at  the  discount  window  and 
through our traditional open market operations with dealers. Then, we found that we needed 
to supply credit against a greater variety of collateral to primary dealers so we opened the 
discount window to them and expanded our securities lending facilities. And just within the 
past  few  weeks  we  determined  that,  with  normal  intermediation  increasingly  disrupted, 
economic and financial stability required us to lend to firms that issued commercial paper. At 
the same time, we have greatly expanded our dollar swaps with foreign central banks to help 
them meet the dollar funding needs of their domestic banks – needs that have been adding 
to pressures on our markets here at home.  
By  opening  and  expanding  these  facilities,  we  are  trying  to  assure  banks,  dealers,  and 
commercial paper issuers that they can extend credit without worrying about whether they 
will be able to borrow to fund those loans. We are also trying to assure those who lend to 
these firms that the borrowers will have a source of funding to pay them back. Clearly, the 
willingness of the Federal Reserve to lend substantial amounts to more counterparties over 
longer  periods  has  not,  by  itself,  been  sufficient  to  unlock  private  credit  flows;  but  Federal 
Reserve credit has been a critical ingredient in the mix of policy tools.  
As  I  noted  earlier,  the  troubles  in  the  financial  markets  have  spilled  over  to  the  economy. 
Indeed,  fear  of  economic  weakness  and  the  associated  deterioration  in  credit  quality 
contributed to the adverse dynamics in credit markets. To counter this dynamic and adjust its 
policy to the evolving economic outlook, the FOMC reduced the target federal funds rate 50 
basis points last week. To be sure, the effects of the easier stance of policy on the cost and 
availability of credit were overwhelmed last week by the further erosion in confidence. But, 
over  time,  lower  rates  will  help  to  support  asset  prices  and  reduce  the  cost  of  capital  to 
encourage spending, economic expansion, and job creation.  
Importantly,  this  easing  action  was  taken  alongside  similar  actions  by  many  other  central 
banks. Financial markets are connected around the world by the free flow of capital, and the 
freezing up of credit has occurred, to one degree or another, in many foreign economies as 
well  as  our  own.  In  these  circumstances,  measures  to  address  financial  market  problems 
within each country are likely to be more effective if other countries are also taking similar 
steps, as they are doing not only in monetary policy but also in their efforts to recapitalize 
banks, guarantee bank obligations, and shore up the confidence of lenders.  
I am optimistic that this multipronged approach is laying the groundwork for a return to more 
normal functioning in financial markets and a restoration of vigorous economic growth. The 
initial reaction has been positive, but it will take some time before we know to what extent the 
current stresses in the financial sector are being resolved. Over time, financial firms will need 
to bolster profits to offset losses and attract capital, to delever by reducing debt relative to 
equity, and in many cases to consolidate through mergers and acquisitions. All of this points 
to a prolonged period of cautious lending and a high cost of capital relative to benchmark 
interest rates like the federal funds rate, even as market functioning improves. 
Similarly,  although  the  adjustment  in  housing  markets  is  well  under  way,  it  likely  still  has 
further to go. House prices will probably continue to fall for a while, and inventories of unsold 
homes,  while  decreasing,  will  remain  elevated.  At  some  point,  however,  house  prices  will 
begin to stabilize, demand will be bolstered by the lower level of prices and low interest rates, 
and  inventories  will  come  into  better  alignment  with  sales.  To  be  sure,  any  rebound  in 
housing activity will likely be modest, but even a stabilization in housing markets will remove 
what has been a significant drag on the U.S. economy.  
Given  the  likely  drawn-out  nature  of  the  prospective  adjustments  in  housing  and  financial 
markets, I see the most probable scenario as one in which the performance of the economy 
remains subpar well into next year and then gradually improves in late 2009 and 2010. As 
4 
 BIS Review 125/2008
credit restraint abates, the low level of policy interest rates will begin to show through into 
more accommodative financial conditions. This improvement in financial conditions, together 
with the gradual stabilization of housing markets and the stimulative effects of lower oil and 
commodity  prices,  should  lead  to  a  pickup  in  jobs  and  income,  contributing  to  a  broad 
recovery in the U.S. economy.  
At  the  same  time,  inflation  seems  likely  to  move  onto  a  downward  track.  If  sustained,  the 
recent  declines  in  commodity  prices  should  soon  lead  to  a  sharp  reduction  in  headline 
inflation. In addition, I expect core inflation to slow from current levels as lower commodity 
prices and greater economic slack moderate upward pressures on costs. Similar reductions 
in inflation abroad, as well as the recent appreciation of the dollar, should restrain increases 
in the prices of imported goods. 
I would caution, however, that the uncertainty around my forecast is substantial. The path of 
the economy will depend critically on how quickly the current stresses in financial markets 
abate.  But  these  events  have  few  if  any  precedents,  and  thus  we  can  have  even  less 
confidence than usual in our economic forecasts.  
Here's  what  I  do  know:  The  authorities  around  the  world  have  brought  to  bear  on  this 
situation an array of actions that are unprecedented in scope and force; these actions show 
every promise of being successful in restoring confidence in lending institutions and freeing 
the flow of credit to households and businesses; and governments in the United States and 
elsewhere  have  shown  themselves  able  to  work  across  political  parties  and  across 
international boundaries to craft new approaches to problems. As Chairman Bernanke has 
often remarked, at the Federal Reserve we will utilize all the tools at our disposal to meet our 
responsibilities  for  fostering  high  employment  and  stable  prices.  I  also  know  that  the  U.S. 
economy has proven itself over the years to be flexible and resilient as well as innovative and 
productive,  qualities  which  enable  it  to  rebound  from  serious  economic  shocks.  I  am 
confident  that  we  will  emerge  from  this  episode  with  a  stronger  and  more  robust  financial 
system and with a restoration of solid and sustainable economic growth.  
BIS Review 125/2008 
 5
