John Gieve: Rebuilding confidence in the financial system  
Speech  by  Sir  John  Gieve,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  BBA’s  12th 
Annual Supervision Conference, London, 28 October 2008. 
 We are publishing today our bi-annual Financial Stability Report, and so I want to start my 
presentation  by  looking  at  the  wider  context  of  the  debate  on  supervision,  on  which  this 
conference is focusing.  
The word unprecedented is used too frequently. But the instability in financial markets over 
the last year – culminating in the seizure of money markets in recent weeks (Chart 1) – has 
been the most severe in living memory. 
It did not come out of the blue. The price of risk especially in credit markets had fallen to 
unsustainable levels by summer 2007 and many banks and other institutions had become 
reliant on sustained liquidity in new markets which had never had been tested by a downturn. 
In the July 2006 FSR, for example the Bank warned of “UK banks’ increasing dependence on 
wholesale funding” and, in April 2007, we noted that: “if UK banks were unable to securitise 
existing  assets,  new  lending  would  need  to  be  financed  through  other  wholesale  sources, 
which may be difficult or costly to access during times of stress.” So it proved. 
But the Bank was not alone in pointing to the vulnerabilities in the financial system in 2006 
and  2007.  Other  commentators  and  authorities  gave  similar  warnings.  And  many  market 
participants were also expecting a correction at some point; but they generally felt they were 
well  placed  to  handle  it.  In  fact  the  severity  and  breadth  of  the  downswing  has  surprised 
markets, commentators, and policymakers alike. 
In the light of subsequent developments, a number of commentators have concluded that the 
problem  was  simply  a  lack  of  attention  and  short  memories.  I  don’t  think  it  was  quite  as 
simple  as  that.  I  am  with  Mark  Twain  who  said  "History  doesn't  repeat  itself,  but  it  does 
rhyme." While the current crisis has some similarities to previous downswings – in the early 
90s or of the 70s for example – there are some significant differences too.  
For  example  the  last  three  recessions  in  the  UK  (in  the  70s,  80s  and  early  90s)  were 
preceded by sharp rises in consumption and activity and earnings to well above sustainable 
rates. As Chart 2 shows that was not true of the last few years when consumption, output 
and earnings all seemed unusually stable.  
Again  in  previous  recessions,  stress  in  the  banking  sector  has  tended  to  follow  on  from 
defaults and losses on domestic loans as interest rates rise and the economy slows down. 
But this time the downturn started in the banking sector – last summer when losses in the US 
property  market not only led to losses in UK banks trading and treasury books but closed 
important sources of finance to them. The downturn in the housing market and then the wider 
economy followed. Domestic default rates, while beginning to rise, are still low by historical 
standards, despite the fact that we are more than a year into the crisis.  
Those differences reflect the most important distinguishing feature of this downturn, namely 
its roots in global imbalances not just in trade but in the financial system. 
The growth and savings in emerging economies led to an extraordinary flow of funds back to 
the developed world and to the US in particular. That in turn kept interest rates low, allowing 
the rapid growth of credit and fuelling a sharp rise in asset prices and an increasingly risky 
search for yield – for example in sub prime housing in the US.  
The impact in the UK was different but no less marked. Here too the low cost of credit fuelled 
a spectacular expansion of bank balance sheets (Chart 3) and with it a growth in leverage 
(Chart 4). And, as Chart 5 shows, while savings rates fell in the UK, limiting the growth of 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 1
retail deposits, banks financed that lending by tapping wholesale markets. The gap between 
customer lending and deposits moved from zero at the turn of the century to over £700 billion 
in 2008 H1.  
Much of that funding was ultimately sourced overseas. In particular, the United States acted 
as an intermediary, attracting capital inflows from the rest of the world and exporting these 
funds to other countries. Road shows to investors in the US and Europe ceased to be the 
preserve  of  the  international  giants  and  became  common  among  smaller  players  whose 
whole asset base was in the UK.  
As the difficulties in the financial system have persisted and worsened, it has become clear 
that these developments have created real structural weaknesses in the banking sector. In 
particular: 
• 
inflated  aggregate  balance  sheets,  whose  expansion  had  outpaced  growth  in  the 
real economy; 
expansion  into  assets  whose  underlying  value,  credit  quality  and  liquidity  were 
uncertain; 
liability  structures  which  were  overly  reliant  on  sustained  availability  of  wholesale 
funding whose maturity was often short; 
capital and liquidity buffers which became too low , given these asset and liability 
risks; and 
underappreciated, but potent interconnections between firms in the global financial 
system. 
    Policy response 
For  most  of  the  last  year,  the  Bank  has  adopted  a  twin  track  approach,  as  part  of  the 
Tripartite  partnership  with  the  FSA  and  the  Treasury.  The  first  track  has  been  to  provide 
liquidity to the market in order to give most banks time to make the necessary adjustments – 
including  by  raising  capital.  That  has  involved  an  increasing  range  of  measures  including 
long  term  repos  on  a  wide  range  of  collateral  and  the  introduction  of  the  Special  Liquidity 
Scheme  which  allows  banks  to  swap  illiquid  assets  for  Treasury  Bills  for  periods  of  up  to 
three years. The recent dollar swaps and further extensions of the SLS and eligible collateral 
are further steps in that direction. And we recently announced a more permanent structure of 
money market operations including the introduction of a discount window.  
The  second  track  has  been  to  work  closely  with  the  FSA  and  Treasury  to  limit  the 
repercussions  from  the  failure  of  banks  which  do  not  have  an  independent  future  whether 
through arranging mergers or managing closure. Northern Rock was the first in line and led 
to a lot of criticism of the tripartite. I think we have learned a great deal over the year and 
have  shown  more  skill  and  speed  with  subsequent  cases  including  Bradford  and  Bingley 
recently.  
But  in  the  last  6  weeks  it  became  clear  that  this  case  by  case  approach  was  not  enough 
either at home or internationally. Despite the provision of additional liquidity to the system, 
market  conditions  got  worse  over  the  summer  as  worries  grew  about  the  downturn  in  the 
broader economy and its consequences for bank losses.  
Once again the triggers for a further downward lurch came in the US. First Fannie Mae and 
Freddie  Mac  were  taken  into  conservatorship  and  then,  the  following  weekend,  Lehman 
Brothers proved unable to find a buyer and filed for bankruptcy. That shook markets which 
had  expected  it  to  be  saved  by  the  State,  if  necessary,  as  had  been  the  case  with  Bear 
Stearns earlier in the year.  
2 
 BIS Review 132/2008
Within a day, AIG had to be rescued following rumours about the size of its losses on CDS 
contracts  and  pressures  grew  on  the  remaining  securities  dealers.  Later  in  the  week, 
Secretary Paulson announced his initial $700 billion plan to purchase assets to support the 
banking sector. It didn’t entirely still the doubts.  
The  pressures  were  also  felt  in  Europe.  At  the  end  of  September  Dexia,  Fortis  and  Hypo 
Real Estate all had to receive emergency capital injections, mostly government supplied. In 
the  UK  the  authorities  facilitated  a  rapid  consolidation  in  the  mortgage  sector  with  Abbey 
Santander buying Alliance and Leicester, some mergers in the building society sector, and 
the proposed merger of LTSB and HBOS. Finally, in late September the Tripartite authorities 
intervened to resolve growing difficulties in Bradford and Bingley by transferring the deposits 
and branch network to Abbey Santander and taking the remaining assets and liabilities into 
public ownership for orderly wind down.  
But  the  loss  of  confidence  went  wider  than  a  subset  of  vulnerable  banks.  Our  report 
estimates the total US and European marked to market losses on credit assets at nearly $2.8 
trillion. While these will not all fall on banks and may exaggerate the losses to those who can 
hold debt to maturity, investors and counterparties became worried about the extent of the 
likely losses on banking and trading books in a wider range of institutions and in their ability 
to  continue  to  finance  their  businesses.  The  focus  of  their  concerns  shifted  from  future 
profitability  to  future  survival.  CDS  premia  rose  to  unprecedented  levels  (Chart  6),  bank 
equity  prices  fell  sharply  and  the  money  markets  seized  up.  Interbank  lending  spreads 
widened  dramatically  (Chart  7)  and  lending  became  almost  entirely  concentrated  in  the 
overnight market. The shortening of interbank maturities generated a dangerous “snowball” 
effect as maturing term funding had to be rolled overnight. 
It  was  to  tackle  that  wider  loss  of  confidence  that  the  UK  authorities  announced  on  8th  of 
October its comprehensive package of support for recapitalisation, guaranteed funding and 
enhanced  liquidity.  It  was  designed  to  remove  solvency  fears  by  ensuring  that  banks  had 
more than sufficient capital to survive a severe economic downturn and thus to enable them 
to continue to lend on normal criteria to good credits. 
The  new  capital  and  the  government  guaranteed  borrowing  and  liquidity  support  was 
designed  to  ensure  and  be  seen  to  ensure  that  banks  would  be  able  to  sustain  their 
businesses through a downturn. With the banking system fully solvent, guarantees could be 
extended  without  exposing  taxpayer  to  unacceptable  risks.  In  a  remarkable  show  of 
international  consensus,  a  similar  approach  was  quickly  adopted  by  many  other  countries 
both in the US and EU and more widely.  
Looking ahead 
The early signs suggest that the package is underpinning the banking system both directly 
and  as  a  demonstration  of  the  authorities’  determination  to  do  whatever  is  needed  to  re-
establish  confidence.  In  particular  CDS  premia  for  banks  have  fallen  markedly  (Chart  6) 
since  the  package  was  announced.  And  progress  on  guarantees,  while  gradual,  has  also 
been  encouraging,  with  a  number  of  banks  issuing  bonds  even  without  the  use  of  the 
guarantee. Libor spreads have also edged down and are now expected to fall a bit further 
and  faster  than  before  the  package  (Chart  8).  Many  banks  continue  to  face  a  period  of 
deleveraging and rebalancing to reduce their dependence on Central Bank finance and on 
short term wholesale funding. However a stronger capital and financing position will make it 
possible for them to do that over a period of some years, which will diminish the squeeze on 
lending in the short run. 
More widely, of course, the financial system remains under acute strain. The falls in equity 
markets, corporate bond prices and the prices for leveraged loans is hitting both long term 
institutional investors and leveraged investors, including hedge funds. Some are being forced 
to sell into a falling market in response to margin calls and redemptions.  
BIS Review 132/2008 
 3
And  there  are  growing  signs  of  stress  in  many  emerging  market  economies.  We  have 
already seen a banking sector and currency crisis in Iceland and in the past few days the 
IMF has also announced loan packages for the Ukraine and Hungary.  
In  short,  the  package  of  measures  introduced  in  the  UK  and  elsewhere  has  improved  the 
prospects  significantly,  especially  for  banks  but  it  is  too  soon  to  declare  the  crisis  over. 
Authorities worldwide need to remain vigilant and to be ready to step in again if necessary.  
 The medium term agenda 
We all have lessons to learn from the turmoil of the last fifteen months. I would like to pick 
out three in particular, two of which are international and one UK specific: 
• 
the  need  to  develop  new  “macro  prudential”  policies  to  bridge  the  gap  between 
monetary policy and the regulation of particular institutions and markets; 
the need to establish a more effective regime in the UK for handling failing banks; 
and 
the need to improve the handling of cross border crises and bank failures. 
• 
Central Banks have always paid close attention to asset prices and credit growth in deciding 
monetary  policy  but  they  are  setting  interest  rates  for  the  whole  economy  and  there  is  no 
guarantee that the rate or the rapid changes in rates that could be needed to dampen asset 
price growth will be appropriate more widely.  
On the other side, regulation and supervision are focused on the resilience and conduct of 
individual institutions: their management, risks controls, capital and liquidity and so on. What 
we  have  found  in  the  last  few  years  is  that  the  sum  of  what  makes  sense  at  the  level  of 
individual  institutions  does  not  necessarily  add  up  to  what  is  needed  for  the  system  as  a 
whole.  
We  need  to  develop  what  are  called  “macro  prudential”  policies  to  bridge  that  gap.  In 
particular  we  need  to  establish  stronger  restraints  on  the  build  up  of  risks  in  the  financial 
system over the cycle with the dangers they bring to the wider economy. That means not just 
increasing capital and liquidity requirements for individual institutions but relating them to the 
cyclical pressures in the system more broadly.  
One way of doing that has been developed in Spain. It is called “dynamic provisioning”. Chart 
9 illustrates how it works. It requires banks to build up a general loss reserve during good 
times,  based  on  past  experience  of  likely  losses  on  new  lending.  The  effect  is  to  build  up 
reserves  when  loans  are  originated  which  can  then  be  drawn  down  when  the  economy 
begins  to  deteriorate  and  actual  losses  are  incurred.  That  would  lessen  the  need  to  raise 
capital in downturns. And as draw downs on these general provisions would be automatic, 
the market should not view this as negatively as reductions in regulatory capital ratios. 
The second lesson comes directly from our experience with Northern Rock where even after 
the  bank  had  become  totally  dependent  on  the  State,  there  was  no  legal  framework  for 
resolving its future quickly and effectively. No regulatory regime can prevent all bank failures. 
So it is important, for financial stability, that any such failures are orderly. That is the role of 
the Special Resolution Regime, a key component of the Banking Bill.  
The SRR gives four tools to the three Tripartite Authorities to cope with failing institutions:  
• 
First,  the  transfer  of  all  or  part  of  a  bank’s  business  to  a  private  sector  purchaser; 
something we have already seen used in the resolution of Bradford and Bingley and 
Kaupthing under the Special Provisions Act. 
Second,  the  transfer  of  the  viable  part  of  a  bank’s  business  to  a  temporary  bridge 
bank owned by the Bank of England. This would allow continuity of banking services 
BIS Review 132/2008
 4 
   for its customers whilst enabling due diligence by potential private sector purchasers 
and providing for the orderly wind down of the rump. 
Third, temporary public ownership which would give the treasury the power to transfer 
the shares of a failing bank to a nominee of the Treasury. This power would be used 
in cases where significant amounts of public sector funds are required to stabilise the 
failing bank or where long term restructuring of the bank is necessary. 
Fourth  bank  insolvency  procedures  –  a  last  resort.  This  would  look  much  like  a 
standard  company  insolvency  but  with  the  important  difference  that  the  liquidator’s 
primary objective would be to assist the FSCS in protecting depositors. 
I can understand why there has been some nervousness among banks and investors about 
this  regime  and  particularly  about  the  powers  to  split  failing  banks  into  “good”  and  “bad” 
parts. But equally I think they can see that when a bank is failing it is in everyone’s interests 
to  resolve  the  situation  quickly  and  cleanly.  I  hope  that  they  will  be  reassured  by  the 
extensive safeguards we are now proposing, including the guarantee that no creditor will be 
made worse off in such a split than they would have been in a conventional insolvency and 
protection of netting and set-off. 
Finally,  the  financial  turmoil  has  also  revealed  the  need  for  better  international  crisis 
management. The experience of Lehmans has shown once again the problems that arise in 
the insolvency of a large international bank with operations in many countries. We also saw 
in late September and early October the danger emerging, of the banking equivalent of the 
old beggar thy neighbour policy on currency depreciation, as individual countries began to 
guarantee their own banks’ debt. On the other side, recent events have also demonstrated 
how  effective  international  action  can  be:  the  coordinated  interest  rate  cuts  on  the  8th  of 
October;  the  provision  of  dollar  liquidity  by  central  banks  and  the  adoption  of  national 
measures to support banks at international meetings during the weekend of 11/12 October. 
International groups such as the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) have already started to take 
action. It has begun to develop a practical checklist of issues and principles that should guide 
the management of a distressed cross-border institution.  
Having started with Mark Twain I want to finish with another quote this time from Santayana:  
“A  man’s  memory  may  …become  the  art  of  continually  varying  and 
misrepresenting his past, according to his interests in the present.”1
One  lesson  from  recent  events  is  the  need  for  rigour,  balance  and  transparency  in  policy 
making and risk assessment. I hope that the Bank can play a part in that in future as it has in 
the past.  
                                                 
1   “Reasons and places”, George Santayana. 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 5
 Chart 1: Financial market liquidity 
Liquidity index 
1.0 
0.5 
+
0.0 
 
0.5 
- 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
 92
94  96
98
00
02
04
06
08
Sources: Bank of England. Bloomberg, Chicago Board Options 
Exchange, Debt Management Office, London Stock Exchange, Merrill 
Lynch, Thomson Datastream and Bank calculations 
 
 
 
 
Chart 3: Bank lending to households and non-
financial companies in the UK 
 
8
1973 Q3
1980 Q1
1990 Q3
2008 Q3
Percentage changes on a year earlier
10
Chart 2: Household consumption growth: what 
happened to the boom? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quarters
-16
-12
12
16
-6
-4
-2
-4
-8
0
2
4
6
0
4
8
 
 
 
 
Chart 4: Major UK banks’ leverage ratio 
 
Households
Households
Percentage of GDP
Percentage of GDP
100
100
90
90
80
80
70
70
60
60
50
50
40
40
30
30
20
20
10
10
0
0
Non-financial companies
Non-financial companies
70
70
74
74
78
78
82
82
86
86
90
90
94
94
98
98
02
02
06
06
Sources:  Bank of England, Thomson Datastream and Bank 
Sources:  Bank of England, Thomson Datastream and Bank 
calculations.
calculations.
 6 
   
Sources: Published accounts and Bank calculations 
 BIS Review 132/2008
Chart 5: Major UK banks’ customer funding 
gap, household saving ratio and foreign 
interbank deposits 
Chart 6: Major UK banks’ and LCFIs’ credit 
default swap premia 
Major UK banks
US commercial banks
US securities houses
European LCFIs
(c)
Basis points
700
650
600
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Jul.
Sep. Nov. Jan. Mar. May.
Jul.
Sep.
2007
08
Sources: Markit Group Limited , Thomson Datastream, published 
accounts and Bank calculations. 
  Basis points
250
Forward spread on
 7 October 2008(c)
Forward spread on 
20 October 2008(c)
200
150
100
50
0
Sep. Nov.
Jul.
2008
Jan. Mar. May.
09
Jul.
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations 
 Sources: Bank of England, Dealogic, ONS, published accounts 
and Bank calculations. 
   
 
 
 
US dollar
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jan.
08
Basis points
Euro
(d)(e)
(c)
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Sterling
 Jan. Apr.
2007
Jul. Oct.
Jul. Oct.
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations. 
Apr.
Chart 7: Three-month interbank rates relative 
Chart 8: Three-month UK interbank rate relative 
to expected policy rates 
to expected policy rates 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 7
 Chart 9: Dynamic provisioning 
 
Specific provisions as a percentage of total loans
General provisions as a percentage of total loans
Total provisions as a percentage of total loans
Per cent of  total loans
Upswing
Downturn
Time
 
 
 
Table 1: Key actions to improve resilience 
 
• Macroprudential tools are needed to guard against systemic risk
• Capital levels need to rise and need to be of sufficient quality
• Liquidity standards should be strengthened
• Strengthen the legal framework for depositor protection and bank
resolution
• Better management of cross-border financial institutions
• More disclosure, including potential future balance sheet volatility
• Developing centralised infrastructures for over-the-counter 
instruments
 0
  8 
 BIS Review 132/2008
