Mugur Isărescu: 10 years since the launch of Ziarul Financiar 
Speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, on the occasion 
of 10 years since the launch of Ziarul Financiar, Bucarest, 16 December 2008. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to be present at this special anniversary of Ziarul Financiar. The 
one-decade  long  presence  of  this  prestigious  economic  daily  newspaper  overlapped  a 
turbulent period in the history of Romania. 
Allow me to dwell for a while upon a series of events that occurred shortly after the release of 
the first issue of Ziarul Financiar. In the wake of the crises in Russia and Southeast Asia, 
Romania’s need for external financing was much more difficult to cover, while the then level 
of foreign currency reserves left the authorities with little room for manoeuvre. Back then, the 
same as today, the rating agencies were extremely cautious in assessing Romania’s country 
risk, and according to the headlines disseminated obsessively by international agencies for 
over a year, Romania would have faced an imminent payment default. At that moment, the 
situation became even more complex due to the fact that the International Monetary Fund 
resorted to a new approach to indebted countries, called P.S.I. (private sector involvement) 
or “burden sharing”. This approach, which was tested in four countries including Romania, 
proved  to  be  a  failure, and  the  IMF  later  abandoned  it. However,  Romania  had  to  choose 
between  adjusting  its  external  deficit  by  its  own  means  or  take  foreign  borrowings  under 
unacceptable conditions. Romania adopted the former solution and subsequently signed an 
agreement  with  the  IMF.  Nevertheless,  Standard&Poor’s,  which  had  promptly  downgraded 
Romania’s  rating  to  one  notch  above  a  level  which  would  have  indicated  external  debt 
payment  default  –  which  had  not  occurred  in  the  case  of  Romania  –  maintained  this  low 
rating for a long time, even after the crisis had been overcome band the country’s reserves 
had resumed growth. 
I reminisced this event that occurred ten years ago as I have been experiencing a particularly 
strong  déjà-vu  feeling  during  recent  months.  First  came  the  bleak  assessments  of  some 
foreign analysts, followed by the failed speculative attack against the RON. The next stage of 
the game was the downgrading of the sovereign rating to below investment grade, Romania 
being  the  only  EU  Member  State  in  such  a  situation.  Yesterday,  I  read  another  comment 
anticipating  neither  more  nor  less  that  Romania  and  Bulgaria  risk  a  default  on  sovereign 
foreign  debt  payments  even  though  most  of  the  foreign  debt  stock  is  private.  In  order  to 
underpin this viewpoint, the most far-fetched reasons are put forward, such as the cases of 
other countries in the region that concluded agreements with the IMF or the statement that 
the Bulgarian and Romanian currencies have depreciated against the US dollar, even though 
the  Bulgarian  currency  is  pegged  to  the  euro  and  fluctuates  against  the  US  dollar  at  the 
same rate as the euro, while the RON is traded against the euro. To a certain extent, this 
approach is similar to that used during 1998-1999. 
There is however a fundamental difference, despite its being mentioned only occasionally, 
namely that Romania’s foreign exchange reserves are currently higher than its whole stock 
of public debt. Therefore, by implementing appropriate domestic policies, Romania is likely to 
move past this period in better conditions than in 1999. 
I strongly believe this for yet another reason: the past decade as a whole – covered together 
with Ziarul Financiar – marked significant progress for Romania. We should not overlook that 
our country witnessed economic growth in nine years out of ten, while annual GDP growth 
rates exceeded 5 percent in seven years out of ten. The three-digit inflation rates of the early 
’90s dropped to single-digit levels in recent years. 
Moreover,  Romania’s  joining  NATO  and  the  European  Union  also  places  it  in  a  political 
context underpinning sustainable economic growth. This year’s gross domestic product will 
BIS Review 161/2008 
 1
amount to nearly EUR 140 billion, i.e. EUR 6,500 per capita. In 1999, Romania’s GDP stood 
at merely EUR 33 billion, while GDP per capita was lower than EUR 1,500. This leap, which 
led to significant changes including higher consumer standards, will have to be accompanied 
by similar progress in understanding economic issues, so that the path forward should be as 
smooth as possible. 
If we look at the long-term development of the Romanian society, the decade elapsed since 
the  launch  of  Ziarul  Financiar  is  a  significant  landmark,  which  can  be  compared  with  the 
significant upturn after World War I and the achievement of the Grand Union of 1918. 
At such turning points, the quantitative developments, which are nonetheless important, need 
to be accompanied by qualitative changes that are related to social philosophy as a whole, 
as well as to progress in national standards and values. From this perspective, the opinion-
makers and the press in general play a major role. Economic newspapers in particular find 
themselves in a very special position. 
As a matter of fact, the National Bank of Romania has steadily promoted economic education 
and  has  done  its  best  to  raise  journalists’  level  of  professionalism  when  approaching 
economic issues. Let us remember that Ziarul Financiar was launched ten years ago in the 
very  Marble Hall of the NBR. Numerous occasions have arisen over the years when NBR 
representatives  participated  in  events  organised  by  Ziarul  Financiar  and  vice  versa.  There 
has been a steadfast dialogue benefiting, in my opinion, both Ziarul Financiar journalists and 
central bank experts. And, if it is true that the central bank should not be confined to an ivory 
tower,  it  holds  equally  true  that  economic  media  should  avoid  slipping  into  cheap 
sensationalism,  which  only  yields  short-term  gains.  Eventually,  the  media  should  help  its 
public take informed decisions, to the benefit of overall economic developments. 
I am well aware that shaping the public opinion is neither simple, nor linear. It is hard for a 
generation  that  has  learnt  that  prices  are  formed  by  adding  the  planned  benefit  to  the 
planned  cost  to  grow  accustomed  to  today’s  reality,  when  price  formation  depends  on 
demand and supply. Hence the greater difficulties faced by economic policymakers, analysts 
and the media alike. 
Disseminating – sometimes in good faith – the statements of certain market participants may 
equally generate confusion. For instance, let us recall that representatives of some edible oil 
producers claimed a few months ago that the price of their products would be on the rise, 
although  this  year’s  market  supply  is  several  times  higher  than  a  year  earlier.  As  it  was 
normal, edible oil prices entered a downtrend which is likely to persist given the change in 
the supply-demand ratio. Another example is that of a businessman who said that weaker 
demand  in  a  particular  industry  would  entail  higher  prices  in  the  producers’  attempt  to 
safeguard  their  profits.  This  was  another  statement  that  did  not  receive  an  adequate 
response, so that the message conveyed to the market is that prices will rise no matter what. 
Another instance I would like to briefly refer to relates to the assertion of several colleagues 
from  credit  institutions, who  claim  that  the  NBR  performed  some  sort  of  a  trick  in  October 
2008,  making  the  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  vanish.  In  other  words,  in  its  attempt  to 
sanction  those  having  orchestrated  the  speculative  attack  on  the  domestic  currency,  the 
central  bank  actually  hit  domestic  credit  institutions.  Understanding  the  channels  whereby 
RON-denominated liquidity moves about in the system is, indeed, quite complex and hence 
likely to easily generate confusion and twist the true meanings of words and actions. In fact, 
one cannot speak of a liquidity crunch as long as banks have complied with the 20 percent 
level of reserve requirements in both October and November (according to preliminary data). 
At  most,  relative  decreases  might  occur  temporarily  relative  primarily  to  corporate  tax 
payments to the government budget. But even in such situations the NBR provides a lending 
facility, allowing immediate access to all banks capable of setting up the required collateral. 
The fact that some banks have not taken due care to set up a stock of government securities 
in a timely manner only means that the management of these credit institutions has decided 
2 
 BIS Review 161/2008
to take chances for higher profit and increased market share. However, it is often the case 
that taking chances does not necessarily bring profit alone. 
The  role  of  specialised  media  in  grasping  the  actual  dimensions  of  the  phenomena  under 
review is equally important. Furthermore, a specialised newspaper boasting the strength and 
the  prestige  of  Ziarul  Financiar  has  the  obligation  to  judiciously  calibrate  any  piece  of 
information  with  an  analysis  of  its  significance.  For  instance,  the  media  have  adopted  a 
bleak, sometimes apocalyptic, tone these past few days amid an abundance of news alerts 
on  the  likely  number  of  unemployed  over  the  upcoming  months,  i.e.  around  30,000 
individuals.  Of  course,  taken  individually,  anyone  being  made  redundant  is  faced  with  a 
tough  issue.  However,  from  an  economy-wide  perspective,  the  rise  in  unemployment  by 
30,000 people only accounts for about 0.5 percent of the workforce. Coupled with the very 
low  level  of  unemployment  (3-4  percent)  prior  to  the  outbreak  of  the  ongoing  global 
recession, the economic analyst will conclude that unemployment is hardly a pressing issue 
in Romania for the time being. 
On the other hand, it is equally true that the short-term outlook for the domestic economy is 
not  and  cannot  be  too  favourable.  To  the  bleak  international  environment  added  what  we 
may  also  call  the  irrational  exuberance  of  both  markets  and,  on  many  occasions,  state 
authorities.  In  my  opinion,  the  mixture  between  a  hostile  external  environment  and  what 
seems  to  be  an  inadequate  domestic  response  to  this  environment  stands  out  as  the 
underlying reason for which rating agencies have downgraded, sometimes rather severely, 
our  sovereign  rating.  Of  course,  we  may  voice  our  discontent  with  the  rating  agencies’ 
evaluation. At times, rating agencies themselves have facilitated our criticism. Indeed, I find it 
hard to understand how an earnest rating agency might assess sovereign risk without even 
referring to that country’s level of public debt and international reserves. As a professor, I can 
safely assume that the “subject is not treated”, hence the conclusion is unsubstantiated. 
As  concerns  these  assessments,  I  must  say  however  that  things  are  not  in  the  least  that 
simple. Of course, we could assert that at present our economy is in a better position than 
those of other countries in the region rated within the “investment grade” range. But those 
countries have at least adopted austerity measures at domestic level. 
How  do  things  stand  in  our  country?  After  two  consecutive  years  of  wage  increases  in  a 
range from 20 percent to 25 percent per year – i.e. more than twice the labour productivity 
gains  –  the  wage  rises  envisaged  for  2009  ranged  between  50  percent  and  60  percent, 
whereas  the  agreements  with  the  trade  unions,  whenever  struck,  do  not  provide  for  hikes 
lower  than  35  percent.  Such  an  approach  reveals  a  dangerous  decoupling  between 
aspirations and reality. In the current international context and given the already dangerously 
high level of external deficit, we must not aim at further increases in domestic consumption 
above labour productivity gains, since there are no more financing sources for something like 
that. And unless we understand this state of affairs ourselves, rating agencies are going to 
warn us. And if we act so as to reach wage agreements and even compile laws that are not 
backed by real economic resources, and if demand – potential at this moment – becomes 
real and immediate, we might witness some of the worst effects possible. The wage rise will 
not bring about a higher living standard – on the contrary, all the accomplishments made in 
terms of economic stability, investment expansion and growth potential over the past years 
might  dissipate  very  easily.  As  I  have  already  stated  before  the  Parliament  of  Romania, 
should  the  improvement  of  the  living  standard  boil  down  to  a  matter  of  willingness  and 
political decisions, there would no longer be poor countries anywhere in the world. 
It  is  true  that  the  economic  press  tackles  this  issue  in  a  balanced  manner.  The  economic 
press evolved significantly over the past decade. Now we have dedicated publications, even 
dedicated TV channels, a financial analysts’ market, which is ultimately indicative of a mature 
Romanian  society.  I  would  even  dare  say  that  economic  journalists  and  analysts  are 
generally more connected to reality than most decision-makers. 
BIS Review 161/2008 
 3
I  must  be  very  clear  about  one  thing:  Romania  has  no  alternative  to  adjusting  domestic 
demand in order to visibly cut down external deficit. I know how painful this is and I am well 
aware  of  the  difficulties  that  every  government  encounters  in  putting  this  measure  into 
practice. I was head of government during the critical period of 1999-2000 and I know exactly 
how  difficult  it  is  to  adjust  domestic  consumption,  even  by  two  percentage  points  of  GDP 
only.  This  time,  the  difficulty  posed  by  the  adjustment  will  be  perceived  as  rather  big, 
because it must be accomplished after several years of significant increases in consumption. 
The trend seemed to go on forever, which led to the decoupling between aspirations and real 
possibilities to fulfil them. Therefore, it is adequate to adjust domestic demand sooner rather 
than  later,  as  long  as  we  still  enjoy  a  marked  economic  growth,  given  that  at  this  point 
adjustment implies only resizing and not amputation. 
An essential issue that the Romanian society must solve without delay refers to what should 
be adjusted first: consumption or investment. I realise that we must ponder on this matter. 
The question is whether we should opt for buying an increasing number of cars or set aside 
resources in order to build the adequate road infrastructure. In a few years, the former choice 
could lead us to a total traffic jam, and the only additional consumption left for us could be 
that  of  carbon  monoxide  released  by  the  exhaust  pipes.  This  example  is  not  only 
metaphorical.  We  can  see  everywhere  that  the  imbalance  between  domestic  consumption 
and saving, as an investment financing resource, is already posing serious problems, both to 
the  economy  as  a  whole  and  to  citizens  –  whose  true  living  standard  is  paradoxically 
amputated precisely as a result of the imbalance between consumption and investment. 
The  current  state-of-affairs  is  undoubtedly  a  critical  one  and  therefore  the  adjustment  of 
domestic  demand  cannot  be  delayed.  It  is  not  my  intention  to  dramatise  or  to  give  any 
unjustified  warning.  But,  as  I  have  pointed  out  on  other  occasions  as  well,  either  we  will 
proceed to a soft landing via wise domestic policies or we will face an adjustment triggered 
from outside, by the external capital market, and in this case the adjustment will be neither 
smooth nor reasonably sized. I have only one thing to add to my previous statements on this 
topic: the international context no longer leaves too much time for hesitations. 
I would like to end on an optimistic note. As a matter of fact, Ziarul Financiar has adopted 
more often than not a positive note, which I wish it can keep unaltered. With you by my side, 
I have confidence in our country’s future. And I wish, as much as you do, that wisdom prevail 
in  front  of  impatience,  and  that  the  risk  of  a  severe  slippage  fail  to  materialise  in  the 
forthcoming months. 
With these thoughts, I wish the best of luck to all the editors of Ziarul Financiar as well as 
professionalism in dealing with the difficult economic issues to all the economic media. 
4 
 BIS Review 161/2008
