Michael C Bonello: Interview with The Sunday Times (of Malta) 
Interview with Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, by The Sunday 
Times (of Malta), published on 17 November 2008. 
 If  I  had  spoken  to  you  at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  would  you  have  envisaged  this 
financial mess worldwide? 
I do not think anybody, anywhere, could have fully anticipated the devastating consequences 
of  the  sub-prime  mortgage  crisis  in  the  US.  We  are  learning  a  sobering  lesson  about  the 
downsides of liberalisation and globalisation. For almost a decade the world economy had 
experienced  rapid  growth.  Now  we  are  seeing  the  other  face  of  globalisation.  This  is  a 
systemic  crisis  and  it  will  therefore  take  longer  to  resolve  than  other  recent  crises.  The 
challenge  for  policymakers  is  both  complex  and  unprecedented.  It  is,  however,  somewhat 
reassuring that it is being tackled in a determined and coordinated manner at both political 
and technical levels. 
When do you think we'll be out of this dark tunnel? 
I do not think anybody is in a position to answer to that. It is still unfolding. 
Do you think there was a belated political response to the financial crisis? Were the 
warning signs ignored? 
This problem did not happen overnight. It was precipitated by the Lehman Brothers failure, 
but  we  had  preliminary  signs  in  August  2007,  which  culminated  in  the  Northern  Rock  (UK 
bank)  failure.  The  ECB  and  other  central  banks  started  injecting  liquidity  into  the  markets 
then. The gravity of the situation only became fully apparent a year later. 
The government is insisting the local banks are under no threat from the international 
financial crisis because of their conservative lending. Do you concur with this point of 
view? 
Maltese  banks  are  not  directly  threatened  by  the  financial  crisis.  Our  banks  do  not  hold 
asset-backed  securities  associated  with  the  sub-prime  crisis.  And  as  the  International 
Monetary  Fund  confirmed  last  summer,  they  are  well  capitalised  and  have  high  liquidity 
ratios. Maltese banks do not generally borrow from the international money markets to fund 
lending operations but rely on customers' deposits. 
It is significant that at the end of September, deposits by Maltese residents amounted to €8.6 
billion,  which  is  equivalent  to  one-and-a-half  times  Malta's  GDP.  That  was  an  increase  of 
€239 million since the end of 2007. Our banks, moreover, have very prudent lending policies. 
They  have  diversified  portfolios  and  appropriate  risk  management  systems.  This  explains 
why the fallout from the crisis has been fairly limited. 
Like investors everywhere, however, all our banks and other investors are seeing the value 
of their investment portfolios decline as a result of the generalised decline in asset prices. 
This will result in lower profits, but since our banks are well capitalised they are able to cope 
with it. 
This  does  not  mean  there  should  be  room  for  complacency,  particularly  at  times  of 
unprecedented  market  dysfunctionality  and  a  looming  global  recession.  A  small  banking 
system like ours is inevitably characterised by a degree of concentration risk and, because of 
a  typical  Maltese  idiosyncrasy,  our  banks  are  heavily  exposed  to  the  construction  and 
property sectors. Since our economy is likely to be affected by the oncoming recession and 
will experience a slowdown next year, it would be advisable for the banks to strengthen their 
balance sheets further. 
BIS Review 152/2008 
 1
Would you say that the worst is over for local banks? Can you envisage a scenario 
where one of the banks will go down? 
There is no direct threat from the crisis – they are not directly exposed. If the economy slows 
down,  certain  borrowers  might  be  overextended  and  there  might  be  an  increase  in  non-
performing loans. 
During a press conference in Frankfurt last week, ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet 
said he did not exclude further interest rate cuts. Why the need for further cuts and are 
you optimistic that these cuts are the solution? 
During the ECB Governing Council of November 6, we concluded that the outlook for price 
stability  had  improved  further  because  inflation  rates  are  expected  to  continue  declining. 
Market  expectations  about  medium-term  inflation  based  on  information  extracted  from  the 
bond markets have fallen to just over two per cent. 
While  the  Governing  Council  does  not  pre-commit  itself,  should  the  data  available  at  our 
December  meeting  point  to  a  further  alleviation  of  upside  risks  to  price  stability,  then  the 
conditions  would  be  ripe  for  another  cut  in  interest  rates.  Lower  interest  rates  should 
contribute to easing current tensions in the financial markets and also to facilitating the flow 
of credit. 
But  monetary  policy  alone  cannot  resolve  the  financial  and  economic  crisis.  Corrective 
actions at other levels of policy are required, and these have indeed been taken by national 
governments and central banks as well as by international institutions. It will, however, take a 
while for confidence to return to a level that would permit the financial system to fully service 
the needs of a globalised economy. 
So why did the ECB increase rates in the first place in July? 
Consistently with its interpretation of the mandate, at that time the ECB perceived that there 
were  strong  upside  risks  to  price  stability.  Decisions  are  always  based  on  the  latest 
information  available  and  on  a  full  analysis  at  a  given  point  in  time.  The  slowdown  in 
economic activity has been very sudden, and projections for inflation have in the meantime 
been revised downwards. 
2 
 BIS Review 152/2008
Do you think the cuts should always be passed on to the customer? In some cases the 
local banks have refused to do so, or they didn't reduce them to the full extent. 
In  Malta,  banking  practice  has  generally  been  to  set  interest  rates  with  reference  to  the 
official policy rate. Where such is the case, we would expect most of the ECB's interest rate 
cuts, one percentage point in the past month, to be passed on to customers, particularly at a 
time of weakening growth prospects. I have just seen that our two main banks are moving in 
this direction and are also giving preferential treatment to mortgages. 
You also have to remember that a bank manages two sides of the balance sheets. It collects 
interest from borrowers but it pays interest to depositors. It is the efficient management of the 
difference between interest earned and interest paid that earns a bank its profits. Given that 
both lending and deposit books may differ from one bank to the other, there could be various 
reasons why the full interest rate cut is not passed on to the customer straight away. 
Are you optimistic that these interest rate cuts are enough to stave off recession? 
Monetary policy is just one instrument available for macroeconomic adjustment, so it has a 
limited  capacity.  It  just  tries  to  achieve  price  stability,  because  without  price  stability  you 
cannot  have  long-term  investment  plans  plus  economic  growth  and  employment.  The 
problem  is deeper  than  that.  We  need  a  coordinated  effort  at  the  political, central banking 
and regulatory levels. 
There is talk of a looming recession in Malta. Do you agree with this argument? 
I have not seen any economic indicators which at this point in time suggest that this scenario 
is  imminent.  I  would  rather  wait  to  see  the  figures  as  they  come  out.  So  far  we  have  an 
average growth rate of over three per cent for the first half of the year. The figures for the 
third  quarter  are  unlikely  to  be  dramatically  different  from  what  we  have  seen  so  far. 
Unemployment is still rather stable at a relatively low level. We have, of course, started to 
see the first signs of a slowdown in our major markets with some companies reducing the 
number of work days and letting go of some employees. We are a very open economy, we 
depend on external demand and it is only natural that we will be affected. 
Has personal debt in Malta increased in the last years? 
As you would expect in a growing economy, household debt has been rising. It is currently 
estimated at €2.6 billion or 48 per cent of Malta's GDP. It was 31 per cent in 2002, but the 
ratio  remains  below  the  euro  average  of  60  per  cent.  The  interest  burden  on  Maltese 
households arising from this debt as a proportion of disposable income is comparable to the 
euro area average at three per cent. 
Are we saving more? 
It  is  unlikely.  There  has  been  a  declining  trend  because  habits  and  cultures  change.  The 
existence of a very extensive social safety net has acted as a disincentive to save for one's 
old age. 
It is appropriate for households to borrow funds to smooth their consumption patterns as long 
as this is backed by reasonable income expectations. The number of non-performing loans 
has been coming down for some years in the household sector though it has risen slightly 
recently  to  2.5  per  cent.  On  the  positive  side,  net  financial  wealth  of  households  has 
increased by 15 per cent since 2003 – it was estimated at €8.2 billion in June. On average, 
households  have  considerably  more  assets  than  liabilities,  which  suggests  that  household 
debt is within sustainable levels. 
So do you disagree with claims that we've started living beyond our means? 
As  long  as  people  can  manage  their  finances,  if  they  do  not  keep  accumulating  debt  and 
repay their debts to banks, there does not seem to be a problem at the level of households. 
BIS Review 152/2008 
 3
At a national level, the picture is different – we still have a tendency to spend more than we 
earn as evidenced by the current account of the balance of payments and the fiscal position, 
which both show a deficit year after year. The prospects for changing this behaviour, at least 
at this point in time, do not seem very encouraging. These days we are seeing a growing 
chorus of people calling on the government to run an even larger deficit and to increase the 
public debt further. 
During  a  seminar  last  June,  you  said  that  automatic  compensation  for  inflation, 
especially  at  the  national 
level,  was  counterproductive.  The  government  has 
calculated its COLA at over €4.09 a week. What do you make of it? 
When  you  have  countries  with  wage  indexation  schemes  that  link  wages  to  past  inflation, 
there is always a danger of the two feeding on themselves and the creation of a wage-price 
spiral. At the ECB Governing Council, we repeatedly point out the dangers of allowing a one-
time spike in prices of exogenous origin to affect wage levels in this way because it becomes 
a  self-perpetuating  increase  harming  competitiveness.  In  Malta  the  indexation  scheme  is 
partial, but nevertheless it contains the potential for creating higher costs. We have to sell our 
products and services abroad and so we need to remain competitive. 
So do you think it was wrong to give workers a €4.09 increase? 
That is an agreement reached with the social partners. If we accept that it is a priority for us, 
then we need to make sure we increase our productivity to match the increase in wages. 
Nearly  one  year  on,  do  you  think  the  euro  was  to  blame  for  the  rising  inflation  and 
would you describe its phasing in as successful? 
A Eurobarometer survey last April showed that 90 per cent of Maltese citizens considered 
that the change to the euro was smooth and efficient. A Eurobarometer survey in February 
said that 84 per cent of Maltese citizens believed that the price conversions into euro were 
"always, or mostly" fair. A Eurostat assessment in April found that the total one-off impact of 
the euro changeover was between 0.2 and 0.3 percentage points. According to the European 
Commission, the perceived inflation index for Malta fell from 51 points in December 2007 to 
40.5  points  in  January  to  34  points  in  February.  This  is  evidence  that  we  have  not 
experienced a spike in inflation directly attributable to the euro. 
A lot of people would tell you that everything went haywire after March... 
Yes, we have since had an increase in inflation but this is largely attributable to the delayed 
higher  international  energy  prices  and  the  spike  in  food  and  cereal  prices.  We  have  been 
importing  inflation,  and  the  way  we  have  administered  prices  in  the  energy  sector  has  not 
helped. We have tried to protect ourselves for too long from market prices, and then when 
you make changes they tend to be bigger than if you had allowed the gradual movement of 
prices to take place. 
To what extent has the introduction of the euro helped to cushion the impact of the 
financial crisis? Where would we be with the Maltese lira? 
I was one of those who always expressed the belief that Malta's small open economy in a 
liberalised  global  environment  and  with  its  own  currency  was  becoming  increasingly 
vulnerable. That is why I was an advocate of EU membership and of early euro adoption. We 
only need to look at the example of Iceland, which stayed out of the EU, and the financial 
disaster it is now experiencing. Look at Denmark – an advanced stable country which is also 
pegged  to  the  euro.  Because  of  this  turmoil,  the  Danish  central  bank  has  had  to  increase 
interest rates. This is the price of going it alone in times of stress. 
How much Maltese lira remains in circulation? 
There is still a considerable amount of Maltese currency which has not been presented for 
redemption.  There  is  about  Lm11  million  (€25.6  million)  in  coins  and something  like  Lm28 
million  (€65.2  million)  in  notes.  Holders  of  coins  have  two  years  to  present  them  at  the 
4 
 BIS Review 152/2008
Central Bank of Malta and in the case of notes it is 10 years. Money is still coming in, but at a 
very slow pace. 
Do you think this Lm39 million will ever be returned? 
The  experience  of  other  countries  suggests  there  is  always  a  considerable  proportion  of 
currency issued which is never returned. It depends on how long the currency has been in 
circulation. Many coins which were issued up to 30 years ago have probably left the country 
through  tourism  or  have  been  lost.  It  is  the  same  with  notes,  especially  the  small 
denomination  notes  –  they  might  have  been  lost  or  deteriorated.  Some  of  the  higher 
denomination notes might still be hidden away, and maybe forgotten. 
Has the euro hoarding started? 
I do not suppose all those who had that habit have adopted a new way of doing things. In 
2007 there was considerable activity with people exchanging Maltese lira notes for euro on 
the kerb market – and that probably represented mainly hoarded money. We had people who 
were hoarding money because of habit – these were persuaded to open bank accounts. Last 
year we saw a sharp increase in bank deposits when the banks targeted these people with 
very attractive interest rates on short-term deposits to take them over the end of the year to 
save  them  the  trouble  of  having  to  exchange  cash.  What  we  know  is  that  we  have  not 
reached the same level of currency issued that we had before. There is a caveat here as the 
currency is shared with 14 other countries. 
Do  you  believe  that  the  international  financial  crisis  is  prompting  more  people  to 
become reluctant about depositing their money into banks? 
There  is  no  evidence.  Across  the  Eurosystem,  in  September,  after  the  Lehman  Brothers 
collapse  there  was  an  increased  demand  for  currency  notes  in  some  countries,  especially 
those whose banks were exposed to emerging economies. It seems to have largely subsided 
since then. 
BIS Review 152/2008 
 5
