Fabrizio Saccomanni: Managing international financial stability 
Edited text of remarks by Mr Fabrizio Saccomanni, Director General of the Bank of Italy, at a 
meeting at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington DC, 11 December 
2008. 
 I  am  delighted  to  be  here  at  the  Peterson  Institute  to  present  my  views  on  international 
financial  instability  before  such  a  distinguished  audience  of  eminent  scholars  and  officials, 
among which I am fortunate to count many old friends. This is my first visit to the Institute 
since I was invited to join its Advisory Committee and I would like to express my gratitude to 
Fred Bergsten for the invitation. I am honoured to participate in this important body of the 
Institute and I look forward to contributing to its activity in the promotion of policy–oriented 
research in the field of international economics. 
Instability in the age of globalization 
International financial instability is a subject that has fascinated and intrigued me since when 
I was a young economist at the IMF and witnessed with considerable anxiety the collapse of 
the Bretton Woods system on August 15, 1971. The ensuing decade of instability was mostly 
attributable  to  the  shock  of  the  downward  floating  of  the  dollar  and  the  resulting  two  oil-
shocks of 1974 and 1979. After some unsuccessful attempts to rebuild Bretton Woods, the 
negotiations  for  the  reform  of  the  international  monetary  system  ended  in  1976  with  the 
legalization of freely floating exchange rates and that seemed sufficient to fix the problem. A 
tired US Treasury Secretary, William Simon, commented: “All is well that ends”. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  1980s,  following  the  process  of  liberalization,  deregulation  and 
privatisation set in motion by Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan, it was widely expected 
that  full  international  capital  mobility  would  interact  with  floating  exchange  rates  to  ensure 
adjustment of balance of payments disequilibria and a stable financial environment. Instead, 
these new conditions paved the way for the emergence of a global financial system in which 
financial innovation and the ICT revolution combined to produce an extraordinary expansion 
of  financial  sectors  and  markets  compared  with  the  real  sector  in  both  industrialized  and 
emerging countries. The seeds of instability were thus planted on fertile soil. Indeed since the 
1980s financial disturbances have occurred with increased frequency and intensity and have 
entailed major international repercussions. 
I will not review here the long list of debt crises, currency misalignments, illiquidity in credit 
markets, asset price bubbles, that have characterized the age of globalization, a subject to 
which I have devoted considerable attention in the last few years.1 I would rather quote from 
a  paper  written  by  Michael  Bordo,  Barry  Eichengreen  and  others  in  2001  on  “the  crisis 
problem”: 
since 1973 crisis frequency has been double that of the Bretton Woods and classical 
gold  standard  periods  and  matched  only  by  the  crisis-ridden  1920s  and  1930s. 
History thus confirms that there is something different and disturbing about our age.2
                                                 
1   See  Saccomanni  F.  (2008),  Managing  International  Financial  Instability.  National  Tamers  versus  Global 
Tigers, Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, Ma: Edward Elgar. 
2   See Bordo M., B. Eichengreen, D. Klingebiel and M.S. Martinez-Peria (2001), “Is the Crisis Problem Growing 
more Severe”, Economic Policy, April, pp. 53-82. 
BIS Review 159/2008 
 1
So,  given  that  the  situation  has  not  improved  since  2001,  what  is  different  and  disturbing 
about the age of globalization? Here are some features that I regard as crucial. 
What is different 
• 
The world economy operates under a “market-led international monetary system” in 
which  market  forces  determine  exchange  rates  and  the  international  allocation  of 
capital. This is the key point of a paper Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa and I wrote for a 
conference  organized  by  Fred  Bergsten  and  Peter  Kenen  at  this  Institute  to 
celebrate the 50th Anniversary of the Bretton Woods System in 1994.3 In the paper 
we  underlined  the  risk  that  the  increased  globalization  of  financial  markets  could 
lead  to  “disturbances  that  may  have  an  impact  on  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system”. 
Global financial intermediaries operate in a highly competitive environment, but with 
essentially  uniform  credit  allocation  strategies,  risk  management  models  and 
reaction functions to macroeconomic developments and credit events. 
Financial  innovation  (mainly  through  securitization  and  derivatives)  has  greatly 
enhanced the ability of global players to manage market and credit risks. 
What is disturbing 
• 
There  is  no  stability-oriented  anchor  for  the  macroeconomic  policies  pursued  by 
systemically relevant countries. 
Monetary  policies  targeted  exclusively  to  consumer  price  inflation  are  not  likely  to 
prevent unsustainable trends in credit flows and in asset prices (equity, real estate, 
bonds, foreign exchange). 
The procyclicality of the financial system has been enhanced by factors leading to 
excessive  credit  creation  followed  by  sharp  credit  contraction.  These  factors  are 
related  to  both  market  dynamics  (underpricing  of  risk,  overestimation  of  market 
liquidity,  uniformity  of  financial  strategies  and  of  risk  management  models, 
information  asymmetries,  herd  behaviour)  and  to  financial  regulation  (capital 
requirement, fair value accounting). 
Perverse incentives and loopholes in the regulatory system have made it possible 
for financial innovation to transfer credit risks to unregulated entities. 
Widespread  conflict  of  interest,  between  originators  of  financial  products,  credit 
rating agencies and law firms, has facilitated the dissemination of highly complex, 
risky  and  opaque  instruments  among  investors  with  inadequate  risk  management 
culture. 
      The response to financial instability 
The response of the international community to the episodes of instability that have affected 
the world’s monetary and financial system since the 1980s has been on the whole conducted 
on a case-by-case basis, with an emphasis on “domestic” factors and circumstances, rather 
than  on  “systemic”  determinants.  This  has  reflected  the  prevailing  conventional  wisdom 
                                                 
3   See Padoa-Schioppa T. and F. Saccomanni (1994), “Managing a market-led global financial system” in P.B. 
Kenen (ed.), Managing the World Economy. Fifty Years After Bretton Woods, Washington, DC: Institute for 
International Economics, pp. 235-68. 
2 
 BIS Review 159/2008
according to which crises are inevitable as they are mostly the result of immutable human 
factors  like  greed  and  gullibility.  Crises  are  also  seen  as  part  of  a  physiological  process 
whereby  “unfit”  market  participants  are  eliminated  and  the  “fittest”  survive  and  become 
stronger. In this context, market excesses are tolerated in the conviction that they will self-
correct in a relatively short time.   From  a  policy  point  of  view,  the  conventional  wisdom 
recommended  the  so-called  “house-in  order-approach”.  This  assumes  that  all  imbalances 
have  a  domestic  origin  and  that,  if  all  countries  adopt  appropriate  policies  at  home,  there 
would  be  no  systemic  problems  to  cope  with  and  therefore  no  need  for  an  internationally 
coordinated  response.  Obviously,  domestic  factors  do  play  a  role  in  triggering  crisis 
situations, but they are often amplified and propagated by the operation of global financial 
markets. Thus a balanced response to crises should ideally address both types of factors. 
In  reality,  the  policy  response  has  been  generally  biased  towards  adjusting  the  domestic 
causes of imbalances, such as in the case of IMF financial support packages to emerging 
countries during the 1990s. Actions targeted to tackle systemic problems have been sporadic 
or partial in scope. Occasional interventions to correct exchange rate misalignments of major 
currencies have been conducted by G7 countries, but have been mostly of an “oral” kind in 
recent years, despite some evidence of success in arresting unsustainable or unwarranted 
trends, such as the appreciation of the dollar in the mid-1980s, the appreciation of the yen in 
1995 or the depreciation of the euro in 2000.  
Also  the  much-hyped  “reform  of  the  international  financial  architecture”  (IFA),  launched  by 
the  G7  countries  after  the  Asian-Russian  crisis  of  the  1990s,  turned  out  to  be  focused 
essentially on the need to strengthen financial systems in emerging market countries, mostly 
through  the  adoption  of  a  series  of  standards  and  codes  of  good  conduct.  The  plan  drew 
criticism from a high level Task Force, set up by the Council on Foreign Relations and led by 
Morris Goldstein,4 for not addressing more fundamental issues, like the moral hazard implied 
by  IMF  sponsored  bail-outs  or  the  overlapping  of  roles  of  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  in 
crisis  management  and  resolution.  A  minority  of  that  Task  Force,  including  Fred  Bergsten 
and  Paul  Volcker,  criticized  the  plan  for  ignoring  the  question  of  reforming  the  world’s 
exchange rate regime, an omission that they equated to “watching Hamlet without the Prince 
of Denmark”. 
In the end the IFA reform obliged the IMF to invest a large amount of resources in a Financial 
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) which produced reports, highly valuable but not widely 
read,  on  almost  all  its  member  countries,  but  with  the  significant  omission  of  the  United 
States  and  China.  Another  main  objective  of  the  reform,  that  of  closing  loopholes  in  the 
financial regulatory regime, again forced the IMF to concentrate mostly on the activity of off-
shore  financial  centres  based  in  exotic  islands,  rather  than  on  hedge  funds  and  other 
unregulated financial market participants of greater systemic relevance. 
At  a  conference  on  “Reforming  the  IMF  for  the  21st  Century”,5  organized  in  2006  by  this 
Institute, the mandate of the Fund, its governance and resources, were thoroughly reviewed 
by  an  impressive  range  of  academics  and  officials,  including  the  Managing  Director  of  the 
Fund. In that context it was recalled that financial sector supervision had led to “a mission 
creep” in the IMF, diverting resources from its key institutional task of conducting surveillance 
on  macroeconomic  and  exchange  rate  policies  of  member  countries.  This  concern  way 
bluntly underlined by a senior US Treasury official, claiming that the IMF had been “asleep at 
the  wheel  of  its  most  fundamental  responsibility  –  exchange  rate  surveillance”.6  However, 
                                                 
4   See Goldstein M. (ed.) (1999), Safeguarding Prosperity in a Global Financial System. The Future International 
Financial Architecture (Goldstein Report), Washington DC: Institute for International Economics. 
5   See Truman E. (ed.) (2006), Reforming the IMF for the 21st Century, special report, April, Washington, DC: 
Institute for International Economics. 
6    See  Adams,  T.D.  (2006),  “The  IMF:  back  to  basics”  in  E.M.  Truman  (ed.),  Reforming  the  IMF  for  the  21st 
Century, special report 19, April, Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, pp. 133-8. 
BIS Review 159/2008 
 3
this  unexpected  “wake-up  call”  turned  out  to  be  less  motivated  by  global  stability 
considerations, than by more prosaic concerns about the widening bilateral trade gap of the 
United  States  with  China,  entirely  attributed  to  the  undervaluation  of  the  renminbi.  Ted 
Truman, who had chaired the conference, concluded that: “The IMF is in eclipse as the pre-
eminent  institution  of  international  financial  cooperation.  Consequently,  the  world  is  worse 
off.” 
To  have  permitted  this  “eclipse”  is  probably  the  most  crucial  flaw  in  the  response  of  the 
international  community  to  the  challenges  of  globalization.  It  led  to  the  perception  by  the 
markets,  and  the  public  opinion  in  general,  that  widening  global  payments  imbalances, 
exchange  rate  misalignments,  fast  growing  monetary  and  credit  aggregates,  exceptionally 
low risk premia, were not seen as posing a threat to global financial stability. This perception 
was  reinforced  by  the  recent  decision  taken  by  the  IMF  shareholders  to  “downsize”  the 
institution because its lending activity to members had shrunk to almost nil in the high tide of 
international liquidity, as if it had nothing else to do. 
The international community thus went on to confront the worst economic and financial crisis 
since  the  1930’s  with  unjustified  complacency,  ill-prepared,  and  with  its  key  institution 
weakened by internal policy disagreements. 
The response to the current crisis 
In reviewing the response to the current crisis, I will not address the unprecedented array of 
immediate  crisis  management  measures  undertaken  by  central  banks  and  national 
Governments  in  the  major  countries  to  underpin  banking  and  financial  systems  and  to 
support economic activity. I will rather concentrate on the longer-term work being undertaken 
in  the  IMF  context,  in  the  G20  and  in  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)  to  reform  the 
international  monetary  and  financial  system  in  order  to  make  it  less  crisis-prone  than  the 
present one and more resilient to shocks. On this more systemic issue, a lively debate has 
developed  involving  politicians,  academic  economists  and  financial  analysts.  A  recurrent 
theme  in  the  debate  is  the  call  for  a  “new  Bretton  Woods”  and  the  recent  meeting  of  the 
Heads of State and Government of the G20 here in Washington last November was seen by 
many observers as the starting point of a process that could lead to a fundamental reform of 
the world’s monetary and financial system.7  
If by a “new Bretton Woods” one means a system built upon the foundations of the “old” one, 
it may be appropriate to recall how this was shaped. In essence, the Bretton Woods system 
was based on three main pillars: (i) a stability-oriented anchor for macroeconomic policies, 
operating through the par-value regime for member currencies in terms of gold and the US 
dollar;  (ii)  an  obligation  to  maintain  freedom  from  restrictions  for  trade  and  other  current 
international transactions; (iii) the possibility of introducing restrictions on capital movements 
for restoring equilibrium in the balance of payments. Obviously, in any reform project, these 
pillars would have to be adapted to the new reality of financial globalization. Leaving aside 
for a moment the “anchor” question of the first pillar, it must be noted that in the G20 Summit 
Declaration of November 15, 2008 one can find encouraging language on the issues covered 
by the two other pillars. 
As  regards  free  trade,  paragraph  13  of  the  G20  Declaration  has  strong  words  on  the 
“importance of rejecting protectionism” and a firm commitment both to “refrain from raising 
new barriers to investment or to trade in goods and services” and to strive for “a successful 
conclusion  of  the  WTO’s  Doha  Development  Agenda  with  an  ambitious  and  balanced 
                                                 
7   See, for example, Eichengreen B. and R. Baldwin (eds) (2008), “What G20 Leaders Must Do to Stabilise our 
Economy  and  Fix  the  Financial  System”,  London:  Centre  for  Economic  Policy  Research,  a  VoxEU.org 
publication circulated on the web on the eve of the G20 meeting. 
4 
 BIS Review 159/2008
outcome”. This is a rather non ritual language and it sounds pleasantly out of tune with the 
widespread feeling that protectionism is on the rise again as a result of the crisis. 
As  regards  financial  regulation,  paragraph  9  of  the  G20  Declaration  broadly  outlines  an 
approach  that  rules  out  any  form  of  old-time  restrictions  that  would  impede  or  distort  the 
operation of financial markets. This is good, and it should allay the fears of a return to the 
past. However there is a strong commitment “to ensure that all financial markets, products 
and participants are regulated or subject to oversight as appropriate to their circumstances”. 
The G20 further outlined the need to strengthen transparency and accountability, to promote 
integrity in financial markets and to reinforce international cooperation in the regulatory field, 
broadly  endorsing  the  program  and  the  division  of  labour  agreed  upon  in  this  field  by  the 
Managing  Director  of  the  IMF  and  the  Chairman  of  the  FSF.  The  FSF,  in  the  words  of 
Chairman Draghi, is working in particular to ensure that financial systems would have more 
capital, less leverage and would be subject to more effective regulation. This would imply, 
inter  alia,  reducing  the  procyclicality  of  the  regulatory  framework  and  its  reliance  on  “self-
regulation”  by  market  participants,  which  paves  the  way  to  “regulatory  capture”.  This  is  a 
welcome change from the attitude that allowed in the past a growing proportion of markets, 
products  and  participants  to  go  unregulated  on  the  grounds  that  “they  have  no  systemic 
impact”.  This  is  the  attitude  that  brought  to  us  the  “shadow  banking  system”  made  up  of 
unregulated SIVs and conduits, distributing opaque structured products containing subprimes 
and other risky assets with the active marketing of unregulated rating agencies.  
Obviously,  the  systemic  impact  of  these  G20  commitments  will  depend  on  the  actual 
outcome of the negotiations underway in the relevant trade and regulatory bodies.  
Turning, finally, to the anchor question I must say at the outset that this is the area where 
little progress has been made so far in official fora. The G20 Declaration mentions the need 
to reform international financial institutions, but mostly to reflect more adequately “changing 
economic  weights  in  the  world  economy  in  order  to  increase  their  legitimacy  and 
effectiveness”. How can we be sure that these steps will ensure that a global crisis such as 
the present one will not happen again? Pro-cyclicality is an inherent feature of all financial 
systems and it is likely that a mere rebalancing of power would not achieve significant results 
in  the  absence  of  effective  supra-national  mechanisms  to  promote  stability-oriented 
macroeconomic policies at the national level, especially by systemically important countries. 
Unfortunately,  the  G20  Declaration  has  placed  insufficient  emphasis  on  measures  against 
the  perpetuation  of  policies  that  led  to  unsustainable  imbalances  at  the  global  level  in  the 
recent past.  
These are difficult problems, but the time has now come, perhaps, to have a fresh look at 
what are the possible technical solutions. I do not think that the “old Bretton Woods” can offer 
a viable arrangement for the 21st Century: fixed exchange rates are gone. And yet one must 
admit  that  freely  floating  exchange  rates  have  not  really  helped  the  adjustment  of  global 
imbalances. Perhaps this is because currencies have now become financial assets that are 
traded for profit motives with little or no relation to the economic situation or the balance of 
payments  of  the  issuing  country:  the  exchange  rate  has  thus  become  more  part  of  the 
problem than of the solution. 
From  this  point  of  view  it  would  appear  more  logical  to  look  again  at  anchors  based  on  a 
system  of  target  zones  for  key  currencies  or  to  a  substitution  account  that  would  replace 
national  reserve  currencies  with  the  SDR,  which  I  presume  is  still  alive  somewhere.  But 
although  logical,  a  revival  of  these  proposals seems  hardly  promising  for  reasons  that  are 
perhaps more ideological than practical but that are still strongly held. 
Realistically,  the  only  anchor  that  one  can  think  of  today  is  an  institutional  anchor,  i.e.  an 
anchor  based  on  institutions  endowed  with  effective  multilateral  surveillance  powers.  This, 
BIS Review 159/2008 
 5
again,  is  easier  said  than  done.  Willem  Buiter,  with  his  typical  bluntness  recently  wrote: 
”Don’t waste time on multilateral surveillance. The IMF will never have any influence on large 
member states with strong government budgetary positions and strong external positions”.8 
This is a valid point and indeed so far IMF surveillance has not been very effective despite 
various  attempts  to  strengthen  it.  Yet,  in  my  view,  a  further  effort  by  the  international 
community in this direction is needed.  
As  I  argue  in  my  book,  the  IMF,  drawing  also  from  the  expertise  of  the  FSF  and  other 
relevant  international  institutions  and  standard-setting  bodies,  must  be  entrusted  with  the 
task  of  identifying  unsustainable  trends  in  payment  imbalances,  credit  flows,  asset  prices, 
exchange rates, and of formulating specific policy advice to the relevant member countries to 
promote  monetary  and  financial  stability.  This  is  an  area  where  additional  research  is 
required and where the IMF could supplement the analytical work conducted by the Bank for 
International  Settlements  and  in  the  central  banks’  community.  Monetary  policies  and 
regulatory  measures  should  be  designed  to  complement  each  other  in  the  context  of  a 
“macro  prudential  approach”,  whereby  the  objectives  of  fighting  inflation  and  preserving 
stability in financial systems could be jointly pursued. 
If  the  policy  indications  formulated  in  the  context  of  IMF  multilateral  surveillance  are  not 
followed, the IMF should make its own assessment known to the public opinion. It is possible 
that  this  may  create  a  certain  volatility  in  financial  markets,  but  it  will  also  strengthen  the 
market perception of a two-way risk, thus contributing to brake unidirectional unsustainable 
market trends that inevitably lead to credit booms (and busts), bubbles, and misalignments. 
In  the  end,  I  think  that  the  gravity  of  the  present  crisis  requires  a  strong  determination  to 
correct the flaws and the inadequacies of the present market-led international monetary and 
financial system. In embarking in this difficult effort, the international community should follow 
the good suggestions that Barry Eichengreen and Richard Baldwin outline in the Introduction 
to the book I have already quoted: “strengthen existing institutions; start thinking outside the 
box; do no harm”.9
                                                 
8   See Buiter W. (2008), “Some Suggestions for the G20 on November 15th” in Eichengreen B. and R. Baldwin 
(eds), op. cit., pp. 17-20. 
9   See Eichengreen B. and R. Baldwin (eds), op. cit. pp.1-2. 
6 
 BIS Review 159/2008
