Jan F Qvigstad: Writing central bank and monetary history – what are the 
issues? 
Welcome remarks by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of 
Norway), at a workshop co-organised by The Graduate Institute, Geneva and Norges Bank, 
Oslo, 30 October 2008. 
 Dear participants, 
It is a great pleasure for me to  welcome all of you to the first workshop in Norges Bank’s 
Bicentenary  Project.  In  particular  I  want  to  express  a  warm  welcome  to  those  of  you  who 
have travelled far. Norges Bank and the Graduate Institute here in Geneva are privileged to 
host a workshop with such a distinguished group of international experts in central bank and 
monetary  history  from  academic  institutions  and  from  the  central  bank  community  all  over 
Europe and from the US. 
The financial crisis that was unleashed in the US more than a year ago went into uncharted 
waters on 15 September this year. Since then G7, IMF and governments all over the world 
have taken active policy measures that hopefully will steer the financial world into smoother 
water, although the real economy probably will be in dire straits the next year or two. It might 
seem strange, and a bit of an intellectual escapism in this situation, to gather here in Geneva 
to discuss economics in a hundred year perspective. However, while it may be necessary to 
take active policy measures in the short run to solve the crisis, it is equally important to learn 
from historical lessons of the past so we can be better prepared for the future.  
Why are we here? Why has Norges Bank taken the initiative to this workshop? To answer 
this we have to turn the clock back to the time of the birth of Norges Bank right after the end 
of the Napoleonic wars in Europe. Six laws about the Norwegian monetary system, passed 
by the Norwegian Parliament in 1816, paved the way for the establishment of Norges Bank. 
The Norwegian Constitution of 17 May 1814 specified that the Parliament should oversee the 
monetary  system  but  made  no  explicit  reference  to  a  central  bank.  The  Constitution  was 
modified  in  November  1814  after  Sweden  showed  some  military  muscle  to  enforce  the 
Treaty  of  Kiel.  The  revised  Constitution  was  in  place  on  4  November  1814,  and  the  main 
changes  reflected  the  fact  that  Norway  had  entered  a  loose  union  with  Sweden  under  a 
common  King.  A  change,  often  overlooked,  was  that  a  new  paragraph  had  been  added 
which explicitly stated that Norway should keep its own bank and monetary system. Hence 
the Norwegian Parliament preserved an independent legal authority to decide on Norway’s 
monetary system and institutions under the union with Sweden.  
Norges  Bank  is  thus  celebrating  its  200-year  anniversary  in  2016  and  has  announced 
ambitious  targets  for  its  Bicentenary  Project.  In  2016  we  want  to  see  that  this  project  has 
produced three high quality books on The History of Norges Bank 1816-2016, The Monetary 
History of Norway 1816-2016 and on selected Topics in Central Banking in an international 
historical perspective.  
The  aim  of  the  workshop  is  to  bring  together  international  experts  from  central  banks  and 
academia for informal discussions and an exchange on topics related to the writing of central 
bank and monetary history. We expect discussions to be active and lively and we want this 
workshop  to  kick-start  research  activities  in  these  important  areas.  I  want  to  thank  the 
Graduate  Institute  here  in  Geneva  and  Professor  Marc  Flandreau  in  particular  for  their 
hospitality and for allowing us to spend almost two days discussing research in central bank 
and monetary history. 
Previous  books  about  the  history  of  Norges  Bank  have  been  written  in  Norwegian,  and 
predominantly  by  previous  central  bank  governors.  But  “the  times  they  are  a-changin”,  to 
BIS Review 131/2008 
 1
phrase Bob Dylan (Dylan, 1964),1 and today we believe that best practice in writing central 
bank and monetary history is achieved by contributions from professional academic experts 
in  relevant  areas.  The  research  should  be  brought  up  to  international  quality  standards 
through  the  usual  peer  review  process.  And,  once  it  is  recognized  that  there  is  only  one 
central bank in each country, it is also clear that a strong international perspective on central 
bank history and monetary history is needed in order to trace the origin of ideas and how 
monetary policy views and practices have developed over time as well as across different 
countries. 
The key responsibilities of central banks are to promote price stability and financial stability. 
This  fall,  policy  makers  around  the  world  have  struggled  to  implement  policy  measures  to 
bring the international financial markets back into a more normal mode of operation. In this 
pursuit  we  are  constantly  reminded  of  the  importance  of  having  a  solid  understanding  of 
economic  history  and  developments  as  a  backdrop  to  designing  the  right  policy  for  the 
current situation.  
This fall, international experts like you are in greater demand than ever to help bring about 
this level of understanding, and many of you appear frequently in debates on these issues in 
policy workshops and conferences as well as in the media. Against this backdrop we see this 
workshop as one of many arenas where policy makers and academic experts can exchange 
ideas and views on what has been characterized as the most serious financial crisis since 
the Great Depression in the 1930s.  
The escalation of the financial crisis on 15 September was a consequence of an abrupt loss 
of confidence and credibility in the financial markets. The banks’ trust in other banks dropped 
to a level where interbank lending almost came to a complete halt. Confidence and credibility 
is the core in money and finance. What good is a 100 dollar note if there is no trust in its 
worth to buy 100 dollars of goods and service.  
When confidence and credibility have been destroyed it may take a long time before they are 
restored. An example from Norwegian monetary history illustrates this. The example is from 
the time of the birth of Norges Bank. The successful establishment of Norges Bank in 1816 
played a key role in stabilizing the external value of the Norwegian currency after the chaos 
following  the  Napoleonic  wars  in  Europe.  The  previous  joint  currency  with  Denmark  had 
collapsed and two attempts to restore the currency based on broad guarantees had failed, 
first from the Danish government in 1813 and second from the hastily called Constitutional 
Assembly in 1814.  
The successful restoration of credibility in the Norwegian currency was finally brought about 
by  the  establishment  of  Norges  Bank,  but  it  took  a  long  time.  Norges  Bank  was  in  full 
operation  already  in  1818,  but  since  the  Parliament  postponed  the  decision  to  reintroduce 
silver convertibility, the value of the notes continued to fall until the Parliament changed its 
strategy  in  1822.  In  this  year  a  course  to  reintroduce  silver  convertibility  was  set. 
Convertibility was introduced, first at poor (low) rates far from silver parity, but as confidence 
improved  the  convertibility  rate  was  gradually  moved  closer  to  parity.  This  process  took 
painstakingly long and it was not until 1842 that full convertibility at par values against silver 
was  reintroduced  after  85  years  with  a  paper  money  standard.  From  the  time  when  the 
strategy was laid in 1822 it took more than 20 years to build enough credibility to sustain full 
convertibility even after Norges Bank had been successfully established.  
During  the  first  century  of  its  operations  Norges  Bank  exercised  a  high  degree  of 
independence  from  the  central  government  and  built  a  reputation  of  credibility  and 
confidence in defending first silver convertibility and thereafter gold convertibility. During the 
heydays of the classic gold standard in the four decades preceding WWI, recent research on 
                                                 
1   Dylan, Bob (1964), The times they are a-changin, Columbia studios. 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2008
monetary policy (Øksendal, 2008)2 finds that credibility and confidence allowed Norges Bank 
more room for discretion than has previously been acknowledged. This room for discretion 
was  used  to  take  domestic  considerations  into  account.  This  extra  room  for  manoeuvring, 
however,  was  only  available  to  the  bank  as  long  as  its  commitment  to  defend  the  gold 
standard  was  not  called  into  question.  Was  this  a  preview  of  today’s  modern  inflation 
targeting regime? As long as inflation expectations are well anchored, more weight can be 
given to developments in the real economy.  
The  independence  of  Norges  Bank  was  de  facto  substantially  reduced  after  WWII.  The 
legitimacy of the bank and confidence in the bank had been seriously undermined during the 
interwar  period  and  during  WWII.  The  government  tried  on  several  occasions  in  the  first 
decade after WWII to turn Norges Bank into a subordinated agency. If the history of Norges 
Bank was written in a vacuum with no international references, one might have thought that 
this was unique for Norway. Not so, similar developments were observed in many countries 
who  previously  subscribed  to  the  gold  standard.  Political  control  over  central  banks  was 
tightened in many countries with one notable exception, the Bundesbank in West Germany 
which  was  established  as  the  most  independent  central  bank  in  the  post-WWII  period 
(Sejersted, 1994).3 Norges Bank was in fact not as dependent as believed. The truth may lie 
somewhere in between. Recent research on the role of Norges Bank during the first decade 
after WWII (Ecklund, 2008)4 suggests that Norges Bank maintained a relatively high degree 
of operational independence in this period.  
Norges  Bank’s  independence  was  gradually  restored.  In  1986  Norges  Bank  was  granted 
instrument  autonomy  and  started  to  set  short-term  interest  rates  to  sustain  the  prevailing 
fixed exchange rate regime. The current inflation targeting regime was introduced in March 
2001 and Norges Bank now sets short-term interest rates aimed at keeping inflation around 
2.5% over time. Greater independence demands adequate accountability. Along with greater 
degree  of  autonomy  and  independence  Norges  Bank  has  become  more  open  and 
transparent  in  its  monetary  policy  communication.  Increased  openness  by  Norges  Bank  is 
not  only  a  way  of  achieving  accountability  to  its  constituents,  but  is  also  instrumental  to 
enhance  policy  effectiveness.  This  stands  in  stark  contrast  with  the  mystique  and 
opaqueness which characterized earlier central bank communication.  
For  a  long  time  central  banks  have  focused  predominantly  on  their  interest  rate  policy. 
Considerably less attention has been devoted to their liquidity policy which used to be carried 
out somewhere in the basement of the monetary policy temple, far away from the spotlight of 
the announcement of interest rate decisions. This year, liquidity policy has moved into the 
spotlight and has taken over the lead role at the forefront of the monetary policy scene. The 
current  situation  also  highlights  the  close  interaction  between  price  stability  and  financial 
stability and that the focus of policy makers today is on crisis management. The challenge in 
the coming months and year is to pursue a dual approach consisting of short-term action and 
long-term solutions. We must constantly be on the alert to put out fires when and where they 
emerge,  while  studying  the  causes  of  the  current  crisis  and  finding  the  right  long-term 
remedies in the form of new rules and systems so that we do not repeat the same mistakes. 
As the French saying goes, there is no point in putting a band-aid on a wooden leg.  
                                                 
2   Ecklund, Gunhild (2008), Creating a new role for an old central bank: The Bank of Norway 1945-1954, Series 
of Dissertations No. 2-2008, BI Norwegian School of Management. 
3   Sejersted, Francis (1994), On the so-called “autonomy” or “independence” of central banks. Reflections on the 
Norwegian case of  minimal formal  authority, TMV Working paper No. 75, Oslo: Center for Technology and 
Culture (TMV). 
4   Øksendal,  Lars  Fredrik  (2008),  Essays  in  Norwegian  monetary  history,  1869-1914,  PhD-dissertation, 
Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration. 
BIS Review 131/2008 
 3
