Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Recent market volatility – implication for the 
Philippine economy and banking system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Public Hearing of Senate Committee on Banks, Manila, 
29 September 2008. 
 Mr. Chairman, members of the Committee, Senators. Good morning. The Bangko Sentral ng 
Pilipinas is thankful for the opportunity to discuss what is undoubtedly the most talked-about 
issue in the world today. Indeed, the international financial architecture has been irrevocably 
remodeled by events over the past two years. To understand what all of these events mean 
and to situate the Philippines in all these, it is quite important that we undertake a clinical 
diagnosis of what exactly has transpired and outline a roadmap, if you will, of where the drifts 
of change may take us.  
In today’s briefing Mr. Chairman, we share with your Committee our analysis, beginning with 
a  brief  discussion  of  the  events  that  led  to  what  is  now  euphemistically  referred  to  as  the 
Sub-prime mortgage crisis. After presenting the broad outline of the current turmoil, we go 
directly to how all these are affecting the Philippines. It is in this section, Mr. Chairman, that 
we  reiterate  our  earlier  pronouncements  that  our  exposures  are  limited  and  that  our  hard-
earned  financial  market  stability  continues.  At  the  request  of  the  Chairman,  we  have  also 
prepared  a  separate  short  presentation  of  the  more  technical  details  of  the  typical 
transactions and the financial instruments involved. 
The genesis of the current financial difficulties in the US market  
Allow me Mr. Chairman to raise 4 themes that in our view give context to what is currently 
transpiring in the market – The Great Moderation, Market Psychology, Financial Innovation 
and Globalization. The “Great Moderation” refers to the period where there was low volatility 
in  inflation  and  output.  By  the  early  part  of  this  decade,  this  was  supported  as  well  by  an 
environment of low interest rates. This is an essential development since it fueled the boom 
in mortgages, aided no doubt by the traditional market psychology that real estate prices – 
particularly  housing  values  –  would  perpetually  rise.  The  same  market  psychology 
encouraged investors to seek new avenues to enhance portfolio yields within this low interest 
rate environment.  
The financial market responded to this by introducing so-called structured products. These 
instruments  are  designed  to  repackage  the  traditional  risks  related  to  mortgage  out  of  the 
balance  sheet  of  banks  while  providing  newer  means  to  handle  the  financing  of  the 
mortgage. These structured products were made available to a wide spectrum of investors 
across  different  jurisdictions  allowing  for  new  opportunities  in  a  more  diversified  portfolio. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, when mortgage defaults became prevalent, the same links that 
diversified risks to a broader web of stakeholders are precisely the very same links through 
which we find some contagion effect that is now reflected by the present difficulties. 
The role of information, Mr. Chairman, in all of these simply cannot be understated. When 
times  are  good,  there  is  the  overwhelming  tendency  to  ride  the  bandwagon,  oftentimes 
sacrificing  the  need  to  validate  all  information  as  prudence  dictates. However,  when  times 
are bad, it is precisely the dearth of information that drives institutions and the general public 
towards panic. 
To see this in better detail, we begin with what is arguably one of the most followed market 
rate, the Effective Fed Funds rate. Soon after the onset of the new millennium, the Effective 
Fed  Funds  rate  was  moving  downwards,  eventually  reaching  its  lowest  levels  in  the  3rd 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 1
quarter of 2003. The low interest rate regime was intended to spur lending and indeed one 
sector that benefited was the mortgage markets. 
Housing  prices  were  experiencing  a  pronounced  appreciation  and  the  low  interest  rate 
regime served to further fuel a boom in mortgages. In ages past, banks simply took the tenor 
mismatch of short-term liabilities funding long-term assets such as mortgages. This business 
model however exposes the bank to considerable long-term risks. Under the Basel Accord 
framework – the de facto international best practice for bank supervision – these risks must 
be mitigated by corresponding capital charges. It is the long-term nature of the mortgage that 
makes it relatively “expensive” to maintain from the standpoint of allocating a fixed amount of 
bank capital.  
The process of securitization offers an alternative since US financial institutions could take 
out much of the traditional mortgage-related risks from their balance sheet. Essentially, this is 
what  occurred  as  housing  equity  loans  (HELs)  were  securitized,  providing  FIs  both  fresh 
funds and balance sheet leeway to extend new loans, particularly mortgages. The securitized 
HELs  became  what  is  referred  to  as  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS)  and,  with  further 
structuring,  eventually  fed  into  another  instrument  which  is  called  Collateralized  Debt 
Obligations or CDOs. 
The conversion of mortgages into Mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and Collateralized Debt 
Obligations  (CDOs)  may  seem  complicated  but  in  reality  these  are  fairly  straightforward 
transactions. To provide the Committee a rough schematic, we start with those who take out 
amortizing housing loans from banks. For the bank, this is a long-term asset which ties up 
resources and is prone to market and credit risks. To mitigate these risks, the bank may pool 
the  amortizations  expected  from  the  mortgage  and  create  a  security  which  can  be  sold  to 
investors.  The  coupon  payment  of  the  new  security  is  funded  by  the  amortizations  of  the 
housing  loan.  This  security  is  referred  to  as  the  MBS  and  the  transaction  is  oftentimes  is 
handled through a Special Purpose Vehicle. 
To the bank, the effect is an improvement in the asset quality of its balance sheet because 
the traditional mortgage risks are mitigated. Investors welcome this because it affords them 
another  instrument  that  they  can  consider  for  their  portfolio.  The  SPV  earns  from  being  a 
conduit while the mortgagor is unaffected because he/she has already received the proceeds 
from the original loan.  
Taking this a step further, Collateralized Debt Obligations may also be created and likewise 
offered  to  investors.  There  are  technical  differences  between  CDOs  and  MBS  but  for 
purposes of situating the current market conditions, it is perhaps sufficient to suggest that the 
two  instruments  are  similar  in  that  they  pool  underlying  assets  and sell  an  instrument  that 
represents these underlying assets. 
The Effective Fed Funds rate subsequently reversed course. Housing prices also began to 
fall  significantly  and  mortgage  defaults  began  to  rise.  Since  the  home  was  typically  the 
collateral  of  the  mortgage,  falling  housing  prices  also  eroded  the  value  of  the  collateral 
supporting the loan. In the past, a loan default would have simply meant foreclosing on the 
home.  However,  since  the  mortgage  was  already  “converted”  into  a  security  (MBS  and 
CDOs) held by investors worldwide, the combination of rising mortgage defaults and falling 
collateral values translated into losses for the MBSs and the CDOs (either through outright 
defaults, missed coupon payments and loss in market value of the security). 
These  factors  sparked  the  widespread  dilemma  that  we  now  find  ourselves  in.  If  memory 
serves  us  right,  it  was  in  February  2007  that  the  term  “subprime  mortgage”  was  publicly 
alluded to in a disclosure by an international financial institution. 
The  subprime  difficulties  began  to  take  explicit  shape  as  mortgage  institutions  take  their 
losses  into  their  financial  books.  In April  2007, New  Century  Financial files  for  Chapter  11 
protection and less than a year after, Bear Stearns is acquired with Fed support. 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2008
The Philippine situation 
You  may  wonder  Mr.  Chairman  what  this  unfortunate  situation  has  to  do  with  a  small 
archipelagic economy half-way across the globe. 
If they are affected, why are we? The answer to that Mr. Chairman is the realities of macro-
financial economics. The funds market is indeed global; investors seek the most competitive 
terms  without  necessarily  being  confined  within  national  borders  while  issuers  are  free  to 
raise capital across different jurisdictions and under different currencies. Exchange rates are 
always  bilateral  in  nature  but  eliminating  arbitrage  requires  that  adjustments  are  inevitable 
once bilateral rates are linked, i.e., from euro to pound to dollar to peso. On top of this, there 
is our longstanding economic ties with the US and this would easily manifest itself in many of 
our mainstream economic indicators such as the BOP (both current and financial accounts), 
inflation, employment and OFW remittances. 
It  is  also  important  to  bear  in  mind  Mr.  Chairman  how  innovation  plays  a  role  here.  With 
funding  markets  more  global  than  any  other  point  in  history,  new  products  and  new 
transactions  are  routinely  developed  to  address  evolving  needs.  We  earlier  provided  a 
schematic  that  essentially  converted  housing  loans  from  long-term  illiquid  assets  held  by 
banks and into marketable securities held by the investing public. Without altering the basic 
cash  flows  (i.e.,  the  amortization  of  the  loan),  the  market  has  altered  the  character  of  the 
instrument  and  allowed  the  product  to  be  available  to  the  public.  This  is  intrinsic  to  the 
changes in the market landscape and as we will see later, is essential to understanding how 
our own banks became involved with Lehman Brothers exposures. 
The extent of exposure of Philippine banks 
Going  to  the  actual  exposures  of  Philippine  based  banks  to  Lehman  Brothers,  we  have 
already  stated  publicly  that  the  magnitude  is  roughly  0.3  percent  to  0.4  percent  of  total 
assets.  In  other  words,  the  extent  is  less  than  one-half  of  1  percent  of  total  assets.  This 
marginal  exposure  is  spread  over  a  limited  number  of  banks  and  involves  transactions 
arising  from  Special  Purpose  Vehicles  as  well  as  the  direct  investment  in  Lehman-issued 
financial instruments. 
Banking market remains stable 
Apart from the limited exposure, we find that our market’s reaction has been contained as 
well.  The  Peso,  for  example,  depreciated  when  talk  of  Lehman’s  difficulties  took  center 
stage.  This  is  evident  the  day  after  Lehman  filed  for  bankruptcy  protection  as  market 
uncertainty set in. Yet in the same vein, that uncertainty abated and the peso appreciated 
once the rescue plan of the US Fed and Treasury was announced. 
Looking  at  check  clearing  activity  for  that  particular  week,  we  find  no  evidence  of  either 
abnormal or sharp reactions. In fact among universal and commercial banks, there was a net 
check deposit of roughly Php970 million on the 16th and 17th of September – the period of 
Lehman’s filing for Chapter 11 – followed by a net check withdrawal of basically the same 
amount  on  the  18th.  In  effect,  resources  were  not  withdrawn  on  balance  as  a  result  of 
Lehman’s  difficulties  and  commercial/universal  banks  even  closed  the  week  with  further 
additions. 
Over at the interbank market, average rates remained relatively the same as well throughout 
the same period. 
Where the market response was most evident was in the pricing of the credit risk. One can 
see  from  the  chart  that  the  EMBI+  indices,  both  Global  and  for  the  Philippines,  rose 
immediately  after  September  16.  The  same  pattern  is  evident  in  our  5-year  Credit  Default 
Swaps,  suggesting  that  it  became  more  expensive  to  hedge  against  the  possibility  of  a 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 3
Philippine default. However, we would like to stress that those spikes have likewise abated, 
again once the market absorbed the information on the rescue plan. 
Assessing our market landscape 
What we are suggesting Mr. Chairman is that our own market’s reaction has been relatively 
subdued despite the otherwise historic developments offshore. We attribute this to our own 
structural make-up specifically. 
A  banking  system  where  institutions  are  well-capitalized  relative  to  the  risks  they  take  on 
their balance sheet. Our latest Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) for universal and commercial 
banks  is  practically  50  percent  higher  than  our  prudential  standard  of  10  percent  which  is 
itself higher than the international standard of 8 percent set forth by the Basel Accord. 
The continued asset clean-up of banks, accomplished through market-oriented schemes and 
without the use of public funds, has boosted the banking system’s overall asset quality. The 
banking  system’s  NPL  ratio  is  now  closer  to  the  pre-crisis  level  of  around  4.0  percent. 
Furthermore, Return to Equity continues to improve, currently at 10.8 percent as of end-2007 
Investing in banking reforms 
These strengths have been made possible because we have invested in previous reforms. 
While  recognizing  that  change  is  itself  difficult,  we  have  nonetheless  moved  forward  in 
putting in place a risk-based supervisory approach where minimum prudential standards are 
set, behavior and conduct are monitored but the day-to-day strategic & operational decisions 
are  clearly  vested  on  the  banks  in  the  context  of  their  fiduciary  responsibilities  and  their 
governance mandate as good corporate players. We have earlier shown the committee Mr. 
Chairman the capital adequacy position of our universal & commercial banks, setting the bar 
higher  than  the  Basel  Accord.  Over  and  above  that,  we  now  have  a  core  of  dedicated 
specialists  who  are  individually  assigned  to  oversee  specific  institutions  and  have  the 
technical  expertise  &  training  required  for  this  critical  function.  We  are  instituting  a  new 
reportorial  system  –  the  FRP  –  that  is  fully  compliant  with  International  Accounting 
Standards.  Perhaps  most  critically,  we  have  regular  and  open  discussions  with  our 
stakeholders  so  that  issues  can  be  thoroughly  ventilated  and  a  common  understanding 
reached. 
The broad overlying issues 
All of these developments on the ground eventually mesh with the broad overlying issues. 
We have strengthened ourselves internally because we recognize that funding markets are 
irrevocably  global  where  ups  and  downs  necessarily  cascade  to  everyone.  The  market  no 
longer  distinguishes  where  perturbations  emanate;  it  only  appreciates  how  the  contagion 
may be transmitted. In this respect, the current problems in the United States are certainly 
not an isolated “US issue”. There is no other stronger proof of this than the fact that various 
central  banks  have  been  working  in  concert  to  provide  the  necessary  liquidity  to  prevent 
systemic dislocations. Moving forward though, information will always remain to be the key 
ingredient  so  that  appropriate  measures  can  be  calibrated  for  differentiated  difficulties. 
Information  though  is  a  two-way  street:  we  will  continue  to  oversee  covered-institutions 
based on our risk-based supervisory framework while stakeholders need to remain faithful to 
the tenets of transparency and disclosure.  
4 
 BIS Review 119/2008
Macro-economic landscape 
We  would  like  to  reiterate  that  the  country’s  macro  fundamentals  remain  sound  and  the 
economy has proven to be resilient. Despite a general slowdown worldwide and skyrocketing 
oil  prices,  we  continue  to  generate  growth.  Our  inflation  numbers  have  indeed  moved 
upwards  and  we  recognize  the  difficulties  that  this  brings.  However,  based  on  present 
commodity  market  conditions,  we  may  soon  see  some  relief.  Our  international  reserves 
continue to rise, reaching $36.7 Billion as of end-August. This represents 6 months worth of 
imports  and  the  payments  of  goods  and  services,  doubling  our  previous  norm.  And 
considering  all  the  external  volatilities,  our  Balance  of  Payments  position  still  shows 
encouraging news with a surplus of $2 Billion after the first 8 months. All these Mr. Chairman 
auger well for us.  
The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas fully appreciates the historic implications of the most recent 
shock but we also note the very marginal exposures from our end. The good news then is 
not  only  the  limited  exposures  but  perhaps  more  so  that  it  validates  our  prior  collective 
investments  in  macro-financial  reforms.  This  could  only  suggest  that  the  financial  stability 
that we have achieved can be expected to further continue. 
Legislative landscape 
On this note, we thank the Senate for its support and the passage of the PERA and CISA 
bills.  These  are  essential  tools  as  we  move  further  in  developing  the  capital  market  and 
institutionalizing credit information. 
If  there  is  a  lesson  from  the  current  turmoil  though,  it  must  certainly  be  that  markets  are 
constantly evolving and that prudential oversight must likewise keep in step. Given the vast 
array  of  possible  influences  that  bear  upon  market  conditions,  the  general  public  must  be 
afforded  greater  protection  which  is  itself  possible  through  more  effective  means  of 
supervision.  With  the  support  of  the  Senate,  we  would  like  to  move  forward  on  existing 
proposals  so  that  we  can  effectively  institute  the  principle  of  consolidated  supervision. 
Among others, the market conditions provide a compelling reason to consider the regulator’s 
ability  to  direct  existing  shareholders  to  infuse  additional  capital,  accept  new  investors  or 
consolidate  with  qualified  financial  institutions  when  deemed  necessary.  This  pro-active 
move  would  certainly  minimize  potential  resolution  costs.  These,  as  well  as  others,  are 
provided  for  in  the  proposed  amendments  to  Republic  Act  No.  7653.  Other  legislative 
initiatives such as the Corporate Recovery Act, the Payments System Act and the Collective 
Investment Schemes Law are also essential in our on-going efforts to strengthen our market 
as well as in the light of the current market issues. 
Mr. Chairman, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas thanks you, the Committee and the Senate for 
this opportunity to provide our views and analysis on the issues at hand. We trust that we 
have  comprehensively  addressed  your  concerns  and  we  look  forward  to  our  continuing 
collaboration to ensure that our financial market sustains its development. 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 5
