Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Islamic finance – a global growth opportunity amidst a 
challenging environment 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
State Street Islamic Finance Congress 2008 "Islamic Finance: A Global Growth Opportunity 
Amidst a Challenging Environment", Boston, 6 October 2008. 
 finally 
from  being  domestic  centric 
This decade has witnessed the rapid evolution of Islamic finance. This has resulted in the 
dramatic transformation of the industry, from being focused on retail financing to providing an 
extensive  spectrum  of  financial  products  and  services,  from  being  focused  on  the  Muslim 
community to having an extended reach that serves the non-Muslim community, from being 
governed  by  conventional  regulatory  and  accounting  standards  to  having  promulgated  its 
own  standards  and 
increasingly 
internationalised. The Islamic financial services industry has during this decade transitioned 
into  a  dynamic,  fast  growing  and  competitive  form  of  financial  intermediation  servicing  the 
global community.  
It is my honour and great pleasure to be here in Boston to participate in this inaugural State 
Street Islamic Finance Congress. With the recent evolution and expansion in Islamic finance, 
it  has  now  emerged  as  a  viable  new  asset  class  for  investors  and  a  competitive  form  of 
financing  for  businesses.  It  has  therefore,  not only  allowed  for  the  further  diversification  of 
risks, but, the resulting higher level of foreign participation and the increased cross border 
flows  has  not  only  strengthened  international  financial  inter  linkages  between  nations  but 
also contributed to the more efficient international allocation of resources across borders.  
to  becoming 
the 
that 
financial 
injunctions  require 
Intrinsic strength of Islamic finance 
Islamic  finance  has,  thus  far,  remained  positive,  despite  the  current  challenging  global 
financial  environment.  The  strengths  in  Islamic  finance  are  derived  from  the  Shariah 
principles,  the  key  pillar  of  Islamic  finance  that  has  contributed  towards  its  overall  stability 
and  resilience.  The  Shariah 
transactions  be 
accompanied  by  an  underlying  productive  activity  thus  giving  rise  to  a  close  link  between 
financial and productive flows.  
In addition, under the risk sharing arrangement, the Islamic financial institution will share the 
profit or loss incurred by the entrepreneur. Under this arrangement, there is an explicit risk 
sharing  by  the  financier  and  the  customer  and  the  real  activity  is  expected  to  generate 
sufficient wealth to compensate for the risks. This arrangement, thus, entails the appropriate 
due diligence and the integration of the risks associated with the real investment activity into 
the financial transactions. In addition, the Shariah principles also prohibit excessive leverage 
and speculative financial activities thus insulating the parties involved from excessive risks 
exposures.  
The intrinsic principle of profit and risk sharing thus provides an in-built check and balance to 
the  Islamic  financial  transactions.  Explicit  in  this  arrangement  is  the  element  of  risk 
management  and  governance  practices.  Hence,  it  is  a  modality  in  which  there  is  strong 
explicit  emphasis  on  the  economic  viability  of  the  underlying  assets  and  on  good 
governance, ethics and transparency.  
A demand-driven industry with growing potential 
This decade has seen the global Islamic finance industry evolve from being faith-based to a 
business  driven  industry  for  all  communities.  Its  significant  similarities  to  the  principles  in 
BIS Review 121/2008 
 1
ethical finance and socially responsible investment has been a further factor that has drawn 
interest  in  Islamic  Finance.  Islamic  finance  does  not  only  involve  the  avoidance  of  riba 
(usury)  but  also  extends  to  issues  relating  to  ethical  values,  such  as  fair  trade  and 
environmental protection. This has prompted participation from conventional global players in 
Islamic  financial  activities  and  in  the  acquisition  of  strategic  stakes  in  Islamic  financial 
institutions.  
There  is  also  a  growing  number  of  established  international  financial  centres  such  as 
London,  Tokyo,  Hong  Kong  and  Singapore  that  have  initiated  plans  for  the  integration  of 
Islamic  finance  into  their  financial  systems.  Islamic  finance  has  now  become  one  of  the 
fastest  growing  segments  in  the  global  financial  system.  The  total  Islamic  assets  under 
management by Islamic banks and conventional banks offering Islamic banking services is 
reported  to  exceed  USD500  billion.  This  growth  has  also  been  in  the  other  major 
components of the Islamic financial system. Islamic mutual funds are estimated to be about 
USD300  billion,  while  global  takaful  or  Shariah-compliant  insurance  contributions  are 
estimated to be about USD5 billion. 
Strengthening the international infrastructure 
Integral to the efforts in the development of Islamic finance has been the development of the 
supporting  international  Islamic  financial  architecture.  The  establishment  of  the  Islamic 
Financial Services Board (IFSB) in 2002 to set the prudential standards for Islamic finance, 
and  the  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organization  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions  (AAOIFI) 
established  in  1990  has  been  key  to  ensuring  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the  Islamic 
financial system.  
The  IFSB  and  AAOIFI  have  had  an  important  role  in  the  harmonisation  of  prudential  and 
accounting  standards  across  the  different  jurisdictions.  They  are  also  instrumental  in 
instituting  international  best  practices  in  the  global  development  of  Islamic  finance.  The 
Islamic financial institutions are also subject to the requirements on anti-money laundering 
and anti-terrorist financing.  
Islamic 
the  early  development  of 
finance  was  domestic  centric, 
Opportunities through greater international financial integration 
The  globalisation  of  Islamic  finance  has  gained  significant  momentum  in  this  recent  five 
years.  While 
its 
internationalisation is now manifested by increased cross border flows, greater participation 
in  international  Islamic  financial  markets,  the increased  presence  of  financial  institutions  in 
new  jurisdictions  and  more  recently,  the  increased  number  of  Islamic  financial  institutions 
which have shareholders from multiple jurisdictions.  
Greater  financial  integration  has  essentially  been  facilitated  by  the  more  rapid  pace  of 
liberalisation  that  has  been  supported  by  the  progress  that  has  been  achieved  in  the 
development  of  the  international  Islamic  financial  infrastructure.  This  trend  has  also  been 
prompted by the need for greater diversification of risks in the management of funds. In the 
current  international  financial  environment,  this  trend  has  become  more  pronounced 
prompting investors to consider other asset classes and markets that provide stability. Thus 
far, the global financial crisis has had limited direct effects on Islamic finance. While Islamic 
finance  by  its  very  nature  only  engages  in  transactions  that  have  underlying  tangible 
productive activities, the slower overall growth and the increased uncertainties have affected 
pricing  and  activity  in  certain  market  segments.  However,  this  in  part  reflects  the  shift  in 
activity from the financial markets to the Islamic financial institutions.  
The scope of Islamic financial business has now expanded to more sophisticated financial 
products  in  response  to  the  changing  global  customer  base.  Such  Shariah-compliant 
products include private equity, project finance, the origination and issuance of sukuk, as well 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2008
as  fund,  asset  and  wealth  management  products.  The  sukuk  market  in  particular,  has 
become  an  important  avenue  for  international  fund  raising  and  investment  activities.  This 
market has expanded by an annual growth rate of 40%. The year 2007 saw an exceptional 
growth of the global sukuk market which expanded by more than 70%. New issues during 
the  year  reached  a  record  high  to  about  US$47  billion  and  the  outstanding  global  sukuk 
market has now surpassed the US$100 billion mark. Up until August this year, it has held its 
ground with a total global issuance now exceeding US$14 billion, and is expected to exceed 
USD200 billion in 2010. This growth is spurred in part by the growing funding requirements in 
emerging market economies, in particular, in Asia and the Middle East. This is reinforced by 
the continued confidence of investors in the Islamic financial instruments.  
Malaysia's Islamic finance journey 
Let me now turn to Malaysia's journey in the development in Islamic finance. Islamic finance 
in Malaysia first started as a strategy for greater financial inclusion, so as to have a greater 
outreach  to  the  underserved  segment  of  society  to  basic  banking  and  insurance  products 
that are compatible with Shariah principles. After three decades, the Islamic financial industry 
in  Malaysia  has  evolved  as  an  integral  and  competitive  component  of  the  overall  financial 
system that operates in parallel with the conventional financial system.  
The  Malaysian  Islamic  financial  system  is  founded  on  three  major  strategies.  Firstly,  the 
Islamic  financial  system  has  been  evolved  as  a  comprehensive  financial  system  that  is 
diversified  in  terms  of  its  institutions,  markets  and  players.  The  Islamic  financial  system 
comprises the Islamic banking institutions, the takaful industry, the non-banking institutions 
and the Islamic money and capital markets. The supporting financial infrastructure includes 
the robust regulatory and supervisory framework that is reinforced by the legal and Shariah 
framework,  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  and  the  mechanism  for  the  liquidity 
operations by the Central Bank.  
The assets of the Islamic banking system now comprise 16% of the market, while the takaful 
sector has garnered 7% market share. Significant progress been achieved in particular in the 
Islamic capital market where the outstanding amount of Islamic private securities amounted 
to  USD79  billion  or  54.3%  of  the  total  outstanding  private  securities  in  the  market.  The 
number of Shariah-based unit trust funds have also increased to 136 with a net asset value 
of  over  USD5.2  billion  while  85%  of  the  listed  Malaysian  stocks  are  Shariah-approved 
counters.  
The  second  strategy  is  to  accord  greater  emphasis  on  the  enabling  environment  for 
increased innovation in the Islamic financial industry. The product range in Islamic finance 
has  now  expanded  into  a  broad  spectrum  of  innovative  instruments,  including  investment 
and equity linked products based on musyarakah, mudarabah and ijarah. These products are 
competitive both in terms of product structure and pricing. The enhanced depth of the Islamic 
financial  markets,  in  particular,  the  sukuk  market,  has  increased  the  attractiveness  of  the 
Islamic financial instruments as an asset class for investment. 
The  drive  for  innovation  has  been  supported  by  the  investment  in  human  capital 
development. A sufficient pool of the talent and expertise has been key to the development 
of  the  Islamic  financial  hub  in  Malaysia.  The  International  Centre  for  Education  in  Islamic 
Finance  (INCEIF)  was  established  in  2006.  INCEIF  which  has  an  international  faculty  and 
students  from  more  than  40  countries  is  focused  on  programmes  for  Islamic  finance 
professionals and specialists in Islamic finance. The first group of students for the Chartered 
Islamic Finance Professional qualification, CIFP, offered by INCEIF, is expected to graduate 
at the end of this year after completing a three year programme that includes an internship 
with  an  Islamic  financial  institution.  INCEIF  also  offers  a  Masters  and  PhD  Programme  in 
Islamic finance.  
BIS Review 121/2008 
 3
To promote research in Islamic finance, the International Shariah Research Academy (ISRA) 
was established this year to conduct applied Shariah research on the contemporary Islamic 
finance  issues.  ISRA  also  provides  a  platform  that  promotes  active  engagement  and 
dialogue  among  global  Shariah  scholars  that  promote  mutual  respect  in  Shariah  and  the 
convergence of views from different jurisdictions in the global Islamic financial system. 
The third strategy is to promote greater financial integration with the global Islamic financial 
system.  The  Malaysian  Islamic  financial  system  has  also  been  progressively  liberalised  to 
allow  for  increased  foreign  entry  and  participation  in  our  financial  system,  thus  facilitating 
greater  cross  border  flows  and  thus  strengthening  the  international  financial  inter-linkages. 
This has taken the form of issuance of new licences and increasing foreign participation in 
both Islamic banks and takaful companies to 49%. New licences were also issued to foreign 
fund  managers  and  foreign  stockbrokers.  In  this  new  phase  of  development  for  Islamic 
finance,  Malaysia  as  an  international  Islamic  financial  hub,  has  increasingly  become  a 
meeting place for businesses from different parts of the world that need to raise funds and for 
investors that have surplus funds for investment.  
Islamic finance going forward 
There  is  now  a  strong  and  growing  demand  for  Islamic  financial  products  in  the  global 
market,  far  exceeding  the  current  availability  of  financial  products  and  services  being 
provided  by  the  Islamic  financial  institutions.  Going  forward,  there  is  therefore  tremendous 
upside potential for Islamic finance. 
As  the  pace  of  development  of  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry  accelerates,  the 
increasingly  more  complex  and  challenging  environment  will  continue  to  shape  the 
advancement of the industry. Central to this will be the expansion of the business parameters 
and  innovative  product  offerings.  For  this,  there  is  increased  investment  in  research  and 
development to yield new instruments and structures to meet the changing requirements of 
the international community. An area of focus, in particular, is related to the development of 
mechanisms for risk mitigation and liquidity management. Of importance, are the solutions 
needed to converge the market requirements and the Shariah compliance.  
Increased innovation also calls for greater emphasis on the implementation of best practices 
and higher standard of risk management. Vital to this is the implementation of the prudential 
standards  promulgated  by  the  IFSB.  There  is  also  a  need  to  leverage  more  on  IT 
applications  and  the  strengthening  of  management  capabilities  of  the  Islamic  financial 
institutions.  Going  forward,  with  the  increased  awareness  and  understanding  of  Islamic 
finance,  the  role  of  market  discipline  will  become  increasingly  important  in  driving  Islamic 
financial  institutions  towards  ensuring  Shariah  compliance  in  the  operations,  in  improving 
operational efficiency and in instituting sound and dynamic risk management practices.  
The forces of innovation also raise a number of issues concerning the divergence of Shariah 
views underlying a number of the Islamic financial transactions. While such a divergence of 
opinions  in  Islamic  financial  transactions  is  not  a  new  phenomenon,  it  has  now  prompted 
increased international dialogue among the Shariah scholars from the different parts of the 
world. It is the closer linkages between the global Islamic financial markets and the increased 
platforms for greater engagement on Shariah issues that will contribute towards promoting 
an  increased  common  understanding  and  mutual  acceptance  on  the  rules,  standards  and 
Shariah views, and for convergence to occur. This would evolve global Shariah standards for 
the Islamic financial industry.  
As  Islamic  finance  continues  internationalise  with  expanding  scale,  there  will  be  greater 
financial  intermediation  linkages  among  the  East  Asian,  West  Asian,  and  the  Middle  East 
regions  –  creating  the  "New  Silk  Road".  While  this  New  Silk  Road  of  financial  flows  is 
enhancing connectivity between Asia and the Middle East, both regions have, as in the case 
of the old Silk Road, extended the New Silk Road to the rest of the world. Global investors 
4 
 BIS Review 121/2008
and  the  international  financial  community  have  already  drawn  benefits  from  the  increased 
diversification of investment activity to the two regions. The expansion of the interlinkages of 
intermediation to and among these regions would in turn contribute towards a more efficient 
allocation of capital in the global financial system.  
Closing remarks 
Against  a  backdrop  of  an  increasingly  uncertain  global  environment,  Islamic  finance,  as  a 
form  of  financial  intermediation  in  the  international  financial  system,  has  continued  to  be 
viable  and  competitive.  In  the  coming  years,  the  greater  global  participation  in  this 
developmental  process,  both  directly  and  indirectly,  would  enhance  the  potential  role  that 
Islamic  finance  would  have  in  contributing  towards  greater  global  financial  stability  in  the 
international financial system. 
BIS Review 121/2008 
 5
