Svein Gjedrem: The economic outlook for Norway 
Address  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  for 
Norges Bank’s regional network, Region East, 19 November 2008. 
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  speech  is  based  on  the 
assessments  presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy 
meeting on 29 October and Monetary Policy Report 3/08. 
 Financial market imbalances 
The first signs of an emerging crisis in financial markets came into evidence in early 2007. 
The crisis intensified in August last year and entered a new phase in March this year when 
the US authorities had to bail out the investment bank Bear Stearns. What began as isolated 
losses  in  a  small  segment  of  the  US  housing  market  gradually  had  substantial  spillover 
effects on the global financial system.  
The crisis took a new and dramatic turn when Lehman Brothers, the fourth largest US bank, 
filed  for  bankruptcy  on  15  September  this  year.  The  failure  contributed  to  a  weakening  of 
confidence  between  financial  market  participants,  and  many  financial  markets  abroad,  but 
also in Norway, almost stopped functioning. Confidence was further eroded when the crisis 
spread  to  US  commercial  and  savings  banks.  Among  other  things,  bondholders  suffered 
losses after the largest US savings bank – Washington Mutual – was split up and partially 
acquired  by  JPMorgan  Chase  in  the  wake  of  heavy  mortgage  losses.  On  17  September, 
American International Group (AIG), the largest US insurance company, had to rely on an 
emergency  loan  from  the  Federal  Reserve.  The  company  played  a  key  role  in  the  credit 
default insurance market.  
The  financial  crisis  has  heightened  in  several  European  countries.  Banks  in  Belgium, 
Denmark, France, the Netherlands, the UK, Sweden and Germany have been taken over by 
the government or other financial institutions. In Iceland, the authorities took over the three 
largest banks and are now unwinding their international operations. The crisis at these banks 
prompted a flight from Iceland’s national currency which, combined with a property market 
crash, has triggered a sharp recession.  
In  Norway,  the  effects  of  the  financial  crisis  have  also  occurred  more  rapidly  and  become 
more pronounced than the outlook seemed to imply only recently. Norway is still in a better 
position than most countries. Capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy has been very 
high.  The  surplus  on  current  account  is  considerable  and  government  finances  are  solid. 
Norwegian banks have limited exposures to international securities. They have suffered only 
small  losses  and  recorded  solid  earnings  in  recent  years.  Furthermore,  the  Norwegian 
banking system is not large relative to the size of the Norwegian economy. 
In response to the uncertain environment, banks abroad and at home are reluctant to lend to 
each other and are tightening their credit standards. Credit channels are drying up. Money 
market rates have increased markedly, and to levels substantially higher than central bank 
key  rates.  The  fallout  has  been  particularly  pronounced  in  the  US,  but  European  interest 
rates have also risen sharply. The flow of dollars among banks has seized up at times.  
Other than central bank measures to supply liquidity to banking systems, the authorities in 
the  US  and  Europe  first  approached  the  financial  crisis  as  a  succession  of  problems  at 
individual institutions. In the US, a general package was adopted by Congress on Friday 3 
October.  USD  700  billion  was  allocated  for  purchasing  illiquid  assets  from  financial 
institutions. On 8 October, the UK government announced a number of measures to stabilise 
financial markets, but with emphasis on providing risk capital. Euro area countries followed 
suit and on 12 October agreed to take similar action. On 12 November, the strategy for the 
BIS Review 143/2008 
 1
US crisis package of USD 700 billion was changed to provide the authorities with the scope 
to inject capital into banks and other financial institutions. 
There  is  unusually  high  uncertainty  surrounding  economic  developments  ahead.  This  is 
reflected in equity markets among other things. Since spring, stock indices have plummeted 
both abroad and on the Oslo Stock Exchange. The Oslo Stock Exchange has declined by 
more than 50 per cent since the peak in May.  
On 8 October, the central banks in the US, the UK, Canada, the euro area, Switzerland and 
Sweden implemented coordinated interest rate cuts. The central bank of China also reduced 
its  key  rate.  On  29  October,  the  Federal  Reserve  reduced  its  key  rate  by  a  further  0.5 
percentage  point.  On  6  November,  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Bank  of  England 
reduced  their  key  rates  by  0.5  percentage  point  and  1.5  percentage  points,  respectively. 
Market  participants  expect  key  rates  to  be  reduced  further  among  most  of  our  trading 
partners. Norges Bank reduced its key policy rate by a total of 1 percentage point to 4.75 per 
cent.  
Norwegian  money  market  rates  increased  markedly  as  a  result  of  risk  premiums  abroad 
spilling  over  into  the  Norwegian  market.  The  eurodollar  market  has  been  a  widely  used 
source  of  financing  for  Norwegian  banks.  Dollars  in  this  market  are  used  to  procure  NOK 
liquidity and to redistribute liquidity among banks. Banks borrow in US dollars and then swap 
them for NOK.  
The conditions in financial markets have improved somewhat recently, but access to credit is 
still limited and risk premiums are high. Premiums are expected to edge down in the coming 
quarters, but market participants believe that it will take time to restore confidence in banks. 
Monetary policy influences the economy through several channels, often referred to as the 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  The  relationship  between  Norges  Bank’s  key 
policy  rate  and  the  effects  on  activity  and  inflation  has  been  impaired  by  money  market 
conditions. The transmission mechanism is not functioning as previously. 
Money markets have become highly segmented. There is limited turnover and at times it is 
difficult for foreign operators to satisfy their need for NOK liquidity. Small Norwegian banks 
that previously borrowed from large banks are now turning directly to Norges Bank for loans. 
In  this  period  the  central  bank  in  Norway,  as  in  other  countries,  has  actually  become  a 
marketplace, and the only marketplace, for banks. 
With a view to curbing the effects of the turbulence Norges Bank has implemented a range of 
measures  to  boost  liquidity  in  the  banking  system.  Norges  Bank  has  provided  loans  with 
maturities that are longer than normal and has expanded the list of eligible bank collateral for 
loans.  The  Storting  (Norwegian  parliament)  has  adopted  a  package  providing  for  an 
arrangement  whereby  banks  can  exchange  safe,  but  today  illiquid  residential  mortgage-
backed bonds for highly liquid government securities.  
Higher  money  market  premiums  have  led  to  higher  interest  rates  on  loans  to  both 
households  and  firms.  As  most  residential  mortgages  in  Norway  are  floating-rate  loans, 
money market rates have a greater bearing on Norwegian households than households in 
most  other  European  countries.  Liquidity  measures  in  Norway  and  other  countries  have 
resulted  in  some  decline  in  premiums.  Combined  with  a  reduction  in  Norges  Bank’s  key 
policy rate, this has prompted several banks to reduce their deposit and lending rates and to 
cancel  previously  announced  increases.  Interest  rates  have  now  fallen  back  to  levels 
observed before the collapse of Lehman Brothers.  
Oil prices have fallen by more than USD 80 after peaking in July. Growth in oil demand has 
fallen as a result of weaker economic developments. Moreover, the fall in demand probably 
reflects adaptations among households and businesses in the wake of the sharp rise in oil 
prices up to summer. A stronger dollar, heightened uncertainty and reduced willingness and 
ability  to  take  risk  among  financial  investors  in  the  futures  market  for  oil  may  also  have 
contributed to the fall in oil prices.  
2 
 BIS Review 143/2008
Commodity  prices  have  dropped  sharply  since  summer.  Lower  metal  prices  reflect  lower 
global growth prospects. It may almost seem as though that there has been a bubble in oil 
and commodity markets which has now burst.  
The fall in energy and commodity price has resulted in a weakening of Norway’s terms of 
trade.  
Foreign  exchange  markets  have  also  been  volatile.  Interest  among  investors  has  shifted 
away from carry trade to more liquid currencies or own currencies. Since June, low-interest 
currencies,  such  as  the  Japanese  yen  and  the  Swiss  franc,  have  appreciated  while  high-
interest currencies, such as the Australian and New Zealand dollar, have depreciated. The 
US dollar has appreciated from low levels.  
The krone exchange rate has depreciated since end-June. This partly reflects the financial 
market  turmoil.  Low  risk  willingness  had  induced  investors  to  scale  back  their  positions  in 
less  liquid  currencies  such  as  the  Norwegian  krone.  The  fall  in  the  price  of  oil  and  other 
commodities  has  probably  also  contributed  somewhat  to  the  depreciation.  The  krone 
exchange rate is expected to appreciate gradually when financial market conditions improve. 
The  fall  in  terms  of  trade  may  nevertheless  imply  that  the  krone  exchange  rate  does  not 
return to previous heights. A weaker krone may contribute to underpinning profitability in the 
export sector. Cost competitiveness in manufacturing has improved in recent quarters.  
Effects on output, employment and inflation 
The financial turbulence has weakened the outlook for investment and consumption in many 
regions of the world. Against the backdrop of losses and structural changes in the financial 
sector,  many  large  financial  institutions  will  for  a  long  period  ahead  seek  to  increase  their 
interest  rate  margins,  reduce  lending  and  risk.  Lending  standards  have  been  tightened, 
particularly in the US and the UK, but also in the euro area. Output has fallen in the US, the 
euro area and the UK, and growth may be negative in the coming quarters. 
In  emerging  economies,  the  cyclical  downturn  has  also  come  into  growing  evidence.  In 
several  countries,  economic  growth  is  being  pulled  down  by  both  lower  market  growth  in 
other countries and reduced access to credit.  
Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards annual consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 
per cent over time. In recent years, inflation has on average been somewhat lower, but fairly 
close to 2.5 per cent. Low and stable inflation is the most important contribution monetary 
policy can make to sound economic developments, providing firms and households with an 
anchor for inflation expectations. Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime 
so that weight is given to both variability in inflation and variability in output and employment 
when setting interest rates.  
The  Norwegian  economy  has  in  general  exhibited  solid  growth  since  the  beginning  of  the 
1990s,  although  with  a  mild  setback  in  2002  and  2003.  Over  the  past  four  years,  the 
mainland economy has been in a sharp upturn, with annual growth averaging well over 4 per 
cent  and  particularly  vigorous  growth  in  2007.  Growth  is  now  slowing  markedly  in  the 
Norwegian economy. Household consumption has stagnated and house prices are falling.  
Growth in the Norwegian economy has slowed, while inflation has accelerated. In October, 
the year-on-year rise in the consumer price index (CPI) was 5.5 per cent. Electricity prices 
rose sharply through summer after unusually low prices last year.  
Underlying  inflation  has  also  picked  up.  Inflation  adjusted  for  tax  changes  and  excluding 
temporary changes in energy prices (CPIXE) was 3½ per cent in October. Wage growth is 
markedly  higher  and  productivity  growth  has  slowed  considerably.  The  high  rate  of  cost 
inflation  has  led  to  a  faster  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and  services. 
Prices  for  imported  consumer  goods  are  no  longer  falling  and  are  now  on  the  rise.  The 
slowdown  in  the  real  economy  is  expected  to  start  pushing  down  inflation  towards  next 
BIS Review 143/2008 
 3
summer. Higher unemployment and weaker corporate profitability will probably lead to low 
pay  increases  in  the  wage  negotiations  next  spring.  Energy  price  inflation  will  also  be 
considerable lower ahead. 
In August, the enterprises in Norges Bank’s regional network noted that there had been a 
shift  in  sentiment  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  An  extra  round  of  calls  to  some  contacts  in 
October indicated that the outlook had worsened since August.  
The latest reports from enterprises in Region East indicate that demand has declined since 
summer, with a further drop in September and October. Customers are responding to tighter 
lending conditions by postponing projects. The changes have occurred rapidly, and there is 
now considerable uncertainty among our contacts in this region with regard to developments 
over  the  next  six  months.  The  majority  of  the  enterprises  report  that  they  will  reduce 
investment. Many are considering workforce reductions as an alternative if the situation does 
not  change  in  the  New  Year.  The  majority  also  envisage  lower  wage  and  price  inflation 
ahead. 
In the past year, unemployment has been as low as in the mid-1980s. Seasonally adjusted 
registered  unemployment  was  1.8  per  cent  in  October.  The  enterprises  in  Norges  Bank’s 
regional network are expecting some reduction in the workforce ahead. There has been a 
slight  increase  in  layoffs.  Going  forward,  enterprises  will  probably  adjust  the  workforce  to 
lower output growth and reduce the use of overtime.  
After  a  long  period  of  high  housing  investment  and  rising  prices,  activity  in  the  housing 
market is now slowing. Tighter credit conditions are amplifying the fall in house prices. Even 
though there are variations across regions, the trend in house prices is the same – from a 
more moderate rise at the beginning 2007 to a clear decline at the beginning of 2008. 
Norges  Bank’s  lending  survey  for  the  third  quarter  shows  that  banks  are  tightening  credit 
standards  for  households.  Banks  announced  further  tightening  ahead.  Owing  to  growing 
turmoil and liquidity shortages in financial markets, banks have raised their requirements with 
regard to collateral and borrowers’ debt-servicing capacity. Growth in household credit has 
slowed in recent months.  
House price developments affect building starts, which have decreased in the past year. The 
decline  is  sharpest  for  residential  building  starts.  In  October,  enterprises  in  Norges  Bank’s 
regional  network  indicated  a  very  low  level  of  housing  starts  in  the  period  ahead.  Order 
reserves  for  commercial  buildings  and  holiday  homes  are  high,  however.  Commercial 
construction  is  largely  financed  by  loans,  and  may  therefore  be  affected  by  changes  in 
interest rate and credit conditions. Enterprises in Norges Bank’s regional network report that 
commercial building starts have declined in recent months. 
Household saving has picked up. Household income accounts show that the savings ratio 
excluding share dividends has risen, but is still very low and negative. Household borrowing 
requirements  have  also  decreased  somewhat.  (Household  net  lending  has  picked  up 
slightly.) The financial market crisis has led to higher borrowing costs for banks and has kept 
bank  lending  rates  at  a  higher  level  than  developments  in  the  key  rate  would  imply. 
Households probably need to build up financial buffers and reduce debt, which will in turn 
weigh down on growth in private consumption ahead. 
Growth in spending on goods stalled last autumn. There has been a considerable drop in car 
sales  in  particular.  Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  also  reports  a  decline  in  demand  for 
goods related to moving home, such as white and brown goods and refurbishing equipment. 
Growth in consumption is expected to be very low for a period ahead, but growth in private 
consumption may pick up again towards the end of next year.  
Growth  in  mainland  investment  has  been  strong  in  recent  years,  but  is  now  moderating. 
According to the national accounts, corporate investment was still on the rise in the first half 
of  the  year,  but  there  was  a  considerable  decline  in  housing  investment.  Falling  housing 
starts,  reduced  order  reserves  and  assessments  from  the  enterprises  in  Norges  Bank’s 
4 
 BIS Review 143/2008
regional  network  indicate  that  housing  investment  will  continue  to  show  a  pronounced  fall 
next  year.  Gross  investment  is  expected  to  decline  by  14  per  cent  on  an  annual  basis  in 
2009, remain at a low level in 2010 before picking up in 2011. 
Even though the krone depreciation is curbing the impact, the global downturn is expected to 
result in lower growth in Norwegian exports. 
The high level of petroleum investment was an important driving force during the economic 
upturn,  and  petroleum  investment  is  expected  to  remain  high  in  the  years  ahead.  Some 
investments  may  be  postponed  if  oil  prices  fall  permanently  below  USD  60-70  per  barrel, 
especially  small  investments  and  upgrades  of  fields  in  operation.  Exploration  activity  may 
also  be  cut  back.  Large  field  development  projects  are  probably  being  affected  only  to  a 
limited  extent,  while  small  companies  and  smaller  investment  projects  may  be  adversely 
affected by the reduced availability of credit. 
Growth in the Norwegian economy slowed markedly in the first half of this year. The effects 
of  the  financial  crisis  will  most  probably  be  greater  than  envisaged  only  recently.  The 
slowdown in the Norwegian economy seems to be occurring rapidly and to be pronounced. 
Mainland  growth  is  projected  to  be  very  low  in  2009,  then  recover  in  2010  and  2011. 
Petroleum  investment  will  buoy  up  activity.  The  central  government  budget  will  also  boost 
growth in public demand for goods and services. 
In the Monetary Policy Report, the results of monetary policy assessments are illustrated in a 
chart  showing  projections  for  the  interest  rate,  inflation  and  capacity  utilisation  in  the 
economy. We have illustrated the uncertainty surrounding our projections using fan charts. 
The width of the fan charts is based on historical disturbances, and therefore expresses the 
average  that  covers  periods  of  high  and  low  uncertainty.  There  is  now  unusually  high 
uncertainty surrounding future developments in inflation and output and hence surrounding 
interest rate developments. It is difficult to determine probabilities of different outcomes of the 
ongoing  financial  crisis.  In  such  decision-making  situations  it  may  be  appropriate  to 
implement  measures  that  can  reduce  the  uncertainty  and  stave  off  particularly  adverse 
outcomes  for  the  economy.  This  now  implies  a  more  active  monetary  policy  than  normal, 
both  in  interest  rate  setting  and  through  liquidity  policy  measures.  When  setting  the  key 
policy rate, we must also take account of developments in premiums in money market rates, 
other bank funding costs and bank deposit and lending rates.  
Weight has been given to moving forward the reduction in the key policy rate so that lending 
rates for households and firms can gradually be reduced. Norwegian banks, households and 
some  businesses  have  increased  their  borrowings  considerably  in  recent  years.  It  is 
important that the necessary deleveraging does not take place too abruptly. Lower interest 
rates, combined with liquidity measures, may curb the impact of the financial crisis on output 
and inflation. 
At the monetary policy meeting on 29 October, Norges Bank’s Executive Board decided to 
reduce the key policy rate by 0.50 percentage point to 4.75 per cent. The Executive Board's 
assessment was that the key policy rate may lie in the interval 4-5 per cent in the period to 
the  publication  of  the  next  Monetary  Policy  Report  in  March  2009,  unless  the  Norwegian 
economy is exposed to new major shocks. 
Thank you for your attention! 
 
BIS Review 143/2008 
 5
    6 
 BIS Review 143/2008
    BIS Review 143/2008 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 143/2008
    BIS Review 143/2008 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 143/2008
    BIS Review 143/2008 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 143/2008
    BIS Review 143/2008 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 143/2008
    BIS Review 143/2008 
 15
    16 
 BIS Review 143/2008
    BIS Review 143/2008 
 17
    18 
 BIS Review 143/2008
    BIS Review 143/2008 
 19
    20 
 BIS Review 143/2008
    BIS Review 143/2008 
 21
   22 
 BIS Review 143/2008
