Mugur Isărescu: Issues related to real convergence on the path to euro 
adoption 
Presentation  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  on  the 
occasion  of  the  session  organised  by  the  Romanian  Academy  on  “The  Euro  Adoption 
Strategy and the International Financial Crisis”, Bucharest, 2 October 2008. 
 The Romanian authorities set as a strategic economic policy objective the fulfilment of all the 
requirements  that  would  allow  the  adoption  of  the  euro  as  the  national  currency  in  2014. 
Although this is an ambitious objective, it can be achieved provided that a coherent economic 
policy mix is adopted and maintained to support both nominal and real convergence with the 
euro area countries. 
Mention should be made that, in order to join the euro area, only the nominal convergence 
criteria need to be considered: a stable exchange rate, subdued inflation, interest rates close 
to  those  applied  by  euro  area  countries,  moderate  budget  deficit  and  public  debt. 
Nevertheless, the maintenance of the convergence of nominal indicators in the long run and 
even  the  turning  to  good  account  of  all  the  advantages  derived  from  being  part  of  a  well-
functioning  monetary  system  compel  us  to  equally  consider  the  accomplishment  of  real 
convergence between the European developed economies and the Romanian economy. In 
this context, Romania’s adoption of the single currency before achieving a minimum level of 
real  economic  convergence  would  be  risky  and  counterproductive.  We  have  to  make  sure 
that when achieving the nominal criteria a substantial progress in real convergence will have 
been achieved as well. 
Thus,  in  my  presentation  today  I  thought  that,  by  giving  an  analysis  of  the  Romanian 
economy’s path to the adoption of the European single currency, it is adequate to focus not 
only  on  nominal  convergence,  a  topic  which  I  have  repeatedly  approached,  but  also  on 
several issues pertaining to real economic convergence. Or, this means, in a plain language, 
to put in place the conditions necessary for a rapid, sound and sustainable economic growth. 
The  large  disparities  between  the  performance  of  the  Romanian  economy  and  that  of 
European Union countries compel us to do that. 
In  this  context,  allow  me  to  approach  a  topic  less  debated  during  public  meetings  in  our 
country, but which is deeply linked to the capacity of the Romanian economy to maintain a 
rapid  and  sustainable  growth.  It  is  all  about  the  general  problems  relative  to  structural 
reforms and, in particular, about labour market flexibility, the imperative need for this to come 
into  line  with  the  most  modern  practices  applied  in  successful  countries,  by  taking  into 
account both the realities of the Romanian economy, and the requirements of competition on 
an increasingly demanding international market. 
At  first  glance,  there  are  few  connections  between  the  changeover  to  the  euro and  labour 
market flexibility. In fact, the connection is strong, even essential, I would say. 
Before proceeding to a more in-depth analysis of the topic, allow me to clarify an issue that 
was subject to previous public debate. The National Bank of Romania has nothing against 
wage hikes. Quite the opposite, we might say. The Romanian economy could only benefit 
from an increasingly fast rise in wages, in order to enjoy a higher living standard, surmount 
the  historical  disparities  that  separate  us  from  the  Western  economies  and  put  a  stop  to 
labour force migration. Nonetheless, we must analyse with a clear mind and assert bluntly 
that  a  mismatch  between  pay  rises  and  labour  productivity  gains  is  unsustainable.  Wage 
hikes in excess of labour productivity are not likely to bring about a higher living standard, but 
on  the  contrary,  they  may  lead  to  a  lower  living  standard,  given  that,  sooner  or  later,  the 
disparity between the two fundamental indicators will entail a fast-paced rise in prices, the 
weakening of domestic currency, external indebtedness. All this has a negative influence on 
BIS Review 162/2008 
 1
investment  and  delays  the  achievement  of  real  convergence  of  the  economy  rather  than 
speed it up. 
Over the past few years, annual productivity gains came in at impressive 10% and beyond 
each year. Multiple factors stood behind this performance, such as the initial low level, the 
significant decline – even if not always illustrated by statistical indicators – in the population 
working in agriculture and, highly important, the strong increase in investment. However, this 
increase was exceeded by far by the wage hikes, which explains the sizeable widening of the 
external deficit, as well as the increasing inflationary pressures over the past year and a half. 
So, we embark upon this path, carrying a serious burden on our shoulders. I wonder what 
will  happen  the  moment  the  increase  in  labour  productivity  slows  down.  Such  a  trend  is 
closely  connected  to  economic  rigidities,  the  infrastructure-related  issues,  the  slowdown  in 
economic restructuring. In view of all these issues, the NBR does not embrace the idea of 
slowing  down  wage  increases,  but  rather  it  advocates  the  creation  of  conditions  likely  to 
render this hike sustainable and maintain its actual nature. After all, from a nominal point of 
view,  there  is  no  limit  to  increasing  wages.  However,  the  market  will  admit  only  pay  rises 
matched  by  labour  productivity  gains.  The  rest  fuels  inflation  and  the  depreciation  of 
domestic currency, taking the real level of wage rises to where it is matched by output and 
labour productivity. 
Next,  I  would  like  to  make  reference  to  the  factors  that  establish  the  direct  connection 
between the NBR’s legal tasks concerning wage increases, on the one hand, and the rise in 
labour productivity, on the other. In this vein, I must specify that, once Romania joined the 
European  Union  and  the  National  Bank  of  Romania  became  a  member  of  the  European 
System of Central Banks, we are not only entitled, but also bound to present our viewpoint 
where we see that fundamental equilibria of the economy may be jeopardised by a particular 
development. 
Hence,  I  will  refer  to  the  NBR’s  objective  to  ensure  and  maintain  price  stability  and  bring 
inflation rate down to a level compatible with its capacity as a member of the Eurosystem. 
Generally, a lower inflation rate is associated with a slower economic growth and even with 
recession.  However,  this  phenomenon  occurs  only  when  there  is  a  contradiction  in  the 
economic policy mix and when subdued inflation is not the primary objective of other policies, 
particularly fiscal and income policies. When the policy mix is balanced, inflation rate may be 
curbed  while  maintaining  a  sustained  growth  pace.  Behind  this  development  stand  mainly 
foreign direct investment inflows which enhance the productive capacity of the economy and 
ensure the sustainable financing of a relatively high external deficit. In Romania’s case, the 
experts working with the central bank as well as the independent analysts estimated that the 
national economy may further rise at a fast clip amid alleviating inflationary pressures, even 
in the context of a current account deficit of 8-10% of GDP. Nevertheless, in order for capital 
inflows  to  continue,  Romania’s  economy  must  stay  attractive.  This  attractiveness  may  no 
longer  be  objectively  related  to  low  unit  labour  cost  or  disproportionate  tax  facilities  which 
would not comply with EU norms. Therefore, an investor-friendly environment should be the 
result of a different set of characteristics such as increased flexibility in the fiscal regime and 
in the labour market. Thus, the NBR’s primary objective to ensure and maintain price stability 
is closely linked to the policy mix pursued by the Romanian authorities. 
Another  nominal  objective  which  is  essential  for  joining  the  euro  area  is  exchange  rate 
stability. In recent years, the improved performance of the Romanian economy enabled the 
significant alleviation of exchange rate fluctuation as compared with the situation in the last 
decade. In fact, the foreign exchange regime adopted by the Romanian authorities, namely a 
flexible  exchange  rate  requiring  far  lesser  interventions  in  the  forex  market  by  the  central 
bank,  bolstered  the  national  economy.  Even  the  over-appreciation  episode  in  early  2007, 
generated  by  massive  capital  inflows  following  Romania’s  accession  to  the  EU,  was 
corrected via autonomous forex market movements. We may state that, at present, there are 
no  significant  pressure-inducing  factors  in  relation  to  the  exchange  rate  in  terms  of 
2 
 BIS Review 162/2008
it 
in 
is  clear 
that  exchange  rate  stability 
appreciation  or  depreciation,  despite  the  temporary  two  way  movements  caused  by  global 
financial market turmoil. 
However, the foreign exchange market has come into balance in the context of a policy mix 
featuring  a  restrictive  monetary  policy,  with  high  interest  rates,  an  insufficiently  tight  fiscal 
policy, subject to further pressures to increase public spending, concurrently with the drop in 
incomes, whereas pay rises have been in excess of productivity gains for a long time. This 
policy mix is unsustainable. One could hardly speak about long-run forex market equilibrium, 
even though in the nearer term, high interest rates may offset the effects of other policies. 
Nonetheless, 
the  context  of  worsening 
competitiveness of the Romanian products, following the increase in wages faster than that 
in  productivity,  leads  inevitably  to  widening  trade  deficit  and  ultimately  to  exchange  rate 
depreciation. Should this occur, I would not be surprised to hear voices blaming the central 
bank  for  this  outcome,  without  trying  to  identify  the  actual,  deep  reasons  behind  the 
unfavourable developments.  
Therefore,  both  subdued  inflation  and  exchange  rate  stability  are  strongly  related  to  the 
coherence of the policy mix adopted by the authorities. In particular, the run-up to elections 
laid the groundwork for making empty promises and even for adopting pieces of legislation 
that  are  likely  to  have  a  significant  impact  on  macroeconomic  equilibria.  In  this  case,  the 
NBR’s task is to identify major risks arising from the implementation of ill-designed policies. 
Unfortunately, credibility is hard to gain, but easy to lose. Losing credibility can have more 
severe effects than, let us say, the temporary government deficit widening. 
The  world  economy  is  facing  tremendous  difficulties.  I  express  my  confidence  that,  the 
coordinated and appropriate policies of the most developed international economies will help 
prevent a crisis similar in size to that of 1929-1933. It is beyond any shadow of a doubt that 
this period will have a decisive impact on the world economic model. 
During such hard times worldwide, it is necessary, now more than ever, that the Romanian 
authorities should exert caution and wisdom as concerns both public spending and specific 
promises. The run-up to elections is usually a period when hard to keep promises are easily 
made. At present, however, despite the most difficult international economic conditions in the 
post-war period, the pre-election public promises seem far more unrealistic. 
I would like to reiterate the fact that the NBR policies focus on the euro adoption in 2014. In 
the medium run, we envisage not only the resumption of disinflation and bringing price hikes 
in  line  with  the  European  standards,  but  also  the  alleviation  of  imbalances,  especially  the 
gradual narrowing of external deficit, in order to render disinflation sustainable. 
In terms of monetary policy, it is crucial to foster savings with a view to narrowing the current 
gap in relation to investment. The increased contribution of the domestic component, amid 
the rise in saving ratio, can ensure the same high investment rate. In fact, the increase in 
interest  rates,  which  is  part  of  the  current  monetary  policy  stance,  was  aimed  at  fostering 
savings. The results are visible, even though – for statistical reasons – the NBR calculations 
appear to give a different picture. In order to avoid possible confusions, allow me to present 
several technical details. 
The data released indicate a faster dynamics of demand deposits compared to time deposits, 
apparently hinting at the emergence of additional inflationary pressures. We are dealing in 
fact  with  two  developments  related  to  statistical  evidence  rather  than  real  economic 
substance. One such development is the transfer, since 2007, of forex-denominated demand 
deposits from “quasi-money”, which is part of M2, into M1 (narrow money). This is merely a 
matter  of  compliance  with  EU  definitions.  The  economic  substance  has  not  changed:  the 
Romanians do not resort to foreign currency accounts for current transactions, but rather as 
a means of saving. 
Another development weighs heavier and it is also manifest in the case of forex-denominated 
current accounts, while being extremely significant from a quantitative perspective for RON-
BIS Review 162/2008 
 3
denominated ones. Since deposit accounts are subject to income tax, while current accounts 
are not, banks have developed a way to attract customers: current accounts whose yields 
are  higher  than  deposit  rates.  This  led  to  massive  portfolio  shifts  to  the  detriment  of 
traditional deposits, as households placed their savings in the so-called current accounts, or 
even card accounts, which are highly remunerated conditional upon maintaining a balance 
higher than a certain floor. 
Central bank experts have adjusted the figures based on the assumption that actual demand 
accounts should see a growth similar to that of currency in circulation, as it was the case in 
previous  years.  Hence,  it  would  appear  that  quasi-money  rose  over  80%  December  2004 
through August 2008 versus only 40% as indicated by statistical data. In other words, both 
household and corporate savings in domestic currency expanded at a pace much faster than 
that of time deposits. These statistics led the media to comment on a would-be stalemate in 
RON-denominated  savings.  The  NBR  specialists  will  make  sure  these  developments  are 
explained in further detail. This is how a fiscal policy slippage entails both a contraction in 
budget revenues and potential errors in assessing monetary developments. 
Given the heightened turbulences on the international financial markets in the last few weeks 
and the fact that the NBR is vigilantly monitoring these developments, I believe we should 
refer  to  their  potential  impact  on  the  domestic  financial  system  and  on  the  Romanian 
economy  as  a  whole.  The  Romanian  banking  sector  is  still  affected  mainly  by  increased 
external  financing  costs.  The  limited  impact  is  due  to  domestic  financial  environment 
characteristics,  as  well  as  to  the  prudential  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability 
strengthening  measures  adopted  by  the  central  bank  over  the  years.  Let  me  highlight  the 
most important of these measures. 
First  and  foremost,  credit  institutions  in  Romania  do  not  have  exposures  to  subprime 
instruments,  which  lie  at  the  root  of  the  turmoil.  This  is  particularly  due  to  the  profitability 
given  by  wide  interest  rate  margins  on  the  domestic  market  as  well  as  to  the  fast-paced 
increase in lending via traditional banking products. 
Secondly,  the  overwhelming  majority  of  banks  operating  in  Romania,  including  those  with 
foreign  capital,  are  legal  entities  subject  to  NBR  licensing,  regulation  and  prudential 
supervision. Similarly to foreign bank branches having their main office in other EU Member 
States, these banks abide by the Basel II prudential and capital adequacy standards. 
Thirdly, some regulations issued by the National Bank of Romania have often proved more 
restrictive  than  the  Basel  II  standards.  More  specifically,  initial  capital  requirements  for 
licensing a credit institution in Romania are almost twice as much as the minimum level laid 
down in EU regulations. Moreover, it is worth mentioning that the NBR representatives are 
part  of  the  competent  EU  structures  involved  in  the  review  and  improvement  of  EU 
regulations governing the financial system architecture. 
Last  but  not  least,  the  minimum  reserve  requirement  ratios  are  still  high  at  20%  on  RON-
denominated  liabilities  with  maturities  of  up  to  2  years  and  40%  on  foreign  currency-
denominated liabilities. In addition to their contribution to curbing credit expansion, reserve 
requirements also play a prudential role in credit institutions maintaining an adequate liquidity 
level. 
Finally,  let  me  point  out  the  measures  recently  taken  by  the  central  bank  with  a  view  to 
ensuring sustainable credit growth in the longer-run. These measures are all the more useful 
amid the persistent turbulences on global financial markets. As a matter of fact, liquidity in 
the credit institutions sector in Romania – albeit relatively on the wane compared to previous 
years – is at a comfortable level to guarantee smooth market functioning, while the NBR has 
the necessary tools and mechanisms available to ensure liquidity in line with the applicable 
European norms. 
All of the above are an indication that the domestic banking system runs a relatively limited 
risk of contagion amid the persistent turmoil on world financial markets. However, adverse 
4 
 BIS Review 162/2008
effects  may  become  manifest  in  Romania  as  well,  among  which:  (i)  more  pronounced 
exchange rate volatility, following the trend seen by other countries in the region, given the 
increased  risk  aversion  of  investors  on  emerging  markets,  (ii)  still  rising  costs  of  external 
financing and a decline in its volume, (iii) the likely moderation in the volume of autonomous 
capital  inflows  and  the  possible  early  repatriation  of  capital  gains,  (iv)  potentially  flagging 
demand  for  Romanian  exports  amid  downward  growth  prospects  in  the  other  EU  Member 
States. 
The National Bank of Romania will continue to carry out its mandate with utmost vigilance as 
regards both price stability and safeguarding financial stability. 
Allow me now to conclude by reiterating that the objective of joining the euro area in 2014 is 
within reach. By pursuing appropriate policies, the authorities could also meet the objective 
of  rapidly  raising  the  standards  of  living.  However,  breaking  the  fundamental  equilibria 
through inadequate measures does not entail more welfare. On the contrary, it may put both 
real and nominal economic convergence in jeopardy. The strategic objective of euro adoption 
in 2014 is equally at risk. 
BIS Review 162/2008 
 5
