Radovan Jelašić: Challenges for Serbia during the global economic 
turmoil 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the 4th Annual 
Forum – “Financial Services in South East Europe”, Belgrade, 4 December 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is only four weeks until the end of the year and we may safely say that 2008 to date has 
been  more  eventful  than  the  past  2  or  3  years  taken  together!  Namely,  no  sooner  had 
inflationary pressures subsided on the back of falling food and fuel prices than we were faced 
with  another,  even  greater  challenge.  Global  financial  markets  went  into  unprecedented 
turmoil, which has already affected Serbia and is likely to produce further effects in 2009. At 
times like these, however, it is of vital importance to be fully aware of the real state of things, 
and to adopt a pragmatic rather than a populist approach.  
As  we  were  well  aware  that  Serbia  had  no  political  buffers,  we  made  use  of  the  relatively 
good times in the banking sector to prepare for the more difficult times we are now facing. Or 
as Warren Buffet famously said: “It is only when the tide goes out that you know who was 
swimming naked!” The unfortunate circumstances of late have given us a chance to prove 
that we were well prepared for the challenges, i.e. that we were not swimming “naked” on the 
tide of liquidity. And as usual we received no commendations for the strength of the country’s 
banking  system  which,  though  faced  with  high  deposit  withdrawals,  successfully  withstood 
the challenge, greater maybe than that faced by other banking systems of the region. The 
success  of  our  banking  sector,  however,  is  obvious:  a)  Serbian  taxpayers  did  not  have  to 
spend a single dinar on rescuing banks; b) NBS’ measures did not destabilize our banking 
sector  –  reserve  requirement  on  domestic  savings  has  remained  at  40%;  c)  and  the  bank 
ownership structure has proved adequate in times of crisis.  
For  Serbia,  a  key  question  remains  –  what  further  steps  to  take  in  view  of  the  global 
economic turmoil:  
1. 
We  should  finally  understand  that  the  current  macroeconomic  policy  cannot  be 
continued:  it  is  completely  unrealistic  to  expect  that  the  time  of  a)  cheap  foreign 
funds and b) plentiful foreign investment will suddenly return to help us finance our 
current account deficit of 15 – 20%. Now is the time of reckoning, and the sooner we 
accept  this  fact,  the  better  it  will  be  for  all  concerned:  enterprises,  banks, 
households, state, etc.  
We  must  admit  that  current  challenges  are  fast  spilling  over  to  Serbia,  first  as 
psychological effects and, as of late, as economic effects as well;  
We  must  take  emergency  measures,  both  on  a  macro  and  on  a  micro  level,  to 
alleviate  the  effects  of  the  financial  turbulences.  The  budget  of  the  Republic  of 
Serbia will play a key role in that respect. And I am no longer talking about plans 
and intentions in general, but about building up concrete mechanisms and targeting 
figures to ensure not only sufficient liquidity levels but also an adequate volume of 
lending to enterprises.  
2. 
3. 
Until about two months ago, I was often labeled a great pessimist who uses turbulences in 
international markets as a pretext for opposing an increase in pensions, which is, by the way, 
not based on real earnings. In the meantime, however, my pessimism has been surpassed 
by many, including those who had earlier argued that an increase in pensions would actually 
do us good. The reason for this is simple – the turmoil in international markets is now a good 
pretext for a U-turn in their economic policies! So, by a weird twist of events, I have suddenly 
been turned into an optimist again! 
BIS Review 157/2008 
 1
The grounds for my cautious optimism are as follows:  
- 
      However, there are things that keep me awake at night:  
- 
On 19 December this year, the IMF Executive Board is to approve an arrangement 
with Serbia, which will buttress macroeconomic stability in the country;  
The  drafting  of  the  Memorandum  between  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of 
Serbia, National Bank of Serbia and Deposit Insurance Agency relating to stability 
and  liquidity  of  the  financial  sector  is  expected  to  complete  this  week.  The 
Memorandum will contain not only concrete mechanisms, but also exact figures.  
Full support of international financial institutions to Serbia will continue in 2009: 
• 
• 
European Investment Bank: loans to SMEs; 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development: capital increases by 
banks, loans to SMEs and large enterprises; 
German  Reconstruction  Bank  (KfW):  financing  energy  efficiency  projects 
and SMEs through commercial banks; 
Loans of the Government of the Republic of Italy. 
• 
All of the above, of course, is an add-on to domestic bank loans and foreign loans.  
Measures taken so far by the NBS have not worked to the detriment of the stability 
of  the  banking  sector,  or  better  still,  our  reserve  requirements  have  not  been 
lowered,  which  means  that  we  are  ready  to  get  to  grips  with  any  additional 
challenges ahead!  
 First, the media – their unprofessional, sensational and incomplete reporting on the 
crisis has played a significant role in the withdrawal of household deposits. Thus, in 
percentage  terms,  more  money  was  withdrawn  from  banks  in  Serbia  than  in 
countries  that  have  three  times  lower  capital  adequacy  ratios  and  which  saw 
government rescue packages worth a dozen billion euros! It is as if the media were 
competing in the dissemination of bad economic news, trying to convince the public 
that  everything  “is  the  same  as  it  was  two  decades  ago”  even  though  everybody 
knows it is not!  
Second  area  of  concern  is  action  taken  outside  Serbia:  Measures  taken  by  some 
governments  within  the  EU,  and  by  the  Brussels  itself,  have  been  only  half-
measures. They were not targeted enough and it will take quite a while before they 
kick in. Hence, it is very difficult for us in Serbia to take any measures that would 
complement  those  taken  abroad!  Although  everyone  seems  to  be  falling  over 
themselves in making promises, substantive details are scarce and the money even 
scarcer: save in England! Let me illustrate this by asking: Will the interbank market 
in  Serbia  revive  or  just  liven  up  briefly  if  banks  in  Frankfurt,  Vienna  or  Athens 
continue to mistrust one another? Somehow, I doubt it.  
The third reason for concern are the financial systems of the neighbouring countries: 
A stable banking system in Serbia is not sufficient in itself because if anything goes 
wrong  in  the  region,  it  is  bound  to  produce  consequences  for  Serbia  as  well.  To 
foreign institutional investors looking for emerging market opportunities it is all one 
and the same thing, although we, of course, know it is not.  
And  finally,  how  much  longer  will  this  last  and  how  much  further  will  it  go?  I  truly 
hope that the pessimists will be proved wrong and that the sums invested by central 
banks and governments of major world countries will manage to prevent the worst-
case scenario.  
Let  us  be  clear  –  there  are  no  magic  bullets,  just  as  there  are  no  absolutely  good  or  bad 
solutions.  We  should,  however,  keep  our  mind  on  the  objectives  of  the  National  Bank  of 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2008
Serbia – the primary being price stability and the secondary, financial stability. For this very 
reason, the National Bank of Serbia’s Monetary Policy Committee will, next Monday at the 
latest, consider the enactment of the following measures:  
- 
To increase the share of foreign currency required reserves kept in dinars from 20 to 
40 percent with a view to providing banks with extra foreign currency liquidity and 
withdrawing any excess dinars from circulation;  
To  encourage  banks  to  keep  the  released  excess  foreign  currency  liquidity  in  the 
domestic banking sector, rather than to use it to repay foreign debts or to reduce 
foreign deposits;  
To  resume  organizing  fixing  sessions  as  early  as  today  since  the  current  level  of 
margins and trading volumes are not satisfactory;  
To  lower  the  net  open  position  of  banks  from  20  to  only  10  percent,  in  order  to 
reduce their exposure to the exchange rate risk.  
   In parallel, we have been drafting a decision to be adopted by mid-December to relax in 2009 
requirements from some of the NBS regulations (e.g. 30%, 50% and 150% limits). 
Everybody says that Serbia performs best when backed into a corner. Well, we have been in 
that position for quite a while and some seem to have realized it only now. Understanding 
your position is necessary, but not in itself sufficient. In most difficult times during the process 
of transition, one should step up and not rest on one’s oars. Everybody is willing to help us, 
but no one will nor should do our job for us.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 157/2008 
 3
