Tarisa Watanagase: Securing Thailand’s future with capital market 
development and the role of the Bank of Thailand 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Thailand Focus 2008, Bangkok, 17 September 2008. 
 Excellencies, 
Distinguished Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning, I would like to begin by thanking the Stock Exchange of Thailand for inviting 
me  to  deliver  a  keynote  address  at  this  year’s  Thailand  Focus.  This  annual  forum, 
traditionally  opened  by  the  Prime  Minister  of  Thailand,  has  firmly  established  itself  as  the 
event of the year where domestic and foreign investors meet and interact with Thailand’s top 
policymakers and leading listed companies. It is thus not only my great pleasure but also my 
great honor to be here. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Given the turbulent time we are in at the moment, I am very pleased at the number and the 
composition of this year’s turnout. Glancing through the list of prospective attendees, I saw 
participants from Asia, Australia, Europe and North America, representing a large spectrum 
of investors. This is despite the fact that a number of invited fund managers were forced to 
cancel  their  trips  due  to  the  declared  state  of  emergency  that  was  lifted  on  Sunday. 
Moreover, I see that many of you have been long-time investors in the Thai stock market. All 
of these are quite reassuring, for they reflect your continued faith in the Thai economy. And 
for those of you who are newcomers, I hope my talk today will give you reasons why you 
should invest in Thailand. 
My  talk  today  will  be  divided  into  three  parts.  In  the  first,  I  will  touch  on  how  the  Bank  of 
Thailand sees the Thai economy evolving at the moment as well as in the longer term. In the 
second, I will talk about the role of capital market in the economy’s long-term growth. The 
final  part  will  then  highlight  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  roles  to  promote  capital  market 
development. 
Let  me  start  with  the  current  picture  of  the  Thai  economy.  As  you  all  know,  our  real  GDP 
growth moderated from 6.1% in the first quarter to 5.3% in the second quarter of this year. 
Thailand however was not alone in this development, as most countries in the region, with 
the notable exception of Indonesia, all experienced growth slowdown at varying degrees. In 
fact, when compared to Hong Kong, Singapore, and Taiwan which saw their growth rates cut 
down sharply from 7.3% to 4.2%, 6.9% to 2.1%, and 6.3% to 4.3%, respectively, Thailand 
fared much better with respect to the magnitude of the slowdown. The fact that we managed 
to  hold  on  a  satisfactory  growth  performance  given  the  surrounding  circumstances  is  a 
testament to the resiliency and the underlying strength of the Thai economy. 
Two major negative developments were behind the slowdown in the second quarter. On the 
external  front,  crude  oil  prices  surpassed  the  120USD  mark  for  the  first  time  in  history. 
Successive  rises  in  oil  prices  weighed  down  heavily  on  firms’  production  costs  and  cut  in 
consumers’  real  spending  power.  Had  our  exports  not  held  up  well,  Thailand’s  real  GDP 
growth would have been much lower. In addition, the direct and second-round effects from oil 
price increases also led to the acceleration in inflation this quarter, with the headline inflation 
rate reaching 8.9% for the month of June. 
The  second  negative  development  was  on  the  domestic  front  and  that  was  the  return  of 
street demonstration that has escalated to today’s political standoff. This development has 
BIS Review 118/2008 
 1
had significant effects on consumers’ and businesses’ sentiment, not to mention investors’ 
confidence that has contributed to continued net selling by foreign investors. 
Fortunately for Thailand, agricultural prices also accelerated in the second quarter. The rise 
in the prices of agricultural exports contributed to the robust export performance and at the 
same  time  partially  offset  the  negative  impact  of  increases  in  the  prices  of  oil  and  other 
commodities  imports.  Moreover,  increases  in  farm  income  due  to  the  price  effect  coupled 
with  strong  production  allowed  farmers  to  cope  with  higher  costs  of  living  associated  with 
rising  inflation,  providing  support  for  private  consumption  which  continued  into  this  current 
quarter. 
For  the  remainder  of  this  year,  the  recent  trend  in  oil  prices  appears  to  be  on  our  side, 
especially  on  inflationary  pressure.  Oil  prices  have  fallen  much  lower  than  what  we  had 
anticipated during  our  last  round  of  economic  forecast  in July  which  had  headline  inflation 
projection  in  the  range  of  7.5-8.8%  for  the  year.  The  fall  in  oil  prices  adds  on  top  of  the 
temporary favorable price impact from the government’s six-months-six-measures program 
which  was  not  included  in  time  for  the  forecast  and  will  together  be  a  major  factor  in  our 
October forecast round. 
The fall in oil prices is also expected to have a significant impact on economic growth which 
was forecasted to be in the range of 4.8%-5.8% for this year. Unfortunately, the impact of the 
escalated  political  tension  was  also  something  we  had  not  anticipated.  In  particular,  the 
damage it has inflicted on the tourism sector will significantly shave off one significant source 
of external revenue the economy has relied on. 
Still,  we  see  the  economy’s  growth  momentum  to  remain  in  tact.  Here  I  am  not  alone  in 
believing so. The latest SET’s CEO Survey released last week showed that the majority of 
listed  companies’  CEOs  remained  confident  in  the  growth  prospect  of  the  Thai  economy. 
Obviously, this is a difficult time for the economy. But you have to remember that we are no 
strangers  to  difficult  challenges,  some  much  worse  than  what  we  are  facing.  Most 
importantly, as I repeatedly said on different occasions, Thailand possesses strong economic 
fundamentals and room for maneuvering the right policy mix that makes us resilient against 
economic shocks. Allow me to elaborate on some of these. 
First, Thailand’s external position remains strong. Our external debt to GDP has hit an all-
time low since 1980, recording 29.4 percent last year. Our foreign reserves doubled within 
three years reaching over 100 billion US dollar at present day. The amount of foreign reserve 
has by far exceeded the short-term external debt by more than four times. This provides us 
an ample room to safeguard against instability from volatile capital flows and exchange rate 
movements. 
Second, the government’s fiscal position continues to improve as reflected by a falling trend 
of public debt to GDP. This gives the government the financial flexibility to tackle economic 
problems  and  stimulate  the  economy  if  necessary.  It  is  no  coincidence  that  credit  rating 
companies  often  stated  the  strength  of  our  fiscal  and  external  position  in  their  underlying 
reasons  for  affirming  Thailand’s  sovereign  ratings.  In  fact,  to  cite  James  McCormack,  the 
Head of Asia Sovereign of Fitch Ratings, at the firm’s last week annual Thailand conference, 
unless  political  uncertainty  significantly  undermines  Thailand’s  future  growth  prospect,  it  is 
unlikely  that  Thailand  will  be  downgraded,  for  the  country’s  sovereign  credit  fundamentals 
remain sound. 
Third, the banking sector remains healthy and strong enough to weather the current global 
financial turmoil. The BIS ratio remains high and the ratios of NPLs to total loans continued to 
decline. Together with the implementation of IAS39 accounting standard in 2006-2007 and 
the adoption of Basel II by the end of this year, the banking sector would be less prone to 
adverse  shocks.  Finally,  the  soon-to-be-implemented  second  phase  of  the  financial  sector 
master  plan  will  further  improve  efficiency  of  the  banking  sector  through  reduction  of 
regulatory  costs,  enhanced  legal  and  information  infrastructure,  and  new  competition 
introduced in orderly manner through phased deregulation and liberalization. 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2008
Fourth,  the  private  sector  has  shown  much  resiliency  and  adaptability.  For  example,  in 
response  to  the  appreciation  of  the  baht,  exporters  have  made  increasing  uses  of  foreign 
exchange hedging instruments. At the same time, the increasingly diversified export market 
structure has provided Thai exporters with cushions against the current slowdown in major 
advanced economies. As another example but perhaps more relevant to today’s audience, 
our listed companies no longer over-leverage their balance sheets, turning instead to equity 
and retained earnings as major sources of funds. 
Fifth,  Thailand  is  among  the  world’s  top  places  when  it comes  to  the  ease  of  starting  and 
operating  businesses.  The  recent  report,  “Doing  Business  2009,”  by  the  World  Bank 
upgraded Thailand by six places. Despite all the storms we have faced, we are now ranked 
at  13th  place  out  of  181  countries  (4th  in  Asia  after  Singapore,  Hong  Kong,  and  Japan). 
According to the report, Thailand led other reformers in the region with improvements in four 
areas  –  Registering  Property,  Protecting  Investors,  Paying  Taxes,  and  Trading  across 
Borders. As investors, you may be interested to hear that one of the cited reform measures is 
amendments  to  the  Thai  Securities  and  Exchange  Act  to  strengthen  minority  shareholder 
rights. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Provided that the current political deadlock is soon resolved and the new political equilibrium 
is  reached,  these  fundamentals  should  provide  a  solid  platform  for  Thailand’s  economic 
growth  going  forward.  A  recent  study  by  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  staff  finds  Thailand’s 
potential  GDP  growth  to  be  in  the  range  of  5.5-6.1%  between  2008  and  2015.  This  may 
appear a far cry from the 1987-1996 period when the growth of the Thai economy averaged 
9.5%. However, everyone now realizes that the Thai economy then was operating beyond its 
potential  and  therefore  not  sustainable.  In  contrast,  our  staff’s  projection  was  based  on  a 
balanced growth path scenario used to characterize an economy in a steady state. 
There is however an important catch in the cited projection and that is the implicit assumption 
that the ratio of real gross investment to real GDP recovers from the current level of 22% to 
28-30% by the end of the period. Thus, things like mega-project investments are conceivably 
already included in the projection. The current political doldrums only make the scenario far 
reaching. Without the resuscitation of investment, Thailand’s potential growth rate will likely 
fall to a lower path. 
The  same  study  also  points  out  the  impact  of  demographic  change  on  Thailand’s  future 
growth. By 2026-2035, the economy’s potential GDP growth rate under the balanced growth 
path  assumption  is  projected  to  fall  to  4.8-5.4%  due  to  ageing  population.  Moreover,  the 
study finds that measures such as attracting foreign workers and raising the retirement age 
from 60 to 65 have only small impact at boosting the economy’s long-term growth and that 
the  key  to  maintaining  high  growth  rate  lies  in  enhancing  productivity  growth  rather  than 
trying to squeeze out more hours from the aging population. 
While improvement in educational and skill attainment of the labor force and de-bottlenecking 
of inefficient sectors such as improvement in the logistic system and water management for 
irrigation  are  most  obvious  policies,  financial  deepening  must  not  be  neglected.  It  is  the 
efficiency  of  resource  allocation  which  includes  funds  and  capital  that  enhances  economic 
productivity, hence, raising the economy’s long-term growth potential. This is the focus of the 
rest of my talk to which I now turn. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As you know, the fundamental function of financial markets and intermediaries is to channel 
funds  from  those  who  have  a  surplus  of  savings  to  those  who  have  a  deficit.  If  financial 
markets  are  functioning  efficiently,  they  contribute  to  an  optimal  allocation  of  resources, 
reduce the cost of capital, and allow for risk-sharing and risk-diversification. Well-developed 
and  efficient  financial  markets  contribute  to  higher  productivity  growth  because  they  are 
better at channeling capital from sectors in decline to those with growth opportunities, in a 
BIS Review 118/2008 
 3
process  of  Schumpeterian  “creative  destruction”  that  ultimately  drives  economic  growth. 
Having efficient resource allocation is particularly important now for the Thai economy, given 
the ongoing structural shift in relative prices of commodities and asset prices which render 
some businesses obsolete while opening up many other new opportunities. 
Indeed, the vast body of research over the past decade strongly suggests that improvements 
in financial developments precede and contribute to economic performance. In other words, 
the widespread desire to see an effectively functioning financial system is warranted by its 
clear causal link to growth, macroeconomic stability, and poverty reduction. 
As  for  the  specific  form  of  financial  market  development,  it  is  also  well  accepted  by 
policymakers that economies that have well-developed banking sectors and capital markets 
are  advantageous  to  others  that  rely  mostly  on  only  one  type  of  the  financial  markets. 
Indeed,  banks  and  capital  markets  are  complements,  and  not  substitutes.  For  some 
industries  at  certain  times  of  their  development,  capital  market-based  financing  is 
advantageous. For example, financing through stock markets is optimal for industries where 
there  are  continuous  technological  advances  and  where  there  is  little  consensus  on  how 
firms should be valued or managed. The stock market checks whether the manager's view of 
the  firm's  production  is  a  sensible  one.  For  other  industries,  bank-based  financing  is 
preferable. This holds in particular for industries which face strong information asymmetries. 
Financing  through  financial  intermediaries  is an  effective  solution  to adverse  selection  and 
moral hazard problems that exist between lenders and borrowers. 
Furthermore,  efficient  and  well-balanced  financial  system  will  allow  the  system  to  better 
manage and absorb shocks as the market would be less prone to one-way market conditions 
and possesses greater liquidity. The experience of the Asian crisis, for example, points to the 
critical importance of the development of long-term local currency debt market, to increase 
the depth and the breadth of financial market. In addition, the lack of diversified structure and 
market  may  lead  to  increased  risk  from  concentration  of  credit  and  maturity  risks  in  the 
banking system. Lack of markets may lead to the mispricing of risk and excessive delay in 
correcting large exposures, as well as increased vulnerabilities from capital inflows. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  interaction  between  financial  markets,  economic  growth  and  monetary  policy  is  by  no 
means a new issue for central bankers. Indeed, the continued deepening of capital markets 
is  a  significant  issue  for  policymakers,  and  particularly  for  central  bankers,  since  smooth 
functioning and efficient financial markets are crucial in ensuring an effective transmission of 
monetary mechanism. 
The  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  Thailand’s  capital  market 
development  and  its  economic  growth  is  to  maintain  steady  medium-term  price  stability. 
Such a policy is beneficial, as it will minimize the adverse effects of inflation and high inflation 
uncertainty.  As  we  all  know,  price  stability  brings  numerous  benefits.  It  not  only  creates  a 
climate  for  higher  economic  and  investment  activities,  but  also  reduces  the  economic  and 
social inequalities caused by the asymmetric distribution of the costs of inflation among the 
various  economic  agents.  In  addition,  in  an  environment  of  low  inflationary  expectations, 
inflation risk premia become relatively less important as a determinant of financial prices. As 
a  result,  other  factors  such  as  credit  risk  can  play  a  larger  role  in  the  price  formation 
mechanism.  Ultimately,  this  results  in  clearer  market  price  signals  and  a  more  efficient 
allocation of financial resources. 
On the BOT’s role in the pursuit of price stability, allow me to elaborate further on two points: 
First,  the  BOT’s  inflation  targeting  framework  aims  ultimately  at  anchoring  medium  term 
inflation expectations. As we are all aware, central banks have direct control only on the very 
short end of the market interest rates. In the case of the BOT, it is the one-day repurchase 
rate. Meanwhile, the interest rates that matter to investment decisions by most businesses 
are those in the medium to long end of the yield curves. Thus, it is imperative that the central 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2008
bank gain trust with the public by conducting monetary policy in such a way that is consistent 
with anchoring low inflation expectation in the medium and long term. To put in plain words, 
markets and the public must be confident that the central bank would not tolerate inflation 
developments  deem  to  undermine  long-term  economic  growth.  Given  the  possibility  of 
persistent expectations of high inflation following the run-up of oil and other commodity prices 
early this year, the issue of central bank’s credibility in achieving price stability has become 
even more critical. 
Indeed,  over  the  past  few  months,  there  was  intense  debate  on  the  appropriate  monetary 
stances  to  deal  with  the  current  inflation  problem.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  has  decided  to 
gradually withdraw the demand stimulus, by increasing the policy rate by a total of 50 basis 
points  during  the  past  two  Monetary  Policy  Committee  Meetings.  The  rationale  is  that 
uncontained demand, boosted in no small part by the presence of large real negative interest 
rates, as well as relatively small output gap during the first half of 2008, could potentially fuel 
even  more  severe  and  persistent  inflation  and  force  us  to  take  a  bigger  dose  of  bitter 
medicine with significant loss of economic growth in the future. 
Second, to further enhance the effectiveness of central bank’s objective in achieving price 
stability,  it  is  crucial  to  establish  an  understanding  between  the  central  bank  and  the 
government of the lagged-nature of monetary policy transmission, and the need for targeting 
stability to effectively anchor long-term inflation expectations. 
To this end, the recently passed BOT Act specifies that, at the end of each year, the Bank of 
Thailand’s Monetary Policy Committee, jointly with the Minister of Finance, will be required to 
set an annual target for monetary policy for the following year. This formal process of close 
coordination  would  help  ensure  that  monetary  policy  is  aligned  with  the  country’s  overall 
economic policy direction. More importantly, it will also contribute to a greater understanding 
of the public at large of the fact that the only long-term role for monetary policy is in creating 
an environment of price stability which would help support sustainable economic growth. 
In  addition  to  the  mandated  responsibility  of  maintaining  price  stability,  the  BOT  has  also 
taken a direct role to further develop Thailand’s capital market and its infrastructure via our 
involvement in the National Capital Market Development Committee and the Domestic Bond 
Market  Development  Sub-committee  which  were  set  up  to  coordinate  capital  market 
development efforts among government agencies as well as the private sector. 
With regard to equity market development, beginning in 2002, we have taken a step-by-step 
approach in opening up outward portfolio investment, by first allowing institutional investors, 
such  as  mutual  funds  and  insurance  companies,  to  invest  abroad.  This  year,  as  Thai 
investors  have  become  more  familiar  with  diversifying  risks  abroad  and  with  financial 
instruments  in  more  developed  markets,  we  have  now  allowed  Thai  individuals  to  invest 
abroad through local securities company. Through this initiative, not only local investors and 
professionals  in  the  capital  market  industry  would  have  a  better  understanding  of  the  link 
between  the  local  market  and  the  global  market,  as  well  as  risk  management  strategy,  it 
would help contribute to higher standards and practice in the local capital market in the long 
run. 
With  respect  to  bond  market  development,  we  have  taken  a  more  active  role  both  in  the 
primary and the secondary market.  This is because the bond market is where we operate 
monetary policy through liquidity injection and absorption in order to align short-term interest 
rate  with  the  policy  interest  rate.  Therefore,  the  more  developed  and  efficient  the  bond 
market  is,  the  more  effective  the  monetary  management  would  be.  Besides,  a  vibrant 
domestic bond market is essential for a robust and efficient financial system, which is a solid 
foundation for long-term economic stability. 
In the primary bond market, while meeting with the sterilization needs, the issuance of BOT 
bonds and bills are also designed to promote the bond market. In particular, we coordinate 
closely with the MOF on issuance schedule to provide regular and predictable supply, reduce 
auction  frequency  and  consolidate  issuance  to  reduce  the  number  of  issues  in  order  to 
BIS Review 118/2008 
 5
facilitate secondary market trading. The BOT bonds have  helped widen investor base and 
contributed to the growth of mutual fund industry, as retail investors are seeing this as an 
alternative  to  banks’  deposit.  Other  than  the  issuance  of  BOT  bonds  and  bills,  we  also 
introduced floating rate notes to add diversity to the products in the market as well. 
With  respect  to  secondary  bond  market  development,  developing  the  private  repo  market 
has been one avenue that the Bank has adopted to enhance a more liquid bond market. 
What I have mentioned here is only some examples of the earlier and ongoing efforts that 
the Bank of Thailand was involved in developing the capital market. Going forward, there is 
still much work to do. The Bank of Thailand will continue to coordinate with other authorities 
and  the  private  sector  in  order  to  move  us  closer  to  having  a  deeper  and  well  structured 
capital market. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  underlying  fundamentals  of  the  Thai  economy 
remain  sound,  as  evidenced  by  its  continued  ability  to  weather  various  adverse  shocks. 
While it is uncertain how the current political confrontation will unwind, I am confident that the 
economy  will  prevail,  as  it  has  done  a  number  of  times  in  the  past.  Over  the  longer  term 
however,  Thailand  will  need,  among  other  things,  a  deeper  and  stronger  capital  market  in 
order to grow sustainably. It is therefore in our best interest to promote the development of 
the Thai capital market and make Thailand an attractive destination for quality investors. For 
this, we will need your active participation and continued faith in the Thai economy. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 118/2008
