Savenaca Narube: Launching Fiji’s new coins 
Address by Mr Savenaca Narube, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the official launch 
of Fiji’s new coin series, Suva, 11 December 2008. 
 Cabinet Ministers 
Members of the Board of the Reserve Bank of Fiji 
Distinguished Guests 
Introduction 
Let me add my warm welcome to you all and thank you for accepting our invitation to the 
launch of our new coins. We believe that this is a noteworthy milestone in the history of our 
nation and the Reserve Bank of Fiji. 
As  I  will  explain  later,  the  change  of  coins  is  more  complicated  and  difficult  to  do  than 
changing  currency  notes.  The  logistics  and  arrangements  are  very  different.  We  have 
changed  our  currency  notes  several  times  and  will  perhaps  do  so  every  ten  years  or  so. 
However changing coins is a rare thing to do. 
We may be therefore witnessing a “once in a life time” event. For some of us, we may never 
experience it again. So, it is a very special occasion. We are therefore extremely glad that 
you could join us in this celebration. Christmas is also around the corner so it is a good time 
for celebration as well. 
History 
Coins  date  back  to  our  earliest  recorded  history.  Shells  and  even  turtles  were  used  for 
trading in the very early years. As traders came to our islands, they brought with them foreign 
coins. British, German, Mexican and even Russian coins co-circulated in Fiji for some time. 
Fiji  minted  our  first  coins  in  1934.  Some  of  us  may  still  remember  the  pennies  and  half 
pennies with holes in the middle.  They  make very popular souvenirs now days. I am sure 
many of us still remember the three pence and the shillings. 
While  we  have  changed  our  currency  notes  several  times,  it  is  almost  40  years  since  we 
changed our coins and this was from the pennies and shillings to decimal currency on 13 
January 1969. 
In 1969 we had only 1 cent, 2 cents, 5 cents and the 20 cents. The 50 cents and the one 
dollar were still in banknote or paper form. We converted the 50 cents note to coin in 1975 
and the one dollar in 1995. These coins have remained basically the same as they were then 
up until today. 
As I said, we do not change coins as frequently as we change currency notes. There is one 
good reason for this and that is coins do not get counterfeited as much as currency notes do. 
Why? There are two obvious reasons. The first is that minting coins as you saw in the video 
is  a  complicated  and  expansive  process.  Second,  as  you  would  imagine,  the  return  from 
counterfeiting  coins  are  pretty  small.  But  interestingly  these  have  not  stopped  some  from 
setting up bogus minting presses in the past. 
Why are we changing coins now? 
You may ask: Why are we then changing our coins now? Let me explain: 
BIS Review 158/2008 
 1
   Firstly, prices of base metals used in coin production have increased dramatically. 
This increase has made central banks change the metal composition of coins. This 
has significantly reduced the cost of minting them. 
Secondly,  technology  has  allowed  innovative  minting  techniques  to  make  more 
efficient use of base metals. Again, this has reduced costs. 
Thirdly, we can reduce the size of the coins. Many countries have done this. Smaller 
and  lighter  coins  are  much  cheaper  to  mint.  Not  only  that,  the  handling  costs  are 
also reduced.  
So, we are changing our coins basically to reduce the cost of minting and handling. These 
costs continue to increase as demand for cash continues to rise. The cashless society is yet 
to fully eventuate and I think that it will not do so for some time yet. 
Why are we dropping the one and two cent coins? 
We have taken the opportunity to also review the structure of our coins. In doing so, we are 
dropping the one and two cents. This is because of the following reasons:  
• 
One,  the  value  of  lower  denomination  coins  like  the  one  and  two  cents  have 
dropped  significantly.  This  is  because  of  the  increase  in  the  prices  of  goods  and 
services. As a result, the one and two cent coins do not circulate well. People simply 
leave  them  in  jars,  drawers  and  so  forth.  It  therefore  makes  good  sense  to  stop 
minting them. 
Two,  the  cost  of  minting  the  lower  denomination  coins  are  more  than  their  face 
value. For instance, the cost of minting the one cent coin is four times its face value 
even with cheaper metal composition. So, while these coins are lying idle in jars and 
drawers, we spend a lot of money minting new ones. This is a clear waste of public 
funds. 
Third,  businesses  and  banks  continue  to  incur  higher  cost  in  handling  and 
transporting fresh supplies of these coins year in and year out.  
  A significant change such as this always incites people’s concerns. This is understandable. 
So let me take this opportunity to answer some concerns on the cessation of the one and two 
cents coins. 
• 
Some say that it will be inflationary. I say that the experience in New Zealand and 
around the world clearly shows that it is not. 
Others say that, it will not allow a continuous series of currencies. I say that this is 
nice in theory. In reality, there is really no need whatsoever to have a continuous 
series. 
Lastly, others say that the gains from the multiplier effects of money will negate the 
loss of minting these coins. I say that the gains will be much, much more if we do 
not mint them. They do not circulate any way and there is no point in minting them in 
the first place. 
  I strongly believe that the benefits of ceasing the one and two cent coins far outweigh the 
cost of retaining them and the decision fully serves the interest of the nation. 
Should we coin the two dollars? 
On  the  other  end  of  the  coin  scale,  again  because  of  the  rise  in  prices,  the  lower 
denominated currency notes are now being converted to coins, again as a move to cut costs. 
The notes last for only about five years. Coins last much longer. For this precise reason we 
2 
 BIS Review 158/2008
had coined our fifty cents in 1975 and our one dollar note in 1995. In our public survey, we 
asked the people if they wanted to also coin the two dollars as Australia and New Zealand 
have done, but the answer was a clear no. Therefore, we have not coined the two dollars but 
my guess is that it will be seriously considered sooner rather than later. 
Learning from the rest of the world 
I would like to say that we have benefited a lot from the experience of other countries notably 
New  Zealand  who  issued  their  new  coins  only  two  years  ago.  The  Reserve  Bank  of  New 
Zealand had done a lot of work to evaluate various options on coins. They willingly shared 
the results of their research with us. They also helped us by providing technical expertise. 
I would therefore like to express our sincere appreciation and gratitude to the Reserve Bank 
of New Zealand for their immense assistance and support. We are honoured today to have 
the company of Mr. Brian Lang, former Head of Currency at Reserve Bank of New Zealand. 
Mr. Lang visited Fiji in 2006 to help us during the technical evaluations. 
Currency review 
Today,  we  are  launching  Fiji’s  new  coins  which  are  smaller,  thinner  and  lighter  than  the 
existing ones.  
This change has already commenced when we ceased issuing the one and two cents coins 
to commercial banks from October 13 of this year. 
Let  me  put  this  process  in  its  bigger  prospective.  We  decided  back  in  2002  to  review  our 
entire  currency  –  both  notes  and  coins.  We  decided  to  work  on  the  notes  first  and  this 
culminated  last  year  when  we  issued  the  new  currency  banknotes  including  the  One 
Hundred Dollar note. I am glad to say that the new paper currency has been widely accepted 
by the people of Fiji. The use of the one hundred dollar bill was much more rapid than the 
fifty dollar bill when it was first introduced. 
Today marks the completion of the whole currency review with the launch of the new series 
of coins. The entire journey has taken us about 7 years. We are pleased with the results so 
far.  I  am  confident  that  the  country  will  also  accept  the  new  coins  that  we  are  launching 
today. 
Unlike banknotes, changing our coins is a much more complex process. The logistical issues 
are many. For instance, when we stop issuing the one and two cents, there was a rush to 
return these coins to the commercial banks even though they are still legal tender. We have, 
up  to  now,  collected  around  120  tons  of  one  and  two  cents.  This  is  a  lot  of  weight  to 
transport. It also requires a lot of space to store 120 tons of coins. As we collect more old 
coins, these logistics will intensify. 
Cabinet approval 
I  wish  to  assure  everyone  that  we  have  obtained  the  necessary  approval  under  the  law. 
Under the Reserve Bank of Fiji Act, only the approval of the Minister for Finance is required 
before we can change our currency either they be notes or coins. We have kept the Minister 
and Cabinet fully informed of the progress throughout this currency review. We sought and 
obtained Cabinet’s approval of the new coins and the cessation of the one and two cents on 
11 March 2008. 
BIS Review 158/2008 
 3
Minting 
In  March  this  year,  the  Board  awarded  the  tender  to  the  Royal  Canadian  Mint  for  the 
production of a five year supply of our new coins. The contract is valued at approximately 7.8 
million Fiji dollars (US $4.2 million). Royal Canadian Mint has minted Fiji coins in the past 
and is recognised as one of the leading and innovative mints in the world. We are extremely 
happy to continue this association with the Royal Canadian Mint. 
How much will it save Fiji? 
Our new coins will be on average nine (9) percent smaller, forty three (43) percent lighter, 
and twenty one (21) percent thinner.  
How much savings will we get from these changes in our coins? 
If we were to produce the same quantity of our current coins, it would have cost us about 
eight million Fiji dollars more. We save five  million dollars by not minting the one and two 
cents  coins  and  a  further  three  million  dollars  by  reducing  the  size,  weight  and  metallic 
composition. These savings will also apply when we re-order these coins in future. Hence, if 
we  assume  that  we  will  not  change  these  coins  in  another  forty  years,  these  savings  can 
amount to over 100 million dollars. 
Savings in handling, transportation and storage 
The benefits and savings do not end there. Due to the significant reduction in size and weight 
of  these  new  coins,  individuals  and  businesses  will  save  substantial  costs  in  terms  of 
transportation, handling and storage. 
Assistance for the visually impaired 
Some  have  expressed  concerns  that  the  visually  impaired  will  find  it  more  difficult  to 
differentiate the value of the new coins. But, as we did in the new currency notes, we have 
taken into account the needs of those of us that are visually impaired. For the first time, we 
have introduced the varied edge designs. These will serve as an effective identification and 
differentiating feature for the visually impaired as well as for the general public. Coins can 
now  be  differentiated  not  only  by  size  but  also  by  their  edgings.  Different  coins  will  have 
different edgings. This will help greatly when the coins are about the same size. The five (5) 
cents coin will now have a plain edge while the ten (10) cents will have the serrated or rough 
edge.  The  twenty  (20)  cents  being  the  closest  in  size  to  the  ten  (10)  cents  will  have 
intermitted serrations. 
Designs 
Let me turn briefly to the designs on the coins. When we changed our currency notes we 
also  changed  their  designs.  However,  for  our  new  coins,  we  have  retained  the  existing 
designs both on the front and back. Why? We think the current designs are still relevant and 
appropriate. They reflect directly on our culture and heritage. In addition, leaving the designs 
unchanged  makes  the  change  to  the  new  coins  much  easier.  They  make  the  new  coins 
easier to identify. 
Multi-ply technology and metal composition 
The  metal  composition  of  our  coins  is  now  different.  Our  new  coins  are  manufactured  by 
Royal  Canadian  Mint  in  “multi-ply”  layers.  Multi-ply  technology  is  patented  by  Royal 
Canadian Mint and offers greater security, reliability and durability at reduced minting costs. 
4 
 BIS Review 158/2008
Multi-ply technology gives the coins unique electromagnetic signatures (EMS) which is how 
modern coin vending machines are programmed to differentiate different denominations. The 
technology  enables  coins  of  similar  size  and  weight  to  have  different  electromagnetic 
signatures  which  allows  a  vending  machine  to  be  programmed  to  accept  one  and  not  the 
other. Simply put, you cannot put a foreign coin into our vending machines anymore. These 
machines can be easily programmed to recognise and accept Fiji coins only. These would 
give fewer headaches to city councils and vending machine operators let alone increase their 
revenue take. 
Are what we saying really work? Yes they do. We have already tested these coins in parking 
meters and vending machines and we have not encountered any problem at all. 
Durability 
I mentioned that we have achieved all these improvements at lower cost without sacrificing 
durability. Rigorous testing has shown that these coins are resistant to corrosion in tropical 
country  like  ours  and  to  household  products.  On  average,  these  coins  have  a  life  span  of 
approximately  25  years.  These  test  results  have  been  corroborated  by  independent  tests 
conducted by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand during their evaluation. 
Public awareness 
Such  a  major  change  as  this  requires  a  comprehensive  public  awareness  campaigns.  We 
have started this already. After the launch today, we are going all out to inform the public 
about our new coins and what we are going to do in the next three months. The campaign 
will  commence  with  newspaper  advertisements  and  supplements  in  December.  Television 
advertisements will start in January 2009. All these will be conducted in three languages. We 
will also send teams to the rural areas to ensure the message filters down to all sections of 
the community. 
Issuance 
What are our plans to implementing the change over to our new coins? 
The  new  coins  will  be issued  into circulation  on  13  January  2009,  the  40th  anniversary  of 
decimal currency in Fiji. The new and old coins will co-circulate for about three months until 
31 March 2009. This gives the Reserve Bank of Fiji time to work with the commercial banks 
and the public on the logistics of extracting the old coins from circulation and replacing them 
with the new. We have received excellent cooperation from the commercial banks during the 
cessation exercise and we look forward to their continue cooperation. 
When  we  changed  currency  notes  last  year,  the  old  and  the  new  notes  circulated  side  by 
side up to now. You may then ask: Why can we not do the same things for the new and old 
coins? The answer is that the new coins are of very different dimensions and weight than the 
old  ones.  If  the  old  circulate  with  the  new,  this  will  create  huge  problems  in  identification, 
counting, handling and to some a lesser extent coin machines. That is why we will only allow 
a short time for the two sets of coins to circulate together before we withdraw the old ones. 
Old coins 
Our old coins, including the 1 and 2 cents coins will be officially demonetised on 31 March 
2009 meaning they will cease to be a legal tender from 01 April 2009. From then onwards 
you can only get value of these old coins from the Reserve Bank of Fiji. As we approach this 
date, the public will be reminded through our public relations exercise. 
BIS Review 158/2008 
 5
What will we do with the old coins? We intend to sell them for their metallic content and we 
have received several interests in this area. 
Concluding remarks 
I  conclude  by  saying  that  I  believe  we  have  an  excellent  set  of  currency  notes  and  coins 
which can fully serve our needs well into the future. The new currency notes have been well 
received. I am confident that new coins will also receive the same acceptance. 
I now have much pleasure in officially launching the new coins. 
I wish you all a Merry Christmas and a very Happy New Year. 
6 
 BIS Review 158/2008
