John Gieve: Learning from the financial crisis 
Speech  by  Sir  John  Gieve,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  2008  Europe  in  the 
World  Lecture  Panel  Discussion,  at 
the  European  Business  School,  London, 
19 November 2008. 
 The years after sterling left the ERM were the most successful and stable in my lifetime. In 
early  2007,  for  example,  inflation  had  not  moved  by  more  than  a  single  percentage  point 
away from target in the previous 10 years, the output of the economy had grown in every 
quarter since 1992 Q3 (Chart 1), unemployment had fallen by 5 percentage points from its 
peak in the early 1990s and living standards had steadily increased. Interest rates had been 
low and stable. 
However as we know now, that was the end of “the Great Stability”. The summer ushered in 
a  period  of  extraordinary  turmoil  in  Western  financial  markets  which  we  are  still  trying  to 
calm. And this year has seen the onset of recession not just in Europe but throughout the 
advanced economies. Despite the dramatic policy measures of the last months, the outlook 
for 2009 is bleak and the prospects beyond are uncertain.  
That move – in the space of only 12 months – from the policy maker’s dream of steady non-
inflationary growth to the biggest banking crisis since the outbreak of World War I and the 
onset of recession sets the questions for this evening.  
First, how did we get into this position?  
Second, what are the immediate challenges for policy? 
And finally, what lessons should we draw for the future?  
How did we get here? 
The path that led from losses in the US sub prime housing market to a collapse of confidence 
in  the  Western  banking  system  and  a  savage  credit  squeeze  has  been  described  many 
times,  most  recently  in the  Bank’s Financial  Stability  and  Inflation  Reports.  I  don’t  need  to 
repeat  that  here  but  I  would  highlight  two  features:  first  this  is  a  global  story;  second,  the 
nature  of  the  crisis  has  changed  over  the  past  15  months  and  has  called  for  a  changing 
policy response.  
A global crisis 
You cannot explain recent developments on a national basis, even in the US. The roots of 
the crisis lay in global imbalances in trade and capital flows between advanced and emerging 
economies. The rapid growth of exports from Asia, and latterly the Gulf, was reflected in a 
substantial build up of savings. In China the national saving rate peaked in exceeded 50% of 
GDP. Those funds flowed back to the developed world and to the US in particular. That kept 
interest rates low and allowed a rapid growth of credit. Following the dotcom bubble, there 
was  a  particular  appetite  for  fixed  income  investments  which  led  to  an  increasingly  risky 
search for yield. That was the platform for the excesses of lending to the sub-prime housing 
market in the US and a sharp rise in house prices more generally. 
The impact was not confined to the US. The flow of funds into the US was re-exported to the 
advanced  economies,  especially  through  the  growing  securitisation  markets,  and  helped 
finance the rapid increases in house prices in the UK (Chart 2) and many other countries. 
And  that  internationalisation  of  markets  was  reflected  also  in  the  build  up  in  our  banks  of 
portfolios of AAA-rated securities which offered a slightly better yield than traditional bonds 
and many of which were based on sub-prime assets.  
BIS Review 145/2008 
 1
So  when  losses  emerged  in  sub-prime  market,  they  not  only  hit  US  banks  but  ricocheted 
through  the  international  financial  system.  Much  of  the  commentary  has  focused  on  the 
structured credit losses in banks’ trading books and treasuries and they have certainly been 
large.  
But equally as important was the impact on the liability side of balance sheets. Banks had not 
only  expanded  their  balance  sheets  too  far,  they  had  in  the  process  become  reliant  on 
wholesale  funding  markets  which  had  not  been  tested  in  a  downturn.  In  the  UK,  the  gap 
between customer lending and deposits moved from zero at the turn of the century to over 
£700 billion in 2008 H1 (Chart 3). That proved a structural weakness when investors realised 
that  the  AAA  label  concealed  substantial  and  uncertain  risks  and  withdrew  from  the 
securitisation markets. 
Just as the origins of the crisis lay in global imbalances its effects are also global. Initially, the 
impact of the crisis seemed to be concentrated in the US and a handful of European banks in 
Germany, the UK and Switzerland which had pursued particularly risky strategies. The euro 
area as a whole did not see a marked reduction in credit growth. Meanwhile the emerging 
economies of Asia continued to boom. With wages and prices rising, many of the people I 
met  in  India  and  China  at  the  start  of  the  year  rather  welcomed  the  prospect  of  a  fall  in 
Western demand as a means of taking a little of the heat out of their own economies.  
But despite different starting points and policies, we have now seen bank failures in many 
countries in Europe and acute pressures develop everywhere. And the US, Japan, the euro 
area and the UK have all entered recession. This summer has also brought a slowdown in 
growth in the Far East and other emerging economies which is likely to test political as well 
as economic regimes.  
The challenge for policy 
It  was  clear  last  autumn  that  the  financial  crisis  was  leading  to  a  squeeze  on  credit  and 
lowering the prospects for growth and inflation in the UK. That was why the MPC, which had 
been raising rates as late as July, cut Bank Rate in December last year and followed with two 
more  reductions  in  February  and  April.  While  the  euro  area  started  with  lower  rates  and 
initially  seemed  less  affected  than  the  UK  by  a  credit  crunch,  expected  increases  in  rates 
were delayed.  
However, these downside pressures were not the only challenge to policy. Oil prices which 
had been pushed up by the rapid growth in emerging markets took another dramatic jump 
and food prices began rising more quickly too. Between 2007 and mid-2008 oil more than 
doubled in price, while food prices rose by around 80%. At the same time sterling which had 
climbed to $2.10 in November 2007, fell back. The result was that consumer price inflation in 
the UK rose well above target to 3% in April and over 5% in September, its highest rate since 
1992 (while RPI inflation has been over 4% for all but 4 months out of the past two years).  
Not  surprisingly  expectations  of  inflation  also  rose  sharply  (Chart  4),  raising  the  risk  that 
higher  inflation  would  become  embedded  in  decisions  on  the  prices  for  other  goods  and 
services  and  on  pay.  Of  course  commodity  prices  and  inflation  more  generally  have  now 
begun to come down but I believe the risk of dislodging expectations was a real one, not a 
mirage. Certainly I felt that to reduce rates during months when inflation was not only rising 
rapidly, but was rising faster than we had forecast, would be confusing and might weaken 
confidence  in  our  resolution  and  the  credibility  of  the  inflation  target  .  On  similar  grounds, 
despite the appreciation of the euro, the ECB raised rates in July this year. 
In  the  spring  and  early  summer,  the  financial  crisis  also  was  showing  some  signs  of 
stabilising in the US and in Europe, particularly after the takeover of Bear Stearns in March 
signalled that the “state safety net” in the US had been extended to cover investment as well 
as  commercial  banks.  The  introduction  of  the  Special  Liquidity  Scheme  in  April  here  and 
extensive liquidity measures in the US led to a period in which funding pressures eased and 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2008
Libor  spreads  and  CDS  premia  softened.  Our  August  forecast  was  for  a  pronounced  but 
limited  deterioration  in  growth.  The  threat  of  a  strengthening  feedback  loop  from  a 
contracting banking sector to a severe downturn in the real economy had not disappeared 
but did not seem the central case.  
But the risks and the challenges changed dramatically in the autumn. 
First, the losses incurred by investors in the rescues of Fannie and Freddie combined with 
the  decision  to  allow  Lehman  Brothers  to  go  into  administration,  led  to  a  dramatic  loss  of 
confidence in financial markets (Chart 5) threatening a savage further twist in the squeeze 
on credit for households and companies. 
Second, we saw a sharp weakening in oil prices (Chart 6), with the odds implied by options 
of  such  a  fall  less  than  1%.  Other  commodity  prices  also  fell.  And,  even  before  that  was 
reflected in consumer prices, the public’s inflation expectations turned down decisively. 
In short, the balance of risks between inflation being above or below target in the medium 
term shifted decisively to the downside.  
That  was  the  background  to  the  internationally  coordinated  reductions  in  interest  rates  in 
early  October  and  the  aggressive  cut  of  150  basis  points  in  Bank  Rate  in  November,  the 
largest  reduction  in  official  interest  rates  since 1992  (indeed  I  believe  it  was  only  the  third 
time Bank rate had been cut by 150bp since the Bank was founded over 300 years ago).  
Even  so,  our  latest  medium  term  projections  for  inflation  show  inflation  remaining  below 
target in the medium term and suggest further reductions may be necessary (Chart 7). Of 
course, there are large uncertainties around that projection; more so than usual. In particular, 
they take no account of any fiscal measures that the Government may announce next week.  
Just as we had to change gears on monetary policy, so we needed to change our approach 
to  the  banking  sector.  The  tripartite  authorities  –  the  Bank,  FSA  and  Treasury  –  were 
criticised for the handling of Northern Rock and for being slow off the mark when the crisis 
started  in  2007.  But  we  learned  from  that  experience.  We  have  established  new  ways  of 
providing the market with the liquidity that it needs. And, as the crisis has widened, we have 
dealt  with  vulnerable  and  failing  banks,  such  as  Bradford  and  Bingley,  more  speedily  and 
cleanly.  
But as the crisis deepened in late September, it became clear that we needed more than a 
case  by  case  approach  here  to  tackle  the  continuing  loss  of  confidence  in  the  banking 
system  in  the  UK,  in  euro  area  and  in  the  US.  On  8  October  therefore  we  announced  a 
comprehensive  package  of  measures  including  support  for  recapitalisation,  guaranteed 
funding  and  enhanced  liquidity.  That  very  quickly  became  the  template  for  action  in  other 
advanced and some emerging countries. 
The central plank of the package was the offer to underwrite capital issuance of at least £50 
billion and it is important to be clear what that was intended to do. It was not to establish new 
regulatory  minimum  ratios.  It  was  intended  to  underpin  confidence  in  the  banks  and  to 
ensure that each institution would have a sufficient capital buffer both to absorb losses that 
are likely to arise during a recession and to continue lending on normal commercial criteria. 
Under the new Basel II rules the ratio of capital to risk weighted assets is almost bound to fall 
as arrears and losses mount. The aim of the package was to create the headroom for that to 
happen and to remove the capital pressure on banks to deleverage quickly by refusing even 
good credit requests.  
The  capital  raising  is  not  complete  of  course  but  the  process  is  underway.  Banks  and 
building  societies  have  already  secured  around  £50  billion  of  guaranteed  funding  in  the 
market and has facilitated new bank debt issuance without the need of a guarantee. Overall 
there  has  been  some  easing  in  the  money  markets  and  some  repair  in  confidence.  The 
complete seizure that was looming has been averted.  
BIS Review 145/2008 
 3
However, we are clearly not out of the woods yet. Financial markets across the world are still 
badly impaired; spreads have not yet returned to their summer levels; and, while banks look 
more  secure,  many  hedge  funds  for  example  are  under  increased  pressure.  In  the  wider 
economy, we are only in the early stages of a recession in the advanced economies and of 
the slowdown in emerging markets. So we must be ready to take further action if required 
whether monetary, fiscal, or directly in the financial sector.  
Lessons for the medium-term 
That is the immediate prospect. I want to finish by drawing out some lessons for the medium 
term. 
Closer international co-ordination of macroeconomic policy 
1.  
The first lesson is the vital importance of international cooperation in a global economy.  
For several years we worried about the growing imbalances between the US in particular and 
emerging Asia. We can now see how painful the rebalancing is proving. No doubt we could 
do better in national policy making but we also need to recognise that the sum of policies 
which make sense at the national level may well not be optimal at the global level. To give 
one example, for most economies individually a change in the oil price is an external event – 
something beyond the reach of policy. But clearly that is not true of the global economy as 
whole.  
Of course we have a great deal of experience in the EU of establishing common rules and 
policies. We know it is a painstaking process among 27 countries. But on finance and the 
economy  we  need  to  go  wider  than  the  EU  and  wider  than  the  G7  to  engage  the  new 
economies which account for so much of world growth. That is why it was so important and 
welcome  that  the  recent  meeting  in  Washington  was  of  the  G20  rather  than  the  G7. 
Alongside the IMF it is going to play a key role in global macroeconomic coordination. 
Better ground rules for cross-border financial crises 
2.  
The  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  has  confirmed  that  cross-border  failures  of  large  and 
complex firms are just as damaging and difficult to manage as we had feared. We need to 
ensure that proper contingency plans are prepared between the authorities most concerned 
for failures not just within the EU, where a lot of work is in hand, but on a global basis.  
As  a  start  I  hope  we  can  establish  a robust  and  predictable  framework  of  rules  and 
conventions  that  ensure  that  home  authorities  will  co-ordinate  a  cross-border  response 
better. The Financial Stability Forum is working on these urgently. 
This is not easy. In particular emergencies there are often different national interests at stake 
and the sheer pressure of events can limit cross-border consultation. However, if we do not 
tackle this we will see the growth of national restrictions on the terms on which cross-border 
operations are permitted – in terms of capital, liquidity and legal structure – and that could 
have great economic costs. 
Strengthening banks’ resilience 
3.  
The  financial  crisis  has  revealed  a  number  of  gaps  and  flaws  in  the  regulatory  and 
accounting conventions especially for banks. We need to put those right quickly and on an 
international  basis.  The  G20  Summit  has  asked  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  to  take  that 
forward.  
For example the events have shown up the lack of any agreement on liquidity requirements 
on banks. The FSA is developing proposals for UK which will deliver tougher standards. But 
4 
 BIS Review 145/2008
we  are  pressing  also  for  international  agreement  in  the  Basel  Committee.  Events  also 
brought  home  the  need  for  a  fundamental  review  of  both the  amount  and  the  definition  of 
capital requirements.  
And developing macro-prudential tools  
4.  
The  last  lesson  I  have  drawn  is  that  we  need  to  bridge  the  gap  between  macroeconomic 
policy  and  the  regulation  of  individual  firms.  We  need  a  third  club  in  our  bag  which  can 
directly dampen the financial cycle. This is needed both for financial stability and for wider 
economic management.  
As we have been reminded over the past 15 months, it is primarily in the “bad times” that 
banks need to demonstrate that they have adequate financial resources. We need to ensure 
that banks build up resources in good times to a greater extent, which can then cushion the 
shock in bad times. I think of this as “protecting banks from the economic cycle”.  
But  we  have  seen  also  how  the  financial  sector  can  drive  the  wider  business  cycle,  by 
becoming over-confident in the upswing and over-constrained (by lack of financial resources 
–  capital  and  liquidity)  in  the  downswing.  It  seems  to  me  that  mechanisms  which  oblige 
banks to build up resources in good times can serve a second useful purpose of dampening 
the economic cycle. I think of this as “protecting the cycle from banks”. 
We  need  two-way  protection  and  I  would  like  to  describe  three  ways  you  might  go  about 
providing it.  
The  first  is  the  Spanish  system  of  dynamic  provisions,  which  requires  banks  to  build  a 
general reserve that can be drawn on in downturns. Each period, banks are required to make 
general  provisions  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  “inherent”  losses  (based  on  the 
growth of loans and a long-term average of incurred losses) and the specific provisions on 
impaired  assets  for  the  period.  The  difference,  if  positive,  is  treated  as  an  expense  in  the 
profit  and  loss  account.  If  negative,  it  is  treated  as  income  –  provided  that  the  general 
reserve has been previously built up to the required level. 
The specific provisions made by Spanish banks fluctuate substantially through the business 
cycle, as one would expect, falling during upswings and increasing in downturns. But the flow 
of general provisions moves in the opposite direction, acting as a countercyclical mechanism. 
In the last boom, the accumulated stock of total provisions grew steadily between 2005 and 
2008,  to  a  level  which  at  the  start  of  this  year  was  twice  as  large  as  their  non-performing 
loans.  That  figure  has  fallen  sharply  in  recent  quarters,  in  the  face  of  fast-growing  credit 
losses,  but  it  did  ensure  that  Spanish  banks  were  better  placed  than  their  counterparts  in 
other countries to absorb such losses without immediately eating into their core capital. The 
Bank  of  Spain  estimates  the  current  level  of  general  provisions  could  absorb  losses 
associated with a doubtful assets ratio of 9% (the current level is 1.5%). The general reserve 
is also substantial in comparison with the tier 1 capital ratios, representing 1.3% of the risk-
weighted assets. 
I know that general provisions fall foul of modern accounting practice and can be unpopular 
with tax authorities. But the Spanish example demonstrates that – despite all the technical 
arguments there might be about the details – a mechanism with broadly the right features is 
practicable  and  can  generate  worthwhile  additional  reserves  against  the  losses  which 
crystallise  in  cyclical  downturns.  It  does  not  require  precise  estimates  of  the  length  of  the 
cycle, or predictions of when the cycle will turn; and it can be capped, so that the reserve 
does  not  continue  to  grow  inexorably  in  an  extended  upswing.  I  think  it  merits  serious 
consideration for more widespread adoption, irrespective of the accounting and tax treatment 
such reserves might attract. 
One key feature of such reserves is that they should be useable. That is, the markets and 
analysts need to accept that using such reserves to absorb write-offs when losses are high is 
the natural counterpart of building them up when losses are cyclically low. It is not a sign of 
BIS Review 145/2008 
 5
weakness or of inadequate capitalisation, but of prudent management of the cyclical pattern 
of losses. From the point of view of market acceptability, separating cyclical reserves from 
more structural capital requirements seems a valuable idea.  
The second scheme I want to promote is growth-related capital requirements.  
Losses  tend  to  be  lower  in  the  early  stages  of  a  loan’s  life  than  when  it  is  fully  seasoned 
because borrowers are more certain of their own and the economy’s near-term prospects. A 
loan  book  which  is  growing  more  rapidly  than  average  will  be  weighted  towards  such 
unseasoned loans, and so will appear to be performing better than a balanced portfolio of 
loans of different vintages. In addition, rapid growth of lending tends itself to be associated 
with taking on poor business – even if that is not obvious at the time it is written. Typically, 
rapid growth can only be achieved by drawing in marginal borrowers to the market. That is 
true of the banking sector as a whole. And when such growth is achieved by an individual 
bank,  over  and  above  that  achieved  by  its  peers,  adverse  selection  –  attracting  weaker 
borrowers,  who  are  unable  to  raise  funds  from  other  lenders  –  is  an  additional  factor 
depressing the quality of the loan book. The simple fact is that rapid absolute and relative 
growth is strongly associated with poorer average loan quality and, sooner or later, sharply 
higher non-performing loans. 
The proposal is that, the risk weighting (and so, the capital requirement) of bank loans should 
include a growth-based component. This could be linked either to the economy-wide growth 
rate  of  a  particular  type  of  business,  or  to  the  growth  rate  of  an  individual  bank’s  lending 
relative to the market as a whole; or some combination of the two. This would make it more 
expensive for banks to expand their balance sheets faster that normal when confidence is 
high and could be a useful means of dampening banks’ contribution to the business cycle. 
The  third,  less  direct,  mechanism  to  discourage  over-rapid  expansion  would  be  on  the 
liabilities side. Rapid balance sheet expansion tends to be fuelled by access to less stable 
sources of funding, attracted perhaps by higher interest rates as the bank seeks to meet its 
balance sheet aspirations (and feels able to pay, because – as already explained – loan loss 
experience is good). Such funding could be treated as an added risk factor in assessing a 
bank’s  liquidity  needs  and  those  needs  should  be  reflected  in  a  requirement  to  hold  high 
quality  liquid  assets.  So  banks  which  are  funding  their  expansion  in  this  way  will  need  to 
match that expansion with an increasing stock of safer and lower-yielding assets. This will 
tend to reduce their profit margins and so discourage rapid growth which is funded from less 
stable sources. 
Of  course  these  outline  proposals  need  a  lot  more  work.  Striking  an  appropriate  balance 
between  the  prudential  objective  of  protecting  the  banks  against  the  cycle  and  the 
macroeconomic objective of dampening lending in the upswing will not be easy. And they are 
never going to be the whole answer. The more we raise the cost of cost of increasing lending 
by banks, the greater the incentive we will create for the growth of intermediation outside the 
regulated  banking  sector  or  to  foreign  banks  not  subject  to  such  counter-cyclical 
requirements.  Even  if  such  unregulated  competition  had  no  consequences  for  banks 
themselves,  it  could  certainly  undermine  the  desired  counter-cyclical  effects.  And  the 
secondary banking crisis of the early 1970s is a reminder that we cannot anyway be relaxed 
about changes in the scale of lending taking place outside the regulated sector. 
Conclusion 
To sum up, the last 15 months have brought home the costs of unbalanced growth in the 
world economy. Although the correction started with a bursting property bubble in the US, it 
has  expanded  into  a  global  financial  crisis  and  brought  on  recession  throughout  the 
advanced economies and a sharp deceleration of growth elsewhere. The immediate priority 
is  to  deal  with  this  downswing.  The  extraordinary  measures  we  have  taken  in  this  country 
and others are having a positive impact but we may need to do more. We must also learn 
6 
 BIS Review 145/2008
some lessons for policy in the medium term including the need for far better coordination of 
policy internationally and the need for some new policy instruments alongside interest rates 
to dampen the financial cycle.  
 
 
Chart 1: GDP and employment 
 
 Chart 2: House prices and earnings 
  
Source: ONS (including Labour Force Survey) 
  
Source: Halifax, Nationwide, ONS and Bank calculations 
 
BIS Review 145/2008 
 7
 Chart 3: Major UK banks’ customer funding 
gap, household saving ratio and foreign 
interbank deposits 
 
Chart 4: CPI and households’ inflation 
expectations for the year ahead (scaled to match 
CPI on average) 
 
 
 
 
Source: Bank of England, Dealogic, ONS, published accounts 
and Bank calculations. 
 
  
Sources: The AlphaMonitor: consumer, YouGovAlpha, Bank of 
England, Barclays Capital, Citigroup, GfK NOP, research carried 
out by GfK NOP on behalf of the European Commission and 
YouGov.  
 
  Chart 5: Sterling three-month interbank rates relative 
to future expected policy rates 
 
Chart 6: Oil prices 
  
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank Calculations 
 
 
  
 
Sources: Bloomberg and Thomson Datastream 
 
8 
 BIS Review 145/2008
Chart 7: CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate expectations 
 BIS Review 145/2008 
BIS Review 145/2008 
 9
9
