Ben S Bernanke: Remarks 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the President’s Working Group Market Stability Initiative Announcement, 
Washington DC, 14 October 2008. 
 Good morning. Before I begin, I want to express my appreciation of my colleagues, Secretary 
Paulson and Chairman Bair, for their efforts in what has been an extraordinary collaboration. 
As Americans well know, the challenges evident in the financial markets and in the economy 
are  large  and  complex,  but  I  believe  that  the  steps  taken  today  will  help  us  to  overcome 
them. Our strategy will continue to evolve and be refined as we adapt to new developments 
and the inevitable setbacks. But we will not stand down until we have achieved our goals of 
repairing  and  reforming  our  financial  system  and  thereby  restoring  prosperity  to  our 
economy.  
Over the past year, the Federal Reserve has actively used all its powers and authorities to try 
to  help  our  economy  through  this  difficult  time.  And  central  banks  around  the  world  have 
consulted  closely  and  cooperated  in  unprecedented  ways  to  reduce  strains  in  financial 
markets and to bolster our economies. We will continue to do so. However, clearly the time 
had come for a more comprehensive and broad-based solution. 
History  teaches  us  that  government  engagement  in  times  of  severe  financial  crisis  often 
arrives very late, usually at a point at which most financial institutions are insolvent or nearly 
so. Waiting too long to act has usually led to much greater direct costs of the intervention 
itself and, more importantly, magnified the painful effects of financial turmoil on households 
and businesses. That is not the situation we face today. Fortunately, the Congress and the 
Administration have acted at a time when the great majority of financial institutions, though 
stressed  by  highly  volatile  and  difficult  market  conditions,  remain  capable  of  fulfilling  their 
critical function of providing new credit for our economy. The Congress's prompt and decisive 
action in passing the financial rescue legislation made possible the critical steps that have 
been announced this morning. I also find it heartening that we are seeing not just a national, 
but  a  global  response  to  the  crisis,  commensurate  with  its  global  nature.  Indeed, this  past 
weekend,  the  finance  ministers  and  central  bankers  of  the  Group  of  Seven  industrialized 
countries  announced  a  set  of  principles  embodying  a  comprehensive  approach  to  dealing 
with the crisis. The steps we are taking today are fully consistent with those principles. 
As in all past crises, at the root of the problem is a loss of confidence by investors and the 
public in the strength of key financial institutions and markets, which has had cascading and 
unwelcome effects on the availability of credit and the value of savings. The actions today 
are aimed at restoring confidence in our institutions and markets and repairing their capacity 
to  meet  the  credit  needs  of  American  households  and  businesses.  The  voluntary  equity 
purchase program will strengthen financial institutions' capacity and willingness to lend. The 
guarantee  of  the  senior  debt  of  all  FDIC-insured  depository  institutions  and  their  holding 
companies  will  restore  the  confidence  of  these  institutions'  creditors  and  reinvigorate  the 
crucial inter-bank lending markets. Additionally, the Federal Reserve is pressing forward with 
its  facility  to  provide  a  broad  backstop  for  the  commercial  paper  market,  so  vital  to  the 
functioning of our businesses.  
Policymakers  here  and  around  the  globe  have  taken  a  series  of  extraordinary  steps. 
Americans  can  be  confident  that  every  resource  is  being  brought  to  bear:  historical 
understanding,  technical  expertise,  economic  analysis,  and  political  leadership.  I  am  not 
suggesting the way forward will be easy. But I strongly believe that the application of these 
tools, together with the underlying vitality and resilience of the American economy, will help 
BIS Review 123/2008 
 1
to  restore  confidence  to  our  financial  system  and  place  our  economy  back  on  a  path  to 
vigorous, healthy growth. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2008
