Shamshad Akhtar: Reflections on global and domestic developments 
Speech  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  formal 
launching of Samba Bank Ltd. in Pakistan, Karachi, 1 November 2008. 
 Year 2008 is and will be remembered as one of the most turbulent years in world’s economic 
history. Impact of the sequence of global events, ranging from global financial market turmoil 
to surge in global commodity prices, has impacted regions differently and unevenly. United 
States  being  the  epicenter  of  the  Tsunami  of  financial  market  upheaval,  has  witnessed 
deeper and steeper reverberations whose tremors have impacted all of Europe. From what 
started as turmoil in one segment of financial markets i.e. Subprime mortgage market and 
the CDOs etc., which constituted a very small part of the global financial assets, the ravaging 
fire has spread across all segments of financial sector, and across continents. Flight to safety 
also put pressure on commodity prices which appeared to be an alternate avenue to hedge 
investors from financial market upheavals. 
Financial  markets’  indulgence  in  over-leveraging  and  reckless  issuance  of  mortgage 
securities without due diligence, with resetting of pricing in a rising interest rate environment, 
overwhelmed  both  the  issuer  and  the  investor.  Major  money  and  interbank  markets 
witnessed  liquidity  crunch  as  counterparties  faced  settlement  difficulties  and  defaulted, 
adversely  impacting  credit  markets.  The  problem  magnified  as  the  global  liquidity  crisis 
eventually hurt global financial institutions that one after the other collapsed under the stress. 
This  was  marked  by  falling  share  prices  of  financial  institutions,  rising  cost  of  funding  and 
credit default protection, and depressed asset prices. 
From a liquidity crisis, world financial markets faced a host of insolvency of global financial 
houses  as  the  deleveraging  gained  momentum.  Amidst  all  this,  equity  markets  fell  across 
continents and lost sizeable market capitalization with severe wealth effects at both industry 
and household levels. Financial markets and housing problems have significantly impacted 
global economic outlook that is now expected to slow down to 3% with advanced economies 
already in recession. 
Central  bankers  and  regulators  have  been  now  firefighting  for  over  15  odd  months.  Aside 
from  the  steady  easing  of  monetary  policy,  liquidity  injections  of  unprecedented  levels 
through offers of rounds of term facilities and specialized arrangements, and taking off illiquid 
securities off the financial institutions’ books etc., to a range of fiscal tax breaks and financial 
market revival packages that aim to recapitalize banks, liquidate troubled assets and further 
lubricate financial institutions have been offered. Global struggle to stabilize financial markets 
continues  but  has  already  changed  the  emerging  financial  landscape  and  has  intensified 
exciting debates regarding the financial regulatory and supervisory architecture. The global 
scene has shaken confidence across economies and markets. 
Amidst all this, there are several reviews on how Asia fared and withstood the global financial 
shocks. Generally, Asia has been impacted but the impact has been steeper in countries with 
weaker  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  low  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  those  with 
high  exposure  to  CDOs  and  related  products.  As  events  have  unfolded,  myths  regarding 
decoupling of Asia have evaporated. 
Abstracting  from  the  larger  debate  of  emerging  complications  for  Asia,  I  propose  to  now 
concentrate on Pakistan. But before I dwell upon the domestic market, it is important to offer 
a qualifier that in the present environment there is a strong risk that analysis gets detracted 
by the global financial crisis and its diagnosis, and there is a tendency to draw parallelism 
between  those  developments  and  events  and  what  has  been  happening  in  smaller 
developing countries. There is need for extreme caution and prudence in one’s analysis to 
ensure that we offer correct diagnosis of the highly impacted countries. What is happening in 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 1
advanced countries is a financial market turmoil which manifested itself into a liquidity crisis 
that has now turned into an insolvency problem. The options and solutions being adopted are 
highly  controversial,  and  unless  accompanied  by  appropriate  actions,  could  carry  moral 
hazard and loss of tax payer’s money. In the context of Pakistan, the diagnosis is different. 
So  rather  than  facing  a  financial  crisis,  Pakistan  is  caught  in  a  complex  macroeconomic 
problem  as  twin  deficits  rose  to  unprecedented  proportion  in  fiscal  year  2007/2008  which 
remained unattended for some period. 
Being an open and highly import dependent economy, Pakistan has been hit aggressively by 
the surge in global commodity prices whose impact magnified as the oil and other strategic 
import prices rose. As a result, the origins of economic ailments lie in the sharp growth in the 
domestic  fiscal  deficit  and  the  external  current  deficit.  Among  others,  a  principal  factor  for 
growth in macro-economic imbalance is the continuous rise in import oil prices. On domestic 
account, subsidies on oil rose to Rs175 billion and on external account side oil import bill was 
equivalent to 6.9% of GDP or almost 80% of external current account deficit, as the price per 
barrel of oil touched its heights. During FY08, average price per barrel was $94.4 and the 
pressure  intensified  in  Q1  of  FY09  with  average  price  barrel  reaching  close  to  $115.5. 
Another  complexity  was  with  local  produce  being  short  of  requirements  as  well  as 
distributional problems, both of which required the Government to import food items which 
were not anticipated at the start of the year. Concurrent with high global commodity prices, 
both public and private sector imports in value terms were much higher. Imports cumulatively 
in FY08 reached $40 billion – reflecting a growth of 30.9%. 
Burden  of  fiscal  expansion  was  clearly  unsustainable.  The  level  of  stress  of  the 
macroeconomic burden can be judged by the growing recourse of the budget on central bank 
financing,  visible  in  decline  in  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  the  depreciation  in  the 
currency.  Imported  inflationary  trends  and  persistent  growth  in  inflationary  financing,  food 
inflation  as  well  as  pass  through  of  oil,  utility  and  exchange  rate  adjustments  all  have 
combined and have resulted in high inflation. Unless addressed, this high inflation will hurt 
the competitiveness of Pakistan economy and has eroded the purchasing power of the poor 
most. Proactive monetary tightening over FY08 was needed and but for it there may have 
been more complications. 
The  strengths  of  financial  markets  came  under  test  during  this  chaotic  period.  The  equity 
markets vibrated the most in line with the regional and international markets trends, but the 
domestic  events  also  played  their  role.  The  banking  system  performed  reasonably  well 
despite  the  growing  public  and  private  sector  demands  for  credit,  but  sentiments,  rumor 
mongering  and  speculations  regarding  banks  did  trigger  temporary  liquidity  constraints. 
Central bank’s timely intervention has continued to lubricate the financial markets. In the first 
round between 11 October to almost 20 October, 2008, the central bank released close to 
Rs250 billion and on 1 November we have additionally released close to Rs 30 billion. The 
stress on liquidity of course stems from the high public sector borrowings (both Government 
and parastatals) from the banking system, withdrawal of Government deposits, seasonal eid 
cash withdrawals from the banks, and the low growth in deposits with few weeks of panic 
deposit  withdrawals.  Steadily  public  confidence  is  being  restored  and  banks  are  regaining 
lost deposits. 
The banking system has managed to thus far meet the financial requirements of the public 
sector,  while  also  catering  for  the  stock  market  as  well  as  the  non  bank  finance  sector. 
However, a deeper analysis of financial stability which is underway has once again brought 
to  the  forefront  the  need  for  a  more  balanced  growth  of  the  various  components  of  the 
financial  sector.  The  efficiency  of  scale  that  emerges  with  the  availability  of  long-term  and 
alternative financing options from capital markets, has been conspicuous by its absence. The 
continued  integration  and  deepening  of  financial  markets  is  a  significant  issue  for  policy 
makers,  and  particularly  for  central  banks  that  are  entrusted  with  the  formulation  and 
implementation of monetary policy, since smoothly functioning and efficient financial markets 
are crucial in ensuring a smooth transmission of monetary impulses. 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2008
The  financial  sector  is  too  bank-centric,  and  the  outreach  and  growth  of  the  Non‐Bank 
Finance Companies and the Insurance sector have languished in recent years. NBFCs face 
direct  competition  from  banks  and  are  not  likely  to  grow  significantly  until  their  funding 
sources and costs are streamlined. At the same time, growth in the insurance sector is weak, 
and  private  pension  funds  have  only  recently  started  to  gather  some  pace.  The  insurance 
sector  is  unlikely  to  grow  unless  it  gets  an  infusion  of  innovation  and  efficiency.  This  may 
require  privatization  and  possible  breakup  of  the  dominant  state-owned  company.  The 
interest  from  banks  to  associate  themselves  with  insurance  companies  and  develop  new 
products  for  cross-selling  may  also  revitalize  the  sector.  Private  pension  funds  have  an 
enormous  potential  as  indicated  by  the  growth  of  such  funds  in  other  emerging  markets, 
where they have become important and in some cases, principal institutional investors and 
the main providers of long-term funds. 
To build on the pace and momentum of financial sector reforms, SBP launched the next 10 
years’  financial  sector  vision  and  strategy  in  July  2008.  This  strategy  has  been  developed 
based  on  a  comprehensive  assessment  and  evaluation  of  the  banking  and  the  broader 
financial  system  that  has  helped  identify  the  key  issues  and  limitations.  In  order  for  the 
financial sector to develop and reach its potential, broad‐based growth will be required, not 
only  of  the  banking  sector  but  also  of  other  financial  institutions  and  markets.  Despite 
spectacular  value  growth  in  recent  years  –  much  of  which  has  disappeared  in  2008  –  the 
relative  size  of  the  equity  market  is  still  well  below  peer  countries  and  must  grow  in  the 
future, based on new company listings and issues. The biggest growth potential lies in the 
private  debt  securities  market,  the  development  of  which  would  be  essential  for  private 
investment, especially in transportation and energy infrastructure as well as in housing. 
The  objective  of  the  financial  sector  strategy  will  be  to  broaden  and  deepen  the  financial 
system to help Pakistan: (i) Achieve higher and sustainable economic growth, (ii) Develop a 
dynamic,  robust  and  stronger  system,  (iii)  Mobilize  the  domestic  and  foreign  resources  for 
private investment (which has to be the key driver of the economy), and (iv) Deepen financial 
penetration for poor and underserved regions. 
The major areas of reforms advocated in the financial sector strategy are: 
(i) 
Central  Bank  Governance:  No  reform  can  be  complete  without  also  further 
strengthening  of  the  central  bank.  In  this  context,  SBP  has  launched  work  to 
modernize  the  central  bank  legislation  in  line  with  the  international  best  practices. 
Ours is one of the oldest laws in the world and as such it includes some outdated 
provisions,  even  though  the  law  has  served  the  central  bank  well  in  delivering 
several of its function. The new SBP Act ought to provide more autonomy of SBP, 
along  with  proper  accountability,  to  pursue  clearly  defined  goals  of  monetary  and 
financial  stability  and  would  make  explicit  how  the  SBP  has  to  report  on  its 
performance to the Cabinet and Parliament. 
Adoption of a holistic financial inclusion program which is quite far reaching both 
in its depth and breadth. Recognizing how underserved people and the regions of 
Pakistan  are  by  financial  markets,  SBP  has  advocated  commercialization  of  the 
microfinance  industry  which  will  help  provide  financially  and  socially  sustainable 
financial services. Under this program, effort will be made to enhance outreach to 
initially 3 million people relative to fewer than one million a year back. Ultimate goal 
being to raise it to 10 million. In the same view SBP is steering the Islamic finance 
industry  to  also  deepen  financial  penetration  to  serve  the  requirement  of  that 
segment of population and industry which has self excluded itself for faith reasons. 
SBP  is  planning  to  launch  several  initiatives  to  enhance  SME  financing  and  such 
initiatives include, among others, development of credit scoring, credit enhancement 
mechanism and innovative product and modalities etc. Plan is to also meet 75-80% 
of agriculture requirements and SBP is steering several initiatives ranging from crop 
(ii) 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 3
loan insurance to offering guidelines for financing livestock, fisheries and horticulture 
etc. 
Strengthen consumer protection and financial education. Under this rubric, SBP 
plans  to  introduce  a  Consumer  Protection  Bill,  requires  PBA  to  adopt  a  Banking 
Code to commit banks to fairness, disclosure and ethical standards, while nurturing 
competitive  pricing  of  products,  strengthen  the  Consumer  Protection  Department 
which  was  recently  established  in  SBP,  transforming  banking  sector  ombudsman, 
introduce the small depositor protection scheme and launch campaign of financial 
literacy. 
Consolidate and strengthen the banking sector by promoting continued mergers 
and  acquisitions,  while  seeking  to  restructure  the  outstanding  public  financial 
institutions.  To  promote  consolidation,  SBP  will  maintain  its  moratorium  on  new 
licenses but will on exceptional basis issue license with capital requirements of $300 
million – both existing conventional and Islamic banks will need to comply with these 
requirements  over  an  agreed  timetable.  Licenses  for  Microfinance  banks  will 
continue but confined at national and provincial levels only. 
Strengthening competition and efficiency. Among others, SBP will be seeking for 
removal  of  structural  distortions  facing  the  banking  sector  that  has  resulted  in 
suboptimal  pricing  regime  for  the  depositor  and  borrowers.  A  major  competitive 
force for banks would however involve a financial sector wide campaign to stimulate 
the equity and debt markets so that banks compete effectively with their competitor 
institutions. 
Strengthen prudential regulation and supervision – while reputable experts have 
confirmed  the  adequacy  of  the  regulatory  regime,  there  is  in  my  view  need  for 
debate  and  reflection  of  an  adequate  balance  to  be  struck  between  rules  versus 
principle  based  regulatory  regime  –  but  ultimately  it’s  the  right  enforcement  which 
will ensure this regime is respected. In line with the global trend, SBP has launched 
Basel  II  implementation  which  requires  banks  to  align  their  capital  with  the  risks 
taken.  Requirement  of  capital  would  be  lower  only  if  banks  work  with  corporate 
sector to seek appropriate external rating or credit scoring mechanisms. On its part 
the  central  bank  is  launching  a  project  to  use  e-CIB  to  develop  an  industry  wide 
scoring system based on credit history as captured by e-CIB. 
Commercial banks now have de facto moved into conglomerate structure with or 
without holding companies framework. By and large banks have acquired stakes in 
NBF  institutions  including  insurance,  brokerage,  financial  advisory  services  etc. 
Financial  conglomerate  present  a  major  regulatory  and  supervisory  challenge  as 
such structures are prone to contagion risk. 
the  regulatory 
To  address 
architecture. Our current regulatory architecture is not well suited for consolidated 
supervision  and  no  agency  has  powers 
financial/nonfinancial 
conglomerate.  SBP  proposes  to  transfer  all  deposit  and  lending  institutions  for 
oversight  to  SBP  and  to  entrust  it  with  the  responsibility  of  lead  supervisor  for 
consolidated supervision. This has been a major omission in financial sector laws 
and regulations. 
Develop financial safety net frameworks which range from the introduction of small 
depositor  protection  scheme,  empowering  the  central  bank  with  the  lender  of  last 
resort  functions  and  developing  an  appropriate  bank  exit  frameworks.  It  is  critical 
that all these schemes are developed in line with international best practices while 
avoiding the moral hazard consequences. 
these  concerns, 
to  reconsider 
to  oversee 
is  need 
there 
BIS Review 135/2008
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
4 
 (x) 
Development  of  core  financial  infrastructure  is  critical  which  ranges  from 
development of RTGS and retail payment system to credit rating agencies and land 
and property registries and judicial system. 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 5
