Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Challenges for the Euro at ten 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the conference “The Euro at ten: Governing the Eurozone in a globalised 
world economy”, Berlin, 8 December 2008. 
 Dear Ladies and Gentlemen,1
It is for me a great honour, and a pleasure, to have been invited here today to speak about 
the current state of the euro area, and the challenges it faces. In little more than three weeks, 
we will celebrate the tenth anniversary of the creation of the Euro. The decision to establish 
European  Monetary  Union  was  –  as  you  know  –  not  uncontroversial.  During  the  years 
leading up to EMU, indeed, several commentators offered gloomy projections on the viability 
of the common currency, with the range of predictions going from the swift break-up of the 
monetary union in the face of the first breeze, to the possibility that EMU might even lead to 
conflicts among member states. The experience of the last ten years – and especially the 
dramatic events of the last several months – have clearly shown the full extent to which such 
predictions were misguided.  
First,  since  January  1999  the  Euro  has  guaranteed  to  hundreds  of  millions  of  people  the 
same  extent  of  price  stability  which  had  traditionally  been  associated  with  the  strongest 
among  its  constituent  currencies.  Second,  the  common  currency  has  effectively  protected 
euro area countries from both the inflationary impulses originating on world food and energy 
markets, and, since August 2007, the worst financial storm since the end of the 1920s. The 
success of the Euro along this second dimension is testified by the simplest, and most telling 
indicator of all: as widely reported in the financial press, in several European countries which 
had not previously contemplated joining EMU, the financial crisis has led to significant shifts 
in public opinion in favor of Euro adoption. It is during tough economic times such as those 
we  are  currently  going  through  that  both  the  benefits  of  belonging  to  a  strong  and  stable 
currency  area,  and  the  dangers  of  “going  it  alone”  in  an  economic  environment  which  is 
prone to sudden and violent swings, become fully apparent. The Euro is only ten years old, 
but with the current crisis it is truly coming of age.  
Today I will discuss the main accomplishments of European Monetary Union, and I will then 
elaborate on the challenges faced by the euro area, both within the current conjuncture, and 
from a longer-term perspective. 
                                                 
1  
I am very grateful to Luca Benati for his valuable input. 
BIS Review 156/2008 
 1
1.   Key accomplishments of European Monetary Union 
 
  
Figure  1  provides  a  clear  illustration  of  a  key  accomplishment  of  EMU  showing  aggregate 
euro area HICP inflation since the collapse of Bretton Woods in August 1971. It also shows 
individual  inflation  rates  for  the  15  countries  which,  as  of  today,  belong  to  the  monetary 
union;  and  the  evolution  of  the  cross-sectional  standard  deviation  of  inflation  rates  among 
these countries2 as a simple measure of heterogeneity of their inflationary experiences.  
As apparent from the chart, after showing some signs of instability during the years leading 
up to the collapse of Bretton Woods, inflation increased dramatically after 1971, reaching, at 
the euro area-wide level, a peak of 13.6 per cent in the fourth quarter of 1974. Moreover, 
cross-sectional  dispersion  of  inflation  rates  reached  a  peak  in  excess  of  9  per  cent  in  the 
second half of the 1970s.  
Starting  from  the  first  half  of  the  1980s,  the  disinflation  process  was  characterized  by  a 
decrease in both individual countries' inflation rates, and the extent of their cross-sectional 
dispersion. Under EMU, euro area inflation has been equal, on average, to slightly more than 
2 per cent, and has been, by historical standards, remarkably stable. 
This  inflation  stabilisation  under  EMU  has  been  accompanied  by  two  further  key 
developments: first, the disappearance of inflation persistence, defined as the tendency for 
inflation to deviate from the central bank’s price stability objective following a shock, rather 
than  quickly  reverting  to  it;  and  second,  the  stabilisation  of  inflation  expectations,  with  the 
                                                 
2  
In the last panel of Figure 1 the cross-sectional standard deviation has been computed by excluding Slovenia, 
which until the second half of the 1990s exhibited an inflation rate in excess of 20 per cent (see the second 
panel), and can therefore be regarded as an outlier. 
2 
 BIS Review 156/2008
disappearance of an impact of actual inflation outcomes on agents’ expectations, which is a 
clear  indication  of  the  credibility  of  our  price  stability  objective.  I  briefly  elaborate  on  both 
issues. 
Recent  ECB  research3  has  shown  that,  after  January  1999,  inflation  persistence  has 
disappeared  both  at  the  aggregate,  euro  area-wide  level,  and  within  its  three  largest 
countries  (Germany,  France,  and  Italy).  Further,  similar  changes  have  affected  inflation 
dynamics in several inflation-targeting countries and in Switzerland under the “new monetary 
policy concept”, whereas they have been largely absent in the United States and Japan, two 
countries  characterised  by  a  committment  to  price  stability  but  lacking  a  clearly-defined 
nominal anchor. As a result, in the euro area, Switzerland, and inflation-targeting countries, 
inflation dynamics is – as of today – essentially purely forward-looking, whereas in countries 
such  as  the  United  States  and  Japan  it  still  retains  a  significant  backward-looking 
component.  
What explains these findings? The simplest and most logical explanation is that credible and 
clearly defined nominal anchors, by providing a “focal point” for agents’ inflation expectations, 
have rescinded the link between such expectations and past inflation outcomes, which was 
instead inevitable during historical periods in which such anchors either were absent or were 
not  regarded  as  credible.  This  conjecture  is  indeed  compatible  with  the  stylised  fact 
previously mentioned: the stabilisation of inflation expectations under EMU. 
Several recent studies4 suggest that the introduction of explicit numerical targets for inflation 
has  anchored  inflation  expectations,  that  means  making  them  essentially  unresponsive  to 
actual  macroeconomic  developments  –  in  particular,  to  past  inflation  outcomes.  Beechey, 
Johannsen,  and  Levin  (2007),  for  example,  show  that  long-run  inflation  expectations  are 
more  firmly  anchored  in  the  euro  area  than  in  the  United  States.  They  show  that 
macroeconomic news have significant effects on U.S. forward inflation compensation – even 
at  long  horizons  –  whereas  they  only  influence  euro  area  inflation  compensation  at  short 
horizons.  
 
                                                 
3   See Benati (2008). 
4   These studies are surveyed by Blinder et al. (2008). 
BIS Review 156/2008 
 3
  
Low and stable inflation, and the firm anchoring of inflation expectations, have automatically 
led  to  another  fundamental  achievement  of  European  Monetary  Union:  historically  low 
interest rates, with all the accompanying benefits for both consumers and firms, in terms of 
lower borrowing costs. [See Figure 2] 
Overall,  European  Monetary  Union  has  been  associated  with  a  remarkable  stabilisation  of 
the  nominal  side  of  the  economy,  with  low  and  stable  inflation,  well-anchored  inflation 
expectations, and historically low and stable nominal interest rates. A question that naturally 
arises is: “Did the stabilisation of the nominal side of the economy come at the expense of 
developments  on  the  real  side?”  As  I  will  now  discuss,  empirical  evidence  clearly  rejects 
such a notion along several dimensions. 
 
4 
 BIS Review 156/2008
   
Figure 3 shows a scatterplot of the standard deviations of annual CPI inflation and real GDP 
growth for the euro area, the United States, and 47 other countries since the beginning of 
European Monetary Union.5 As the figure makes clear, the performance of the euro area has 
been remarkable. First, the standard deviation of euro area inflation, equal to 0.5 per cent, 
has  been  the  lowest  of  the  sample,  with  only  Switzerland  and  Japan  close,  but  slightly 
higher. Second, the volatility of output growth, at 1.1 per cent, has been the second lowest of 
the  sample  after  the  United  Kingdom,  which  has  however  exhibited  a  markedly  higher 
volatility  of  inflation,  equal  to  0.9  per  cent.  Third,  the  comparison  with  the  United  States  – 
which, being a monetary Union of roughly similar economic size, provides the most natural 
benchmark  –  is  uniformly  positive,  with  the  U.S.  volatilities  of  inflation  and  output  growth 
equal to 0.9 and 1.2, respectively. The evidence reported in Figure 3 therefore suggests that 
the stabilisation of the nominal side of the euro area economy has not been achieved at the 
expense of the real side. Rather, the opposite appears to be true, with both the real and the 
nominal side exhibiting an excellent performance from an international perspective. 
Indeed, macroeconomic stabilisation has been accompanied by a remarkable performance in 
terms of job creation. First, from January 1999 until the end of 2007, the number of people 
employed in the euro area has increased by 15.7 million, compared with an increase by only 
about 5 million during the previous nine years; second, under EMU the unemployment rate 
has  fallen  to  its  lowest  level  since  the  early  1980s.  The  improvement  in  euro  area  labour 
market’s  performance  reflects  corporate  restructuring,  wage  moderation  in  most  countries, 
and  –  crucially  –  the  progress  made  on  structural  reforms  associated  with  the  Lisbon 
process. As I will come to in a moment, a lot of progress in this dimension is – of course – 
still possible and needed. 
                                                 
5   Specifically, beyond the euro area  we have considered all countries for  which  we could find at least seven 
years of data in the International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics database. 
BIS Review 156/2008 
 5
A  further  benefit  of  the  introduction  of  the  Euro  has  been  the  strengthening  of  trade  and 
financial linkages across euro area countries. First, the sum of intra-euro area exports and 
imports increased from around 31% of GDP in 1998 to about 40% in 2007. Second, the Euro 
has been fostering a gradual portfolio reallocation away from holdings of domestic financial 
instruments, and towards holdings of financial instruments issued elsewhere within the euro 
area.  Euro  area  cross-border  holdings  of  long-term  debt  securities,  for  example,  have 
markedly increased from about 10% of the overall stock at the end of the 1990s to nearly 
60% in 2006. Notably, euro area residents have also almost doubled the amount of cross-
border  holdings  of  equity  issued  within  the  area,  from  15%  in  1997  to 29%  in  2006.  Well-
integrated  euro  area  financial  markets,  and  well-diversified  asset  portfolios,  decrease  the 
extent  to  which  the  saving  and  spending  decisions  of  firms  and  households  depend  on 
economic  and  financial  developments  in  a  specific  country,  region  or  sector.  As  a 
consequence, credit and risk-sharing channels are increasingly contributing to attenuate the 
impact of shocks within a specific euro area country or sector. 
Summing  up,  nearly  ten  years  after  the  start  of  European  Monetary  Union,  the  common 
currency  has  to  be  regarded  as  an  unqualified  success,  guaranteeing  macroeconomic 
stability  to  hundreds  of  millions  of  European  citizens,  and  shielding  them  from  the  direst 
consequences  of  the  macroeconomic  shocks  which  –  especially  in  recent  months  –  have 
been affecting the world economy. Many challenges however remain. I will devote the next 
part of my speech to long-term challenges, and I will then turn to current issues. 
Long-term challenges 
2.  
The long-term success of European Monetary Union crucially depends on four key issues: 
first,  increasing  the  long-term  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area;  second,  making  the  euro 
area economy more flexible and more competitive; third, pursuing sound fiscal policies; and 
fourth, the completion of the single market. I will discuss these issues in turn. 
Although  the  euro  area  economy’s  stability  under  EMU  has  been  remarkable,  its 
performance in terms of average growth rates has been less impressive. Since the beginning 
of  the  1990s,  euro  area  real  GDP  growth  has  been  equal,  on  average,  to  2.1  per  cent, 
compared with 2.8 per cent in the United States. Since the beginning of EMU, the annual 
growth rate for the euro area has averaged 2.2 per cent per year, compared with 2.7% in the 
US. A key reason for the euro area’s moderate performance is the comparatively low trend 
growth  in  labour  productivity.  Whereas  in  the  1980s,  the  average  annual  growth  rate  of 
labour productivity was equal to 2.3 per cent, in the 1990s it declined to 1.8 per cent, and 
between  1999  and  2007  it  further  decreased  to  1.2  per  cent.  By  contrast,  over  the  same 
periods average U.S. hourly labour productivity growth accelerated from 1.2 to 1.6, and then 
to  2.1  per  cent.  What  lies  at  the  origin  of  these  differences  in  labour  productivity 
developments  in  the  two  areas?  Specific  policies  targeted  at  increasing  employment  –  in 
particularly  for  the  unskilled  segment  of  the  labour  market  –  certainly  contributed  to  the 
decrease  in  labour  productivity  growth  in  the  euro  area.  Labour  supply  developments, 
however, can only explain a minor fraction of the overall deceleration in labour productivity 
growth, with the dominant portion being instead due to a significant slowdown in total factor 
productivity growth (or TFP growth), which is generally taken as a measure of technological 
progress, and of improvements in the organisation and overall efficiency of all the factors of 
production. Average TFP growth in the euro area, indeed, was equal to 1.6 per cent in the 
1980s, and it declined to 1.1 per cent in the 1990s and to 0.7 per cent between 1999 and 
2007. 
What  explains  such  difference  between  the  United  States  and  the  euro  area  in  terms  of 
average TFP growth? The consensus among economists points towards a clear edge, on the 
part  of  the  United  States,  in  exploiting  advances  in  information  and  communication 
technology  (ICT),  due  largely  to  a  favourable  regulatory  environment,  a  superior  ability  to 
redesign  management  and  organisational  systems,  the  relative  ease  of  reallocating, 
6 
 BIS Review 156/2008
retraining,  and  shedding  workers,  and  continued  investment  in  research  and  development 
(R&D). In 2006, the fraction of R&D investment relative to GDP in the euro area was only 1.9 
per  cent,  compared  with  2.7  per  cent  in  the  United  States.  This  is  a  first  dimension  along 
which improvements ought to be made. It is also necessary to intensify cooperation between 
industry, universities, and public sector research institutes, in order to raise the efficiency of 
public R&D spending. As for investment in human capital, in several euro area countries its 
rate  of  accumulation  is  still  insufficient,  in  particular  when  compared  with  the  needs  of 
contemporary,  knowledge-intensive  economies.  The  effectiveness  of  the  accumulation  of 
human capital should be enhanced at all stages of the education process, by improving the 
quality  and  efficiency  of  our  schools  and  universities,  and  should  be  continued  through 
lifelong training and learning.  
A further step ought to be increasing competition in both labour and product markets, thus 
providing  strongest  incentives  to  invest  and  innovate,  and  to  ultimately  boost  productivity. 
More  generally,  it  is  necessary  to  support  a  more  innovative  and  entrepreneur-friendly 
economic  environment.  Europe  needs  to  create  an  environment  which  is  more  apt  at 
fostering  new  and  dynamic  firms  willing  to  reap  the  benefits  of  opening  markets  and  to 
pursue creative or innovative ventures. Finally, a key requirement is for firms to be able to 
access  relatively  easily  the  finance  they  need.  From  this  point  of  view,  the  euro  area 
significantly lags behind the United States, with its venture capital financing, expressed as a 
fraction of overall GDP, being equal to a fraction of what it is in the U.S. 
Turning more specifically to the labour market, the comparative rate of growth of working-age 
population is one of the key factors explaining differences in real GDP growth between the 
euro  area  and  the  fastest  growing  industrial  economies.  Over  the  last  two  decades,  for 
example,  the  average  contribution  to  real  GDP  growth  from  growth  of  the  working-age 
population has been approximately 0.8 percentage point higher in the United States than in 
the euro area. Looking ahead, the euro area faces the prospect of an ageing population, so 
that the labour force could become an important constraint on trend growth.  
Turning to labour utilisation, in spite of subdued growth in working-age population, over the 
last ten years there has been a significant increase in the total number of hours worked in the 
euro  area.  This  stands  in  contrast  to  developments  in  the  United  States,  where  a  small 
deceleration has taken place. A significant portion of the acceleration in the euro area can be 
explained  by  an  increase  in  labour  utilisation,  and  in  particular  by  improvements  in  both 
participation  and  employment  rates.  Despite  this  progress,  however,  there  is  still  room  for 
improvements in the workings of European labour markets. First, the employment rate in the 
euro  area  is  still  low  by  international  standards.  Second,  the  rate  of  unemployment  in  the 
euro  area  is  still  high,  in  particular  in  some  individual  countries.  In  particular,  whereas  the 
employment rate for prime-age males in the euro area is comparable to that in the United 
States,  significant  disparities  between  the  two  areas  remain  concerning  the  youth,  female 
and older segments of the labour force. For example, in 2007 the female employment rate 
was 58 per cent in the euro area, compared with 66 per cent in the United States, whereas 
the employment rates for older workers were 43.3 and 61.7 per cent, respectively. Finally the 
youth employment rates in the two areas were 38 and 54.2, respectively.  
In spite of significant achievements in job creation over the most recent years, both the still 
comparatively high unemployment rates in the euro area, and the low participation rates in 
some countries, point towards the need to stimulate both the supply and the demand sides of 
the  labour  market.  Concerning  labour  supply,  further  reforms  in  income  tax  and  benefit 
systems would contribute to increase incentives to work, especially for those segments of the 
labour force characterised by a weaker attachment to the labour market, such as women and 
older workers. Concerning labour demand, it is necessary to reduce labour market rigidities, 
in  particular  those  restricting  wage  differentiation  and  wage  flexibility,  which  negatively 
impact  upon  the  hiring  especially  of  younger  and  older  workers.  Under  this  respect,  in 
several  euro  area  countries  progress  towards  greater  contractual  flexibility  has  been 
BIS Review 156/2008 
 7
comparatively  slow,  and  employment  protection  legislation  –  especially  for  permanent 
contracts – remains quite rigid.  
Beyond  increasing  flexibility,  another  key  challenge  for  the  euro  area  is  improving  its 
competitiveness.  In  this  respect,  a  key  issue  is  keeping  the  dynamics  of  unit  labour  costs 
firmly  under  control  to  prevent  or  correct  abnormal  deviations.  In  situations  in  which  such 
deviations  appear,  it  is  of  paramount  importance  that  social  partners  and  national 
governments  take  swift  action  in  order  to  address  wage  developments  that  go  beyond 
productivity increases, so that unit labour costs in those economies increase less rapidly than 
the euro area average. 
The third key long-term challenge is the commitment to sound fiscal policies and, thereby, to 
implement  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  There  are  several  reasons  why  sound  fiscal 
policies  are  a  crucial  prerequisite  for  the  monetary  union’s  long-term  success.  First  and 
foremost,  they  are  needed  in  order  to  minimise  the  risk  of  fiscal  policy  spillover,  both  into 
monetary policy and, more generally, across countries. Further, they are needed to increase 
the  flexibility  and  adaptability  of  the  economy.  Sound  fiscal  policies,  for  example,  are  a 
necessary  condition  for  flexibility,  thus  dampening  business-cycle  fluctuations  through  the 
workings of automatic stabilisers. 
The final challenge pertains to the full completion of the Single Market, which will not only 
increase competition and efficiency, but also improve adjustment mechanisms in the face of 
adverse shocks. Under this respect, in spite of the fact that the single market was already a 
goal of the founding fathers of the European Union – as set out in the Treaty of Rome – there 
is still significant progress to be made. According to the OECD, for example, product market 
regulation is still high in several euro area countries, and the extent of regulation in the euro 
area considered as a whole is still significantly higher than in the United States. 
Let me now turn to a key challenge that we are currently facing, namely how EMU deals with 
the current developments in financial markets.  
Current challenges 
3.  
The world economy is currently going through the most dramatic crisis since the 1930s. The 
factors  leading  up  to  the  current  turmoil  were  excessive  growth  in  global  credit,  and 
historically  high  leverage  in  the  financial  system  as  well  as  in  the  non-financial  sectors  of 
some countries. Excessive credit growth and inordinately high levels of leverage, however, 
are not a product of nature: rather, they were the product of a specific time and of specific 
regulatory frameworks. In fact, the developments since August 2007 were also the outcome 
of minimal, or “light touch” regulation – or even the circumvention of regulation at all – which 
in the views of some went so far as to maintain that markets could essentially “self-regulate”. 
Therefore, I believe – and this will be an important challenge for the coming years – that the 
current episode will ultimately lead to a new intellectual consensus on the proper boundaries 
between  governments  and  markets,  first  and  foremost  concerning  the  most  appropriate 
regulation of financial markets.  
Working  within  such  a  system  in  flux,  policymakers  around  the  globe  are  now  battling  the 
consequences on the real economy of the strongest recessionary winds since the financial 
market  collapse  of  the  end  of  the  1920s.  The  situation  is  made  especially  complex  by  a 
combination of several different problems which – even taken in isolation, by themselves – 
would be sufficient to create significant challenges for policymakers. Let me briefly discuss 
the most important among them. 
First of all, there is the painful realisation, on the part of consumers in several countries, that 
the economic strength that they had come to regard as “natural” over the last several years 
seems  not  sustainable.  To  a  significant  extent,  such  strength  was  largely  based  on 
borrowing: borrowing against houses whose prices has been artificially inflated by bubbles 
8 
 BIS Review 156/2008
and  borrowing  by  accumulating  credit  card  debts.  Today,  household  in  several  countries 
have found themselves burdened by staggering amounts of debts, which prevent them from 
consuming precisely at a time when their consumption would be most needed to cushion the 
economy from the winds of recession.  
Within such an environment of retrenching consumption expenditure, having well-functioning 
financial markets, and a strong banking system, would be of paramount importance in order 
to smooth out the impact on the economy. But since early August 2007 the financial sector 
has  been  engulfed  by  an  even  more  serious  crisis,  which  has  required  policymakers  to 
intervene to a previously unthinkable extent. The crisis has shown the benefits of belonging 
to  a  strong  and  stable  currency  area.  As  a  consequence,  the  current  crisis  has  led  to  a 
radical  reassessment  of  the  desirability  of  joining  the  Euro  on  the  part  of  policymakers, 
financial market participants, and citizens in several countries outside the euro area. 
The  recent crisis  has  clearly  shown  the  fundamental  role  played  by  central  banks in  crisis 
management, through the provision and management of liquidity in the money markets and – 
in some exceptional cases – by providing emergency liquidity to individual institutions. In this 
respect,  the  ECB’s  money  market  operations  have  consistently  been  based  on  the 
fundamental principle of separation of the monetary policy stance from liquidity management. 
The  former  is  determined  in  the  light  of  the  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability 
over the medium term. The latter’s goal, on the other hand, is minimising financial stability 
risks,  and  ensuring  the  orderly  functioning  of  money  markets.  The  provision  of  unlimited 
liquidity to the euro area banking system on the part of the ECB, against an expanded array 
of eligible collateral since mid-October, should effectively eliminate concerns about liquidity 
risk,  and  should  therefore  further  reduce  pressures  in  the  money  markets.  Central  banks’ 
actions, however, can only go so far, as they cannot tackle some of the underlying causes of 
tensions on the money markets, first and foremost concerns about counterparty credit risk, 
and the continuing uncertainty on banks’ other funding sources and capital positions. In this 
respect,  the  measures  taken  by  the  governments  and  shareholders  are,  therefore  of 
paramount importance, and should address these problems over time. Moreover, it is key to 
ensure that there is access to financing for all sectors of the economy, especially for small 
and medium sized enterprises, which cannot access the capital market so easily. 
Concluding remarks 
4.  
I would like to conclude by recalling some important points which ought to be kept in mind in 
order to reinforce the strength and resilience of the euro area economy, thus contributing to 
preserve and consolidate the remarkable success of the Euro. First and foremost is the need 
to proceed along the path of structural reforms, with the firm implementation of the Lisbon 
strategy, as refocused and reinforced by the EU Council. This is crucial to increase the euro 
area’s growth potential, foster job creation, and increase the resilience of the economy in the 
face  of  shocks.  A  second  key  issue  is  the  need  to  regularly  monitor  developments  in  unit 
labour  costs  across  euro  area  countries.  In  particular,  in  those  countries  which  have 
witnessed  sizeable  cumulative  increases  in  unit  labour  costs  above  and  beyond  the  euro 
area average, with the resulting loss in competitiveness, it is essential that all social partners 
fully  understand  the  importance  of  cost  and  price  moderation  within  the  context  of  the 
Monetary  Union.  Third,  it  is  of  crucial  importance  –  especially  within  the  current  uncertain 
environment – to preserve the public’s trust in the soundness and long-term sustainability of 
fiscal  policies.  And  fourth,  it  is  important  to  get  the  regulatory  response  right.  Market 
participants  cannot  go  back  to  the  business  models  of  the  60s  and  70s.  However,  the 
regulatory and institutional framework for the financial sector as well as business models, risk 
taking and corporate governance should be reviewed with and open mind in the interest of 
long term prosperity and stability.  
Let  me  close  with  a  positive  note  by  emphasizing  that  it  is  important  to  remember  the 
benefits the Euro has brought to hundreds of millions of people: low inflation and low interest 
BIS Review 156/2008 
 9
rates, macroeconomic stability, and – at the current juncture – has given protection against 
some of the potential consequences of the worst financial storm since the end of the 1920s. 
Let  me  re-assure  you  that  ECB  will  stand  up  to  the  challenges  we  are  facing  to  continue 
achieving our main goal of maintaining price stability in the euro area as part of the European 
policy agenda to preserve and reinforce the success of the euro.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
References 
Beechey, Meredith J., Benjamin K. Johannsen, and Andrew T. Levin (2007), “Are Long-Run 
Inflation Expectations Anchored More Firmly in the Euro Area than in the United States?”, 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion 
Series, 2008-23. 
Benati,  Luca  (2008),  “Investigating  Inflation  Persistence  Across  Monetary  Regimes”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123:3, August 2008, 1005-1060. 
Benati,  Luca  and  Charles  Goodhart  (2008),  “Monetary  Policy  Regimes  and  Economic 
Performance:  The  Historical  Record,  1979-2008”,  prepared  for  B.  Friedman  and  M. 
Woodford,  editors,  Handbook  of  Macroeconomics,  Volume  1D,  (to  be  published  by  North 
Holland in 2010). 
Blinder, Alan S. Michael Ehrmann, Jakob de Haan, Marcel Fratzscher and David-Jan Jansen 
(2008),  “Central  Bank  Communication  and  Monetary  Policy:  A  Survey  of  Theory  and 
Evidence”, Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming. 
Cogley,  Timothy  W.,  Thomas  J.  Sargent  (2002),  “Evolving  Post-WWII  U.S.  Inflation 
Dynamics”,  in  B.  Bernanke  and  K.  Rogoff,  eds.  (2002),  NBER  Macroeconomics  Annuals 
2001, Cambridge, The MIT Press. 
Cogley,  Timothy  W.,  Thomas  J.  Sargent  (2002),  “Drifts  and  Volatilities:  Monetary  Policies 
and Outcomes in the Post WWII U.S.”, Review of Economic Dynamics, 8 (April), 262-302. 
Gürkaynak,  Refet  S.,  Andrew  Levin,  and  Eric  Swanson  (2006),  “Does  Inflation  Targeting 
Anchor Long-Run Inflation Expectations? Evidence from Long-Term Bond Yields in the US, 
UK and Sweden”. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2006-09. 
Stock, James H., and Marw W. Watson (2007), “Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to 
Forecast?”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 39(1), 3-33. 
10 
 BIS Review 156/2008
Figure 1 Inflation, and cross-sectional standard deviation of inflation rates in the euro 
area (source: Benati and Goodhart, 2008) 
Figure 2 Short-term nominal rates in the euro area 
BIS Review 156/2008 
  11
Figure 3 Standard deviations of annual CPI inflation and output growth since January 
1999 (source: Benati and Goodhart, 2008) 
 12 
 BIS Review 156/2008
