Ben S Bernanke: Economic outlook and financial markets 
Testimony of Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Committee  on  the  Budget,  US  House  of  Representatives, 
Washington DC, 20 October 2008. 
 Chairman Spratt, Representative Ryan, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate 
this opportunity to discuss recent developments in financial markets, the near-term economic 
outlook, and issues surrounding the possibility of a second package of fiscal measures. 
Financial developments  
As you know, financial markets in the United States and some other industrialized countries 
have been under severe stress for more than a year. The proximate cause of the financial 
turmoil was the steep increase and subsequent decline of house prices nationwide, which, 
together with poor lending practices, have led to large losses on mortgages and mortgage-
related  instruments  by  a  wide  range  of  institutions.  More  fundamentally,  the  turmoil  is  the 
aftermath of a credit boom characterized by underpricing of risk, excessive leverage, and an 
increasing  reliance  on  complex  and  opaque  financial  instruments  that  have  proved  to  be 
fragile under stress. A consequence of the unwinding of this boom and the resulting financial 
strains has been a broad-based tightening in credit conditions that has restrained economic 
growth.  
The financial turmoil intensified in recent weeks, as investors' confidence in banks and other 
financial institutions eroded and risk aversion heightened. Conditions in the interbank lending 
market  have  worsened,  with  term  funding  essentially  unavailable.  Withdrawals  from  prime 
money market mutual funds, which are important suppliers of credit to the commercial paper 
market, severely disrupted that market; and short-term credit, when available, has become 
much more costly for virtually all firms. Households and state and local governments have 
also experienced a notable reduction in credit availability. Financial conditions deteriorated in 
other  countries  as  well,  putting  severe  pressure  on  both  industrial  and  emerging-market 
economies. As confidence in the financial markets has declined and concerns about the U.S. 
and  global  economies  have  increased,  equity  prices  have  been  volatile,  falling  sharply  on 
net. 
In collaboration with governments and central banks in other countries, the Treasury and the 
Federal Reserve have taken a range of actions to ameliorate these financial problems. To 
address ongoing pressures in interbank funding markets, the Federal Reserve significantly 
increased  the  quantity  of  term  funds  it  auctions  to  banks  and  accommodated  heightened 
demands for funding from banks and primary dealers. We have also greatly expanded our 
currency  swap  lines  with  foreign  central  banks.  These  swap  lines  allow  the  cooperating 
central banks to supply dollar liquidity in their own jurisdictions, helping to reduce strains in 
global money markets and, in turn, in our own markets. To address illiquidity and impaired 
functioning  in  the  market  for  commercial  paper,  the  Treasury  implemented  a  temporary 
guarantee  program  for  balances  held  in  money  market  mutual  funds,  helping  to  stem  the 
outflows from these funds. The Federal Reserve put in place a temporary lending facility that 
provides financing for banks to purchase high-quality asset-backed commercial paper from 
money market funds, thus providing some relief for money market funds that have needed to 
sell  their  holdings  to  meet  redemptions.  Moreover,  we  soon  will  be  implementing  a  new 
Commercial Paper Funding Facility that will provide a backstop to commercial paper markets 
by purchasing highly rated commercial paper from issuers at a term of three months.  
The  recently  enacted  Emergency  Economic  Stabilization  Act  provided  critically  important 
new tools to address the dysfunction in financial markets and thus reduce the accompanying 
BIS Review 126/2008 
 1
risks  to  the  economy.  The  Troubled  Asset  Relief  Program  (TARP)  authorized  by  the 
legislation will allow the Treasury to undertake two highly complementary activities. First, the 
Treasury will use TARP funds to provide capital to financial institutions. Indeed, last week, 
nine of the nation's largest financial institutions indicated their willingness to accept capital 
from the program, and many other institutions, large and small, are expected to follow suit in 
coming weeks. Second, the Treasury will purchase or guarantee troubled mortgage-related 
and  possibly  other  assets  held  by  banks  and  other  financial  institutions.  Taken  together, 
these measures should help rebuild confidence in the financial system, increase the liquidity 
of  financial  markets,  and  improve  the  ability  of  financial  institutions  to  raise  capital  from 
private sources.  
As another measure to improve confidence, the act also temporarily raised the limit on the 
deposit insurance coverage provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 
and  the  National  Credit  Union  Administration  from  $100,000  to  $250,000  per  account, 
effective immediately.  Unfortunately, the loss of confidence in financial institutions became 
so severe in recent weeks that additional steps in this direction proved necessary. The FDIC, 
the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  and  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  in  consultation  with  the 
President  determined  that  significant  risks  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  were 
present.  With  this  determination,  the  FDIC  was  able  to  use  its  authority  to  provide,  for  a 
specified  period,  unlimited  insurance  coverage  of  funds  held  in  non-interest-bearing 
transactions  accounts,  such  as  payroll  accounts.  In  addition,  the  FDIC  announced  that  it 
would guarantee the senior unsecured debt of FDIC-insured depository institutions and their 
associated  holding  companies.  In  taking  the  dramatic  steps  of  providing  capital  to  the 
banking system and expanding guarantees, the United States consulted with other countries, 
many  of  whom  have  announced  similar  actions.  Given  the  global  nature  of  the  financial 
system,  international  consultation  and  cooperation  on  actions  to  address  the  crisis  are 
important for restoring confidence and stability. 
These  measures  were  announced  less  than  a  week  ago,  and,  although  there  have  been 
some encouraging signs, it is too early to assess their full effects. However, I am confident 
that these initiatives, together with other actions by the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and 
other regulators, will help restore trust in our financial system and allow the resumption of 
more-normal  flows  of  credit  to  households  and  firms.  I  would  like  to  reiterate  the  critical 
importance  of  the  recent  legislation  passed  by  the  Congress;  without  that  action,  tools 
essential  for  stabilizing  the  financial  system  and  thereby  containing  the  damage  to  the 
broader economy would not have been available. That said, the stabilization of the financial 
system, though an essential first step, will not quickly eliminate the challenges still faced by 
the broader economy.  
Economic outlook 
Even  before  the  recent  intensification  of  the  financial  crisis,  economic  activity  had  shown 
considerable signs of weakening. In the labor market, private employers shed 168,000 jobs 
in  September,  bringing  the  total  job  loss  in  the  private  sector  since  January  to  nearly 
900,000.  Meanwhile,  the  unemployment  rate,  at  6.1  percent  in  September,  has  risen  1.2 
percentage  points  since  January.  Incoming  data  on  consumer  spending,  housing,  and 
business  investment  have  all  showed  significant  slowing  over  the  past  few  months,  and 
some  key  determinants  of  spending  have  worsened:  Equity  and  house  prices  have  fallen, 
foreign economic growth has slowed, and credit conditions have tightened. One brighter note 
is that the declines in the prices of oil and other commodities will have favorable implications 
for the purchasing power of households. Nonetheless, the pace of economic activity is likely 
to be below that of its longer-run potential for several quarters. 
As  I  noted,  the  slowing  in  spending  and  activity  spans  most  major  sectors.  Real  personal 
consumption expenditures for goods and services declined over the summer and apparently 
fell  further  in  September.  Although  the  weakness  in  household  spending  has  been 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2008
widespread, the drop-off in purchases of motor vehicles recently has been particularly sharp. 
Increased difficulty in obtaining auto loans appears to have contributed to the decline in auto 
sales.  Consumer  sentiment  has  been  quite  low,  reflecting  concerns  about  jobs,  gasoline 
prices, the state of the housing market, and stock prices.  
In the business sector, orders and shipments for nondefense capital goods have generally 
slowed,  and  forward-looking  indicators  suggest  further  declines  in  business  investment  in 
coming months. Outlays for construction of nonresidential buildings, which had posted robust 
gains  over  the  first  half  of  the  year,  also  appear  to  have  decelerated  in  the  third  quarter. 
Although the less favorable outlook for sales has undoubtedly played a role, the softening in 
business investment also appears to reflect reduced credit availability from banks and other 
lenders. 
As has been the case for some time, the housing market remains depressed, with sales and 
construction of new homes continuing to decline. Indeed, single-family housing starts fell 12 
percent  in  September,  and  permit  issuance  also  dropped  sharply.  With  demand  for  new 
homes  remaining  at  a  low  level  and  the  backlog  of  unsold  homes  still  sizable,  residential 
construction is likely to continue to contract into next year. 
International trade provided considerable support for the U.S. economy over the first half of 
the year. Domestic output was buoyed by strong foreign demand for a wide range of U.S. 
exports, including agricultural products, capital goods, and industrial supplies. Although trade 
should continue to be a positive factor for the U.S. economy, its contribution to U.S. growth is 
likely to be less dramatic as global growth slows.  
The prices of the goods and services purchased by consumers rose rapidly earlier this year, 
as steep increases in the prices of oil and other commodities led to higher retail prices for 
fuel  and  food,  and  as  firms  were  able  to  pass  through  a  portion  of  their  higher  costs  of 
production.  These  effects  are  now  reversing  in  the  wake  of  the  substantial  declines  in 
commodity  prices  since  the  summer.  Moreover,  the  prices  of  imports  now  appear  to  be 
decelerating,  and  consumer  surveys  and  yields  on  inflation-indexed  Treasury  securities 
suggest  that  expected  inflation  has  held  steady  or  eased.  If  not  reversed,  these 
developments, together with the likelihood that economic activity will fall short of potential for 
a time, should bring inflation down to levels consistent with price stability.  
Over  time,  a  number  of  factors are  likely  to promote  the  return  of  solid  gains in  economic 
activity and employment in the context of low and stable inflation. Among those factors are 
the stimulus provided by monetary policy, the eventual stabilization in housing markets that 
will occur as the correction runs its course, improvements in our credit markets as the new 
programs  take  effect  and  market  participants  work  through  remaining  problems,  and  the 
underlying  strengths  and  recuperative  powers  of  our  economy.  The  time  needed  for 
economic recovery, however, will depend greatly on the pace at which financial and credit 
markets return to more-normal functioning. Because the time that will be needed for financial 
normalization and the effects of ongoing credit problems on the broader economy are difficult 
to judge, the uncertainty currently surrounding the economic outlook is unusually large.  
Fiscal policy 
I understand that the Congress is evaluating the desirability of a second fiscal package. Any 
fiscal action inevitably involves tradeoffs, not only among current needs and objectives but 
also  –  because  commitments  of  resources  today  can  burden  future  generations  and 
constrain  future  policy  options  –  between  the  present  and  the  future.  Such  tradeoffs 
inevitably involve value judgments that can properly be made only by our elected officials. 
Moreover,  with 
timing,  scale,  and 
composition of any fiscal package are unclear. All that being said, with the economy likely to 
be weak for several quarters, and with some risk of a protracted slowdown, consideration of 
a fiscal package by the Congress at this juncture seems appropriate.  
the  outlook  exceptionally  uncertain, 
the  optimal 
BIS Review 126/2008 
 3
Should  the  Congress  choose  to  undertake  fiscal  action,  certain  design  principles  may  be 
helpful. To best achieve its goals, any fiscal package should be structured so that its peak 
effects on aggregate spending and economic activity are felt when they are most needed, 
namely,  during  the  period  in  which  economic  activity  would  otherwise  be  expected  to  be 
weak. Any fiscal package should be well-targeted, in the sense of attempting to maximize the 
beneficial effects on spending and activity per dollar of increased federal expenditure or lost 
revenue; at the same time, it should go without saying that the Congress must be vigilant in 
ensuring that any allocated funds are used effectively and responsibly. Any program should 
be designed, to the extent possible, to limit longer-term effects on the federal government's 
structural budget deficit. 
Finally,  in  the  ideal  case,  a  fiscal  package  would  not  only  boost  overall  spending  and 
economic  activity  but  would  also  be  aimed  at  redressing  specific  factors  that  have  the 
potential  to  extend  or  deepen  the  economic  slowdown.  As  I  discussed  earlier,  the 
extraordinary tightening in credit conditions has played a central role in the slowdown thus far 
and  could  be  an  important  factor  delaying  the  recovery.  If  the  Congress  proceeds  with  a 
fiscal  package,  it  should  consider  including  measures  to  help  improve  access  to  credit  by 
consumers,  homebuyers,  businesses,  and  other  borrowers.  Such  actions  might  be 
particularly effective at promoting economic growth and job creation. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2008
