Radovan Jelašić: Global Compact, social responsibility and global 
financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelašić,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  at  the  regional 
conference  on  social  responsibility  in  the  Chamber  of  Commerce  of  Serbia,  Belgrade, 
4 November 2008. 
 The  overwhelming  interconnectedness  of  modern  economy  on  the  global  scale  has  been 
positively  confirmed  over  the  last  several  weeks  when  the  whole  world  was  shaken  by 
turbulences  in  international  capital  markets.  Their  effects  are  evident  across  all  continents 
and the bout of instability which ensued has again brought to the fore issues like confidence, 
transparency in private sector operations, the role of the state, profits and bonus payments, 
as well as the responsibility to educate financial services consumers. I am addressing you 
here today not only as the Governor of the National Bank, but also as a representative and a 
participant  in  the  UN  Global  Compact,  an  important  initiative  launched  in  Serbia  with  the 
support  of  the  UNDP  almost  a  year  to  date.  As  you  are  certainly  aware,  this  initiative 
promotes socially responsible behaviour, a notion of mounting significance in turbulent times 
such as these, the role of which shall no doubt grow in future. 
Today,  I  wish  to  discuss  briefly  the  effects  of  the  events  on  the  world  financial  market  on 
Serbia  and  the  role  of  social  responsibility  within  that  context.  Confidence  in  the  financial 
sector  is  particularly  significant  in  Serbia  in  view  of  its  turbulent  political  and  economic 
history. Decline in economic activity in developed countries has three main features:  
1. 
In  general,  people  in  the  West  tend  to  save  more,  and  they  save  with  banks.  In 
Serbia, however, there is a saying “he who is bitten by a snake fears a lizard” and, 
unfortunately,  the  volume  of  savings  in  Serbia  declined  in  October.  However,  by 
withdrawing  their  savings  deposits  from  bank  accounts  citizens  manage  only  to 
multiply the negative effects coming from abroad, and everybody involved stands to 
loose: citizens lose out on interest earnings, those needing money get smaller and 
more expensive loans and the state gets less in tax revenues as GDP declines!  
Decline in economic growth in Western countries induces decline in inflation due to 
weaker  demand.  But  in  Serbia  we  have  often  had  stagflation,  which  means 
minimum/negative  economic  growth  at  increased  growth  in  inflation,  primarily 
induced  by  insufficiently  developed  market  mechanisms,  i.e.  monopolies  and 
oligopolies.  
Western  governments  offer  sizeable  amounts  of  money, 
implement 
expansionary  fiscal  policy.  But  in  Serbia,  we  implement  expansionary  fiscal  policy 
even when it is not called for, and when such policy stance is required – the money 
is simply not there!  
i.e. 
2. 
3. 
Now,  let  us  see  what  can  be  achieved  in  this  context  by  implementing  the  concept  of 
corporate social responsibility: 
1. 
In times like these, banks should positively increase their activities at strengthening 
the  confidence  of  users  of  banking  services.  In  addition  to  ensuring  greater 
transparency of services they offer, they should also take on the responsibility for 
educating their clients to gain better understanding of the terms and conditions of 
the services they are getting. The National Bank has assumed the responsibility for 
educating financial services users and has prepared seven additional guide booklets 
linked to key life-changing events, from setting up a family, embarking on university 
education, to retirement. In addition to the above, the NBS also prepared another 
booklet which is highly topical right now and deals with saving and profit, i.e. income 
BIS Review 141/2008 
 1
2. 
from saving! This is in addition to numerous other steps already taken, like, setting 
up a call centre, printing leaflets in almost 2 million copies, conducting educational 
campaign  aimed  for  children  “Win  by  Saving”,  etc.  As  regards  our  region,  it  is 
important  to  raise  the  question  of  how  consistent  it  is  with  socially  responsible 
behavior to offer credits denominated in Swiss francs or Japanese yens (the latter, 
fortunately, never a practice in Serbia) when no bank would willingly assume such a 
risk! Perhaps because bankers are very well aware of what the exchange rate risk 
implies. 
In addition to all of the above, the NBS is now prescribing tighter conditions relating 
to the very contents of loan contracts to make sure that clients are not placed into an 
inferior position by signing clauses such as “the spread shall vary in compliance with 
business policy of the bank”, etc.  
Current turmoil in global financial markets shall definitely induce a change not only 
with respect to the role of the state as a regulatory authority, but also with respect to 
all other aspects of supervision – from supervisory boards, auditors to credit rating 
agencies. Everybody seems to be more than aware that a free market could do with 
slightly tighter supervision (which does not necessarily mean stricter control). Text 
book examples of the lack of corporate social responsibility are the events of past 
few weeks where a profit is treated as a private matter, but losses become a burden 
on the society. Many more morals can be drawn from recent events. 
The NBS, however, took a few steps even before the recent events took place: a) as 
of the next year financial institutions will have to disclose earnings of all members of 
their management and executive boards in their annual reports, b) when the NBS 
provides  financial  support  to  such  institutions,  this  will  not  only  result  in  cutting 
wages of members of management boards (German example), but will also set the 
scene  for  their  dismissal,  and  c)  we  have  strengthened  significantly  the  role  of 
internal audit in all financial institutions within the remit of the NBS.  
All  of  the  above  topics,  such  as  transparency,  responsible  operations,  provision  of 
information and education, can be grouped under one common heading “socially responsible 
behaviour”  and  will  be  of  key  importance  for  the  recovery  of  financial  markets  both  in  the 
West  and  in  Serbia.  Banks  and  financial  institutions  will  have  to  take  full  responsibility  for 
their products and services because I feel quite certain that the generous financial packages 
now offered by governments and central banks will undeniably cease in the near future. And 
they ought to cease. Otherwise, it will be clear that we have learnt nothing from the past few 
weeks and that we lack social responsibility. 
2 
 BIS Review 141/2008
