Jean-Claude Trichet: Remarks on the financial turmoil 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the British 
Bankers Association’s Annual Reception, European Parliament, Brussels, 8 December 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me begin by thanking MEP Purvis and Ms Knight for the opportunity to address such a 
distinguished audience and to share my remarks on the financial market turmoil. I need not 
emphasize to this audience just how extraordinary and challenging current times are; but I 
would  like  to  emphasize  that  the  response  of  central  banks  and  governments  to  address 
these challenges have been equally extraordinary.  
In  my  intervention  today  I  will  focus  on  the  decisive  and  resolute  actions  taken  by  public 
authorities to support the functioning of the financial system in the wake of the very difficult 
developments following the intensification of the financial crisis that occurred mid-September, 
I will also take the opportunity of speaking before you, to stress the important role that the 
financial industry has to play in this respect.  
Indeed,  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  triggered  an  unprecedented 
deterioration  in  the  degree  of  confidence  in  the  banking  sector  which  ran  the  risk  of 
undermining its fundamental function of financial intermediation. In Europe, this was reflected 
in record increases in overnight interest rates, especially for US dollar funding, and a marked 
decline  in  traded  volumes,  in  both  interbank  and  swap  markets.  Some  banks  were  even 
"locked  out"  of  the  money  market  completely.  In  addition,  strong  declines  in  banks'  share 
prices  and  large  increases  in  banks'  CDS  spreads  were  observed.  These  developments 
required a prompt and extensive set of actions to be coordinated across countries and public 
institutions. 
With  hindsight  and  drawing  on  my  personal  experience  in  those  very  intense  coordination 
efforts, I can say that the overall response by governments and central banks was effective 
in  preventing  further  deterioration  in  market  conditions.  With  particular  reference  to  the 
experience in the EU, in addition to the long-established cooperation among central banks, 
the coordinated approach for government measures to support the banking sector should be 
highlighted. The agreement by the  Heads of State of the euro area Member States on 12 
October,  subsequently  endorsed  in  the  European  Union  summit  were  key  events  in 
endorsing an action plan at the highest political level. These summits were very important 
milestones because they demonstrated the high degree of commitment and responsibility of 
public authorities to act decisively and in a unified manner to preserve confidence and proper 
financing conditions for the economy.  
I should also underline the very effective coordination which prevailed between governments 
and central banks in the definition of these measures.  
Let  me  now  focus  on  the  measures  taken  by  public  authorities  aimed  at  facilitating  the 
funding  activity  of  banks  and  their  recapitalisation.  I  will  then  turn  to  key  challenges  going 
forward  that  need  to  be  addressed  to  prevent  the  reoccurrence  of  such  financial  market 
turbulences in the future.  
The funding conditions of banks 
Since  the  onset  of  the  financial  turmoil,  increased  uncertainty,  reflected  particularly  in 
counterparty risk, has led banks to hoard liquidity. This has resulted in a significant decline of 
trading in the interbank money markets. However, the dramatic deterioration of confidence 
that  emerged  in  mid-September  led  public  authorities  to  take  a  wide  array  of  measures  to 
BIS Review 154/2008 
 1
support the funding activity of banks. Central banks intensified their actions in the interbank 
money  market  which  were  complemented  by  specific  government  measures  to  improve 
market functioning over longer term maturities.  
First, the Eurosystem and other central banks substantially stepped up their efforts to ensure 
access to central bank liquidity by  solvent banks. Let me  recall the main measures in this 
respect.  
On  8  and  15  October  2008,  the  Eurosystem  took  in  particular  the  decision  to  adopt 
temporarily a fixed-rate tender procedure with full allotment in all refinancing operations, that 
is  operations  with  maturities  of  1  week  up  to  6  months.  These  measures  increased  the 
intermediation  role  of  the  Eurosystem  and  were  aimed  at  reducing  banks’  funding  costs 
which  had soared  as  parts  of  the  money  market  became  dysfunctional.  At  the  same  time, 
longer-term  operations  are  conducted  more  frequently  and  at  more  diversified  maturities. 
These  exceptional  measures  ensure  that  banks  have  access  to  refinancing  at  longer-term 
maturities, the market for which has been particularly affected by the turmoil. 
Since December 2007, the ECB has participated in unprecedented joint operations with the 
US Fed and several other central banks to improve US dollar funding conditions by providing 
US  dollar  refinancing  to  its  own  counterparties  against  euros  or  collateral  eligible  for  euro 
open  market  operations.  In  October  2008,  the  ECB  started  conducting  its  US  dollar 
operations as fixed-rate tenders with full allotment and increased the range of maturities. In 
addition,  it  entered  into  a  swap  agreement  with  the  Swiss  National  Bank  to  facilitate  the 
distribution of Swiss franc liquidity to euro area banks. 
Coupled with the sizeable enlargement of the list of assets eligible as collateral, which will 
remain in place until the end of 2009, these measures have substantially reduced the funding 
strains of banks. However, significant challenges remain as money market activity continues 
to be abnormally limited. 
Second, governments in a concerted and coordinated manner granted guarantees on new 
issuances of bank debt.  
The aim of this measure is to address funding problems of liquidity constrained but solvent 
banks. The granting of government guarantees on bank debt should facilitate the distribution 
of liquidity in interbank money markets, particularly by reducing globally the uncertainty on 
counterparty risk and by increasing the volume of tradable collateral in the private interbank 
market.  
The Eurosystem contributed to this endeavour  by proposing a set of recommendations on 
the  appropriate  framework  for  the  granting  of  government  guarantees.  These  included 
recommendations on overarching objectives as well as on parameters of the pricing system. 
From  our  perspective,  such  a  framework  should  aim  at:  solving  the  funding  problems  of 
solvent  but  liquidity  constrained  banks;  preserving  the  level-playing  field  among  financial 
institutions, avoiding market distortions; and ensuring consistency with the management of 
liquidity  by  the  Eurosystem  and  with  its  operational  framework,  so  as  not  to  impair  the 
implementation of the single monetary policy.  
Banks have recently begun to make use of this funding opportunity. The current outstanding 
volume of government guaranteed unsecured bank bonds in Europe amounts to €24 billion, 
of  which  €15  billion  have  so  far  been  issued  by  the  UK  banks.  More  banks  have  already 
indicated  their  intentions  to  issue  similar  bonds  this  year.  The  issuances  have  been 
considerably oversubscribed and spreads of these government guaranteed bonds are lower 
than for secured bonds from the same country with a comparable maturity. Thus this initiative 
is effectively representing a viable and less costly source of funding. 
2 
 BIS Review 154/2008
The recapitalisation of banks 
Government measures in this context should mainly be designed to strengthen the capital 
position of fundamentally sound banks, with the aim of improving the functioning and stability 
of the banking system and fostering an adequate flow of credit to the economy.  
Member  States  have  committed  to  providing  banks  with  additional  capital  resources,  by 
acquiring equity in the form of ordinary shares, preferred shares or other hybrid instruments 
such as subordinated debt.  
Also  in  regard  to  these  measures,  the  Eurosystem  has  contributed  with  a  set  of 
recommendations  on  the  main  features  and  pricing  of  different  forms  of  capitalisation 
instruments. These recommendations are without prejudice to guidance from the European 
Commission aimed at avoiding distortions in competition in accordance with State aid rules 
of the Treaty.  
In  this  context,  the  Eurosystem  considers  that  any  recapitalisation  should  take  into 
consideration  the  specific  market  situation  of  each  institution,  distinguishing  in  particular 
between fundamentally sound and distressed banks. Furthermore, it is important to ensure 
that the temporary nature of government measures is preserved and that capital raising by 
private investors is not discouraged.  
The level of commitment of public authorities in restoring confidence and the flow of credit to 
the  economy  is  very  high.  This  is  also  reflected  in  the  figures:  EUR  1,800  billion  in 
government guarantees and EUR 280 billion in recapitalisation schemes have been agreed 
thus far.  
Overall, I believe that the actions taken by central banks and national governments provide 
an  exceptional  response  to  address  the  challenges  stemming  from  the  recent  significant 
deterioration in market confidence and provide a new environment aiming at reactivating the 
intermediation role of banks. At the same time, success ultimately depends on the banking 
sector making appropriate and prudent use of these measures and contributing to restoring 
normal market conditions. In this context, reactivating the interbank market and ensuring the 
proper financing of the economy is of paramount importance. Taking advantage of speaking 
before such a distinguished audience, I call on banks to live up to their responsibility in this 
regard.  
Key challenges to be addressed  
Let  me  now  shortly  focus  on  some  key  challenges  that  need  to  be  addressed  in  order  to 
prevent that such a crisis occurs again in the future.  
At  the  current  juncture,  priority  has  been  given  to  comprehensively  formulate  policy 
responses  to  address  the  challenges  raised  by  the  financial  market  turbulence  and  to 
effectively  and  timely  implement  the  agreed  measures.  As  you  are  aware  a  number  of 
reforms  have  been  put  forward  at  the  European  and  international  level  notably  by  the 
ECOFIN Council and the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), and have recently been reflected in 
the declaration of the G20 summit. I will mention three issues, which I believe are especially 
important  in  a  longer-term  perspective:  first,  mitigating  procyclicality;  second,  correcting 
incentives  towards  short-termism  and  third,  enhancing  transparency  by  improving  the 
availability of data important from a financial stability perspective. 
First,  there  is  a  need  to  mitigate  procyclical  effects  stemming  from  the  current  regulatory 
framework.  A  number  of  potential  sources  need  to  be  investigated,  including  capital 
requirements,  valuation  and  leverage,  banks’  compensation  schemes  and  provisioning 
regimes. In this context, I welcome the work to be carried out under the auspices of the FSF.  
Second, markets have excessively rewarded short-term profits at the expense of lower long-
term performance or plain losses. The excessive focus on the short-term has resulted in a 
BIS Review 154/2008 
 3
significant underestimation of low probability but high risks and in the increase of risk-taking 
behaviour. In this context, there is a need to create an incentive framework that adequately 
assesses and rewards performance over the medium to longer term.  
Third,  the  availability  of  aggregate  information  regarding  the  main  risks  to  the  financial 
system  needs  to  be  significantly  enhanced.  Information  should  be  available  concerning 
institutions,  instruments  and  markets  that  are  currently  unregulated  but  whose  risks  raise 
financial stability concerns given their potential systemic impact. In this context, one example 
is  the  need  for  increased  transparency  in  the  OTC  derivatives  markets.  In  particular,  I 
welcome the initiative to establish a central counterparty clearing for the CDS market.  
Conclusion  
To  conclude,  national  governments  and  central  banks  have  taken  decisive  and  concerted 
measures to address the challenges posed by the current conditions in the financial markets. 
In addition we have put forward reforms aimed at avoiding the reoccurrence of a similar crisis 
in the future. However, measures taken by public authorities can only go so far.  
The  banking  sector  needs  to  also  do  its  part  by  committing  to  reactivating  the  interbank 
market, resuming their intermediation role and implementing the necessary reforms aimed at 
strengthening the resilience of the financial system in the long term. The Governing Council 
of the ECB looks forward to witnessing your action in this regard and will continue to support 
your efforts.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 154/2008
