Randall S Kroszner: Strategic risk management in an interconnected 
world 
Speech  by  Mr  Randall  S  Kroszner,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at 
the  Risk  Management  Association  Annual  Risk  Management 
Conference, Baltimore, Maryland, 20 October 2008. 
 It is not an overstatement to say that we are in the midst of a fundamental transformation in 
financial  services,  with market-wide  ramifications.  At  the  heart  of  that  transformation  lies  a 
much more intense emphasis on funding and liquidity. Additionally, we are all witnessing the 
extent to which banking and financial markets are interconnected.  
The  current  environment  certainly  presents  some  fundamental  challenges  for  banking 
institutions of all types and sizes.1 Their boards of directors and senior management, who 
bear the responsibility to set strategy and develop and maintain risk management practices, 
must  not  only  address  current  difficulties,  but  must  also  establish  a  framework  for  the 
inevitable  uncertainty  that  lies  ahead.  Notably,  the  ongoing  fundamental  transformation  in 
financial  services  offers  great  potential  opportunities  for  those  institutions  able  to  integrate 
strategy  and  risk  management  successfully,  and  I  will  argue  that  survival  will  hinge  upon 
such an integration in what I will call a "strategic risk management framework." 
In the remainder of my remarks, I plan to discuss the necessity for institutions to improve the 
linkage between overall corporate strategy and risk management, and how they can develop 
concrete strategic risk management frameworks. I will argue that in the highly interconnected 
financial world, funding and liquidity need to be at the center of such frameworks. But before 
doing so, I will briefly review recent events. 
Recent events in financial markets  
We  are  indeed  witnessing  dramatic  shifts  in  the  structure  of  financial  markets.  These  are 
quite  extraordinary  times  that  have  required  extraordinary  responses  from  the  Federal 
Reserve, the Treasury, and other governmental bodies in the United States and around the 
world. Since last summer, there had been a continuous deterioration of conditions in financial 
markets, becoming much more acute since March of this year. For instance, we have seen 
significant  disruption  in  several  key  sectors  of  our  financial  system,  such  as  normally 
creditworthy  companies  having  difficulty  issuing  commercial  paper,  dramatic  increases  in 
interbank  lending  rates,  and  significant  concerns  about  money  market  funds  "breaking  the 
buck."  These  are  sectors  usually  considered  to  be  relatively  low  risk  and  quite  liquid,  so 
disruptions here have signaled the extent and depth of this turmoil and the lack of confidence 
among financial market participants. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  responded  to  these  developments  in  two  broad  ways.  First, 
following classic tenets of central banking, the Federal Reserve has provided large amounts 
of  liquidity  to  the  financial  system  to  cushion  the  effects  of  tight  conditions  in  short-term 
funding  markets.  Second,  to  reduce  the  downside  risks  to  growth  emanating  from  the 
tightening of credit, the Fed, in a series of moves that began last September, has significantly 
lowered its target for the federal funds rate. Indeed, earlier this month, in an unprecedented 
joint action with five other major central banks and in response to the adverse implications of 
the deepening crisis for the economic outlook, the Federal Reserve again eased the stance 
                                                 
1  
I  will  use 
In  my  remarks, 
interchangeably. 
the 
terms  "banks,"  "banking 
institutions,"  and  "banking  organizations" 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 1
of monetary policy. We will continue to use all the tools at our disposal to improve market 
functioning  and  liquidity,  to  reduce  pressures  in  key  credit  and  funding  markets,  and  to 
complement the steps the Treasury and foreign governments will be taking to strengthen the 
financial system. 
As a result of these ongoing upheavals, we are witnessing substantial institutional changes, 
in  which  some  long-standing  financial  institutions  have  either  failed,  sought  government 
assistance,  or  were  forced  to  merge  with  other  institutions.  What  were  the  major  U.S. 
investment  banks  have  essentially  disappeared,  such  as  by  merging  with  bank  holding 
companies or becoming bank holding companies themselves. Other major banks and thrifts 
have  been  absorbed  into  other  banking  organizations.  Financial  institutions  and  investors 
have placed much more emphasis on the banking charter, likely driven by banks' more stable 
funding and deposit insurance, even before the recently announced government support of 
the banking system. 
Over the past year, there has been increasing concern among financial institutions and other 
counterparties about the health of some financial institutions. Uncertainty about the value of 
assets and other exposures, as well as uncertainty about the ability of institutions to sustain 
continued access to funding, has caused financial institutions to operate with great caution 
and hoard funds. What was once a healthy, active interbank market has become frozen from 
time to time, as some institutions feel that conditions are so uncertain that they cannot even 
lend to long-standing clients or counterparties. In quite a dramatic shift from just 18 months 
ago, there is much more scrutiny being placed on capital adequacy, with financial institutions 
trying to retain as much capital as they can, raise as much as possible, and demonstrate that 
their  capital  positions  are  not  impaired.  The  Capital  Purchase  Plan  by  the  U.S.  Treasury 
Department under the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act is focused on improving capital 
adequacy and, hence, improving confidence in the interbank market. 
Perhaps  one  of  the  most  pressing  issues,  as  I  mentioned  briefly  earlier,  is  the  intense 
emphasis  on  funding.  This  dramatic  shift  in concerns  about  a  financial institution's funding 
base results in much more focus on the stability of funding sources – one of the reasons that 
the bank charter has become so attractive. Indeed, we are seeing the emphasis on funding 
driving  many  other  factors  that  affect  financial  institutions,  including  the  viability  of  various 
aspects of firms' business models. And problems with liquidity have affected capital levels, 
which in turn have further exacerbated liquidity concerns. It is indeed quite remarkable how 
this "flight to liquidity" has brought about so many institutional and structural changes, and 
become  essentially  the  most  important  factor  (at  least  now)  for  the  viability  of  a  financial 
institution.  
Over the past year there have been a number of studies analyzing the causes of the current 
turmoil,  which  include  shortcomings  in  the  risk  management  practices  of  financial 
institutions.2  It  is  absolutely  clear  that  many  financial  institutions  need  to  undertake  a 
fundamental review of risk management. They now realize that ignoring risk management in 
any  aspect  of  the  banking  business  usually  creates  problems  later  on.  Risk  management 
shortcomings need to be addressed not only to improve the health and viability of individual 
institutions, but also to maintain stability for the financial system as a whole.  
Framework for strategic risk management 
At  this  time,  I  would  like  to  explain  a  bit  more  about  what  I  mean  by  a  "strategic  risk 
management framework." In my view, an effective overall corporate strategy combines a set 
                                                 
2   One  example  is  a  report  entitled  “Observations  on  Risk  Management  Practices  during  the  Recent  Market 
Turbulence,”  issued  by  the  Senior  Supervisors  Group,  which  included  supervisory  agencies  from  France, 
Germany, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 
2 
 BIS Review 127/2008
of activities a firm plans to undertake with an adequate assessment of the risks included in 
those activities. Unfortunately, many firms have forgotten the second part of that definition. In 
other  words,  there  can  be  no  real  strategic  management  in  financial  services  without  risk 
management,  hence  my  use  of  the  term  "strategic  risk  management."  Risk  management 
needs  to  be  interwoven  into  all  aspects  of  the  firm's  business  and  should  be  part  of  the 
calculus for all decision-making. Strategic decisions about what activities to undertake should 
not be made unless senior management understands the risks involved; assessing potential 
returns without fully assessing the corresponding risks to the organization is incomplete, and 
potentially hazardous, strategic analysis.  
Ensuring  that  risk  management  permeates  an  entire  organization  may  require  some 
fundamental  changes  for  certain  firms.  And  this  lesson  applies  not  just  to  the  prominent 
organizations mentioned in the headlines of late, but also to smaller firms. Even if smaller 
firms have been less affected by the recent turmoil (and perhaps have even won back some 
market  share  as  customers  seek  more  "traditional"  places  to  put  their  money),  their 
managements must understand that the financial landscape has changed and needs to be 
surveyed anew because events outside of their control in market-wide flight to liquidity, for 
example,  can  have  direct  impacts  on  them.  Of  vital  importance  will  be  incorporating  into 
strategic risk management the lesson that funding and liquidity will be a major determinant of 
institutions' success going forward.  
Building a rigorous strategic risk management framework requires an institution to reexamine 
both its internal practices and its external environment, and to understand how closely the 
two are connected. In other words, external factors have an impact on internal practices, but 
those internal practices, because financial markets are so interconnected, can in turn have 
an  impact  on  how  the  institution  is  viewed  externally  –  and  even  have  an  impact  on  the 
marketplace more broadly. We have witnessed several such examples of late, in which an 
institution  encountered  severe  liquidity  needs,  which  then  affected  funding  for  other 
institutions.  Institutions  need  to  understand  better  that  a  number  of  factors  affecting  their 
business are beyond their control, and that events can have secondary or tertiary "knock-on" 
effects. The real art is to realize that while all institutions may be affected by external factors, 
each is affected in its own way.  
Now that I have laid out a general framework for strategic risk management, I would like to 
offer a few examples of its application.  
Funding and liquidity 
As  I  noted,  the  clear  driver  of  the  fundamental  transformation  in  financial  services  is  the 
increased importance of funding and liquidity. The ability to secure funding is a fundamental 
task  in  banking,  and  banks  have  been  managing  expected  liquidity  demands  since  the 
beginning  of  banking  itself.  In  times  of  stress,  such  as  now,  having  a  solid  and  reliable 
funding structure becomes much more important, in some cases so much so that it affects 
most other banking activities. 
The  current  turmoil  has  brought  about  substantial  deleveraging  in  financial  services. 
Managing  this  process  is  an  immediate  challenge  for  banking  institutions,  as  they  must 
consider  the  need  to  reduce  leverage  at  their  own  institution  as  well  as  understand  the 
consequences of deleveraging at other firms. This is clearly an example of external factors 
affecting internal practices, and vice versa. From a strategic perspective, bank directors must 
examine  their  current  and  future  funding  situation  in  light  of  recent  deleveraging,  its  near-
term prospects, and the state of overall liquidity in financial markets.  
Financial institutions rely on external funding in some fashion – either through retail deposits, 
interbank lending, or debt offerings. Therefore, they must understand that their funding can 
be  subject  to  the  vagaries  of  the  market,  such  as  sudden  shortages  of  market  liquidity  or 
rapid  swings  in  investor  sentiment.  For  example,  banks  may  benefit  in  the  near  term  in 
attracting deposits and thereby improve their funding positions, but they also may experience 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 3
more  difficulty  securing  other  sources  of  funds  and  find  that  situation  persisting  for  some 
time. Additionally, counterparty reactions to changes in the business mix or risk profile of an 
institution (or even the perceived change in its risk profile) could suddenly hamper the ability 
to find funding.  
In  recognizing  the  inherent  leverage  in  the  business  of  banking,  institutions  must  examine 
longer-term  implications  of  funding  and  liquidity,  and  begin  to  build  those  into  the  overall 
strategic plan for their organizations. The market for external funding is an international one, 
so  liquidity  troubles  in  one  market  can  have  repercussions  in  others.  Accordingly,  banks 
should be prepared for a range of adverse situations related to funding and market liquidity 
that can be precipitated by a range of sources. 
Bank directors and senior management need to anticipate potential difficulties in funding the 
bank, and demand that solid contingency plans are in place – and are regularly updated – for 
a  variety  of  funding  and  liquidity  problems.  Such  plans  should  include  the  potential  for 
external  factors  to  generate  a  funding  squeeze  for  the  institution,  even  if its  own  positions 
and risk profile have not materially changed. Preparing for sudden changes in the pricing and 
availability  at  any  price  of  funding  sources  is  something  that,  leading  up  to  the  current 
turmoil,  most  banks  did  not  fully  consider.  Instead,  their  managements  focused  mostly  on 
building  market  share,  growing  revenues,  and  realizing  the  short-term  profitability  of  their 
activities – a telling example of banks not properly including risk management in their overall 
corporate  strategy.  As  the  Senior  Supervisors  Group  Survey  of  major  financial  institutions 
pointed out, there have been numerous examples of failures of strategic risk management 
and these must be rectified going forward. 
Finally,  strategic  risk  management  for  funding  and  liquidity  needs  to  consider  potential 
liquidity problems on both sides of the balance sheet. We saw such examples recently when 
there were draws on liquidity commitments to structured investment vehicles and commercial 
paper conduits, and when banks faced difficulty selling exposures in illiquid markets. When 
there  is  a  marketwide  scramble  for  liquidity,  a  bank  must  be  prepared  to  manage  funding 
challenges and unplanned asset expansions simultaneously. Developing a strong strategic 
risk management framework that recognizes the vital importance of funding and liquidity to 
both sides of the balance sheet is one way in which directors and senior management can 
help ensure that their institutions are ready for such outcomes. They should also ensure that 
they fully understand that funding and liquidity issues will drive many of the activities in which 
they will be able to engage, something to which I will now turn.  
Choice of financial services activities 
While  the  financial  landscape  is  by  no  means  settled,  certain  emerging  trends  will  affect 
which activities make sense, which exposures should be assumed, and which risks should 
be  undertaken.  One  immediate  trend  is  that  much  of  the  future  of  business  activities  of 
banking  organizations  will  be  driven  by  the  increased  focus  on  funding  and  liquidity. 
Accordingly, this trend must be integrated into a strategic risk management framework. For 
instance, there may be less opportunity to pursue activities that were quite prolific under the 
previous "originate-to-distribute" model, such as securitizations, given current disruptions or 
longer-term  uncertainties  about  the  reliability  of  market  liquidity.  For  similar  reasons,  other 
activities,  such  as  investing  in  collateralized  debt  obligations  or  structured  investment 
vehicles – which typically relied on relatively easy maturity transformation – may not be as 
viable in this new environment.  
Whether  transactions  take  place  on  an  organized  exchange  or  in  the  so-called  over  the 
counter  market  is  another  important  aspect  of  the  strategic  risk  management  choices 
undertaken  by  an  organization.  When  contracts  are  traded  on  an  exchange,  clearing  and 
settlement,  for  example,  may  have  less  uncertainty  associated  with  them.  In  addition,  an 
exchange that has a centralized counterparty – perhaps the clearinghouse of the exchange – 
can reduce uncertainty about counterparty risk and help to avoid market dislocations that can 
4 
 BIS Review 127/2008
arise from such uncertainty, not only for an individual firm but, potentially, more broadly in 
that market. Thus, market infrastructure and its impact on how organizations are connected 
to each other can have a large impact on market confidence in times of stress.  
Of course, we have seen that uncertainty, fear, and lack of trust among key counterparties 
can dramatically affect trading in some products across markets in many countries, again an 
example  of  the  impact  of  interconnectedness.  These  days,  institutions  are  seeking  more 
assurance that their counterparties will not default from one day to the next. Whether there is 
a  shift  to  more  trading  on  clearinghouses  will  be  driven  by  firms'  analysis  of  counterparty 
credit  risk  and  the  extent  to  which  they  are  comfortable  doing  business  with  leveraged 
counterparties about which they have limited information. Firm managers should take these 
infrastructure and interconnectedness issues into account in undertaking their own strategic 
risk management choice about what activities to undertake and the risks posed by each. This 
is  a  clear  example  of  how  external  structures  should  be  taken  into  account  in  a  firm's 
strategic planning.  
In  their  strategic  risk  management  frameworks,  institutions  should  also  understand  the 
broader  issue  of  potential  gravitation  to  a  model  in  which  most  or  all  types  of  financial 
services are brought together in single institutions. That is, institutions have to prepare for the 
possibility  that  they  could  lose  customers  and/or  be  less  competitive  if  they  are  unable  to 
provide  the  full  set  of  financial  products.  Importantly,  however,  bank  directors  and  senior 
management,  in  assembling  their  strategic  risk  management  framework,  should  fully 
understand the complications associated with offering multiple products and engaging in a 
wide array of activities – such as reputational risk. And they should not automatically assume 
that  engaging  in  multiple  activities  in  multiple  geographic  markets  will  provide  so-called 
"natural  diversification."  As  I  just  noted,  different  financial  markets  and  different  types  of 
financial  services  are  quite  interconnected,  and  during  times  of  stress  all  can  experience 
losses concurrently.  
Of  course,  there  may  also  be  an  opportunity  for  some  institutions  to  benefit  from  more 
traditional,  "bread-and-butter  banking,"  with  exposures  and  risks  tied  more  closely  to  bank 
balance sheets. This potential opportunity for niche banking could have certain benefits, as 
clients and investors, because of the fear of contagion, seek institutions that are specifically 
not  involved  in  multiple  markets  and  activities.  And  local  banks  can  often  provide  more 
personalized service and have a better understanding of their clients' needs. In such cases, 
however, institutions conducting specialized or local business must understand the inherent 
risks, such as potential risk concentrations.  
Compensation 
As  many  of  you  know,  as  an  economist  I  am  particularly  interested  in  the  impact  that 
compensation has on incentives for bank management.3 I am pleased that the industry has 
also  begun  to  address  this  issue,  as  reflected  in  a  recent  report  by  the  Institute  of 
International  Finance.4  Clearly,  the  industry  needs  to  better  understand  the  link  between 
compensation  and  risk  management,  as  in  the  past  those  two  areas  have  usually  been 
addressed in isolation.  
Generally, investors analyze financial institutions on a risk-adjusted basis, interpreting profits 
based on the amount of risk taken. Management at financial firms should do the same thing 
with  regard  to  their  business  units  and  their  employees.  A  risk-sensitive  compensation 
                                                 
3   Randall S. Kroszner, 2008, "Improving Risk Management in Light of Recent Market Events," speech delivered 
at the Global  Association of Risk Management Professionals Annual Risk Convention,  New York, February 
25. 
Institute  of  International  Finance,  2008,  "Final  Report  of  the  IIF  Committee  on  Market  Best  Practices: 
Principles of Conduct and Best Practice Recommendations," July, http://www.iif.com/regulatory. 
4  
BIS Review 127/2008 
 5
framework  will  help  provide  the  right  incentives  for  employees,  and  establish  a  better  link 
between the actions of those employees and the firm's overall risk profile. Institutions should 
be  particularly  sensitive  to  employee  activities  that  could  either  directly  or  indirectly  impair 
access to funding or disrupt liquidity. 
Clearly,  bank  directors  have  an  influential  role  to  play  in  setting  compensation,  and  they 
should  exercise  their  authority  to  establish  a  more  risk-sensitive  compensation  framework 
while  embedding  it  in  the  broader  strategic  risk  management  framework  of  the  institution. 
Directors should understand the consequences of providing too many short-term and one-
sided incentives. There are many ways that this risk sensitivity could be accomplished, and it 
is up to the firms themselves to arrive at solutions. One possibility, for example, is to include 
more types of deferred compensation, since the risks of certain investments or trades may 
not  manifest  themselves  in  the  near  term.  It  makes  sense  to  try  to  match  the  tenor  of 
compensation  with  the  tenor  of  the  risk  profile  and,  thus  explicitly,  take  into  account  the 
longer-run performance of the portfolio or division in which the employee operates. A good 
risk-sensitive  compensation  regime,  properly  embedded 
in  a  strong  strategic  risk 
management framework, can bring about changes in behavior so that the firm's employees 
refrain from taking on risk beyond the firm's stated risk appetite. Perhaps most importantly, 
such  a  compensation  regime  must  give  the  appropriate  incentives  to  take  risks  fully  into 
account during good times, when many often underestimate longer-term risks.  
Conclusion 
I  have  tried  to  lay  out  the  importance  for  banking  institutions  to  develop  and  maintain  a 
strategic  risk  management  framework  that  fully  incorporates  all  the  risks  they  face  –  both 
internal and external – when making choices about what activities and markets in which they 
will operate. Indeed, having a corporate strategy that does not include risk management at its 
core is not really a strategy at all. Market infrastructure, which affects not only the ways in 
which firms are connected to each other but also the types of shocks to confidence that they 
may encounter, is an important external factor that should be taken into account in strategic 
risk management. 
As a concluding point, I will offer a few comments on one additional area to which banking 
institutions  must  pay  particular  attention:  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  structure  in  which 
banks  operate.  Banking  is  an  industry  that  is  subject  both  to  market  competition  and 
considerable  regulation.  Therefore,  banking  institutions  must  not  only  evaluate  potential 
changes  in  the  competitive  financial  landscape  (as  I  noted  earlier),  but  must  also  pay 
attention to potential changes on the regulatory side.  
Over the past year, there have been a number of suggestions for possible statutory changes 
in  U.S.  financial  services  regulation,  so  bank  directors  must  be  prepared  for  whichever 
outcomes  such  changes  might  imply  for  the  regulatory  structure  in  the  United  States.  For 
example, the Congress may wish to undertake legislative action to effect regulatory changes, 
or  there  may  be  changes  to  the  existing  authority  and  responsibility  of  certain  regulatory 
bodies.  In  any  event,  there  will  likely  be  some  type  of  adjustments  in  regulatory  structure 
simply  given  the  changes  in  the  financial  services  landscape.  Given  the  fluid  situation  in 
which  we  find  ourselves  today,  bank  directors  and  senior  management  in  their  strategic 
planning have to anticipate a range of potential outcomes in the regulatory sphere in both the 
short and long term.  
Since banking and financial markets are so interconnected, the fundamental transformation 
in  financial  services  is  affecting  all  types  of  financial  institutions,  even  those  less  directly 
affected by recent events. Importantly, in developing strategic risk management frameworks, 
institutions  must  not  only  understand  the  direct  consequences  to  their  own  firms  of  such 
shifts,  but  must  also  recognize  that  consequences  to  other  firms  can  have  effects  on  the 
broader market. The heightened importance of funding and liquidity is a clear example of a 
major  change  that  has  far-reaching  ramifications  and,  thus,  has  to  be  appropriately 
6 
 BIS Review 127/2008
addressed  in  assembling  any  credible  strategic  risk  management  framework  in  an 
interconnected world. 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 7
