Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Central Bank of the Philippines – 
supporting academic excellence 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  BSP  UP  Centennial  Professorial  Chairs  Launching 
Ceremony, Quezon City, 7 October 2008. 
 Senator  Angara,  President  Roman,  Chancellor  Cao,  our  friends  from  the  UP  community, 
fellow supporters of UP, special guests, good afternoon.  
On  behalf  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  I  am  here  to  launch  the  seven  BSP-UP 
Centennial Professorial Chairs. We believe that setting up professorial chairs is the best way 
to institutionalize our support to academic excellence that is the hallmark of the University of 
the Philippines.  
As I said before, the concentration of UP alumni in legal, political and government circles as 
well  as  in  the  scientific  pool  speaks  volumes  about  the  university’s  central  role  in  nation-
building. By helping mold the minds of the nation’s best and brightest or what we call iskolars 
ng bayan, by stoking the engine of innovation, and by providing an intellectual compass and 
healthy critique to public policymaking, UP has contributed and continues to contribute to the 
advancement of our country.  
The  BSP-UP  Centennial  Professorial  Chairs  managed  by  the  UP  Foundation  Inc.  are 
professorial chairs donated by the Central Bank of the Philippines in 1982-1983 during UP’s 
Diamond  Jubilee  celebrations.  The  original  endowments  for  these  chairs  was  P150,000 
each. We raised each endowment to P1,500,000 by donating an additional P1,350,000 per 
chair. Meanwhile, the BSP UP Centennial Professorial Chair in Business Administration has 
an endowment of P1.5 million from several donations made by the CBP and the BSP since 
1981. We raised the endowment to P3 million through an additional donation of P1.5 million. 
The terms also have been enhanced to maximize the benefits to the chairholder. 
Since  1983  when  the  professorial  chairs  were  first  awarded,  they  have  been  held  by 
distinguished  scholars  whose  research  and  public  service  have  contributed  significantly  to 
the shaping of policy decisions, the enactment of landmark legislation and the formation of 
institutions, both in the government and private sectors.  
The  decision  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  to  establish  additional  professorial  chairs  namely,  the 
BSP  Sterling  Professorial  Chair  in  monetary  and  Banking  Economics  at  the  UP  School  of 
Economics and the BSP Sterling Professorial Chair in Government and Official Statistics at 
the UP School of Statistics, manifests the satisfaction of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas in 
the  contribution  of  the  chair  holders.  Therefore,  when  UP  President  Roman  and  Dean 
Echanis  approached  the  BSP  for  upgrading  the  old  CBP/BSP  chairs  to  UP  Centennial 
Professorial Chairs, they found ready support within the Monetary Board. 
In awarding the chairs, the BSP affirms the academic excellence and freedom that makes 
the  University  of  the  Philippines  what  it  is  today.  The  professorial  chairs  provide  funding 
support  for  research  but  the  chair  holders  are  free  to  set  the  research  agenda  within  the 
sphere covered by the professorial chairs.  
On the whole, the gains to the UP exceed the obvious opportunity to retain and upgrade its 
most important resource, its faculty. It provides a chance to generate research and facilitate 
extension activities among the major units of the UP system.  
For its part, the BSP benefits through improvements in the existing body of policy-oriented 
social  science  research,  of  which  it  is  both  a  producer  and  user.  Our  partnership  with  the 
University will allow us to further avail of intellectual assets to generate ideas, evolve good 
BIS Review 130/2008 
 1
practices,  access  good  vetting  and  generate  competitive  advantage  in  a  difficult  policy 
environment.  
I must say that the establishment of the BSP UP Centennial Professorial Chairs is also in 
recognition  of  the  role  of  the  University  of  the  Philippines  as  the  alma  mater  of  the  many 
professionals among its staff.  
Through these offerings, we hope to continue to provide UP’s community of academics and 
scholars the opportunity to generate ideas and applications that uphold the long-standing UP 
tradition  of  academic  rigor,  intellectual  freedom,  and  practical  relevance.  More  importantly, 
we  hope  that  the  research  generated  through  the  professorial  chairs  will  be  of  benefit  to 
policymakers  at  the  BSP  and  in  government  who  are  engaged  in  the  quest  for  socio-
economic  development,  one  that  will  truly  meet  the  development  aspirations  of  Filipino 
society. 
The BSP UP Centennial Professorial Chairs also serve as a challenge for UP’s community of 
academics to continue to serve as catalysts for meaningful change in our society.  
Once again, the Bangko Sentral celebrates with you the first 100 years of the University of 
the Philippines and look forward to the next one hundred years of excellence in research and 
education at UP.  
Maraming salamat at magandang hapon sa inyong lahat! 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2008
