Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Competitiveness, growth, and equity in a 
globalizing economy – a central banker’s view 
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the 
Philippines  (Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  46th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Philippine 
Economic Society, Manila, 14 November 2008. 
 The  distinguished  officers  and  members  of  the  Philippine  Economic  Society  led  by  Dr. 
Aldaba, fellow central bankers, our friends from the media, special guests, good morning.  
On behalf of the Monetary Board, I welcome all of you to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, the 
venue  of  the  46th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Philippine  Economic  Society(PES).  To  us,  the 
annual meetings of the PES have always served as an invigorating collegial setting among 
professional economists in the Philippines for the dissemination of research, incisive debate, 
and careful consideration of critical policy issues.  
This year’s meeting is being held in conjunction with the 11th International Convention of the 
East Asia Economic Association or the EAEA. This marks the first time that our country is 
hosting EAEA.  
It is therefore with keen anticipation that we look forward to the discussions ahead, especially 
in light of the timeliness of this year’s PES theme of “Competitiveness, Growth, and Equity in 
a Globalizing Economy.” At the same time, EAEA’s theme of “Regional Risk Management in 
East Asia” is particularly relevant given the present global financial crisis that is likely to be 
the deepest in decades.  
Given the broad-ranging impact of the financial market turmoil, the scope of the conference 
papers addresses varied issues: this includes the need for complementary interventions in 
the areas of energy and infrastructure; human capital investments; governance; competition 
policy;  and  the  need  to  integrate  the  poor  into  the  mainstream  of  development.  In  other 
words, there would be much food for thought along these lines in subsequent discussions.  
On  my  part,  I  will  focus  on  the  conference  theme  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  monetary 
policymaker. 
Globalization and the Great Moderation 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  Prior  to  the  current  economic  and  financial  turmoil,  the  world  had 
experienced a prolonged period of above-trend growth. An important driving force behind this 
is  globalization  –  as  manifested  by  an  unprecedented  increase  in  the  trade  in  goods  and 
services  around  the  world,  coupled  with  an  even  greater  expansion  in  the  cross-border 
movement of capital flows.  
In fact, between the 1990s and the current decade, global trade grew almost twice as fast as 
world GDP, while the stock of foreign direct investment grew almost five times faster than 
GDP growth. For emerging market economies (EMEs), in particular, foreign trade rose from 
40 percent of GDP in 1990 to almost two-thirds of GDP by 2006, while private capital flows to 
EMEs increased tenfold during the same period.  
Globalization has also meant the relocation of many production processes to the most cost-
efficient  firms  across  countries,  so  that  the  contestability  of  domestic  production  is  now 
greater than what appears from the trade figures alone. 
The  dampening  of  price  pressures  as  a  result  of  increased  competition  has  worked 
synergistically  with  a  major  transformation  in  monetary  frameworks  that  was  also  taking 
place at the same time. In particular, central banks have come to focus on price stability as 
BIS Review 140/2008 
 1
their primary policy objective and on the role of the monetary framework in establishing the 
credibility of policy.  
This  shift 
in  monetary  policy  –  along  with  globalization,  productivity  gains,  and 
complementary institutional factors such as increased central bank independence – helped 
bring  about  a  period  of  decreasing  inflation,  above-average  economic  growth,  and  the 
dampening of the business cycle that has come to be known as the “Great Moderation.”  
The  hope  then  was  that  this  benign  weather  would  continue,  that  the  global  imbalances 
would be resolved with soft landings, and that EMEs could now focus and turn their attention 
from  macroeconomic  management  toward  ensuring  more  meaningful  participation  in  the 
economic  mainstream  of  all  the  segments  of  the  population,  no  matter  the  income  levels. 
Since  then,  talk  has  shifted  from  the  “Great  Moderation”  to  what  a  senior  IMF  executive 
describes as a “financial storm of historic proportions”.  
What went wrong? 
Crisis and rethinking 
As events continue to unfold in the global arena, it may be too early to draw conclusions. 
Nevertheless, the ongoing crisis should be a catalyst for change. It is imperative that we try 
to  distill  even  at  this  stage  some  fundamental  lessons  from  this  episode  with  a  view  to 
strengthen  the  underpinnings  of  the  economy,  reduce  its  vulnerabilities  and  rigidities,  and 
unlock its productive potentials.  
This will also help us avoid the same policy missteps that contributed to the environment of 
increased risk-taking that has severely bruised the stability of financial systems worldwide. It 
is in this context that I will discuss some important policy issues. 
First,  the  crisis  underscores  the  importance  of flexibility  in the  implementation  of  monetary 
policy, and inflation targeting in particular. The need to cast a broad eye on the horizon was 
emphasized in a cautionary note made by US economist Hyman Minsky more than a decade 
ago. Minsky – as you may remember – has written extensively on financial market fragility, 
and is well known for the phrase “Minsky moment”, which refers to the slow movement of 
financial systems from stability to crisis. He said that economic stability and prosperous times 
can  encourage  excessive  leverage  and  risk-taking,  eventually  setting  the  conditions  for  a 
financial crisis.  
Related to this, there is renewed debate on whether monetary policy should react directly to 
changes in asset prices. The majority view is it should not. For example, US Federal Reserve 
Chairman  Ben  Bernanke  wrote  that  changes  in  asset  prices  should  affect  monetary  policy 
only  to  the  extent  that  they  affect  the  central  bank’s  forecast  of  inflation.  After  all,  central 
banks are not likely to have informational advantage over the market in assessing to what 
extent asset price movements are due to fundamentals and to what extent they are following 
what is called a “pathological path.”  
Moreover,  central  bank  stabilization  of  asset  prices  can  generate  moral  hazard  problems; 
that  is,  the  implicit  “safety  net”  created  by  the  central  bank  could  provide  an  incentive  for 
greater risk-taking in pursuit of returns. Furthermore, monetary policy tends to have a weak 
linkage with many asset prices. We know for instance that most fluctuations in equity prices 
occur for reasons unrelated to monetary policy.  
Nevertheless,  recent  events  support  the  need  for  flexibility  in  this  thinking.  Preemptive 
measures against the build up of asset price bubbles need not be incompatible with inflation 
targeting, which is an information-intensive approach.  
The  need  to  monitor  a  broad  range  of  variables  is  supported  by  the  possibility  that 
globalization  may  have  further  complicated  the  role  of  the  Consumer  Price  Index  as  an 
indicator of price pressures. For instance, increased competition from abroad can dampen 
2 
 BIS Review 140/2008
the prices of tradables, so that the first symptoms of an overheating economy can show up in 
the prices of some non-tradables – including real estate – that may not be reflected in the 
CPI basket. In this respect, a flexible exchange rate can help maintain the proper balance of 
relative prices.  
Second, there is a need to carefully examine present incentive structures to minimize, if not 
avoid, the emergence of moral hazard that can abet inappropriate risk-taking behavior. For 
example, analyses of the roots of the expansion of the US subprime mortgage market have 
focused on the confluence of several driving factors, including a loosening of US monetary 
policy  at  the  beginning  of  the  decade;  an  easing  of  standards  for  mortgage  lending, 
encouraged in part by a range of legislative and policy changes that aimed to make home 
ownership  more  accessible  to  households  that  had  been  historically  underserved  by 
mortgage  lenders;  the  rise  of  complex  structured  products,  the  overall  riskiness  of  which 
proved to be difficult to properly monitor and assess; fragmented and loose supervision of 
financial  institutions  which,  among  other  things,  kept  US  investment  banks  outside  Fed 
oversight; and the inaccurate ratings of credit rating agencies. 
In the case of the Philippines, the restructuring of our banking system in the aftermath of the 
Asian  financial  crisis  was  achieved  without  the  infusion  of  public  funds.  This  helped  avoid 
moral hazard issues mentioned earlier and actually promoted greater prudence in banking 
activities. And since most of our financial institutions were still in the process of strengthening 
their balance sheets when securitization began to be popular among investors abroad, their 
exposure to these structured products is relatively limited. 
Thirdly,  I  cannot  overemphasize  the  importance  of  a  strong  supervisory  and  regulatory 
framework.  The  fundamental  rationale  for  banking  regulation  is  to  guard  against  moral 
hazard, as banks use and lend out funds sourced from deposits.  
In  the  Philippines,  the  banking  system  has  benefited  from  our  continuous  efforts  to  better 
monitor, mitigate, and manage risks. A package of banking reforms was implemented in the 
areas of risk management, corporate governance, capitalization, and information disclosure 
practices  –  such  as  rules  to  disclose  detailed  information  on  banks’  restructured  and  non-
performing loans.  
Going  forward,  our  focus  will  be  on  further  enhancing  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework; promoting market discipline in financial markets through enhanced reporting and 
disclosure requirements; improving corporate governance through promotion of compliance 
with 
the 
implementation of risk-based supervision; strengthening ties with other regulators; continuing 
support for the development of a deep and efficient capital market, as well as the passage of 
necessary legislative reforms.  
reporting  standards;  enhancing 
international  accounting  and 
financial 
Globalization and financial liberalization  
Much  as  the  “Great  Moderation”  has  highlighted  the  benefits  of  globalization,  the  recent 
global turmoil has also highlighted its challenges.  
There  is  no  question  that  freer  trade  in  financial  products  and  services  confers  significant 
benefits – direct as well as collateral ones – to those countries that are prepared for it. These 
benefits come in the form of – among other things – portfolio diversification, greater access 
to foreign exchange, financial depth and technological transfers. At the same time, however, 
global  financial  integration  has  also  enabled  the  cross-border  trading  of  complex  and 
potentially risky financial assets. It also brings about the possibility of sudden stops in capital 
flows in times of market stress.  
Excessive  financial  openness  therefore  raises  important  policy  concerns  relating  to  the 
monitoring  and  surveillance  of  the  flow  of  capital,  as  well  as  the  formulation  and 
BIS Review 140/2008 
 3
implementation of appropriate policy responses. The latter concern provides important food 
for thought as we pursue efforts to reform our foreign exchange regulatory framework.  
As we noted earlier, economic literature holds that the freer flow of capital confers several 
important  benefits  to  the  economy.  However,  the  realization  of  these  benefits  depends 
critically in part on threshold effects related to the level of development of domestic financial 
markets, the quality of institutions and corporate governance, the nature of macroeconomic 
policies, and the extent of openness to trade. In other words, reaping the growth and stability 
benefits  of  financial  globalization  requires  prudent  macroeconomic  policies,  appropriate 
prudential regulation, and sound institutions. The BSP therefore must remain vigilant on all 
these fronts when pursuing financial openness. 
Monetary policy imperatives  
For us at the BSP, vigilant and sound policymaking necessitates keeping a watchful eye on 
price  developments,  since  price  stability  is  the  BSP’s  primary  mandate.  The  BSP  will 
therefore  remain  vigilant  against  the  threats  to  inflation  and  inflation  expectations.  To  the 
extent that risks to inflation are reduced by easing supply-side pressures, we will have more 
flexibility in determining appropriate monetary policy settings that will promote price stability 
that  is  conducive  to  balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth.  We  will  watch  closely  for 
future signs of easing inflationary pressures as well for price pressures that are still in the 
pipeline, since their pass-through is expected to continue for sometime. The challenge is to 
ensure that monetary policy settings are calibrated as appropriate so that there is sufficient 
confidence  that  inflation  would  be  on  a  declining  path  over  the  near-  and  medium-term  to 
keep inflation expectations well anchored.  
At the same time, the BSP also remains strongly committed to provide necessary liquidity in 
the financial system for banks that may need funds to ensure the normal functioning of credit 
and financial markets.  
Conclusion  
Indeed, important lessons have emerged from the ongoing global crisis. Nevertheless, Asian 
economies  continue  to  face  difficult  policy  questions  on  how  best  to  manage  risks, 
individually  and  collectively.  This  represents  fertile  area  for  research,  particularly  on  what 
Asian economies can do outside of existing institutional arrangements.  
Similarly, the region’s economies continue to grapple with questions of how best to achieve 
competitiveness, growth, and equity amidst the tide of globalization. As economists, we must 
use every opportunity not only to ask the important questions but also to try to piece together 
answers that would help our economies.  
But while attempting to do so, and as we engage in elegant and animated discussions in the 
days ahead, let us be mindful that no one has a monopoly over wisdom. Even the venerable 
Alan Greenspan now projects newfound humility, admitting to a lapse in judgement. And so, 
fellow  economists,  let  us  ask  the  questions  –  as  we  should,  keeping  in  mind  that  it  is  the 
collective wisdom of this group that we should mine.  
Let us live up to the challenge before the participants to this 46th annual meeting of the PES: 
to  have  a  fruitful  meeting  on  “Competitiveness,  Growth,  and  Equity  in  a  Globalizing 
Economy.” May this PES annual meeting be remembered as a complete success. On this 
optimistic note, I welcome all of you, once again, to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas.  
Mabuhay ang Philippine Economic Society! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! Salamat sa inyong lahat!  
4 
 BIS Review 140/2008
