Jan F Qvigstad: Efficiencies in Norway’s payment system 
Opening address by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of 
Norway),  at  the  Research  Conference  on  Payment  Systems,  Norges  Bank,  Oslo, 
14 November 2008. 
 It is a great pleasure to welcome you all to Norges Bank’s research conference on payment 
systems. Welcome also to Oslo, a fantastic place to visit all year round, but perhaps not in 
November. November is the time of the year when Norwegians dream of being somewhere 
else.  Personally,  I  dream  of  being  in  Nice  on  the  south  coast  of  France,  where  I  have 
relatives and thus often visit. Nonetheless, we greatly appreciate you coming from all over 
the world to contribute and spend some time with us. And who knows, maybe the weather 
conditions will provide the perfect incentive to work hard at the conference.  
Central banks have always taken a great interest in the payment system. This is due to the 
vital  importance  to  confidence  in  the  currency  and  in  the  financial  system  of  a  safe  and 
efficient system for the exchange of funds and the settlement of claims. These days we all 
know the importance of this confidence. A payment system should not be the source of  a 
crisis and it should continue to serve the markets even in the event of market turbulence. 
An efficient payment system should carry out payments quickly, securely and at low cost. In 
just a few years, many new electronic services and gadgets have become natural parts of 
our  lives.  This  has  also  influenced  how  we  execute  payments.  Payments  via  Internet 
banking, mobile banking and card payments over the Internet have become the norm. Paper-
based instruments such as cheques and mail giros have become less important.  
Norway is a good example of the transition from a paper-based to an electronically-based 
payment  system.  Only  twenty  years  ago,  90  per  cent  of  payments  from  deposit  accounts 
were made using paper-based instruments such as cheques and paper giros. Today, more 
than 95 per cent of such payments are made electronically, mostly via payment cards and 
Internet banking.  
The first results from Norges Bank’s cost survey were published today. The survey estimates 
the  social  costs  of  using  and  producing  payment  services  in  Norway  to  around  11  billion 
kroner,  or  just  under  half  a  per  cent  of  GDP.  This  estimate  covers  payment  activities  by 
banks,  subcontractors,  the  central  bank,  households  and  merchants.  The  estimate  for 
Norway is quite low in an international context, although estimation methods may vary.  
How we organise our payment system has consequences beyond the system. Direct debiting 
and  electronic  invoicing  will,  for  example,  involve  substantial  savings  for  businesses.  Thus 
the  potential  savings  for  banks  and  the  rest  of  society  of  moving  towards  more  efficient 
payment systems are considerable. 
Payment  cards  and  Internet  banking  have  not  only  replaced  cheques  and  mail  giros,  they 
have  also  contributed  to  a  reduction  in  the  use  of  cash.  Estimates  from  our  recent  survey 
indicate a sharp drop in the use of cash over the last 15 years. Estimates of the exact level of 
cash  use  vary  according  to  data  sources  and  methodology.  However,  it  is  fair  to  say  that 
cash is still an important means of payment. Notes and coins will also remain important as 
symbols of money.  
I  believe  that  there  have  been  two  very  important  factors  behind  the  rapid  transition  to 
electronic payment services in Norway. Banks have cooperated on standards and payments 
infrastructure while competing on the supply of services, and banks have charged for the use 
of payment services.  
Prices  that  reflect  relative  differences  in  production  costs  encourage  users  to  choose  the 
most  cost-effective  services.  Research  (by  Humphrey,  Kim  and  Vale)  has  shown  that  a 
BIS Review 140/2008 
 1
relatively  high  price  per  transaction  for  paper-based  payment  services  and  a  low  price  for 
electronic  payment  services  have  accelerated  the  trend  towards  an  increasing  share  of 
electronic  transactions.  Without  incentives  for  consumers  or  merchants  to  move  to  more 
efficient instruments, banks and other payment service providers will more likely be left trying 
to improve on old solutions.  
Payment systems are networks for the exchange of values between payers on the one hand 
and  beneficiaries  on  the  other.  In  two-sided  markets  like  this,  the  benefit  to  existing  users 
increases when new users join up. These kinds of externalities are similar to those studied in 
the  cluster theory  that  has  successfully  been  applied  to  explain  the  geographic  location  of 
economic  activities,  the  field  of  economics  for  which  Paul  Krugman  received  this  year’s 
Nobel Prize in economics. 
It used to be common knowledge that the potential for productivity growth was highest in the 
manufacturing sector of the economy. This is no longer the case. Over the past decades, we 
have  seen  substantial  productivity  growth  in  the  service  sector.  Since  1990,  productivity 
growth  in  the  Norwegian  financial  sector  has  been  around  twice  that  of  the  total  economy 
including  the  manufacturing  sector.  In  1988  banks  in  Norway  employed  around  33  000 
people,  had  2200  branches  and  processed  just  under  400  million  payment  transactions. 
Today  banks  in  Norway  employ  around  20  000  people,  have  1260  physical  branches  and 
carry out around 1.6 billion transactions.  
However,  the  development  of  payment  instruments  and  services  are  not  “just”  technical 
developments; they also pose some real challenges to us economists. For central banks, it is 
important  that  our  payment  system  policies  are  founded  on  sound  economic  theory  and 
research.  An  event  such  as  this  conference  is  thus  important  for  Norges  Bank  and  other 
central banks that wish to promote the use of efficient payment services.  
As mentioned, safe payment systems should continue to serve the markets even in periods 
of market turbulence. In my opinion, most large-value payment systems have operated very 
reliably  in  the  ongoing  financial  situation.  Safe  and  efficient  clearing  and  settlement  have 
been in demand as banks’ trust in each other has weakened. In Norway, our systems have 
had  to  handle  major  problems  in  two  Icelandic  banks  operating  in  our  country.  These 
problems have been handled smoothly. 
Times of crisis can also be a turning point, providing the opportunity for change. During the 
Norwegian banking crisis in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Norges Bank and other public 
authorities  put  pressure  on  banks  to  increase  their  income  from  bank  charges,  including 
payment  services.  I  believe  that  as  banks  have  to  focus  even  more  on  running  a  cost-
efficient business, the incentives for developing the payment system further will be strong in 
times to come.  
For this conference we have received a large number of high-quality papers. I know that the 
selected conference speakers represent some of the best researchers in this field. We are 
especially pleased to have as keynote speakers two of the leading scholars in the economics 
of  payments  systems:  David  Humphrey  from  Florida  State  University  and  Jean-Charles 
Rochet from Toulouse School of Economics.  
Let  me  also  extend  my  thanks  to  the  three  other  members  of  the  programme  committee: 
Gabriela  Guibourg  from  Sveriges  Riksbank,  Eirik  Gaard  Kristiansen  from  the  Norwegian 
School of Economics and Business Administration, and Bent Vale from Norges Bank.  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  I  visit  Nice  in  the  South  of  France  quite  often.  And  from  my  direct 
observations, I notice that France has developed very fancy methods of processing cheques. 
However, when I go shopping in Nice, I can’t help noticing that writing these cheques still 
creates  rather  long  queues  at  the  checkouts.  Hopefully  the  knowledge  we  gain  from  the 
research  you  produce  will  improve  efficiency  in  the  payments  systems  –  and  shorten 
checkout queues!  
2 
 BIS Review 140/2008
I hope you will all enjoy the conference. I now give the floor to Bent Vale, who will chair the 
morning session. Thank you.  
BIS Review 140/2008 
 3
