Yandraduth Googoolye: Credit risk and market risk – the journey ahead 
Opening  and  closing  remarks  by  Mr  Yandraduth  Googoolye,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the 
Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  working  session  on  “Credit  risk  and  market  risk  –  the  journey 
ahead” at the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry and Indian Bank’s 
Association  Conference  on 
“Navigating 
successfully in an uncertain world” Mumbai, 7 November 2008. 
“Global  Banking:  Paradigm  Shift”  Theme: 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is a pleasure for me to chair this afternoon session on Credit risk and Market risk, a subject 
whose importance is gaining momentum among policymakers these days. 
Economic theory tells us that Credit risk and Market risk are intrinsically related to each other 
and are not separable (Jarrow and Turnbull: 2008). With financial innovation, the interaction 
between Credit risk and Market risk has itself become even more complex today. The recent 
financial crisis has indeed showed us how a credit risk event can trigger other market related 
and liquidity related risk events. 
The sub-prime crisis in the United States, which has its origin in protracted low interest rate 
policy, has shown us how our interest rates setting decisions impact on credit risk – a linkage 
that has been somehow neglected over recent times. As we coordinate our efforts to ease 
monetary conditions to curb the growing risk that our economies would dip into recession; we 
need to be vigilant on the long term consequence of our decisions today, to avoid another 
financial turmoil in future. 
Financial innovation has spurred the development of risk management tools but it has also 
brought  together  various  other  forms  of  risk  into  financial  products,  making  the  art  of  risk 
management even more sophisticated. The rapid growth of derivative instruments blurs the 
dividing line between the established concepts of Credit risk and Market risk. The trading of 
credit derivatives and other exotic securities has transformed credit risk into market risk. 
When the credit conflagration morphed into a fully-fledged panic in financial markets over the 
last few weeks, the major stock markets plunged. 
A  decade  or  so  ago,  technological  innovation  produced  securitized  and  other  credit 
derivatives  to  help  financial  institutions  to  manage  risks  (credit  or  liquidity).  Those 
instruments quickly gained popularity among practitioners as they promised to transfer credit 
risk to those who were supposedly in a better position to bear those risks while contributing 
to financial stability. As these instruments grew in complexity, existing risks were transformed 
into other risks and new risks emerged. Those risks were typically measured and managed 
in isolation from one another, whereas in reality, they are closely linked. A credit event that 
drives down the value of a particular asset is likely to reduce the liquidity and price of that 
asset  as  well,  at  least  in  the  short  term.  Therefore,  as  trading  in  those  credit  instruments 
grew, new portfolio models were developed to take on board the interaction between Credit 
risk and Market risk. 
Traditionally,  regulation  has  distinguished  between  Credit  risk  and  Market  risk,  and  has 
treated  both  risks  independently.  The  Basel  II  Accord  requires  banks  to  keep  capital  for 
Credit risk for banking book exposures and Market risk for trading book exposures. However, 
it does not provide an implicit capital cushion for correlation between the two risks, other than 
a  capital  charge  for  counterparty  credit  risk  for  certain  trading  book  exposures.  However, 
emphasis is put on stress testing credit portfolio for these types of events. 
The  recent  events  in  financial  markets  have  brought  Central  Bankers,  Regulators  and  risk 
managers to rethink and question the reliability of these new risk management systems for 
BIS Review 163/2008 
 1
Credit  risk  and  Market  risk;  and  the  diversification  effects  and  the  relevance  of  risk 
aggregation embedded in these instruments. 
Having said this, it may also be opportune to reflect over the future of regulatory practices for 
Credit risk and Market risk. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, as my time is almost over, let me take the next few minutes to tell 
you more on our distinguished speakers for this session. We welcome today, experts from 
McKinsey & Company. 
(Presentations by the speakers) 
Concluding remarks 
I  thank  you  all  gentlemen  for  your  fruitful  presentations  on  such  an  interesting  topic.  This 
session has indeed been very informative for all of us present today and I hope that we may 
all draw lessons from your presentation on Credit risk and Market risk, particular on part of 
the  presentation  that  was  focused  on  the  experience  of  Indian  banks  in  managing  those 
risks. 
I now wish to quote a few sentences from the report: “Towards Superior Risk Management in 
Indian Banking.” 
“Banks will need to continuously refine today’s practices. It is important to 
constantly  revisit  the  risk  architecture  through  the  on  going  refinement  of 
models, stress testing scenarios, revalidating limits, redesigning customer 
facing  processes  and  restructuring  of  the  organization.  This  also  implies 
broadening  the  traditional  purview  of  risk  management  to  include  newer 
practices  such  as  reputational  risk,  business  process  re-engineering  and 
concurrent audit improvement.” 
To conclude, as banking gets more sophisticated, risk management systems should be able 
to  size  up  the  newer  risks  the  operations  expose  a  bank  to.  Therefore,  while  the  banking 
sector has grown rapidly and displayed high resilience, the need for continuous vigil on the 
part  of  bank  managements  and  the  regulator  can  hardly  be  overemphasized.  For  me 
therefore, it is the systems and processes for being able to anticipate risk events in time in a 
complex financial world that should be the focus area for banks the world over including the 
banks in India. 
Thank you all for you attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 163/2008
