Jean-Claude Trichet: Some lessons from the financial market correction 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
“European  Banker  of  the  Year  2007”  award  ceremony,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  30  September 
2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great privilege for me to be awarded the “European Banker of the Year” in 2007. I am 
very grateful to receive it. Thank you for the honour you have bestowed on me. Let me also 
warmly thank Jean-Claude Juncker for having been so kind in his speech. For all reasons I 
am very touched. 
At this stage, let me say that we are presently in the purdah period, namely within a week 
before the next decision meeting of the Governing Council. Nothing in what I will say should 
be interpreted in terms of our monetary policy stance and our future decision next Thursday.  
In  accepting  this  prestigious  award,  let  me  first  reflect  on  what  Jean-Claude  Juncker  just 
said.  Indeed,  the  turbulence  on  the  global  financial  markets  over  the  last  year  has  posed 
particular  challenges  for  financial  institutions,  investors,  supervisory  authorities  and  central 
banks  alike.  The  European  Central  Bank  has  made,  and  continues  to  make,  substantial 
efforts  to  address  the  weaknesses  and  to  promote  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  financial 
markets. Today, I would like to share with you a few thoughts on the lessons that we have 
drawn  thus  far  from  the  financial  market  correction  in  the  context  of  monetary  policy  and 
financial stability. 
The ECB’s reactions as regards the management of the money markets  
I.  
In  its  ten-year  history  the  ECB  has  had  to  conduct  monetary  policy  under  particularly 
challenging circumstances in a number of occasions: the global correction in equity markets 
after the bursting of the “New Economy” bubble and the terrorist attacks in September 2001 
are cases in point. The emergence of the financial market tensions in early August 2007 is 
certainly the most challenging experience to date. 
As  other  major  central  banks  in  the  world  the  ECB  has  reacted  promptly  and  consistently 
during the various phases of the market turbulences to ensure the smooth functioning of the 
money market. In order to fully understand this role of the ECB let me start by explaining the 
so-called separation principle. The ECB makes a clear separation between, on the one hand, 
the determination of the monetary policy stance and, on the other hand, its implementation 
using  liquidity  operations.  The  monetary  policy  stance  is  determined  so  as  to  serve  the 
primary objective of the ECB, namely the maintenance of price stability. The implementation 
of  the  stance  through  liquidity  operations  aims  at  steering  very  short-term  money  market 
rates  close  to  the  ECB’s  key  policy  rate  (the  minimum  bid  rate  in  the  Eurosystem’s  main 
refinancing operations).  
The  monetary  policy  stance  is  made  concrete  through  the  Governing  Council’s  decision 
taken at the beginning of each month on the appropriate level of key ECB interest rates that 
will best serve the achievement of price stability in the euro area. 
The  ECB’s  Executive  Board  is  then  responsible  for  implementing  these  decisions.  To  this 
end, it has at its disposal a set of operational instruments and procedures which are used to 
bring the money market interest rates at the very short end of the money market yield curve 
in line with the interest rate level set by the Governing Council. A key element of this process 
is the conduct of so called liquidity operations, through which the ECB can as the exclusive 
BIS Review 118/2008 
 1
supplier of euro central bank money, determine the amount of funds supplied to the banking 
system and thereby steer the short term money market interest rates. 
In  this  context  it  goes  without  saying  that,  from  the  central  bank  perspective,  the  orderly 
functioning of the money market is of the utmost importance for the transmission of the key 
policy rates to the economy in general and the price level in particular. Recent experience 
demonstrates that disturbances in the money market may interfere with the monetary policy 
transmission  process,  particularly  during  periods  of  stress  stemming  from  heightened 
uncertainty and a lack of confidence among banks and investors. In such an environment, 
we can use liquidity operations to support the smooth functioning of money markets – and 
thus their role in the transmission of monetary policy – while recognising that ultimately only 
the private sector itself can address the concerns over creditworthiness, lack of transparency 
and resulting mutual mistrust that underpin the current money market tensions. 
Therefore, within the context of the separation principle mentioned above, the ECB has used 
in  a  flexible  way  its  operational  instruments  and  procedures  in  order  to  contribute  to  the 
smooth functioning of the money market. In particular, the ECB has applied three measures 
in  order  to  support  solvent  banks’  access  to  liquidity  and  the  general  functioning  of  the 
money market: 
First, the ECB has frontloaded the supply of liquidity over the reserve maintenance periods. 
This has been achieved by increasing the allotment amounts in main refinancing operations 
at  the  beginning  of  the  maintenance  period  while  reducing  them  towards  the  end  of  the 
period  so  that  the  average  supply  of  liquidity  has  remained  unchanged  over  the  entire 
maintenance period. 
Second,  the  ECB  has  used  the  flexibility  offered  by  its  operational  framework  and  has 
broadened  the  modalities  according  to  which  the  liquidity  was  allocated  to  the  banking 
system. Specifically, the ECB:  
1. 
2. 
has made more frequent use of fine-tuning operations;  
has  conducted  supplementary  long  term  refinancing  operations  and  consequently 
has lengthened the average maturity of open market operations, and  
has applied on few instances a special tender procedure with full allotment. 
3. 
Third,  the  ECB  has  strengthened  its  cooperation  with  other  central  banks,  in  particular  by 
coordinated  steps  to  provide  USD  liquidity.  As  you  know,  we  have  decided  yesterday  to 
engage with the Federal Reserve System in a swap agreement of an amount of USD 240 
billion.  
As a result of all these actions, the average level of EONIA, the euro overnight index, has 
remained close to the minimum bid rate despite higher than usual volatility from a historical 
perspective. While refraining from being complacent, developments over past months show 
that  the  ECB’s  operations  have  positively  impacted  money  market  conditions  in  the  Euro 
area.  
Let  me  emphasise  that the  ECB  will  continue  to  support  solvent  banks’  access  to  liquidity 
and the functioning of the money market as long as necessary. 
II.  
Lessons and recommendations to be drawn in terms of financial stability and 
supervision 
I would like to discuss some lessons that we have drawn in terms of financial stability and 
supervision from the present turbulences. Let me start by providing you with a broad-brush 
picture  of  the  main  weaknesses  of  the  financial  system  and  the  regulatory  framework  that 
have been revealed by recent events on global financial markets. A thorough understanding 
of  the  underlying  developments  as  well  as  the  identification  of  the  nature  and  scope  of 
shortcomings in the financial system are key for providing proper guidance for policy makers, 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2008
responsible for promoting financial stability. In particular, the fact that the financial system is 
globally integrated and that developments in various markets are often strongly interwoven 
and even mutually reinforcing, makes this task particularly challenging for all of us. 
First, the root of the problems for many financial institutions affected by the market distress 
was their inability to adequately assess the risks associated with the exposures they held, 
either directly in their books, or indirectly, via off-balance sheet entities. Imperfections in risk 
management  systems  as  well  as  in  risk  governance  proved  to  be  substantial  contributing 
factors  to  the  accumulation  of  exposures  whose  long-term  risk  characteristics  were  not 
properly identified in advance. With the reversion of the housing and credit cycles, and the 
drying up of liquidity in certain market segments, a substantial part of these exposures turned 
out to be overpriced, pressing financial institutions to book substantial losses. Clearly, risk 
management failed to provide accurate signals for institutions to build up sufficient cushions 
that could absorb losses, when materialized. 
Second, financial institutions came short of addressing the flawed incentives created by the 
originate-and-distribute model. Recent events have revealed again that sound underwriting 
standards are key for preserving stability both at firm and systemic levels. Over the period 
preceding the market correction we had seen credit standards declining substantially across 
the  board,  triggering  an  unprecedented  surge  in  delinquencies  on  sub-prime  mortgages 
recently.  As  unfavourable  events  continue  to  unfold,  with  house  prices  declining  and 
economic growth decelerating in many countries worldwide, financial institutions have to face 
further write-downs on their low quality exposures. 
Third,  the  lack  of  transparency  throughout  the  securitisation  process  that  engineered  the 
underlying  mortgages  into  complex  structured  products  made  it  difficult  for  market 
participants  to  identify  where  the  risks  were  accumulating  in  the  financial  system  and  to 
assess  the  possible  losses  from  these  exposures.  This  opaqueness  of  the  securitisation 
process,  accompanied  by  investors’  over-reliance  on,  and  poor  understanding  of,  external 
ratings, seriously undermined investor confidence and continue to put strain on the financial 
markets. 
Fourth, with liquidity strains characterising certain market segments, it became impossible for 
firms  to  properly  value  a  range  of  financial  assets  and  off-balance  sheet  exposures. 
Admittedly, the existing standards on valuation and accounting proved to be inadequate for 
illiquid markets. 
The  sources  of  the  current  turbulence  on  financial  markets  are  manifold.  So  are  the 
consequences. What we can see now is that financial institutions are becoming increasingly 
under pressure to clean their portfolios and to strengthen their capital base, reinforcing the 
rapid  de-leveraging  process  already  underway.  These 
tendencies,  accompanied  by 
increasing risk-aversion and the tightening of credit standards, may have substantial impacts 
on the real-economy that policy makers should be aware of. In this context, regulators and 
supervisors have to face the challenge of finding the narrow path between giving prompt and 
adequate  responses  to  current  developments  in  the  short  run,  and  mitigating  the 
mechanisms that may fuel the downward spiral of financial and economic contraction in the 
longer term. 
Since the very beginning of the financial market turmoil, public authorities at the international, 
European  and  national  level  have  been  very  active  in  identifying  measures  aiming  at 
restoring confidence and enhancing the resilience of the financial system. At the European 
level, the ECOFIN Roadmap defines the actions to be taken by authorities over the course of 
2008  and  beyond,  while  at  the  international  level  policy  initiatives  are  co-ordinated  by  the 
Financial  Stability  Forum,  whose  recommendations  were  endorsed  by  G7  ministers  and 
central  bank  governors  in  April  this  year.  Among  the  many  issues  covered  by  these 
initiatives, I will briefly touch upon a few selected ones that I deem of particular importance. 
First, strengthening risk management techniques and procedures as well as enhancing firm-
wide  oversight  are  cornerstones  for  any  policy  response.  In  this  context,  improving  the 
BIS Review 118/2008 
 3
management of risk concentrations on a group level, revising banks' stress testing practices 
both  in  the  context  of  liquidity  and  credit  risk  management  as  well  as  addressing  the 
weaknesses in the management of securitised assets and other off-balance sheet exposures 
are  only  a  few  examples.  Notwithstanding  the  important  role  to  be  played  by  public 
authorities  in  this  field,  the  primary  responsibility  to  address  the  serious  weaknesses  in 
business  practices  should  rest  with  the  financial  services  industry.  In  this  connection,  the 
effective  and  timely  implementation  of  the  principles  and  best  practice  recommendations 
defined  by  the  industry  [in  the  reports  of  the  Institute  of  International  Finance  and  the 
Counterparty  Risk  Management  Policy  Group  III  (“Corrigan  report”)],  and  a  regular 
assessment of their compliance therewith, are of paramount importance. 
Second,  enhancing  transparency  and  improving  the  reliability  of  information  disclosed  by 
firms are crucial for regaining confidence in financial markets. Work is underway as regards 
reviewing  the  disclosure  requirements  under  the  current  regulatory  framework,  especially 
with respect to complex securitisation exposures and off balance sheet vehicles. In addition, 
the  compliance  of  banks’  reporting  practices  with  the  recommendations  of  the  Financial 
Stability Forum on public disclosure is being evaluated by authorities. 
Third, strengthening liquidity buffers of financial institutions. In this context, let me point out 
that  the  Basel  Committee  is  about  to  finalise  its  guidance  on  Sound  Liquidity  Risk 
Management and Supervision, and once published, the supervisory community will assess 
banks’ compliance with the principles. 
Finally, strengthening regulation on capital adequacy is key for promoting financial stability. 
In this regard, extensive international cooperation is already on track, under the auspices of 
the Basel Committee. Proposals addressing certain topical issues of capital regulation have 
already been published and are envisioned to be phased in over 2010 and 2011.  
In this connection, the importance of the capital monitoring exercises, conducted by various 
international fora, including the Basel Committee, should be highlighted. These exercises are 
seeking to analyse the developments of the minimum capital requirements under the Basel II 
framework with the aim of assessing the level and cyclicality of capital requirements. This is 
the basis for exploring their possible impacts on banks’ behaviour and the business cycle. 
Since  the  complete  elimination  of  cyclical  variations  in  banks’  lending  activity  would  be  an 
unrealistic goal, regulators should instead focus on reducing the occurrence and severity of 
systemic crises. To this end, the regulatory framework should be revised so as to restrain the 
build-up of excessive risks during the expansion phase and to dampen the costs of financial 
distress in the contraction phase. A major challenge for authorities, however, is the proper 
definition  of  a  regulatory  framework  that  would  allow  banks’  capital  buffers  to  shrink  in 
downturns (i.e. to absorb losses), without creating moral hazard and regulatory arbitrage. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2008
