Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Money laundering and terrorism financing 
Speech by Mr Ajith Nivard Cabraal, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the Asia-
Pacific Group on Money Laundering Typologies Workshop 2008, Colombo, 27 October 2008. 
 His  Lordship,  the  Chief  Justice,  Hon  Sarath  N  Silva,  the  Attorney  General,  other 
distinguished guests from Sri Lanka as well as from abroad; my dear friends. 
At the outset, I wish to extend to all of you a very warm welcome to this Asia Pacific Group 
Seminar on Money Laundering and Terrorism Financing. It is indeed a pleasure to see all of 
you here, from 34 different countries, and we hope that you will have a wonderful stay and 
take  back  happy  memories  of  your  period  here;  not  only  as  far  as  the  Conference  is 
concerned, but also by experiencing our country. 
Sri  Lanka  has  been  in  the  forefront  of  the  worldwide  efforts  on  the  containment  of  money 
laundering  and  terrorism  financing.  We  have  been  associated  with  this  effort  in  a  special 
way, not only to help the international effort, but also to fulfil our own local needs. That is why 
we are very pleased to see such a large gathering of experts on this subject who are getting 
together to develop ways and means by which this vexed problem could be dealt with. We 
are also particularly pleased to have with us, His Lordship the Chief Justice who has graced 
this occasion and by doing so has unambiguously displayed the commitment of Sri Lanka’s 
judiciary  to  this  massive  effort.  Our  effort  against  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing 
cannot be made by one or two persons only, or by one or two agencies only. It has to be a 
co-ordinated and concentrated effort that needs the support of a wide range of people, both 
nationally and internationally. In that context, Sri Lanka’s commitment is clear to everyone, 
and we are particularly pleased to have you with us, the Honourable Chief Justice.  
My  dear  friends,  the  fight  against  terrorism  cannot  only  be  on  the  military  field  or  battle 
ground. In my view, the fight has to be on four different fronts simultaneously. Although it is 
vitally important, one cannot defeat terrorism by a military effort only. To successfully deal 
with terrorism, we need a diplomatic offensive also. Diplomatically, we need to ensure that 
cohesive steps are taken so that, together, countries can meet this challenge. At the same 
time,  the  fight  has  to  be  on  the  international  media  front  as  well.  Therefore,  a  media 
campaign in all parts of the world against terrorism is also very important. That is something 
that  the  world  has  clearly  recognized  today,  and  internationally,  we  see  a  greater  co-
ordination in the media in dealing with terrorism. The other important front in this war against 
terror is the stopping of financing for terrorism. Without finance, terrorism cannot progress. 
So,  steps  taken  by  countries  to  ensure  that  the  funding  lines  to  terrorism  and  money 
laundering are cut off, that terror financing transactions are interrupted or stopped, and that 
there is worldwide co-operation to track down persons who are suspected of being involved 
in terror financing in whatever way, is of vital importance. 
Just take a small example. If at the end of the month, you do not receive your salary, you will 
find it difficult to comfortably progress with your next month’s activities. In the same way, if 
we can stop the funds going to terrorist activities, that will put a dampener on their activities. 
It is very simple to understand. Therefore, not only should we deal with terrorists on a military 
basis, but we should disrupt their progress by cutting off and interrupting their funding lines. 
By doing so, we complicate their agenda.  
In order to do so, and to continue to do so, we have to equip ourselves. The judiciary, the law 
enforcement agencies, the regulators, the media, the bankers, the prosecutors, all of these 
groups,  have  to  equip  themselves  with  whatever  it  takes,  to  meet  with  this  challenge.  We 
have  to  learn  from  each  other.  We  have  already  learnt  many  lessons  during  our  own 
activities in this field. But, it is important that we share such knowledge and experience with 
others as well. If we do so, perhaps others too, could replicate some of those efforts which 
BIS Review 133/2008 
 1
have  been  proved  to  be  successful.  Hence,  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  us  to  create  the 
awareness. We also have to enact the necessary laws. Sri Lanka has already passed the 
necessary  laws  for  this  purpose:  so  have  many  other  countries.  That  is  very  important. 
Because,  without  the  legal  framework  and  the  legal  backing,  our  efforts  will  not  succeed. 
Then,  we  have  to  build  our  own  capacities.  We  have  to  have  people who  are  trained  and 
competent to deal with  these challenges. Because, unless you have the competence, and 
the  ability  to  recognize  certain  disguised  transactions,  the  ability  to see  through  the  clever 
facades,  and  the  ability  to  anticipate  the  next  move  of  the  terror  financiers  or  money 
launderers, we would not be able to progress. Therefore, we have to diligently follow rules 
and detection principles. That is why this kind of conference is very important.  
My dear friends, we have to realize that money launderers and terrorist financiers are also 
smart. Your Lordship, they may also be having conferences of this nature, in their own way, 
to see how best they can be a step ahead of all of us, to ensure that they will be able to 
perform their own dastardly deeds more successfully. They will take advantage of calamities. 
On many occasions we have seen how that has worked. Earthquakes, droughts, civil strife, 
tsunamis, etc. can be useful breeding grounds for this kind of illegal financing efforts. These 
terror financiers make use of unsuspecting bankers as their partners. Although sometimes, 
certain  bankers  can  be  knowingly  involved,  on  many  occasions,  they  may  even  be 
unknowingly  involved.  Sometimes  these  money  launderers  and  terrorists  use  informal 
systems. They by-pass the formal systems and have other parallel systems. I am sure that, 
in your deliberations you would be discussing these matters and considering as to how these 
can  be  addressed.  If  there  is  a  parallel  system,  which  is  operating  side  by  side  with  the 
formal system, they can make use of such systems to do what they want. They also disguise 
transactions.  Certain  transactions  which  are  actually  for  laundering  money  or  which  are 
financing  terrorism  would  not  be  obvious,  as  they  may  be  cleverly  concealed.  The 
transactions will be packaged in such a way that unless you have a vigilant or trained eye, 
you would not be able to spot it. Very often, the illegal financiers will also pretend to be very 
respectable people in society, and indeed, may even be considered so by the world at large. 
They  may  come  in  the  guise  of  social  workers,  philanthropists,  community  workers,  aid 
workers, NGOs, etc. Therefore, we have to be alert. We have to be a few steps ahead. We 
have to have bankers, media, regulators, prosecutors and a judiciary who will keep abreast 
of the methods and the ruses that could be adopted by these unscrupulous people. We must 
also have regular updates. Because in the same way that we are monitoring developments, 
terrorists  and  money  launders  too,  would  be  having  their  regular  updates.  So,  the  clear 
message is; we have to be a step ahead. We have to work together. We need to share our 
informational  abilities,  as  well  as  our  systems,  with  each  other  so  that  we  can  really  put 
together a concerted effort against money laundering and terrorism financing. 
My dear friends, I have, with great interest, gone through your workshop session programme. 
I have seen that it is very comprehensive. The topics range from legal frameworks to issues 
relating  to  casinos  and  gambling.  It  covers  crime  investigations  and  prosecutions,  and  the 
vulnerabilities  caused  by  security  situations.  Sometimes,  terror  financiers  and  money 
launderers use the security situation in a country to disguise transactions. I note that you will 
be considering case studies on terrorist financing and also focus on studies on “following the 
money”, as well as consider the ways of “asset recovery”. I remember many years ago, when 
I  was  studying  accountancy,  one  of  the  basics  that  we  were  trained  in,  was  how  to  follow 
through transactions to a finish. Then only, you see exactly how a transaction takes place. 
That  is  very  important.  I  was  also  particularly  pleased  that  you  are  building  up  your  own 
capacities  to  follow  through  transactions  and  also  have  an  overview  of  the  methods  of 
cooperation between the Financial Intelligence Units. Because, today, there are millions of 
cross border transactions taking place all the time, across boundaries. In such instances, we 
need to have a close co-operation between the FIUs in order to ensure that we are able to be 
ahead of those with criminal intent. Further, I was particularly impressed that all of you are 
hoping to have an action plan to be implemented thereafter. 
2 
 BIS Review 133/2008
My dear friends, it goes without saying that we need to come out strongly in our efforts to 
deal with all these matters. We have seen world economic frameworks being threatened, and 
being  under  tremendous  pressure  during  the  past  one  month  or  so.  We  have  seen 
unprecedented  chaos  and  turbulence.  Nevertheless,  we  have  been  able  to  come  through 
because of the diligent work that we have done. In our own country, there were times when 
we  were  encouraged  to  deregulate,  deregulate  and  deregulate.  Fortunately,  we  did  not 
deregulate as much as we were advised to, by certain quarters. Because of that, we had a 
few fences around our economy; and those fences today are the important buffers that are 
protecting us when the unparallel financial tsunami is hitting the entire world. When you have 
fences, it is difficult for outsiders to come in. At the same time, however, when an external 
disaster strikes, the fences come in handy, because the fences protect you. So, in a way, we 
have been protected by some of the safeguards that we had installed in our systems. Even 
when we opened out our economy, we were careful, and we opened out slowly. When we 
removed one fence, we put in a different defence in some other way in order to make sure 
that we are sheltered. Those protective steps are vital in all economies.  
These then are the challenges that all of us are facing. All in all, we have to protect our own 
economies  from  within  as  well  as  from  outside.  Let  us  therefore,  look  forward  to  the  next 
three days with enthusiasm, because I believe that what you are going to do over the next 
three days will help the economies of the world to sustain and defend themselves, so that we 
can all move forward with confidence.  
Let me also wish you a happy Deepavali, and extend my warm wishes on the occasion of the 
festival of lights. It is an important festival in Sri Lanka and we are happy that you are here to 
celebrate the day with us. It is also a holiday. But yet, I am glad to see so many dignitaries 
here today. I am sure that that is because all of you believe that this Conference is such an 
important  event.  In  particular,  I  wish  to  thank  the  Honourable  Chief  Justice,  His  Lordship 
Sarath N Silva, the Attorney General, Mr Priyasath Dep, the Secretary, Ministry of Justice, Mr 
Suhada Gamlath, the foreign dignitaries and our own Deputy Governors who have been very 
involved  in  this  process.  I  also  wish  to  thank  our  own  FIU,  which  has  been  a  tremendous 
source  of  strength  to  us  to  protect  our  own  financial  system.  We  hope  that  the  next  three 
days will give you an opportunity to enjoy Sri Lanka, as well as to learn more about money 
laundering and terror financing. I wish you a pleasant stay and a very useful and successful 
conference. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 133/2008 
 3
