Caleb M Fundanga: Strengthening the Zambian banking sector 
Address by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Commissioning 
and Official Opening of Access Bank (Zambia) Ltd, Lusaka, 24 September 2008. 
 today’s  event 
• H.E, Acting President of Republic of Zambia, Mr. Rupiah Banda M.P; 
• Honourable Ministers; 
• H.E Nigerian High Commissioner to Zambia; 
• Access Bank Group Deputy Managing Director; 
• Access Bank Zambia Chairman; 
• Access Bank Zambia Managing Director; 
• Distinguished guests; 
• Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I  am  greatly  honoured  to  be  given  this  opportunity  to  make  brief  remarks  at  this  formal 
commissioning and opening of Access Bank (Zambia) Ltd. I wish to extend a warm welcome 
to  all  of  you  gathered  here  today,  particularly  those  who  have  travelled  from  outside  the 
country. 
Your  Excellency,  Honourable  Ministers, 
is  a  crowning  moment  and 
demonstrates  the  fruits  of  the  economic  reforms  that  the  Government  has  continued  to 
implement  in  the  financial  sector  in  particular  and  the  economy  in  general.  Indeed  it  is  a 
landmark  achievement  in  the  Government’s  concerted  efforts  aimed  at  attracting  foreign 
investors. It is also gratifying to note that Access Bank Zambia Limited is the first bank to be 
registered in the country since 1999. I am also happy to inform you, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
that the Bank of Zambia is currently reviewing other applications for banking licenses. In this 
regard, we expect a few more banks to be registered in the near future. 
This  interest  we  are  witnessing  in  the  financial  sector  is  due  to  the  favourable  economic 
environment that has been created in the last seven years. During this period, the economy 
has performed relatively well as reflected in the overall macroeconomic stability, which has 
been  underpinned  by  sustained  positive  growth  rates  in  the  real  Gross  Domestic  Product 
averaging  over  5%  in  the  last  five  years.  I  do  hope  that  Access  Bank  Zambia,  will  play  a 
special role in taking this growth to an even higher level. 
In  the  financial  sector,  stability  has  continued  to  characterize  the  financial  system  with  all 
banks  being  adequately  capitalised  and  non-bank  financial  institutions  performance  being 
satisfactory. I am convinced that this stability, among other factors, will continue to contribute 
to the attraction of international investors such as Access Bank to invest in Zambia. 
It is my hope that with new entrants in the banking sector, the provision of financial services 
to the public will become more competitive both in terms of the variety of services offered, 
efficiency and pricing. The need for provision of affordable banking services to the majority of 
our people can not be ever emphasised. Such services will greatly benefit our people and 
contribute positively to poverty reduction in the country. 
As Access Bank ventures into full fledged business, I urge the bank’s management to devise 
strategies that will contribute to Government’s efforts of reducing the cost of borrowing and 
increasing the  level  of  inclusiveness  in  the  country.  I  also  implore  management  to  provide 
support  to  various  sectors  of  the  economy,  especially  the  priority  sectors  of  agriculture, 
tourism, manufacturing and small-scale mining to effectively contribute to the development of 
the country. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  introduction  of  the  fourteenth  bank  in  the  banking  sector  will 
obviously  come  with  its  own  challenges.  For  us  at  Bank  of  Zambia,  this  entails  further 
strengthening of our supervisory capacity. We welcome this challenge and hope to rise to the 
BIS Review 117/2008 
 1
occasion by providing adequate supervisory infrastructure and an environment conducive to 
conducting good business. 
In the past few years, the Bank has embarked on a process of strengthening its supervisory 
framework through various initiatives. One such initiative is the adoption of an enhanced risk-
based approach to supervision (RBS). The enhanced RBS approach will entail more regular 
interaction with the banks than previously in order to understand and monitor activities and 
risks  on  a  continuous  basis.  As  part  of  the  adoption  of  the  enhanced  RBS,  the  BoZ  has 
formulated Risk Management Guidelines to banks which will serve as a minimum standard in 
their design and implementation of risk management frameworks, relative to their size and 
complexity. 
Further, in 2006, the Bank issued Corporate Governance Guidelines to all Financial Service 
Providers. The guidelines set forth a broad framework of fundamental governance principles 
to  guide  the  actions  of  directors  and  managers.  This  will  strengthen  governance  in 
institutions and minimize the risk of bank failures as a result of bad governance. 
Your Excellency, Honourable Ministers in order to insulate the financial system from external 
influences like the financial turmoil currently being experienced in some Western countries, 
the Bank has been working on a macro prudential approach to supervision of the financial 
system. Macro prudential analysis looks at the health of the underlying financial institutions in 
the system and performs stress tests and scenario analysis to help determine the system's 
sensitivity  to  economic  shocks.  This  analysis  also  looks  at  macroeconomic  data  including 
GDP  growth  rates,  inflation,  interest  rates,  balance  of  payments,  exchange  rates,  asset 
prices and the correlation of markets within the system. 
Distinguished  guests,  I  am  advised  that  Access  Bank  comes  with  a  bouquet  of  banking 
products and excellent services, aimed at enhancing the quality of lives of Zambians and the 
economy in general. I urge management to remain committed to ethical standards and see 
themselves as a Zambian bank because you are indeed a Zambian bank now. Based on our 
inquiries,  the  Bank  has  a  strong  heritage  and  history  of  performance  that  will  positively 
contribute to the health of the financial sector in Zambia. 
Your  Excellency,  Honourable  Ministers, 
the  bank  we  are 
commissioning today is coming to Zambia in the context of pan-Africanism. This is an African 
bank investing in another African country, a demonstration of South to South cooperation. It 
is such investments that will accelerate the pace of the much needed economic integration in 
Africa.  I  am  particularly  pleased  that  the  first  Managing  Director  of  Access  Bank  Zambia 
Limited is a Zambian who is vastly experienced in our financial sector. 
Finally,  as  we  witness  the  commissioning  of  the  bank,  I  wish  to  warmly  welcome  Access 
Bank (Zambia) Ltd to the Zambian banking sector and wish them the best in their operations. 
Thank you! 
is  also  exciting 
that 
It 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2008
