Jean-Claude Trichet: Current challenges for the euro area 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at “Lunchtime 
discussions” with the Spanish business community, Madrid, 27 October 2008. 
 Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
I would like to thank KPMG and Europa Press for inviting me today to share with you some 
reflections on the current state of the euro area and its future.  
This summer we celebrated the tenth anniversary of the European Central Bank and of the 
European System of Central Banks, and next January the euro will be ten years old. Since 
the launch of the euro, the average inflation rate in the euro area has been slightly above 
2%. This record compares favourably with the average inflation rate of 3% that was achieved 
in  the  member  countries  in  the  previous  nine  years.  The  ECB  has  preserved  and  made 
available to all euro area countries the stability and credibility that were the privilege of the 
most successful legacy currencies to be replaced by the euro. Our success in delivering low 
and  stable  inflation  over  the  last  decade  is  all  the  more  remarkable  when  one  remembers 
that, in the early years, the project of a single European currency was received with a degree 
of  scepticism  by  prominent  commentators.  These  critics  have  clearly  been  proven  wrong. 
The  euro  has  rapidly  achieved  a  well-recognised  status  worldwide  as  a  stable  anchor  in 
turbulent times. Far from suppressing growth and entrenching divergences, the euro acts as 
a vital catalyst for change in the economic landscape of Europe.  
Nonetheless, there is no place for complacency. Price stability in the medium term has to be 
permanently  ensured.  And  the  success  achieved  so  far  needs  to  be  complemented  and 
consolidated. For this reason, in the remainder of my talk today I would like to discuss the 
challenges  that  the  ECB,  and  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  face  as  they  enter  their  second 
decade.  
Price stability: current situation and prospects 
I  
Let me first share with you some reflections on the prospects for price stability. 
Starting with the current situation, euro area HICP inflation has remained at a high level since 
last  autumn.  This  spike  in  euro  area  HICP  inflation  had  its  origins  in  external  forces,  in 
particular the very strong global rise in several commodity prices – notably those of energy 
and food.  
Given  the  magnitude  of  these  increases  in  global  commodity  prices,  there  has  been  a 
sizeable direct pass-through into the food and energy components of inflation. Much of the 
ongoing inflationary pressure at this stage also derives from the indirect effects on inflation of 
cost  pressures  in  the  production  chain.  In  addition,  there  is  a  concern  that  second-round 
effects  could  materialise  if  consumers  or  firms  attempt  to  compensate  for  any  loss  in 
purchasing  power  stemming  from  the  increase  in  commodity  prices  by  pushing  for  higher 
wages or prices.  
Available  evidence  on  price  and  wage-setting  behaviour  in  the  euro  area  suggests  some 
cause for concern in two respects: 
• 
First, the indirect impacts on inflation have been strong, given both the scale of the 
rise in energy and food prices and the fact that these commodities are an extensive 
input into the production of other goods and services. Strong producer price inflation 
was not confined to the direct energy and food price components of producer prices. 
BIS Review 130/2008 
 1
 Indirect effects have also been visible at the retail level, most notably in areas with a 
strong link to energy and food prices, such as the transport and restaurant and café 
components.  Ultimately,  the  extent  to  which  price  pressures  at  early  and 
intermediate stages of production feed through the production chain and up to the 
retail level crucially depends on the pricing behaviour of firms. An important factor 
here  is  the  extent  of  competition  in  product  markets,  which  obviously  serves  to 
reduce the pricing power of individual firms.  
Second,  labour  costs  exhibited  a  clear  acceleration  in  the first  half  of  this  year.  A 
pick-up  in  the  growth  rate  of  wages  at  a  time  when  labour  productivity  growth  is 
decelerating  has  resulted  in  a  significant  increase  in  unit  labour  costs.  It  is 
imperative  to  avoid  broad-based  second-round  effects  in  wage  as  well  as  price-
setting.  In  this  context,  the  ECB  has  repeatedly  expressed  its  concern  about  the 
existence  of  schemes  in  which  nominal  wages  are  indexed  to  consumer  prices. 
Such schemes involve the risk of upward shocks in inflation leading to a wage-price 
spiral,  which  would  be  detrimental  to  employment  and  competitiveness  in  the 
countries concerned.  
As for the prospects for inflation, on the basis of current commodity futures prices the annual 
HICP inflation rate is likely to remain above a level consistent with price stability for some 
time,  moderating  gradually  during  the  course  of  2009.  Taking  into  account  the  recent 
substantial decline in commodity prices, together with the substantial weakening in demand 
which  has  emerged  lately,  upside  risks  to  price  stability  have  diminished.  Taking  this 
environment  into  account  and,  particularly  also  the  fact  that  inflation  expectations  have 
significantly  diminished,  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  to  diminish  rates  by  50  basis 
points on 8th of October. Assuming that the new information which is progressively becoming 
available since then and until our next meeting, is likely to indicate a further alleviation of the 
upside  risks  to  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  and  a  confirmation  of  the  more  solid 
anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  in  line  with  our  definition  of  price  stability,  I  consider 
possible  that  the  Governing  Council  would  decrease  interest  rates  once  again  at  its  next 
meeting on the 6th of November. It is not a certainty. It is a possibility. If we have decreased 
rates on the 8th of October it was because upside risks to price stability had diminished and 
that we were fully confident that the new monetary policy stance would permit us to deliver 
price stability in the medium term. All our decisions are inspired by this fundamental primary 
objective: price stability. Any new monetary policy stance that we could decide on at our next 
regular  monetary  policy  meeting  must  continue  to  allow  us  to  tell  our  320  million  fellow 
citizens: “you can be confident. We will deliver price stability in line with our definition of less 
than 2% but close to 2% in the medium term.” 
Potential growth, productivity and structural reforms in Europe 
II  
Let me move on to the growth performance of the euro area. Over the short term, annual 
euro  area  real  GDP  growth  is  expected  to  slow  down.1  The  uncertainty  surrounding  this 
outlook  is  particularly  high  at  the  current  juncture  and,  generally,  downside  risks  from  the 
financial  market  tensions  prevail.  However,  today  I  would  like  to  look  beyond  recent 
developments in economic activity and discuss growth prospects over the medium and long 
term. I am afraid that prospects for potential output growth over the medium term do not offer 
a completely reassuring picture. Raising potential output growth remains a challenge for the 
                                                 
1   Euro area GDP growth was 2.7% in 2007, and in the September 2008 ECB staff macroeconomic projections 
real GDP growth is projected to be between 1.1% and 1.7% in 2008 and between 0.6% and 1.8% in 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2008
euro area.2 Let me elaborate on the three main factors underlying trends in real GDP growth: 
working-age population growth, labour utilisation and labour productivity.3  
• 
Working-age population growth remains one important factor explaining disparities 
in  real  GDP  growth  between  the  euro  area  and  the  fastest  growing  industrial 
economies.  Over  the  past  20  years,  the  average  contribution  to  real  GDP  growth 
from growth of the working-age population has been approximately 0.8 percentage 
point higher in the United States than in the euro area.4 Looking ahead, the euro 
area  faces  the  prospect  of  an  ageing  population,  and  the  labour  force  could 
therefore become a strong constraint on the growth potential of the euro area.  
As for labour utilisation, over the past ten years, and despite subdued growth in the 
population of working age, there has been a strong acceleration in the number of 
total hours worked in the euro area. This stands in contrast to developments in the 
United States, where a small deceleration has taken place.5 Much of the euro area 
acceleration can be explained by enhanced labour utilisation over this period, and 
the  main  drivers  of  this  to  date  can  clearly  be  identified  as  improvements  in 
participation and employment rates.  
 However, despite this visible progress, there is room for further improvement with regard to 
the way in which labour markets work in Europe. First, the employment rate in the euro area 
remains low by international standards.6 Second, the unemployment rate is still too high on 
average in the euro area and especially in certain countries. 
• 
As for labour productivity growth, from a longer-term perspective, developments in 
the euro area have been characterised by a sustained decline. This is in contrast 
with strong gains in labour productivity in the United States over the past ten years.7 
This acceleration in US labour productivity was triggered by advances in information 
and communication technology (ICT) during the 1990s. A very favourable regulatory 
environment, continued investment in research and development (R&D), the ability 
to  redesign  management  and  organisational  systems,  and  the  relative  ease  of 
reallocating  and  retraining  (as  well  as  shedding)  of  workers,  allowed  US  firms  to 
benefit  from  ICT  investment  and  to  achieve  significant  gains  in  productivity. 
Developments  in  the  euro  area  in  the  last  few  years  suggest  that  the  decline  in 
labour  productivity  growth  may  have  come  to  a  halt,  although  at  a  very  low  level, 
                                                 
2   Estimates  from  international  institutions  project  euro  area  potential  output  growth  to  be  between  1.8%  and 
2.0% in 2009 (European Commission 1.8%, OECD 1.9% and IMF 2.0%). 
3   This analysis relies on the commonly used growth accounting framework that links real GDP (Y) to the product 
of labour productivity (L), labour utilisation (LU) and working-age population (WA), i.e. Y = LP x LU x WA. 
4   Euro area working-age population growth was 0.5% over the period 1987-97 and 0.4% over the period 1998-
2007. Over these same two periods US working-age population growth was 1.1% and 1.3% respectively. 
5   Growth in total hours worked accelerated in the euro area from an average of 0.2% per year during the period 
1987-97 to 1.0% during the period 1998-2007. Over these same periods growth in total hours worked slowed 
down in the United States from 1.7% to 0.8%. 
6   The participation rate in the euro area was 71.1% in 2007, while that in the United States was 75.3%. The 
disparities in participation rates between the euro area and the United States are particularly strong for people 
aged 55 to 64 (46.3% in the euro area versus 63.8% in the United States) and those aged 16 to 24 (44.7% in 
the euro area versus 59.4% in the United States). 
7   Measured per hour, average productivity growth in the euro area in the period 1998-2007 was 1.2% and thus 
clearly lower than the 2.1% recorded in the earlier period 1987-97. US real GDP growth per hour worked has 
shown  a  strong  increase  in  recent  years,  averaging  2.1%  over  the  period  1998-2007,  compared  with  1.3% 
over the period 1987-97. 
BIS Review 130/2008 
 3
and  the  longer-term  effects  of  the  current  downturn  still  have  to  be  assessed.8 
Specific  policies  aimed  at  increasing  employment,  particularly  in  the  unskilled 
segment of the labour market, have certainly contributed to the slowdown in labour 
productivity growth, especially in services, which are usually more labour-intensive. 
However, the developments in labour supply are only part of the story. To a large 
extent,  the  slowdown  in  labour  productivity  growth  can  be  attributed  to  a  marked 
slowdown  in  total  factor  productivity  (TFP)  growth,  which  is  generally  taken  as  a 
measure  of  technological  progress  and  improvements  in  the  organisation  and 
overall efficiency of production.  
These  developments  described  for  the  euro  area  have  also  been  seen  in  Spain, 
where  productivity  has  been  very  low  over  recent  years  around  0.4%  on  average 
over the period 1999-2007. This appears to be related to an increase in employment 
over  the  last  few  years  and  a  production  structure  more  oriented  towards  labour-
intensive sectors, in particular construction and services activities. I am aware that 
improving productivity in Spain is fully acknowledged as a medium-term challenge 
by the Spanish authorities, as stated in the country’s National Reform Programme. 
 To  sum  up,  the  prompt  and  effective  implementation  of  structural  reforms  –  covering  the 
labour and product markets – is essential in order to raise factor productivity and potential 
output, to create new jobs, to achieve lower prices and higher real incomes, and to increase 
the  resilience  and  flexibility  of  the  economy.  In  this  context,  let  me  stress  that  the  Lisbon 
strategy and the peer surveillance of its implementation at the national level have certainly 
been  successful  in  raising  awareness  among  Member  States  that  structural  reforms  are 
decisive,  and  the  institutional  environment  has  indeed  significantly  improved  over  the  last 
decade. However, the reform process is far from being complete. The intensity of reform has 
been uneven across countries. Countries should be encouraged to continue with the reform 
process  irrespective  of  the  phase  of  the  business  cycle,  and  progress  towards  the  Lisbon 
targets should be the object of constant monitoring and assessment.  
I  should  like  to  discuss  some  of  the  key  priorities  for  reform  in  three  main  areas,  namely 
getting  more  people  into  work;  supporting  an  innovative  environment;  and  increasing 
competition.  
• 
Getting more people into work. Despite the impressive achievements in job creation, 
the  still  relatively  high  unemployment  rates  in  the  euro  area,  as  well  as  low 
participation  rates  in  some  countries,  clearly  suggest  that  there  is  a  need  to 
stimulate not only labour supply but also labour demand. As regards labour demand, 
it  is  necessary  to  reduce  labour  market  rigidities,  because  they  restrict  wage 
differentiation and flexibility and thus tend to discourage the hiring of younger and 
older  workers  in  particular.  Progress  towards  greater  contractual  flexibility  has 
remained slow in several euro area countries and employment protection legislation, 
in  particular  for  permanent  contracts,  remains  fairly  rigid.  Moreover,  in  those 
European  countries  and  regions  where  competitiveness  has  declined  and/or  the 
unemployment  rate  remains  high,  it  is  important  that  wage  increases  do  not  fully 
exhaust  productivity  gains,  in  order  that  incentives  remain  for  firms  to  create 
additional jobs. As regards labour supply, further reforms in income tax and benefit 
systems  would  help  to  increase  incentives  to  work,  in  particular  for  those  with 
weaker ties to the labour market, such as women and older workers. 
Supporting an innovative environment. The reforms that I have mentioned need to 
be complemented by measures supporting innovation through higher investment in 
                                                  
8   Average annual hourly labour productivity was 1.3% during the period 2005-07, compared with 1.4% during 
the period 1995-2004. In the United States hourly labour productivity growth declined to 1.2% from 2.1% over 
the same two periods. 
4 
 BIS Review 130/2008
R&D and policies geared towards improving human capital. A more entrepreneur-
friendly  economic  environment  is  also  needed,  to  ensure  that  new  and  dynamic 
firms  emerge  which  can  reap  the  benefits  of  pursuing  creative  and  innovative 
ventures.  
We know that R&D, as well as human capital, makes valuable contributions to productivity 
growth. In 2006, R&D investment relative to GDP was only 1.9% in the euro area, compared 
with  2.7%  in  the  United  States.  Cooperation  between  universities,  public  sector  research 
institutes  and  industry  must  also  intensify  in  order  to  raise  the  efficiency  of  public  R&D 
spending. Unfortunately, in several euro area countries investment in human capital is still 
too  low  for  a  “knowledge-intensive”  economy.  This  is  a  matter  of  concern  since  the 
employability  and  flexibility  of  the  labour  force  requires  human  capital  to  be  continuously 
adjusted  to  labour  market  needs.  This  investment  should  start  “early”,  by  enhancing  the 
quality  and  efficiency  of  our  schools  and  universities,  and  should  be  continued  through 
lifelong training and learning. 
• 
Increasing  competition.  Establishing  efficient  and  well-functioning  product  and 
services markets can boost productivity trends by enhancing the incentive to invest 
and  innovate.  The  long-run  dividends  offered  by  competition-enhancing  policies 
cannot be overstated, since “little else other than productivity growth matters in the 
long run”, as Nobel Prize winner Robert Solow once put it. Moreover, such policies 
will  support  employment  creation,  reduce  inflation  persistence  and  keep  upward 
price pressures contained, thereby improving the adjustment capacity of countries. It 
is undeniable that, over the past two decades, significant progress has already been 
made under the Single Market Programme. This has already yielded major benefits 
for  European  economies.  However,  the  extension  and  deepening  of  the  Single 
Market  still  remains  a  high  priority  in  order  to  achieve  further  financial  market 
integration, effective competition in the energy market and the full implementation of 
the Services Directive. 
Competitiveness and unit labour cost developments in euro area countries 
III  
Having discussed the outlook for inflation and growth – as well as highlighted what are in my 
view  the  priority  areas  in  which  decisive  progress  on  structural  reforms  is  most  urgently 
needed – I would now like to move on to another key challenge for the euro area countries: 
improving competitiveness. In this respect, let me elaborate further on developments in unit 
labour costs,9 which I briefly mentioned a few minutes ago.  
A  number  of  euro  area  countries  have  witnessed  relatively  strong  increases  in  unit  labour 
costs  since  the  beginning  of  1999.  In  particular,  in  cumulative  terms,  over  the  nine-year 
period from 1999 to 2007, a group of countries witnessed increases in unit labour costs of 
between  25%  and  35%,  well  above  the  average  euro  area  cumulative  increase  of  around 
14%. In Spain, unit labour costs grew in total by around 26% over this period, compared with 
less than 2% in the case of Germany and around 4% in the case of Austria.  
Differing developments in unit labour costs across the euro area countries from 1999 to 2007 
appear  to  be  largely  the  result  of  differences  in  the  growth  rates  of  compensation  per 
employee. However, in a few countries, including Spain, the cumulated productivity growth 
rate  over  the  nine-year  period  of  reference  appears  to  have  been  outstandingly  low,  also 
contributing to above average increases in unit labour costs. Persistent differences in labour 
cost  developments  have  important  implications  for  the  price  and  cost  competitiveness  of 
individual countries and, therefore, an impact on a country’s current account balance through 
                                                 
9   Labour costs per unit of output, which are usually computed as compensation per employee divided by labour 
productivity. 
BIS Review 130/2008 
 5
the export channel. Most of the euro area countries that experienced a sizeable loss in price 
and cost competitiveness over the period 1999-2007 appear to have also seen a worsening 
in their current account positions. In particular, in Spain, the current account reached a deficit 
of 10% of GDP. 
Three main factors can explain relatively strong cumulated labour cost or price increases in 
individual countries. First, there are factors that can be linked to the real convergence and 
economic integration process of a country. In practical terms, however, it is extremely difficult 
to  disentangle  the  portion  of  the  price  and  labour  cost  differentials  that  may  reflect  an 
adjustment  to  a  new  equilibrium  level.  Second,  a  lack  of  flexibility  in  product  and  labour 
markets  can  create,  in  the  case  of  adverse  shocks,  persistent  relative  price  and  cost 
increases  in  the  countries  affected.  The  close  link  between  the  persistence  of  wages  and 
inflation  may  be  related  to  institutional  features,  such  as  the  presence  of  some  form  of 
automatic  price  indexation  of  wages  which  continues  to  exist  in  some  countries,  including 
Spain. And third, an economy can suffer a long period of strong demand pressures. These 
pressures may initially be related to either country-specific demand shocks or an excessive 
reaction to common shocks, which are then exacerbated by overly optimistic expectations on 
the  part  of  consumers  or  firms  regarding  future  income  prospects.  This  situation  may  be 
further intensified by an insufficiently tight fiscal stance. Such a situation is likely to lead to an 
inflationary process and cumulated losses in competitiveness. Moreover, the impact may be 
seen  not  only  on  goods  and  services  prices  but  also  on  asset  price  inflation,  notably  in 
housing markets. 
What then should be done on the policy side? Let me clarify that country-specific price and 
labour  cost  dynamics  that  result  from  relatively  inefficient  institutional  arrangements  or 
domestic  policies  need  to  be  addressed  by  national  policy-makers;  as  already  stressed, 
structural reforms are key. With respect to labour market policies, governments and social 
partners  must  share  responsibility 
to 
competitiveness  and  employment  in  wage  determination.  In  particular,  schemes  in  which 
nominal wages are indexed to consumer prices should be abolished. Such schemes involve 
the  risk  of  upward  shocks  in  inflation  leading  to  a  wage-price  spiral,  which  would  be 
detrimental  to  employment  and  competitiveness  in  the  countries  concerned.  Furthermore, 
national  authorities  can  make  a  substantial  contribution  to  more  modest  labour  cost 
developments. In particular, the public sector should be a role model in terms of wage-setting 
and should not contribute to strong overall labour cost growth. 
Some countries have already started to witness a correction or unwinding of the imbalances 
accumulated  over  the  last  few  years.  In  this  context,  the  sooner  corrective  measures  are 
taken  by  the  national  authorities,  the  lower  the  risks  will be  of  that  country  experiencing  a 
protracted period of low growth and losses in employment. 
that  sufficient  attention 
for  ensuring 
is  paid 
Conclusion  
Ladies and gentlemen, having covered a number of areas which are at the heart of monetary 
policy-making  in  the  euro  area,  let  me  conclude  by  summarising  some  important  points. 
Specifically, I would like to list a number of points which should be kept in mind if we want to 
preserve and consolidate the remarkable success of the euro and to reinforce the strength 
and resilience of the euro area economy.  
• 
First, in the current uncertain environment it is crucial that the public’s trust in the 
soundness of fiscal policies is preserved. Therefore, I welcome that the European 
Council  reconfirmed  that  budget  policies  must  continue  to  be  in  line  with  the 
provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact. This means that the rules of the Pact 
should be applied fully, while also reflecting the current exceptional circumstances. 
Concretely,  fiscal  policies  need  to  ensure  the  longer-term  sustainability  of  public 
finances.  For  some  countries,  this  implies  that  there  is  no  leeway  for  fiscal 
loosening.  By  contrast,  countries  with  budgetary  room  for  manoeuvre  can  let 
6 
 BIS Review 130/2008
    automatic  stabilisers  operate  freely  and  fully,  thus  contributing  to  smoothing  the 
business cycle.  
A second building block on which I touched, and through which we will consolidate 
our success, is structural reforms. As I have said today, the firm implementation of 
the Lisbon strategy, as refocused and reinforced by the EU Council, is essential in 
order  to  augment  our  growth  potential,  consolidate  sustainable  prosperity  and  job 
creation,  and  strengthen  the  resilience  of  our  economy.  This  agenda  calls  for 
courageous  structural  reforms.  In  the  current  crisis,  economic  flexibility,  including 
flexibility in prices and wages, is even more important than in more normal times.  
Third, as I have explained, it is essential to regularly monitor developments in unit 
labour costs across the euro area countries. In particular in those countries, such as 
Spain,  where  there  has  been  a  substantial  and  long-lasting  cumulation  of  above 
average  increases  in  labour  costs,  and  therefore  losses  in  competitiveness,  it  is 
essential  that  all  social  partners  understand  the  importance,  in  the  context  of 
Monetary Union, of moderating cost and price increases. This is crucial in terms of 
both  labour  costs  and  firms’  mark-ups.  All  social  partners  must  understand  their 
shared responsibility in delivering price stability and supporting job creation and a 
sustainable output growth pattern.  
Fourth,  we  are  presently  experiencing  a  period  of  intense  turbulences  which 
correspond  to  a  very  significant  market  correction  at  a  global  level,  which  is 
extremely  demanding  for  all  Institutions  whether  public  or  private,  for  all  market 
participants and for all authorities. The ECB and the Eurosystem together with the 
other Central Banks have taken a number of decisions as regards the refinancing of 
commercial  banks  that  were  appropriate  in  view  of  the  exceptional  circumstances 
we  had  to  cope  with.  Amongst  the  most  recent  of  these  orientations,  was  the 
decision to engage in unlimited provision of liquidity for all our refinancing duration, 
from one week to six months and at a fixed interest rate. Also very significant was 
the decision to enlarge our collateral framework to facilitate the provision of liquidity 
to commercial banks in a period of intense stress. I am impressed by the fact that all 
observers  and  all  our  partners  have  praised  our  capacity  to  react  rapidly  and 
efficiently to the present exceptional challenges. At the same time, everybody has 
recognised  that  the  rapidity  of  our  reaction  in  the  domain  of  commercial  banks’ 
refinancing did not hamper our credibility in delivering price stability in the medium 
term.  We  made  clear  since  the  first  days  of  the  turbulence  in  the  beginning  of 
August  2007  that  we  were  making  a  very  clear  separation  between  the  monetary 
policy stance – aiming at delivering price stability over the medium term – and the 
implementation of that monetary policy stance, taking into account the “policy level” 
of interest rates.  
And fifth, it is precisely because we judged – fully in line with our separation principle 
– that the alleviation of risks to price stability and the regaining control of inflation 
expectations were significant and convincing that we decreased rates in October. As 
I said, it is possible that we would decrease rates again in the occasion of the next 
meeting of the Governing Council. If we do so – I repeat if – it would be because we 
would  have  judged  that  a  further  alleviation  of  inflation  risks  and  a  further 
improvement of inflation expectations fully justify the move. Let me also say that our 
last decision to decrease rates was based upon the assumption that our very strong 
call to price setters and social partners not to engage in second round effects had 
been  not  only  heard,  but  understood  as  being  essential 
the  present 
circumstances. I would today reinforce my very strong call to all partners concerned.  
in 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 130/2008 
 7
