Mr  Bäckström  looks  at  the  Riksbank  and  financial  system  stability  and  comments  on
the LTCM case
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, to the Swedish Economics
Association in Stockholm on 25/2/99.
Financial stability is a topical subject in the light of events in the past year(cid:190)
a year that saw
continued financial problems in Asia, the devaluation of the rouble and suspended payments
in Russia, considerable turbulence in western financial markets and financial unrest in Brazil.
What happened last autumn, when it was considered that problems for a single player(cid:190)
the
hedge fund Long Term Capital Management(cid:190) might create grave difficulties for the financial
system in the United States, highlighted risks of a new type. The LTCM case can be seen both
as an extreme example of what could happen in Sweden’s financial markets and as a serious
reminder that  the  continuous  development  of  financial  markets  is  liable  to  give  rise  to  new
risks. The suspension of payments in Russia and its consequences should likewise lead us to
reflect on the risks in the system.
Today I shall be discussing the problems behind last autumn’s events in the U.S. market and
the fact that a systemic crisis was judged to be imminent. First, however, I shall briefly sketch
the background and explain stability’s central importance for the Riksbank.
Background
There  is  nothing  new  about  financial  crises.  Over  the  centuries  they  have  repeatedly  hit
financial systems in the industrialised world, as well as in less developed countries.
A classic example is the tulipmania in the Netherlands, which ended in 1636 with the collapse
of the market for tulip options. From the tulip crisis it is also clear that derivative instruments
are not a recent innovation in financial markets. The world also saw numerous financial crises
in the nineteenth century. As for the present century, what first comes to mind is the crisis in
the wake of the stock-market crash in New York in 1929, with effects that left their mark on
the global economy in the 1930s. There are various explanations for the Great Depression but
it clearly involved widespread financial turbulence and the failure of many banks. In Sweden,
too, there were serious bank crises in the early 1920s and ’30s; on both occasions they were
accompanied by a deep economic depression and serious deflation. The drop in output and the
price level reached two-digit figures before the problems could be overcome.
In  recent  years  the  pace  of  financial  market  development  has  been  rapid.  As  a  result  of
innovations  in  communications  and  information  technology,  with  the  new  instruments  and
methods they provide for risk management, the financial system is now more extensive and
globalised than ever before. The system channels savings more effectively to those activities
in the global economy that need them most.
The  rapid  pace  of  financial  developments  and  their  internationalisation  are  a  logical
consequence  of  arrangements  for  the  production  and  international  exchange  of  goods  and
services in the world economy. To cope with these arrangements, firms and households have
required  new  financing  facilities.  The  developments  also  stem  from  a  deliberate  post-war
trend in economic policy(cid:190)
trade barriers have been removed and tariffs abolished. There are
no  grounds  for  supposing  that  the  benefits  from  labour  specialisation  have  been  exhausted.
1
BIS Review   23/1999
The  ongoing  globalisation  of  the  production  of  goods  and  services,  with  increased
international  trade,  calls  for  continued  development  and  internationalisation  of  the  financial
system.
However,  just  because  the  financial  system  channels  savings  and  spreads  risks  more
efficiently  today,  it  naturally  does  not  follow  that  it  functions  sufficiently  well  in  every
respect.  The  recurrent  financial  crises  are  at  least  an  indication  of  this.  To  some  extent  the
problems  may  have  stemmed  from  uncertainty  about  the  future  price  trend  in  financial
markets. But political errors or faulty risk assessments among market players may also have
played a part.
While  the  crises  in  recent  years  have  arisen  in  different  ways,  they  all  demonstrate  the
important  part  that  a  properly  functioning  financial  system  plays  for  a  good  real  economic
development.  There  have  been  some  instances  where  a  global  increase  in  financial  market
unrest has arisen from a sudden deterioration in the macroeconomic conditions for a particular
country. Last autumn, however, the causal relationships of the events in financial markets in
the  industrialised  world  were  the  opposite(cid:190)
it  was  problems  in  the  financial  markets  that
engendered fears of a serious shock to much of the global economy.
The Riksbank and financial stability
Much work is being done with a view to avoiding financial crises. The Riksbank is one of the
participants in these endeavours. Our efforts have included the development of an intellectual
framework for contributions to improving the stability of Sweden’s payment system. In recent
years it has become increasingly clear that the Riksbank has a main function that is probably
just as important as maintaining price stability, namely promoting financial stability.
The  financial  system  has  a  central  function  in  the  economy  and  performs  three  main  tasks:
firstly, it handles payments; secondly, it channels savings to investments with a good return
for future consumption; and thirdly, it spreads and reduces economic risks in relation to the
players’ required returns.
A smooth functioning of all these activities facilitates economic growth in that the production
of goods and services as well as employment are promoted by lower costs and risks. In this
way the financial system contributes to increased prosperity.
In  view  of  the  financial  sector’s  central  function  in  the  economy,  the  authorities  are
particularly active in monitoring and regulating developments in this sector. In Sweden, the
work for financial stability was accentuated by the serious incidents in the early 1990s. Since
1989  the  Riksbank  had  been  required  by  law  to  “promote  a  safe  and  efficient  payment
system”.  The  problems  among  Swedish  banks  naturally  strengthened  the  Riksbank’s
determination  to  contribute  to  the  work  on  stability  so  that  similar  events  would  not  occur
again.
As  virtually  all  economic  transactions  involve  some  form  of  payment,  one  of  the  financial
system’s principal components is the payment system. This is clearly expressed in a statement
in  the  main  report  from  the  Banking  Law  Committee,  to  the  effect  that  concern  for  the
payment system is the primary reason for supervising and controlling financial institutions.
BIS Review   23/1999
2
In Sweden it is the Riksbank that provides and is accountable for the central payment system.
This  RIX  system  handles  1,500  interbank  payments  a  day  with  a  total  value  of  SEK  350
billion. While it is often the central bank that is responsible for a country’s payment system,
there is nothing to prevent this function being performed by some other player. In countries
where  that  is  the  case,  the  payment  system  is  not  a  central  bank  concern.  Nonetheless,  one
reason for assigning the task to the central bank is the payment system’s importance for the
transmission of monetary policy. Another reason is that a central bank is in a unique position
to provide the liquidity that the smooth functioning of the system constantly requires. Players
are liable to need a temporary supply of liquidity in order to smooth the flow of payments with
other participants.
The  payment  system  can  be  said  to  consist  in  turn  of  two  components:  the  payment
infrastructure and the financial firms, mainly banks, with access to the system. The stability of
the  system  is  dependent  on  the  proper  functioning  of  both  these  components.  The
infrastructure must be constructed so that it does not exacerbate any problems that may arise.
It needs to be capable of handling external shocks without any danger of collapsing.
However,  the  severe  strains  that  arise  from  time  to  time  in  the  payment  system  tend  to  be
generated not so much by hang-ups in technical and administrative systems as by problems for
one or several of the participating banks. Problems for one bank quickly spread to the rest of
the payment system and may generate a systemic risk. This risk arises if problems with credit
or  liquidity  prevent  bank  A  from  completing  its  payments  to  bank  B,  which  thereby  has
difficulties  in  paying  bank  C.  Banks  B  and  C  are  then  liable  to  fail  solely  because  bank  A
cannot  fulfil  its  commitments.  The  risk  obviously  varies  with  the  size  of  the  payments  in
question; the larger these are, the greater is the potential systemic risk.
The occurrence of systemic crisis threatens the whole or parts of the payment system, and if
this ceases to function the entire financial system as well as the real economy will be affected.
The crisis in Sweden in the early 1990s was associated with large systemic risks. Last autumn
the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  perceived  considerable  systemic  risks  in  the  domestic  financial
market. In neither of these cases, however, was there a full-blown systemic crisis.
In the event of a systemic crisis, the payment system needs a large supply of credit. As a last
resort the law therefore allows the  Riksbank  to  provide  financial  support  for  banks  that  are
viable but in temporary difficulties. The provision of credit is a very important instrument in
the management of systemic crises.
The  Riksbank  focuses  on  the  banks,  particularly  the  largest  ones,  because  one  of  the  main
systemic  risks  stems  from  problems  with  the  settlement  of  large-value  payments.  It  is
therefore important that the Riksbank analyses the overall stability of the bank sector in order
to identify banks that may encounter temporary difficulties. In this way, our oversight of the
payment system is extended to include much of the financial system.
The  continuous  analysis  of  the  financial  system  by  the  Riksbank  currently  focuses  on  three
aspects:
1. Each  institution’s  efficiency  and  earning  capacity,  as  this  is  liable  to  influence  the
institution’s risk behaviour.
3
BIS Review   23/1999
2. Credit risks, particularly those connected with the payment system, that is,  counterparty
and  settlement  risks.  The  analysis  of  these  risks  is  intended  to  give  the  Riksbank  a  general
picture of the whole system and enable the timely detection of any problems in some stage of
the payment process.
3. Systemic  risks  from  factors  outside  the  payment  system.  Problems  may  be  caused  by
uncertainty  and  a  lack  of  confidence  in  the  financial  system.  This  involves  other  players
besides the banks. Historically, it is macroeconomic imbalances that have caused confidence
to  decline  in  this  way.  Examples  of  such  imbalances  are  highly  volatile  asset  prices,
fluctuations in the rate of price increases and a growing household debt ratio. Macroeconomic
indicators accordingly play an important part not only in the assessment of future inflation but
also  in  the  analysis  of  payment  system  stability.  Experience  has  shown  that  a  balanced
macroeconomic  policy  and  stable  prices  reduce  the  risk  of  shocks  that  threaten  financial
stability.
Analyses of these three aspects are presented twice a year in our Financial Market Report.
The  Riksbank  is  accountable  for  oversight  and  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  for
supervision. This means that the Riksbank is primarily concerned with the development of a
system or a market, while the FSA considers the situation in each institution as well as the
system’s overall stability. But as the dividing line between these two functions is blurred in
practice,  it  is  important  that  these  two  authorities  cooperate  closely.  Such  cooperation  is
indeed a hallmark of our interaction, from senior management down to divisional staff.
Note, therefore, that while oversight is an important Riksbank function, the direct supervision
of Sweden’s financial system is not our concern. Our legislators have assigned the latter role
to  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority,  which  accordingly  has  the  possibility  of  directly
pointing to shortcomings in particular institutions.
The  Riksbank  may  nonetheless  detect  problems  at  an  early  stage  because  they  are  likely  to
leave  their  mark  on  the  payment  system,  which  is  the  Riksbank’s  concern.  Our  chances  of
influencing the course of events then lie in contacting the bank’s executives and informing the
Financial  Supervisory  Authority.  Our  Financial  Market  Report  can  no  doubt  also  play  an
important part in exerting a more continuous influence. In the longer run, the Riksbank can
also contribute to stability through international collaboration, as well as by participating in
Sweden in legislative work and the structural adjustment of various systems.
Undervalued credit risks—a recurrent phenomenon
One aspect of the Riksbank’s oversight of financial stability in Sweden has been the analysis
of  the  run-up  to  the  bank  crisis  here  and  the  possible  causes  of  crises  in  other  parts  of  the
world.
The causes and course of the various crises have differed in some respects but they do present
many similarities. Many of them were preceded by a period of rapidly rising asset prices and a
strong expansion of credit. This period ended with an abrupt reassessment—a jolt that altered
risk  assessments  and  led  to  heavy  losses  for  those  involved.  Signs  of  economic  problems
meant that the supply of credit virtually ceased. It seems that the stronger the credit supply in
the  first  period,  the  more  serious  were  the  effects  in  the  second  phase,  with  decreased
production and rising unemployment.
BIS Review   23/1999
4
Another factor in many cases has been that the country had a fixed, but adjustable, exchange
rate  regime  that  lacked  credibility.  With  such  a  regime,  the  central  bank  seemingly  absorbs
exchange  risks,  which  gives  private  investors  an  incentive  to  utilise  the  interest  rate
differential with the rest of the world that characterises a situation where domestic inflation
expectations  are  higher  than  in  other  countries.  Loans  were  therefore  obtained  in  foreign
currency for investment in domestic assets. The maturities of the financing instruments often
differed from those of the investments—the funds were borrowed short and invested long.
When the exchange rate ceased to be perceived as sustainable and the risk of an adjustment
grew, the earlier capital inflows turned into massive outflows. This accentuated the pressure
on  the  exchange  rate  and  created  an  acute  currency  crisis.  If  the  capital  inflow  had  been
channelled through the banking system, the lack of confidence during the acute phase of the
crisis often led to severe repercussions on the financial system.
The course of events of this type is essentially dependent on the supply of credit. The problem
has lain in widespread lending losses and it seems that the banks have repeatedly made much
the  same  mistakes.  This  applies  to  their  generosity  in  financing  asset  investment  by  private
players  as  well  as  to  the  willingness  of  international  banks  to  supply  foreign  currency  to
domestic counterparties. Situations of this type often involve a high concentration of credits
and the credit risk assessments appear to have been rather superficial.
What are the reasons for this? One is probably the difficulty, for banks as well as supervisors,
in assessing the risks in loan portfolios. The management of credit risks is cumbersome and
neither  is  it  easy  to  obtain  a  good  picture  of  the  players’  portfolios.  Genuine  difficulties  in
making assessments are thus one explanation; another is that in certain cases the banks seem
to have hunted with the pack instead of making independent risk assessments.
Undervalued  credit  risks  accordingly  seem  to  be  a  recurrent  theme  in  these  crises.  It  is
therefore essentially the banks that must construct sounder credit policies in their institutions.
These policies must include the scrutiny of everything from the work of the individual credit
officer up to the more general strategies of the executive management and board of directors.
A great deal of international work has also been done to rectify these problems. Authorities
and financial agents are working together on the formulation and introduction of international
principles—core principles—for the proper functioning of banking systems and supervision.
One aspect of these efforts is the construction of capital adequacy rules that are more suited to
the banking system’s present situation—the current rules were formulated in the light of the
financial  situation  in  1988.  Efforts  are  also  being  made  to  achieve  a  higher  degree  of
transparency and clearer accountancy.
The recurrent crises in financial markets unmistakably show that the work of reinforcing the
system is a continuous process that must not be neglected. Developments last autumn made it
clear that the work the banks had already initiated to improve risk management did not suffice
to prevent renewed financial turbulence. The pattern of risks differed somewhat from earlier
periods with problems. Instead of the familiar difficulties with the banks’ loan portfolios, in
large  measure  it  was  a  matter  of  risks  that  certain  highly  leveraged  players  would  generate
problems through large positions in the repo market, for example.
A drastic example—LTCM
5
BIS Review   23/1999
The problems in the U.S. hedge fund Long Term Capital Management can be seen as a drastic
example  of  how  systemic  risks  can  arise  if  the  banks’  counterparty  risks  and  concentration
risks become unduly large. A single player, seemingly far removed from the payment system,
threatened  to  generate  a  systemic  crisis  in  the  U.S.  financial  system,  with  the  risks  of
contagion that this might involve.
LTCM, which had been operating since 1994, based its strategy on the use of statistical and
mathematical  models  to  identify  temporary  price  differentials  between  similar  financial
market assets. This involved speculating, for example, in narrowing interest rate spreads in the
U.S.  bond  market.  In  simple  terms,  a  limited  capital  input  was  used  to  combine  forward
purchases of U.S. corporate bonds with forward sales of U.S. federal bonds. The combination
of  countervailing  positions  meant  that  the  outcome  would  not  be  affected  by  the  general
development of interest rates. It was only  the  relative  paths  of  the  two  asset  categories  that
mattered—a narrowing interest rate spread would result in a profit.
Similarly, the fund took large countervailing positions between different asset markets as well
as between markets in different geographical regions. To begin with the strategy was notably
successful; high profits were obtained with a low capital input. In 1995 and 1996 the annual
profit was over 40 per cent. This performance and the confidence that the fund management
enjoyed made many banks willing to provide loans or invest in the fund.
In time, however, the financial markets moved in the opposite direction to what LTCM—and
others—had  expected.  Russia’s  debt  moratorium  on  17  August  was  followed  by  markedly
increased  financial  turbulence  as  investors  became  more  nervous  and  withdrew  from  other
markets that could be perceived as risky. A uniform tendency developed, with  falling  share
prices,  widening  interest  rate  spreads,  growing  unrest  and  decreased  liquidity.  There  was  a
flight to quality of a kind that had not been observed before in the financial markets. Instead
of  narrowing,  interest  rate  differentials  became  markedly  wider.  The  diversity  of  risks  on
which LTCM had relied ceased to provide protection. The market movements were such that,
if anything, it was a source of increased losses.
The  rumours  of  problems  in  LTCM  contributed  in  turn  to  even  greater  turbulence  in  the
financial  markets.  In  that  market  prices  would  be  depressed  by  a  winding-up  of  positions,
investors  tried  to  close  positions  in  those  markets  where  they  feared  that  LTCM  was  also
involved.  It  can  be  mentioned,  for  example,  that  Risk  Magazine  estimated  that  LTCM’s
positions  in  the  interest  swap  market  totalled  5  per  cent  of  the  global  market,  which  says
something about the size of the fund’s positions. The flood of closures, almost amounting to a
panic, caused a further widening of interest rate spreads.
LTCM’s situation deteriorated rapidly; by the end of September the fund had lost almost 90
per cent of its capital in the course of nine months. The U.S. Federal Reserve had initiated a
meeting  with  some  of  LTCM’s  counterparties  and  on  23  September  fourteen  banks  with
claims  on  the  fund  agreed  to  take  over  LTCM  as  a  joint  venture  and  try  to  wind  up  the
positions in a more orderly manner.
The Federal Reserve’s motivation for initiating a solution to the problem was not the sizeable
losses that might have been incurred by many of the banks concerned. Its concern instead was
the financial system in general. If the banks that had provided loans were to close their large
positions spontaneously in a market that was already illiquid and turbulent, other agents who
were not directly involved would be hit. The steep price fall would probably have paralysed
BIS Review   23/1999
6
the  financial  markets  for  a  time  and  this  might  have  triggered  a  vicious  circle  of  declining
confidence  and  further  closures—the  Fed  perceived  a  large  systemic  risk.  The  ultimate
consideration was, of course, the potential hazard for the global economy.
It is difficult to say what might have happened if the Federal Reserve had not acted. The banks
that  were  involved  had  a  strong  interest  in  achieving  a  controlled  settlement  of  their
commitments and would probably have acted at some stage. In such a crisis, however, prompt
action is vitally important. The central bank initiative contributed to this.
Lessons
Swedish banks were never directly involved in these problems, though they did feel certain
effects of the developments in U.S. financial markets. Even the Swedish market became less
liquid.
However,  the  involvement  of  Swedish  banks  might  have  been  greater  and  that  is  why  the
Riksbank needs to analyse the origins of such problems. Our function of promoting a safe and
efficient  payment  system  cannot  be  performed  properly  without  a  good  capability  for
analysing and understanding the implications of the crises that occur around the world. The
results can lead to conclusions that underpin the stability of Sweden’s financial system. The
Riksbank  has  in  fact  been  working  on  these  matters  for  a  long  time;  risks  of  the  type  that
caused  problems  last  autumn  were  considered  in  the  Financial  Market  Report  that  was
published in November.
In the case of LTCM, the threat of a systemic crisis came from the combination of extensive
counterparty  risks  and  a  high  risk  concentration.  Counterparty  risks  occur  when  there  is
uncertainty about the ability of counterparties to meet their commitments.
One of the problems was the large number of banks that had provided loans to LTCM. This
gave a concentration of risks to a particular counterparty, which had large positions of its own.
Such a concentration can have several causes. The high profits—probably also the reputable
status  of  executives—no  doubt  made  the  fund  attractive  as  a  counterparty.  Banks  were
therefore willing to approve credits in order to establish a relationship with such a profitable
customer  as  LTCM.  At  the  same  time,  the  fund’s  reticence  about  its  risk  profile  made  it
difficult for creditors to form an accurate picture of the total risks. The banks were evidently
unaware  of  the  size  of  the  credits  that  other  players  had  provided,  which  by  itself  is
remarkable.  Neither  did  they  fully  appreciate  what  the  large  positions  might  have  for
consequences if the collateral had to be called. In other words, the banks ought not to have
relied to such an extent on the collateral, in the form of securities, they had accepted for their
loans. Lending of this type requires that even the banks obtain a picture of the borrower’s total
situation.  Had  they  done  so  in  the  case  of  LTCM,  the  outcome  would  certainly  have  been
different.
The  problems  last  autumn  also  revealed  shortcomings  in  current  risk  models  and  the
management of certain types of risk. The banks must pay more attention to how the models
work in the event of a pronounced change in market conditions. The markets moved to such
an extent that historical estimates of co-variations ceased to apply.
The crisis accordingly offers several lessons:
7
BIS Review   23/1999
 In  the  light  of  what  happened  in  international  financial  markets  last  autumn,  all
participants in the financial system must improve their credit policies.
•  Relying solely on securities as collateral is not enough; a picture must also be obtained of
the borrower’s total commitments.
•  The LTCM crisis demonstrates that credit assessments must include  a  larger  element  of
readiness  for  extreme  events.  Models  based  on  historical  events  were  incapable  of
foreseeing  the  debt  moratorium  in  Russia  and  the  resultant  slump  in  virtually  every
market. Neither could they envisage that market liquidity would dry up to such an extent
that the banks would not be able to dispose of their loan collateral without eliciting a very
steep  price  fall.  The  banks  need  to  augment  their  risk  models  with  stress  tests—
assessments  of  the  direct  and  indirect  effects  that  unusual  market  developments  would
have on their current positions.
•  Banks must improve their risk management and knowledge of different forms of risk but
so must the supervisory authorities.
•  A  further  question  concerns  the  adequacy  of  existing  laws  and  regulations.  Are  there
things  we  have  missed?  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  intensive  efforts  are  being  made  to
improve the rules.
Having said all this, we must also recognise that the extensive work that is continuously being
done  to  strengthen  the  financial  system  does  not  mean  that  the  system  will  be  made
completely  immune  to  crises.  The  work  must  focus  on  mitigating  the  effects  and  trying  to
ensure that crises which  do  occur  are  less  extensive  and  socially  costly  than  those  we  have
experienced in recent years.
The  competent  parties  must  endeavour  to  find  solutions  that  combine  the  necessary  market
regulation  and  supervision  with  the  advantages  inherent  in  capital  mobility.  A  completely
regulated  market  reduces  capital  flows  and  generates  large  fluctuations  in  market  prices,
leading  in  turn  to  welfare  losses.  But  neither  is  a  market  without  any  common  rules  and
supervision an ideal remedy. Operations in financial markets need some degree of supervision
but  this  must  not  paralyse  the  potential  for  developments  that  can  contribute  to  higher
prosperity in the global economy.
BIS Review   23/1999
8
