Mr Duisenberg considers the euro, the dollar and national economic policies: what room for
manoeuvre?
Speech  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Euro,
J+80 Conference in Paris on 25 March 1999.
The  euro  made  its  debut  on  the  international  financial  markets  at  the  start  of  this  year.  Its
successful launch in the 11 countries which form the so-called euro area constitutes a milestone in
the process of European integration. The introduction of the euro has  created  a  single  currency
area  which  approximately  matches  the  United  States  in  terms  of  economic  size,  is  the  world’s
largest with respect to its share in total world exports and ranks second in terms of the size of its
capital markets. Thus, the euro has had and will continue to have in the years to come a profound
impact upon both the euro area and the world economy.
The  launch  of  the  euro  has  raised  questions  concerning  the  relationship  between  the  exchange
rate,  the  monetary  policy  of  the  ECB  and  the  room  for  manoeuvre  of  national  policy.  For  the
purpose of today’s discussion I would propose to break down this rather complex issue into three
aspects: namely, the role of the exchange rate of the euro in the Eurosystem’s monetary  policy
strategy,  the  ECB’s  view  of  recent  developments  of  the  euro  exchange  rate  vis-à-vis  the  US
dollar,  and  the  relationship  between  the  single  currency  in  the  euro  area  and  the  flexibility  of
macroeconomic and structural policies in euro area countries.
The role of the exchange rate in the monetary policy of the Eurosystem
The introduction of the euro implies a change in the role and the importance of the exchange rate
in Europe. Considered individually, most euro area countries are exceptionally open economies.
In 1997 the sum of their exports  plus  imports  as  a  share  of  their  combined  GDP  was  53%.  By
contrast, for the euro area as a whole, trade in goods, measured as exports and imports combined,
is around 26% of GDP and thus only somewhat higher than that of the United States and Japan.
Hence the importance of a certain movement in  the  euro  exchange  rate  for  domestic  economic
developments  has  become  less  compared  with  the  same  movement  of  the  exchange  rate  of  a
national currency in the past. Nevertheless, through its effect on economic activity and prices, the
exchange rate affects the outlook for price stability and thus still undoubtedly plays an important
role in the monetary policy of the Eurosystem. Let  me  therefore  elaborate  on  this  role  in  some
more detail.
The  primary  objective  of  the  single  monetary  policy  is  the  maintenance  of  price  stability.
Monetary  policy  will  always  be  geared  to  this  objective.  Consequently,  the  monetary  policy
strategy  of  the  Eurosystem  does  not  embody  an  implicit  or  explicit  exchange  rate  target  or
objective,  since  gearing  monetary  policy  decisions  to  maintaining  such  an  exchange  rate  target
may, at times, conflict with the goal of price stability.
Consequently, the ECB subscribes to the view that the exchange rates are primarily the outcome
of  current  and  expected  monetary,  fiscal  and  structural  policies  as  well  as  cyclical  and  other
economic  developments,  rather  than  an  objective  or  target  of  monetary  policy.  Exchange  rate
misalignments  and  excessive  volatility  often  reflect  macroeconomic  imbalances  and/or  market
uncertainties.  Accordingly,  stability-oriented  macroeconomic  policies  pursued  in  a  transparent
manner  are  the  best  contribution  that  can  be  made  by  policymakers  to  fostering  exchange  rate
stability.  In  other  words,  misalignments  and  excessive  volatility  should  be  contained  by
addressing their underlying causes. The Eurosystem’s stability-oriented monetary policy strategy
ensures  that  the  single  monetary  policy  makes  the  best  possible  contribution  in  this  regard.  By
contrast, attempts to suppress exchange rate movements through direct targeting do not address,
1
BIS Review   33/1999
by  themselves,  the  underlying  causes  of  misalignment.  Monetary  policy  in  particular  cannot
correct misalignments caused by structural or fiscal policies. They need to be addressed via other
policy actions.
Moreover,  in  a  world  characterised  by  integrated  and  highly  liquid  international  financial
markets, there is serious doubt as to whether pegging or targeting exchange rates is feasible. The
sophistication, depth and liquidity of today’s financial markets make it increasingly difficult for a
central bank to defend an exchange rate for a prolonged period. In addition, the experience with
exchange rate coordination among the G7 countries shows that it has always been very difficult to
agree on a common objective. Obstacles to exchange rate coordination were also experienced by
some ERM member states. When during the late 1980s and early 1990s economic developments
in some member states of the ERM diverged, their bilateral exchange rates came under pressure,
and eventually the exchange rate bands had to be widened to ensure two-way risk for speculators.
Some currencies were even forced to abandon the ERM. These experiences are now reflected in
ERM II. ERM II has relatively wide standard fluctuation bands and the ECB has the possibility of
suspending  intervention  and  financing  if  these  could  impinge  on  its  primary  objective  of
maintaining price stability. ERM II is explicitly designed to foster convergence to the euro area of
countries that have not yet adopted the euro.
For  all  these  reasons,  stable  exchange  rates  of  the  euro  are  best  served  by  stability-oriented
policies  that  are  consistent  with  economic  fundamentals.  In  particular,  exchange  rate  targets  or
objectives  would  be  neither  a  substitute  for  a  credible  and  stability-oriented  macroeconomic
policy stance nor a surrogate for a flexible response on the part of domestic markets.
Nevertheless,  exchange  rates  affect  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  as  they  influence  import
prices and activity, and thereby consumer prices, in the euro area. Moreover, they reflect market
expectations  about  future  economic  developments  and  policies.  Furthermore,  due  consideration
has to be given to the exchange rate of the euro against the background of the importance of the
euro area in the international monetary and financial system.
Therefore,  the  ECB  monitors  exchange  rate  movements  on  an  ongoing  basis  within  its  broadly
based  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price  developments.  The  euro  exchange  rate  is  an  integral
part of the broad range of variables used by the Eurosystem to take its monetary policy decisions.
The exchange rate is also monitored as it may be a channel for monetary policy transmission.
Clear exchange rate misalignments, although difficult to identify, would be a cause of concern for
the  Eurosystem.  If  prolonged,  they  might  affect  inflation  expectations  and  distort  economic
activity as well as hamper the efficient allocation of financial resources. Although in the euro area
these negative effects will be mitigated, as a result of the low degree of openness of the economy,
they cannot be ignored altogether.
According  to  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  the  ECOFIN  Council  may  formulate  so-called  general
orientations for exchange rate policy. These orientations – and this is consistent with the above –
shall  be  without  prejudice  to  the  primary  objective  of  the  Eurosystem  of  maintaining  price
stability.  Therefore,  the  EU  finance  ministers,  who  are  ultimately  responsible  for  the  exchange
rate  policy  of  the  euro,  agreed  in  December  1997  that  they  would  only  issue  these  general
orientations for the euro exchange rate in exceptional circumstances, such as in the case of clear
and  persistent  misalignments  of  the  euro.  Successful  and  credible  stability-oriented  policies
should help prevent the emergence of misalignments in the future.
BIS Review   33/1999
2
The ECB’s view on the dollar exchange rate
Let me now share with you our views on  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  against  the  dollar.  The
weakening of the euro vis-à-vis the dollar during January and February was mainly attributable to
a series of economic data releases over this period, which were mostly relatively favourable as far
as the US economy was concerned. The US economy surprised commentators with very positive
data on employment and output. Over the same period data releases for the euro area were more
muted.
It appears, therefore, that the recent developments of the euro exchange rate primarily reflect the
previously unexpected strength of the US economy.
Therefore,  the  recent  fluctuations  of  the  euro  exchange  rate  should  not  be  considered  overly
dramatic. The exchange rate of the euro against the dollar is  now  comparable  with  the  level  at
which  the  so-called  synthetic  euro  was  quoted  against  the  dollar  prior  to  September  1998.
Moreover,  long-term  government  bond  yields  of  euro  area  member  states  continue  to  be  lower
than in the United States, also suggesting that investors believe in the stability of the euro.
The  current  euro  exchange  rate,  therefore,  does  not  hint  at  a  misalignment  or  at  a  structural
weakness of the euro. Moreover, there is no indication that financial markets doubt the credibility
of  the  monetary  policy  of  the  Eurosystem.  Nevertheless,  we  should  keep  in  mind  that  the
credibility  of  a  currency  is  a  precious  but  likewise  fragile  asset.  The  possibility  cannot  be
excluded that increased uncertainty about the political  support  for  a  stability-oriented  monetary
and  fiscal  policy  has  contributed  to  the  weakening  of  the  euro.  Through  pursuing  a  stability-
oriented monetary policy, the Eurosystem underscores the confidence that the world has in this
young currency, the euro.
What flexibility is left to national governments?
I now turn to the final part of my talk. It is clear that euro area governments will continue to need
flexibility in national policies to address country-specific developments. For example, they will
need to be able to respond to asymmetric shocks, that by their nature do not affect all euro area
countries  equally,  and  to  more  deep-seated  economic  problems  related  to  the  structure  of  their
economies.  Clearly,  following  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  instruments  of  monetary  policy
and  the  exchange  rate  are  no  longer  available  to  national  governments  for  addressing  country-
specific developments. Therefore the need for flexibility in other policies at the national level is
even more apparent than before. Such national flexibility will be necessary both to address short-
term imbalances in demand and to deepen structural reform efforts with a view to improving the
supply-side  conditions  of  the  individual  euro  area  economies.  National  governments  retain  the
principal ability to address both objectives as they retain control of fiscal policy and the capacity
to undertake structural reform.
Responding to short-term imbalances in demand
Let us first consider the role that national governments continue to play in responding to short-
term  imbalances  in  patterns  of  demand.  It  is  sometimes  argued  that  the  requirements  of  the
Stability and Growth Pact will prevent national governments from using fiscal policy to address
these  imbalances.  However,  if  implemented  correctly  and  without  undue  delay,  the  contrary  is
true, as compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact provisions will allow sufficient room for
manoeuvre. The centrepiece of the budgetary provisions to be respected by member states is the
medium-term objective of a budgetary position close to balance or in surplus. Sound government
finances  are  important  to  strengthen  the  conditions  for  price  stability  and  for  the  strong  and
sustainable growth necessary to support employment growth. Moreover, if governments achieve
3
BIS Review   33/1999
balanced budgets in normal periods of the cycle, they create a safety margin, sufficient to allow
the operation  of  automatic  stabilisers  in  the  event  of  a  slowdown,  or  in  the  face  of  unexpected
shocks, without risking excessive deficits.
The problem at the moment is that in the euro area as a whole we are still far from reaching the
target  of  balanced  budgets  in  normal  cyclical  conditions.  Substantial  structural  imbalances
continue to restrict the flexibility of public sector budgets. In a number of  countries,  deficit-to-
GDP ratios remain close to the 3% value set in the Treaty as a reference for excessive deficits,
rather than the medium-term balanced or surplus position envisaged in the Stability and Growth
Pact. Recent fiscal consolidation has been rather disappointing. A significant increase in overall
deficits,  for  instance  as  a  response  to  a  decline  in  real  GDP  growth  rates,  could  reverse  the
progress  we  have  seen  in  recent  years  in  reducing  deficit-to-GDP  ratios  across  the  euro  area.
Moreover,  in  the  case  of  a  prolonged  growth  slowdown,  it  is  quite  possible  that  deficits  will
quickly reach excessive levels.
So it is clear that it is of the utmost importance that governments make structural improvements
to their fiscal positions, as this would allow them to regain sufficient flexibility in their budgets
and, most importantly, could effectively contribute to supporting stability and growth in the euro
area.  However,  despite  the  desirability  of  achieving  this  room  for  manoeuvre  swiftly,  only
moderate fiscal consolidation is currently envisaged for the medium term. A number of stability
programmes are aimed at attaining the necessary flexibility only at a relatively late date, and this
is on the assumption of sustained economic growth and low interest rates. It is important that we
see a commitment from policymakers to ensuring the swift achievement of this aim or to going
beyond the aims envisaged in these programmes once economic growth has picked up.
The role of longer-term structural reforms
The  most  important  area  where  there  is  national  flexibility  is  in  relation  to  structural  policies.
Indeed it is arguable that many of  the  important  challenges  which  face  euro  area  countries  can
only be addressed through national policies in this area. As the March 1998 Convergence Report
of the European Monetary Institute already identified, there is an urgent need for lasting policy
adjustments arising from:
•  high and persistent unemployment which is largely of a structural nature;
•  demographic  trends  which  are  expected  to  place  a  heavy  burden  on  future  public
expenditure; and
•  the high levels of public debt, which will weigh on the current budgets of many member
states until debt levels are reduced.
To start with the first long-term economic issue, I now turn my attention to the contribution that
structural  reforms  to  euro  area  labour  markets  can  make  to  reducing  the  very  high  level  of
European  unemployment.  As  I  have  done  in  my  comparison  of  the  euro  with  the  dollar,  let  us
again  contrast  the  developments  in  Europe  with  those  of  the  United  States.  In  1970
unemployment in the United States, at around 4%, was actually significantly higher than in most
European  economies.  Since  then,  although  there  has  been  a  marked  variation  in  the  US
unemployment rate during the course of each economic cycle, there has been no apparent long-
term  trend,  as  the  unemployment  rate  stood  at  4.4%  in  January  1999.  In  contrast,  average
European  unemployment  has  been  on  a  steadily  rising  path.  The  unemployment  rates  in  the
United States and Europe appeared to have broadly converged by the early 1980s, and since that
time the unemployment rate in the United States has been below the EU average. Even though the
euro  area  unemployment  rate  fell  last  year,  the  January  1999  figure  of  10.6%  was  more  than
double the corresponding US rate.
BIS Review   33/1999
4
Looking  at  the  latest  unemployment  rates  around  the  euro  area  –  which  range  from  2.8%  in
Luxembourg  (January  1999)  and  3.6%  in  the  Netherlands  (December  1998)  to  17.8%  in  Spain
(January 1999) – suggests that policies must be developed at the national level. What is needed
appears to be national structural reforms to make sustainable reductions in unemployment rather
than a boost to euro area aggregate demand. Moreover, making labour markets more flexible can
also make it easier to cope with short-term imbalances in demand.
However,  the  situation  in  euro  area  labour  markets  is  not  uniformly  bad.  Some  countries,
particularly  those  with  more  flexible  labour  markets,  more  moderate  wage  increases  and  less
discouraging  tax  and  social  security  policies,  have  managed  to  avoid  the  trend  of  ever-rising
unemployment.  For  example,  the  Netherlands,  Ireland,  Portugal,  Austria  and  Luxembourg  all
currently show unemployment rates well below the euro area average. There are also examples of
other countries with higher unemployment rates, such as Spain, that have begun to take steps to
reform their labour markets and are now beginning to see tangible results. We can also look at
some of the non-participating member states, such as Denmark and the United Kingdom, to see
that high unemployment can be reduced through structural reforms.
The need for structural reform is widely recognised, for instance in the OECD Jobs Study and at
the November 1997 Luxembourg European Council meeting, and some progress with new policy
measures  is  already  being  made.  First,  there  are  ‘active  labour  market  measures’  to  provide
education,  training  and  work  experience  –  particularly  targeted  at  the  long-term  unemployed.
Second, there are reforms to ensure that tax and social security systems make people significantly
better off in work than out of it. Third, there are measures to ensure that low-productivity workers
are not forced out of the labour market. These include reducing the burden of taxes and non-wage
labour  costs  and  making  sure  that  minimum  wage  schemes  and  collectively  bargained  wage
agreements take account of the need to preserve such jobs. I would also wish to add that, contrary
to  some  suggestions,  such  policies  do  not  amount  to  ‘competitive  devaluations’,  and  structural
reforms and wage moderation are no ‘zero sum game’. They can help generate net increases in
average employment and should not be criticised as ‘wage or social dumping’.
The second long-term economic issue I should like to address today is the need to prepare for the
substantial financial consequences of the ageing of European populations. On the basis of current
trends  in  birth  rates  and  life  expectancy,  unfunded  public  pension  and  healthcare  schemes
generate very high implicit  government  liabilities  in  most  euro  area  countries.  Indeed,  in  many
cases  these  implicit  liabilities  appear  to  be  of  such  magnitude  that  they  dwarf  even  the  large
official government debt levels. Unless action is taken quickly, these financial burdens will fall
on future generations of taxpayers and may also threaten the soundness of government finances.
Therefore, to prepare for the ageing of the population, substantial savings need to be made.
The third key issue is the need to make progress in reducing the high government debt-to-GDP
ratios  that  have  substantially  increased  over  the  past  two  decades.  Whilst  there  was  some
improvement in the run-up to the start of EMU, the recent progress has been disappointing as the
average debt-to-GDP ratio for the euro area fell only slightly to 73.8% in 1998, compared with
74.6%  in  1997.  Such  imbalances  are  undesirable  and  can  also  have  wider  implications  for  the
conduct of monetary policy. If there are any doubts about the soundness of fiscal policies, this can
influence  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  instruments,  and  undermine  the  credibility  of
monetary policy.
In addition to the  long-term  economic  issues  mentioned  so  far,  I  should  also  like  to  emphasise
that  the  structural  reform  agenda  available  to  national  governments  to  promote  economic
development extends well beyond the reform of labour markets and public finances. For example,
national governments can take steps to promote entrepreneurship and make it easier for people to
5
BIS Review   33/1999
start  and  run  businesses  and  thus  create  new  jobs.  This  could  involve  encouraging  competition
through measures to promote the entry of new firms, such as reducing the administrative burdens
they  face,  making  markets  more  competitive  and  facilitating  access  to  venture  capital.
Governments can also liberalise previously highly regulated sectors, such as utilities, to increase
efficiency  and  reduce  prices  to  the  benefit  of  industrial  and  household  users  of  these  services.
National governments may also wish to take steps to raise productive investment in research and
development to increase growth in expanding high-tech industries.
The  introduction  of  the  euro  and  a  common  monetary  policy  has  certainly  not  rendered
national governments impotent. With the ability to vary fiscal policy and undertake structural
reforms,  national  governments  retain  the  key  powers  to  address  the  real  needs  of  their
economies. If the terms of the Stability and Growth Pact are adhered to, then there is sufficient
flexibility  to  allow  automatic  stabilisers  to  work  in  the  event  of  a  slowdown.  Structural
reforms provide the only means of achieving lasting reductions in unemployment, preparing
for  the  ageing  of  the  population  and  reducing  the  burden  of  government  debt.  National
governments would be well advised to press ahead with such reforms. Apart from having their
own  merits,  such  policies  would  also  support  the  ECB  in  maintaining  price  stability  in  the
euro area.
BIS Review   33/1999
6
