Mr Latter gives an overview of the current monetary policy stance of Hong Kong
Address by Mr Tony Latter, a Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority,
at the CLSA Investors’ Forum in Hong Kong on 17 May 1999.
I should like to say a few words about the present stance of monetary policy in Hong Kong
and its relation to the broader state of the economy.
Hong Kong has a fixed exchange rate against the US dollar. The pros and cons continue to be
a focus of debate in some quarters, but I don’t intend to dig over that ground yet again today.
Suffice  it  to  say  that  over  the  past  fifteen  years  Hong  Kong  has  enjoyed,  on  balance,
remarkable prosperity. I happen to think that the visible and trusted monetary discipline of the
exchange rate link has been a decisive contributory factor to that prosperity.
Of  course,  one  cannot  deny  that  there  is  some  association  between  the  strength  of  the
exchange rate and the level of interest rates on the one hand, and the current recession on the
other,  but  I  would  caution  against  adopting  too  short-term  a  horizon  when  drawing
conclusions, and I would also suggest that some of the adjustment which we have experienced
- for example in property prices - was both necessary and somewhat overdue. Perhaps I should
also  add  that  the  Hong  Kong  dollar’s  stability  after  the  depreciations  of  other  regional
currencies  in  1997  probably  helped  to  avert  what  might  have  been  a  spiral  of  further
depreciations, which could have caused greater damage in the region and might even have had
more painful eventual consequences for Hong Kong itself than we have in fact suffered.
Slide 21 shows the path of the real effective exchange rate since mid-1997. This is the trade-
weighted exchange rate adjusted for differences in movements of consumer price indices. It is
one  of  several  possible  measures  -  none  of  them  ideal  -  of  external  competitiveness.  A
movement up the page denotes a loss of competitiveness. The steep loss around the time of
the Asian crisis in late-1997 has been partly recovered. The setback in the earlier part of this
year arose mainly from the strength of the US dollar.
 But  let’s  look  at  this  question  in  a  longer-term  perspective.  Slide  3  shows  that  in  the  13½
years  from  the  introduction  of  the  linked  exchange  rate  up  to  mid-1997  the  real  rate
appreciated  on  average  by  4%  a  year;  in  the  period  since  then  the  real  appreciation  has
averaged 4½% a year.
 On this basis one might say that we are scarcely off track at all, from what appears to have
been  a  secular  trend  of  real  appreciation  of  the  currency.  But  others  might  argue  that  the
structural changes of the eighties and nineties which were consistent with an appreciating real
rate because of much more rapid productivity gains in the tradable than in  the  non-tradable
sectors, cannot be repeated, so that the assumption of a continuing secular uptrend is invalid.
On  that  view,  the  net  appreciation  over  the  past  couple  of  years  may  be  deemed  to  have
dragged us away from our preferred path.
 It is hard to judge where the proper balance of these views lies. I recall how, 15-20 years ago,
the doom merchants were prophesying the end of Hong Kong’s long run of growth because
we were rapidly losing competitiveness in much of manufacturing. Presumably they did not
                                                     
1 Slides are not included in this text document.
1
BIS Review   54/1999
foresee  the  remarkable  extent  to  which  the  service  sector  would  develop  as  an  alternative
wealth-generating lynchpin of the economy. Now, the next generation of doom merchants is
prophesying imminent disaster as competitiveness in certain parts of the service sector appears
to  have  been  eroded.  Will  they  be  wrong  again?  Have  they  failed  to  appreciate  the  true
workings  of  the  market  economy  and  comparative  advantage?  Do  they  not  realise  how
difficult  it  is  to  foretell  exactly  how  an  economy  will  evolve,  even  though  the  evolution  is
taking place right under our noses? Indeed, as we sit here worrying about it, there are people
out  there  who  are  busy  exploiting  niches  and  opportunities  which  will  mould  the  future
structure  of  the  economy.  We  can  try  to  facilitate  that  process,  or  even  to  guide  particular
aspects which we reasonably expect to be important (eg the cyberport), but there will always
be surprises.
 In  any  analysis  of  competitiveness  there  is  inevitably  scope  for  argument  about  the
appropriateness  of  the  statistics  one  is  using.  I  believe  that  in  the  current  Hong  Kong
conjuncture  the  popular  measures  such  as  the  real  exchange  rate  may  have  been  lagging
somewhat behind the recovery of competitiveness that may have actually occurred. Business
decisions are influenced more by marginal prices and expectations  of  future  prices,  than  by
prevailing average prices; yet the measure of rentals which enters the CPI is typically based on
an average of outstanding contracts and not the price at which new contracts are being struck -
which  have  over  the  past  year  or  so  fallen  much  more  steeply.  Thus,  when  thinking  of
business  decisions,  even  assuming  that  residential  rentals  are  a  satisfactory  proxy  for  rental
costs  affecting  business,  some  adjustment  for  the  marginal/average  discrepancy  may  be
needed at times when that discrepancy is significant - as it certainly is when one is at or near
turning points in the rental cycle. Please be assured that I am not criticising the construction of
the CPI, which is, so far as I am able to judge, absolutely appropriate in terms of arriving at an
overall cost-of-living index, but I do suggest that some qualifications may be needed if it is to
be used in other analysis, such as that of business decisions which we are discussing here.
 Let  me  turn  now  to  interest  rates.  Real  rates  have  been  high,  at  least  as  measured  on  the
backward-looking basis in slide 4 (ie nominal rates less recorded inflation over the preceding
twelve months). This is the arithmetic result of nominal rates which are very much dictated by
US rates and recent deflation of prices in Hong Kong. US rates are being held up in part by
the  extremely  buoyant  US  economy,  and  you  will  see  from  slide  6  that  the  Hong  Kong
economy is out of phase with the US, on the downside, to a greater extent than at any time
since  our  exchange  rate  link  was  established.  The  only  comparable  divergence  was  in  the
1980s,  and  that  was  on  the  upside,  when  we  experienced  -  in  complete  contrast  to  today  -
uncomfortably rapid inflation and negative real interest rates.
 But  tight  monetary  policy  is  being  balanced  by  a  more  relaxed  fiscal  stance  (slide  7),  as
defined  by  the  size  of  the  budget  balance  relative  to  GDP.  This  is  a  reversal  of  the  more
common position in Hong Kong of relatively loose monetary and tight fiscal policy. The chart
confirms that historically, as one might expect, there has generally been an offsetting balance
of these two policy components.
 I think, nevertheless, that there is a tendency to exaggerate the tightness of monetary policy at
the  present  time.  This  happens  because  of  too  simplistic  an  approach  to  measuring  real
interest  rates  and  assessing  their  influence.  I  can  best  illustrate  this  by  reference  to  the
illustration in slide 8. As at April last year, 12-month HIBOR was 8.0%. Looking back over
the preceding  12  months  (ie  April  1997  to  April  1998),  inflation  had  been  4.7%,  so  at  that
BIS Review   54/1999
2
time (April 1998) the commonplace measure of the real interest rate would have yielded 3.3%.
A  more  sophisticated  method  would  have  been  to  take  the  forecast  for  inflation  over  the
coming  year  (April  1998  to  April  1999),  which  was  then  4.2%  (I  have  based  this  on  an
interpolation from the annual figures from the consensus of private sector forecasters at that
time), yielding a somewhat lower real rate of 3.8%. But that forecast of inflation turned out to
be wildly wrong; the actual outturn for the 12 months April 1998 to April 1999 was minus
2.6%,  which  means  that  the  real  rate  actually  realised,  and  thus  experienced  by  someone
borrowing or lending for twelve months at HIBOR, was, on the CPI basis, 10.6%. On top of
that, the marginal/average adjustment for rentals to which I referred earlier would have tended
to raise the realised real rate even further, because the prices influencing business decisions
probably fell by more than the CPI. In sum, what started as a headline real rate of 3.3% ended
up  as  a  rate  well  in  excess  of  10½%.  Businesses  would  have  been  affected  by  the  factors
responsible  for  the  difference  between  these  figures,  but  would  not  have  been  able  to
anticipate all of them.
 If we move on to April this year, the position is rather different. The backward-looking real
rate, which tends to be the one which most people take as their guide when clamouring about
oppressive monetary policy,  is  indeed  high  at  8.9%  -  again  taking  12-month  HIBOR  as  the
base. But because expectations are that prices are now going to move up rather than down, the
forward-looking measure, based on consensus forecasts (from the private sector) of what the
published  CPI  will  show,  yields  much  less,  5.6%.  In  addition,  the  marginal/average
adjustment  may  now  have  turned  the  corner,  since  business  decision-takers  may  be  facing
prices that will rise by more than the recorded CPI, in which case real interest rates will now
be perceived as lower than 5.6%. Perceptions may still be of a figure which is above the 3-4%
range, which is often regarded as a global norm; but perceptions vary, and there may be some
who  visualise  a  lower  figure.  We  are  of  course  not  yet  in  a  position  to  observe  the  actual
outcome; there may, as last year, be surprises in store. My examples have been based on 12-
month HIBOR; there may, of course, be benchmarks higher or lower than this reference point
which are more relevant to individual decisions.
 I hope that I have succeeded in demonstrating that the measurement of real interest rates is
rather more complex than may appear at first sight, and is dependent also on the context.
 If you were to look at only the popular measure of the real rate - the nominal rate deflated by
a  measure  of  past  inflation  -  then  the  recovery  in  asset  prices  in  Hong  Kong  over  recent
months  would  seem  inexplicable,  because  real  rates  would  have  appeared  so  high.  The
recovery in asset prices would, however, be consistent with a reduction in perceived real rates
-  which  is  in  fact  what  I  am  suggesting  has  occurred,  on  a  fairly  significant  scale,  as
expectations  of  inflation  have  probably  become  positive  while  headline  recorded  inflation
remains negative. For those who see some downside in all of this from the implication in the
consensus forecasts that general inflation is now expected to resume, it is worth noting that
the forecast magnitude is only very modest.
 I would not pretend that every piece of evidence unequivocally supports my thesis today. For
instance, the continuing lethargy of bank lending to business in Hong Kong might suggest that
high real interest  rates  remain  a  deterrent  to  borrowing  and  investment.  However,  I  suspect
that, while that may well have been the case a little while ago, we are now in a period where
decisions are being more influenced by confidence factors  relating  to  the  broader  economic
situation than by interest rates per se, although interest rates do of course remain important.
3
BIS Review   54/1999
 I  have  pointed  to  elements  of  the  present  economic  conjuncture  -  namely,  competitiveness
and interest rates - where the position may not be so bleak as painted by some. But I do not
deny that we face tough challenges and I note that the consensus for the immediate outlook is
for  no  more  than  an  unspectacular  recovery.  I  have  no  brief  today  to  try  to  talk  up  our
economic  prospects.  My  wish  is  rather  to  contribute  analytically  to  the  discussion  of  those
prospects. The only certainty is that the future is always uncertain.
BIS Review   54/1999
4
