Mr Thiessen discusses the effect on the Canadian economy of recent global financial turbulence
Remarks by Gordon G Thiessen, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the “Chambre de commerce de
la région sherbrookoise” in Sherbrooke, Quebec on 4 May 1999.
 Global financial turbulence and the Canadian economy
 The  world  economy  and  Canada  have  had  to  navigate  some  difficult  straits  in  the  past  couple  of
years.  But  we  have  made  it  through.  And  considering  the  tide  from  the  Asian  financial  crisis  that
washed around the world, the Canadian economy has coped better this time around than in the past.
 With the clouds of international uncertainty gradually lifting, Canada’s solid economic foundations
are providing good reason to remain positive about the outlook for our economy.
 Today, I would like to talk about recent economic developments and the prospects for Canada. But
since much of what has been happening here recently has been heavily influenced by external events,
I  would  also  like  to  discuss  some  of  the  measures  the  international  community  is  contemplating  to
prevent, or at least reduce the severity of, any future crises.
 Recent developments in the Canadian economy
 The financial crisis that began in Southeast Asia in mid-1997 turned out to be much more persistent
and serious than anyone had expected. During 1998, the turmoil spread to Russia and Brazil, causing
a great deal of nervousness and volatility in markets everywhere. This led to large outflows of capital
from many emerging-market economies, rising interest rates, tighter credit conditions, and a marked
slowdown in economic growth worldwide.
 Canada has not been insulated from these forces. Many of our industries, including those in Quebec,
have been hard hit. The most immediate impact on our economy has been the lower foreign demand
for  the  key  primary  commodities  we  produce  and  a  20  per  cent  drop  in  their  prices  between  the
middle of 1997 and the end of 1998. These developments were reflected in the value of our currency,
which declined sharply against the U.S. dollar.
 As the turmoil in markets increased following the Russian debt moratorium last August, the Bank of
Canada moved to head off signs of a potential loss of confidence in Canadian dollar investments, by
raising  the  Bank  Rate  one  full  percentage  point.  The  confidence  of  households  and  businesses  in
Canada  was  also  affected  by  market  nervousness  and  volatility,  and  this  dampened  domestic
spending.  Consequently,  the  Canadian  economy  expanded  by  just  under  3  per  cent  through  1998
(fourth quarter over fourth quarter) compared with over 4 per cent in 1997.
 Considering the seriousness of the external disturbances, this is not a bad economic outcome. And for
this,  we  can  thank  our  sounder  fiscal  position  and  low  and  stable  inflation,  which  have  helped  us
weather the international instability better this time around. These same factors, coupled with calmer
financial markets, have allowed the Bank to lower the Bank Rate four times since the autumn (fully
reversing last August’s increase), and to refocus attention on the medium-term objective of keeping
inflation within the 1 to 3 per cent target range. Currently, inflation is just inside the bottom of the
range.
 The economic outlook
 As I said before, the world economic horizon is now clearer. Interest rate reductions around the world
-- most recently across the euro area -- have helped to rebuild investor confidence and to calm global
financial markets. This includes markets in the troubled Southeast Asian economies, where progress
1
BIS Review   50/1999
is being made on structural reforms and the outlook for a turnaround this year and next has improved,
especially in South Korea, but also in Thailand and Malaysia. There are also signs that the financial
situation  in  Brazil,  which  looked  precarious  in  late  1998,  is  now  stabilizing  with  the  adoption  of
measures to address imbalances in the country’ s fiscal and external accounts.
 What is less clear is the extent of short-term economic weakness one can expect in Latin America
because of the difficulties in Brazil.
 There has also been a slowdown in the pace of economic expansion in Europe. But easier monetary
conditions -- that is, lower interest rates and the lower value of the euro -- should help offset some of
the  economic  weakness  there.  And  these  lower  interest  rates  are  a  positive  element  for  the
international economy as a whole.
 The  main  question  mark  in  the  outlook  continues  to  be  the  Japanese  economy,  which  has  been  in
recession since late 1997. Even if stimulative macroeconomic policies are pursued systematically, and
progress continues on banking sector reform, it is rather unlikely that there will be much of a recovery
there before the year is out.
 In contrast, the U.S. economy continues to flourish, consistently outperforming expectations and with
no sign of inflationary pressures. That economy ended 1998 on a much stronger note than had been
expected. And the momentum of U.S. economic activity in early 1999 is greater than most forecasters
had predicted. From a Canadian perspective, this is the most positive element in the current external
economic environment, as anyone who sells to U.S. markets can confirm.
 Strong U.S. demand for Canadian products and the rebound from major labour disruptions in Canada
led to renewed vigour in our economy in the fourth quarter of 1998 which, by all indications, carried
into early 1999. And this has been accompanied by healthy employment growth.
 As  we  look  ahead,  steadier  financial  markets,  employment  gains,  and  accommodative  monetary
conditions  should  bolster  spending  by  Canadian  households  and  businesses.  All  this,  coupled  with
sustained  U.S.  demand  and  our  improved  competitiveness,  should  continue  to  contribute  to  an
expanding Canadian economy.
 Since world economic and financial conditions are still fragile and since the timing of a firm recovery
in  primary  commodity  markets  remains  uncertain,  I  cannot  be  more  specific  about  how  strong  our
economy will be. But we are now looking at a somewhat more positive scenario than seemed possible
last autumn -- both for the world economy and for Canada.
 What to do about future crises
 As much as we are all anxious to put this latest episode of global financial turbulence behind us, I
hope  that  in  one  respect,  at  least,  we  won’  t  soon  forget  it.  The  fact  that  things  are  getting  better
should not distract us from devising strategies to reduce the risks of similar crises in the future. And
should there be any, we need to be better prepared to handle them and to minimize their economic
fallout.
 So what are some of the issues, and what is being done about them?
 It would be all too easy to blame globalization and unhindered, large, cross-border capital flows for
the  recent  financial  problems,  and  to  suggest  that  we  retreat  behind  national  borders  and  place
restrictions  on  the  flow  of  capital.  But  it  would  be  unwise.  For  even  though  capital  flows  may
sometimes be difficult to manage, especially for small countries, the benefits from access to a bigger
pool of world savings are substantial -- when those savings are used prudently and productively. What
we must do is find ways to minimize the risks, without surrendering the benefits.
BIS Review   50/1999
2
 There are three main areas towards which international efforts are currently directed: strengthening
financial systems; ensuring that countries follow responsible macroeconomic and financial policies;
and developing effective processes for managing crises when they arise.
 Let’s  look  at  these  three  areas.  First,  there  is  the  need  to  encourage  sound  financial  systems  --
nationally and internationally. Some of the things being addressed here are accounting and disclosure
standards,  supervisory  and  regulatory  frameworks,  and  bankruptcy  procedures.  Why  do  we  need  to
strengthen these practices?
 Widely  accepted  accounting  standards  are  the  key  to  communicating  reliable  information  about  a
company’s financial health and to making its operations more transparent. Disclosure of accurate and
timely information strengthens confidence and helps markets to make more informed judgments about
the riskiness of investments. Recall that one of the main problems behind the recent difficulties was
the  huge  amounts  of  funds  placed  in  some  emerging  markets  in  Asia  by  investment  advisers  from
industrial countries and by their clients, evidently without adequate information or appreciation of the
risks  involved.  History  shows  than  when  concerns  arise,  lack  of  information  causes  investors  to
expect the worst and run for cover.
 There is also a need to improve the effectiveness of regulation and supervision of banks and other
financial  institutions,  especially  in  emerging-market  economies.  Banks  are  important  intermediaries
for moving funds around at  home  and  abroad.  But  they  will  perform  this  role  most  effectively  and
soundly  if  they  are  properly  supervised  and  if  they  have  reason  to  control  risk.  In  countries  where
banks  have  strong  links  to  industry  and/or  to  government,  their  ability  to  make  objective  credit
judgments may suffer. And sometimes these relationships include provisions that protect banks from
failure but do not encourage prudent behaviour.
 Plans  to  improve  global  financial  rules  also  involve  strengthening  bankruptcy  procedures.  Well-
defined  bankruptcy  codes  are  important.  They  can  provide  debtors  and  creditors  with  a  clear
understanding of the rules for resolving defaults. And they would enable the private business sector to
continue to function even in the event of a financial crisis.
 So far, I have talked about institutional improvements that international bodies, like the International
Monetary Fund, are helping to design and put in place through a code of “best practices”. Let me now
turn to economic policies and their role in promoting greater financial stability.
 One  important  lesson  we  have  learned  from  experience  --  including  our  own  in  Canada  --  is  that
countries  must,  above  all,  follow  sound  and  credible  macroeconomic  policies.  This  means  a  fiscal
policy that avoids unsustainable public sector deficits and debts, and a monetary policy aimed at low
and stable inflation.
 But  the  question  of  a  country’  s  exchange  rate  policy  is  also  very  relevant.  Recent  experience
highlights the importance of ensuring that financial markets have the right incentives to make sound
decisions  and  to  avoid  excessive  exposure  to  risks.  When  a  government  pegs  its  exchange  rate  to
another currency, pledging to do whatever it takes to ensure that the peg holds, domestic and foreign
investors tend to minimize the exchange rate risk, as long as things are going well.
 The problem with a fixed, but adjustable, exchange rate is that it does not guarantee that a currency
will  not  decline  in  value.  Should  it  come  under  pressure,  because  it  is  fixed  at  a  level  that  is
inconsistent with changing fundamentals in the economy, and should markets begin to question the
authorities’  pledge  to  the  peg,  domestic  and  foreign  investors  would  likely  rush  for  the  exits,
triggering a crisis. When you think of recent crises in Southeast Asia and in Brazil, the first thing that
strikes you is that they all occurred in countries with fixed exchange rates.
3
BIS Review   50/1999
 I  would  argue  that,  in  most  of  these  cases,  greater  exchange  rate  flexibility  would  have  helped  to
make  borrowers  and  lenders  more  aware  of  exchange  rate  risks.  And  so  I  find  it  encouraging  that
some  of  the  crisis-afflicted  emerging  countries  have  since  moved  towards  more  flexible  exchange
rates.
 Let  me  now  say  a  word  about  the  need  to  devise  processes  for  the  effective  management  and
resolution of future crises, should they occur. Right now, the International Monetary Fund is the main
provider  of  emergency  assistance  to  a  country  that  runs  into  financial  difficulties,  while  its  private
creditors are not always involved. The main, and somewhat contentious, issue here is to ensure that
private lenders have the incentive to participate in crisis prevention and that they bear their fair share
of the financial burden of dealing with crises.
 Progress  in  this  area  has  been  slow,  but  a  number  of  proposals  are  being  examined  that  would
encourage  debtor  countries  and  their  creditors  to  work  out  financial  problems  in  a  cooperative
manner.
 Let  me  conclude.  Thanks  to  a  stronger  foundation  these  days,  the  Canadian  economy  has  thus  far
weathered  the  financial  volatility  and  the  global  economic  slowdown  of  the  past  couple  of  years
reasonably well. And having started 1999  on  a  strong  note,  we  are  looking  for  sustained  economic
expansion this year.
 The  situation  in  world  financial  markets  has  improved.  And  the  international  community  has  been
hard at work, seeking ways to strengthen the international financial architecture. There is no single,
simple solution to prevent crises. Today, I have discussed some of the measures planned to provide a
degree of comfort. None of them is dramatic, and much remains to be done. But I believe that these
changes  should  help  reduce  future  risks.  Canada  has  a  stake  in  building  a  stronger,  more  stable
international financial system, and strongly supports global initiatives designed to achieve this.
BIS Review   50/1999
4
