Mr Noyer looks at some initial experiences with the euro
Speech by Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the conference organised
by the ‘Gesprächskreis Nord’ of the Friedrich-Ebert Foundation, in Hamburg on 8 March 1999
Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  here  on  the  occasion  of  this  conference  organised  by  the
‘Gesprächskreis Nord’ of the Friedrich-Ebert Foundation. It is only two months since  the  euro  was
launched.  The  introduction  of  the  euro  has  been  accomplished  successfully  and  the  enormous
technical  and  logistical  challenges  arising  during  the  early  days  of  monetary  union  have  been
surmounted.
The  start  of  monetary  union  proved  to  be  a  formidable  operation.  In  spite  of  the  operational
difficulties  and  risks  involved,  the  changeover  passed  without  any  serious  incidents  affecting  the
orderly  conditions  in  the  monetary  system.  The  operations  of  the  Eurosystem  relating  to  the
conversion of former national currencies into the euro went smoothly. There was no need to invoke
any contingency measure, whether ‘ordinary’ or ‘extraordinary’. The first main refinancing operations
of  the  Eurosystem  and  the  first  regular  longer-term  refinancing  operations  were  also  settled
successfully.
The introduction of the euro is unprecedented in European history. Although not yet embodied in the
physical form of new banknotes and coins, there is no doubt that the new currency is set to play an
important role in the euro area and beyond. The euro is present on all major financial markets around
the globe. Currency trading is regularly carried out in euro. There are now shares denominated in euro
on most European stock exchanges. Moreover, the euro has attracted new international bond issues as
the currency of denomination. In some ways, the introduction of the euro may justify expectations of
large efficiency gains in the international financial system. For EU citizens, two obvious gains will be,
on the one hand, the reduction of transaction costs and, on the other, increased transparency, which
facilitates price comparisons between different goods.
Monetary union offers a unique opportunity to establish and maintain price stability within the euro
area. It promises a credible and lasting environment of price stability for almost 300 million people.
Price  stability  is  at  the  core  of  the  ‘stability  culture’  that  we  are  seeking  to  establish  throughout
Europe. The Governing Council of the European Central Bank (ECB) is in charge of monetary policy
decisions  for  the  euro  area.  However,  their  implementation  rests  with  the  Eurosystem  –  that  is  the
ECB  and  the  11  participating  national  central  banks  (NCBs).  The  Eurosystem  has  had  the  good
fortune to assume authority over monetary policy in the euro area in an environment of price stability,
owing to the successful process of disinflation and convergence within Europe over the past decade.
The Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy and the Treaty
The Treaty on European Union, commonly referred to as the Maastricht Treaty, assigns the European
System of Central Banks (ESCB) the primary objective of maintaining price stability in the euro area.
In order to give clear guidance for expectations of future price developments, the Governing Council
has  announced  a  quantitative  definition  of  its  primary  objective.  This  clarifies  how  the  Treaty’s
mandate is interpreted by the Governing Council and gives the public and the European Parliament
clear guidance concerning its assessment of the success of the single monetary policy.
Price  stability  is  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term.  It  has  been  defined  as  a  year-on-year
increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%. As the
word  ‘increase’  makes  clear,  deflation  –  that  is,  a  persistent  fall  in  the  price  level  –  would  not  be
consistent  with  price  stability.  The  annual  rate  of  inflation,  according  to  the  most  recent  available
data, of 0.8%, measured on this harmonised basis, is consistent with the definition of price stability. It
should  also  be  emphasised  once  again  that  the  monetary  policy  is  a  single  one  and  therefore
1
BIS Review   26/1999
indivisible  –  by  definition.  Monetary  policy  decisions  must  be  based  on  euro  area-wide
considerations, rather than national considerations. As simple as it may sound, those commentating on
our monetary policy do not always appear to grasp this principle.
Monetary policy needs a forward-looking, medium-term orientation. Monetary policy should not and
shall  not  react  to  every  change  in  all  the  information  that  is  produced  on  an  almost  daily  basis.  It
would be over-ambitious and therefore risky to try to steer the economy in the short term. Fine-tuning
would be more likely to lead to instability than stability. To maintain price stability, we have chosen a
distinct monetary policy strategy, one that reflects the special circumstances that exist at present as
well as those likely to prevail in the foreseeable future. The Eurosystem’s stability-oriented monetary
policy strategy ensures as much continuity as possible with the former strategies of the NCBs. At the
same time, it gives due consideration to the unique situation which will prevail in the early years of
monetary union. This strategy rests on two pillars. First, broad money is assigned a prominent role in
the strategy. This is deemed to be important on account of the essentially monetary origins of inflation
over the longer term. Second, a broadly based assessment of the outlook for price developments and
the risks to price stability in the euro area as a whole is carried out.
Monetary developments can reveal useful information about future price  developments  and  thereby
offer  an  important  compass  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  There  is  broad  consensus  that  the
development of the price level is a monetary phenomenon in the medium to long term. This takes into
account  the  fact  that  monetary  policy  affects  the  price  level  only  with  variable,  usually  long  and
unpredictable  time  lags.  It  is  not  able  to  control  all  short-term  movements  in  the  price  level.
Furthermore, the historical experience of central banks in Europe and beyond demonstrates that it is
important for the success of monetary policy to carry out a thorough analysis of monetary aggregates
and the information they contain.
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  announced  a  quantitative  reference  value  for  the  annual
growth of the broad monetary aggregate M3. Substantial or prolonged deviations of current monetary
growth from the reference value should, under normal circumstances, signal risks to price stability in
the medium term. The choice of M3 as an aggregate is supported by empirical evidence regarding the
long-run stability and leading indicator properties of this aggregate. Moreover, conceptual arguments
pointed  to  the  importance  of  including  in  the  monetary  aggregate  those  assets  which  have  a  high
degree  of  substitutability  with  narrower  definitions  of  money.  Monitoring  monetary  developments
also helps identify the nature of shocks hitting the economy. It thereby contributes to the assessment
of overall economic developments.
Monetary  policy  does  not  react  to  deviations  of  monetary  growth  from  the  reference  value  in  a
‘mechanistic’  way.  In  the  first  instance,  such  deviations  will  be  thoroughly  analysed  to  infer  any
signals which they may offer about the prospects for price developments. If the deviation points to a
threat  to  price  stability,  monetary  policy  will  react  in  a  manner  appropriate  to  counter  this  threat,
rather than attempting to eliminate the deviation of monetary growth from the reference value in the
short term.
The first reference value for M3 growth has been set at an annual rate of 4½%. This reference value is
consistent  with  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  while  allowing  for
sustainable  output  growth  and  the  trend  decline  in  the  velocity  of  circulation  of  M3.  It  will  be
reviewed in December 1999.
Although monetary data contain information which is important for monetary policy decision-making,
monetary  developments  alone  will  clearly  not  constitute  a  complete  summary  of  all  the  economic
information necessary to take appropriate policy decisions. The Governing Council recognises that it
is important, in parallel with the assessment of monetary growth, to look at a wide range of financial
and  other  economic  indicators,  including  economic  forecasts.  This  systematic  analysis  of  all  other
BIS Review   26/1999
2
relevant information about economic and financial conditions will ensure that the Governing Council
is as well informed as possible when taking monetary policy decisions.
By fulfilling the unequivocal commitment of the Governing Council of the ECB to maintaining price
stability  in  the  euro  area,  we  shall  ensure  that  the  single  monetary  policy  contributes  as  much  as
possible to economic welfare in the broadest sense. At the same time, national fiscal authorities and
general  economic  policies  also  have  to  demonstrate  their  commitment  to  the  maintenance  of  price
stability in the euro area over the medium  term.  In  this  context,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  a
crucial element. Its aim is to encourage the pursuit of disciplined and sustainable fiscal policies in the
euro  area.  In  so  doing,  it  can  make  a  significant  contribution  to  the  establishment  of  favourable
conditions for sustained economic growth and high employment in the medium to long term. It would
be counterproductive if national fiscal policymakers did not continue their efforts in the light of the
achievement of monetary union and the currently positive price outlook. I am not fully convinced that
consolidation efforts are currently being undertaken with sufficient determination in all participating
member  states.  The  ECB  cannot  commit  itself  to  take  into  account,  in  its  overall  assessment,  any
announced, but as yet uncertain, fiscal consolidation in some of the member states.
In line with its clear mandate, enshrined in the Treaty, and for sound economic reasons, the ECB has
to decide which monetary stance best serves the maintenance of price stability over the medium term
and  then  act  accordingly.  At  the  same  time,  the  Treaty  also  emphasises  the  need  for  sound  fiscal
policies.  This  clear  separation  of  responsibilities  is  both  efficient  and  transparent.  Monetary  policy
alone – even if it is well designed and fully successful in monitoring  price  stability  –  cannot  solve
Europe’s economic problems. Appropriate structural reforms implemented  by  national  governments
are  of  the  utmost  importance.  Much  progress  is  required  in  this  broad  area.  Moreover,  responsible
wage settlements in both the public and private sectors are necessary to reduce the unacceptably high
level of unemployment in many parts of the euro area. Recent wage agreements in some parts of the
euro area do not appear to be in the interest of higher employment.
Unemployment in the euro area is largely structural in origin. Implementing a monetary policy stance
which is more lax than is justified by the monetary, financial and economic conditions will not solve
this problem. Instead it will exacerbate it over the medium term, as inflation distorts investment and
savings decisions, raises the risk premium in long-term interest rates and undermines the  allocative
efficiency of the price mechanism. Only effective structural policies that improve the flexibility and
efficiency of labour and goods markets can reduce unemployment in a successful and lasting manner.
I  appreciate  that  such  reforms  are  not  always  easy,  not  least  because  the  benefits  which  they  yield
occur  mainly  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  However,  they  are  essential.  In  those  euro  area  member
states that have taken up the challenge  of  structural  reform,  unemployment  has  fallen  significantly.
Other euro area member states are called upon to follow these examples: structural reform throughout
the euro area is fundamental to the success of monetary union and to improving Europe’s economic
performance. In this respect, we may also be able to learn something by looking at the reasons behind
strong  employment  growth  and  low  unemployment  in  some  of  the  member  states  of  the  European
Union and in the United States, in particular regarding the flexibility of labour markets and incentives
to create and accept new jobs.
Monetary policy decisions and the outlook for price stability
Since  the  start  of  this  year  the  Governing  Council  has  taken  the  following  main  monetary  policy
decisions. In December 1998 the Governing Council of the ECB announced that the level of interest
on the main refinancing operation would be 3%. Since then, the Governing Council has kept this rate
unchanged, as it has judged that doing so was serving best the maintenance of price stability.
The 12-month growth rate of the broad monetary aggregate M3 increased to 5.7% in January 1999
from  4.5%  in  December  1998.  This  increase  is  mainly  due  to  rapidly  growing  overnight  deposits,
which account for around one-third of M3. The three-month moving average of M3 (for the period
3
BIS Review   26/1999
from  November  1998  to  January  1999)  increased  to  4.9%,  that  is,  slightly  above  the  announced
reference value of 4½% per annum. In view of the uncertainty relating to special factors pertaining to
the changeover to the stage three environment and the introduction of the euro, the Governing Council
does  not  view  the  recent  acceleration  in  M3  as  a  signal  of  future  inflationary  pressures.  However,
monetary developments need to be monitored closely in the coming months.
With  regard  to  the  broadly  based  outlook  for  price  developments  and  risks  to  price  stability,  new
information  on  indicators  of  future  price  developments  and  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area
continue to provide mixed signals. Financial indicators such as the yield curve show that the spread
between  short-term  and  long-term  interest  rates  has  recently  widened  somewhat.  This  followed  the
decline  in  long-term  interest  rates  in  January  to  the  lowest  levels  seen  since  the  late  1940s.
Nevertheless, conditions for investment at the start of monetary union are favourable. This relates in
particular to the prevailing low interest rate level, which significantly reduces the costs of financing
for investors.
Recent developments appear to have led to a reduction in some of the uncertainties surrounding the
evolution  of  the  world  economy  in  1999.  This  mainly  relates  to  the  strong  performance  of  the  US
economy.
In  the  euro  area  the  latest  indicators  confirm  that  those  risks  which  were  identified  earlier  have
materialised to some extent. Real GDP growth in the euro area, which weakened in the fourth quarter
of 1998 compared with the previous quarter, suggests that activity has been slowing down in recent
months. This assessment is supported by other indicators, such as decreasing capacity utilisation and
industrial  confidence,  both  of  which  have  been  on  a  declining  trend  since  mid-1998.  By  contrast,
consumer  confidence  continues  to  present  a  favourable  picture.  The  level  of  unemployment  has
remained more or less unchanged over the past few months.
Recent  price  developments  are  consistent  with  price  stability.  The  latest  data  on  the  Harmonised
Index of Consumer Prices show that the downward movement of inflation has stopped. The annual
increase for February 1999 was reported to be 0.8%, the same as in the previous month. The current
low inflation rate is partly due to substantial reductions in energy prices over the past half year, which
have diminished somewhat very recently. Decreasing unit labour costs have also made a significant
contribution.
In summary, the outlook for price stability remains favourable and, until now, we have not identified
any significant upward or downward pressures on prices in the short term. On the downward side, the
slowdown  in  the  euro  area  economy  is  a  cause  for  concern.  On  the  upward  side,  increasing  wage
pressure  and  a  relaxation  of  the  fiscal  stance  could  adversely  affect  the  prospects  for  future  price
stability. Furthermore, recent exchange rate developments will also need to be monitored closely in
view of their impact on prices.
In the absence of any strong upward or downward pressure on price developments, maintaining the
current stance of monetary policy appeared justified. The Governing Council therefore decided last
week that for the next two main refinancing operations the same conditions will apply as for the main
refinancing operations settled earlier this year. This means they will be fixed rate tenders conducted at
an  interest  rate  of  3.0%.  Interest  rates  applicable  to  the  deposit  facility  and  the  marginal  lending
facility  will  continue  to  be  2.0%  and  4.5%  respectively.  Of  course,  the  Governing  Council  will
continue to monitor all developments and reassess its monetary policy in its bi-weekly meetings.
The international dimension and the exchange rate
Let me now turn to the international dimension of the euro. As the representative of a monetary union
which is comparable in size and importance with the United States, and as the central bank managing
a currency that is likely to play a large and increasingly international role, the ECB will  inevitably
serve an important function in the international financial system. The ECB will embrace the implied
BIS Review   26/1999
4
responsibility  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  will  have  to  be  modest  and  realistic  in  its  actions  in  the
international arena. The ECB may be expected to contribute to international cooperation by adopting
a positive attitude. The introduction of the euro could potentially simplify the process of international
policy cooperation between the major economies, since the number of key players has been reduced.
In particular, it should make this process more efficient by facilitating the exchange of views and the
formulation of common understandings on economic and financial issues at the global level.
With regard to the Eurosystem’s relationship with European Community institutions, the Treaty states
that the President of the ECOFIN Council and a member of the European Commission may participate
in  the  meetings  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  with  the  right  to  express  their  views  but
without  voting  power.  Moreover,  the  ECB  is  required  to  disclose  to  the  European  Community
institutions  (the  Council  of  the  European  Union,  the  European  Commission  and  the  European
Parliament)  an  annual  report  on  its  monetary  policy.  The  President  of  the  ECB  shall  present  this
report  to  the  ECOFIN  Council  and  the  European  Parliament  and  also  take  part  in  the  subsequent
debate.  As  announced  before,  the  President  will  attend  the  hearings  at  the  European  Parliament  at
least four times a year to discuss the activities of the Eurosystem. Finally, I should like to mention that
the President of the ECB is also invited to the newly established informal Euro-11 Council meetings.
In  the  field  of  the  international  representation  of  the  ECB,  some  decisions  are  still  under
consideration.  Formal  and  informal  agreements  have  already  been  reached  with  the  International
Monetary Fund (IMF), the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and in
the  context  of  the  G7  and  the  G10.  At  the  end  of  last  year  the  IMF  granted  the  ECB  the  status  of
observer.  As  you  will  be  aware,  full  membership  of  the  IMF  is  restricted  to  individual  nations.
Nevertheless,  this  observer  status  will  allow  the  ECB  to  participate  in  the  relevant  work  and
assessments by the Fund of economic policies in the euro area and beyond.
The  ECB  stands  ready  to  participate  fully  in,  and  contribute  to,  international  policy  discussions.  It
will, of course, offer expertise and exchange views when and where appropriate. However, the best
contribution the ECB can make to a stable international monetary system, including stable exchange
rates and smoothly functioning international capital markets, is to maintain price stability within the
euro area. Fulfilling the mandate assigned to it by the Maastricht Treaty will help the ECB shoulder
its international responsibilities.
The  Eurosystem  takes  a  neutral  stance  with  regard  to  the  international  role  of  the  euro.  It  neither
promotes  nor  hinders  the  development  of  the  euro  as  an  international  currency.  The  Eurosystem
accepts  the  international  role  of  the  euro  as  it  develops  through  market  forces.  There  will  be  no
deliberate policy of challenging third currencies. As yet it is too early to predict how long it will take
for the euro to emerge as a truly international currency. Generally speaking, the commitment of the
ECB to successfully fulfilling the mandate of the Treaty, that is to maintaining price stability in the
euro area, will contribute to the international role of the euro.
Allow me to say a few words on certain proposals made in the ongoing public debate, which might
suggest  that  the  focus  of  monetary  policy  should  be  shifted  towards  objectives  other  than  price
stability. Some suggestions seem to imply that the Eurosystem should react more or less automatically
to  exchange  rate  movements  or  other  specific  variables.  Just  as  a  doctor  cannot  stop  a  fever  by
holding  the  thermometer  under  cold  water  without  an  appropriate  therapy,  monetary  policy  cannot
stabilise  exchange  rates  if  pressure  occurs  as  a  result  of  diverging  cyclical  positions,  market
fundamentals  or  structural  and  fiscal  policies.  Therefore,  we  deliberately  excluded  any  kind  of
explicit or implicit exchange rate objectives or targets from our monetary policy strategy.
Nevertheless,  the  Eurosystem’s  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy  takes  into  account  the
external value of the euro as one, potentially important, determinant of the outlook for price stability.
If  its  development  poses  a  threat  to  price  stability  in  the  euro  area,  this  threat  will  be  assessed.
However, all other factors that impart information on price developments will always be taken into
5
BIS Review   26/1999
account before a decision will  be  taken.  Obviously,  if  a  strong  and  abrupt  appreciation  of  the  euro
were  to  occur,  this  would  lead,  all  other  things  being  equal,  to  downward  pressures  on  price
developments.  In  such  a  situation,  there  would  be  more  reason  to  lower  the  ECB’s  interest  rates,
which might then, in turn, help counteract part of the prior exchange rate movement.
But  setting  exchange  rate  targets  might,  for  example,  imply  that  a  central  bank  has  to  increase  its
interest  rates  in  a  situation  of  weak  demand  and  downward  pressures  on  prices,  just  because  of  a
depreciation in the exchange rate. I think you will agree with me that this might not be appropriate.
According  to  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  the  ECOFIN  Council  may  formulate  so-called  general
orientations for the exchange rate policy, which shall be without prejudice to the primary objective of
maintaining  price  stability.  The  ECOFIN  Council  has  agreed  to  issue  so-called  orientations  for
exchange rate policy only in exceptional circumstances, such as a clear and sustained misalignment of
the euro. In addition, we are not currently participating in a formal exchange rate arrangement with
third countries outside the EU, for instance the United States, and we consider it very unlikely that
this situation will change.
Accountability and transparency of the monetary policy of the Eurosystem
Let me turn to the issues of accountability and transparency. In general, central banks should be open,
transparent and accountable, reporting extensively to the public on their activities. The issue of the
transparency of monetary policy is very important, given that the Eurosystem is a new institution and
the public is not accustomed to evaluating its behaviour. Moreover, by communicating clearly with
the  public,  the  Eurosystem  reinforces  its  credibility  and  signals  that  its  monetary  policy  is
appropriately geared to the maintenance of price stability. In this regard, the Eurosystem’s approach
bears comparison with the ‘best practices’ of any other central bank. Accountability is the counterpart
to  independence.  We  should  also  be  clear  that  the  independence  of  the  ECB  does  not  exclude  a
dialogue with political authorities.
The monetary policy of the Eurosystem will be held accountable for reaching its overriding objective
of maintaining price stability. The Eurosystem is open, transparent and, above all, accountable for its
performance.  As  part  of  its  communication  strategy,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  regularly
informs the public about its assessment of the monetary, economic and financial situation in the euro
area and about specific monetary policy decisions. Moreover, since January 1999 the ECB has been
publishing a Monthly Bulletin containing additional and detailed analysis of the economic situation in
the euro area.
In  some  areas  the  Eurosystem  has  gone  beyond  the  Treaty  requirements.  The  Governing  Council
meets  every  fortnight.  The  first  meeting  in  every  month  is  immediately  followed  by  a  press
conference,  at  which  the  President  of  the  ECB  and  I  explain  the  decisions  taken  by  the  Governing
Council. On that occasion, the ‘Introductory Statement of the President’ of the Eurosystem is released
to the press. This is similar to what other central banks call minutes. We are convinced that this very
prompt delivery of information serves the interests of the public in an optimal way. Few central banks
follow a policy of publishing their minutes almost immediately after the meeting of their governing
body. We are also convinced that it is in the public interest for the view of the Governing Council as a
whole to be presented, rather than the views of individual members.
Concluding remarks
Let me finally urge caution with regard to any excessively high expectations at the start. History also
shows that the full benefits of changes as substantial as the introduction of the euro may come neither
immediately  nor  automatically.  It  normally  takes  some  time  to  adapt  to  a  new  situation.  Most
importantly, efficiency and welfare gains will require structural reforms of labour and goods markets
to improve flexibility. One can only hope that the euro is working as a catalyst for such change.
BIS Review   26/1999
6
