Mr  Macfarlane  elucidates  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  comments  on  what  the
Reserve Bank of Australia needs to do to fulfil its financial stability responsibilities
Text of the eighteenth R.C. Mills Memorial Lecture delivered by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the
Reserve Bank of Australia, in Sydney on 29 July 1999.
It  is  an  honour  to  be  here  today  at  the  University  of  Sydney  delivering  the  eighteenth  R.C.  Mills
Memorial  Lecture.  It  is  customary  to  start  a  Memorial  Lecture  by  paying  homage  to  the  person  in
whose memory the lecture is held, but I would like to break with tradition and do that a little later
where it fits in more naturally.
On nearly every occasion when I speak before an audience such as this, I talk about some aspect of
monetary policy. That is what is expected of me because people – very naturally – associate central
banks with monetary policy. Monetary policy’s major task is  to  contribute  to  sustainable  economic
growth through maintaining low inflation, as we have been doing with some success during the 1990s.
I have talked about this at length elsewhere, and I am sure that informed people are well acquainted
with  the  current  monetary  policy  regime  in  Australia,  which  is  based  on  an  inflation  target,  an
independent central bank and a floating exchange rate. As a result, I do not wish to take up any more
time going over old ground.
The subject of financial stability does, however, call for some public explanation. For a start, a lot of
people are unsure of exactly what it means. Additionally, there are those who are unsure of what its
relation is to central banking, which, as I have just said, they usually associate with monetary policy.
In the remainder of my lecture I would like to cover both these topics, plus two other issues: what
does  the  Reserve  Bank  need  to  do  to  fulfil  its  financial  stability  responsibilities;  and  whether  the
changes we have seen in the structure of financial systems over recent decades have made the system
more or less stable.
(i)
What is financial stability?
Financial stability is the avoidance of a financial crisis. A financial crisis is a more modern term for
describing what used to be called “banking panics”, “bank runs” and “banking collapses”. We use the
broader term financial because, with today’s more sophisticated financial systems, the source of the
crisis  could  be  the  capital  markets  or  a  non-bank  financial  institution  rather  than  a  bank,  although
almost certainly banks would become involved.
A well functioning financial sector is critical to an economy’s well being because it is so intimately
connected to every other sector of the economy through its role of providing credit. When large-scale
failures  occur  among  financial  institutions,  the  supply  of  credit  dries  up  and  this  quickly  leads  to
cutbacks in other industries. Additionally, the finance sector is the part of the economy that is most
susceptible  to  crises  of  public  confidence.  A  problem  that  hits  one  part  of  the  finance  sector  can
quickly  spread  to  the  rest  of  the  sector,  and  then  to  the  economy  more  widely.  Once  it  becomes
widespread,  it  is  termed  a  systemic  financial  crisis  to  distinguish  it  from  one  that  is  confined  to  a
single institution or a very narrow part of the financial system.
Another way of approaching financial stability is to look at it from the perspective of developments in
the overall economy. There is widespread recognition in the community that the normal growth path
of an economy is not smooth. We have all lived through a number of business cycles, and although we
wish that the cycle could be abolished, most of us are resigned to the fact that expansions cannot go
on  forever,  and  they  will  be  followed  by  a  recession.  Provided  that  these  recessions  are  not  very
frequent  and  not  very  deep,  public  confidence  in  the  legitimacy  of  the  economic  system  remains
intact.  The  problem  with  a  serious  bout  of  financial  instability  or  a  systemic  crisis  –  inevitably
involving a boom in asset prices, followed by a bust – is that it makes the recession much deeper and
longer, and can even turn it into a depression.
1
BIS Review   86/1999
The best known example of this is the Depression in the United States in the 1930s, the severity of
which  is  now  widely  attributed  by  modern  scholars  to  the  collapse  of  the  US  banking  system.1
Australia had a similar experience in the Depression of the 1890s, and some more recent examples,
which I will cover later, contained some of the same elements, although fortunately on a smaller scale.
Over the past three years, we have witnessed the Asian economic crisis, the depth of which is largely
due to the collapse of financial systems in these countries. Although it is not well known in Australia,
the Nordic countries (Sweden, Norway and Finland) went through a similar experience a decade ago.2
In short, it is possible to have a normal business cycle where financial stability remains intact. These
are usually quite mild cycles. It is also possible to have cycles where financial instability plays a large
role. These are usually very severe. Thus, there are very good reasons for a country to do what it can
to avoid financial instability. History shows that it does not happen very often, but when it does, its
effects can be devastating.
Table 1: Cost of Recapitalisation
Country
Spain
United States (Savings & Loans)
Scandinavia
Finland
Norway
Sweden
Latin America
Chile
Mexico
Asia
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
Period
1977-1985
1984-1991
1991-1993
1987-1989
1991
1981-1983
1995
1997-1998
1997-1998
1997-1998
1981-1987
1997-1998
Cost as per cent of GDP
16.8
3.2
8.0
4.0
6.4
41.2
13.5
34.5
24.5
19.5
3.0
34.5
Sources:
Caprio and Klingebiel, World Bank, July 1996.
World Bank, Asian Growth and Recovery Initiative, 1999.
Another direct and measurable cost of financial crises is the cost to taxpayers of fixing them. When
there is widespread failure of banks and other deposit-taking institutions, the Government invariably
pays out depositors in full or in part, whether or not there is a formal system of deposit  insurance.
Financial institutions also have to be recapitalised in order to allow them to start lending again. The
cost to the Budget of both these types of assistance can be enormous, as shown in Table 1. Note that
the  figures  given  for  Asian  countries  are  only  estimates  as  the  final  bill  has  not  yet  come  in.  The
outcome could be lower  or  higher,  depending  largely  on  how  quickly  Asian  countries  resume  their
growth path.
                                                     
1 
2 
See, for example, Bernanke (1983) and Romer (1993).
See Llewellyn (1992).
BIS Review   86/1999
2
(ii)
Central banks and financial stability
The  idea  that  a  central  bank  should  have  responsibility  for  financial  stability  has  roots  deep  in  the
history  of  central  banking.  Indeed,  in  many  countries,  financial  stability  considerations  were  the
original reason for the formation of the central bank. Perhaps the best example is the United States.
The establishment of the Federal Reserve System in 1913 was a direct response to the bank runs and
financial panic of 1907. It was only later that an explicit monetary policy role was grafted onto the
Federal Reserve’s financial stability responsibility.
Elsewhere too, financial stability issues played a significant role in central banking. By the end of the
19th  century,  the  Bank  of  England  was  well  practised  in  acting  as  the  lender  of  last  resort.  In  the
1850s and 1860s, following the bursting of speculative bubbles in the US and UK railroad sectors, it
lent freely to institutions to prevent financial panic, as it did during the Barings crisis of the 1890s. In
France, the unravelling of speculative positions in the stock market in 1882 led the Banque de France
to provide secured loans to the Paris Bourse. In Italy, the collapse of a building boom in Rome and
Naples in 1893, and the resulting failure of one of Italy’s largest banks, prompted the creation of the
central bank, the Banca d’Italia.3
Financial  stability  considerations  also  played  a  role  in  the  development  of  central  banking  in
Australia, although less explicitly than in the United States. In the early decades of this century there
were strong advocates for a central bank along the lines of the Bank of England. Progress, however,
was hampered by ideological debates about the role of private banking, and by concern that a central
bank  would  out-compete  private  banks.  While  the  Commonwealth  Bank  did  take  on  some  central
banking  functions  in  the  1920s,  including  note  issue  and  the  provision  of  settlement  accounts,  the
watershed was the 1936 Royal Commission.
It is here that we return to Professor R.C. Mills. In between establishing the economics department of
the University of Sydney and chairing the University’s Professorial Board, Professor Mills played a
prominent role as a member of the Royal Commission. As S.J. Butlin notes in his biography of Mills,
the  structure  of  the  Commission’s  Report  and  its  drafting  owes  much  to  Mills’  hard  work  and  his
ability to argue and persuade. Mills was an advocate of a strong central bank with responsibility for
ensuring the overall stability of the financial system and the economy. He, and his colleagues on the
Royal  Commission,  argued  that  the  private  banks  had  intensified  economic  fluctuations  by  lending
aggressively  during  the  boom  of  the  late  1920s  and  then  contracting  lending  harshly  during  the
Depression. This was seen to be a repeat, although on a smaller scale, of the situation in the 1880s and
1890s. The Commission argued that a strong central bank might have been able to limit the unhealthy
expansion that eventually brought about the crisis.
The idea that a central bank should seek to restrict those developments in the financial system that
threaten the health of the economy strikes a strong resonance today. The difference between today’s
interpretation and that advocated by Mills and his colleagues is a subtle, but important, one. In the
1930s, banks dominated the financial system, and a framework of regulation on banks was seen as the
best way to ensure financial stability (and to operate monetary policy). Today we realise that heavy
regulation stifles competition and innovation, and is an ineffective mechanism for monetary policy –
even though it can achieve a high degree of financial stability.
We  also  recognise  today  that,  while  banks  remain  at  the  core  of  the  financial  system,  financial
markets – and by this I mean the money, debt, equity, derivative and foreign exchange markets – play
a  much  bigger  role  than  they  did  in  the  1930s.  Control  of  banks  is  no  longer  the  same  thing  as
ensuring  financial  stability  –  the  issue  is  now  much  more  complicated.  Indeed,  following  the
recommendations of the Wallis Report in 1997, the Government specifically separated the prudential
                                                     
3 
Goodhart (1985) gives a comprehensive review of this history.
3
BIS Review   86/1999
supervision  of  banks  from  the  Reserve  Bank  and  vested  it  in  a  completely  new  institution,  the
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA).
This sounds on the surface to be very different from the sort of world envisaged by Mills, but it is
only so in a managerial sense, not in a fundamental economic sense. The Reserve Bank still has dual
responsibilities for monetary policy and financial system stability, something of which Mills would
have approved. And, of course, these two responsibilities were spelled out again in the Wallis Report,
and in the speech by the Treasurer when introducing the Wallis reforms.
What is different now is that the day-to-day face-to-face process of bank supervision, with its setting
of  standards,  monitoring,  interpretation  and  data  collection,  is  carried  out  in  a  separate  agency  –
APRA  –  which  also  has  responsibility  for  the  equivalent  supervision  of  other  deposit-taking
institutions,  insurance  companies  and  the  superannuation  industry.  APRA’s  role  is  an  extremely
important one. Recent events in Asia have reminded us that good supervision of financial institutions
is the single biggest contribution that governments can make to ensure financial stability, whether it is
the central bank or another agency that carries out the actual work.
While  the  present  system  is  managerially  a  different  arrangement  to  the  one  it  replaces,  it  is  not
fundamentally  different  in  kind.  There  are  still  very  close  relations  between  bank  supervision  and
financial system stability through the close connections between the Reserve Bank and APRA (with
the  former  having  two  Board  positions  on  the  latter).  In  addition,  there  is  the  Council  of  Financial
Regulators, which brings together the heads of the Reserve Bank, APRA and the Australian Securities
and  Investments  Commission  (ASIC).  The  fact  that  I  chair  this  group  reinforces  the  point  that  the
Reserve Bank has not vacated its responsibility for overall system stability, even if it no longer does
the “hands on” supervision of banks.
(iii)
The Reserve Bank and financial stability
I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  the  third  issue:  how  the  Reserve  Bank  meets  its  financial  stability
responsibility.  Here  it  is  useful  to  think  about  two  broad  sets  of  policies:  those  that  help  prevent
financial disturbances and those that counteract the effects of disturbances if they occur. I will start
with the first set.
Policies that help to prevent crises
(a)
Maintaining low inflation
When listing policies that help to prevent financial crises, the first one we come to is the maintenance
of low inflation. It stands to reason that a background of low inflation is less likely to underpin rapidly
rising  asset  values,  and  the  speculative  excesses  that  go  with  them,  than  a  background  of  high
inflation. But we should not take too much comfort from this, as events in Japan remind us. A better
formulation would be to say that low inflation is probably a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition
for financial stability. The transition phase from high to low inflation and from high to low interest
rates  can  actually  raise  some  asset  prices  for  very  good  reasons.4  Similarly,  if  the  move  to  low
inflation  has  coincided  with  the  deregulation  of  financial  markets,  the  first  observed  effect  may  be
increased instability.5 As so often in economics, it takes a long time to observe changed behaviour in a
new steady state, such as low inflation; most of our recent observations come from transition phases
between one regime to another.
                                                     
4 
A transition from a period of high inflation to a period of low inflation usually leads to a reduction in
real,  as  well  as  nominal,  interest  rates  which,  other  things  equal,  would  cause  a  rise  in  equity  prices.
Also, at lower nominal interest rates, people’s borrowing capacity rises, which can also lead to rises in
asset prices. See Stevens (1997).
See Macfarlane (1995). For an earlier Latin American example, see Diaz-Alejandro (1985).
5 
BIS Review   86/1999
4
(b)
Ensuring that the payments system is safe
The Bank also has important responsibilities in the payments system. As part of last year’s regulatory
changes,  a  new  Payments  System  Board  was  established  within  the  Reserve  Bank.  This  Board  has
explicit legislative responsibility for ensuring the stability and efficiency of the payments system. In
the stability area much of the hard work has already been done. The introduction, last June, of our
Real-Time  Gross  Settlement  system  for  high-value  payments  greatly  strengthened  the  payments
system  infrastructure,  as  did  the  passage  of  a  number  of  technical  pieces  of  legislation  involving
bankruptcy proceedings and the netting of obligations. Australia’s payments system is now as robust
as any in the world.
(c)
Maintaining an influence on regulatory arrangements in Australia
Before explaining this, I must emphasise again that the Bank has no intention of duplicating the work
of  APRA.  We  recognise  that  APRA  is  the  policy-making  body  responsible  for  setting  prudential
standards in Australia. We also recognise that the responsibility for supervising individual institutions
lies  with  APRA,  and,  as  part  of  this  division,  the  Bank  has  taken  the  decision  not  to  receive
confidential  prudential  data  on  individual  institutions  on  an  ongoing  basis.  It  relies  on  APRA  to
monitor the health of these institutions, but it does receive aggregate data, and on occasions attends
APRA’s  on-site  visits  as  an  observer  to  keep  up  to  date  with  the  changing  nature  of  financial
institutions.
Where the Bank can make a real contribution to regulatory arrangements is through its knowledge of,
and day-to-day dealing in, financial markets and through its broad macro-economic responsibilities.
Two  examples  should  help  to  illustrate  this.  First,  it  was  through  our  own  dealings  in  the  foreign
exchange market that we became aware of the high level of activity of hedge funds in Australia  in
June  last  year.  This  was  well  ahead  of  the  collapse  of  Long-Term  Capital  Management  (LTCM),
which is the event that alerted the world’s bank supervisors to the risks associated with large hedge
funds. The second example comes from the macro-economic studies we have undertaken of the Asian
crisis.  These  reveal  that  the  main  contributor  to  the  rapid  inflow  and  outflow  of  capital  to  these
countries was short-term bank-to-bank lending. One of the reasons that banks in Europe, Japan and
the United States were so keen to lend short-term to banks in emerging markets was that the Basle
capital weights favoured short-term lending over medium or long-term lending. This is logical from
the point of view of an individual bank – there is less risk associated with a short-term loan. But it is
not  helpful  to  international  stability  if  banks  as  a  whole  show  a  disproportionate  tendency  to  lend
short-term. It is these flows which, with good reason, are often termed “hot money”. The Bank and
APRA  are  grappling  with  this  conflict,  and  I  for  one  hope  that  the  Basel  weights  are  adjusted  to
remove the incentive towards short-term international lending.
(d)
Being able to participate in international fora on financial stability issues
As a result of recent instability in international financial markets, there has been renewed interest in
official  circles  in  examining  the  causes,  and  seeing  what  can  be  done  to  improve  the  situation.
Australia  has  taken  quite  a  prominent  role  in  these  discussions,  with  a  number  of  arms  of  the
Government  involved.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  contributed  to  Australia’s  efforts,  particularly  by
focussing on two areas where we believe the incentive structure is leading to excessive risk-taking and
heightened  instability.  The  two  areas  are  the  activities  of  hedge  funds,  and  the  arrangements  for
handling  a  crisis  once  it  has  occurred  –  in  particular,  ensuring  that  at  least  some  of  the  losses  are
borne by the lenders. An indication of the success of the Australian effort to date is that Australia is
one of the four countries that has been added to the original Group of Seven to form the new Financial
Stability Forum. I will be representing Australia at the next meeting in September in Paris.
5
BIS Review   86/1999
(e)
Keeping abreast of developments in financial markets
In carrying out its ordinary business, the Reserve Bank trades in the money, bond, foreign exchange
and futures markets. This gives us a familiarity with financial instruments and market practices which
can add value to the views of other regulators. I do not wish to suggest that this puts the Reserve Bank
in  a  better  position,  only  a  different  position.  Regulators  such  as  ASIC  have  a  much  better  legal
perspective than the Reserve Bank, while APRA is more knowledgeable on prudential standards and
institutional  practices.  Taken  together,  therefore,  there  is  a  very  broad  range  of  skills  among  the
members of the Council of Financial Regulators.
(f)
Handling “once-off” threats to stability
These will arise from time to time and may be difficult to predict in advance. The clearest example of
this to date is the challenge of the Year 2000. While the financial system is well prepared for the new
year, the best-laid plans could be threatened if the public were to over-react to Year 2000 concerns.
For this reason, given our mandate to maintain the stability of the financial system, we are directing a
lot of resources to ensure a smooth transition. A lot of the work has been very technical – making sure
that computer systems work, that the financial system has sufficient liquidity and that ample currency
notes  are  printed.  But  in  the  final  analysis,  we  have  to  ensure  continued  public  confidence  in  the
financial system, so it is a matter of public reassurance and communication.
In each of these policy areas, the Bank needs to be mindful not only of the stability of the financial
system, but also its efficiency. While in many cases, policies designed to improve the stability of the
financial system also improve its efficiency,  this  is  not  always  the  case.  A  highly  regulated  system
might well be very stable, but it is unlikely to be very competitive or innovative. The Bank’s broad
policy responsibilities require it to balance these various considerations.
Handling of a financial crisis
The  other  situation  in  which  the  Reserve  Bank  will  be  required  to  play  an  important  role  is  if  a
financial disturbance actually occurs. It is unrealistic to expect that financial regulators will be able to
prevent all financial disturbances. The Bank, therefore, needs to be able to respond to disturbances
when they happen.
The main way in which it would do this is through the use of its balance sheet to provide liquidity to
the financial system. The Bank’s preference would be to do this through its usual daily operations in
the cash market, providing liquidity to the market as a whole, rather than to individual institutions.
Nevertheless, in the highly unusual case in which a fundamentally sound institution was experiencing
liquidity difficulties, and the potential failure of the institution to make its payments posed a threat to
overall stability of the financial system, the Bank would be able to provide a lender-of-last-resort loan
directly to that institution. In principle, a lender-of-last-resort loan could be made to any institution
supervised by APRA.
It is important, however, to make clear that the Reserve Bank’s balance sheet is not available to prop
up  insolvent  institutions.  Put  more  plainly,  the  Reserve  Bank  does  not  guarantee  the  repayment  of
deposits in financial institutions. Indeed, the recent legislative changes have removed from the Bank
the  responsibility  for  protecting  depositors.  This  is  now  APRA’s  responsibility,  and  APRA  has  the
power  to  issue  directives  to  institutions,  to  revoke  licences  and  to  arrange  for  the  orderly  exit  of
troubled institutions. Obviously, if it were necessary to undertake any of these actions, APRA and the
Bank would consult closely in order to limit the flow-on effects to the rest of the financial system.
BIS Review   86/1999
6
(iv)
Has the financial system become more or less stable?
From  a  purely  Australian  perspective,  our  biggest  financial  crisis  was  in  the  1890s.  Although  the
1930s was comparable as an economic contraction, it was a lot smaller as a financial crisis.6 And for
the  first  four  post-war  decades  financial  instability  was  rarely  in  the  foreground.  One  could  be
excused for thinking that the problem of financial instability was fading away.
The  events  from  the  mid-eighties  to  the  early  nineties  dispelled  this  illusion.  A  widely  based  asset
price  boom  came  to  an  end,  and  the  ensuing  asset  price  falls  brought  down  many  highly  geared
businesses and, more importantly for present purposes, a number of financial institutions. Two large
State Government-owned banks failed, as did one of the largest building societies, as well as several
merchant  banks  and  fringe  financial  institutions.  The  effect  on  the  real  economy  was  profound,
particularly  in  Victoria  where  a  disproportionate  share  of  the  financial  failures  occurred.7  It  was  a
salutary experience, but fortunately many lessons were learned both by the private-sector participants
and by the regulators.
From an international perspective, it would be easy to gain the impression that financial instability is
on the rise. The past decade has included the banking collapses in the Nordic countries, the Mexican
crisis of 1994, the Asian crisis of 1997, Russia in 1998 and Japan’s problems stretching over much of
the decade. During the same  period,  we  have  heard  disturbing  news  of  many  individual  companies
and markets, the most celebrated ones being the demise of Barings and the near demise of LTCM.
Looking over the experience at home and abroad, I do not think it is possible to say that the risk of
serious financial instability has either increased or decreased in the course of the past century. The
only  reasonable  working  assumption  is  that  the  risks  of  serious  financial  disturbance  are  about  the
same as they always have been. An important reason for this is the unchanging human propensity to
go  through  periods  of  extreme  optimism  which  pushes  asset  prices  to  great  heights,  followed  by  a
reaction which causes prices to fall precipitously. What has changed over the course of the century,
particularly in the past couple of decades, is the nature of the risks we face.
The traditional financial crisis was triggered by the failure of one or more banks, often during a period
of declining asset prices. The cause was usually a failure to correctly assess credit risk, for example
by lending against temporarily inflated asset values. Fire sales of assets and contagion led to runs on
other banks and the emergence of a full-scale financial crisis. Such a scenario is still possible today,
particularly in an economy heading into recession, but it no longer  represents  the  stereotype.  For  a
start, bank supervision and banks’ own control of credit risk have improved enormously over the past
decade. Also, financial disturbances are now more likely to originate in, and be transmitted through,
financial markets than has been the case in the past.
Financial markets are now much larger and many transactions are much more complex, making the
risks associated with them harder to understand. Derivatives – the biggest growth area – are a good
illustration. While they enable many businesses to hedge risks which they formerly had to accept, they
also allow others to take risks that they formerly could not. Notably, derivatives can make it easier for
some participants to engage in leverage – an old-fashioned activity which can greatly increase risk.
The recent LTCM episode brought this out clearly and its near-collapse illustrated how market risks
can be large enough to be systemic.
Recent events also reminded us that in a globalised market place, financial instability will often come
from abroad. Last year, after the Russian and LTCM incidents, risk premia on loans to all but the best
credits increased sharply. Even in the United States, lesser corporates found sharply higher borrowing
                                                     
6 
See Fisher and Kent (1999).
7 
In the early 1990s recession, final demand in Victoria fell by 6.5 per cent compared with 1.5 per cent for
the rest of Australia. There was a similar disparity in employment. See Macfarlane (1992).
7
BIS Review   86/1999
costs,  while  in  emerging  markets  even  large  stable  companies  could  not  roll  over  maturing  debt  at
interest rates which would keep them solvent. Fortunately, this situation did not prevail for long, but
action by the US Federal Reserve was required to end it. As an aside, I should add that Australia was
only marginally affected in this episode, and our new-found reputation for financial stability was not
questioned.
Of course, the spread of financial problems across national boundaries is not new. A hundred years
ago  the  default  by  the  Argentinian  Government  on  securities  underwritten  by  Baring  Brothers
triggered financial turmoil in London, which led to Britain reducing its overseas investments. This, in
turn, contributed to major contractions in economic activity in Australia, South Africa and the United
States. In Australia, the turnaround in capital flows was as dramatic as that recently experienced in
some  Asian  countries,  and  the  effects  on  the  economy  were  just  as  severe.  What  is  new  today,
however, is the speed with which events are transmitted around the world, and the role that markets,
as opposed to institutions, play in the process.
(v)
Conclusion
It  is  important  that  we  maintain  financial  stability  because  of  the  contribution  that  it  makes  to
ensuring a more prosperous and more fully employed economy. It is also important that we receive
recognition as a country that has a world class financial infrastructure which is capable of maintaining
this stability into the future. Our recent exemplary performance has helped in this regard.
But the task of ensuring we have an acceptable degree of financial stability in the years and decades
ahead is a never-ending one. No-one can or should guarantee that no financial institutions will fail,
any  more  than  no  manufacturers  or  retailers  will  fail.  In  fact,  in  an  ideal  world  there  would  be  a
scattering of small disturbances every year or two to keep everyone on their toes. Unfortunately, the
real world is not like this: there are long periods of calm when virtually no financial disturbances take
place  and  rising  prosperity  is  taken  for  granted,  creating  a  false  sense  of  security  and  eventually
leading to short periods which contain several failures and the threat of many more. The requirement
for  all  those  involved  in  ensuring  financial  stability  is  to  be  alert  and  pro-active  during  the  long
periods of calm, just as an army must be during peacetime. There is a constant challenge to be found
in  identifying  new  risks,  avoiding  harmful  incentives  and  adjusting  the  regulatory  arrangements  to
keep  pace  with  changes  in  financial  technology.  It  is  not  an  easy  task,  but  I  am  confident  that  the
major regulators – APRA, ASIC and the Reserve Bank – are up to it.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bernanke, B. (1983), “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great
Depression”, American Economic Review, 73(3), pp.257-276.
Butlin, S.J. (1958), Richard Charles Mills, The University of Sydney, mimeo.
Caprio, G. and D. Klingebiel (1996), “Bank Insolvencies: Cross-Country Experience”, World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper, No. 1620.
Diaz-Alejandro,  C.  (1985),  “Goodbye  Financial  Repression,  Hello  Financial  Crash”,  Journal  of
Development Economics, September/October, 19, pp.1-24.
Fisher,  C.  and  C.  Kent  (1999),  “Two  Depressions,  One  Banking  Collapse”,  Reserve  Bank  of
Australia Research Discussion Paper, forthcoming.
Goodhart, C. (1985), The Evolution of Central Banks. A Natural Development?, London School of
Economics and Political Science, Imediaprint, London.
BIS Review   86/1999
8
Llewellyn,  D.  (1992),  “The  Performance  of  Banks  in  the  UK  and  Scandinavia:  A  Case  Study  in
Competition and Deregulation”, Quarterly Review, Riksbank, 3, pp.20-30.
Macfarlane,  I.J.  (1992),  “Making  Monetary  Policy  in  an  Uncertain  World”,  Reserve  Bank  of
Australia Bulletin, September, pp.9-16.
Macfarlane, I.J. (1995), “Financial Deregulation and Financial Markets”, Reserve Bank of Australia
Bulletin, May, pp.1-6.
Romer, C. (1993), “The Nation in Depression”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7(2), pp.19-39.
Stevens, G.R. (1997), “Some Observations on Low Inflation and Household Finances”, Reserve Bank
of Australia Bulletin, October, pp.38-47.
Wallis  (1997),  Financial  System  Inquiry  Final  Report,  Australian  Government  Publishing  Service,
March.
World  Bank  (1999),  “Financial  and  Corporate  Sector  Restructuring  Progress  and  Constraints”,
World Bank Background Paper No. 1, Asian Growth and Recovery Initiative.
9
BIS Review   86/1999
