Mr  Thiessen  discusses  the  change  in  views  on  the  role  of  monetary  policy  since  the
Porter Commission
Text of the Tony Hampson Memorial Lecture by Gordon G Thiessen, Governor of the Bank
of Canada, at the C D Howe Institute, Toronto, Ontario, on 11 March 1999.
A. TONY HAMPSON AND THE PORTER COMMISSION
Tony Hampson made a number of outstanding contributions to Canadian public life as well as
having a successful business career. Many in this audience will be familiar with the fact that
for  a  number  of  years  he  was  Chairman  of  the  C.D.  Howe  Institute’s  Policy  Analysis
Committee. Early in his career, he worked on the Royal Commission on Canada’s Economic
Prospects (the Gordon Commission) and, most prominently, served as secretary of the Royal
Commission on Banking and Finance (the Porter Commission).
His  colleagues,  on  these  Commissions  as  elsewhere,  remember  an  engaging  personality,  an
ambitious and demanding manager, a clear-headed analyst, and a thorough and helpful editor.
He  was  also  a  superb  communicator  and  writer.  Let  me  quote  the  acknowledgement  in  the
Porter  Report:  “Our  greatest  debt  has  been  to  Mr.  H.  A.  Hampson,  the  Secretary  of  the
Commission. His intellect, organizing ability and energy proved invaluable in the planning of
our work, the development of our views and the drafting of our entire report.”1
The hearings and analysis undertaken in the early 1960s by the Porter Commission, together
with  its  Report  and  the  discussions  it  generated,  were  events  of  major  importance  for  the
Canadian financial system and for the Bank of Canada. Indeed, I will suggest in this lecture
that the Porter Report contained the seeds of a major reorientation of thinking about financial
structure  and  monetary  policy.  Its  emphasis  on  competition,  and  on  the  use  of  market
mechanisms in the implementation of monetary policy, clearly showed the way ahead. It also
foresaw many of the subsequent changes in financial institutions and markets. Moreover, the
Commission  underlined  the  necessity  for  inflation  control  at  a  time  when  the  view  that
inflation could be traded off for lower unemployment was gaining in popularity.
The Commissioners themselves, chaired by Chief Justice of Ontario Dana Porter, were people
of  experience  and  insight.  They  assembled  an  extraordinarily  talented  young  research  staff,
and Tony Hampson proved to be an admirable team leader.
The  Commission  believed  in  markets.  This  was  not  such  a  popular  stance  at  the  time.
Extensive  government  controls,  a  legacy  of  the  post-World  War  Two  period,  were  still  in
place  in  many  advanced  economies,  and  they  were  widely  thought  to  be  necessary,  if  not
desirable.  In  contrast,  the  Porter  Commission  felt  that  the  somewhat  more  liberal  financial
regime  in  Canada  was  by  and  large  working  effectively.  The  financial  system  had  played  a
central role in the post-war expansion, especially in the smooth financing of the tremendous
wave  of  investment  in  the  1950s.  Moreover,  at  the  time  it  was  undergoing  considerable
change, in response to the evolving demands in the financial markets of households, firms and
governments.  On  the  basis  of  this  encouraging  experience,  the  Porter  Report  came  out
strongly  in  favour  of  increased  competition  and  deregulation.  It  was  aware  that  this  might
entail some risks, but thought they were worth taking.
                                                     
1
Porter Commission Report, p. 572.
1
BIS Review   30/1999
This advice was followed in the revisions to federal financial legislation of 1967, notably in
the following measures:2 removal of the 6 per cent ceiling on bank loan rates; permission for
banks  to  enter  conventional  (i.e.  non-government-insured)  mortgage  lending;  prohibition  of
interbank agreements on interest rates and of  interlocking  directorates;  and  the  reduction  of
the burden of cash reserve requirements on chartered bank deposits.
These measures have stood the test of time and have served Canada well. For example, the
liberalization  of  interest  rates  allowed  financial  institutions  to  adapt  appropriately  to  the
requirements of the more volatile financial environment of the decades that followed. Canada
was  spared  the  systemic  weaknesses  caused  elsewhere  by  ceilings  on  administered  interest
rates.  In  the  United  States,  for  example,  such  ceilings  were  a  major  factor  encouraging  the
unbalanced portfolios of the thrift institutions, which in the 1980s would be revealed as a fatal
flaw.
In  more  philosophical  terms,  Porter’s  arguments  on  financial  liberalization  and  competition
were ahead of their time, and still read very well today.
I  cite  all  this  to  underline  that  the  Porter  Commission  made  an  important  difference  to  our
financial landscape. But financial reform, important and topical though it may be, is not the
central theme of my lecture. Instead, I will focus on the Commission’s work on the conduct of
monetary policy. First, I will set out a broad characterization of the view of monetary policy in
the  Porter  Report.  I  have  not  tried  to  provide  a  thorough  description  of  the  Commission’s
analysis of monetary policy. Rather, I have focused on a few general policy issues that strike
me  as  important.  Next,  I  will  present  the  general  approach  to  policy  that  is  taken  today.
Comparison  of  the  two,  you  will  see,  reveals  some  striking  differences,  but  also  some
common themes. These themes lead me to the view that the Porter Commission Report and
the surrounding debate were a key step in the evolution towards the current monetary policy
framework in Canada.3
B. THE PORTER COMMISSION VIEW OF MONETARY POLICY
1. The basic framework
The Porter Report in most respects adopted a standard 1960s view of monetary policy. It was
the heyday of Keynesianism, in official circles as well as in the universities. Although Milton
Friedman and his collaborators had begun their restoration of the quantity theory with some
                                                     
2 
The  main  revisions  were  to  the  Bank  Act  and  the  Bank  of  Canada  Act.  While  the  Commission  had
recommended a comprehensive definition of banking, the legislation did not go so far as to eliminate
distinctions  between  different  kinds  of  financial  institutions.  Moreover,  the  Commission  was  against
government-backed  deposit  insurance,  which  was  nevertheless  enacted  in  1967,  following  a  run  on  a
trust company.
3 
The Commission also dealt with the issue of central bank governance. It recommended formalizing the
agreement  on  dual  government-Bank  of  Canada  responsibility  that  Louis  Rasminsky  had  drawn  up
before accepting his appointment as governor. In consequence, the Bank of Canada Act was amended in
1967 to provide the Minister of Finance with the right to issue a directive to the Bank if the government
disapproved of the Bank’s policy. Thus, the government is ultimately responsible for monetary policy,
but if no directive is issued the Bank has full responsibility for designing and implementing monetary
policy.
BIS Review   30/1999
2
impressive,  if  controversial,  empirical  work,4  theirs  was  very  much  a  minority  view  in  the
early 1960s.
There were four key tenets in the standard view of monetary policy at the time.5
First,  monetary  policy  was  seen  as  just  one  element  of  macroeconomic  policy,  which  in  its
entirety has multiple objectives (high employment and output, low inflation, rapid economic
growth, external balance, etc). And it was argued that monetary, fiscal and debt management
policies should be coordinated in pursuit of these objectives.  These  propositions  reflected  a
strong focus on the short run. While there is no doubt that monetary policy and fiscal policy
both  affect  real  variables  in  the  short  run,  it  was  less  clear  at  the  time  that  the  effects  of
monetary  policy  on  the  demand  for  goods  and  services  did  not  extend  into  the  longer  run.
Given its short time horizon, it was not surprising that macroeconomic analysis in the 1960s
focused on stabilizing output and employment.
Second, monetary policy on its own was viewed as not very effective. Large movements in
credit conditions or interest rates might in theory have a large economic impact, but they had
to  be  avoided  because  of  harmful  side  effects  (instrument  instability,  financial  instability,
balance of payments repercussions, etc.). The changes in credit conditions that were feasible
had a comparatively limited effect.
Third, the credit channel was thought to be the main source of impact of monetary policy on
the  economy.  Conventional  monetary  policy  instruments  (open  market  operations,  bank
reserve management, and Bank Rate changes) were said to affect credit flows by changing the
liquidity positions of financial institutions. This credit channel embodied the effects of both
the  availability  and  the  cost  of  borrowing.  However,  its  overall  influence  was  complex  and
typically slow; and the impact of an easing of credit was considered to be especially weak –
“you can’t push on a string.”6
Fourth, a need was seen for moral suasion or formal controls on lending in difficult short-run
situations,  such  as  balance  of  payments  crises.  The  Commission  recognized  the  defects  of
such measures: arbitrary discrimination, economic distortions, and eroding effectiveness over
time. However, the general view at the time was that such controls were helpful when quick
effects were urgently needed.
2. The relationship between inflation and economic activity
In 1958, A.W. Phillips published the analysis of the relationship between wage increases and
unemployment in the United Kingdom that now bears his name, and researchers in the United
States soon found a similar relationship.7 By the early 1960s macroeconomists were regarding
                                                     
4
See, for example, Friedman (1956).
5 
6
7
These ideas were also to be found in similar inquiries of that time in the United Kingdom (the Radcliffe
Report) and in the United States (the Commission on Money and Credit). However, there were  some
differences in the argumentation of the three reports. For example, Radcliffe was most interventionist
while Porter was the strongest advocate of market mechanisms.
Porter Commission Report, p. 434.
Phillips (1958), Samuelson and Solow (1960).
3
BIS Review   30/1999
the Phillips curve as a description of a policy trade-off between inflation and unemployment.
By accepting more inflation, it seemed possible to reach a higher level of output. A seminal
study of the policy implications of the Phillips curve was  in  a  Royal  Commission  Working
Paper by Grant Reuber.8 The Porter Commission accepted this line of reasoning and argued
that a balance had to be struck between the goals of price stability and maximizing output, and
that neither should be pursued to the exclusion of the other.
At  the  same  time,  however,  the  Commission  was  aware  that  inflation  could  have  very
negative longer-run  consequences  for  the  economy.  “The  objective  of  stable  prices...,  while
desirable  for  its  own  sake,  is  also  important  as  a  means  to  a  wider  end....  rising  prices  can
weaken real economic growth by undermining the system of fixed value contracts on which
efficient  business  is  founded,  by  generating  a  fear  of  long-term  saving  and  lending
commitments, and by diverting real resources into unproductive and inefficient channels ....”9
In a similar vein, the Report rejected the argument  for  mild  inflation  to  lubricate  real  wage
adjustment,  after  noting  that  productivity  was  increasing  at  2  per  cent  a  year,  so  that  a
considerable degree of adjustment was possible without real wage declines, and that measures
to  increase  market  flexibility  were  a  better  solution.  The  Report  also  described  inflation  as
acting  “like  a  drug  whose  dose  must  be  continually  increased  to  get  the  same  effect:  if  the
authorities permitted the economy to become addicted, the inevitable return to reality would
bring about very painful withdrawal adjustments.”10
These  passages  were  prescient  in  the  light  of  what  was  to  happen  over  the  next  20  years.
However,  the  Report  struggled  to  reconcile  its  advocacy  of  multiple  targets  with  its  vivid
warnings  about  inflation.  The  tension  between  the  two,  we  can  now  see,  stemmed  largely
from a lack of clarity about relevant time horizons. The multiple targets approach to monetary
policy  focused  on  the  short-run  trade-off  between  inflation  and  unemployment.  It  did  not
recognize that this trade-off disappears over time as inflation expectations adjust to changes in
the rate of inflation. The idea of a vertical long-run Phillips curve, which was implied by the
adjustment of inflation  expectations,  was  developed  only  later  in  the  decade.11  At  the  same
time, the Report did recognize the likely damage that inflation could cause in the longer run to
the productive capacity of the economy.
In  the  end,  the  Report  did  not  recommend  the  firm  guideline  for  monetary  policy  that  its
spirited advocacy of price stability would, in retrospect, seem to have justified.12 Despite this
ambivalence,  the  Commission  was  more  far-sighted  in  its  concerns  about  inflation  than  the
                                                     
8
See Reuber (1962, 1964).
9
10
11
12 
Porter Commission Report, pp. 399-400.
Porter Commission Report, p. 419.
The main authors were Milton Friedman (1968) and Edmund Phelps (1967).
The Submissions of the Bank of Canada also pointed to the importance of restraining inflation (II,
paragraph 59): “Central banks feel a particular obligation for seeing that in the consideration given to
the proper ‘mix’ of public policies adequate emphasis is at all times placed on price stability... being in a
position to exercise an influence on the volume of money, they must inevitably be concerned with its
value.”
BIS Review   30/1999
4
consensus of economists of the day, which was that the Bank of Canada had been investing
too much in fighting inflation.13
3. The scope for monetary policy under a fixed exchange rate
Canada  had  been  on  a  floating  exchange  rate  regime  when  the  Porter  Commission  was
appointed in October 1961, but the government adopted a fixed exchange rate in May 1962.
Given  the  degree  of  asset  substitutability  between  Canada  and  the  United  States,  Canadian
interest rates were thereafter tightly constrained by the objective of maintaining the dollar at
the parity of 92.5 U.S. cents.14
With  respect  to  longer-run  policy  objectives,  as  we  know  today,  the  fixed  exchange  rate
implied  that  monetary  policy  in  Canada  would  be  mainly  determined  in  the  United  States.
However, the prevailing opinion among economists, reflected in the Porter Report, was that
Canadian  monetary  policy  could  nevertheless  serve  a  constructive  short-run  purpose  with
respect to the range of macroeconomic policy objectives, as long as the currency was fixed at
a reasonable value and the government had an adequate reserve of foreign exchange.
At the time, most policy-oriented economists did not draw the sharp distinction we now do
between fixed and floating exchange rate regimes. To understand this, we have to recognize
three factors. First, under Canada’s floating exchange rate regime of the 1950s – which was
the only post-war experience in the industrialized world to go by – variations in the exchange
rate had been quite modest, as had the movements in Canada-U.S. interest rate differentials.
That  is,  in  practice,  the  float  did  not  appear  to  be  very  different  from  a  fixed  rate  regime.
Second,  with  their  focus  on  short-run  output  and  employment,  policy-makers  tended  to
neglect the possible inconsistency between the objective for domestic inflation and the fixed
exchange  rate.  Third,  the  theory  of  monetary  policy  in  an  open  economy  was  in  a  fairly
rudimentary state.15 The severe constraints that a fixed exchange rate imposes even on short-
run monetary policy choices in a world of high asset substitutability were not fully appreciated
at the time.
In  the  case  where  a  conflict  might  materialize  between  domestic  objectives  and  the  fixed
exchange  rate  for  the  dollar,  the  Commission  recommended  that  domestic  considerations
should prevail, and that the exchange rate parity be allowed to change. But it did not reopen
the  debate  over  the  exchange  rate,  which  had  been  a  topic  of  heated  political  controversy
earlier in the decade. By 1964, at the time the Report was published, the view of the Canadian
authorities was very much that the fixed exchange rate system was appropriate, and that the
existing parity was in the right range.
                                                     
13
In part these views stemmed from theories of inflation that emphasized non-monetary factors, e.g. cost
push, union or seller power, demand shift, struggle for income, and so on.
14
15
Exchange  controls  had  been  eliminated  in  the  early  1950s.  The  Canadian  dollar  would  remain  fixed
until June 1970.
Robert Mundell was at that very time making the contributions  that  would  form  the  standard  modern
model for open-economy policy analysis. See Mundell (1961, 1962, and 1963).
5
BIS Review   30/1999
4. Monetary policy instruments and the transmission mechanism
Both the Porter  Commission  and  the  Bank  in  its  submissions  described  the  transmission  of
monetary  policy  actions  in  terms  of  their  effects  on  credit  conditions.  By  credit  conditions
they meant “the whole range of terms and conditions affecting borrowing and lending and the
purchase and sale of financial assets.”16 This would include, most importantly, interest rates,
but  also  standards  of  creditworthiness,  collateral,  repayment  periods,  and  other  terms  and
conditions.
In general, whereas the Bank of Canada17 stressed the importance of availability effects, the
Porter Report was more inclined to give a central place to interest rates. One of the reasons
why the Bank of Canada put so much emphasis on credit availability at that time was because,
even  apart  from  the  6  per  cent  bank  loan  rate  ceiling,  it  believed  that  wide  fluctuations  in
interest rates were not feasible. Indeed, historical experience was of a quite narrow range of
interest rate movements. For example, the prime lending rate of the chartered banks, a key rate
in the transmission mechanism, had never been lower than 4.5 per cent, while the maximum
legal rate was 6 per cent – a range of 150 basis points. There simply had not been much scope
for borrowing costs to vary.
As outlined by the Commission and the Bank, there were a number of possible reasons for this
belief that wider movements in interest rates were not feasible: the possibility of instrument
instability  (with  interest  rates  swinging  abruptly),  the  potential  effect  of  sharp  changes  in
security  prices  on  the  stability  of  financial  institutions,  adverse  public  opinion,  and  the
external constraint posed by the fixed exchange rate. While the Commission agreed with some
of these concerns, it nonetheless argued that such considerations should not stand in the way
of a vigorous monetary policy.
The Porter Report accepted, however, the description put forward by the Bank of Canada of
the way that monetary policy affected the operation of chartered banks. The provision of cash
reserves  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  would  bring  about  changes  in  chartered  bank  holdings  of
liquid assets, which over time would affect the banks’ willingness to make loans. However,
when quick results were deemed necessary, the Bank felt that resort to direct limits on bank
lending would be justified. On the several occasions that moral suasion had been employed in
the  1950s,  it  had  seemed  to  work.  The  Commission  showed  little  enthusiasm  for  such
intervention. It argued that controls impaired market efficiency, were discriminatory, and were
of  diminishing  effectiveness  over  time.  There  was  also  a  concern  about  their  clumsiness,
especially the delays in making instructions effective in bank branches across the country, and
possible misinterpretation of their eventual withdrawal.
Despite all that was said and done about the credit conditions approach to monetary policy,
empirically any significant effects seem to have been confined to a few brief periods of moral
suasion  and  the  impact  on  residential  construction  of  the  lags  in  changing  the  administered
NHA mortgage rate and the interaction between this rate and the 6 per cent bank lending rate
ceiling.  The  available  empirical  evidence  did  not  indicate  that  changes  in  credit  conditions
systematically  had  much  effect  on  aggregate  demand.  Econometric  tests  reported  in  the
Commission’s  Working  Papers  show  no  significant  effects  on  consumption  and  investment
                                                     
16
Bank of Canada Submissions, II, para. 11.
17
Bank of Canada Submissions, II, paras. 13 and 14.
BIS Review   30/1999
6
spending from interest rate or credit variables.18 This seems to have been because monetary
policy actions had not been very aggressive.
These  results  confirmed  the  conventional  belief  that  ordinary  monetary  policy  actions  were
not very effective. And this was a major reason for the insistence on policy packages with the
right mix of fiscal and monetary policy, plus coordinated debt management policy, and on the
possible need for moral suasion and/or some sort of direct controls on bank lending.
5. The role of debt management
I have noted that the package of macroeconomic policies advocated during the 1960s tended
to include debt management policy along with fiscal and monetary policies. Certainly, central
bankers  of  the  day  regarded  debt  management  policy  as  an  integral  part  of  macroeconomic
policy. The Porter Report had some sympathy with this notion. There were three discernible
lines of thinking here.
First,  monetary  policy  is  itself  a  kind  of  debt  management  with  an  open  market  operation
switching  one  public  sector  liability  (central  bank  deposits)  for  another  (e.g.  treasury  bills).
Second, changes in relative supplies of debt could affect the liquidity of the banks and hence
their  willingness  to  lend.  Third,  debt  management  might  directly  alter  the  term  structure  of
interest rates.
These notions may have had greater plausibility at the time, when there were some indications
of segmented markets. But over time, market segmentation diminished in importance as both
lenders  and  borrowers  became  increasingly  willing  to  adjust  the  maturity  of  their
commitments in response to interest rate differences across the term structure. Moreover, in
the years following the publication of the Porter Report, evidence accumulated supporting the
expectations theory of the term structure of interest rates. According to this theory, long-term
rates are the average expected value of future short-term rates, plus a liquidity risk premium.
Although in principle the latter could vary systematically as the composition of debt changes,
in  practice  such  effects,  if  they  exist  at  all,  are  of  too  short  duration  to  have  any
macroeconomic impact.
C. THE CANADIAN POLICY FRAMEWORK IN THE 1990s
1. The basic propositions
Between  the  1960s  and  the  1990s,  informed  opinion  about  the  appropriate  role  of  central
banks  shifted  radically.  The  current  mainstream  view  can  be  briefly  summarized  in  the
following four propositions.
First, the main objective of monetary policy is to preserve the value of money, in other words
to achieve a very low rate of inflation over the long run. Other economic objectives are not
ignored,  however,  because  price  stability  is  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can
make  towards  high  employment  and,  more  generally,  towards  a  prosperous,  growing
economy.  Second,  an  independent  monetary  policy,  or,  more  precisely,  a  domestically  set
objective for inflation, logically requires a floating exchange rate. Third, markets, and price
mechanisms,  work  efficiently  and  thus  provide  effective  channels  for  the  transmission  of
                                                     
18
Johnson and Winder (1962) and Reuber (1962).
7
BIS Review   30/1999
monetary  policy  through  short-term  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate.  Fourth,  short-term
interest rates must be adjusted as much as required to meet the monetary policy objective.
Most of the present policy framework is, I hope, reasonably familiar to you. So I will spare
you  further  detail.  Instead,  I  would  like  to  underline  the  magnitude  of  the  revision  that  has
taken place in accepted thinking about monetary policy since the Porter Commission, and to
speculate on the reasons for the shift.
2. Contrasts in views about policy objectives
The sharpest apparent contrasts between the ideas and practices I have sketched for the two
periods concern the objectives of monetary policy. Nowadays we focus the job of the central
bank squarely on  the  single  objective  of  price  stability.  In  the  1960s,  that  would  have  been
looked  upon  by  most  observers  as  an  extreme  and  partial  view  of  the  role  of  monetary
policy.19
What has been learned from the experience over the years is that high and variable inflation
can  be  very  costly  for  the  economy  and  that  aiming  at  low  and  stable  inflation  is  the  best
contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  achieving,  over  time,  the  multiple  economic
objectives  espoused  by  Porter.  Desirable  economic  outcomes  can  never  be  guaranteed,  but
chances of achieving them are best when inflation is low and stable. That is, low inflation is
an indispensable asset for the achievement of the other economic goals.20
Consider, for example, the accepted view during the 1960s that there was an exploitable trade-
off  between  inflation  and  unemployment.  Along  with  the  short-term  perspective  of  policy-
makers,  this  view  led  to  excessively  easy  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  in  most  industrial
countries.  In  Canada,  we  found  ourselves  confronted  by  an  enormous  and  destructive
inflation, with peaks in the mid-1970s and the beginning of the 1980s,  and  another  bout  of
upward pressure in the late 1980s. Moreover, the high rates of inflation were accompanied by
an economic slowdown in the 1970s (reflected in the coining of the term “stagflation”) and
were followed by unusually sharp economic recessions in the early 1980s and early 1990s.
The  idea  of  an  exploitable  long-run  trade-off  between  inflation  and  unemployment  was
effectively demolished by this experience. And the lesson was reinforced by the success of the
firm stance in favour of price stability taken by the German and Japanese central banks in the
late 1970s.
                                                     
19
The  Bank  has  long  had  a  concern  about  restraining  inflation.  What  was  lacking  in  the  past  was  the
support from theory and experience to make that focus more precise and explicit. Public milestones in
the  evolution  of  the  Bank’s  views  were  three  lectures  by  my  predecessors:  the  1966  Per  Jacobsson
Lecture by Louis Rasminsky on the objectives of monetary policy and the mechanisms through which it
operates; the 1982 Per Jacobsson Lecture by Gerald Bouey, which highlighted the need for a “place to
stand” or, in other words, for a “nominal anchor”; and the 1988 Hanson Lecture of John Crow, which
singled out price stability as the objective of monetary policy in Canada. Also, I would draw attention to
Gerald Bouey’s final Annual Report, for 1986, which emphasized the costs of inflation and the difficulty
of reducing it once entrenched.
20
For  a  fuller  explanation  of  the  relation  between  price  stability  and  other  economic  objectives,  see
Thiessen (1998-1999).
BIS Review   30/1999
8
The  inflation  of  the  1970s  and  early  1980s  demonstrated  just  how  costly  inflation  was  and
how  difficult  it  was  to  eradicate  once  rooted  in  expectations.  These  experiences  were  key
factors  underlying  the  shift  in  views  about  monetary  policy.  They  also  were  central  to  the
acceptance of the expectations-augmented Phillips curve in place of the simple Phillips curve
as part of the analytic framework underlying monetary policy.
This is not just theory or central bank ideology. As we look around the world and over history,
we see that countries that achieve high standards of living and sustained strong output growth
have also maintained low rates of inflation.
3. Understanding the role of the exchange rate in monetary policy
As I explained earlier in this lecture, when the Commission was preparing its Report, neither
the then current economic theory nor the Canadian experience of the 1950s provided strong
evidence for the crucial role that exchange rate flexibility plays in the operation of monetary
policy in an open economy like Canada’s. When we floated our exchange  rate  in  1950  and
again in 1970, it was because we were pushed off our pegged rate by the pressures of rising
commodity prices and associated strong inflows of capital. The notion of a national monetary
policy with an independent inflation target did not feature in these decisions.
As we now see it, a floating exchange rate plays two key roles. In the first place, in the long
run a floating currency allows the central bank to pursue a national inflation target, regardless
of the behaviour of foreign inflation. In the second place, variations in the currency allow the
real exchange rate, and hence the economy, to adjust more smoothly to international shocks to
relative prices.
It  was  only  after  currency  and  capital  controls  began  to  be  removed  (or  were  increasingly
bypassed) in the post-war period, and domestic financial markets became more deregulated in
a number of  countries,  that  economists  came  to  appreciate  fully  the  interaction  of  domestic
interest rates and exchange rates. In open economies with unhindered capital flows, it is only
when  the  real  exchange  rate  moves  to  levels  where  it  is  widely  expected  to  appreciate  or
depreciate that domestic real interest rates can temporarily move away from their international
counterparts.
Furthermore, what we understand much more clearly these days is that movements in the real
exchange  rate  are  a  major  part  of  the  process  whereby  an  economy  returns  to  a  sustainable
growth path after being hit by a shock.  For  example,  it  is  well  known  that  a  drop  in  world
commodity prices reduces the real equilibrium value of the Canadian dollar. If this is brought
about  by  currency  depreciation,  the  overall  domestic  price  level  need  not  deviate  from  its
target path. In contrast, with a fixed exchange rate, domestic prices would have to fall below
that path, and perhaps fall absolutely, to bring about the required decline in the real exchange
rate.  It  is  clear  that  real  exchange  rate  adjustment  works  much  more  smoothly  when  the
nominal exchange rate can adjust. However, for the benefits of exchange rate flexibility to be
realized, expectations about nominal exchange rates must be anchored by a monetary policy
that is focused on maintaining low and stable inflation over the medium term.
4. Increased confidence in the resilience and efficiency of markets
It  would  have  been  unthinkable  in  the  1960s  to  have  suggested  that  the  central  bank’s
influence  over  interest  rates  was,  in  and  of  itself,  enough  to  enable  it  to  keep  the  rate  of
9
BIS Review   30/1999
inflation low and stable. The view at the time was that there were narrow bounds on how far
interest  rates  could  be  moved,  and  that  these  severely  limited  what  the  central  bank  could
accomplish  by  varying  them.  As  a  result,  moral  suasion  to  affect  bank  lending  policies  or
direct controls were seen as important additional instruments for central banks.
A key reason for the change in attitude today is an increased confidence in markets. Certainly,
at central banks, we are more confident than we were in the 1960s of the ability of financial
markets  to  absorb  changes  in  interest  rates.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  accumulated  strong
evidence  to  support  the  view  that  market  mechanisms  transmit  monetary  policy  actions
effectively.
In the 1960s the Porter Commission was ahead of the Bank, and of conventional wisdom, in
this. It envisaged a monetary system that in key respects would function much as it does today
–  driven  by  market  forces,  flexible,  and  frequently  undergoing  rapid  change.  In  its
recommendations  for  reform,  the  Commission  was  looking  forward  to  a  world  in  which
monetary policy would be increasingly reliant for its effectiveness on appropriate movements
in financial market prices.
In line with this view, the Porter Report maintained that institutions and markets were well
able to withstand substantial shocks and warned against letting the conduct of monetary policy
be excessively influenced by an undue concern for the stability of asset values. It saw that the
aversion to significant interest rate movements expressed at the time by the Bank of Canada
put  at  risk  its  ability  to  achieve  its  macroeconomic  objectives.  In  one  of  its  more  colourful
phrases,  the  Report  warned  that  “the  authorities  must  not  be  restrained  by  excessive
tenderness.”21
However,  the  present  confidence  in  markets  is  not  just  a  question  of  philosophy.  Since  the
1960s, a variety of legislative and structural changes have made the financial sector still more
resilient and flexible. This has made the transmission of monetary policy more efficient and
has eliminated residual concerns about the inability of the markets to cope with the effects of
central bank actions.
D. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Even  though  the  Porter  Commission  had  some  remarkable  insights,  there  is  no  doubt  that
there  has  been  a  major  change  in  views  since  the  1960s  with  respect  to  the  objective  of
monetary policy and the mechanisms through which policy works. Two factors stand out in
trying to understand the change. The first is the simple accumulation of experience that has
exposed  some  of  the  shortcomings  in  earlier  thinking  about  macroeconomic  policy.  The
second  is  the  advances  in  the  analytic  framework  available  to  policy-makers  to  help  them
analyze  the  workings  of  the  economy  and  of  monetary  policy.  These  are  not  independent
factors, of course, since economic analysis does change in response to experience. In this case,
it  was  the  inability  of  the  previous  framework  to  provide  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  the
developments  in  the  second  half  of  the  1960s  and  the  1970s  that  led  to  changes  in  the
framework for analyzing the macroeconomy.
                                                     
21 
Porter Commission Report, pp. 477-478.
BIS Review   30/1999
10
Experience  of  good  and  bad  outcomes  has  thus  played  a  major  role  in  the  development  of
views  about  monetary  policy.  The  theory  dominating  the  views  of  Tony  Hampson  and  his
colleagues  was  developed  in  response  to  the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s.  However,  the
views  of  my  generation  of  central  bankers  have  been  coloured  by  the  great  inflation  that
marked  our  professional  years.  This  brought  back  to  the  fore  the  fundamental  truth  about
inflation being a monetary phenomenon that had become temporarily obscured in the 1950s
and 1960s.
I  want  to  make  sure,  however,  that  I  do  not  leave  you  with  the  impression  that  views  on
monetary  policy  are  mere  creatures  of  circumstance.  Our  belief  in  the  objective  of  price
stability has a more solid foundation than that. A vast range of historical evidence as well as a
large  body  of  economic  theory  have  long  supported  this  objective  as  a  necessary  factor  for
good performance with respect to output, employment, and growth.
I would like to end this lecture by drawing attention to the area in which central banking has
probably changed most dramatically quite recently. This is the move, particularly during the
1990s, towards much greater transparency and public accountability in monetary policy and in
the operations of central banks generally. Here again, the Commission was insightful but did
not make strong recommendations for greater transparency.22
Since 1991, the use of explicit low-inflation targets as the objective of monetary policy has
been the most prominent aspect in Canada of this broader development. We now believe that
our actions are likely to be more effective and more credible to the extent that they are more
clearly  understood  and  more  predictable.  Therefore,  today  we  provide  the  public  with  large
amounts  of  data  and  commentary  on  monetary  policy,  in  our  regular  publications,  on  the
internet, and in response to specific requests. We also try to give information on the outlook
for the economy and monetary policy in our Monetary Policy Reports, in speeches by Bank of
Canada  officials,  and  in  the  extensive  informal  contacts  of  our  regional  offices  across  the
country. In our Technical Reports and Working Papers and annual economics conferences, the
Bank makes its latest research available in a timely fashion. This is a two-way street, by the
way, since feedback and criticism are essential to good research.
There  has  been  a  similar  move  to  openness  with  respect  to  the  process  of  policy
implementation.  Since  1994,  the  Bank  has  announced  its  operating  band  for  the  overnight
interest rate, which is now tied to the Bank Rate. And since 1996, press releases providing an
explanation of the Bank’s actions have accompanied each change in the Bank Rate.23
Much of this is quite a break from the past, since traditionally central banks liked to retain a
strong element of mystery about their conduct of policy and at times liked to have the capacity
to surprise the market with shifts in the supply of reserves to move the overnight rate.
                                                     
22
“Mystery  leads  to  misinformation,  and  monetary  policy  needs  informed  public  opinion  to  function
effectively and acceptably. As the Governor pointed out, much of this information must be backward-
looking, but we believe it need not all be.” Porter Commission Report, p. 555.
23
For a detailed discussion of the movement to greater transparency, see Thiessen (1995).
11
BIS Review   30/1999
Public opinion has been an underlying driving force in this movement towards transparency.
People  expect  much  more  than  they  used  to  with  respect  to  the  accountability  of  public
institutions. The great expansion in higher education over the past 40 years, and with it the
rise in sophistication about financial and economic matters, mean that the public is more apt
to raise questions about economic policies. The amount and the quality of the information that
we provide has had to keep in step.
Also,  the  great  inflation,  which  has  had  a  lasting  effect  on  perceptions  about  the  value  of
money, has led to a heightened interest in the conduct of monetary policy. Expectations are
not held as firmly as they were in the 1950s and early 1960s. People have had to be convinced
in recent years that price stability is a credible objective. They still do not take the present low
inflation completely for granted. Each action of the central bank is liable to be scrutinized for
any  sign  of  backsliding.  For  example,  the  volatility  of  bond  and  foreign  exchange  markets,
which persists despite almost a decade of low inflation, can partly be attributed to lingering
uncertainties with respect to future price movements. At the Bank of Canada, we have taken
the  position  that  these  concerns  are  best  confronted  by  making  clear  statements  about  the
objective  and  strategy  of  monetary  policy,  by  releasing  our  economic  analysis  to  outside
examination, and by publishing all relevant data.
It  is  possible  that  some  future  governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  will  want  to  give  a  lecture
looking  back  at  monetary  policy  in  the  1990s.  I  believe  that  this  future  governor  will  be
particularly  impressed  by  the  influence  that  demands  for 
transparency  and  public
accountability have had in shifting the culture of central banks and their approach to monetary
policy in the 1990s.
References – 1999 Hampson Lecture
Bank  of  Canada.  1962.  Submissions  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  to  the  Royal  Commission  on
Banking and Finance. Ottawa: Bank of Canada.
---------------. 1987. Annual report of the Governor to the Minister of Finance and statement of
accounts for the year 1986. Ottawa: Bank of Canada.
Bouey,  Gerald  K.  1982.  “Monetary  Policy  –  Finding  a  Place  to  Stand.”  The  Per  Jacobsson
Lecture, University of Toronto, Toronto, September 5.
Crow, John. 1988. “The Work of Canadian Monetary Policy.” The Eric J. Hanson Memorial
Lecture, University of Alberta, Edmonton, January 18.
Friedman, Milton. 1956. “The Quantity Theory of Money – A Restatement,” in Studies in the
Quantity Theory of Money, edited by Milton Friedman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
--------------.  1968.  “The  Role  of  Monetary  Policy,”  American  Economic  Review,  Volume
LVIII, Number 1, (March): 1-17.
Johnson, Harry G. and John W. L. Winder. 1962. “Lags in the effects of monetary policy in
Canada,” Working Paper prepared for the Royal Commission on Banking and Finance.
Mundell, Robert A. 1961. “Flexible Exchange Rates and Employment Policy,” The Canadian
Journal of Economics and Political Science, Volume 27, Number 4, (November): 509-517.
BIS Review   30/1999
12
---------------.  1962.  “The  Appropriate  Use  of  Monetary  and  Fiscal  Policy  for  Internal  and
External Stability,” IMF Staff Papers, Volume IX, Number 1, (March).
---------------.  1963.  “Capital  Mobility  and  Stabilization  Policy  under  Fixed  and  Flexible
Exchange  Rates,”  The  Canadian  Journal  of  Economics  and  Political  Science,  Volume  29,
Number 4, (November): 475-485.
Phelps,  Edmund  S.  1967.  “Phillips  Curves,  Expectations  of  Inflation  and  Optimal
Unemployment Over Time,” Economica, Volume XXXIV, Number 135, (August): 254- 281.
Phillips,  A.  W.  1958.  “The  Relation  Between  Unemployment  and  the  Rate  of  Change  of
Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861-1957,” Economica, Volume XXV, Number
100, (November): 283-299.
Porter Commission Report. 1964. Report of the Royal Commission on Banking and Finance.
Ottawa: Queen’s Printer.
Radcliffe  Report.  1959.  Committee  on  the  Working  of  the  Monetary  System.  Report.
(August). London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
Rasminsky,  Louis.  1966.  “The  Role  of  the  Central  Banker  Today.”  The  Per  Jacobsson
Lecture, Altieri Palace, Rome, Italy, November 9.
Report of the Commission on Money and Credit. 1961. Money and Credit: Their Influence on
Jobs, Prices and Growth. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Reuber, Grant L. 1962. “The objectives of monetary policy,” Working Paper prepared for the
Royal Commission on Banking and Finance.
---------------.  1964.  “The  Objectives  of  Canadian  Monetary  Policy,  1949-61:  Empirical
“Trade-offs”  and  the  Reaction  Function  of  the  Authorities,”  The  Journal  of  Political
Economy, Volume 72, Number 2, (April): 109-132.
Samuelson,  Paul  A.  and  Robert  M.  Solow.  1960.  “Analytical  Aspects  of  Anti-inflation
Policy,” American Economic Review, Volume 50, (May): 177-94.
Thiessen, Gordon G. 1995. “Uncertainty and the transmission of monetary policy in Canada.”
The HERMES-Glendon Lecture, York University-Glendon College. Bank of Canada
Review (Summer 1995): 41-58.
---------------.  1998-1999.  “The  Canadian  experience  with  targets  for  inflation  control.”  The
Gibson Lecture, Queen’s University. Bank of Canada Review (Winter 1998-1999): 89-107.
13
BIS Review   30/1999
