Mr Lee examines some of the major themes for strengthening
the global financial system against the background of the financial crisis in Asia
Opening  address  by  Mr  Lee  Hsien  Loong,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  The  Monetary
Authority of Singapore and Deputy Prime Minister at the fifth meeting of Finance and Central Bank
deputies on the Manila Framework at Shangri-La Hotel on 29 August 1999.
 Introduction
I am happy to address the Manila Framework Group.
Prospects  for  the  region  have  brightened  considerably  since  your  inaugural  gathering  in  November
1997, in the depths of the regional economic turmoil. The worst of the crisis is now well past. Most of
the  crisis-countries  are  seeing  growth  again.  Investor  sentiment,  while  edgy,  is  generally  upbeat.
Equity markets have surged, some beyond pre-crisis levels. Currencies have stabilised; indeed some
governments have had to temper the appreciation of their currencies.
But  financial  markets  are  notorious  for  their  short-term  memories.  An  upturn  does  not  necessarily
mean  that  basic  problems  have  been  solved.  It  remains  important  for  financial  regulators  and
policymakers  to  remain  mindful  of  the  lessons  thrown  up  by  the  crisis  and  to  tackle  them  before
another storm blows up.
No  two  Asian  economies  are  the  same.  During  the  crisis,  hardly  any  were  spared  the  panic  and
contagion. But how each was struck, how external problems interacted with internal weaknesses and
how each government responded, varied from country to country. These diverse experiences offer rich
materials for study and contrast. Lessons learnt at great cost of human suffering and political upheaval
may help us formulate sounder policies for the future. A thorough comparative study would occupy
several PhD theses. But a brief review  of  what  happened  in  each  country  will  be  a  useful  basis  for
examining some of the major themes for strengthening the global financial system.
Asian crisis – what happened
Thailand
The  crisis  began  in  Thailand  after  a  long  boom.  The  establishment  of  the  Bangkok  International
Banking Facility or BIBF and the implicit guarantee of a fixed exchange rate encouraged unhedged
borrowing in foreign currency by Thai companies. This led to a build-up of external debt and an asset
bubble.
As  the  Thai  economy  weakened,  the  balance  of  payments  deteriorated  and  the  baht  came  under
pressure.  Attempts  to  defend  the  baht  were  costly  and  ultimately  unsuccessful.  When  the  baht  was
finally allowed to weaken, its sharp fall triggered the collapse of many Thai corporations as well as the
banking system. The Thai economy contracted sharply.
The aftershocks of the Thai problem affected many other Asian economies. Confidence in the whole
region was shaken. Both domestic residents and foreign investors alike rushed to hedge or reduce their
exposure to the region.
Malaysia
Malaysia  was  among  the  next to  be  affected.  Its  economy  was  fundamentally  sound  although  there
were  concerns  over  a  property  boom  and  over  investment  in  infrastructure.  An  acute  loss  of
1
BIS Review 93/1999
confidence, partially prompted by Thailand’s problems, led to a sell-off of Malaysian shares and the
ringgit. The stock market and exchange rate crashed.
Unlike  other  countries,  Malaysia  did  not  have  excessive  external  borrowing.  However,  domestic
borrowing  was  very  high  as  banks  had  lent  large  sums,  often  against  share  collateral  and  to  large
property projects. The crash exposed these weaknesses in the private  sector.  On  1  September  1998,
Malaysia decided to impose capital controls.
Indonesia
Indonesia  was  also  believed  to  be  fundamentally  sound,  even  well  after  the  initial  outbreak  of  the
regional  currency  turmoil.  In  late  1997,  analysts  continued  to  be  upbeat  on  Indonesia’s  economic
prospects,  expecting,  on  average,  a  strong  6-7%  GDP  growth  in  1998.  But  as  regional  problems
stacked up, Indonesia too could not escape the progressive erosion of confidence.
The  Indonesian  economy  had  two  domestic  weaknesses:  unsound  banks  and  companies  that  had
borrowed  excessively  abroad  in  short-term  loans  unbeknown  to  the  government.  These  companies
started hedging  their  exposures,  sending  the rupiah into a  downward  spiral. The  companies  became
insolvent, badly affecting the banking system. Policy errors by the Suharto government compounded
this. Grave social and political difficulties eventually led to a political crisis and a political transition
that is still not completed.
Korea
Korea’s  dynamic  economy  had  certain  weaknesses,  but  these  were  long-standing  and  well  known:
chaebols were very highly leveraged and banks often made lending decisions on government direction
instead of commercial viability. Like Indonesia, Korea’s short-term foreign debt was high. When the
crisis  broke,  foreign  creditors  refused  to  roll-over  credit  lines.  Korean  banks  which  had  borrowed
heavily overseas came under severe pressure.
However, unlike in Indonesia, the major creditor countries, particularly the United States, got together
and agreed on an orderly roll-over of Korean banks’ short-term debt. This stabilised the situation and
enabled the Korean economy to resume growth quickly.
Hong Kong
Hong  Kong  and  Singapore  were  the  two  economies  with  the  least  structural  problems  or  foreign
borrowings, yet neither could escape the contagion. Hong Kong’s economy benefited from its linkages
with  China  which  was  relatively  unaffected  by  the  regional  currency  turmoil.  But  the  Hong  Kong
dollar’s  (HK$)  peg  to  the  US$  caused  Hong  Kong’s  real  exchange  rate  to  appreciate  significantly
when all the other regional currencies fell. The full adjustment to the changed external environment
had  to  be  borne  internally,  through  nominal  prices  of  assets  and  wages.  The  result  was  a  sharp
recession from which Hong Kong is just beginning to emerge.
At the same time, the high HK$ led the markets to assess the risks of a devaluation. Interest rates rose,
further squeezing the economy. After several speculative attacks on the currency and “double-play” on
the  currency  and  share  markets,  the  HKMA  intervened  directly  to  buy  shares  in  August  1998.  The
speculative attacks were successfully beaten off, but the Hong Kong Government remains extremely
concerned  over  the  dangers  posed  by  speculators,  and  particularly  hedge  funds,  to  their  economic
stability.
Singapore
Singapore was more directly  affected  by  the  crisis  than  Hong  Kong  because  of our  close  economic
linkages to Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia. Our growth slowed down drastically, turning negative
for several  quarters.  However,  unlike  Hong  Kong,  the  S$  exchange  rate  could  and  did  adjust  down
BIS Review 93/1999
2
relative to the US$, in line with its trading partners. This extra degree of freedom helped to soften the
impact of the sharp regional slowdown and depreciation of its neighbours’ currencies.
In  addition,  the  Government  sought  to  make  prompt  and  direct  adjustments  to  the  real  economy,
cutting taxes and levies, reducing the CPF contributions with the support of unions and workers and
building capabilities for the longer term. These measures helped see Singapore through the storm and
are now enabling Singapore to recover, together with the rest of the region.
Lessons from the crisis
When the Asian currency crisis first broke out, many observers blamed the “Asian model”. But then
other emerging markets, even the developed world, came under fire. It became clear that the problem
was not just Asia, but also weaknesses in the structure of the global financial system.
Capital controls – can they help?
There  is  general  agreement  on  what  the  key  weaknesses  were,  but  not  yet  on  their  solutions.  Very
broadly, I identify five issues:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Strengthening domestic institutions – a prerequisite to participation in the global system.
Hedge funds – what do they imply for global systemic stability?
Global financial supervision – is this possible?
Exchange rate regimes – fixed or floating?
Capital controls
This  crisis  has  prompted  a  reconsideration  of  the  merits  of  capital  controls.  In  an  ideal  world,  the
global capital market should be one integrated whole, with no restraints on the movement of capital.
Then  savings  could  be  channelled  to  their  most  productive  uses  and  countries  could  fund  their
investment needs at the lowest possible cost.
But in reality many economies still lack  the  institutional  framework  to  deal  with free  capital  flows.
Furthermore, investors are prone to herd behaviour which can result in large surges of capital into and
out  of  countries.  These  surges  cause  bubbles  and  crashes  which  can  do  great  harm  to  economies,
especially small and vulnerable ones.
The liberalisation of capital accounts must thus be treated with caution. It must not proceed faster than
the  strength  of  countries’  domestic  financial  systems  and  institutional  capability.  Controls  on  “hot
money”  are  difficult  to  administer  and  subject  to  evasion,  but  they  can  help  make  countries  less
vulnerable to volatile financial markets.
For  instance  in  Indonesia,  following  the  liberalisation  of  the  banking  sector  in  the  late  1980s,
companies made large short-term borrowings in foreign currencies. They circumvented rules intended
to  prevent  this.  When  the  crisis  struck,  the  Indonesian  government  did  not  know  how  much  the
companies  had  borrowed.  Yet  the  total  was  almost  US$  50  billion1,  more  than  double  Indonesia’s
gross foreign reserves.
The effects of the capital controls which Malaysia imposed in September 1998 are still being debated.
But  even  Malaysia,  which  is  implacably  opposed  to  speculators  out  to  make  a  quick  profit,  still
welcomes  foreign  investors  including  portfolio  investors  buying  Malaysian  shares.  Ultimately,  all
countries still hope to enjoy the benefits of global capital markets such as more foreign investments
and transfers of technology.
1 External debt of the non-bank sector totalled US$ 47 billion in FY1997, accounting for 83% of total private external debt
and 41% of Indonesia’s total external debt.
3
BIS Review 93/1999
In Singapore, our currency is fully convertible. We abolished exchange controls in 1978. We have no
restrictions either on the inflow or outflow of funds. Because we are a financial centre, these flows are
large relative to the size of our economy. Hence we want to be careful not to let them overwhelm or
damage our real economy.
This is why we have maintained a policy of non-internationalisation of the Singapore dollar (S$). This
is  not  a  form  of  exchange  or  capital  control.  It  is  a  monetary  policy  measure  to  deter  speculation
against the S$. It prevents non-residents from borrowing the S$ for purposes unrelated to our economy
for example to fund a short position in the S$.
We believe that the S$ exchange rate should be appropriate to prevailing economic conditions and the
underlying state of the Singapore economy. Indeed in the long term, keeping the currency in line with
fundamentals is the best way to avoid offering speculators too tempting a target.
Exchange rate regimes
Massive speculative attacks on exchange rates are a common element in financial crises. Misaligned
fixed exchange rates have figured prominently in financial crises throughout the 1990s, even the 1980s
and 1970s.
In  the  post-crisis  era,  the  conventional  wisdom  is  that  emerging  markets  should  choose  either  a
free-floating or fixed exchange rate system.
But neither is a panacea. Fixed exchange rates are hard to sustain in a world of global capital mobility.
Furthermore,  they  tend  to  be  viable  only  when  supported  by  large  foreign  reserves  and  strong
institutional arrangements. Even then, the exchange rate can still become misaligned and vulnerable,
as has happened in Argentina.
In Hong Kong, strong foreign reserves and well-developed financial authorities and institutions made
its currency board workable and credible. But even the Hong Kong dollar came under fierce attack in
this crisis. In other countries a fixed exchange rate may be completely infeasible. Thus Professor Steve
Hanke’s  proposal  to  set  up  a  currency  board  system  to  stabilise  the  rupiah  was  viewed  with  deep
scepticism by policymakers both in Indonesia as well as the IMF and the World Bank.
Neither  does  a  free-floating  exchange  rate  always  work.  Even  developed  countries  do  not  remain
impassive when capital flows overwhelm trade flows and threaten the competitiveness of the country’s
exports. A prime example is Japan. And despite a free-float, the exchange rate may spiral downwards
if  there  is  a  loss  of  confidence.  This  happened  in  Indonesia  and  Brazil  after  they  abandoned  their
exchange rate pegs.
Singapore operates a managed float. This policy has prevented the currency from getting too far out of
line and rendering our exports uncompetitive as a fixed rate might have done. A managed float has not
totally eliminated speculative pressures on the S$, but for our circumstances it is the most appropriate
approach.
The best exchange rate regime depends on the specific  circumstances  of  each  economy.  While it  is
important to get this right, the exchange rate does not exist in a vacuum. Ultimately, it is the strength
of the country’s economy, the soundness of its fiscal and monetary policies and the confidence of both
foreign investors and its  own  citizens  in  the  country  that determines  whether  or  not  the  currency  is
stable. If these fundamentals are out of kilter, no technical fix of the exchange rate regime will avert a
crisis.
Hedge funds
Perhaps  the  most  controversial  issue  to  have  arisen  from  the  crisis  is  that  of  hedge  funds.  They
undoubtedly took positions successfully against the Thai baht. The Malaysian Government is certain
that hedge funds were behind the collapse of its stock market and currency. Hong Kong and Australia
are similarly convinced that hedge funds led attacks on their currencies.
BIS Review 93/1999
4
On  the  other  hand  there  is  some  evidence  that  except  in  Thailand  the  hedge  funds  may  have  been
wrong  footed  in  the  crisis.  George  Soros  has  denied  being  short  on  the  ringgit,  during  and  several
months before the crisis2. A spokesman for Soros Fund Management said in October 1997: “Recent
volatility  in  world  financial  markets  is  reflected  in  the  volatility  of  the  Quantum  Group’s
performance”, a nice cryptic way to say that they had incurred substantial losses.
While  the  facts  are  still  hotly  disputed,  they  are  ascertainable.  What  role  hedge  funds  played  in
different countries is an empirical question and not a matter of opinion. A Working Group on HLIs has
been set up under the Financial Stability Forum. I hope it will settle the facts unambiguously so that
the debate can move on to consider what, if anything, should be done.
In deciding whether to restrict the activities of hedge funds, there are three considerations. First, who
are the shareholders of hedge funds? They do not represent the retail public. Typically, hedge funds
invest  on  behalf  of  wealthy  individuals  and  institutional  investors  who  do  not  need  consumer
protection. From this point of view, the activities of hedge funds are private business and need not be
subject  to  the  same  strict  regulations  and  disclosure  demands  as  financial  institutions  that  collect
monies from the public.
The  second  is  a  prudential  concern.  Are  financial  institutions  that  lend  to  hedge  funds  being
sufficiently prudent and provisioning enough capital in relation to the lending? Hedge funds are not
rated by commercial rating agencies, unlike most large banks and corporations. They often keep their
portfolios and strategies secret which hampers a proper assessment of their financial soundness. The
existing regulatory framework is not tight enough in this respect. As LTCM showed, creditors often
lent independently of one another and were not setting aside sufficient capital to cover their lending to
highly leveraged funds.
The third is a systemic consideration. Are hedge funds a source of instability in the global financial
system? While their role in the Asian crisis remains controversial, the LTCM incident shows clearly
that on occasion hedge funds can be destabilising, through their sheer size and leverage.
Banning hedge funds altogether is not the solution. Many other institutions make similar plays as the
hedge  funds.  Indeed  hedge  funds  can  play  a  positive  role  in  international  financial  markets.  Their
signature contrarian and arbitrage strategies can help to stabilise and even enhance the efficiency of
financial  markets.  However,  checks  are  necessary  to  prevent  them  from  accumulating  excessive
positions, unknown to the market and to regulators.
Directly  regulating  hedge  funds  will  also  not  work.  There  is  the  practical  problem  of  regulatory
arbitrage  –  such  players  can  easily  relocate  if  regulation  is  forced  on  them.  Besides,  not  all  hedge
funds are large and highly leveraged. There is no need to regulate all of them in the same way.
One  possible  approach  is  indirect  regulation,  through  their  lenders  and  other  counterparties.  This
means  bringing  the  private  sector  into  the  surveillance  picture.  We  should  create  incentives  in  the
supervisory  framework  for  the  counterparties  of  hedge  funds  to  become  more  vigilant  and  prudent.
Lenders  must  strengthen  their  own  credit  assessment systems,  while  regulators  should  find  ways  to
encourage  risky  borrowers  to  disclose  more,  voluntarily,  to  their  creditors.  For  example,  we  could
introduce a higher risk weighting for borrowers who are large and highly leveraged and who do not
disclose enough to either their creditors or the credit rating agencies. This would spur hedge funds to
disclose more or to obtain a credit rating.
Global financial supervision
The crisis has set off debate as to whether the global capital market needs a global regulator. I doubt
this  is  workable,  or  even  desirable.  A  global  financial  super-regulator  requires  countries  to  give  up
national  sovereignty.  This  is  politically  unrealistic;  witness  how  carefully  the  IMF  had  needed  to
2 George Soros in The Crisis of Global Capitalism, Ch. 7 The Global Financial Crisis, p. 136.
5
BIS Review 93/1999
canvas its major shareholders to support its prescriptions and how closely the US Congress scrutinises
the IMF’s actions.
A more practical, albeit modest, solution is the establishment of the Financial Stability Forum. This
brings  together  both  the  G7  countries  as  well  as  non-G7  financial  centres  and  international
organisations  such  as  the  IMF,  World  Bank  and  the  BIS  to  discuss  the  vulnerabilities  of  the  world
system. The Forum should be able to get best practices and supervisory standards implemented more
widely and effectively.
The  FSF  has  set  up  three  working  groups  to  study  areas  of  vulnerability  highlighted  by  the  crisis:
capital flows and exchange rate regimes, highly leveraged institutions and offshore financial centres
(OFC).
Singapore  has  been  invited  to  participate  in  the  FSF,  together  with  Australia,  Hong  Kong  and  the
Netherlands.  We  are  also  in  the  OFC  working  group.  OFCs  have  attracted  considerable  attention
because  of  the  significant  capital  flows  they  generate.  They  are  a  weak  link  in  the  maintenance  of
global  best  practices  and  regulatory  and  supervisory  standards.  If  OFCs  do  not  meet  international
standards  they  will  provide  an  opportunity  for  regulatory  arbitrage.  Financial  institutions  may  be
tempted to migrate to such OFCs. This would make it very difficult for other jurisdictions to maintain
or raise their own standards.
There  is  work  ahead  to  understand  the  roles  and  uses  of  OFCs  and  their  implications  for  financial
stability. Singapore, together with the other members of the OFC working group, will involve OFCs in
this  study.  We  aim  to  find  ways  to  get  them  to  meet  international  standards  of  cooperation  in
cross-border information exchange and enforcement. We must create incentives for OFCs to play by
the rules or at least not disregard the rules. Bringing OFCs under the global regulatory umbrella will
help raise prudential standards and enhance the stability of the global system.
Strengthening domestic institutions
The  most  important  and  reliable  safeguard  for  economies  which  open  themselves  up  to  the  global
market is a strong domestic institutional framework. Governments must strengthen domestic financial
institutions  and  companies  by  adopting  best  practices  of  financial  supervision  and  corporate
governance. Banks need a strong credit culture while other  companies too  need  a rigorous  business
culture.
In  the  helter-skelter  growth  before  the  crisis,  Asian  governments  had  neglected  these  institutional
underpinnings.  While  this  was  not  the  sole  cause  of  the  crisis,  in  many  countries  weak  domestic
institutions undoubtedly made things much worse. What Indonesians have termed KKN – corruption,
collusion and nepotism – is now generally recognised to be a serious problem to be combated and not
just accepted as the way business is done.
Strengthening  domestic  institutions  will  enable  Asian  countries  to  sustain  long-term  recovery  and
growth.  Governments  must  restructure  the  financial  and  corporate  sectors.  Insolvent  financial
institutions need to be closed  down  or  merged  with stronger  ones.  In  the  corporate  sector,  unviable
companies  must  go  while  weak,  but  viable  companies  must  restructure  their  balance  sheets  and
rationalise their operations. This calls for deft handling and sensitive political judgement as to how fast
and  far  to  go  and  how  to  trade  off  between  social  and  political  objectives  on  the  one  hand  and
economic efficiency on the other.
A sound banking system is fundamental. This starts with the adoption of high standards of financial
supervision  and  regulation  supported  by  a  sound  legal  system.  More  importantly,  regulators  and
governments should not neglect the establishment of a strong credit culture. This is the “software” of
good banking governance. Banks must lend in a disciplined way, based on commercial viability rather
than “relationships”. A relationships-based system undermines competition and disclosure. It results at
best in misallocation of resources and at worst in a collapse of the whole financial system.
Banking  governance  must  be  complemented  by  strong  corporate  governance.  Poor  corporate
governance  practices  have  allowed  massive  unreported  losses  and  hidden  liabilities  to  develop.
BIS Review 93/1999
6
Upgrading  corporate  governance  means  raising  the  quality  and  influence  of  boards  of  directors,
protecting  shareholder  rights  and  raising  and  enforcing  accounting  and  audit  standards.  All  these
preconditions are necessary before market discipline can work properly.
It is encouraging that most of the crisis Asia countries have declared their intention to work towards
international  best  practices  in  corporate  governance.  But  business  environments  cannot  be  changed
overnight. It involves changing entrenched social relationships and norms that vary from country to
country. This will take time. The best hope for individual countries to restore long-term growth in the
global village lies in their succeeding in this transformation.
Conclusion
There is no escaping the process of globalisation. In theory, countries can opt out, but in practice the
price is prohibitive.
While the globalisation of trade flows undoubtedly benefits all countries, the globalisation of capital
flows carries much greater risks. Ideally, capital markets should be self-stabilising and should promote
economic  efficiency  by  directing  capital  to  its  best uses  on  a  global  basis.  But  whether  this  always
happens in reality is an open question. The frequent crises, of which this is just the most recent, give
us reason for doubt.
The Asian crisis has wrought grievous harm on many countries. But one positive consequence is that it
has  provided  a  fresh  impetus  for  reconsidering  and  strengthening  the  global  financial  system.
Countries  will  not  want  to  dismantle  the  existing  structure  and  start  from  scratch,  as  happened  in
Bretton  Woods  after  World  War  II.  More  likely  and  prudently,  they  will  pursue  incremental
improvements to strengthen the structure and remedy the flaws which have been uncovered. We must
find ways to make bubbles and crashes less likely and make countries less vulnerable to such mishaps
when they occur.
While  we  can  strengthen  the  global  financial  system,  we  can  never  eliminate  bubbles  and  crashes
completely. Manias, panics and crashes are inherent to capitalism dating back to the tulip mania and
South  Sea  Bubble  of  the  17th  century  and  probably  before.  In  theory,  investors  make  independent
decisions which collectively result in a stable and efficient market outcome. In reality, uncertainty due
to incomplete information and a basic human instinct to herd can prove destabilising and disastrous.
For  small  open  economies,  the  best  defence  against  an  uncertain  and  sometimes  dangerous
environment  is  to  pursue  prudent  macroeconomic  policies,  strengthen  their  financial  systems  and
improve their governance framework. Sound domestic policies and institutions cannot eliminate panic
and contagion. But they can cushion the adverse effects and make the economies more resilient to the
financial shocks when they occur.
Thank you.
7
BIS Review 93/1999
