Mr Erçel discusses the monetary policy of the European Central Bank
Opening speech by the Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Mr Gazi Erçel, at
the Economic Research Foundation, Istanbul. 18/12/98
European economic and monetary union (EMU) will come to life at the beginning of next year. The
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  will  commence  operations,  and  the  euro  will  become  an  official
reserve currency.
Eleven of the 15 countries in the European Monetary System will link their domestic currencies to
the euro by January 1, 1999. They will stop issuing their own currencies three years later. There will
no  longer  be  independent  domestic  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies.  Instead,  monetary  and
exchange  rate  policies  will  reflect  the  needs  of  the  euro  region  as  a  whole,  as  determined  by  the
European Central Bank.
This stage has obviously not been reached easily or quickly. This new institutional arrangement was
the product of years of effort. First the philosophical groundwork had to be established, before the
technical work could even begin. The final stages were only reached gradually. The European Union
was  thoroughly  thought  out.  Under  German  initiative,  with  French  support  and  British  technical
assistance,  and  contributions  from  all  the  others,  the  institutions  were  established  which  will  be
responsible  for  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  decisions  under  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  the
Stability and Growth Pact.
Countries have made heroic efforts to satisfy the Maastricht convergence criteria. They have reduced
their budget deficits, pushed down their inflation rates to less than 2%, and brought their growth rates
close  to  3%.  Favourable  global  economic  conditions  made  it  possible  to  create  an  environment
suitable  for  the  proper  functioning  of  the  system.  Meanwhile,  the  European  Monetary  Institute
completed the necessary preparations for  launching  the ECB,  and transferred its  responsibilities  to
that Bank at the beginning of July 1998.
At  its  founding,  there  was  a  broad  consensus  that  the  ECB  should  be  independent.  There  were
continuing  discussions  about  its  main  target,  however,  and  even  though  this  question  seems  to  be
resolved, sometimes it still appears on the agenda. The main point being discussed is that while price
stability is specifically mentioned in the constitutional agreement as an objective of the ECB, the role
of the growth and economic stability objectives is less clear. It is generally agreed that the primary
task of central banks should be price stability, but some still argue that the price stability objective
should not conflict but should cooperate with the growth and stability objectives. Others insist that
since  the  existence  of  price  stability  brings  about  high  employment  and  sustainable  growth  in  the
medium and long term, there is no conflict between the growth and price stability objectives.
I believe that the ECB’s present policies, based on all these discussions, aim at price stability as its
primary task, with sustainable growth and low unemployment as major objectives. I also believe that
the question of  the  general  nature  of  the ECB’s  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  in  pursuit  of
price  stability,  sustainable  growth  and  low  unemployment  is  of  concern  not  just  for  those  11
countries. Since the ECB’s policies will have global effects, they are of global concern.
As  you  all  know,  the  general  outlines  of  the  monetary  policies  to  be  pursued  by  the  11  countries
whose currencies are tied to the euro have already been determined. This has also created some new
problems. But before discussing them, I would like to point out the four main characteristics of the
ECB.
First,  it  is  independent.  This  independence  means  that  it  can  decide  on  what  monetary  policy
strategies  to  follow  and  what  monetary  instruments,  especially  short-term  interest  rates,  to  use  in
pursuit of its primary objective of maintaining price stability.
BIS Review  1/1999
– 2 –
The ECB’s Governing Council, consisting of the governors of the national central banks of the euro
area  and  the  ECB’s  Executive  Board,  will  determine  the  basic  outlines  of  the  ECB’s  monetary
policy.  The  chosen  strategy  will  be  carried  out  by  the  ECB’s  Executive  Board,  consisting  of  a
governor, vice governor and four members appointed by the president or prime minister of countries
in the European Monetary System.
From the independence of the central bank governors on the Governing Council, one can infer a high
degree  of  independence  for  the  system.  As  I  mentioned  before,  the  ECB’s  independence  in
implementing monetary policy towards the price stability objective can be ensured in this way.
The second important characteristic of the ECB is its credibility. High credibility  will increase the
confidence of the public in the ECB’s policies and objectives, which in turn will help it achieve its
primary  objective.  The  most  important  ingredients  of  credibility  are  transparency  and  success  in
attaining its monetary policy objectives. For years now the central banks of Germany, France and the
UK have been earning credibility, and the confidence of firms, institutions and individuals in these
banks has increased considerably. The ECB, established in an environment of confidence provided
by  the  credibility  of  national  central  banks,  believes  its  growing  credibility  will  translate  into
confidence in its conduct of monetary policy.
The third important characteristic of the ECB is transparency, already mentioned as one of the keys
to  greater  credibility.  Transparency  means  openness  about  the  ECB’s  objectives,  its  policy
implementation, its monetary policy deliberations and the forward-looking orientation of its policies.
The ECB has explained, clearly and explicitly, that its main goal is maintaining price stability and
described the strategies by which it is seeking to achieve it. I have already pointed out the additional
issues of growth and unemployment. There is still discussion, but there is consensus concerning the
primary objective. Discussion of these topics will continue in publications, announcements, speeches
by ECB authorities and discussions. This kind of transparency is an important characteristic of the
ECB.
The ECB will be accountable for its policy changes and for its announced policy intentions. This will
contribute to transparency in its daily operations.
In addition, for the sake of transparency the minutes of ECB Executive Committee meetings should
be made public. On this issue, the ECB has one concern. If a member of the Committee approves a
decision  that  is  not  advantageous  for  his  own  country,  it  may  cause  some  problems.  Indeed,  the
publication of the minutes of meetings years later could create some risks. At this stage, I find this a
reasonable objection. Maybe in time this problem can be solved.
The  fourth  important  characteristic  of  the  ECB  is  that  to  reduce  uncertainty,  policymaking  and
economic indicators are treated on a forward-looking basis. The Bank’s fundamental strategy  is  to
calm  down  expectations  for  the  future,  since  uncertainty  is  the  most  important  ingredient  of
instability. The main sources of the ECB’s monetary policy, which is based on these principles, are
thus determined. These are monetary aggregates, inflation targets and other intermediate objectives
such as selected monetary indicators, and finally the conduct of monetary policy in the light of all
these elements. The ECB has indicated that even if it has an inflation target, it will not announce it.
These  monetary  policy  conditions  absolutely  guarantee  that  there  will  be  some  uncertainties  and
questions, and the first question will be whether it will be possible to lower the inflation rate below
2% when the intermediate targets are indicators calculated using the monetary aggregates of member
countries. Other questions follow. Will the mechanisms of monetary policy transmission still work
efficiently?  Can  monetary  policy  moves  made  as  they  are  in  Germany  today,  using  monetary
aggregates as intermediate targets, succeed in the euro area as well? Which monetary aggregates will
be used? What of the money demand function? Will there be a real and reliable database obtained by
collecting  and  harmonising  data  from  within  the  euro  area?  Targeting  inflation  and  conducting
monetary policy in light of the target has been the normal procedure for many countries. Nonetheless
BIS Review 1/1999
– 3 –
there are lingering suspicions in some quarters about the credibility and reliability of this system, and
since there is a good chance that a loss of credibility will follow a failure to meet an inflation target,
the ECB will not announce such a target. I should also mention that some member countries’ central
banks  have  reservations  about  conducting  monetary  policy  with  inflation  targeting.  People  who
accept monetary aggregates as good intermediate targets say that in accordance with the principles of
continuity and flexibility, which are the basis for central bank credibility, it is more realistic to target
monetary indicators and use these targets to attain price stability.
For myself, I believe that central banks can control these monetary indicators and are responsible for
them. If a central bank is assigned a task, it must have control over its instruments and operations and
enjoy  independence  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  to  perform  efficiently.  This  means  that  a
central  bank  that  has  control  over  monetary  indicators  should  use  these  indicators  as  intermediate
targets in reaching its final inflation target.
On the other hand, in low-inflation environments we have seen how successful the implementation of
monetary policy under inflation targeting can be.
The ECB will follow both procedures together, in accordance with the principles of independence,
transparency,  a  forward-looking  policy  orientation  and  accountability.  The  ECB’s  credibility  will
grow.  It  will  solve  the  problems  that  arise  and  correct  its  operational  deficiencies.  It  will  strive  to
attain  and  maintain  price  stability.  Achievement  of  this  objective  in  the  medium  term  will  create
conditions conducive to sustainable growth. Growth and employment will follow a sound path.
I see it at this stage as a perfectly designed set of strategies and applications.
 BIS Review 1/1999
