Mr  Stals  discusses  regional  trade  and  financial  integration  in  the  Southern  African
Development Community
Address by the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, Dr Chris Stals, at a meeting for business
people arranged by the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe in Harare, Zimbabwe on18 June 1999.
Reasons why international financial cooperation is important
There is a worldwide trend towards an integration of financial markets. This process of globalisation
is  no  longer  restricted  to  the  industrial  countries  of  the  world,  but  emerging  markets,  countries  in
transformation and the developing countries of the world are all being drawn into this process.
In many parts of the world, this process of globalisation goes through an intermediate phase, and that
is  one  of  regional  economic  cooperation  or  integration.  The  European  Union,  which  has  been
developing  over  the  past  thirty  years,  has  now  reached  the  advanced  stage  of  almost  full  financial
integration. There are many other examples, such as Mercosur in South America, NAFTA in North
America, and ASEAN in East Asia, where similar initiatives for economic integration are in progress.
The  smaller  countries  of  the  world  can  easily  be  marginalised  in  this  process  of  global  financial
integration, unless they form part of some regional cooperation arrangement to guide them into this
highly competitive global system of integrated financial markets. The Southern African Development
Community  (SADC)  provides  the  opportunity  for  the  countries  of  Southern  Africa  to  approach  the
process  of  global  financial  integration  through  first  combining  forces  in  a  regional  cooperation
arrangement that will, in a second phase, facilitate the real worldwide integration process.
There are, of course, a number of other more localised reasons why financial integration within the
Southern Africa region will hold advantages for all participating countries. These can be summarised
as follows:
•  The expansion of trade between Southern African states will be supported by a simultaneous
integration of the financial sector. Payment and settlements will be facilitated by the removal
of unnecessary financial obstructions and constraints.
•  The  extension  of  services  across  borders  will  be  made  easier.  Such  services  can  include
insurance, business, legal advice and assistance, engineering, architectural, medical, and other
professional services.
•  The movement of people within the region will become easier in support of activities such as
tourism, inter-governmental services, exchange of skills, and the mobility of labour.
 It is of vital importance for the Southern Africa region that maximum use shall be made of
scarce  resources.  The  coordination  and  sharing  of  limited  resources  such  as  skills,
technological infrastructure and financial systems will contribute to a higher rate of economic
development for the region as a whole.
What has been achieved so far?
The Southern Africa Development Community is a political association of the Governments (Heads
of State) of fourteen countries in Sub-Sahara Africa (including Mauritius and Seychelles). It has, of
course, much wider objectives than just financial cooperation in the region.
The Governors of the central banks of the 14 member states of SADC made use of the opportunity to
create  within  the  SADC  structure  an  independent  Committee  of  Governors  of  SADC  with  the
objective of promoting financial cooperation within the region. The South African Reserve Bank set
1
BIS Review   76/1999
up a small Secretariat and Research Unit for SADC within the Economics Department of the Reserve
Bank to assist the Governors’ Committee with its programme. A number of working groups and sub-
committees were created within the structure to give attention to specialised projects.
The work done by the Governors’ Committee over the past 3½ years can be summarised under a few
headings:
(i) Enhanced cooperation amongst central banks:
It  was  important  for  the  central  bankers  of  the  region  to  know  each  other  better.  Meetings  were
therefore arranged, not only between Governors and Managers, but also between staff members at all
levels.  Specialised  groups,  such  as  economic  research  staff,  bank  regulators  and  supervisors,
information technologists, computer operators, money and financial market dealers and traders, and
security officials, met from time to time to exchange views on their functions.
A database was established for each central bank on its structure, functions, internal administration,
relations with government, statistics and legal aspects. This mass of information is now available in
book  form,  and  also  on  a  special  website  provided  on  the  Internet  for  the  distribution  of  SADC
information.
Discussions took place within the Governors Committee on the exchange controls and exchange rate
policies,  interest  rate  policies  and  accommodation  facilities  provided  by  each  central  bank  to  its
national  banking  institutions.  Assessments  were  also  made  of  the  implications  of  last  year’s  East
Asian crisis for the countries of our region.
The independence of central banks is a topic which is often discussed in this forum. There are many
reasons  why  central  banks  should  be  given  some  autonomy  for  the  implementation  of  monetary
policy.  It  is  accepted  that  governments  (Parliament)  established  central  banks  and  gave  them  the
special  power  to  create  money.  Because  of  this  special  power,  central  banks  have  a  great
responsibility,  and  that  is  to  protect  the  value  of  the  currency  (that  is,  to  keep  inflation  low).  The
monetary policies needed to keep inflation low, are often very unpopular, and politicians normally do
not like to take responsibility for such unpopular measures.
Furthermore, the power to create money can easily be abused for short-term gains, but any excessive
creation  of  money  in  the  short-term  will  eventually  lead  to  higher  inflation  (and  therefore  higher
interest rates).
It is also understood that, because Parliament has vested the power to create money within the central
bank, this institution must remain accountable to Parliament for its policies.
(ii) Cooperation amongst bank regulators and supervisors
The  Governors’  Committee  has  encouraged  bank  regulators  and  supervisors  in  the  region  to  work
together  in  order  to  standardise  and  coordinate  policies  followed  to  control  the  banking  system.
Special attention has been given to:
    the implementation of the Basel Committee’s recommendations for capital adequacy;
the implementation of the BIS Core Principles for Banking Supervision;
training of bank regulators and supervisors in the region; and
identifying and eliminating money laundering and illegal banking transactions.
BIS Review   76/1999
2
(iii) The expansion of training facilities for central bankers in the region
The South African Reserve Bank expanded its Training Institute to accommodate participants from
the other central banks of SADC.
We  also  coordinated  our  training  programmes  with  those  provided  by  other  central  banks  (for
example, Bank  of  Tanzania)  and  institutes  (Macroeconomic  and  Financial  Management  Institute  of
Eastern  and  Southern  Africa  [MEFMI])  in  the  region.  Our  training  efforts  within  SADC  are  now
getting recognition from the International Monetary Fund and other central banks, such as the Bank of
England, and can make an important contribution to the improvement of central banking skills in the
region.
(iv) Development of the payment, clearing and settlement systems in the region
An  analysis  was  made  of  the  existing  facilities  for  inter-bank  clearing,  payment  and  settlement
systems in each one of the original 12 members of SADC.
The sophisticated SAMOS system of South Africa, which provides for real-time on-line settlement for
large  transactions  and  full  daily  settlement  for  smaller  transactions,  can  eventually  be  expanded  to
other countries, and can provide a system for cross-border settlement of intra-regional transactions.
(v) Cooperation amongst (private sector) banking institutions in the region
The  Committee  of  Governors  formed  a  sub-committee,  consisting  of  the  private  sector  banking
institutions in the region, to encourage cooperation at this level.
(vi) Cooperation amongst stock exchanges
The  Association  of  Stock  Exchanges  of  the  SADC  region  is  making  a  useful  contribution  to  the
development  of  financial  integration  in  the  region.  This  sub-committee  has  been  instrumental  in
providing for:
•  dual listing procedures;
  the reduction of exchange control restrictions; and
 sharing of information technology.
(vii) Harmonisation of exchange controls
The  existing  exchange  controls  in  the  region  were  analysed  by  a  sub-committee  of  the  Governors’
Committee  with  a  view  to  gradual  harmonisation.  Participating  countries  are  being  encouraged  to
remove  remaining  exchange  controls  for  transactions  within  the  region  as  quickly  as  possible.
Arrangements were made for the repatriation of banknotes amongst participating countries, and for an
easing of private sector investments across borders in the region.
Three countries, i.e. Botswana, Mauritius and Zambia, have removed all exchange controls and some
others are making steady progress in the implementation of this programme.
A vision for the future
As  already  mentioned,  the  SADC  organisation  is  a  political  association  that  covers  a  much  wider
objective than just financial cooperation within the region. This wider objective, however, has more
potential  for  disputes  and  friction,  and  will  also  at  times  be  constrained  by  the  red-tape  of  a  long
drawn-out inter-governmental decision-making process. I believe that the Committee of Governors of
3
BIS Review   76/1999
the Central Banks of SADC provides a unique body that should be able to proceed with a programme
of  financial  cooperation  in  the  region,  without  being  unduly  constrained  by  the  more  complex
political decision-making processes.
At this stage, I believe work should continue to proceed on the accepted road of focusing on identified
projects  that  can  be  developed  on  a  regional  basis  without  full  economic  integration  of  the  14
countries  now  forming  part  of  SADC.  Most  of  these  programmes  will  also  not  require  any  formal
inter-governmental agreements. In the process, we shall provide a basis for gradual but effective co-
operation and integration of the financial systems and markets of Southern Africa.
In the longer term, the vision should be:
   to make it possible for residents of the whole SADC region to move funds around within
the region without formal exchange control restrictions or border controls;
to  make  it  possible  for  residents  of  the  region  to  invest  in  the  shares  of  companies  in
every country of the region without restriction, to buy and sell on any one of a series of
closely-linked stock exchanges, and to arrange for settlement anywhere in the region; and
to make it possible for business people to do their business, whatever kind of business it
might be, anywhere in the region without any undue financial restriction.
To reach these objectives, however, I believe that the central banks of the region should, for the time
being, continue to work on an almost informal way to establish a sound basis for the more ambitious
plan of eventual full economic integration of the region. The momentum built up over the past few
years amongst the central banks, with the attention focused on the building of a compatible financial
infrastructure in the region, must be maintained.
We must first establish:
 independent central banks with strictly defined monetary policy objectives;
•  well-managed and sound private sector banking institutions;
•  well-functioning and well-coordinated financial markets, including foreign exchange markets; and
 effective clearing and settlement arrangements within and amongst countries,
before  we  can  proceed  to  the  more  ambitious  plans  for  macroeconomic  integration.  Only  after  the
basic  financial  structures  have  been  established  in  our  countries  can  we  harmonise  interest  rate,
exchange rate, money supply and inflation policies.
Cooperation on this basis will strengthen the position of the SADC region in the on-going process of
financial globalisation. As part of the strategy, SADC countries should indeed now begin to give more
attention  to  the  development  of  a  common  economic  strategy  vis-à-vis  the  outside  world  for  the
eventual integration of the SADC region in the global financial markets.
BIS Review   76/1999
4
