Mr Yamaguchi discusses the role of central banks in international finance
Speech  by  Mr  Yutaka  Yamaguchi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  at  the  Japan  Center  for
Economic Research in Tokyo on 13 July 1999.
Introduction
Today, I would like to discuss the role of central banks in international finance. The reasons why I
chose this subject, and not the Japanese economy or its financial system, or the monetary policy of the
Bank  of  Japan,  are  twofold.  The  first  and  foremost  is  that  responding  to  the  changes  in  the
international  financial  markets  has  become  a  very  important  issue  to  the  future  of  the  Japanese
economy, as evident from the financial crises involving the emerging economies since Thailand in the
summer of 1997. The other reason is because we feel that the international activities of the Bank of
Japan is not well understood, relative to the contributions the Bank has made so far. In the next hour
or so, I would begin with some salient features of recent international financial crises and the roles of
central  banks  therein.  This  would  be  followed  by  a  discussion  of  the  activities  of  the  Bank  for
International Settlements (BIS) Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS), which I have had
the  pleasure  of  chairing  since  last  May.  Finally,  I  would  conclude  my  remarks  today  by  briefly
explaining the role of the Bank of Japan in international finance.
The changing nature of international financial crises
International financial crises in the 1990s
Let  me  begin  by  laying  down  some  observations  on  the  changes  in  the  phenomena  we  call
international financial crises. In the discussion of “international financial crises,” we can, of course,
begin  by  arguing  what  is  a  “crisis”  and  whether  a  crisis  becomes  “international.”  Let  us,  however,
leave such question of exact definitions aside and look at those financial crises that had international
repercussions.
Such international financial crises are not something new. The British suffered a severe attack on the
Sterling  in  1967.  The  US  dollar’s  convertibility  to  gold  was  suspended  in  1971,  with  serious
international  consequences.  The  mounting  debt  borne  by  the  developing  countries  was  a  serious
concern  during  the  1980s.  We  can  conclude  that  the  international  financial  markets  had  suffered  a
number of shocks or crises in the past, and thus, crises have been recurrent. However, if we look back
on more recent crises, the Japanese bubble and its aftermath in the 1990s, the Nordic banking crises in
the first half of this decade, the attack on the ERM in 1992, the Mexican crisis of 1994–95, and the
turmoil  in  the  emerging  market  economies  beginning  with  east  Asia  in  the  summer  of  1997  and
followed by Russia and Brazil, it seems that the nature of crises has been changing, from what we had
experienced in the 1960s to 1980s as we approach the next millennium. The most evident features are
that  we  are  experiencing  more  frequent  crises,  and  when  crises  occur,  their  effects  are  severer  and
global. In this respect, I would like to draw your attention to the following four aspects.
Macroeconomic imbalances and the malfunctioning of credit allocation systems
The first point is that many international financial crises follow a period of unprecedented boom, and
is  the  result  of  or  is  aggravated  by  interactions  between  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  the
malfunctioning  of  the  banking  or  the  credit  allocation  system.  When  an  economy  enters  into  an
unsustainable  economic  boom,  expectations  of  strong  growth  in  the  demand  of  goods  and  services
becomes  predominant.  Investments  are  planned  and  conducted  to  fill  these  expected  demands,  and
this, in turn, increases actual demand. Such a cycle will also result in an expansion in credit, which
supports the investment boom. For example, in Japan during the bubble years, we have seen sizable
expansion  of  credit  in  the  form  of  increases  in  bank  lending  and  issuances  in  the  capital  markets.
1
BIS Review  84/1999
Meanwhile, in the case of the Asian economies, bank lending from developed countries increased at
an annual rate of 19 per cent in the years between 1990 and 1996 (27 per cent per annum in the last
three years). Unfortunately, such a virtuous  cycle  cannot  be  maintained  forever,  and  when  it  stops,
investments quickly turn into excess capacity and the recouping of capital becomes impossible. In the
course of this process, a large part of financial assets turn into non-performing assets. If the volumes
are  large  enough  to  impair  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system,  the  whole  macroeconomy  will
stagnate. In this way, the interaction between macroeconomic imbalances and the malfunctioning of
the financial system leads to financial crises. This relationship is often described by central banks as
the  interaction  between  monetary  and  financial  stability;  the  macroeconomic  stability,  i.e.  non-
inflationary  sustainable  growth  and  the  stability  of  financial  system  are  interdependent.  Our
experiences of recent financial crises underscore the importance of such interaction
Volatility of short-term capital flows
The second point, which is closely related with the first, is the deepening of crises by sudden changes
in short-term capital flows. As I have mentioned already, bank credit to the Asian countries expanded
significantly in the years preceding the crisis. During the same period from 1990 to 1996, the share of
credit maturing in less than one year has increased by more than 10 percentage points, from 52 per
cent  to  63  per  cent.  Short  term  extensions  of  credit  do  not  cause  problems  if  they  are  rolled  over.
However, when the borrower can no longer roll over its debt, and funds begin to flow outwards, the
borrower quickly faces severe liquidity problems. The Asian crises showed us that the disruptions in
the  economies  and  financial  markets  in  these  circumstances  could  be  very  serious.  In  a  number  of
cases, they could be far more serious than adjustments that would have been warranted to correct the
macroeconomic imbalances that existed before the crisis. In this context, while the merits of capital
inflows should also be fully recognized, the volatility of short term capital flows is an important issue
in dealing with international financial crises.
International contagion of crises
My third observation is that there seems to be more international transmission of financial crises. For
example, when the Latin American debt problem deepened in the 1980s, effects on other continents
were  muted  and  Asia  did  not  suffer  serious  financial  crises.  The  situation  was  similar  during  the
Mexican crisis of 1994–95. However, in the most recent financial crisis beginning in 1997, the wave
of  disruptions  reached  many  emerging  market  economies,  sometimes  quickly,  and  in  other  cases
slowly.  The  transmission  mechanism  was  not  singular:  rapid  declines  in  credit  extensions  to  the
region  by  developed  countries  were  significant  in  some  cases,  whereas  in  others  it  was  the  proxy
hedge  (i.e.  hedging  by  selling  other  currencies  with  similar  risk  characteristics)  or  purely
psychological transmissions of bearish sentiments. It might be said that the crisis that began in Asia
swept around the world to end, seemingly, upon reaching Brazil. In the past, we have seen contagion
of  financial  crisis  within  a  region  where  there  are  significant  interactions  in  terms  of  trade  and
investment flows and/or the economic structure is similar. Contagion to other regions of the globe is a
new phenomenon not observed in the 1970s or 1980s.
More diverse manifestation of crises
Finally, I  should  point  out  that  financial  crises  are  now  manifesting  themselves  in  diverse  ways.  A
classic  financial  crisis  is  when  the  financial  system  is  strained  by  funding  problems,  for  example
when  bank  after  bank  is  hit  by  depositor  runs.  Of  course,  in  the  most  recent  crisis  involving  the
emerging  market  economies,  many  countries,  such  as  Thailand,  Korea,  Russia  and  Brazil,  suffered
quintessential  foreign  currency  funding  problems.  Meanwhile,  we  saw  another  type  of  crisis:  if  a
classic financial crisis is precipitated by bank runs, the new type of crisis results from impairment of
market  functioning  and  such  crisis  could  be  termed  a  “market  run.”  When  Long  Term  Capital
Management  (LTCM)  almost  collapsed  last  autumn,  liquidity  dried  up  in  many  markets  of  the
BIS Review  84/1999
2
developed  countries  as  many  market  participants  dumped  their  assets  in  “fire  sales”  and  flight  to
quality became ever more pronounced. If we recognize that an important function of financial markets
is to price  financial  assets  and  transfer  risks  at  that  price,  i.e.  “price  discovery,”  the  impairment  of
such a function is threatening to market participants.
Why are international crises becoming more pronounced?
Having said that the four features of recent international financial crises are the interactions between
macroeconomic  imbalances  and  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system,  the  volatility  of  short-term
capital  flows,  international  contagion,  and  diversity  in  the  manifestation  of  crises,  I  would  like  to
spend some time to discuss why these changes might have occurred. I do not have a definite answer,
but I agree with many experts who point out that financial innovation and globalization, enabled by
advances  in  information  technology,  had  a  role.  For  example,  cross-border  flows  of  capital  have
increased  more  than  threefold  in  the  last  ten  years.  What  strikes  us  more  is  that  the  cross-border
transfer of risks increased rapidly through derivatives transactions. As a hypothetical case, if we think
of an investment in a bond denominated in Thai baht issued by a Thai firm, the investor faces various
risks: foreign exchange risk, credit risk of the firm, interest rate risk, etc. Derivatives enable investors
to unbundle these risks packaged in a bond into component risks – e.g. the risk that the credit standing
of the issuing firm or the Thai baht exchange rate falls below a certain threshold – and transfer and/or
assume  them  at  will.  Financial  innovation  has  enabled  market  participants  to  engage  in  these
operations at significantly lower costs, and this has resulted in an expansion of transaction volumes.
The expansion in transaction volumes draws the attention of market participants to the need of more
harmonized rules underlying financial transactions – payment and settlement systems and accounting
standards  –  and  encourages  reforms  therein.  These  reforms  push  the  rules  in  the  direction  of
standardization,  which  in  turn,  lower  the  costs  of  transactions  and  leads  to  a  further  increase  in
transaction volumes. Such globalizing financial marketplace facilitates a further division of labor: the
development  of  risk  appraisal  services,  investment  funds,  including  hedge  funds,  tailored  to  suit
diverse risk appetites should be understood in this context.
Accordingly, risk evaluation and risk taking become more specialized and tightly focused. This could
result in a particular type of risk being singled out and transferred when crises or imbalances become
apparent.  In  the  example  of  a  Thai  firm  issuing  bonds  denominated  in  Thai  baht,  investors  in  the
bonds could guard against the  depreciation  of  the  baht  by  efficiently  hedging  the  foreign  exchange
risk with derivatives, which is likely to result in higher pressures of selling baht hedges.
It is, however, not fair to emphasize only the deepening of crises as a result of financial innovation
and globalization. In the case of  East  Asian  countries,  their  incredible  economic  growth  during  the
1980s  and  up  to  the  recent  crisis  was  the  result  of  their  taking  advantage  of  capital  inflows  from
abroad.  Capital  inflows  not  only  supplemented  domestic  investment  funds,  but  also  facilitated  the
transfer of industrial technology and know-how. In this context, derivatives enabled the unbundling of
various risks embedded in economic transactions and the transfer of risks to other market participants.
Such opportunities should have mitigated the perception of high risks associated with investments in
emerging  market  economies  and  stimulated  investments.  Meanwhile,  in  a  broader  context,  market
discipline is also enforced through global market activities. Those that succeed in maintaining sound
economic  performance  through  determined  efforts  of  restructuring,  be  they  firms,  financial
institutions,  or  sovereign  states,  would  be  rewarded  by  the  markets  in  the  form  of  narrower  credit
spreads  and  thus  lower  funding  costs.  Market  discipline  stemming  from  the  global  capital  market,
therefore, is a driving force of robust economic growth in the long run.
Financial innovation and the globalization of financial markets, like any change, have both positive
and negative effects: although positive effects may materialize in the long run, some disruptions may
be expected in the short run. This means that our goal should be to devise plans to take the greatest
advantage of financial innovation and globalization and implement them as well as possible. In other
3
BIS Review  84/1999
words, it is becoming important for each market participant, including firms, financial institutions and
sovereign states, to recognize the role of market discipline, and, at the same time, lay down rules and
practices that are compatible with the globalizing markets.
Central banks and international financial crises
In the international financial community, governments,  central  banks,  financial  institutions,  and  the
academia are now engaged in a hot debate over the reform of international financial system, including
exchange rate regimes and short term capital flows. The purpose of such discussions is to prevent a
resurgence of international financial crises, and they are founded on the recognition that the nature of
international financial crises may be changing, as I have just noted. In the next few minutes, I will
carve out a niche in this very broad debate, and try to explain the roles that central banks could play
with regard to international financial crises.
From this perspective, the most important responsibility for central banks is to maintain the stability
of  their  own  macroeconomy.  More  precisely,  central  banks  are  expected  to  maintain  sustainable
growth under stable prices. Putting one’s house in order is the starting point. Unfortunately, however,
implementing  the  correct  policies  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  domestic  economy  and  financial
system  alone  does  not  guarantee  a  stable  international  financial  system.  The  discussions  on
international  financial  architecture,  which  I  have  just  referred  to,  seem  to  underscore  the  fact  that
efforts  to  maintain  the  functioning  of  international  financial  markets  or  the  international  financial
system are just as important.
Monitoring the state of the international financial system
First  and  foremost,  central  banks  should  strengthen  their  ability  to  understand  the  risks  and
vulnerabilities in the international financial system. More simply, central banks should enhance their
monitoring abilities. As mentioned a little earlier, a period of strong growth may sow the seeds of the
next crisis by allowing excesses in consumption and investment. In fact, if we look back after the fact,
we can often find signs warning of “bubbles” or excesses. For example, before 1997, i.e. before the
Asian  crisis,  the  BIS  Banking  Statistics  indicated  that  banks  in  the  developed  countries  were
increasing their short-term foreign currency lending to the Asian countries. The increase in short-term
foreign currency liabilities is likely to leave a country prone to a rapid outflow of capital and hence
could  lead  to  foreign  currency  liquidity  problems.  The  reason  why  such  warning  signs  were
overlooked or ignored seems to be associated with national confidence. Past financial bubbles seem to
be inevitably associated with such confidence shared by the general public. In Asia, there was the talk
of  the  Asian  miracle.  A  little  earlier,  during  the  Japanese  bubble  years,  the  oft-cited  phrase  “the
largest creditor country” was an indication of such confidence. When the mood of a country is upbeat,
the recognition of risks – even severe downside risks – are not easily acknowledged. Even if it were
possible to identify such risks, it would have been extremely difficult to take the necessary corrective
actions, either at the micro  level  (strengthening  risk  management)  or  at  the  macro  level  (tightening
monetary policy). Even if such risks are initially contained through appropriate corrective measures,
market participants’ risk appetite may be so strong as to eventually render those corrective measures
ineffective, and lead to a bubble. There is no panacea which quickly dissipates macroeconomic risks.
Nevertheless,  it  is  extremely  important  for  central  banks  to  understand  the  risk  factors  and
consciously  analyze  what  could  happen  if  there  are  significant  changes  in  those  risk  factors.  As  a
result  of  the  most  recent  financial  crisis,  it  became  widely  recognized  that  private  financial
institutions  perform  stress  tests  to  identify  vulnerabilities  in  their  own  portfolios.  Stress  tests  may
seem to be technical, but they are not. They are actually fundamentally judgmental processes for the
management  of  financial  institutions  where  various  scenarios  are  employed  to  identify  risks  that
endanger the existence of each institution. Likewise, it has become apparent that central banks should
also adopt a similar approach – in effect stress testing at the macro level. By this, I am not arguing
BIS Review  84/1999
4
that  central  banks  can  always  make  the  right  judgment  concerning  risks  to  the  macroeconomy.
Nevertheless,  I  can  stress  that  it  is  the  raison  d’être  for  central  banks  to  identify  risks  that  would
endanger  the  policy  objectives  that  are  conferred  upon  them,  namely  the  stability  of  the
macroeconomy  (sustainable  growth  under  price  stability)  and  the  financial  system.  I  should  say,
therefore, that in this globalizing world, it is becoming ever more important for central banks to make
joint efforts to understand the risks in the global financial markets.
Policy recommendations for a more robust international financial system
Secondly, even if central banks could understand the conditions of the international financial system
in extreme detail, they would probably not be able to prevent every financial crisis. This means that,
central banks should contribute to the strengthening of the international financial system – building a
system  that  could  withstand  crises  and  stress  that  are  facts  of  life  –  through  appropriate  policy
recommendations.  I  have  used  the  word  policy  recommendations,  because  central  banks  do  not
usually  have  direct  authority  to  make  rules  or  supervise  the  international  financial  markets  or  their
participants. For example, in the recent debate over how to deal with institutional investors including
hedge funds, most central banks do not have any rule-making or supervisory authority over them. In
such cases, the central banks look to other authorities to make and implement proper policy responses.
There  are  also  areas  where  no  regulator  or  supervisor  has  formal  authority,  and  the  authorities  are
presently discussing how and whether to fill such gaps.
However,  stemming  from  central  banks’  status  as  being  players  in  markets,  central  banks  have  a
strong  interest  in  improving  the  functioning  of  markets.  Accordingly,  central  banks  could  adopt  a
constructive  approach:  to  analyze  the  global  financial  markets  and  make  policy  recommendations,
which  are  to  be  implemented  through  dialogs  with  market  participants  and  supervisory  authorities.
Along  with  such  efforts,  central  banks  must  not  neglect  to  improve  their  own  operations,  such  as
payment and settlement services, which can be modified through their own initiatives in response to
the globalization of financial markets.
Responses to international financial crises
Third, but not the least, central banks must consider appropriate responses to international financial
crises once they happen. In many cases international crises involve rapid depreciation of currencies or
depletion  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  and  manifest  themselves  as  near  or  actual  defaults  of
governments  or  private  market  participants.  In  such  instances,  extension  of  assistance  from
international financial institutions or governments could result in moral hazard, just like the domestic
context,  so  it  should  not  be  too  readily  extended.  The  recent  emphasis  of  debate  on  private  sector
involvement has sprung from this context. Nevertheless, if the effects on the international financial
system  would  have  been  deemed  to  be  severe  in  the  absence  of  public  sector  involvement,  public
assistance had been granted. While such direct assistance has been the domain of IMF and national
governments,  central  banks  have  been  more  concerned  with  maintaining  the  stability  of  the
international financial system through maintaining the stability of domestic financial systems.
Central  banks  are  “in  the  market,”  so  to  speak.  As  a  result,  they  are  able  to  collect  up-to-date
information on ever changing market conditions. In this context, central banks occasionally function
as  the  lender  of  the  last  resort,  in  response  to  systemic  risks  posed  by  funding  problems  at  private
financial  institutions.  Of  course,  central  banks  must  be  careful  so  as  not  to  create  moral  hazard.
Meanwhile,  when  disruptions  in  international  financial  markets  could  affect  the  domestic  financial
markets  or  the  domestic  economy  through  global  linkages  between  markets,  central  banks  may
consider  lowering  interest  rates  and  supplying  ample  liquidity.  For  example,  when  the  Federal
Reserve lowered its federal fund rates three times last autumn, as the US financial markets became
unsettled  following  the  Russian  crisis,  the  reason  behind  the  move  was  to  cushion  the  effects  on
5
BIS Review  84/1999
prospective  economic  growth  of 
accommodative financial conditions domestically.
increasing  weakness 
in  foreign  economies  and  of 
less
Committee on the Global Financial System
An international forum for central banks
The three elements of the role of central banks in international finance, which I have just mentioned,
understanding markets, formulating policy  recommendations  for  strengthening  the  financial  system,
and  containing  crises  when  they  happen,  have  always  been  played  by  central  banks  in  order  to
maintain  the  stability  of  the  domestic  financial  system.  As  a  result,  central  banks  tend  to  share  a
common framework, which facilitates exchanges of information and views. This common framework
is  further  strengthened  through  central  banks’  interactions  with  the  markets  –  markets  that  are
globalizing – in their day to day operations. There are many channels for such exchanges, and one of
the  most  important  is  through  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS).  Many  of  you  would
probably know that the BIS  is  a  unique  international  organization  owned  by  central  banks  of  more
than forty countries.
Many committees of central banks meet at the BIS, led by the Governors of the Central Banks of the
Group of Ten Countries (G10 Governors). The activities of the Committee on the Global Financial
System (CGFS), the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, and the Committee on Payment and
Settlement  Systems,  in  particular,  are  closely  interconnected.  Today,  I  would  like  to  outline  the
activities  of  the  CGFS,  which  I  am  involved  in,  and  which  is  closely  related  to  the  theme  of  my
discussion on the roles of central banks in international finance.
Monitoring of international financial markets
The activities of the CGFS can be grouped into three areas:
The first is to conduct comprehensive monitoring of the global financial market. This corresponds to
the accurate appraisal of risks in the global market, which I stressed just a few minutes ago. At the
quarterly meetings of the Committee, we focus on various risk factors and discuss what could be the
risks that central banks should be most aware of. Diverse issues are taken up, but much attention has
been  paid  to  the  origins  and  effects  of  the  recent  wave  of  financial  crises  beginning  in  Asia.  For
example, why were the “Asian Tiger Economies” suddenly faced with currency crises? What were the
risks posed by the devaluation of the Thai baht to her Asian neighbors and to other emerging market
economies? Why does the devaluation by Brazil not seem to have had great effects at least in the short
run? We have also examined issues involving the developed countries such as the market trends in the
run up to and after the introduction of the euro at the beginning of this year, and the inherent risks in
the rising US equity markets. The Y2K risk premia observed in many markets for transactions over
this year’s end is also an issue that we have focused on. Furthermore, as a longer term issue, we have
looked at the restructuring of the international banking industry, which is the reflection of changing
nature of banking business.
There is no standard methodology for such monitoring exercises, but one aspect that the Committee is
now particularly interested in is how to understand “positions” in the marketplace. For example, in the
case  of  market  turmoil  involving  LTCM,  it  is  said  that  there  were  considerable  arbitrage  positions
involving  bonds  of  developed  countries  and  emerging  market  economies:  buying  emerging  market
bonds  and  selling  developed  country  bonds  with  the  expectation  that  the  spreads  between  the  two
classes  of  bonds  should  narrow.  The  speculation  that  this  huge  overhang  of  positions  would  be
unwound was behind the disruptions we saw following the Russian default and huge losses at hedge
funds. Of course, there are as many purchasers as sellers in the market, and all positions sum to zero.
Nevertheless, the reaction of the market following a shock is dependent on who holds the positions,
BIS Review  84/1999
6
how  concentrated  the  positions  are,  whether  positions  are  correlated,  etc.  Paying  attention  to
positions, therefore, is based on a view of the economy or the market that the positions are no less
important factors in causing large market fluctuations than macroeconomic fundamentals. The CGFS
also shares such views.
Improving the functioning of markets
The  second  element  of  the  work  program  of  the  CGFS  is  longer  term  research  with  a  view  to
improving market functioning. This begins with studies involving actual market practices: what sort
of transactions are conducted day to day, how such transactions are executed and settled, what are the
problems  experienced  by  market  participants,  etc.  Such  information  constitutes  a  part  of
understanding the markets and is also very important as input into crisis management.
The  third  area  of  the  Committee’s  activities  is  closely  related  to,  in  fact  based  on,  such  research:
examining alternate policy responses and the elaboration of corresponding policy recommendations to
promote the development of well-functioning and robust financial markets and systems. Needless to
say,  these  policy  recommendations  are  shaped  by  past  events  and  experiences  in  the  international
financial markets and driven by the keen interests of the Committee to prevent another disruption in
market functions.
In this context, the most important activity of the Committee is its efforts to improve the transparency
of  markets  through  improvements  in  disclosure  and  statistics.  Substantial  improvements  of  market
transparency  would  lead  market  participants  to  closely  evaluate  and  select  their  counterparties  and
hopefully market equilibrium would be achieved to a certain extent. Central banks have long attached
great importance to such mechanisms in the market that imposes self-discipline.
From this long line of work, I would like to draw your attention to the Committee’s publication of a
report  titled  “Review  of  the  Disclosure  Template  Regarding  the  Authorities’  Foreign  Currency
Liquidity Position” last autumn. This report is based on our recognition that one of the reasons for the
deepening of the Asian crisis may have been the lack of transparency in the levels of official foreign
exchange  reserves:  for  example,  Thai  and  Korean  monetary  authorities  had  conducted  support
operations  of  their  currencies  in  the  forward  markets  or  assisted  the  foreign  currency  funding  of
domestic  banks  by  depositing  foreign  currency  at  those  banks.  As  a  result  of  such  operations,  the
actual amount of foreign reserves available to the authorities had substantially declined, but it was not
reflected in official statistics on foreign exchange reserves. Accordingly, the Report recommends that
public  authorities  disclose  a  more  comprehensive,  detailed  and  timely  information  on  their  foreign
currency  liquidity  positions:  e.g.  the  disclosure  of  potential  drain  on  foreign  exchange  reserves
through forward and options transactions, and the amount of foreign exchange reserves deposited at
domestic  banks,  every  month  with  one  month  timeliness.  This  initiative  by  the  central  banks  was
taken up by the IMF and incorporated in the Special Data Dissemination Standards, with which many
countries, including Japan, are committed to comply.
Something that is as important as, if not more than, disclosure by public authorities is disclosure by
private market participants themselves. In this regard, we should not forget what happened to LTCM
last autumn. As we all know, LTCM was not able to fund itself when markets moved against its huge
leveraged  positions.  If  counterparties  to  LTCM  had  been  able  to  find  out  that  LTCM  was  holding
some  extreme  positions  through  disclosures  or  macro  statistics,  market  discipline  might  have  been
able to appraise the levels of position taking. In order for market participants to accurately measure
various  risks  –  market  risk,  credit  risk,  liquidity  risk,  etc.  –  improvements  in  disclosure  and  macro
statistics are two sides of the same coin, and the CGFS has pursued both issues.
As  to  disclosure  by  private  market  participants,  the  Committee  published  the  Fisher  Report  in  fall
1994,  advocating  that  disclosure  needs  to  evolve  from  one  based  on  financial  statements  to  one
providing  information  more  accurately  reflecting  the  risk  profiles,  including  results  of  risk
7
BIS Review  84/1999
management model calculations. In the Report, it was noted that since individual market participants
should  wish  to  be  correctly  evaluated  by  the  market,  they  should  have  the  incentive  to  enhance
disclosure, and a competitive mechanism to improve disclosure might be at work. However, as I have
just  pointed  out,  in  the  recent  international  financial  crisis,  one  problem  was  that  only  insufficient
information  was  provided  to  market  participants.  If  so,  it  becomes  necessary  to  examine  why  the
competitive enhancement of disclosure did not materialize and what could we do to make it work. The
Committee,  with  inputs  from  market  participants,  is  spending  considerable  efforts,  with  an  aim  to
devise a framework to enhance disclosure.
Along with these efforts to improve disclosure by the public sector and private market participants,
the CGFS is expending considerable resources to improve statistics on international financial markets.
For example, the BIS and national central banks, following a recommendation in a 1995 report by the
Committee, launched a comprehensive market survey of global derivatives markets, the first in 1995
and  the  second  in  1998.  Another  product  is  a  more  regular  statistics  based  on  a  survey  of  major
derivatives dealers covering more than 80% of global markets in derivatives (“Yoshikuni Statistics”),
which was first published in December last year. In addition, there have been constant  upgrades  to
existing  BIS  Banking  Statistics:  for  example,  the  publication  of  the  BIS  Semiannual  Consolidated
International Banking Statistics, which is now watched closely as a leading indicator of country risk,
is now approximately two months earlier than in the past. The CGFS is further looking into any gaps
in statistics that may be filled.
As I have mentioned, in addition to improving market transparency, there is another distinct group of
work  in  the  activities  of  the  CGFS.  International  financial  crises  are  the  consequences  of  market
participants’  taking  and  unwinding  of  positions.  The  Committee  has  studied  such  dynamics  of
markets and published recommendations based on its findings. One such example is the publication of
a report titled “Market Liquidity: Research Findings and Selected Policy Responses” in May this year.
Market  liquidity  is  admittedly  an  elusive  concept  and  is  difficult  to  quantify.  Nevertheless,  market
participants  and  authorities  are  making  their  day  to  day  decision  on  the  assumption  that  market  is
always  liquid.  One  example  is  the  risk  management  models,  which  is  rapidly  gaining  acceptance.
Such models assume that assets and liabilities can always be liquidated in the market immediately at
prevailing market prices, i.e. the existence of market liquidity. If this assumption does not hold, the
result  could  be  unexpectedly  large  losses,  or  worse,  bankruptcy  of  some  market  participants.  This
illustrates  that  maintaining  the  liquidity  of  markets  would  play  an  important  role  in  upholding  the
stability of the financial system. The Report, from a conceptual viewpoint, identifies the determinants
of  market  liquidity  according  to  product  design,  market  microstructure  and  the  behavior  of  market
participants, with a strong focus on the liquidity of the government securities market, which is one of
the core financial markets. Of the policy implications that are pointed out in the Report, the effects on
market liquidity of the issuing maturity and lot of government bonds and taxes offer valuable insights
into how we can enhance liquidity in the market of Japanese government securities.
Concerning  these  recent  activities  of  the  CGFS,  it  should  be  recognized  that  the  Committee  is  not
working in a vacuum. In order to better play the role of central banks in international financial crises,
be  it  the  understanding  of  risks,  developing  robust  systems,  or  containing  crises,  the  CGFS  should
work  in  concert  with  other  fora.  For  example,  of  the  other  Basel-based  G10  committees,  the  Basle
Committee on Banking Supervision pays attention to issues involving regulation and supervision of
individual banks. The Committee on Payment and Settlement System (CPSS) focuses on the stability
and  efficiency  of  the  payment  and  settlement  systems,  which  are  the  infrastructure  of  financial
systems. Compared with these two committees, the orientation of CGFS is on markets.
In any case, the activities of these and other fora should become more important as financial markets
are further globalized. This April, the Financial Stability Forum, established to strengthen cooperation
among the Group of Seven countries and various international organizations with a view to enhancing
international  financial  stability,  held  its  first  meeting.  The  Chairman  of  the  CGFS  was  asked  to
participate  in  this  new  forum  along  with  the  Chair  of  the  Basle  Committee,  the  CPSS,  IOSCO
BIS Review  84/1999
8
(International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions)  and  IAIS  (International  Organization  of
Insurance Supervisors). This, I believe, means that the CGFS is expected to make contributions from
its market-oriented perspective.
Role of the Bank of Japan in international finance
Finally, I would like to briefly describe the role of the Bank of Japan in international finance. In the
new Bank of  Japan  Law,  effective  since  April  last  year,  provisions  that  allow  the  Bank  to  conduct
activities related to international finance based on its judgments have  been  stipulated  reflecting  the
globalization  of  finance.  The  Bank  performs  many  functions:  e.g.  intervening  in  foreign  exchange
markets  as  an  agent  of  the  Finance  Minister,  providing  services  to  foreign  central  banks  and
international  organizations  wishing  to  invest  in  yen.  In  addition,  the  Bank  is  actively  engaged  in
activities related to international finance through channels other than the BIS, including the G7, G10,
IMF, etc. In the remaining minutes I would like to take up, from this broad spectrum, a few issues that
are related to the role of our Bank with respect to international financial crises.
Understanding developments in international financial markets
First,  let  me  explain  the  monitoring  activities  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  with  respect  to  international
financial markets. The Bank is closely following developments in international financial markets in
addition  to  its  monitoring  of  the  domestic  economy  and  financial  markets,  and  the  outputs  of  such
monitoring is reflected in the Bank’s policy decisions involving both monetary and prudential policy.
For  example,  the  international  effects  of  the  Russian  crisis  of  August  last  year  was  profound,  and
concerns  about  the  repercussions  of  such  effects  on  the  Japanese  economy  were  factored  into  the
decision to lower the target money market rates in September last year. Another example involves the
effects  of  the  Asian  crisis  on  the  funding  operations  of  Japanese  banks.  Japanese  banks  had  been
burdened  with  non-performing  assets,  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  was  concerned  with  the  additional
impacts of the crisis on banks – the possibility of further deterioration of their assets or potentially
severer  credit  evaluation  towards  Japanese  banks  which  could  cause  difficulties  in  their  foreign
currency  funding.  The  Bank  of  Japan  carefully  monitored  the  international  financial  markets  by
closely  contacting  domestic  banks  and  overseas  authorities,  facilitating  the  funding  operations  of
Japanese banks in the domestic markets – I will elaborate on this point later. Fortunately, the tensions
in the international financial markets began to ease in the latter half of October last year, and in line
with this, the external pressures on Japanese financial markets also declined rapidly.
As the domestic and the overseas financial markets move more and more towards convergence, the
Bank  of  Japan  intends  to  enhance  its  monitoring  activities  further,  particularly  on  the  Asian
economies and financial markets.
Contributions to international rulemaking
My  second  point  involves  contributions  to  policy  formulation  at  the  international  level.  One
implication of the globalization of financial markets is that we can no longer be self-sufficient in the
rules related to financial transactions. The trend is the application of internationally developed rules
in  the  domestic  sphere.  The  Basle  Accord  of  1988  was  probably  a  landmark  in  this  context.  Since
globalization  is  inevitable,  the  Bank  of  Japan  must  contribute  to  enhancing  the  stability  of  the
international financial system through making efforts towards designing and implementing rules that
it sees most appropriate. Of course, such rules are not under the sole jurisdiction of central banks, but
we are aiming to make contributions from the perspective of central banks. The active participation of
the  Bank  in  various  fora  which  I  have  just  mentioned  –  Basel-based  committees,  EMEAP
(Executives’  Meeting  of  East  Asia-Pacific  Central  Banks),  fora  in  which  governments  are  also
members, etc. – is based on this judgment. In addition, various technical assistance, including those in
9
BIS Review  84/1999
the area of payment and settlement systems, provided by our Bank to central banks of the emerging
market  economies  should  also  contribute  to  enhancing  the  stability  of  the  international  financial
system.
Containing crises relating to international finance
As  my  final  point  on  the  role  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  Bank’s  role  in
containing crises relating to international finance.
Once a crisis develops and its possible threats to international finance becomes more than negligible,
potential  use  of  multilateral  or  bilateral  liquidity  support  becomes  an  issue.  A  typical  situation  is
when  credit  needs  to  be  extended  to  countries  facing  crises.  In  such  cases,  support  packages  have
usually been arranged by the IMF. Central banks’ involvement is characterized by their nature as a
provider  of  short-term  liquidity,  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  cooperated  in  international  financial
support by, for example, sharing responsibilities in BIS bridge loans.
Moreover,  developments  in  international  finance  are  affecting  Japanese  financial  markets.  For
example, since the summer of 1998, the worries about the Japanese financial system were heightened,
following events such as rumors over the financial health of the Long Term Credit Bank. This was
compounded with concerns over credit crunch in the international financial market stemming from the
Russian  crisis  and  problems  at  some  US  hedge  funds,  with  the  result  that  many  Japanese  banks
experienced difficulties in securing foreign currency funding. Under such circumstances, the so-called
“Japan premium” – the extra risk premium charged to Japanese financial institutions reflecting market
participants’ heightened concerns over their creditworthiness – increased  significantly.  At  the  same
time, Japanese banks entered into swap transactions to obtain much needed foreign currency funding
– such transactions are, from the viewpoint of Japanese banks, exchange of yen funds for dollar funds
for  a  certain  period.  These  operations  by  banks  put  significant  upward  pressures  on  short-term
domestic money market rates. In response, the Bank of Japan conducted money market operations to
provide year-end funding earlier than usual to mitigate funding problems at Japanese banks.
Meanwhile, foreign banks, which had entered into currency swap transactions with Japanese banks,
needed investment instruments for the yen they acquired. During the financial crises, credit risk-free
instruments  were  sought,  and  the  choice  of  foreign  banks  was  Japanese  government  short-term
financing bills (FBs) and the bills drawn by the Bank of Japan. Bank of Japan bills were originally
intended to serve as instruments to absorb excess reserves in the interbank market, but foreign banks
regarded them as favorable investment instruments. In retrospect, there might have even been periods
when  the  Bank’s  bills  played  a  large  role  in  inducing  foreign  banks  to  enter  into  currency  swap
transactions. In effect, an overview of the monetary flows at the time suggests that the provision of
year-end funding and the issuance of short-term bills by the Bank of Japan to stabilize the domestic
financial markets worked to recycle liquidity between Japanese and foreign banks, and facilitated the
foreign currency funding of Japanese banks.
I might add that, although often overlooked, it is important to note that these operations can only be
effective when the assets of the Bank of Japan is sound and the bills issued are risk-free. The Bank’s
effectiveness, especially during crises, as experienced during the unprecedented period of concurrent
crises in the domestic and overseas financial markets recently, relies on the soundness of the Bank’s
balance sheet. This is one reason why the Bank is,  as  it  should  be,  sensitive  about  maintaining  the
quality of its assets.
Today, I have had the pleasure of speaking to you on the role of central banks in international finance.
As a final note I would like to stress that globalization affects not only financial institutions and non-
financial  firms  but  also  central  banks  as  well.  Due  to  limitation  over  time,  I  could  not  touch  upon
profound  changes  in  the  banking  services  provided  by  central  banks,  for  example,  in  the  area  of
payments  and  settlements.  The  changes  that  we  are  experiencing  now  –  financial  innovation  and
BIS Review  84/1999
10
globalization of financial markets – may be a radical change equivalent to the Industrial Revolution of
the eighteenth century. Just as the 18th-century Britons probably did not recognize that they were in
the  midst  of  such  a  revolution,  we  may  be  unknowingly  in  the  midst  of  a  watershed  event.  The
introduction of the euro in Europe and serious discussions  on  the  pros  and  cons  of  dollarization  in
some  Latin  American  countries  seem  to  be  very  symbolic,  as  the  new  millennium  is  dawning.  If  I
draw upon the remarks that Nobel laureate Hicks made almost thirty years ago, central banks may no
longer be at the center and become local banks as a result of globalization. In order for central banks
to continue making their contributions to the stability of the economy and the financial system, they
must review their policies and operations in accordance with the ongoing globalization. The Bank of
Japan is also determined to tackle such challenges ahead.
11
BIS Review  84/1999
