Mr Greenspan’s testimony on monetary policy and the economic outlook in the United
States
Testimony  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,
Mr Alan Greenspan, before the Joint Economic  Committee  of  the  US  Congress  on  17  June
1999.
As  emphasized  by  the  important  hearings  this  committee  has  held  in  the  past  few  days,  an
impressive  proliferation  of  new  technologies  is  inducing  major  shifts  in  the  underlying
structure  of  the  American  economy.  These  fundamental  changes  appear  to  be  far  from
complete.  The  way  America  does  business,  including  the  interaction  among  the  various
economic players in our economy, is in the midst of a significant transformation, though the
pace of change is unclear.
As  a  consequence,  many  of  the  empirical  regularities  depicting  the  complex  of  economic
relationships  on  which  policymakers  rely  have  been  markedly  altered.  The  Federal  Reserve
has thus been pressed to continuously update our understanding of how the newer forces are
developing in order for us to address appropriately our underlying monetary policy objective:
maximum sustainable economic growth.
The failure of economic models based on history to anticipate the acceleration in productivity
contributed to the recent persistent underprediction of economic growth and overprediction of
inflation.  Guiding  policy  by  those  models  doubtless  would  have  unduly  inhibited  what  has
been a remarkable run of economic prosperity.
And yet, while we have been adjusting the implicit models of the underlying economic forces
on which we base our decisions, certain verities remain.
Importantly,  the  evidence  has  become  increasingly  persuasive  that  relatively  stable  prices  –
neither  persistently  rising  nor  falling  –  are  more  predictable  hence  result  in  a  lower  risk
premium  for  investment.  Because  the  nation’s  level  of  investment,  to  a  large  extent,
determines  our  prosperity  over  time,  stability  in  the  general  level  of  prices  for  goods  and
services is clearly a necessary condition for maximum sustainable growth. However, product
price  stability  does  not  guarantee  either  the  maintenance  of  financial  market  stability  or
maximum sustainable growth.
As recent experience attests, a prolonged period of price stability does help to foster economic
prosperity. But, as we have also observed over recent years, as have others in times past, such
a  benign  economic  environment  can  induce  investors  to  take  on  more  risk  and  drive  asset
prices  to  unsustainable  levels.  This  can  occur  when  investors  implicitly  project  rising
prosperity  further  into  the  future  than  can  reasonably  be  supported.  By  1997,  for  example,
measures of  risk  had  fallen  to  historic  lows  as  businesspeople,  having  experienced  years  of
continuous good times, assumed, not unreasonably, that the most likely forecast was more of
the same.
The Asian crisis, and especially the Russian devaluation and debt moratorium of August 1998,
brought the inevitable rude awakening. In the ensuing weeks, financial markets in the United
States virtually seized-up, risk premiums soared, and for a period sellers of even investment
grade bonds had difficulty finding buyers. The Federal Reserve responded with a three step
reduction in the federal funds rate totaling 75 basis points.
1
BIS Review   79/1999
Market  strains  receded  –  whether  as  a  consequence  of  our  actions  or  of  other  forces  –  and
yield  spreads  have  since  fallen  but  not  all  the  way  back  to  their  unduly  thin  levels  of  last
summer.
The  American  economy  has  retained  its  momentum  and  emerging  economies  in  Asia  and
Latin America are clearly on firmer footing, though  in  some  cases  their  turnarounds  appear
fragile. The recovery of financial markets, viewed in isolation, would have suggested that at
least part of the emergency injection of liquidity, and the associated 75 basis point decline in
the funds rate, ceased to be necessary. But, with wage growth and price inflation declining by
a number of measures earlier this year, and productivity evidently still accelerating – thereby
keeping inflation in check – we chose to maintain the lower level of the funds rate.
While this stellar noninflationary economic expansion still appears remarkably stress free on
the  surface,  there  are  developing  imbalances  that  give  us  pause  and  raise  the  question:  Do
these imbalances place our economic expansion at risk?
For the period immediately ahead, inflationary pressures still seem well contained. To be sure,
oil  prices  have  nearly  doubled  and  some  other  commodity  prices  have  firmed,  but  large
productivity  gains  have  held  unit  cost  increases  to  negligible  levels.  Pricing  power  is  still
generally  reported  to  be  virtually  nonexistent.  Moreover,  the  re-emergence  of  rising  profit
margins, after severe problems last fall, indicates cost pressures on prices remain small.
Nonetheless,  the  persistence  of  certain  imbalances  pose  a  risk  to  the  longer-run  outlook.
Strong demand for labor has continued to reduce the pool of available workers. Data showing
the percent of the relevant population who are not at work, but would like a job, are around
the low for this series, which started in 1970.
Despite  its  extraordinary  acceleration,  labor  productivity  has  not  grown  fast  enough  to
accommodate the increased demand for labor induced by the exceptional strength in demand
for goods and services.
Overall economic growth during the past three years has averaged four percent annually, of
which roughly two percentage points reflected increased productivity and about one point the
growth  in  our  working  age  population.  The  remainder  was  drawn  from  the  ever  decreasing
pool of available job seekers without work.
That  last  development  represents  an  unsustainable  trend  that  has  been  produced  by  an
inclination of households and firms to increase their spending on goods and services beyond
the gains in their income from production. That propensity to spend, in turn, has been spurred
by the rise in equity and home prices, which our analysis suggests can account for at least one
percentage point of GDP growth over the past three years.
Even if this period of rapid expansion of capital gains comes to an end shortly, there remains a
substantial  amount  in  the  pipeline  to  support  outsized  increases  in  consumption  for  many
months  into  the  future.  Of  course,  a  dramatic  contraction  in  equity  market  prices  would
greatly reduce this backlog of extra spending.
To be sure, labor market tightness has not, as yet, put the current expansion at risk. Despite
the ever shrinking pool of available labor, recent readings on year-over-year increases in labor
compensation have held steady or, by some measures, even eased. This seems to have resulted
BIS Review   79/1999
2
in  part  from  falling  inflation,  which  has  implied  that  relatively  modest  nominal  wage  gains
have  provided  healthy  increases  in  purchasing  power.  Also,  a  residual  fear  of  job  skill
obsolescence, which has induced a preference for job  security  over  wage  gains,  probably  is
still holding down wage levels.
But  should  labor  markets  continue  to  tighten,  significant  increases  in  wages,  in  excess  of
productivity growth, will inevitably emerge, absent the unlikely  repeal  of  the  law  of  supply
and  demand.  Because  monetary  policy  operates  with  a  significant  lag,  we  have  to  make
judgments, not only about the current degree of balance in the economy, but about how the
economy is likely to fare a year or more in the future under the current policy stance.
The return of financial markets to greater stability and our growing concerns about emerging
imbalances  led  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  to  adopt  a  policy  position  at  our  May
meeting that contemplated a possible need for an upward adjustment of the federal funds rate
in  the  months  ahead.  The  issue  is  what  policy  setting  has  the  capacity  to  sustain  our
remarkable economic expansion, now in its ninth year. This is the question the FOMC will be
addressing at its meeting at the end of the month.
One of the important issues for the FOMC as it has made such judgments in recent years has
been the weight to place on asset prices. As I have already noted, history suggests that owing
to  the  growing  optimism  that  may  develop  with  extended  periods  of  economic  expansion,
asset price values can climb to unsustainable levels even if product prices are relatively stable.
The 1990s have witnessed one of the great bull stock markets in American history. Whether
that means an unstable bubble has developed in its wake is difficult to assess. A large number
of analysts have judged the level of equity prices to be excessive, even taking into account the
rise in “fair value” resulting from the acceleration of productivity and the associated long-term
corporate earnings outlook.
But bubbles generally are perceptible only after the fact. To spot a bubble in advance requires
a judgment that hundreds of thousands of informed investors have it all wrong. Betting against
markets is usually precarious at best.
While bubbles that burst are scarcely benign, the consequences need not be catastrophic for
the economy.
The  bursting  of  the  Japanese  bubble  a  decade  ago  did  not  lead  immediately  to  sharp
contractions in output or a significant rise in unemployment. Arguably, it was the subsequent
failure to address the damage to the financial system in a timely manner that caused Japan’s
current economic problems. Likewise, while the stock market crash of 1929 was destabilizing,
most analysts attribute the Great Depression to ensuing failures of policy. And certainly the
crash of October 1987 left little lasting imprint on the American economy.
This all leads to the conclusion that monetary policy is best primarily focused on stability of
the  general  level  of  prices  of  goods  and  services  as  the  most  credible  means  to  achieve
sustainable economic growth. Should volatile asset prices cause problems, policy is probably
best  positioned  to  address  the  consequences  when  the  economy  is  working  from  a  base  of
stable product prices.
3
BIS Review   79/1999
For monetary policy to foster maximum sustainable economic growth, it is useful to pre-empt
forces  of  imbalance  before  they  threaten  economic  stability.  But  this  may  not  always  be
possible – the future at times can be too opaque to penetrate. When we can be pre-emptive we
should be, because modest pre-emptive actions can obviate the need of more drastic actions at
a later date that could destabilize the economy.
The  economic  expansion  has  generated  many  benefits.  It  has  been  a  major  factor  in
rebalancing  our  federal  budget.  But  more  important,  a  broad  majority  of  our  people  have
moved  to  a  higher  standard  of  living,  and  we  have  managed  to  bring  into  the  productive
workforce those who have too long been at its periphery. This has enabled large segments of
our  society  to  gain  skills  on  the  job  and  the  self-esteem  associated  with  work.  Our
responsibility, at the Federal Reserve and in Congress, is to create the conditions most likely
to preserve and extend the expansion.
Should the economic expansion continue into February of next year, it will have become the
longest in America’s economic annals. Someday,  of  course,  the  expansion  will  end;  human
nature  has  exhibited  a  tendency  to  excess  through  the  generations  with  the  inevitable
economic  hangover.  There  is  nothing  in  our  economic  data  series  to  suggest  that  this
propensity has changed. It is the job of economic policymakers to mitigate the fallout when it
occurs, and, hopefully, ease the transition to the next expansion.
BIS Review   79/1999
4
