Ms Hessius discusses the role of the central bank and market liquidity
Speech  given  by  Ms  Kerstin  Hessius,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a  seminar  of
Sveriges Finansanalytiker Förening on 14 September 1999.
 The financial sector plays a central role in our society’s economy. It is this sector that enables us to
make  payments,  to  transform  savings  into  investments  or  future  consumption  and  to  spread  and
minimise potential financial risks. It is therefore essential that the financial sector functions smoothly
when we pass from one millennium into the next.
Many actors share the responsibility of a smooth transition. Naturally, the Swedish Riksbank is one
party involved, but everyone – from private savers and investors to public authorities and the media –
must bear their part of the responsibility.
Agents in the financial sector addressed early the potential problems that may arise in connection with
the transition to a new millennium. Substantial resources have been devoted to measures designed to
minimise the risk of any technical problems arising and to ensure that all systems can cope with the
transition.  The  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  has  closely  monitored  work  on  systems  adaptation
since 1997.
The role of the Riksbank in this connection is bound up with our regular tasks as Central Bank in the
economy – to implement monetary policy, to promote a secure and efficient system of payments and
to  ensure  that  sufficient  notes  and  coins  are  available  in  the  economy.  My  intention  today  is  to
concentrate on the central role played by the Riksbank in the management of liquidity in the financial
system.
The risks that are  generally  given  prominence  as  being  the  greatest  where the  millennium  period  is
concerned are the risks of technical malfunctions arising, primarily as a result of problems in adapting
all computer systems to the year 2000. Such malfunctions have the potential to disrupt the financial
infrastructure. Irrespective of how high a degree of probability is assigned to these risks, they have to
be treated with the utmost seriousness. The very uncertainty about the possibility of problems arising
is  in  itself  enough  to  lead  to  disturbances;  for  this  reason,  preparations  have  to  do  not  only  with
technical adaptations but also to a great extent with instilling confidence that the systems will function
in practice.
One way to build confidence is to use various types of agreements to attempt to limit the burden on
systems around the millennium  period,  hence reducing  the risks.  One  example  of  a  measure  of  this
kind  is  that  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  ECB,  has  decided  that  the  European  payment  system,
Target, is to be closed on 31 December. The reason for this decision is to enable all measures that need
to be taken by the end of the day and the year to be carried out in good time before midnight. The
closing  of Target  makes  it  possible to close  down all  financial trade  within  the  EU  on  New  Year’s
Eve.
A further means of enhancing confidence and reducing vulnerability is to establish contingency plans,
i.e. measures that will be resorted to should problems still arise in spite of all preparations. Such plans
are  not  something  that  should  be  unique  to  the  change  of  millennium;  they  should  always  exist  in
organisations in the financial sector.
Many  of  the  measures  that  have  been  taken  in  preparation  for  the  transition  to  the  year  2000  have
focused  on  questions  related  to  confidence.  A  high  degree  of  confidence  in  financial  markets  is
important if the markets are to function efficiently. For this reason, anxiety that the functioning of the
market may be impaired or a lack of confidence in the payment systems, are enough in themselves to
constitute a problem.
1
BIS Review 97/1999
Lately,  comments  have  frequently  centred  around  possible  liquidity  problems.  However,  the  exact
significance invested in the word liquidity is often unclear, as is what, fundamentally, could lead to
problems. The word liquidity means “the capacity to quickly obtain funds for the settlement of debts”.1
In practice, the word liquidity is used to express a variety of phenomena. In my opinion, therefore, it
may be appropriate to take a closer look at the concept of liquidity and to clarify the role played by the
Riksbank in managing liquidity.
The  comment  that  liquidity  in  the  market  is  poor  often  describes  a  situation  in  which  major  price
changes occur even when turnover is low. To use market jargon, the market is said to be thin. One
explanation for this can be a low level of customer activity. Such situations frequently tend to arise at
the  end  of  the  year,  when  companies  and  financial  institutions  have  adjusted  their  balances  in
preparation  for  closing  their  books  and  therefore  have  little  interest  in  modifying  their  portfolios.
Judging  by  comments  on  the  market,  there  are  expectations  that  the  period  of  low  activity  in  the
market at the end of this year could turn out longer than usual. In other words, uncertainty about the
effects the change of millennium  might  have  on  interest rates and financing  possibilities  could lead
agents  on  the  market  to  make  adjustments  to  their  portfolios  earlier  than  usual.  On  this  view,  one
possible explanation for why the interest rates on loans and investments that run over into next year
have risen could therefore be a higher liquidity premium, i.e. a rise in the price that reflects how easily
a security can be sold on the market.
However, it is important to point out that this type of liquidity problem – a thin market – has no direct
connection with the practical liquidity management exercised by the Riksbank. The Riksbank’s role in
liquidity management is rather to function as the banks’ bank. This leads us to a second definition of
the concept of liquidity: the opportunities available to financial agents to obtain refinancing without
needing to sell assets.
Uncertainty  regarding  the  future  liquidity  situation  in  both  senses  risks  reinforcing  the  problems.  I
shall therefore explain and inform you, as far as possible, how the Riksbank will manage the supply of
liquidity. I shall also give my opinion of the risk of liquidity problems actually arising in practice.
In Sweden, all major payments between accounts are managed within the RIX payment system which
links together the Riksbank and all major credit institutions. A bank that has a payments deficit always
has  the  option  of  financing  this  deficit  by  borrowing  from  the  Riksbank  against  collateral  at  the
Riksbank’s lending rate. Similarly, a bank that has a surplus  always  has the right to  invest it at the
Riksbank at the Riksbank’s deposit rate. These rates at present stand at 4.25% and 2.75% respectively.
However, a bank that has surplus liquidity always gains by lending it to a bank that has a deficit via
the market for lending between banks, the interbank market. The bank that lends its surplus funds then
receives a higher rate of interest than the Riksbank’s deposit rate, while at the same time the bank that
borrows money pays a lower rate of interest than the Riksbank’s lending rate. Loans on the interbank
market occur within the framework of set credit lines so that here no collateral is required.
If the financial system as a whole has a liquidity deficit with respect to the Riksbank – as a result of
the banks ordering banknotes from us – the deficits and surpluses cannot be settled on the interbank
market. The banks then have to borrow from the Riksbank at an interest rate normally close to the repo
rate; this occurs by means of “fine tuning” transactions on the part of the Riksbank.
As long as the Swedish banks feel sufficient confidence in one another and the banks have adequate
collateral  to  borrow  from  the  Riksbank,  the  banks  will  encounter  no  difficulties  in  obtaining
refinancing. Refinancing can then normally occur at the repo rate or at a rate close to the repo rate.
So do the banks have sufficient confidence in one another, or is there any possible cause to reconsider
the size of credit lines because of uncertainty about the year 2000? I can see no reason for any such
revisions.  For  one  thing,  solvency  in  the  Swedish  banks  is  high.  The  Riksbank  publishes  stability
reports twice a year in which we analyse the Swedish banking system. In our judgement, the financial
1 Nationalencyklopedin (The Swedish National Encyclopaedia).
BIS Review 97/1999
2
strength of the banking system and its capacity to resist disruptions is good. Furthermore, the reports
of  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  make  a  “second  opinion”  available  on  the  progress  of
preparations  for  the  year  2000.  The  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  will  publish  its  next  report  on
1 October.
One further question is whether the banks possess adequate collateral to finance increased borrowing
requirements from the Riksbank. In addition to Government securities, we also accept securities issued
by housing credit institutions and some foreign countries as collateral for loans from the Riksbank. As
of  30  June,  the  stock  of  Government  and  housing  securities  in  Sweden  came  to  approximately
SEK1,700 billion.2 At the same time, only about SEK50 billion worth of securities were being used as
collateral for loans from the Riksbank. The banks held securities that are approved as collateral in the
RIX system amounting to almost SEK200 billion  at the time.  It  is  therefore  reasonable  to  conclude
that collateral ought not to constitute a restriction for increased borrowing from the Riksbank.
In order to judge whether this safety margin is adequate, it is also necessary  to  estimate  how  much
collateral  might  be  needed.  Essentially,  an  augmented  demand  for  banknotes  is  the  only  factor  that
might  be  capable  of  increasing  the  total  refinancing  the  banks  need  to  obtain  from  the  Riksbank.
However, a substantial rise in demand for cash on the part of the general public appears to be unlikely.
The surveys that the National Board of Psychological Defence has carried out indicate that the general
public has great confidence that the banking sector will function in the millennium period. However,
the possibility that the situation may change as a result of psychological factors and the demand for
cash may increase cannot be discounted. Nevertheless, there is not the remotest possibility of the sums
involved being so large that the collateral held by the banks might impose limits on their borrowing
from the Riksbank. In an earlier financial stability report, we outlined a highly hypothetical argument
in which we followed the assumption that all households wanted to hold an extra SEK10,000 in cash.
This  would  be  equivalent  to  increased  withdrawals  totalling  approximately  SEK38  billion.  A  more
reasonable  assessment  of  the  risk  is  that  each  household  might  withdraw  an  additional  couple  of
thousand  kronor;  this  would  be  equivalent  to  about  SEK10  billion.  I  am  therefore  on  firm  ground
when I say that the Swedish bank system is well equipped to cope with any rise in the  demand  for
cash.
Nevertheless, some central banks have announced special lending facilities for the banking system in
preparation for the turn of the millennium. These central banks include the Federal Reserve and the
Bank of Canada. However, both the structure of the banking market and the central banks’ systems for
managing the supply of liquidity vary from country to country. In Sweden we have financially strong
banks and the banking market is easily surveyed, since the number of banks is so small. Moreover, as
a result of the rules that the Riksbank follows for collateral requirements and because of the structure
of the Swedish securities market, a considerable stock of pledgeable securities exists.
In supervising financial stability, the Riksbank also has other means at its disposal. Although in my
judgement the risk of liquidity problems in the run-up to the coming year-end is small, it is of course
never possible to rule out the possibility that technical hitches might lead to temporary problems. One
hypothetical  issue  that  has  been  discussed  is  what  would  happen  if  a  single  bank,  in  spite  of
everything,  encountered  technical  problems  in  sending  out  its  payments.  The  banks  that  were  to
receive these payments would then run the risk of a temporary deficit that would have to be financed
by  the  Riksbank.  If  it  should  prove  impossible  in  that  situation  to  present  an  adequate  amount  of
collateral, the Riksbank would be able to make use of the existing legal option of offering loans on
special terms, always assuming that those affected were solvent. The situations in which this option is
to be used and exactly how this is to occur is considered on a case to case basis. The Riksbank always
maintains a high level of preparedness for taking quick decisions about loans of this kind.
The financial sector was early in paying attention to the millennium problems. Representatives of the
financial sector meet in varying constellations for discussions and to make sure that adequate measures
2
Sveriges Riksbank: Finansmarknadsstatistik No. 6 (Sveriges Riksbank: Financial Market Statistics No. 6).
3
BIS Review 97/1999
have  been  taken  to  avoid  problems.  Already  in  April  1998,  “The  Joint  Year  2000  Council”  was
established;3 its principal task is to ensure coordination between the various actors in the market and to
provide  a  platform  for  an  exchange  of  information  and  experience.  Everybody  is  working  for  a
common goal – to ensure that the turn of the year passes by in a smooth fashion.
Up to now, the preparations for the millennium shift has, in all essentials, been working according to
plans. However, it is of great importance that this issue continues to have top priority. My opinion is
that  the  financial  sector  and  all  interested  parties  can  look  ahead  to  the  new  millennium  with
confidence.
In conclusion, it is worth recalling that the introduction of the euro at the beginning of this year was
able to take place without any serious hitches, even though many systems were being taken into use
for the first time.
3 Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems,  the  International
Organization of Securities Commissions and the International Association of Insurance Supervisors.
BIS Review 97/1999
4
