Mr Duisenberg focuses on maintaining price stability in the euro area
Speech  by  Mr  Willem  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Swiss  Banking
Congress in Zurich on 10 September 1999.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
I was only too pleased to accept your invitation to this place of price stability between Lake Constance
and  the  Dufourspitze,  to  report  to  you  on  the  first  experiences  with  the  euro.  No  other  country  in
Europe can rival the success of Switzerland in combating inflation, and this is something of which you
can be very proud.
With the introduction of the single currency in Europe, European integration has scaled new heights.
Since  the  beginning  of  this  year,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  been  responsible  for  the
stability of the euro. Monetary Union means that for the whole of the euro area there is only one single
monetary policy. The aim of this policy is to achieve price stability in the euro area as a whole. This
means that there can no longer be a monetary policy designed to meet the needs of individual Member
States.  Therefore,  it  will  be  more  important  than  ever  for  individual  Member  States  to  push  on
determinedly with fiscal consolidation and to carry out structural reforms with the aim of enhancing
the  flexibility  of  the  commodity  and  employment  markets  and  improving  the  incentives  for  the
creation and taking-up of employment.
The Governing Council of the ECB determines the single monetary policy centrally. The Governing
Council consists of the Executive Board of the ECB and the governors of the central banks in the euro
area. Monetary policy decisions are implemented by the Eurosystem, which comprises the ECB and
the national central banks of the 11 participating EU Member States. The national central banks are,
above  all,  entrusted  with  the  decentralised  implementation  of  the  single  monetary  policy  and  the
relevant activities in their countries.
First, I should like to say that the launch and the first few months of the common currency have, in our
view, gone well. The initial experiences with the euro and the single monetary policy have proved to
be both positive and encouraging. We have currently achieved price stability and the prospects look
good for this to remain the case in the years to come.
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  become  a  truly  supranational  body.  The  members  of  the
Governing Council clearly see themselves as committed to this joint cause. They take the whole euro
area into consideration when discussing and taking decisions on monetary policy.
The efforts made prior to and at the time of the changeover weekend at the beginning of this year are
already part of history. Since the beginning of this year the euro has been quoted on the international
financial markets and used for cashless payments. Although the euro will only become available in the
tangible form of banknotes and coins in over two years’ time, there is already a feeling that the euro is
accepted by the majority of the population and that the benefits of the euro are appreciated. The euro,
as you in Switzerland are particularly well placed to observe, is playing an increasingly important role
not only within the euro area, but also beyond it.
Monetary policy with a view to price stability
European Economic and Monetary Union is a great opportunity to achieve the objective of sustained
and  widespread  price  stability  in  Europe.  Monetary  stability  is  the  best  contribution  that  monetary
policy  can  make  to  lasting  economic  and  employment  growth.  Stable  prices  promote  the  efficient
allocation of scarce resources and also help to guide expectations.
1
BIS Review 99/1999
For these sound reasons, the Treaty establishing the European Community specifies the maintenance
of  price  stability  as  the  primary  objective  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB)  and
therefore of the Eurosystem.
The Governing Council of the ECB does its utmost to fulfil this function. In this respect, it endeavours
to  communicate  its  monetary  policy  to  the  public  in  a  comprehensible  manner.  In  particular,  the
Governing Council of the ECB has published a quantitative definition of its primary objective of price
stability.  This  helps  provide  economic  agents  with  clear  guidance  on  expectations  of  future  price
developments. The publication of this definition also provides the public and the European Parliament
with  clear  criteria  for  assessing  the  success  of  the  single  monetary  policy,  thereby  rendering  the
Eurosystem and its policy both transparent and accountable.
The  Eurosystem  defines  price  stability  as  a  year-on-year  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of
Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2% to be maintained over the medium term. The
wording “below 2%” clearly delineates the upper boundary for the measured rate of inflation that is
consistent with price stability. At the same time, in this context, the use of the word “increase” implies
that deflation – i.e. a prolonged decline in the price level – is not consistent with price stability.
The price stability objective must be achieved both in the medium term and the long term. On the one
hand, this objective has been set in order to take into account the variable and somewhat unpredictable
time  lags  affecting  monetary  policy.  On  the  other,  it  is  a  reflection  of  the  possible  emergence  of
short-term  volatility  in  prices  resulting  from  non-monetary  shocks  that  cannot  be  controlled  by
monetary policy.
Stability-oriented monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem
The monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem is geared towards price stability within the euro area
and can basically be described as a two-pillar strategy.
The first pillar assigns a prominent role to money as  defined  by  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  M3.
There is wide consensus that medium-term inflation is actually a monetary phenomenon. Therefore,
the  money  supply  provides  a  natural  “nominal  anchor”  for  a  monetary  policy  aiming  at  the
safeguarding  of price stability.  To  emphasise  the  prominent  role  assigned  to  money,  the  Governing
Council of the ECB has announced a quantitative reference value for monetary growth in terms of the
broad definition of M3.
The  second  pillar  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy  is  founded  on  a  broadly  based  assessment  of  the
outlook  for  price  developments  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  This  assessment  is  made  using  a  wide
range  of  indicators.  In  particular,  those  variables  which  may  provide  information  on  future  price
developments  are  thoroughly  analysed.  These  analyses  should  not  only  provide  information  on  the
risks  for  price  developments  but  should  also  help  to  determine  the  cause  of  unexpected  changes  in
important economic variables.
In  view  of  this  policy  stance  and  the  published  definition  of  price  stability,  the  monetary  policy
strategy of the Eurosystem bears some resemblance to that of the Swiss National Bank. Allow me to
quote the President of the Swiss National Bank who outlined the strategy of the Swiss National Bank
as follows: “We try to meet the price stability objective by following developments in the monetary
aggregates, but also, at the same time, taking into account other indicators.” [See the paper by Hans
Meyer  entitled  “Zur  Geldpolitik  im  neuen  Jahr”,  from  the  seminar  held  on  21  January  1999  at  the
University of St. Gallen.]
However, the motives for developing these respective strategies were different. Whilst in Switzerland
disturbances affecting, in particular, the demand for central bank money “for reasons still unknown”
have increased in recent years, the ECB faces additional uncertainties at the beginning of Monetary
Union in terms of the effects of the shift of regime to a single monetary policy in Europe. It is difficult
to assess whether conventional and reliable macroeconomic relationships are changing as a result of
the introduction of the euro. In view of these uncertainties, but also in general, it is unwise to rely on a
few indicators or only one when making monetary policy decisions. Indeed, to date our studies have
BIS Review 99/1999
2
revealed  that  the  M3  monetary  aggregate  shows  clear  signs  of  stability  and  healthy  indicator
properties. This provides a sound basis for the prominent role given to the M3 monetary aggregate.
Monetary policy instruments and the operational framework of the Eurosystem
The operational framework of the  Eurosystem  has  proved  to be  an  effective instrument  for  steering
money  market  interest  rates  and  for  limiting  fluctuations.  The  Eurosystem  controls  money  market
interest rates by means of either the provision or withdrawal of liquidity in the banking system. Open
market operations play an important role in the context of monetary policy strategy. The weekly main
refinancing operations give an indication of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy and provide the largest
share  of liquidity.  Longer-term  refinancing  operations  provide  the  banking  system  with  longer-term
liquidity (three months). The system of (interest-bearing) minimum reserves has contributed towards
smoothing  out  daily  liquidity  fluctuations  in  the  money  market,  whilst  the  “standing  facilities”
effectively limit fluctuations in the money market interest rate.
The efficiency of this set of instruments can be demonstrated by the fact that the Eurosystem has been
able to manage to date without having recourse to any fine-tuning operations in the money market. In
fact, developments in short-term money market interest rates have thus far been exceptionally stable
and money market rates have been relatively close to the interest rates at which the ECB has provided
liquidity through its weekly main refinancing operations. This is a notable success, as is the extremely
rapid integration of the money markets in the euro area, in which, since January, temporary interest
rate  differentials  have  been  rapidly  eliminated  during  the  day  through  arbitrage  by  active  market
participants.
Initial monetary policy decisions
Conditions  at  the  start  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro  were  favourable,  given  a  rate  of  inflation  of
below 2% (measured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices) and moderate monetary growth
rates in the two years leading up to the beginning of Monetary Union. However, the outlook  in the
euro area became increasingly gloomy in the second half of 1998 as a result of the crises in Asia and
in  Russia,  thereby  causing  inflationary  pressure  to  weaken  further.  The  central  banks  of  the
participating countries reacted by reducing short-term interest rates. This caused the average interest
rate level in those countries of the future euro area to be lowered considerably before the beginning of
Monetary Union.
The close cooperation which had always existed between the European central banks was increasingly
stepped  up  in  the  final  months  of  1998  between  those  countries  participating  in  Stage  Three  of
Monetary Union. The coordinated reduction of central bank rates in December 1998  to  3%  made it
perfectly clear that, de facto, Monetary Union had already begun before the start of Stage Three.
Looking at economic developments, in the first few months of this year there have been an increasing
number  of  indications  that  the  negative  effects  of  the  crises  in  Asia  and  Russia  on  growth  and
employment  in  the  euro  area  could  be  more  serious  than  was  first  expected.  With  the  apparent
slowdown in economic growth in the euro area, the risks that the 2% threshold for the tolerable rate of
inflation would be exceeded in the foreseeable future evaporated. This forecast was also reflected in
the revisions to the inflation forecasts of international organisations.
At the beginning of April 1999, the Governing Council of the ECB therefore decided to  reduce the
interest rates on the main refinancing operations by 50 basis points to 2.5%, as well as the rates on the
standing facilities to 1.5% and 3.5% respectively. The M3 monetary aggregate did expand such that it
was  slightly  above  the  reference  value  at  the  beginning  of  1999.  However,  it  was  not  clear,  at  that
point  in  time,  whether  this  sharp  increase  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  was  a  one-off  effect  in
connection  with  the  launch  of  the  single  currency  and  thus  quickly  fall  again.  In  view  of  these
uncertainties, the Governing Council of the ECB saw nothing in the development of M3 in the spring
of this year to prevent it from reducing the interest rates.
3
BIS Review 99/1999
Current assessment of the monetary, financial and economic situation
Please  allow  me  to  explain  briefly  how  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  currently  views  the
monetary, financial and economic situation in the euro area.
Since the beginning of the year, the annual inflation rate for the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
has stood at around 1% in the euro area as a whole, i.e. within our definition of price stability. Whilst
the rate of price increases in food products has been falling since the beginning of the year,  energy
prices have increased strongly as result of the sharp increase in oil prices over the last few months.
Overall the  upward pressure turned  out  to  be  moderate,  and  perhaps  more  moderate  than  expected,
which is a reflection of the increased competition in the service sector and the success of deregulation
in  some  markets.  However,  since  production  costs  could  also  increase  in  time  as  a  result  of  the
increase  in  energy  prices,  the  increase  in  oil  prices  contributes  to  certain  risks  to  price  stability.
However, this should not lead to sustained higher inflation rates, as long as the unions do not use the
higher energy prices as grounds to demand additional wage increases.
The monetary aggregate M3 rose in July by 5.6% compared  with  5.3%  in June. The  money  supply
figures have recently been revised upwards and we still need to examine the factors responsible for
these revisions carefully. Measured by the moving average over the last three months, i.e. May, June,
and  July,  M3  growth  has  moved  further  away  from  the  reference  value  of  4.5%  announced  by  the
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  to  5.4%.  This  increase  is  largely
attributable to the low opportunity costs of holding money. However, the gradual improvement in the
economic outlook has probably also played a role. Similarly, the development in lending to the private
sector  is  not  restrictive  at  present.  Annualised  growth  rates  of  just  over  10%  do  not,  in  any  case,
indicate that the conditions for lending are currently unfavourable.
As previously explained, the money supply development of M3 plays a prominent role in our strategy.
However, short-term fluctuations in the money supply should be viewed cautiously, not least because
of  the  uncertainties  associated  with the  brief  existence  of  Monetary  Union  and  the  recent  statistical
revisions to the money supply figures. However, the most recent figures suggest increased growth.
At the same time, the prospects for an economic recovery in Europe starting this year and continuing
into next year have clearly improved in the meantime. In addition to encouraging trends in the global
economy,  the  stabilisation  of  output  growth  in  the  euro  area  has  contributed  significantly  to  this.
However, the most recent industry and consumer surveys also give positive indications with regard to
economic activity in the euro area. Therefore, it is likely that economic activity will accelerate in the
second half of 1999 and the year 2000.
When assessing the risks for price stability, the ECB does also monitor the external value of the euro.
The weakening of the effective exchange rate of the euro, which remained at around 8% between the
start of the year and early September, lent itself to an increase in import prices denominated in euro.
Taking  into  account  all  available  information,  the  outlook  for  the  preservation  of  price  stability
remains  favourable.  However,  recently  inflationary  risks  have  increased  slightly.  In  the  coming
months it will therefore be necessary to monitor developments in the monetary aggregates and credit
aggregates.  In  addition,  the  short-term  effects  of  the  increase  in  oil  prices  and  exchange  rate
developments on consumer prices need to be taken into account. The latter factors should not affect
the outlook for price stability as long as wage increases remain moderate. The wage round for the year
2000 will, however, play an important role in future price developments.
On  the  basis  of  this  current  assessment  of  the  monetary,  financial  and  economic  situation,  the
Governing Council of the ECB left the central bank interest rates unchanged at yesterday’s meeting.
Economic policy arena: fiscal policy and the employment markets
The  success  of  Monetary  Union  and  the  future  of  Europe  will  also  depend  on  fiscal  and  structural
policies in the Member States significantly improving the structural conditions for further economic
development  and,  in  particular,  employment  developments.  As  is  evident  from  the  waning
BIS Review 99/1999
4
consolidation  efforts  following  the  beginning  of  Monetary  Union  and  the  continuing  high  level  of
unemployment, in general, the initial experiences in this area were rather disappointing.
Most  Member  States  are  currently  still  very  far  from  meeting  the  medium-term  requirement  for  a
balanced budget laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact. The measures currently planned are, for
the  most  part,  insufficient to  achieve  a sustained reduction in  the  long-term  structural  deficits.  This
problem is becoming particularly obvious given the current low interest rates in the euro area, which
have,  in  themselves,  tended  to  increase  the  scope  for  fiscal  consolidation.  In  view  of  the  relatively
positive  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area,  fiscal  policy  should  be  taking  advantage  of  this
opportunity to make cuts in expenditure in order to achieve a more sound fiscal policy in the medium
term.
The high level of unemployment in Europe is primarily of a structural nature, which is evident when a
comparison is made with the United  States.  Whilst in the  United  States,  over the last twenty  years,
unemployment  has  declined  significantly  during  the  economic  cycles  as  a  result  of  a  successful
deflationary  and  stability  policy  introduced  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  unemployment  in  Europe  has
increased further in the same period. Since the beginning of the year, the rate of unemployment has
stabilised  at  around  10%  in  the  euro  area.  Those  Member  States  with  more  flexible  employment
markets and more restrained wage bargaining generally have much higher levels of employment than
the average in the EU.
It  is  still  hoped  that  the  current  upturn  will  not  be  slowed  down  by  excessive  demands  for  higher
wages and will be used to make decisive structural policy reforms. Flexibility in the employment and
commodity markets would therefore appear to be urgently needed.
As you know, at the summit in Cologne the European Council called for an Employment Pact to be
created  with  the  aim  of  achieving  a  sustained  reduction  in  unemployment.  The  Pact  underlines  the
need for the implementation of structural reforms in Europe. It is hoped that the Pact will achieve this
objective. Together with the national fiscal policymakers, the unions and the European Commission,
the Eurosystem will also take part in the macroeconomic dialogue. We shall use this dialogue to make
it absolutely clear to the other parties that structural unemployment cannot be reduced without decisive
reforms. Short-term activism intended to stimulate employment cannot solve the structural elements of
the problem and the Eurosystem will insist that all measures envisaged by other parties are consistent
with the need to preserve price stability.
The international role of the euro
Finally, I should like to talk in more  detail  about  the international  role of the  euro.  The  euro  is the
currency of an  economic  area  consisting  of  almost  300  million  inhabitants  which represents  around
one-sixth of the world’s gross domestic product. Behind the US dollar and ahead of the Japanese yen,
the euro is the second most used currency at the international level. This is a reflection of the former
significance of the national currencies which the euro replaced, as well as the important role that the
euro area plays in the global economy.
The  ability  of  the  Eurosystem  to  preserve  price  stability  has  not  been  hampered  by  the  start  of  the
internationalisation of the euro. Initial experiences have shown that the development of the euro as an
international  currency  will  be  determined,  above  all,  by  the  international  financial  markets.  In  this
context, the use of the euro in the private economic sector as an investment and issuing currency and
as a means of payment is of great importance.
The international interest in the euro is evident, for example, from international new issues. According
to  information  from  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  the  volume  of  new  issues  in  euro
(calculated as a gross figure) almost doubled in the first half of 1999 compared with same period last
year. By contrast, the increase in new issues in US dollars was around 10% weaker. New issues in the
Japanese yen and the Swiss franc either stagnated or even declined somewhat.
With regard to the role of the exchange rates between the euro and other important currencies outside
of the EU, in particular the US dollar, the Eurosystem made an unambiguous choice when shaping its
5
BIS Review 99/1999
monetary policy strategy. This strategy clearly excludes any explicit or implicit targets or target zones
for  the  euro  exchange  rate.  The  pursuit  of  an  exchange  rate  target  could  easily  jeopardise  the
preservation of the price stability objective and therefore hamper real economic developments.
It should also be noted that exchange rate fluctuations are often caused by structural or fiscal policy as
well as divergent economic developments. Monetary policy would be significantly challenged and its
credibility put at risk, if such exchange rate fluctuations had to be contained by monetary policy. The
absence of an exchange rate target does not mean that the ECB views the exchange rate of the euro as
irrelevant  or  does  not  take  it  into  account.  On  the  contrary,  the  exchange  rate  is  monitored  and
analysed as a potentially important monetary policy indicator.
The success of the euro in its relatively early stage of life has led, in many places outside the EU, to
suggestions that domestic monetary policy should be more closely linked to that of the Eurosystem.
Suggestions  range  from  pegging  the  exchange  rate  to  the  euro  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro  as  a
parallel currency or even as a replacement currency. In principle, the ECB maintains a totally neutral
position with regard to such developments. We will neither endeavour to strengthen the international
role of the euro nor to prevent such developments from taking place.
In  this  respect,  I  should  like  to  emphasise  that  when  formulating  monetary  policy  the  Governing
Council of the ECB is bound by the mandate to ensure price stability in the euro area set out in the
Maastricht Treaty. This means that developments in neighbouring European countries are taken into
account to  the  extent that  the  outlook  for  these  countries  influences  price  developments  in  the  euro
area.  However,  the  ECB  cannot  and  may  not  assume  any  obligations  with  regard  to  monetary  or
general economic policies in other countries, irrespective of the role the euro plays in those countries
or of the size of the economies concerned.
I should like to point out that the Maastricht Treaty envisages a clear and transparent procedure which
lays down the conditions for countries wishing to join the euro area. There are three stages. The basic
prerequisite is that the country is a member of the EU which is linked to specific criteria. In addition,
the country concerned is expected to join the Exchange Rate Mechanism II, for which it must similarly
fulfil certain economic criteria. Finally, the convergence criteria must be complied with, which should
ensure that a candidate country wishing to join provides evidence of sufficient economic convergence
with the euro area. In addition to sound public finances and a high degree of price stability, they must
also  provide  evidence  of  relatively  low  long-term  interest  rates  and  stable  exchange  rates.  The
European Council decides whether a country is eligible to join in Monetary Union and calls upon the
ECB and the European Commission to give an Opinion.
Conclusion
I shall now come to a close. The ECB has been responsible for monetary policy in the euro area for
nine  months  now.  So  far,  we  believe  that  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,  the  new  monetary  policy
strategy  and  the  new  range  of  instruments  have  passed  their  first  test  very  well  indeed.  Many
international observers share this view.
The real art of monetary policy will continue to be maintaining price stability in the euro area in the
foreseeable  future.  Faith  in  a  currency  cannot  be  achieved  by  way  of  national  or  international
legislation. Rather, the ECB must try to inspire new faith in the euro on an almost daily basis in order
to  build  up  credibility  over  time.  It  would  be  wise  to  develop  this  credibility  so  that  the  ECB’s
monetary policy is also sufficiently prepared for difficult phases in the future.
BIS Review 99/1999
6
