Mr Duisenberg reports on the outcome of
the latest meeting of the ECB Governing Council
Introductory statement given by Mr Willem Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, to
the Press Conference, Frankfurt, on 9 September 1999.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
The Vice-President and I are here today to report on the outcome of today’s meetings of the General
Council  and  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  which  were  attended  by  Mr  de  Silguy,  European
Commissioner.
The Governing Council reviewed the outlook for price developments and the risks to price stability in
the euro area, in line with its monetary policy strategy. As a result, the Governing Council decided not
to change the prevailing ECB interest rates. The interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the
Eurosystem will thus remain 2.5%. In addition, the interest rate on the marginal lending facility will
continue to be 3.5% and that on the deposit facility has been kept at 1.5%.
Let me give you some details about our review of the latest information on monetary, financial and
other economic developments, as  well as  about  our latest  assessment  of the  monetary  policy  stance
and thereby explain the decisions taken today.
With  regard  to  monetary  developments  in  the  euro  area,  the  12-month  growth  rate  of  the  broad
monetary  aggregate  M3 increased from  5.3%  in  June  to  5.6%  in  July  1999.  The  latest  three-month
average of M3 growth, covering the period from May to July 1999, rose to 5.4%, compared with 5.3%
in the previous three-month period from April to June 1999. Overall, the annual rate of growth of M3
has  been  moving  away  from  the  reference  value  of  4.5%  since  the  start  of  the  year.  This  upward
movement may be explained to a large extent by the very low opportunity costs of holding monetary
assets, especially the most liquid components, but perhaps also by the gradually improving economic
conditions in the euro area. At the same time,  the annual  growth rate  of  credit to  the  private  sector
remained high, even though it declined by 0.5 percentage point in July, to 10.4%.
The  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem  assigns  a  prominent  role  to  the  behaviour  of  M3.
Accordingly,  recent  monetary  developments  merit  close  attention.  At  the  same  time,  taking  into
account the fact that we are still in a very early phase of Monetary Union and that figures for broad
money  growth  have  been  subject  to  some  revisions  in  recent  months,  shorter-term  monetary
developments need to be interpreted with caution.
Concerning  financial  market  indicators, the  upturn  in  long-term  interest rates  in  the  euro  area,  seen
since early May, continued in August and early September. Domestic factors seem to have played a
dominant role, as indicated by the fact that differentials between US and euro area bond yields have
narrowed  further.  In  particular,  market  participants  appear  to  be  increasingly  optimistic  about  the
prospects  for  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time,  expectations  for  inflation,  as
reflected by, inter alia, the signs emanating from index-linked bonds issued in the euro area, tend to
indicate that markets still expect an evolution of consumer prices, which will remain compatible with
price stability.
Developments  in  the  world  economy  continue  to  show  signs  of  improvement.  Growth  in  the  US
economy  continues  and  some  positive  economic  signals  have  been  recorded  for  Japan.  While  the
outlook for stronger growth in the global economy is also supported by recent developments in other
regions,  notably  South-East  Asia,  some  risks  remain,  primarily  in  relation  to  the  strength  of  the
recovery in Latin America.
As regards economic activity in the euro area, industrial production data up to June point to a further
improvement  in  output  growth  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year,  as  has  already  been  indicated  by
1
BIS Review 96/1999
various  survey  data.  Moreover,  available  evidence  in  terms  of  retail  sales  data  and  consumer
confidence,  while  somewhat  more  mixed,  suggests  broadly  sustained  consumption  growth.  These
developments  are  consistent  with  recently  published  forecasts  which  foresee  an upturn  in  economic
growth in the course of this year. The downside risks pertaining to these projections have tended to
recede and real GDP growth might eventually turn out to be somewhat higher than currently forecast.
As generally expected, consumer price increases, as measured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer
Prices (HICP), picked up in July, with the annual rate of change rising from 0.9% in June to 1.1% in
July.  This  effectively  reversed  the  downward  movement  in  the  overall  HICP  rate  which  had  been
evident since April 1999. While prices for unprocessed food declined further in July, this downward
effect on the overall HICP rate was more than offset by a stronger increase in energy prices, resulting
from a continued rise in oil prices. We expect consumer price increases to rise somewhat further from
their July levels, mainly as a consequence of higher oil prices. However, at this stage we also expect
this  further increase  to  level  out  below  the  ceiling  we  have  defined  as  being  compatible  with  price
stability over the medium term.
In  conclusion,  the  prospects  for  a  sustained  economic  upturn  in  the  euro  area  are  good,  as  are  the
chances of continued price stability. However, we remain vigilant taking into account the upward risks
to price stability. In particular, with a view to conducting a thorough assessment of the risks to price
stability in the medium term, the increase in monetary growth over recent months and the high growth
rate  of  credit  to  the  private  sector  need  to  be  monitored  very  carefully.  In  addition,  the  short-term
upward pressure on consumer prices, which stems from the increase in oil prices over recent months
and the lagged pass-through of developments in the exchange rate, have to be taken into account. If
accompanied by continued wage moderation, these factors alone should not be expected to threaten the
current outlook for price stability. Accordingly, the results of the wage bargaining round for the year
2000 will play a  particularly  important role  for  the  further  assessment  of  price  developments  in  the
euro area.
The only way to prolong a non-inflationary recovery, and hence to substantially re-absorb the still very
high  unemployment,  is  for  all  responsible  parties  to  act  decisively,  in  the  near  term,  to  increase
flexibility in the labour, product and service markets. This would also  be  the  best  way  to  allow  the
economy to take full advantage from the present stance of monetary policy.
Taking  all  this  information  into  account,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  maintain  the  prevailing
ECB  interest rates.  In  addition,  it  stressed  that  low  inflation  and  therefore  low  interest  rates  should
encourage  higher  investment,  helping  to  prevent  the  emergence  of  capacity  constraints  during
economic expansion. At the same time, the expected improvement in economic activity offers greater
opportunities to cut fiscal deficits further and to enhance structural reforms. Indeed, the creation of this
virtuous circle depends on all policymakers playing their part.
Let  me  now  give  the  floor  to  the  Vice-President  to  introduce  three  additional  topics  which  we
discussed during our meetings.
In  addition  to  reviewing  the  main  monetary,  financial  and  other  economic  indicators,  we  discussed
issues relating to the transition to the Year 2000.
We are now approaching the final phase of testing activities in connection with preparatory work for
the  Century  Date  Change.  On  25  September  1999  the  ECB  and  the  EU  national  central  banks  will
conduct  a  demonstration  of  the  TARGET  Year  2000  compliance  in  which  –  according  to  current
information – several hundred EU  credit institutions  will  participate.  Prior to  this,  the  ECB  and the
national central banks have already successfully tested their TARGET components first at the national
level and thereafter in cross-border tests. To a large extent, credit institutions have already taken part
in these tests.
In parallel, as announced a few weeks ago, on 29 June 1999 the ECB together with the national central
banks successfully completed the bilateral testing of the ESCB applications that are necessary for the
conduct  of  monetary  policy  operations.  The  testing  exercise,  together  with  the  parallel  remedial
actions, has proved that these systems are Year 2000 compliant.
BIS Review 96/1999
2
You may recall that on 15 July 1999 we decided to close TARGET on 31 December 1999 in order to
smooth the transition not only for the ESCB institutions, but also for the other financial institutions.
This day can thus be kept free for end-of-year operations and for making full back-ups of the relevant
systems.
In  the  area  of  TARGET,  as  well  as  in  the  area  of  monetary  policy  implementation  and  liquidity
management,  we  are  also  reviewing  our  contingency  procedures  to  minimise  any  potential  Year
2000-related impact. It is worth noting that general contingency procedures had already been put in
place shortly before the launch of the euro.
In addition, we will use an efficient communication infrastructure between the ECB and the national
central banks to monitor developments over the Year 2000 transition period. The ECB will also share
information  with  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  and  will  thereby  extend  its  monitoring  capabilities
beyond the Eurosystem to a global perspective.
As far as our monetary policy framework is concerned, we are convinced that it is flexible enough and
has built-in mechanisms designed to deal with any level of liquidity demand that might arise in the
euro  markets.  Indeed,  should  any  adaptation  be  advisable,  this  would  be  of  limited  importance  and
consistent  with  the  overall  set-up.  We  have  analysed  different  scenarios  and  have  come  to  the
conclusion that the Eurosystem will be in a position to cope with any potential increase in the demand
for  liquidity.  The  stock  of  banknotes  held  by  national  central  banks  is  sufficient  to  allow  for  a
considerable additional demand for banknotes in circulation and the amount of collateral available in
the Eurosystem will be sufficient to allow for the corresponding increase in refinancing needs of the
banking system.
We  are  therefore  confident  that  the  Eurosystem  will  continue  its  operations  smoothly  on  3 January
2000 after the Century Date Change.
We also reviewed cross-border retail payment services which are essential for the smooth functioning
of  the  Single  Market.  We  believe  that  citizens  and  businesses  can  only  benefit  fully  from  the
fundamental  principles of the free  movement  of  goods,  services,  capital  and  people  if they  are  also
able  to  transfer  money  as  rapidly,  reliably  and  cheaply  from  one  part  of  the  European  Union  to
another, as is now the case within each Member State. Despite the introduction of the euro, however,
there  is  still  a  clear  gap  between  the  service  levels  of  domestic  and  cross-border  retail  payment
systems in terms of quality, efficiency and pricing. The substantial disparities between domestic and
cross-border services ought now to be reduced, and should ultimately disappear. In order to encourage
the development of cross-border payment systems enabling the public to benefit more fully from the
single currency, the Eurosystem has drawn up a set of objectives for cross-border retail payments in
the euro area. These will be detailed in a separate press release which will be issued in the  coming
days. The Eurosystem calls on the banking and payment service industry to fulfil these objectives by
1 January 2002 at the latest.
Finally, I would like to inform you that we also discussed issues related to fraud prevention. I would
like to emphasise that the ECB shares the concerns of the European Parliament, the EU Council and
the Commission about the protection of the Communities’ financial interests against fraud and other
detrimental  activities.  Consequently,  for the  sake  of  transparency,  efficiency  and  accountability,  the
Governing Council decided to establish an external Supervisory Committee to enforce an Anti-Fraud
Scheme  at  the  ECB.  This  Committee  will  establish  a  cooperative  relationship  with  the  European
Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF).
3
BIS Review 96/1999
