Mr Stals gives a summary of his views on central banking
Remarks by Dr Chris Stals, retiring Governor at a Gala Dinner of the South African Reserve Bank, on
7 August 1999.
 Introduction
1.
I  have  listened  to  many  speeches  about  central  banking  over  the  past  forty  years.  Some  of  my
international colleagues present here this evening will recognise titles such as
“The Agony of Central Banking”
“The Triumph of Central Banking” or
“The Art of Central Banking”
I  can  obviously  make  long  speeches  about  each  one  of  these  subjects,  or  many  others  on  central
banking. Out of respect for this occasion and taking account of the late hour of night, I am going to be
brief and give you, at the end of my long career in this wonderful profession, in summary form my
views on what I would regard as:
2.
2.1
The Twelve Commandments of Central Banking
A true central banker will always be against inflation.
2.2
The need for independence of the central bank must be recognised and appreciated  by  the
public and by governments but, after all is said and done, a central bank can only be as independent as
the  government  of the  day  wants it to  be.  From  my  experience  I  have  learned that,  without  regular
contact and close co-operation with the Minister of Finance the life of a central banker can become
very lonely.
2.3
In many countries of the world the powers of the central bank should be reduced in order to
increase  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  Joined  with  the  potent  power  to  create  money,  the
power also to make loans and spend money has the potential to create a malignant superpower whose
actions can easily lead to financial destruction.
2.4
Wealth  cannot  be  created  by  the  creation  of  more  money;  poverty  cannot  be  relieved  by
increasing the money supply. If this would have been possible there would have been no poverty in the
world any more.
2.5
policy will bring about positive growth in the total foreign assets of the country.
By successfully restricting growth in the total domestic assets of the central bank, monetary
2.6
A  central  banker  is  often  very  unpopular  in  his  own  country.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  the
governor does become popular in his own country, it may be time for him to retire. Monetary policy is
about  financial  discipline,  about  restricting  expenditure,  about  forcing  the  country  to  live  within  its
means. Measures to achieve these objectives can never be popular. You cannot ask the turkeys of the
world to vote for Christmas. You also cannot ask the borrowers of money what the level of interest
rates should be.
Where  anybody  stands  on  monetary  policy  is  determined  by  where  he  sits.  When  I  was
2.7
criticised for the policies of the Bank, I always asked who the critic was and where he worked. The
answer invariably made me apathetic to the criticism.
2.8
A  country  may  be  able  to  keep  politicians  out  of  interest  rates,  but  you  can  never  take
interest rates out of politics. When politicians therefore make statements about interest rates, tolerable
central bankers should accept that politicians talk to their voters, and not to central bankers.
1
BIS Review 88/1999
There is no such thing as central banking by rules. Discretion remains indispensable in the
2.9
daily implementation of monetary policy. Economics, after all, is not an exact science. In the world of
macroeconomic policy two plus two may sometimes add up to five. The central banker must, however,
never try to stretch it to six.
2.10
A central banker must learn to ignore any praise bestowed on him, particularly through or by
the  public  media.  This  will  justify  his  right  also  to  brush  aside  the  unfair  criticism  that  will  be
launched at him next time from the same source.
In  our  present  world  of  a  rapidly  changing  global  financial  environment,  a  central  banker
2.11
must be a student for ever. Always remember the old Chinese saying that a man must study as if he
will live forever, but live as if he will die tomorrow.
2.12
against inflation.
I have left the most important commandment for the last – a good central banker is always
These twelve commandments represent for me a final conclusion of my experience as a central banker
over many years.
The people in central banking
3.
I cannot let this occasion go by without saying a few words about the people I worked with over many
years as a central banker.
Firstly,  there  are  the  people  in  government.  I  wish  to  thank  the  Presidents  of  our  country  who
appointed  me  in  1975  as  Deputy  Governor,  in  1980  as  Senior  Deputy  Governor  and  then  on  two
occasions in 1989 and again in 1994 as Governor of the South African Reserve Bank. It was a great
privilege for me to serve our country and all of its people for more than twenty years in these senior
positions in the Bank.
I thank the five Ministers of Finance with whom I worked very closely over this extended period of
time. And I add to their names the Directors General and the staff of the  Government  Departments
such  as  Finance,  State  Expenditure,  the  S.A.  Revenue  Services  and  Trade  and  Industries  for  their
co-operation. It is still true as Walter Bagehot observed in the previous century that monetary policy
begins at the Treasury. Without co-operation between the central bank and the ministry of finance both
monetary and fiscal policies will be weaker.
I  enjoyed  the  loyal support  of  all  the  people  who  served  with  me  on  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the
Reserve  Bank.  In  particular,  I  would  like  to  thank  those  Board  members  who  supported  me  with
dedication and devotion over the past ten years when I was also Chairman of the Board.
No words can express my appreciation to the staff of the Bank, all my colleagues past and present who
worked with me with great commitment to achieve our objective of protecting the value of the rand in
the interest of all the people of South Africa. Many times  I  said  to  you,  and to  the  many  people in
South  Africa  and  abroad  who  praised  me  for  the  achievements  of  the  Bank,  that  we  must  always
remind  ourselves  that  the  world  is  run  by  people  second  in  charge.  You  made  the  South  African
Reserve  Bank  the outstanding  institution  of  excellence  that  it  is  known  to  be  today.  You  shall  also
protect this laudable reputation of our proud institution in the future.
I  am  grateful  for  this  opportunity  to  direct  a  few  words  of  appreciation  also  to  the  many  foreign
visitors we have with us this evening, firstly, to the Governors and representatives of central banks, the
International Monetary Fund and the Bank for International Settlements. What a wonderful experience
it was for me to have been a member of the exclusive club of central bankers in an expanding global
financial  environment.  I  have  learned  more  from  you  in  conferences,  in  meetings  and  in  numerous
discussions than from all the textbooks I struggled with to obtain my university degrees.
It is a great privilege for us to have the governors of more than ten central banks from Africa here this
evening,  and  also  senior  staff  members  to  represent  others.  I  wish  I  could  spend  another  ten  years
working with you in meeting the great challenges we face together to develop the financial structures
of  our  continent,  and  to  establish  in  Southern  Africa  an  intimate  forum  for  effective  central  bank
co-operation.
We have a number of private foreign bankers present here, representing institutions that battled with
me  in  the  days  of  South  Africa’s  isolation  and  debt  rescheduling  arrangements,  but  also  lend  great
support to me and the Reserve Bank, particularly over the past five years when we had to reintegrate
our country in a rapidly changing global financial market environment.
I pay tribute to the South African bankers who do not always agree with the Reserve Bank’s hard line
approach  on  financial  disciplines,  but  who  always  remain  loyal  to  their  central  bank.  It  did  not  go
unnoticed  in  the  world  financial  markets  over  this  past  year,  with  major  global  financial  market
disruption, that the South African banking sector remained stable and sound. I give the credit for this
to you, the managers of sound and well-disciplined private sector institutions.
Finally, talking about the people of central banking, I must thank my wife, my four children together
with their spouses for their support over many years. I like to refer to the husband and wives of my
children as my children who became my children because of the decisions of my children. My wife
seldom had a normal husband, my children must on many an occasion have missed a normal father in
the house because they had to contend with a husband and a father addicted to central banking. My
peers as central bank governors will know what these words mean.
The future of central banking
4.
Looking ahead, I can only express my regrets that I were not as of today ten years younger. Exciting
times  lie  ahead  for  the  central  bankers  of  the  world  as  the  process  of  the  integration  of  financial
markets around the globe  will continue.  However,  I  leave  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  in  great
peace of mind because I am confident that Mr Tito Mboweni and the team with him in the Bank have
the ability, the determination and the will to steer South Africa successfully into this brave new world.
Tito,  I  admire  the  way  in  which  you  approached  the  past  year  of  induction  with  us  in  the  Reserve
Bank. You succeeded in getting the staff of the Bank on your side. You grasped very quickly what
many outsiders will always regard as the mystique of central banking. You have truly become one of
the  members  of  the  exclusive  club  of  central  bankers  of  the  world.  I  leave  the  Bank  with  great
confidence that you will be the Governor that will finally destroy the African jackal of inflation in our
country. I wish you well.
Conclusion
5.
One day, shortly after lunch, as I was sitting in the Governor’s office on the 32nd floor of the Reserve
Bank  Head  Quarters  building  in  Pretoria,  the  sliding  door  to  the  balcony  in  front  of  the  office  was
standing open. I heard a noise and there came a bird almost falling out of the air as if it was shot. I
walked out and found a beautiful homing pigeon lying on the floor of the balcony as if it was dead. I
carried on with my duties behind my desk.
After about half-an-hour, I noticed the pigeon was recovering. On weak legs and with watery red eyes
it  started  observing  the  environment.  And  then,  to  my  surprise,  with  unexpected  dignity  and
confidence, it walked straight into the Governor’s office. The pigeon settled itself down on the carpet
against the couch. I realised this bird must have come from somewhere far and it must be thirsty and
hungry.  In  an  ashtray,  I  gave  it  some  water.  My  secretary  produced  a  few  breadcrumbs  from
somewhere. The pigeon drank and ate with a grateful look in its beautiful yellow-ringed red eyes, and
then nestled down for a good sleep-in.
I asked my Secretary not to let anybody into the office and to walk on tip-toe as long as the special
guest stayed with me. After about two hours with the sun already setting in the west, my visitor woke
up, looked around and then, with even greater dignity and self-composure, walked out of the office.
On the balcony, it stretched its legs, shook its wings and looked around to determine direction. And
3
BIS Review 88/1999
then it took off and flew away. The bird obviously came a long way and  was  now  destined for the
comforts of its home, and for a good rest after a long journey.
I  could  not  help  but  to  think  of  this  homing  pigeon  when  I  left  the  office  of  the  Governor  on  the
32nd floor of the Reserve Bank building for the last time this morning.
