Mr. Erçel discusses financial risk and its management
Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey,  Mr.  Gazi  Erçel,  at  the
Sixth  Annual  Global  Finance  Conference,  Bilgi  University,  Istanbul,  on  8  April,  1999
 ,(cid:3)DP(cid:3)SOHDVHG(cid:3)WR(cid:3)EH(cid:3)KHUH(cid:3)WRGD\(cid:3)IRU(cid:3)D(cid:3)NLQG(cid:3)LQYLWDWLRQ(cid:3)RI(cid:3)*OREDO(cid:3))LQDQFH(cid:3)$VVRFLDWLRQ(cid:3)DQG(cid:3)łVWDQEXO(cid:3)%LOJL
University. Today I like to discuss financial risk and its management which are one of the hot topics in
the international financial circles.
The  1980s  and  1990s  witnessed  a  major  transformation  in  the  international  financial  markets.    The
advent  of  more  complex  and  dynamic  transactions  have  substantially  increased  uncertainties  in  the
marketplace,  and,  in  today’s  environment,  dominated  by  a  dynamic,  aggressive  financial  service
industry, market participants are exposed to greater financial risks than before.  Of course, there are
several reasons for these changes.
The first reason is the globalization of the international markets.  Markets all over the world are becoming
consolidated into a vast world market as obstacles to the free movement of capital are gradually being
removed.  This can be seen in the present global crisis, which arose because problems occurring in one
region of the world promptly made themselves felt by markets and investors in other regions.
Another  reason  is  that  the  international  markets  have  become  much  more  volatile.    Volatility,  which
means the fluctuation of market prices and ratios, is one of the principal sources of financial risk.  When
market volatility increases, market participants are exposed to greater uncertainty--and greater risk.
Still  another  change  of  conditions  in  the  international  markets  is  the  appearance  of  new  forms  of
investment  with  very  complex  structures.    The  great  variety  of  these  investment  tools  has  led  to  the
development of still others, like derivative instruments, aimed at reducing the degree of risk associated
with several financial transactions.  Derivative instruments are being more and more widely used in the
hope of reducing risk in the financial markets, but the losses coming from derivative operations have also
begun to increase.
The worldwide increase in the supply of loanable funds has also played an important part in the upsurge
of financial risks.  This surge, in combination with greater uncertainties, has caused much greater losses
due to the materialization of financial risks.  In the 1990s especially, such losses have frequently resulted
1
BIS Review  41/1999
from financial scandals. The recent collapse of ”Long-Term Capital Management” has clearly shown that
not even having Nobel-prize winning managers can always reduce the risk.
Finally,  one  of  the  principal reasons for  the  increase in  financial  risks  is  to  be  found  in  the  greater
intensity of international competitiveness. Credit risk in particular has become more complicated since
the banking sectors of developed and emerging market countries began to compete in the same arena,
and since the larger banks began to compete intensively against non-bank financial institutions.
Every one of these developments has fundamentally affected national and international banking systems.
More effective risk management by banks and other financial institutions has become vital for preserving
the financial stability of both domestic and international markets.  The changes I have just described show
that market  participants and departments responsible for financial control, and also portfolio and other
managers, are often unaware of some of the risks to which their institutions are exposed.
For  all  these  reasons,  the  sound  measurement  of  financial  risks  and  methods  for  their  effective
management have become an absolute necessity.  It is also important to make regular announcement of
information on which market participants can base sound decisions about a bank’s financial standing and
risk structure.   It is well known that markets have a natural disciplinary mechanism which rewards banks
that  manage  their  risks  effectively  and  penalize  banks  that  show  themselves  to  be  risky.    Everybody
knows  that  the  successful  operation  of  this  mechanism  depends  on  the  regular  dissemination  of
information making banks and the banking system transparent and allows market participants to arrive at
sound decisions.
In  an  environment  that  is  home  to  all  these  kinds  of  activity,  the  task  of  maintaining  the  stability  of
national and international banking systems has come to require new arrangements and dispositions in the
banking sector.  To lead the way for progress in this area, a committee was established, led by the Bank
for International Settlement  (BIS) and  made  up  of central  banks  and banking supervisors from  several
countries.  Almost all of the proposals that ultimately originated in the work of this ”Basle Committee”
have been adopted for the banking systems of many countries, even though the Committee has no power
to apply sanctions.
One of the first accomplishments of the Basle Committee was a study of banks’ capital adequacy. Issued
in 1988, under the title ”International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards,” this
report was soon endorsed by many countries.  Also known as the ”Basle Capital Accord,” the study took
BIS Review  41/1999
2
account of credit risk.  Although the variety of risks in the international markets is increasing, credit risk is
still the most significant risk category for banks.
Credit risk means the probability of defaulting on one’s obligation to the other party in any transaction.
As I already mentioned, the growth of competitiveness in the international credit markets in recent years,
the active participation of non-bank financial institutions in these markets, and borrowers’ resort to the
capital markets for loans at lower cost, have all brought about a considerable narrowing of profit margins
in credit transactions.  This has forced the banks to make more loans in order to have a competitive edge.
But they have encountered credit problems due to adverse developments in the economic and financial
conditions.    All  these  developments  have  resulted  in  the  design  of  new  methods  for  more  effectively
evaluating the risks and yields of credit transactions.  Besides creating credit rating models for use within
banks,  these  efforts  have  produced  analytical  methods  calling  for  intensive  data  analysis  such  as
retrospective analysis of credit losses, models of bankruptcy probabilities, and stress tests.
Effective management of the credit risks of banks and determining how much capital must be held against
contingencies that could arise from such risks are very important for the soundness and stability of the
banking sector.  The 1988 Basle Capital Accord that I mentioned earlier was the fruit of the work directed
to this aim.  The Accord targets a bank’s capital holdings as a proportion of the credit risk of their on-
balance-sheet and off-balance-sheet business.   For this  purpose, investment instruments  were classified
into  five  main  categories  according  to  their  risk,  and  a  risk  coefficient  assigned  to  each  group.    The
weighting  formula  for  asset  risk  was  intended  to  determine  the  capital  coverage  needed  for  a  bank’s
exposure to credit risk.
But this arrangement dating from 1988 proved ineffective against newer developments emerging during
the last decade, and work continues particularly at the BIS on how to reduce credit risk.
Besides credit risk, the main risk categories that have been identified in transactions and markets: such
as Market risk,  Exchange rate risk,  Interest rate risk,  Liquidity risk,  Operational risk,  Country risk,
Legal risk,  Hedging risk,  Systemic risk.
I do not intend to go into the details of all these categories of risk.  Of special interest, however, is the
improvement  of  systems  and  techniques  that  aim;  to  reduce  these  risks  by  means  of  information
technology.  Once the risk is identified, measuring it accurately is generally accepted as the next step in
3
BIS Review  41/1999
preventing it from happening.  The rapid progress of information technology  in recent years has brought
new risk measurement models to aid in the measurement of market risk.
The  most  widely  accepted  of these is the  ”Value-at-Risk”  model,  called  ”VaR”  for  short.    VaR  is  the
maximum  loss  that  can  occur  in  the  value  of  a  portfolio  having  a  certain  investment  horizon  under  a
certain  probability.    Since  it  is  a  simple  and  clear-cut  concept,  the  VaR  model  is  widely  used  for
measuring market risk.  It permits comparison of the market risk of different investment instruments, so
that portfolio performance can be evaluated in terms of the risk undertaken.   Especially for measuring
market  risk  to  determine  capital  adequacy,  this  model  has  become  a  necessity  in  many  countries  and
financial institutions.
Another method widely used for measuring market risk is ”Scenario Analysis”.  Scenario Analysis is a
technique  used  to  see  how  the  value  of  a  portfolio  would  be  affected  by  various  probable  changes  in
market conditions.
A last widely used method for measuring risk is the ”Stress Test” method.  The Stress Test is used to
estimate how the value of a portfolio would be affected by large, unexpected fluctuations in the markets,
such as have been observed during the global crisis which is still with us.  Though similar to Scenario
Analysis, the  Stress Test  mainly  aims  to predict  the  maximum  value that  would be  lost  by  a  portfolio
under  certain  extraordinary  market  conditions.    The  success  of  this  method  depends  on  successfully
predicting market conditions.
Now let me touch briefly on risk management in Turkey’s banking sector.  From the risk management
standpoint, we are well supplied with well-developed methods for managing risk and supervising the risks
that we do accept.
As to the financial standing of Turkey’s banking sector, Turkish banks have achieved a level of financial
and  institutional development  not to be  underestimated.    But  besides  these  strengths,  there  are  various
threats to the well-being of the Turkish banking sector which should be mentioned.  Turkish banks, are
mostly exposed to credit risk, liquidity risk, interest rate risk, and foreign exchange risk.  This is true even
when  there  is  no  global  crisis  or  macroeconomic  risks  stemming  from  political  uncertainty.  I  should
mention  that  all  these  different  kinds  of  risk  have  been  thoroughly  monitored  by  the  supervisory
authorities,  who  put  preventive  measures  in  place  before  the  effects  of  any  problems  that  were  found
could threaten financial stability. Under this regulatory system, the banks must submit annual, quarterly,
BIS Review  41/1999
4
and  even  daily  financial  data  to  the  Central  Bank  and  the  Treasury.    And  besides  frequent  financial
evaluations of banks by off-site examiners, on-site examinations are conducted to verify the accuracy and
reliability of the data reported and clarify any special issues found during off-site examinations.
Let me conclude my remarks by underlining once again how important it is to assess, manage, and reduce
financial risks to ensure a sound financial system.  A sound economy must be based on well-functioning
real and financial sectors, and there can be no doubt that, in times to come, we will have to give still more
thought to reducing financial risks and keeping them from interfering with the proper functioning of the
system.  If competition, volatility, globalization, and stresses threaten to pressure the banking industry into
resorting to bad risk-taking practices, the responsible authorities and supervisors must take whatever steps
are necessary to restore financial stability.
5
BIS Review  41/1999
