Mr Heikensten discusses whether Sweden should join the euro area
Speech given by Mr Lars Heikensten, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank to Stockholm City’s
financial staff on 3 September 1999.
 Besides  being  one  of  the  most  momentous  changes  in  the  continent’s  economic  policy  for  many
decades, the introduction of the single European currency at the beginning of this year was a major
step in the political process that has been bringing the countries of Europe closer together since the
1950s. When EMU is debated in Sweden, the latter aspect tends to be neglected in favour of more or
less short-run economic advantages and drawbacks.
In 1997 the Government and the Riksdag (Sweden’s parliament) decided that Sweden would not be
adopting the single currency from January 1999. A lack of popular support was given as the reason.
Euro area participation at a later date was not ruled out, however, and it was underscored that Sweden
must  therefore  have  its  options  as  open  as  possible.  For  true  freedom  of  action  there  are  certain
definite requirements. Policy must remain focused on stability so that we can fulfil the jointly agreed
criteria for entry. Sweden must follow developments in Europe and make practical preparations so that
participation is feasible when we want to join.
Freedom  of  action  also  requires  that  we  are  knowledgeable  about  the  monetary  union  and  actively
debate its issues. Today I intend to make a contribution to that discussion.
What I have to say starts from the report that Lars Calmfors and his colleagues presented in 1996 –
one  of  the  most  extensive  and  penetrating  studies  of  EMU  membership’s  pros  and  cons.  When  the
report was circulated for comments, the Riksbank had the opportunity of submitting an opinion and
stated that Sweden ought to participate in the monetary union right from the start.
I  shall  be  reminding  you  why  the  Riksbank  came  to  this  conclusion  and  commenting  on  how
subsequent developments have influenced my own view of the matter. The foundation for my personal
opinion includes my working experience as a close monitor of economic developments and debates,
both in Sweden and internationally. This has involved participation in the European discussion over
the  past  three  or  four  years  as  Sweden’s  representative  in  the  EU’s  Economic  and  Financial
Committee (formerly the Monetary Committee).
Arguments for and against
Calmfors and his colleagues considered that Sweden ought to join the monetary union but that there
were good reasons for waiting. The arguments for and against were presented in the report under three
headings:  stabilisation  policy,  economic  efficiency  and  political  reasons.  In  view  of 
this
classification’s educational merits, I shall be using it here.
The report’s arguments from stabilisation policy
The arguments from stabilisation policy focus on ways in which EMU membership could be expected
to  affect  the  possibility  of  achieving  a  balanced  economic  development  in  Sweden,  with  good
economic growth, high employment, price stability and external balance. The report considered that
the arguments in this respect were not clear-cut either way but that the advantages of staying outside
for the time being predominated. With a national monetary policy at a time when the economy still
had major imbalances and was highly  vulnerable  to  shocks,  Sweden  would then  be  in  a  position  to
parry  any  negative  repercussions  that  might  hit  the  economy  while  leaving  the  euro  area  relatively
unaffected.
1
BIS Review 92/1999
A radical change in conditions for the forest industries is the standard example of such a shock. But
even  a  more  general  worsening  of  conditions  for  growth  in  the  rest  of  the  world  might  have
particularly adverse effects for a small economy with a high level of foreign trade. Moreover, with an
independent monetary policy, interest rates can be increased to counter effects of a specific domestic
policy  failure,  for  instance  an  excessively  weak  budget  policy  or  inflationary  wage  settlements.  At
present some observers might perhaps regard this as the greatest risk.
According to the report, the high unemployment that had occurred in Sweden since the early 1990s
made constraints on Swedish monetary policy particularly risky. In the situation at that time, a shock
could  have  serious  consequences  for  unemployment,  with  a  further  increase  from  a  level  that  was
already  high.  Experience  in  other  countries,  moreover,  pointed  to  a  major  risk  of  an  increase  in
unemployment  becoming  permanent.  Swedish  monetary  policy  could  then  provide  support  for  the
necessary labour market reforms that were advocated in the report. Swedish participation should wait
until these reforms had been implemented and unemployment had fallen. For similar reasons, the weak
public finances might also heighten the risks associated with Swedish membership.
In the ensuing debate, the stabilisation policy argument against EMU participation came to be called
the insurance argument. By retaining a national monetary policy, Sweden could insure itself against
the potentially major negative effects of a macroeconomic shock.
At the same time, the report pointed out that participation in the monetary union could confer benefits
from a more stable exchange rate. But the authors did not believe that such benefits would outweigh
the advantages of retaining a national monetary policy.
The Riksbank’s opinion
The  Riksbank  did  not  agree  with  the  report  in  every  respect.  The  Governing  Board  considered,  for
instance, that it exaggerated  the  risks  of  an  external  shock  hitting  the  Swedish economy  alone. The
Board noted that to a large extent the shocks in Sweden since the 1970s could be said to have been
self-inflicted. The divergent cyclical pattern probably had to do with the direction of economic policy,
where strong fiscal stimuli and repeated devaluations had generated high inflation and problems with
costs.
The Board also stated that the report exaggerated policy’s freedom of action in reality in an outsider
position: it would not be possible for Sweden to implement a monetary policy that differed markedly
from  that  in  the  monetary  union.  This  was  evident  from  Sweden’s  history  of  uncertainty  about
government finances and high inflation were Sweden to choose the outsider alternative on the grounds
of the insurance argument, this could be perceived as a signal that Sweden’s economic policy would
again become accommodating. This risk was also mentioned in the report.
The Riksbank fully agreed, on the other hand, that unemployment is a serious problem in the Swedish
economy.  But  we  did  not  consider  that  this  problem  could  be  resolved  by  remaining  outside  the
monetary  union.  As the  report  had  indeed  pointed  out,  other  measures  were  needed  to  improve  the
workings  of  the  labour  market  and  wage  formation.  The  Riksbank  underscored  that  the  necessary
structural  measures  for  the  labour  market  would  be  easier  to  implement  if  we  had  established  the
credibility of an economic policy for sustainable growth.
Does the stronger economy warrant different conclusions?
In the light of all that has happened in the past two or three years, the assessments presented in the
report and by the Riksbank should perhaps be modulated.
The case for an insurance policy  and freedom  of  action  was  argued  at  a time  when  public  finances
were  weak  and  unemployment  was  still  at  a  record  level.  The  measures  of  economic  policy  had
admittedly begun to build up public confidence in a more stable future after the profound crisis in the
early 1990s but the outlook was still uncertain.
Today the situation is better, with a central government budget surplus and high ambitions for fiscal
policy. In both these respects Sweden does well in a comparison with euro countries. Also, for several
BIS Review 92/1999
2
years now inflation has been at least as low as in the euro area. It is no less important that a number of
urgent  institutional  changes  have  been  made,  with  major  consequences  for  the  implementation  of
stabilisation policy. The budget process has been tightened and a new legal framework has been set up
for  a  more  independent  Riksbank.  Recently,  moreover,  unemployment  has  decreased  appreciably,
though  the  extent  and  duration  of  the  reduction  are  still  uncertain.  This  will  ultimately  depend  on
future wage settlements.
So all in all, the economic situation in Sweden is more stable than I had at least dared to hope for a
couple  of  years  ago.  This  in  turn  is  reflected  in,  for  example,  a  level  of  interest  rates  that  is  only
marginally different from that in the euro area.
From this it might be concluded that Sweden can now stand on its own two feet – we can evidently
cope without EMU. However, one reason for being a little cautious about this conclusion is that, to
some extent, the lower interest rate probably has to do with many people’s expectations that by and by
Sweden  will  in  fact  join  the  monetary  union.  Personally,  moreover,  I  have  never  considered  that
Sweden ought to adopt the single currency primarily in order to tackle problems of stabilisation policy
or reap the benefits of a lower interest rate.
The question of whether or not to join the monetary union mainly has to do with long-term aspects of
economic  development  and  how  we  in  Sweden  view  our  future  political  role  in  Europe.  In  this
perspective,  today’s  stronger  Swedish  economy  is  an  argument  in  favour  of  adopting  the  euro  now
rather than for remaining outside. Some of the Calmfors report’s arguments against participation have
been weakened. A decision to join – based on long-term, strategic considerations – is now associated
with smaller short-term risks than it would have been some years ago.
The report and the Riksbank on economic efficiency
The next step of the analysis in the Calmfors report concerned the consequences of membership for
resource  utilisation,  that  is,  how  the  long-term  output  trend  might  be  affected  by  the  impact  of
membership on, for example, investment, foreign trade and transaction costs.
The  report  focused  on  the  effects  that  are  easiest  to  measure  and  assess.  The  decreased  costs  for
currency exchange and covering foreign-exchange transactions were seen as definitely positive. The
report was uncertain both about the magnitude of this effect and about the effects on foreign trade and
investment but came to the overall conclusion that they were not particularly large.
The  Riksbank  considered  that  the  report  underestimated  participation’s  effect  on  efficiency.  One
reason for this was the report’s assumption that firms could reduce the costs associated with exchange
rate movements by covering them in financial markets. The Riksbank believed this expenditure would
be higher than estimated in the report and that small and medium-sized firms in particular would find
it difficult.
The  Riksbank  also  drew  attention  to  the  risks  of  Sweden  being  discriminated  against  in  various
respects.  One  example  was  the  disadvantageous  terms  for  outsider  countries  in  TARGET,  the
European payment system. Moreover, an outsider position for the time being would involve additional
costs in various parts of the economy. Financial institutions, for instance, would have to operate twin
systems in order to remain competitive.
Negative long-term effects of remaining outside
Such  is  the  nature  of  the  long-term  effects  that  assessments  of  them  are  unlikely  to  change
fundamentally in the course of a year or two. Still, there is new and additional information that may
cast a somewhat different light on certain aspects.
One major issue concerns the link between EMU and the single market. There is empirical evidence
that the single market is exerting downward price pressure in the European Union. Some assessments
suggest, moreover, that EMU may lead to a further price fall; figures as high as 10 to 15% have been
mentioned. If the effects were to be of that magnitude, the welfare gains would be substantial.
3
BIS Review 92/1999
In practice, however, it is not easy to distinguish the parts that EMU and the single market are playing
in price formation. Empirical data therefore have to be treated with caution. At the same time, EMU
and  the  single  market  are  linked  at  another  level;  as  an  American  colleague  recently  remarked,  “If
EMU would help to secure the single market’s survival, it’s worth all the other risks.”
Another important long-term consideration is the structure of Europe’s business sector. I believe we
are now experiencing a formative phase. European manufacturing and services companies are being
rapidly restructured, with effects that are likely to be considerable. Many forces are contributing to this
process;  the  globalisation  of  production  is  one  and  another  is  the  single  market.  But  there  can  be
hardly any doubt that EMU is also playing a part, particularly for the financial sector. Participation in
the  euro  area  would  give  Sweden  and  Swedish  companies  access  to  a  larger  capital  market  that  is
expanding rapidly. Assessing what being outside the monetary union entails in this phase is not easy.
Personally I believe the effects are negative. I also think they may turn out to be considerable.
A related matter is the location of companies. Representatives of large Swedish groups, as well as the
Federation of Swedish Industries, for example, frequently state that euro participation would result in
higher investment in Sweden by both Swedish and foreign companies. This argument has also been
heard  recently  in  connection  with  some  of  the  relocations  of  large  companies.  Decreased  exchange
risks would be one of  the  reasons.  Another,  it is  sometimes  suggested,  would be  that  the  economic
framework  for  firms  would  be  perceived  as  more  secure  and  stable  if  Sweden  adopted  the  single
currency. Once again, the strength of these arguments is difficult to assess, partly because they have
evident political purposes. But opinions of this type may clearly have effects if they are current among
central decision-makers in the business sector.
Political arguments favour participation
This brings me, finally, to the political arguments for and against adopting the single currency. The
Calmfors report discussed the implications of participation for Swedish policy and its legitimacy, as
well as the consequences for Sweden’s voice in Europe and the world. On the first point I shall simply
say that I agree about the importance of any decision to participate having a high degree of legitimacy.
This in turn calls for an animated discussion of the EMU issue.
Having said that, I shall now concentrate on the other aspect. The report  considered  that if  Sweden
participated in the monetary union, we would be in a better position to influence EU decisions. The
more countries that participated, the greater would be the strength of this argument.
The Riksbank agreed but found the argument unduly cautious as regards the political advantages. We
saw major political benefits from participation and considered that an outsider position would clearly
weaken Sweden’s voice in the European debate and decision-making process.
As  I  see  it,  since  the  report  was  presented  and  the  Riksbank  submitted  its  opinion,  the  political
argument  has  gained  appreciable  weight.  The  initial  participants  number  11,  instead  of  the  6  to
9 countries that seemed most probable to Calmfors. That by itself means a great deal. It is a matter of
simple logic: if you belong to a club in which 6 out of the 15 members make a move, there is no cause
to feel an outsider; matters are different when 11 members decide on a course of action and support it
whole-heartedly, leaving only 4 on the sidelines.
It  is  perfectly  clear  that  EMU  is  a  major  project  –  perhaps  the  most  important  at  present  –  in  the
process of European integration. A great deal is being invested in it and the EMU process also affects
policies in other areas. But let us not exaggerate: experience differs from area to area and Sweden’s
voice is naturally not shorn of all its weight just because we are outside the euro area.
As regards economic policy – the only area of which I have direct experience – the pattern is clear. It
surprised me how quickly the euro countries saw themselves as a single unit and the ways in which
this altered the agenda for our committee meetings. In that the finance ministers of the euro countries
have  formed  a  separate  group,  Euro  11,  to  some  extent  Sweden  is  excluded  from  the  interesting
discussions.
BIS Review 92/1999
4
The Community agenda is being constructed in the light of needs among the eleven members of the
euro area. The matters of economic policy that are up for EU discussions are also more specific than
before. How is economic policy to be formulated? How can the labour market be made  to function
better?
At  the  European  Central  Bank  we  have  missed  the  train  on  which  the  participating  central  banks
designed their monetary policy strategy and decided how the functions of the system of central banks
are to  be  performed.  If  we join  the  monetary  union  in  the  future,  influencing  the  procedures  of  the
ECB and the formation of monetary policy will be more difficult.
In the economic domain the European Union is also increasingly tending to establish joint European
positions, for  example  on  such  matters  as  the  crises  in  Russia  and  Brazil,  the  role  of  the  IMF,  etc.
Here, too, I consider we are in a formative phase. Guidelines are now being drawn up for how Europe
is to be represented on international bodies and in the work of developing a new international financial
structure. The questions include the future status of the G7, G10, G33 and other informal groups. In
these contexts we are now becoming rather isolated.
Conclusion
Now for a brief summary and some conclusions.
EMU is a part of the effort that has been in progress for more than five decades to bring the countries
of Europe closer together. Today the monetary union is perhaps the most important EU project and as
a  member  of  the  Community  we  cannot  disregard  it.  If  Sweden  chooses  to  remain  outside,  it  will
ultimately be difficult to get the participating countries to understand our actions.
The fact that the monetary union is a major component of a larger process of integration means that we
cannot  expect  to  get  simple  answers  to  our  questions  by  adopting  an  attitude  of  wait-and-see.
Assessing the project over a complete business cycle certainly has its  advantages  but the prevailing
uncertainty is costly. Investments are postponed or shelved. Twin systems have to be maintained. I am
convinced, moreover, that new questions will arise all the time. We shall never be able to tell just how
EMU will develop. This is something that those who participate decide as they go along.
In the event of turbulence in the world around us, participants in the euro area have extra protection.
This  was  evident  last  autumn,  when  the  financial  market  turbulence  hit  the  Swedish  krona  more
heavily than the Finnish markka. On the other hand, as euro participants we would be in the same boat
as  at  least  eleven  other countries. That  naturally  implies  greater  dependence  –  we  would  be  clearly
involved in problems that arise in the euro area. The only way to counter that would be by actively
influencing developments in the euro area in the right direction.
An insurance argument can be put for remaining outside the euro area. If we continue to manage the
economy properly, there should be freedom of action in our economic policy. But this is not a simple
matter.  On  the  contrary,  we  must  convince  the  rest  of  the  world  that  we  have  not  refrained  from
adopting the euro so as to be able to devalue the krona if the going gets tough.
The long-term positive effects of joining the monetary union should not be played down just because
they are difficult to measure. The participating countries and markets are drawing closer to each other.
This  probably  affects  competition,  investment  flows  and  prices  to  a  greater  extent  than  traditional
models are able to show. I believe that the costs of staying outside are particularly great at present and
in  the  coming  years,  for  instance  as  EMU  generates  far-reaching  structural  changes  in  the  business
sector.
To this should be added the political arguments. Sweden has already lost influence in the area I am
best able to assess, economic policy. This is particularly serious today as the global financial map is
being  redrawn  and  we  need  to  assert  our  position  as  a  small  country  in  Europe.  Others  are  better
placed  to  pronounce  on  other  areas  but  it  seems  logical  that  our  positions  there  are  also  being
weakened because we are not seen as a fully-fledged participant in EU cooperation.
5
BIS Review 92/1999
Finally it is a matter of weighing all these arguments against each other. The assessments involved,
economic as well as political, are naturally difficult. But in the interval since the Riksbank submitted
an opinion on the Calmfors report, I have not changed my opinion: Sweden ought to join the euro area
as soon as possible.
BIS Review 92/1999
6
