Mr  Stals  discusses  the  importance  of  the  Y2K  problem  and  the  responsibility  of  central
banks
Opening  remarks  by  the  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  Dr  Chris  Stals,  at  the
Regional  Year  2000  Meeting  of  Financial  Regulators  from  Africa  organised  by  the  Joint  Year
2000 Council and the South African Reserve Bank in Pretoria on 21/1/99.
1. Introduction
Fairly  early  in  the  second  millennium,  some  time  in  the  course  of  the  eleventh  century,  the
renowned  Persian  philosopher  and  poet  Omar  Khayyám,  also  known  as  the  tentmaker  of
Naishapur, wrote the following verse:
“The Bird of Time has but a little way
To fly -- and Lo! the Bird is on the Wing”
(from The Rubáiyát)
Now, nine hundred years later and in the closing months of the same millennium, these words of
wisdom  become  very  appropriate  once  again,  referring  of  course  at  this  juncture  to  the  Y2K
problem of our modern electronic age. We can with all justification quote Khayyám and say:
“The Bird of Time has but a little way
To fly -- and Lo! the Bird is on the Wing”
I  believe  that  this  Conference  will  serve  to  bring  this  message  more  clearly  to  all  parties
concerned,  and  particularly  to  the  financial  regulators  and  supervisors  of  the  Southern  Africa
region. Time to prepare our financial institutions and systems for this major event of the switch-
over to the new millennium is indeed running out.
It is too late now to  blame  the  designers  and  suppliers  of  electronic  equipment  for  not  having
incorporated  in  the  tools  we  use  today  four-digit  date  facilities.  This  will  be  tantamount  to
blaming Henry Ford for not having provided facilities for a CD player in his Model T Ford of
about a hundred years ago.
The distance already covered by our Bird of Time took us beyond what the experts in this Y2K
exercise  will  describe  as  the  sensitisation,  awareness,  or  risk  identification  phase.  Those  of  us
who have not gone through these preliminaries may have missed the boat already.
Looking through the programme for this Conference, there is a strong focus on the second and
third  phases,  referred  to  as  actions  of  remediation  and  of  testing.  I  hope  that  most  of  our
participants  in  this  Conference  find  themselves,  together  with  the  Reserve  Bank,  already  well
advanced into these secondary stages of preparation for the switch-over date.
Tomorrow’s meetings will proceed into a discussion of the final phases of risk assessment and
contingency  planning.  I  believe  in  this  game  the  best  advice  for  contingency  planning  is  to
provide for worst case scenarios, and eventually to enjoy the pleasure of having been wrong and
unnecessarily pessimistic.
I must congratulate the organisers of this Conference for putting together a very well-structured
and detailed programme. All the aspects and phases of this challenging exercise will be covered
in the discussions of today and tomorrow at this Conference.
BIS Review   8/1999
– 2 –
2. The importance of the Y2K problem for the global financial market
It  is  not  necessary  to  elaborate  on  the  importance  of  electronic  data  processing  and
communication  systems  for  financial  institutions  and  markets.  It  is,  therefore,  understandable
why there is great concern that financial systems will be severely disrupted when the year 2000
arrives and computer systems have not been corrected to be able to process dates into the next
century.  Taking  account  of  the  extensive  globalisation  of  financial  markets,  the  exploding
volume of worldwide cross-border transactions and the integrated inter-relationships of financial
institutions and markets throughout the world, disruptions, if they do occur on any large scale,
will not remain localised.
Just as the East Asian financial crisis of last year had a contagion effect and spread throughout
the rest of the world in a matter of months, a breakdown in computer systems as a result of a
Y2K-bug  infection  in  any  important  financial  centre  will  spread  to  other  places.  The  only
difference  will  be  that  in  case  of  a  Y2K  problem,  the  transmission  mechanism  is  open,
uncontrollable  and  instantaneous.  The  potential  for  severe  disruption  of  the  global  financial
system is enormous and could have dire consequences.
Because of possible “knock-on” effects or “chain” reactions, it is imperative that all countries in
the world take the necessary actions to remove the Year 2000 threat. These actions can best be
initiated and monitored by governments and financial regulators.
There will be a temptation for countries that do comply timeously with the problem to restrict
trade with, and reduce investment in, countries that are not seen to be making sufficient efforts to
become compliant or are unable to satisfactorily prove compliance. In the present volatile world
financial markets, the smaller economies with emerging financial markets, such as South Africa,
cannot afford to add this additional burden to the perceived high risk exposures already linked to
doing business with them.
3. The importance of the Y2K problem for financial regulators
The  main  purpose  of  this  Conference  is  to  assist  financial  regulators  of  the  Southern  Africa
region to bring themselves and their constituencies, that is the financial institutions in the region,
on board in this exercise of preparation for the Year 2000 electronic switch-over. The financial
systems  of  the  world  are  today  in  most  countries  entirely  based  on  electronic  data  processing
technology,  and  any  major  hitch  in  these  systems  will  obviously  have  serious  implications  for
financial markets, and therefore for total economic activity.
I referred to possible knock-on or chain effects in the global financial system, and the danger of
global contagion from one or more infected centre. This danger of contagion is of course, equally
important  in  the  case  of  any  domestic  financial  system.  Because  of  the  inter-dependence  of
financial institutions in any closed system, care must be taken that all the financial institutions in
each country will be compliant by the end of this year. The programme that must be followed in
this process of preparation provides no room for competition amongst individual institutions, but
surely  requires  a  high  degree  of  co-operation.  This  provides  a  further  reason  why  financial
regulators have a major part to play. Problems must be overcome, not only by institutions within
the  financial  system,  but  also  by  all  the  major  clients  of  the  financial  institutions,  such  as
government departments, public authorities, and major non-financial private sector corporations.
4. The responsibility of central banks in the Y2K problem
Central banks hold a pivotal position in domestic and international financial markets. They must
obviously take a leading role in preparing their financial systems for this major event.
BIS Review   8/1999
– 3 –
The South African Reserve Bank started at a very early stage in identifying all problem areas in
its  own  information  technology  and  communication  systems.  In  terms  of  our  programme,  all
electronic technology in use in the Bank must be in full compliance by 31 March 1999. Some
parts of the internal system have already been tested. The crucially important Samos system for
clearing and settlement transactions is to be tested and must be certified as fully compliant by all
participants by mid-April 1999.
The Bank has also established a Financial System Risk Evaluation Committee which is tasked
with  identifying  indirect  exposures  to  the  central  bank  and  the  financial  system,  and  with
developing  contingency  measures.  The  Committee  is,  for  example,  providing  for  additional
stocks of bank notes to be available at all centres for an expected increase in demand around the
dates  of  the  switch-over,  and  is  looking  at  a  possible  need  from  banking  institutions  for
additional financial liquidity over this short transition period.
The  South  African  Government  last  year  also  established  the  National  Year  2000  Decision
Support  Centre  to  co-ordinate  and  provide  advice  on  a  national  scale  for  the  programme  of
preparing for the switch-over to the new millennium.
Finally,  the  Year  2000  problem  has  been  on  the  agenda  of  discussions  of  the  Committee  of
Governors of the countries of the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC) for the past
eighteen months. All member countries will be requested to report back on the progress made in
their country systems at the next meeting of this Committee in April.
5. Concluding remarks
I must thank the organisers of this Conference, and particularly the Joint Year 2000 Council, for
arranging this seminar. It is timely, it is very much needed in our region, and it will hopefully
contribute  further  to  the  awakening  of  a  full  awareness  of  the  urgency  of  the  problem.  I  am
impressed by the list of participants, and the high quality of speakers who have made themselves
available to share with us their experiences, and provide further guidance and assistance in our
efforts to make sure that South Africa and the countries of the  Southern  Africa  region  will  be
compliant before the end of this year with the Y2K problem. Representatives from a number of
the multinational financial institutions of the world, and a number of central banks and regulatory
authorities  from  other  countries  and  from  South  African  institutions,  will  introduce,  lead  and
guide  the  discussions  at  this  Conference  today  and  tomorrow.  We  thank  all  our  speakers  and
facilitators for the sacrifices you are making to ensure a successful, stimulating and productive
discussion at this seminar.
I welcome and thank all other participants in this Conference for accepting the invitation to be
here  today.  We  particularly  welcome  a  number  of  participants  from  other  African  countries.
Looking at the programme, I have no doubt that you will be amply rewarded.
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  thank  my  colleagues  in  the  Reserve  Bank,  and  also  those  staff
members of the Bank for International Settlements in Basle, who were responsible for making all
the arrangements for this Conference.
 BIS Review   8/1999
