Mr  Duisenberg’s  statement  on  the  European  Union’s  monetary,  financial  and  economic
indicators
Introductory statement by the President of the European Central Bank, Dr W F Duisenberg, at a press
conference held in Frankfurt/Main on 15 July 1999.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are here today to report  on  the  outcome  of  today’s
meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB, which was attended by the EU Council President, Mr
Niinistö, and by Mr de Silguy, European Commissioner.
The Governing Council reviewed the main monetary, financial and other economic indicators in line
with  its  monetary  policy  strategy.  As  a  result  of  its  examination  it  decided  not  to  change  the  ECB
interest rates. The interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem will thus remain
2.5%. In addition, the interest rate on the marginal lending facility will continue to be 3.5% and that
on the deposit facility has been kept at 1.5%.
Let me give you some details about our latest assessment of the monetary policy stance and thereby
explain the decisions taken today.
With  regard  to  monetary  developments  in  the  euro  area,  the  three-month  moving  average  of  M3
growth, covering the period from March to May 1999, increased slightly to 5.2%, from 5.1% in the
three months up to April. Consequently, M3 growth remained above the reference value of 4½%. The
major contribution to the rise in M3 growth in May came from overnight deposits. With the exception
of repurchase agreements, marketable securities included in M3 also experienced higher growth.
The annual growth rate of total credit to euro area residents rose in May, from 7.3% in April, to 7.9%.
The  pick-up  in  credit  growth  was  visible  both  in  loans  and  in  securitised  lending  and  occurred  in
respect of credit to both the private sector and the general government. The growth of  loans  to  the
private  sector  rose  to  10%  in  May,  stimulated  by  the  further  decline  in  bank  lending  rates.  Taken
together with the high pace of growth of the most liquid components of M3, this evidence supports
the view that households and firms in the euro area do not currently face liquidity constraints. In the
view  of  the  Governing  Council,  this  situation  is  not  seen  as  threatening  price  stability  at  present.
However, a reassessment may be appropriate if money and credit growth increase further.
Turning to financial market indicators, we have seen a significant upturn in long-term interest rates in
the euro area since the end of May. This development was certainly affected by the continued increase
in bond yields in the United States over the same period. More recently, however, domestic factors
have probably played a more important role in the determination of domestic bond yields than was
previously the case. These factors include financial market perceptions of more evidence pointing to a
further strengthening in economic activity in the euro area during the year, accompanied by a modest
pick-up in inflation expectations from the low levels seen in recent months. The more positive market
sentiment regarding the prospects for euro area output growth has also been reflected in a narrowing
over  recent  weeks  of  the  relatively  wide  differentials  between  US  and  euro  area  bond  yields.
Exchange rate developments do not yet reflect these very same factors.
As we have said on earlier occasions, the Governing Council believes that the euro is firmly based on
internal price stability and therefore, has the clear potential to achieve a stronger external value. The
Governing Council reaffirmed its view at today’s meeting that the monetary policy of the Eurosystem
will safeguard the euro’s internal purchasing power and will thereby support its international value.
The prospects for a more broadly based and sustained recovery in the world economy have become
stronger. The outlook has improved further, in particular in relation to expectations of continuously
strong growth in the US economy and some tentative indications that the prolonged decline in activity
1
BIS Review   83/1999
in  Japan  may  have  come  to  a  halt.  In  addition,  recent  developments  in  economic  and  financial
indicators  for  the  emerging  market  economies  suggest  that  a  recovery  is  under  way  in  South-East
Asia. Moreover, to the extent that the Kosovo conflict may have had a negative impact on economic
sentiment  in  a  number  of  countries,  its  end  has  eliminated  a  risk  to  the  outlook  for  economic
developments  in  the  euro  area.  As  recent  developments  in  Latin  America  indicate  the  outlook  has
improved only moderately.
With reference to developments in economic activity in the euro area, some important data have been
released since our last meeting. Most notably, Eurostat has now started to publish euro area national
accounts data which are based more closely on data compiled in  accordance  with  the  new  ESA  95
methodology. According to these estimates, the quarter-on-quarter rate of real GDP growth increased
to 0.5% in the first quarter of this year, compared with 0.3% in the previous quarter. At present there
is  insufficient  experience  with  regard  to  the  properties  of  the  new  ESA  95  data,  in  particular  their
susceptibility to revision, and some caution should therefore be exercised when interpreting the most
recent developments in real GDP growth. However, further evidence supporting the view that growth
will recover in the course of this year is also provided by the recent development of other indicators
of economic activity. Following successive declines, the level of industrial production appears to have
stabilised in the months up to April. Given the developments in industrial confidence up to June, it
would appear that the trough was reached at the end of the first quarter. This points to a turning-point
in activity in the industrial sector. At the same time, household sector demand patterns appear to be
broadly  unchanged,  as  indicated  by  a  still  high  level  of  consumer  confidence.  Therefore,  while  the
signs of recovery are still modest and are not yet reflected in labour market developments, recent data
appear to confirm the outlook for a continued improvement in the course of this year. The Governing
Council  considers  it  necessary  that  other  policy  areas  make  a  decisive  contribution  to  bolstering
confidence  in  the  euro  area’s  growth  potential,  particularly  by  means  of  firm  structural  reform
measures  to  enhance  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  and  the  efficiency  of  labour  and  product
markets.
Looking at the latest developments in consumer prices, the annual rate of increase in the Harmonised
Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP)  fell  to  1.0%  in  May,  down  from  1.1%  in  April.  While  energy
prices, which had caused the rise in the overall HICP rate in the previous two months, continued to
exert some upward pressure, this was more than offset by movements in other components. A lower
rate of increase was recorded in May for both processed and unprocessed food prices and for services
prices. Hence the decline in the overall HICP rate was also reflected in the HICP rate excluding the
two more volatile components – energy and seasonal food. These developments have to be seen partly
in the context of a one-off base effect resulting from country-specific increases in indirect taxes which
occurred last year. Against this background, the expectation remains that over the next few months
the rate of price increases will tend to edge upwards, mainly reflecting the increase in energy prices.
In conclusion, the outlook for the maintenance of price stability in the euro area remains favourable
and  in  line  with  the  Eurosystem’s  definition  of  price  stability.  The  Governing  Council  therefore
decided to maintain the prevailing levels of the ECB interest rates. At the same time it noted that the
sustained growth of monetary and credit aggregates, the slight improvement in output growth in early
1999,  the  expectation  of  a  strengthening  in  economic  activity  in  the  course  of  1999  and  a  further
acceleration next year all indicate that any upward pressures on prices will have to be monitored very
carefully.
Let  me  now  give  the  floor  to  the  Vice-President  to  introduce  two  additional  topics  we  discussed
during the Governing Council meeting:
In addition to reviewing the main monetary, financial and other economic indicators, the Governing
Council also considered the days on which the TARGET system would be closed in the year 2000.
BIS Review   83/1999
2
With regard to the calendar of TARGET operating days for 1999, the ECB announced on 31 March
1999  that  the  TARGET  system  would  close  on  31  December  1999,  in  addition  to  Saturdays  and
Sundays, Christmas Day and New Year’s Day.
However,  considering  the  financial  and  social  cost  of  keeping  the  TARGET  system  open  on  days
which are traditionally public holidays (or bank holidays) in most of the euro area, and in view of the
indication given by the European banking industry that it would welcome the closing of TARGET on
such days, the Governing Council today decided in principle that next year – in addition to Saturdays
and Sundays – TARGET will be closed on New Year’s Day, Good Friday, Easter  Monday,  1  May
(Labour Day), Christmas Day and 26 December. In countries where one of these days is not a public
holiday, the national central bank  will  endeavour  to  close  the  national  RTGS  system  on  the  day  in
question  or,  when  this  is  not  possible,  will  seek  to  limit  domestic  payment  activity  as  much  as
possible.
You will find further information relating to this decision in the separate press release to be issued
today.
Last and certainly not least, it is my great pleasure to announce a very important milestone along the
road to the introduction of the euro banknotes. The production of the euro banknotes has begun and,
by the end of this month, euro banknote production will be under way in printing works in several
euro area countries.
As you will remember, we presented the draft euro banknote designs in December 1996. The designs
were subsequently adjusted and refined in order to meet the technical specifications in full. Intensive
work then began to convert the detailed designs into the origination material, in other words the final
dies, films and plates which enable printing plates to be made.
Production of the pilot series started in September 1998 and was completed a few months ago. The
printing  of  this  pilot  series  involved  the  production  of  several  million  banknotes  under  normal
operating  conditions.  This  was  a  success  and  we  therefore  agreed  that  the  participating  national
central banks could release their printing orders.
The number of euro banknotes to be printed for the 11 participating Member States before the launch
– which will take place exactly 900 days from today – is estimated at 13 billion. To give you an idea
of the size of the production process, if the 13 billion euro banknotes were placed end to end, they
would stretch to the moon and back twice.
As you may remember, the Governing Council has already decided that the euro banknotes will not
bear  any  national  symbols  and,  therefore,  will  be  totally  identical  irrespective  of  where  they  are
produced.  The  euro  banknotes  are  being  produced  in  accordance  with  specifications  of  the  very
highest standard and they will include a wide range of sophisticated security features.
The  ECB  has  today  issued  a  press  release  on  this  matter.  A  press  folder  containing,  inter  alia,  TV
footage and a brochure on the euro banknotes and coins has also been made available to the media.
The brochure is available in all 11 official languages of the European Union.
3
BIS Review   83/1999
