Mr Mboweni’s address on the occasion of the
seventy-ninth ordinary general meeting of shareholders
of the South African Reserve Bank
Address of Mr T T Mboweni, Governor, at the South African Reserve Bank’s seventy-ninth ordinary
general meeting of shareholders on 24 August 1999.
 Introduction
The  South  African  economy  has  recovered  remarkably  from  the  contagion  effect  of  the  financial
turbulence  in  Asia  and  Russia.  After  being  seriously  affected  by  the  volatility  in  global  financial
markets during the four months from May to August, tentative signs of a return to financial stability
already began to appear during the last few months of 1998. The recovery of the financial sector was,
however, attained at the cost of lower economic growth because of the restrictive measures that the
authorities were forced to apply, the impact of a slowdown in international economic activity in many
parts of the world and a slump in international commodity prices. Currently the economy seems to be
poised  for  higher  growth  in  production,  provided  that  it  is  not  again  affected  by  setbacks  in  other
countries.
At the beginning of the financial turmoil the thinking was that it would only have a limited impact on
domestic  economic  conditions  through  a  lower  demand  for  South  African  exports  from  the  Asian
region.  Later  it  became  apparent  that  the  crisis  would  not  only  be  restricted  to  certain  countries  in
Asia, but would affect many countries around the world. The international financial system was dealt a
further  blow  when  Russia  de  facto  devalued  the  rouble,  imposed  a  moratorium  on  foreign  credit
repayments and unilaterally restructured public debt in August 1998.
As  a  result  of  these  circumstances,  international  investors  lost  confidence  in  emerging  markets  and
withdrew investments from developing countries to higher quality, but lower yielding, financial assets
of industrialised countries. Interest rates rose to high levels, equity and bond prices fell sharply and the
currencies of many economies depreciated considerably. Many banks and other financial institutions
suffered losses, especially on highly leveraged investment positions, which induced systemic risks in
the financial sectors of some emerging-market economies. The financial turmoil spilled over to real
economic activity, with serious consequences for growth in world production and trade.
All these developments once again demonstrated that in a globalised financial system the mobility of
capital has serious consequences for financial stability. In a closely integrated financial world it has
become even more important for monetary policy to be focused primarily on financial stability. The
lack of a credible commitment to that objective by the monetary authorities could intensify the risk of
market  overreaction  and  systemic  instability.  Such  a  policy  approach  does  not,  of  course,  provide
unconditional protection against speculative capital outflows. Decisions by international investors to
withdraw  capital  from  a  country,  based  on  developments  in  other  emerging-market  economies,  are
beyond the control of any central bank. The best approach that the South African Reserve Bank can
follow is to pursue financial stability in a transparent way so that it can forestall uncertainties.
Monetary  policy  will  be  more  successful  in  avoiding  imbalances  and  disruptive  capital  flows  if
measures  are  in  place  to  address  structural  weaknesses  in  the  economy.  Crisis  prevention  requires
close  coordination  between  the  various  spheres  of  macroeconomic  management  to  ensure  market
confidence.  In  addition,  domestic  financial  systems  should  be  closely  monitored  and  made  more
transparent and thus more robust.
1
BIS Review 91/1999
While it is essential for South Africa to maintain these disciplines, the recent crisis has illustrated the
need  to  adapt  the  international  financial  system  to  the  realities  of  global  markets  to  reduce  the
frequency  and  size  of  crisis  situations.  International  organisations  have  made  considerable  progress
with the improvement of the financial architecture. Standards or codes of good practice have been or
are  being  developed  in  many  financial  disciplines  to  allow  market  participants  to  compare  the
practices of countries with internationally agreed benchmarks. The Reserve Bank regards this work as
essential for the creation of more stable conditions and is accordingly willing, wherever possible, to
participate in these endeavours.
If a financial crisis does occur despite the efforts of the monetary authorities to prevent it, monetary
policy has to accommodate the market. Intervention in financial markets can assist in smoothing the
adjustment process, but should not oppose market trends. The authorities have to allow interest rates
and the exchange rate of the currency to move to new levels. Such adjustments increase the cost of
speculation,  reduce  inflationary  pressures  and  contribute  to  an  improvement  in  the  balance  of
payments position of a country.
Unfortunately,  the  adjustments  required  in  a  crisis  also  adversely  affect  real  economic  activity.
However, experience in many of the emerging-market economies during the recent financial crisis has
shown that where monetary policy had not been tightened quickly and sufficiently, instability persisted
with an even greater negative impact on those economies. Pursuing a tighter monetary policy led to a
quicker return to currency stability and market confidence. This, in turn, provided room for a lowering
of interest rates which helped to mitigate the negative results of the earlier tighter measures.
The  efforts  of  individual  governments  and  the  international  financial  community  to  re-establish
financial stability are proving successful. The implementation of flexible exchange rate regimes and
other  structural  adjustments  in  emerging-market  economies  seemed  to  have  stabilised  financial
markets  during  the  first  seven  months  of  1999,  and  are  also  improving  the  prospect  of  a  gradual
economic recovery. Interest rate cuts by central banks in virtually all major industrialised countries are
helping  to  improve  liquidity  and  to  rebuild  investor  confidence.  Although  there  are  still  risks  and
uncertainties in the world economy, conditions are far better now than they were during 1998.
The contagion effects of the international financial crisis on South Africa
The effects of the international financial crisis spilled over into the South African  economy  in  May
1998  when  foreign  fund  managers  began  withdrawing  portfolio  investments.  The  well-developed
capital markets and the relatively free convertibility of capital in the country provided an easy source
of liquidity for fund managers who wished to reduce their exposures to emerging markets. From May
to December 1998 non-residents reduced their holdings of South African bonds by R26 billion. In the
first four months of the year they were net buyers on the South African Bond Exchange to the amount
of R16 billion.
This reversal of portfolio investments in bonds by non-residents was difficult for the  South  African
economy to absorb because it occurred at a time when South Africans were also making direct and
portfolio  investments  in  other  countries  following  a  relaxation  of  exchange  controls.  Moreover,  the
reversal  created  leads  and  lags  in  other  foreign  payments  and  receipts  related  to  an  expected
depreciation of the rand. However, non-residents continued to invest large sums in the equity capital
of  South  African  enterprises,  with  the  result  that  the  net  outflow  of  capital  not  related  to  reserves
amounted only to R0.4 billion in the second half of 1998, compared with an inflow of R8.3 billion in
the first half of the year.
The  international  developments  also  affected  the  current  account  of  South  Africa’s  balance  of
payments  because  they  brought  about  a  substantial  drop  in  international  commodity  prices  and
depressed world trade. The volume of merchandise exports declined in the second half of 1998, while
higher rand proceeds for exports mainly reflected a depreciation of the currency. In addition, the gold
price in terms of United States dollars declined further and the value of imports rose steeply because
of  infrastructural  investments  by  public  corporations.  These  developments  led  to  an  increase  in  the
deficit  on  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  and  a  marked  decrease  in  the  gold  and
BIS Review 91/1999
2
foreign  exchange  reserves  of  the  country.  As  could  be  expected  under  these  circumstances,  the
exchange rate of the rand depreciated to a level at the end of 1998 that was nearly 20% lower than its
weighted value at the end of 1997.
The  volatility  in  international  financial  markets  generated  substantial  increases  in  the  turnovers  of
financial  markets  in  South  Africa,  including  the  markets  in  foreign  exchange,  shares,  bonds  and
derivatives. The large outflow of foreign funds on the Bond Exchange contributed to an increase in the
daily  average  yield  on  long-term  government  bonds  from  a  low  of  12.67%  on  17  April  1998  –  its
lowest level since May 1994 – to 20.09% on 28 August 1998. So much liquidity was drained from the
South African banking sector that the banks had to borrow large amounts from the Reserve Bank on a
daily  basis.  The  liquidity  shortage  in  the  market  pushed  up  short-term  interest  rates  by  about
7 percentage  points,  forcing  the  banks  to  raise  their  prime  overdraft  and  mortgage  lending  rates  to
more  or  less  the  same  extent.  These  higher  lending  rates  had  a  dampening  effect  on  real-estate
transactions.  Share  prices  also  dropped  sharply,  even  though  the  market  was  supported  by  a  strong
demand from foreign investors.
The high turnovers in the financial markets and a desire for precautionary money balances resulted in
an exceptionally strong growth in the money supply. The growth over twelve months in the broadly
defined money supply (M3) reached 19.4% in June 1998 and declined only fractionally to 18.9% in
August 1998. These high rates of increase were recorded despite a slowdown in the growth of nominal
gross domestic product and apparently formed part of the rise in the nominal value of financial asset
portfolios. This latter factor, together with an increased demand for working capital by the corporate
sector and some borrowing by companies to tide them over a period of slack demand in the economy,
were prominent forces behind a continued steep rise in total bank credit extension. The increase in the
demand for bank credit was reinforced by speculative opportunities in a period of heightened volatility
in the securities markets.
The  international  financial  turmoil  halted  the  downward  movement  in  the  rate  of  increase  in  both
production and consumer prices from the beginning of 1997. Over the six months to September 1998,
growth  in  production  prices  accelerated  considerably  as  the  rand  depreciated.  The  consumer  price
index, in turn, was strongly influenced by a sharp rise in the prices of consumer services, notably the
rise in mortgage lending rates. Core inflation, which excludes certain food prices, interest costs, value-
added tax and municipal rates, was far more subdued, rising from 6.9% in March 1998 to only 7.7% in
September 1998.
In  comparison  to  other  emerging-market  economies,  the  South  African  banking  sector  proved
remarkably resilient during the global financial turmoil. Banks were able to weather this storm better
than  some  of  their  counterparts  in  other  countries  because  of  good  management,  strict  legislative
requirements, low international  credit exposures  and  diligent  risk  management.  The level of the  net
external liabilities of banks is low, in other words their exposures to exchange rate risks are minimal.
In addition, our banks eased the increased burden of high interest rates on borrowers by extending the
repayment period.
The non-performing loans of banks nevertheless increased by more than R8.2 billion over one year to
R27.4 billion at the end of June 1999, but the gross overdues of banks as a percentage of total loans
and  advances  amounted  to  only  4.7%  on  this  date;  a  level  which  is  still  low  enough  not  to  be  of
concern.  Many  of  the  banks  have  in  any  case  also  increased  their  provisions  for  bad  and  doubtful
debts, which amounted to 2.7% of loans and advances at the end of June 1999.
The banks in South Africa are well capitalised. The average risk-weighted capital-adequacy ratio for
the system as a whole reached 11.6% at the end of June 1999, compared with the required minimum
ratio  of  8%  stipulated  by  the  Basel  core  principles.  Moreover,  more  than  half  of  the  banks  had  a
capital-adequacy ratio of 15% or better. The disruptions internationally did not materially affect the
profitability of banks, and their return on equity reached approximately 15% at the end of June 1999.
Cost control and an expansion of the business of banks into new areas helped to sustain profit levels.
Banks  have  successfully  developed  alternative  non-interest-bearing  sources  of  income,  and
transaction-based fee income and investment income now represent nearly half of their net revenues.
3
BIS Review 91/1999
The return to financial stability
The  way  in  which  the  banking  sector  coped  with  the  international  financial  crisis,  together  with  a
prudent monetary policy approach, were important factors that contributed to a relatively quick return
to financial stability in South Africa. By the fourth quarter of 1998 there were signs that the storm was
abating. The strain on the South African situation slackened so much in the last part of 1998 that the
exchange rate of the rand against the United States dollar eased from about R6.66 on 28 August 1998
to R5.70 early in January 1999. Domestic interest rates declined by about 3 percentage points over the
same period.
Although  problems  in  Brazil  temporarily  created  new  pressures  in  the  South  African  market  for
foreign exchange in January 1999 and interrupted the decline in interest rates, the nervousness in the
financial markets gradually evaporated when it became apparent that the contagion effects of Brazil’s
problems  would  be  limited.  Non-residents  again  became  net  buyers  of  South  African  bonds,  while
they continued to invest large amounts in shares listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange. In the
first seven months of 1999 the portfolio investments of non-residents in South Africa amounted to no
less than R33.8 billion, compared with disinvestments of R3.2 billion in the last eight months of 1998.
Direct investment by foreigners in domestic enterprises came to R3.7 billion in the first half of 1999.
These investments were neutralised to some extent by South African investments in other countries,
with  the  result  that  the  net  inflow  of  capital  not  related  to  reserves,  or  the  surplus  on  financial
transactions with the rest of the world, totalled R7.4 billion. At the same time, a lower level of final
demand, significant further reductions in inventories and  an  increase  in the cost  of  imported  goods,
depressed the value of imports. By contrast, exports rose strongly  as  the  Asian economies  began  to
recover,  the  decline  in  international  commodity  prices  levelled  out  and  domestic  producers  began
expanding  into  other  markets.  Expressed  in  terms  of  seasonally  adjusted  and  annualised  rates,  the
current account of the balance of payments accordingly turned around from a deficit of R19.1 billion
in the last half of 1998 to a surplus of R0.6 billion in the first half of 1999.
The  improvement  in  South  Africa’s  overall  transactions  with  the  rest  of  the  world  led  to  a  sizable
increase in the international reserves of the country. The total gross gold and other foreign reserves
improved steadily from a lower turning point of R40.9 billion at the end of November 1998 to R47.2
billion at the end of June 1999. The nominal effective exchange rate of the rand nevertheless decreased
somewhat in the first seven months of 1999. At the end of July 1999 the weighted average level of the
exchange rate of the rand was no less than 38.4% below its level at the end of 1995, clearly indicating
a marked strengthening of the international price competitiveness of domestic producers.
The greater stability in the exchange rate of the rand and the containment of domestic cost increases
relieved  inflationary  pressures.  As  a  consequence,  a  slowdown  in  inflation  in  consumer  prices  was
observed from the end of 1998. However, higher oil prices contributed to a rise in production prices
from the very low levels reached in the first half of 1998, while core inflation increased from 7.1% in
April 1998 to 8.2% in July 1999.
The surplus balance on South Africa’s transactions with the rest of the world eased the total liquidity
requirement of banking institutions and prompted a steady decline in money market rates in the first
seven months of 1999. Sentiment in the market for fixed-interest securities became more positive in
view of the slowdown in the inflation of consumer prices, an easing in money market conditions and
declining short-term interest rates, a conservative fiscal policy which reduced government’s funding
requirement for the fiscal year ending 31 March 2000 and positive credit assessments by international
rating  agencies.  Consequently,  the  yield  on  long-term  government  bonds  declined  from  20.09%  on
28 August 1998 to 15.18% at the end of July 1999.
As normality returned to financial markets and the turnovers on these markets came down from the
exceptionally high levels that they had reached during the international financial turbulence, growth in
the monetary aggregates finally started to decline after four years of high rates. The general downturn
in  economic  activity,  lower  inflation  and  a  decline  in  liquidity  preference,  were  other  factors  that
caused the growth in M3 to move within the guideline growth range of between 6% and 10% from
February 1999. The growth in total domestic credit extension by banks also slowed down significantly
in the first half of 1999. Despite these favourable developments, it is important that monetary policy
BIS Review 91/1999
4
takes into account that the ratio of the money supply to gross domestic product was still very high at
53.5% in the second quarter of 1999.
All in all, the financial markets have rallied remarkably during 1999. Internationally, the turbulence
prevailing  during  1997  and  1998  seems  to  have  calmed  down.  Provided  that  there  are  no  serious
setbacks in the international  economy,  we  are  confident that real  economic  activity  in  South  Africa
should begin to recover.
Adverse financial conditions depressed economic growth and employment
At the beginning of 1998 it was expected that the downswing in economic activity experienced during
the preceding year would come to an end and that the economy would turn around before moving into
a  recession.  However,  the  measures  that  the  authorities  were  forced  to  take  to  stabilise  financial
conditions led to sharp declines in the components of domestic demand that are sensitive to interest-
rate  costs,  such  as  inventories,  consumption  expenditure  on  durable  goods  and  private-sector  fixed
investment. Domestic production was also harmed by a lower demand for exports, with the result that
real gross domestic product contracted sharply in the third quarter of 1998. Fortunately, this setback
was short-lived and aggregate output began to increase again, albeit at low rates.
The  downturn  during  the  middle  of  1998  spread  to  most  of  the  economic  sectors,  with  the  notable
exception of financial  services  which  benefited  from  price  volatility  and  high  turnovers in  financial
markets. From the fourth quarter of 1998 the secondary sectors and some of the other tertiary sectors
started to record small positive growth, but the value added by agriculture and  mining  continued to
contract. Gold production, in particular, decreased sharply in reaction to the effect that increased gold
sales by some central banks had on the price of gold.
The gold mines have had to contend with rising costs of production and a generally depressed market
price since the mid-1980s. This has not only had serious consequences for the domestic economy, but
also affected developments in neighbouring countries through the loss of employment opportunities.
From the beginning of the 1980s the number of people employed on the gold mines has been reduced
by almost 250,000 because of mine closures and the introduction of cost-saving production methods.
The  substitution  of  capital  for  labour  in  other  sectors  of  the  economy  further  contributed  to  high
unemployment  in  South  Africa  and  other negative  social effects. The  low  production  growth  in  the
past year aggravated this problem as employment was slashed further.
The decline in employment was accompanied by a marked increase in labour productivity. At first the
growth in output per worker could not contain an acceleration in the rate of increase in nominal unit
labour  costs.  From  the  beginning  of  1999  the  growth  in  unit  labour  costs  has  slowed  down
significantly,  which  could  help  to  curtail  inflation  because  labour  is  still  the  single  most  important
component of overall production cost in the economy.
Unlike the decline in production, the domestic demand for goods and services continued to expand in
1998,  but  the  rate  of  increase  in  aggregate  expenditure  slowed  down.  The  main  reason  for  the
expansion  in  final  demand  was  the  solid  growth  in  fixed  capital  formation,  largely  owing  to
investment expenditure in telecommunication and transport activities by public corporations. Contrary
to these developments, the rates of increase in the consumption expenditure of both the public sector
and  households  slowed  down  considerably  during  1998,  while  private-sector  real  fixed  investment
declined sharply. Inventory levels were reduced significantly in response to the slowdown in domestic
economic activity and the high costs of carrying stock.
In the first half of 1999 the real domestic final demand for goods and services declined markedly when
the capital spending of public corporations contracted. In addition, a decline in interest-rate sensitive
household expenditure on durable goods and the strict discipline applied to government expenditure
resulted in a decrease in consumption expenditure, while private-sector fixed investment continued to
move  to  lower  levels.  Real  gross  domestic  expenditure  contracted  even  more  sharply  than  final
demand,  due  to  a  reduction  in  inventory  levels  as  businesses  economised  further  on  inventory
holdings.
5
BIS Review 91/1999
The reduction in consumption expenditure and efforts of households to bring down high debt levels
led to a marginal improvement in the savings ratio of households in the first half of 1999. Moreover,
the  resolve  by  government  to  adhere  to  sound  fiscal  policies  was  reflected  in  a  decline  in  the  net
dissaving by general government as a ratio of gross domestic product from 5% in 1997 to 3% in the
first half of 1999. The corporate sector succeeded in lifting retained earnings by more than the growth
in  production  over  the  same  period.  As  a  consequence,  the  ratio  of  gross  saving  to  gross  domestic
product rose somewhat from a low of 13% in the fourth quarter of 1998 to 15% in the first half of
1999.  Although  this  is  a  welcome  change  in  the  declining  trend  of  the  savings  ratio,  it  is  still  well
below the levels needed for sustained higher economic growth. Serious attention will have to be given
in economic policy deliberations to promoting saving and inward direct investments in order to create
job opportunities.
Prudent public finance
The  government  persisted  with  a  well-managed  conservative  fiscal  policy  stance.  The  public-sector
borrowing  requirement,  i.e.  the  deficit  before  borrowing  of  the  central  government,  provincial
governments,  local  authorities,  non-financial  public  enterprises  and  public  corporations,  has  been
brought down systematically  from  an  upper  turning  point  of  9.3% of  gross  domestic  product  in  the
fiscal year 1993/94 to a ratio of 3.4% in the fiscal year 1998/99.
In  the  past  fiscal  year  there  was  a  decline  in  the  absolute  value  of  the  public-sector  borrowing
requirement. What made this an even more remarkable achievement was the fact that the revenue of
the  government  increased  at  a  lower  rate  than  in  the  preceding  year.  Total  expenditure  by  general
government, however, rose at a rate of only 5.3% in the fiscal year 1998/99, i.e. significantly below
the inflation rate. General government successfully contained growth in expenditure mainly through a
decisive slowdown in current spending on goods and services.
The financial turbulence and monetary policy
The conservative fiscal policy stance assisted in countering  the  contagion effect  of  the  international
financial  turbulence  during  1998.  However,  the  brunt  of  the  adjustment  process  fell  on  monetary
policy, as it takes a long time to make changes in fiscal and other policy measures. The strains that
developed in the foreign exchange market in 1998 caused the exchange rate of the rand and domestic
interest rates to adjust automatically to the changed supply of and demand for foreign exchange and
the impact of these developments on bank liquidity. In these volatile and uncertain circumstances, the
monetary authorities could only influence the speed of the adjustments required by the market.
The  Reserve  Bank’s  response  was  to underprovide  in the  liquidity  requirement  of  the  banks  and  to
intervene in the foreign exchange market so that financial stability could be restored at the least cost in
terms of inflation and economic growth. As a result, the repo rate moved sharply upwards by about
7 percentage points from the beginning of May to 21.85% on 28 August 1998. The accommodation
system was made  more effective to cope with  the  crisis  by  phasing  in a  wider  spread  from  1  to  20
percentage  points  between  the  repo  rate  and  the  marginal  lending  rate.  These  measures  led  to
corresponding  steep  increases  in  other  short-term  interest  rates,  which  eased  the  adjustment  in  the
exchange rate of the rand.
In tandem with the rise in interest rates, the  Reserve  Bank  at first  intervened  heavily  in the foreign
exchange  market  in  May  and  June  1998  in  an  attempt  to  create  some  order  in  a  market  that  had
become  extremely  sensitive  to  any  negative  news  or rumours. The intervention  consisted  mainly  of
swaps  in  the  forward  market,  which  increased  the  Bank’s  net  open  foreign  currency  position  from
US$ 12.8  billion at the end  of  March  1998  to  US$  23.2  billion  at  the  end  of  September  1998.  The
Bank returned this foreign exchange liquidity to the market which had been obtained previously from
large inflows of portfolio investments.
In view of the large risks and potential costs associated with a net open exposure, the Reserve Bank
stopped using this intervention technique when it became  apparent that  the  contagion impact  of  the
BIS Review 91/1999
6
emerging-markets’ crisis would be more severe and longer lasting than originally expected and when
the  purchases  of  foreign  exchange  preceding  the  crisis  had  been  fully  reversed.  This  decision  was
validated when it became known that highly leveraged funds had built up speculative positions against
the rand through forward foreign exchange transactions. Later, when these leveraged funds incurred
losses in emerging markets and were forced to buy back their short rand positions, these transactions
contributed to the retracing of some of the rand’s earlier losses.
As  indicated,  financial  conditions  became  more  stable  from  the  fourth  quarter  of  1998.  General
nervousness  continued  to  prevail  among  international  investors,  and  they  withdrew  funds  from
emerging-market economies whenever there were signs  of  any  pressure  on  exchange  rates.  In  these
circumstances, the Reserve Bank deemed it prudent to guide the repo and other money market interest
rates gradually down to lower levels. With brief interruptions, the repo rate then moved lower from its
upper turning point of 21.85% on 28 August 1998 to 13.65% on 31 July 1999. Over the same period,
the  net  open  foreign  currency  position  of  the  Reserve  Bank  was  reduced  by  US$  5.6  billion  to
US$ 17.5 billion at the end of July 1999.
Despite the initial wide fluctuations in the repo rate, the repo-based accommodation system that the
Reserve Bank had introduced in March 1998 is proving of considerable value in general and during
periods  of  instability  in  financial  markets  in  particular.  Most  of  the  difficulties  encountered  shortly
after the implementation  of  the  system  were  due  to  general  nervousness  in  the  market  and  teething
problems. The system was flexible enough to be adjusted easily to solve these problems. Changes to
enhance  the  efficiency  of the repo  system  included the  shortening  of  maturities,  the  introduction  of
“square-off  auctions”  at  the  end  of  the  daily  settlement  period,  administrative  adjustments  to  the
management of cash reserves and a refinement of the signalling procedures of the Reserve Bank. After
these changes had been made, short-term interest rates became more flexible without being too volatile
or too slow in reacting to signals.
The way forward
The  liberalisation  and  international  integration  of  financial  services  make  it  imperative  for  South
Africa to bring domestic inflation in step with that of the rest of the world and to maintain sound and
efficient  financial  institutions  and  markets.  If  these  goals  are  not  achieved,  the  economy  could  be
subjected  to  sudden  reversals  in  international  capital  flows,  exchange  rate  instability  and  volatile
interest rates. The thrust of monetary policy in these circumstances should therefore be to establish and
maintain financial stability, i.e. stability of prices, financial institutions and financial markets.
This  does  not  mean  that  monetary  policy  ignores  other  objectives  of  economic  policy,  such  as
economic  growth,  employment  creation  and  improved  social  conditions  in  the  country.  On  the
contrary, we regard financial stability as a precondition for balanced and sustainable economic growth
and improved living conditions, because it improves the efficiency of the pricing system and economic
decision-making;  enhances  the  efficiency  of  financial  intermediation;  minimises  the  inflation  risk
premium in long-term interest rates; reduces the incentive to hedge against inflation; promotes a more
equitable distribution of wealth and income; and facilitates investment decision-making. A monetary
policy that maintains financial stability in a credible and lasting way will accordingly make the best
overall contribution to improving economic growth, employment and living standards.
A  market-oriented  strategy  will  be  followed  to  achieve  this  overriding  goal  of  monetary  policy
because financial institutions and markets function best in the national interest if they are competitive,
active  and  liquid,  and  if  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  are  flexible.  The  Reserve  Bank  will
accordingly continue to discuss with government the relaxation of exchange controls when underlying
conditions are conducive to taking such steps. The eventual removal of exchange control restrictions
should contribute towards dismantling the oversold forward book and reducing the net open foreign
currency position. Once residents have accumulated large amounts of foreign assets, they could  use
these assets to counterbalance short-term currency volatility if they perceive this to be an opportunity
to profit from a temporary undervaluation of the exchange rate.
7
BIS Review 91/1999
In pursuit of the primary objective of price stability it is essential, as stated in the Constitution, that the
Reserve Bank performs its functions independently and without fear, favour or prejudice. The Bank
will maintain an attitude of economic-professional objectivity, but will, of course, at the same time be
accountable to Parliament and the general public for its actions. Transparency in the interpretation of
economic  data  and  the  monetary  policy  stance  will  be  promoted  further.  Regular  reporting  on
economic conditions and Reserve Bank operations to Parliament and the general public will receive
high priority.
Although  the  Bank  will  strive  to  achieve  closer  cooperation  and  coordination  with  the  authorities
responsible for policy decisions in other macroeconomic and microeconomic fields, the autonomy of
the  Bank  will  be  preserved.  There  are  structural  deficiencies  in  the  economy  which  impair  saving,
investment, production growth and employment creation and increase the level of real interest rates. A
number  of  initiatives  announced  by  the  President  at  the  opening  of  Parliament  are  aimed  at  easing
these  supply-side  constraints.  The  implementation  of  these  structural  changes  could  create  further
scope  for  lower  nominal  and  real  interest  rates.  Closer  cooperation  and  coordination  between  the
Reserve Bank and other national official bodies may expedite this process.
The Southern African Development Community (SADC) provides an opportunity for member states to
face jointly the challenges of global financial integration. Considerable progress has been made over
almost four years in promoting interaction in Southern Africa through the Committee of Central Bank
Governors of the SADC. This committee has enhanced cooperation among central banks; forged close
ties between bank regulators and supervisors in member countries, promoted the expansion of training
facilities for employees of central banks, enhanced the  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  systems  of
member  countries,  established  closer  consultation  between  private  banking  institutions  and  stock
exchanges  operating  in  the  region,  analysed  exchange  control  restrictions  in  Southern  African
countries  with  the  aim  of  gradually  removing  or  harmonising  these  restrictions  and  collected  and
disseminated macroeconomic statistics.
The South African Reserve Bank will continue to promote the effective cooperation and integration of
the  financial  systems  and  markets  of  Southern  Africa.  Where  needed,  banking  institutions  and
financial markets should be established in conjunction with effective payment, clearing and settlement
arrangements  within  and  between  countries  in  the  region.  For  the  time  being  this  will  be  done
informally  before  attempting  to  achieve  officially  sanctioned  harmonisation  and  integration  of
financial arrangements.
In  applying  monetary  policy  in  South  Africa  it  is  advisable  to  move  away  from  the  “eclectic”  or
informal  inflation-targeting  framework  to  formal  inflation  targeting.  The  eclectic  monetary  policy
approach  has  been  a  useful  framework  for  containing  inflation,  but  at  times  it  created  uncertainties
about Reserve Bank decisions and actions which were perceived as being in conflict with intermediate
objectives. The guidelines on the growth in money supply and bank credit extension have constantly
been breached in recent years as a result of financial deepening. To the extent that a formal or explicit
inflation-targeting  framework  would  be  more  transparent  than  the  previous  framework,  it  ought  to
allay some of these uncertainties.
With the adoption of inflation targeting, it will become clear that the containment of inflation is not
solely a Reserve Bank responsibility. Inflation targets should be set jointly by the Reserve Bank and
government. Inflation targeting will be more effective when economic policies are well coordinated.
Before  inflation  targeting  is  introduced,  this  coordination  should  be  clearly  spelled  out  and  all
stakeholders must be consulted, including business and the trade union movement. We are convinced
that the government will ensure that the policy measures are properly coordinated.
Our considered view is that a policy target agreement should be drawn up that would be signed by the
Minister of Finance and the Governor of the Reserve Bank to define precisely the coordinated effort
needed to contain inflation in pursuit of the broader economic objectives of sustainable high economic
growth  and  employment  creation.  In  this  agreement  the  instrumental  independence  of  the  Reserve
Bank  must be guaranteed. This stipulation and the rest of the agreement will, of  course,  have to  be
ratified by Parliament.
BIS Review 91/1999
8
Inflation  targeting  is  a  complicated  monetary  policy  framework  that  requires  careful  preparations
before an announcement is made to apply it in practice. To facilitate the implementation of inflation
targeting, the Bank is currently revising and reorganising the functions of the Economics Department,
now renamed the Research Department. As the new name implies, the activities of the department will
concentrate  on  research,  i.e.  analysing  monetary  issues  and  coordinating  research  in  the  Bank.
Although an important part of the Research Department’s work will still be devoted to the compilation
of economic statistics that can be used in economic analysis, greater attention will henceforth be given
to  monetary  policy  assessment,  econometric  modelling,  international  economic  developments,
international relations and labour and social research.
The  Research  Department  is  developing  the  technical  support  systems  that  are  essential  for  the
implementation of an inflation-targeting framework, namely the development of additional and more
sophisticated inflation-forecasting  models,  the  investigation  of  the  transmission  mechanism  between
changes  in  policy  instruments  and  inflation  and  the  design  and  implementation  of  a  survey-based
assessment of inflation expectations.
Although these steps are necessary for the implementation of inflation targeting, this new framework
should not in any significant way affect the conduct of monetary policy. Policy actions will still  be
guided by a medium-term inflation outlook, albeit in a more transparent manner. In order to arrive at
an inflation outlook, the Bank will continue to monitor a wide range of economic indicators, including
developments  in  money  supply  and  bank  credit  extension.  In  this  new  framework  the  Bank’s  main
operational instrument will continue to be the repo mechanism. The same fine-tuning and structural
operational instruments will be used to influence interest rates and the level of the exchange rate of the
rand  will  be  determined  primarily  by  the  impact  of  these  actions  on  the  supply  of  and  demand  for
foreign exchange.
Price  stability  depends  not  only  on  monetary  operational  procedures,  but  also  on  stability  in  the
financial sector or the degree of confidence in the ability of financial institutions and markets to meet
contractual  obligations  without  interruption  or  outside  assistance.  Any  signs  of  weakness  in  the
financial  system  could  disrupt  price  stability.  Conversely,  stability  in  the  financial  sector  could  be
seriously  disturbed  by  sharply  rising  inflation  and  interest  rates,  and  a  resultant  increase  in  non-
performing loans and a fall in asset prices and collateral values. An appropriate balance between risk
and reward in the financial system is a major challenge to any central bank.
In  view  of  these  considerations,  the  Reserve  Bank  will  continue  to  monitor  financial  conditions
carefully as part of its objective to maintain financial stability. Where unavoidable pressures do arise
in the financial system, the Bank may have to carefully contain them directly as “lender of last resort”.
The  lender-of-last-resort  facility  will  not,  however,  automatically  be  made  available  to  all  banks  in
distress,  but  only  in  cases  where  the  failure  of  a  bank  would  pose  a  serious  threat  to  the  financial
system  as  a  whole.  Criteria  will  be  established  to  specify  the  exit  strategy  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  A
deposit-insurance  scheme  is  being  developed  to  cover  retail  depositors.  This  scheme  could  provide
more  latitude  in  deciding  whether  to  close  an  ailing  bank,  without  the  concern  that  depositors  in
financially healthy banks may lose confidence in the banking system as a whole.
Sound financial supervision is a prerequisite for financial stability and warranted the debate during the
past year on the feasibility of establishing a single financial regulatory authority in South Africa. Most
countries  have  securities  commissions  responsible  for  the  regulation  of  investment  services  and  in
many  countries  there  is  still  a  separation  of  banking  and  insurance  supervision.  Current  opinion  in
South  Africa  is  influenced  strongly  by  recent  developments  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  Australia
where banking supervision has been moved out of the central bank into a single financial regulator.
There are convincing arguments both for and against a single financial regulator. Arguments for such a
single  regulator  include  issues  such  as  the  blurring  of  functional  dividing  lines  between  different
institutions,  the  development  of  financial  conglomerates,  the  exploitation  of  gaps  in  financial
regulation and the achievement of economies of scale and a uniform style of regulation. Arguments for
the  retention  of  bank  supervision  as  a  Reserve  Bank  function  are  based  on  the  characteristics  of
banking, the special relationships between the Bank and the banking sector, the high systemic risks in
banking,  the  importance  of  a  healthy  banking  system  for  effective  monetary  policy  and  the  Bank’s
9
BIS Review 91/1999
ability  to  compete  for  scarce  human  resources.  It  is  important  that  all  these  arguments  be  carefully
considered by government to find an appropriate approach to this issue that can continue to assist in
the execution of monetary policy.
A  well-organised  decision-making  process  is  another  important  factor  in  the  conduct  of  monetary
policy. All monetary policy decisions are currently made by the Governors’ Committee (consisting of
the Governor and deputy governors), while the Monetary Policy Implementation Committee (MPIC)
is responsible for carrying out  monetary  policy.  Although  this  decision-making  process  works  well,
monetary  policy  issues  demand  more  attention.  It  has  therefore  been  decided  to  create  a  Monetary
Policy  Committee  (MPC)  for  the  formulation  of  monetary  policy.  The  MPC  will  consist  of  the
Governor  and  deputy  governors  as  voting  members  and  senior  officials  of  the  Bank  as  non-voting
members.
The MPC will consider and evaluate the state of the economy, the current stance of monetary policy
and the operational procedures in the conduct of monetary policy and formulate the changes deemed
necessary  in  monetary  policy  and  operational  procedures.  The  final  decision-making  power  on
monetary policy matters will nevertheless still vest in the Governors’ Committee.
In  order  to  provide  opportunities  for  public  involvement  in  the  monetary  policy  decision-making
process,  it  has  also  been  decided  to  create  a  Monetary  Policy  Forum  (MPF).  The  Governor  of  the
Reserve Bank will chair the MPF, and representatives of private business enterprises, labour and other
interested institutions and organisations will be invited to participate in the meetings of the MPF. The
MPF will meet twice a year to discuss macroeconomic developments and monetary policy issues.
Internal administration of the Bank
The  internal  decision-making  process  of  the  Reserve  Bank  will  be  changed  in  the  coming  year.  In
addition  to the existing  Currency,  Payment  and  Financial  Systems  Committee  and  the  Management
Committee,  a  Budget  Committee  will  be formed. The  Budget  Committee  will  have  the  authority  to
compile and monitor the implementation of the Bank’s annual budget. Through  a  Subcommittee  on
Procurement, the Budget Committee  will also  be responsible  for the  procurement,  management  and
control of supplies, services and assets of the Bank.
In a further attempt to achieve greater transparency, the Bank has decided to establish a fully fledged
Media  Office.  This  office  will  be  primarily  responsible  for  focusing  external  communication,  thus
assisting the media, national and provincial legislative structures and the general public to gain a better
understanding of the Bank’s policies, decisions and activities.
During  the  past  year,  considerable  progress  has  been  made  with  a  number  of  other  administrative
projects in the Reserve Bank. These projects included the certification of year 2000 compliance of the
banking system’s information technology infrastructure and applications, as well as the South African
Multiple Options Settlement (SAMOS) system. Operational contingency plans have been prepared to
handle any problems that may arise over the year-end, including plans for the provision of additional
cash,  the  management  of  liquidity  and  for  continued  clearing,  payment  and  settlement  through  the
SAMOS system. Simulations of the clearing arrangements were conducted on the public holiday on
9 August 1999 and the results were successful. Moreover, the Registrar of Banks has issued a number
of regulations to ensure that the banking sector is year 2000 compliant and, in collaboration with the
Financial Services Board, has prepared a booklet to inform the public of the preparations to overcome
the year 2000 problem.
Further  progress  was  made  in  enhancing  various  national  payment  system  principles,  practices  and
arrangements in preparation for same-day settlement by June 2000. These enhancements included the
introduction  of  settlement  risk-reduction  measures,  the  adoption  of  a  legal  framework  and  the
development of a risk and research database.
The Reserve Bank and the banking industry have also agreed to collaborate in improving the national
notes  and  coin  management  system.  The  wholesale  cash  processing  services  performed  by  SBV
BIS Review 91/1999
10
Services  (Pty)  Ltd.  will  revert  to  the  Reserve  Bank.  A  study  is  currently  being  done  on  ways  of
improving the infrastructure of the branches of the Bank to cater for these changes.
The  Bank  completed  comprehensive  recalculations  of  national  accounts  and  balance  of  payments
statistics during the past year. The estimates follow the conventions and guidelines of the latest System
of National Accounts 1993 and the Balance of Payments Manual, prescribed by the United  Nations
Organisation  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  thus  complying  with  the  IMF’s
requirements for the Special Data Dissemination Standard.
Human  resource  development  is  regarded  as  an  important  element  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s
responsibilities because the Bank’s staff is its major asset. Considerable effort has accordingly been
made in the past financial year to develop the skills of the Bank’s staff. In addition, several courses
were presented to trainees from other African central banks at the Reserve Bank’s Training Institute.
The  Institute,  and  the  Bank  of  Tanzania  Training  Institute  also  jointly  compiled  a  report  on  the
coordination  of  training  and  development  in  the  SADC  region.  In  a  further  attempt  to  promote
training, the Reserve Bank established a task force to review the training currently provided to staff
and to make recommendations on ways of optimising the existing training facilities.
In the past financial year, a beginning has been made in drawing up a human resources plan which will
deal with progressive employment equity in the workplace by promoting equal opportunities and fair
treatment.  The  plan  will  propose  the  implementation  of  affirmative  action  measures  to  redress  the
disadvantages  of  designated  groups  to  ensure  their  equitable  representation  in  all  occupational
categories and levels of the workforce. A renewed focus will be placed on recruiting from the target
group and enhancing the skills profile through development and monitoring. This plan will, however,
be put into effect in a manner that will ensure that the institutional memory does not drop below the
critical  level  required  for  national  and  international  excellence.  To  achieve  these  goals,  a
Subcommittee  on  Human  Resources  will  be  established  under  the  auspices  of  the  Management
Committee to oversee the execution of the human resources plan.
Concluding remarks
Events over the past year illustrate that the thrust of monetary policy in an integrated financial world
should  clearly  be  to  pursue  financial  stability.  Although  such  a  policy  stance  does  not  provide
unconditional  protection  against  volatile  international  capital  movements,  it  improves  the  country’s
ability to withstand international financial turbulence. When international financial disruptions affect
the South African economy, adjustments will inevitably have to be made to the exchange rate of the
rand, domestic liquidity and interest rates. The objective of the monetary authorities should not be to
resist such changes, but rather to ease the adjustment process by pursuing consistent and transparent
policy measures. Financial stability is a precondition for sustained economic growth and employment
creation.
The changes to the monetary policy framework and the monetary policy decision-making process that
are proposed in this address should assist the authorities in this difficult task. Inflation targeting is no
panacea,  but  it  should  help  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  and  minimise  the  inevitable,  but  short-
term,  social  and  economic  cost  of  achieving  price  stability.  A  more  transparent  decision-making
process will further assist in reaching this goal.
The  financial  crisis  over  the  past  two  years  showed  that  globalised  financial  markets  and  volatile
capital movements create new challenges for supervisors to maintain stability in the financial sector.
Various  incidents  revealed  the  extent  to  which  participants  took  advantage  of  a  wide  variety  of
leverage methods to enhance returns on investments in emerging-market economies. The extensive use
of  derivatives  and  short  sales  of  securities  compounded  losses  and  increased  the  need  for  liquidity
when asset prices declined. In view of such developments, credit risk management becomes extremely
important because of the dangers of default and large bad debts in the banking sector. In the recent
crisis South Africa was fortunate to have had efficient and well-run  banking  institutions.  Continued
attention will have to be given in the coming years to sound risk management and to devoting even
more resources to the maintenance of stability in the financial sector.
11
BIS Review 91/1999
In conclusion, I wish to thank the President and Deputy President of the Republic for their support and
appreciation  with  regard  to  the  functions  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  and  its  governors.  I
further wish to thank Mr Trevor Manuel, Minister of Finance, Ms Maria Ramos, the Director-General
of Finance and the staff of the Department of Finance for their support of the Reserve Bank over the
past year. I should like to thank the directors of the Reserve Bank, including the deputy governors, for
their undivided loyalty to the Bank. On this occasion, it is also fitting to pay further tribute to Dr Chris
Stals for his term of ten years as Governor, and just more than 44 years in the service of the Bank.
Dr Stals made numerous valuable contributions to the work of the Bank and for the benefit of South
Africa during his career, for which we are deeply grateful. Dr Chris de Swardt, Deputy Governor for
almost ten years, also retired recently after a distinguished career of nearly 44½ years in the Bank. We
wish both Dr Stals and Dr de Swardt, as well as their wives, a happy retirement and fulfilling years
ahead. Finally, I wish to thank the staff of the Reserve Bank for the professional manner in which they
performed their duties in the past year. I am confident that with their continued loyal support, the Bank
will meet the challenges that lie ahead.
BIS Review 91/1999
12
