Mrs Akhtar Aziz discusses
the international financial architecture
Official speech entitled “International Financial Architecture - The Challenge of Change” by Dr Zeti
Akhtar  Aziz,  the  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  the  Malaysian  central  bank,  at  the
Malaysian Capital Market Summit on 11 August 1999.
 Introduction
The significant fundamental changes that have taken place in the international financial environment
has  brought  with  it  new  challenges  and  consequences  to  the  global  community  and  individual
economies  at  large.  Change  has  become  the  only  constant.  The  evolution  of  the  changes  in  the
international  financial  environment  has  been  facilitated  by  the  significant  advances  in  technology,
market  innovations,  financial  liberalisation  and  the  consolidation  process  in  the  financial  services
sector.  These  developments  have  resulted  in  the  intensification  of  the  process  of  globalisation  and
integration of financial markets. As a consequence, there has been a widespread transformation in the
international  financial landscape  reflecting  the  changes  in  the  relative  significance  of  players  in  the
market, the nature of the financial instruments and the volume of activity in the market.
This process of globalisation is supposed to result in enhanced opportunities for the world economy
that would lead to a more efficient allocation of resources across borders and thereby result in higher
growth and development across countries. The experience however, has shown that globalisation has
also brought with it risks that can lead to highly destabilising consequences that can result in costs that
far  outweigh  the  benefits.  The  challenge  facing  the  international  community  is  how  to  ensure  an
efficient functioning financial system, a system that is not vulnerable to market failures, a system that
would lead to an efficient allocation of resources across borders and provide enhanced prospects for
the world economy. At the individual country level, the challenge is how to participate in this changed
environment,  how  to  be  an  integral  part  of  the  world  economy  without  being  vulnerable  to  violent
destabilising developments. The challenge for individual countries is to be able to be in a position to
experience the benefits of these changes while at the same time enhancing the potential for survival.
Changing trends in the world financial environment
As a result of the changes that have facilitated globalisation, financial flows have now far exceeded
world  trade  flows  by  four  times.  Such  flows  have  now  become  the  dominant  factor  in  determining
exchange rate movements. While previously, exchange rate developments reflected the performance of
the  balance  of  payments  current  account  position,  in  the  current  environment,  the  capital  account
performance has become the dominant factor in determining exchange rate movements. In particular,
the developments in the short-term capital account have become the important factor. In this current
environment  the  expansion  of  international  financial  activities  has  resulted  in  international
developments having a greater influence on the domestic economy.
The increased cross border flows also reflects the increased institutionalisation of savings and the now
relative  importance  of  institutional  investors  in  financial  markets.  In  efforts  to  diversify  risk  and
enhance  returns  participation  in  foreign  markets  by 
increased
exponentially.  This  trend  should  in  theory  improve  the  allocation  of  world  financial  resources  and
increase competitiveness and efficiency of the financial markets as well as open up new avenues for
enhancing prospects for growth.
investors  have 
institutional 
In this process of globalisation the domestic financial conditions of individual countries have become
significantly  influenced  by  international  capital  movements  and  external  economic  and  financial
conditions  and  policies. The extreme  form  of  this  has  been  demonstrated  by  the  contagion  that  has
1
BIS Review 89/1999
occurred during the financial crisis that has been experienced in recent years, in particular during the
ERM crisis, the Mexican crisis and the East Asian crisis. The challenge has therefore been to operate
in  an  environment  that  has  become  more  susceptible  to  greater  uncertainty  and  volatility.  In  such
periods  of  excessive  volatility  and  wide  swings,  market  failure  is  seen  to  result  as  markets  become
unstable,  moving  further  and  further  away  from  equilibrium  levels  following  over  reaction  and
irrational  market  behaviour  amplified  by  herd  behaviour.  At  the  extreme,  these  eventually  become
trigger factors for domestic outflows resulting in total collapse and devastation.
The sudden nature of capital movements also imply the increasing short-termism of the global market.
Such  flows  have  tended  to  focus  on  short-term  and  immediate  gains  rather  than  having  a  more
medium-term perspective, taking into account structural elements for investment decisions. This has
led to excessive risk taking, reflecting the intense pressure for high returns. Market behaviour under
these  circumstances  has  been  characterised  by  sudden  shifts  from  extreme  exuberance  to  over
pessimism. These flows, in effect, do not reflect the underlying fundamentals.
In  this  environment,  the  challenge  has  been  for  enhanced  access  to  information  to  allow  for  better
decision  making.  There  have  been  calls  for  greater  transparency  and  disclosure.  Scrutiny  and
surveillance  by  multilateral  agencies,  rating  agencies  and  the  market  have  intensified.  At  the  same
time,  however,  there  has  not  been  adequate  surveillance  on  short-term  flows  to  allow  greater
understanding of their nature and the dynamics of such flows. The increasing degree of sophistication
of  the  financial  instruments  and  the  complex  nature  of  their  operations  has  not  allowed  for  a  true
assessment  of  the  implications  of  these  developments.  Of  equal  importance  on  the  issue  of
transparency, is the need to also ensure appropriate utilisation of the information.
In  the  context  of  these  developments,  the  regulatory  structure  has  lagged  behind  the  financial
innovations and their internationalisation. It has been widely recognised that there is a widening gap
between outdated regulatory structures and advanced market instruments and developments. Given the
global dimension of the forces of change, the call for the strengthening of individual nations’ financial
systems also needs to be matched by efforts to strengthen the international financial system.
In the  past, changes in  the  financial environment  have  been  met  with  corresponding  changes in the
international financial system. Since the Plaza Accord in 1985, however, the changes in the financial
environment have not been matched by a parallel change in the management of the global financial
system, particularly in the 1990s. The international financial system has continued to operate within a
framework designed for a global environment of the 1970s and 1980s.
In this era of the expansion of capital flows there has essentially been an absence of the development
of  the  appropriate  parallel  prudential  framework  for  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  international
financial markets. In the case of trade, the push towards free trade was matched by adequate rules to
ensure  orderly  development.  International  rules  on  market  opening  measures  and  procedures  for
dispute settlement were established. More importantly, there are safeguards to protect countries facing
balance-of-payments difficulties. In contrast, the push for a liberal environment for capital movements
has not been matched by a parallel development to establish rules for the efficient functioning of the
markets  and  for  safeguards  to  individual  economies  from  the  adverse  consequences  of  capital
movements. The  challenge  is  therefore  not  only  for  the  international  community  to  evolve  a  viable
international system that can function efficiently in the current global environment, but also one that is
relevant to expected future changes.
Quest for a reformed international financial architecture
The forces of change that we are confronted with are essentially international in character. A global
perspective is therefore required to evolve a system in which all countries can participate and benefit
from the globalisation process. A permanent and sustainable outcome would be one that is developed
by the global community, taking into account the diverse backgrounds of countries that make up the
global community as well as its implications on the private sector. Efforts by individual countries to
strengthen their domestic systems and capabilities are important, but this is not a sufficient condition
for ensuring economic and financial stability.
BIS Review 89/1999
2
Several international forums over the last two years have engaged in this exercise and have brought to
the  forefront  the  issues  and  challenges  at  hand.  While  there  is  a  general  consensus  among  the
international  community  that  the  international  financial  system  needs  to  be  reformed  to  ensure  a
system that is relevant to the current changed environment, there is no general consensus of how this
might be achieved.
The  more  recent  initiatives  by  the  G7  have  provided  the  most  encouraging  progress  that  has  been
made  with  the  establishment  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum.  It  provides  the  opportunity  for  the
proposed changes to be translated into concrete implementation.  While  efforts  are  underway,  it  still
remains  to  be  seen  as  to  the  degree  to  which  changes  will  be  made  and  the  time  frame  for  its
implementation. The urgency for the development of an efficient functioning system that would avoid
future  crisis  is  vital,  given  that  the  strains  and  costs  of  such  crisis  occur  not  only  for  the  affected
individual countries but also have widespread consequences across countries.
Rising to the challenge of change
While  individual  countries  will  continue  to  be  vulnerable  to  changes  in  the  external  environment,
initiatives  can  be  taken  to  build  the  foundation  to  enhance  capabilities  and  capacities  to  not  only
absorb  change  but  also  to  be  in  a  position  to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunities  that  globalisation
accords.
An important area towards achieving this is the process of liberalisation. There is now an international
consensus  that  the  process  of  managing  the  liberalisation  should  ensure  that  countries  have  the
institutional framework to deal with international capital flows before liberalising capital transactions.
Financial  liberalisation  implemented  in  an  orderly  and  well  sequenced  manner  would  allow  the
domestic  system  to  be  adequately  developed  to  cope  with  the  challenges  emerging  from  the
globalisation process. The necessary set of preconditions should therefore be in place prior to capital
account  liberalisation.  The  East  Asian  crisis  demonstrated  that  countries  that  have  liberalised  too
rapidly in the absence of the preconditions became relatively more vulnerable. All too often, external
pressure has been applied to emerging economies to hasten the pace of liberalisation without taking
into account the risks that would emerge.
However, it should also be noted that in spite of the best institutional framework, a country can still be
subsumed by a liberalised capital account framework under the current international financial system
that  does  not  have  any  financial  regulatory  framework  for  capital  flows.  Management  of  domestic
risks  must  be  matched  by  measures  to  ensure  efficient  markets.  A  parallel  institution  building  and
surveillance system at the international level is necessary to secure greater stability.
Another important area where safeguards are necessary are the strategies for financing growth. In this
regard, development strategies by individual economies need to make balanced choices between debt
and equity, and the share between domestic and foreign financing. Excessive reliance on external debt
financing increases vulnerability to changes in interest rates of creditor countries as well as exchange
rates of both creditor and debtor countries. The different strategies pursued by the East Asian countries
in  their  financing  strategies  have  resulted  in  different  degrees  of  vulnerability  to  the  external
developments.  Here,  the  development  of  a  deep  and  liquid  capital  market  is  important  to  provide
alternative sources of financing and thereby reduce excessive reliance on the banking system for such
financing.
For an individual country, the changed environment that has resulted in greater unpredictability and
uncertainty, makes risk management vital. Decisions need to be made on the acceptable levels of risk,
the  degree  of  risk  tolerance  and  for  the  development  of  strong  risk  culture.  The  methodology  and
technology need to be developed to measure and monitor the increased risks. Adequate controls and
checks and balances need to be in place to ensure there is no excessive risk taking that could result in
adverse implications.
The  process  of  globalisation  and  change  also  implies  the  need  for  the  domestic  financial  system  to
enhance its capacity to compete in world markets. In this regard, increased efficiency would provide
the competitive edge. The move for consolidation would enhance this process in obtaining gains from
3
BIS Review 89/1999
increased  economies  of  scale  and  cost  saving.  Gains  from  increased  efficiency  in  the  utilisation  of
physical and human resources as well as higher technology become essential in this more competitive
environment.  In  the  context  of  technological  advantage,  the  application  of  IT  will  represent  an
important enabling tool in this process. Efforts to upgrade skills will also be required. An enlarged size
will  enable  significant  increases  in  investment  in  cutting  edge  technology  and  human  resources.  In
essence,  in  an  environment  of  scarce  resources,  the  efficient  utilisation  of  resources  becomes
important.
The process of globalisation and change also implies a need for the domestic economy to enhance its
capacity to compete in the world markets. Small open economies such as Malaysia face the challenges
to build a competitive edge in a product and service market that is also characterised by rapid change.
Many of Malaysia’s exports face rapid technological and market changes. In this context, the strategy
has been for the diversification of the economic base, while at the same time enhancing efficiency and
increasing  labour  mobility.  For  this  purpose  there  is  also  a  need  for  more  diversified  and  efficient
sources of financing. In relation to this, a financial system that is efficient and competitive as well as
an efficient functioning capital market is a key element in the process. Labour mobility also needs to
be enhanced through human resource development. On the corporate front, the current restructuring
and consolidation taking place would make the industries more resilient and efficient. As corporations
become more focused on their core activities and as their activities are streamlined, this will increase
the  prospects  for  enhanced  efficiency  and  competitiveness.  The  ability  to  tap  IT  and  engage  in
innovation  becomes  increasingly  important  to  meet  the  increasingly  more  sophisticated  demand.
Greater efforts will also be needed to promote more efficient flow and use of information. This will
enable industries to respond faster to the changing environment and move towards a more knowledge
based economy.
Conclusion
In this global environment of uncertainty and change, it is difficult to anticipate future risks. While the
future is unpredictable, it is important to understand how the future might change, not only to gauge
the  viability  of  existing  initiatives  but  also  to  develop  new  capabilities  to  operate  in  the  changed
environment. Therefore, in moving forward, we need to look beyond the horizon to have an ability to
face  an  environment  that  is  fundamentally  different  from  the  present  one.  What  is  needed  is  an
understanding  of  the  range  of  possibilities  that  might  occur  and  to  be  in  a  position  to  implement
strategies  that  will  succeed  under  different  circumstances.  It  is  therefore  important  to  identify  the
forces  that  could  determine  these  different  possible  environments.  The  ability  to  recognise  the
potential future developments and to be able to adapt and adjust to these developments would provide
safeguards and increase our resilience and our prospects for survival and sustained growth.
BIS Review 89/1999
4
