Mr Mboweni considers the role of the South African Reserve Bank
in economic integration in the Southern African Development Community
Speech by Mr Tito Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, as a contribution to the
Africa  Dialogue  Lecture  Series  presented  by  the  University  of  Pretoria’s  Department  of  Political
Sciences,  the  Institute  for  International  Affairs  and  Accord,  in  the  Senate  Hall  at  the  University  of
Pretoria on 21 September 1999.
 Introduction
1.
There  are  many  buzzwords  in  today’s  world.  One  of  the  most  recognisable  ones  in  the  economic
vocabulary  is  globalisation.  Many  people  define  themselves  as  being  either  for  or  against
globalisation. My own view is “good luck” to those who want to demonstrate against globalisation. I
would rather people spent time on how they can maximise the benefits of globalisation.
But today our discussion is about the role of the Reserve Bank in economic integration of the Southern
African  Development  Community  (SADC)  which  obviously  has  to  be  placed  within  the  context  of
globalisation.
Some people blame globalisation for many of the problems confronting the world today, ranging from
widening income disparities in the industrialised  world  to financial  crises in  emerging  markets.  But
even  some  of  the  most  vociferous  critics  acknowledge  that  globalisation  can  be  a  powerful  and
positive force for generating wealth and reducing poverty, as rising trade volumes create opportunities
for entrepreneurs, and developing countries may gain greater access to capital from the rich countries
of the world.
Globalisation  seems  to  be  encouraging  economic  regionalisation  as  many  big  and  small  economies
establish  economic  blocs  to  maximise  their  collective  competitive  advantage.  The  advantages  of
regional  economic  integration  are  well  known,  but  it  is  worth  pausing,  for  the  purposes  of  this
discussion, to mention a few.  Among  others,  economic  integration  enables  entrepreneurs to  take  up
new  business  opportunities  by  cutting  red  tape  and  facilitating  the  flow  of  transactions.  Integration
with neighbouring countries can produce economies of scale when competing with other regions in the
world and  can  be  one  of  the  ways  that  countries  ensure  that  the  best  use  is  made  of  the  resources,
capabilities and abilities within their region.
Economic  integration  means  that  individual  nations  are  becoming  less  important  internationally  as
regional groupings gain in significance, especially when it comes to investment and trade in goods and
services. To name a few examples, regional free trade initiatives have either been implemented or are
in  the  process  of  being  implemented  in  North,  Central  and  South  America,  East  Asia  and  in  the
European Union where full financial integration is not far off. Africa also has a number of economic
cooperation initiatives, including the Southern African Development Community (SADC) which has
14 member states.
The  SADC  member  states  are:  South  Africa,  Angola,  Botswana,  Lesotho,  Malawi,  Mauritius,
Mozambique,  Namibia,  Swaziland,  Tanzania,  Zambia,  Zimbabwe,  the  Democratic  Republic  of  the
Congo and the Seychelles.
The forerunner of the SADC was a regional grouping of nine Southern African states which started
working together in 1980 with a view to reducing their economic dependence on the then apartheid
ruled South Africa. Over time, more members joined and by the time South Africa entered the fold
after  the  democratic  elections  of  1994,  the  aim  of  the  regional  grouping  was  to  work  towards
economic integration.
1
BIS Review 98/1999
Whilst  it  is  factually  correct  that  South  Africa is the largest  economy  in  our  region,  accounting  for
some 65% of the region’s gross domestic product in dollar terms, we are, however,  on  a  per  capita
basis, the third best off — behind Mauritius and Botswana. Mauritius has a GDP per capita of more
than  $3,500  while  South  Africa’s  is  less  than  $3,000.  In  the  rich  countries  of  the  world,  per  capita
incomes are about eight times as high as they are in this subregion of Africa.
As part of the process of promoting regional economic integration, each SADC member country was
allocated an economic sector to coordinate, based on the country’s actual or potential capacity. South
Africa has been allocated responsibility for the coordination of the finance and investment sector of
the  SADC.  The  coordination  of  the  sector  is  led  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  of  South  Africa.  The
finance  and  investment  sector  was  given  to  South  Africa  in  recognition  of  its  developed  financial
markets and institutions.
The  Committee  of the  SADC  Central  Bank  Governors  which  meets  twice  a  year, forms  part  of  the
finance and investment sector and is chaired by the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank. The
Committee of Governors met for the first time in November 1995. Its terms of reference focus, among
other things, on closer cooperation among central banks in the SADC in the areas of monetary policy
and policy instruments, bank supervision, money and capital markets, international financial relations,
payment, clearing and settlement systems, training, and money laundering.
Information technology is one of the most important areas of cooperation. The concerns with properly
functioning  financial  and  banking  systems  naturally  made  Year  2000  preparedness  one  of  our
priorities this year.
More generally, it is crucial to note that financial and banking issues cannot be looked at in isolation,
without  reference to  other  SADC  concerns  such  as  trade,  industrial  and  fiscal  policies  and  political
factors too.
South Africa prepares to open its markets
2.
Compared with other regional groupings, the idea of a European Union-like economic union is still
some  way  off  for  the  SADC,  although  progress  is  being  made  towards  implementing  a  free  trade
agreement.
A target implementation date has been set for January next year to begin the process of lowering trade
barriers, streamlining customs and border procedures, and harmonising external  tariffs.  SADC  trade
and industry ministers are due to meet soon for negotiations on the trade protocol in the run-up to the
start of implementation next year. There have been suggestions that South Africa might extend market
access concessions on a unilateral basis after certain key agreements have been reached.
We understand that South Africa plans to eliminate most duties on imported goods from other SADC
countries by 2004 and the region could ultimately develop into a free trade zone.
The  free  trade  discussions  and  negotiations  have  received  some  attention  in  the  media.  Generally
speaking,  it seems  that  people  welcome  the  progress  made  by  the  SADC  as  a  sign  that  it  is  finally
getting down to business. Also in the development programmes are infrastructure developments in the
region,  such  as  the  Maputo  Corridor  which  has  spurred  investments  into  various  economic  sectors
estimated  at  R35bn.  One  example  of  a  big  investment  is  the  Mozal  aluminium  smelter,  which  has
triggered the renewal of the Maputo Harbour. A very welcome development indeed.
Far  less  immediately  newsworthy,  but  also  very  important  for  the  establishment  of  a  regional
economic bloc, has been the work done by the Committee of Central Bank Governors. The work is an
important building block towards the creation of a free trade zone.
One cannot implement free trade in goods and services without having the proper financial systems in
place; the  work  of  the  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors  can  be  seen  as  providing  the  oil  that
makes the wheels of commerce turn faster in the region.
The implementation of a free trade agreement is made easier if  national  payments  systems  function
properly and are compatible with individual states in the region.  In  addition, investors  who  want to
BIS Review 98/1999
2
take advantage of the liberalisation of trade will feel more comfortable if there is a high and uniform
standard of bank supervision; in other words, legal familiarity, certainty and a good sense of a stable,
well  regulated  and  properly  supervised  banking  system.  Similarly,  investors  and  potential  business
partners  usually  want  easy  access  to  reliable  basic  macroeconomic  information  of  countries  in  the
region.
For goods to flow smoothly across borders, it is also important that capital should flow smoothly in the
region,  while  bearing  in  mind  that  potentially  destabilising  and  volatile  capital  swings  must  be
avoided.
These are a few examples of how the Committee’s work fits in with the overall concept of economic
cooperation and free trade. The Committee’s work has mainly been focussed on the following areas:
development  of  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  systems;  the  impact  of  exchange  controls  on  the
cross-border flow of goods, services and capital in the SADC region; the development of a monetary
and financial data base; coordination and training of central bank officials within the region and the
collection of information on the legal and operational frameworks of central banks within the region.
Cooperation  in  the  field  of  information  technology  has  been  an  important  focus  area  for  the
Committee which has resulted in improved communication and collaboration.
Development of the payment, clearing and settlement systems in the SADC region
3.
In support of the SADC objective of establishing free trade within the region by 2004, the Committee
of Central Bank Governors decided at its inception to develop the payment, clearing and settlement
systems of SADC countries.
The benefits of improved payments systems include: promotion of economic activity, both regionally
and internationally; improved control of monetary aggregates resulting from reducing float levels and
minimising  delays;  a  more  productive  use  of  resources  as  a  result  of  lowered  transaction  costs;
improved management of both credit and systemic risk as financial transfers are completed efficiently
and quickly; facilitation of financial sector development; improved trust in the security and reliability
of payment instruments and international acceptance.
One aspect of the SADC payments system project has been an awareness campaign to sensitise a large
cross-section of stakeholders in  each  of  the  countries  about  payments  system  issues.  Workshops  on
payments system issues have been held in most SADC member states.
Now that the awareness campaign is complete and information on the existing payments systems in
countries has been collected, the next step is to develop a strategic framework for each country – and
for the region as a whole. Capacity building is, as always, an important theme.
Mauritius  has  already  decided  that  it  is  feasible  to  implement  the  South  African  Multiple  Option
Settlement (SAMOS) system in that country, in line with its goal of real-time gross settlement. Other
SADC  central  banks  have  also  indicated  they  would  like  to  implement  SAMOS  to  their  banking
systems.
4.
The impact of exchange controls on the cross-border flow of goods, services and capital
in the SADC region
Exchange controls may be, in the case of many countries, a necessary mechanism in a world in which
volatile capital swings can wreak havoc on small economies, as we saw last year. However, controls
within a region which is working towards greater economic integration can be a stumbling block in the
way to smooth and effective cooperation, as well as a deterrent to investors.
The  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors  has  a  subcommittee  on  exchange  controls.  Existing
controls in each country in the SADC region have been analysed with a view to gradual harmonisation
and  the  removal  of  controls  for  transactions  within  the  region.  However,  the  region’s  central  bank
officials  recognise  that  the  sequencing  and  speed  of  exchange  control  liberalisation  depend  on  the
characteristics of each individual economy and also on the political realities.
3
BIS Review 98/1999
The target date of 2004 for the creation of a free trade zone implies that all intra-regional exchange
controls  should  be  abolished  by  then.  However,  the  subcommittee  on  exchange  controls  felt
liberalisation should be completed more rapidly. Controls that directly inhibit the cross-border flow of
goods, services and capital should be tackled first. The subcommittee asked that central banks in the
region  formally  report  on  the  progress  made  on  easing  exchange  controls  when  the  Committee  of
Central Bank Governors meets again next month.
Some  countries  like  Zambia,  Mauritius  and  Botswana  have  liberalised  their  exchange  controls  in  a
short time. However, rapid easing might not be the correct speed for other countries.
Zimbabwe  reintroduced  exchange  controls  in  the  wake  of  last  year’s  global  financial  turmoil.
However,  the  country  has  indicated  that  the  controls  will  be  reversed  as  soon  as  the  balance  of
payments position improves and inflationary pressures subside. Information at our disposal indicates
that Zimbabwe will continue to liberalise capital flows gradually.
South  Africa’s  exchange  controls  favour investment in  the  SADC  region,  as  requirements  for  these
investments are less onerous. Although foreign direct investment (FDI) in the SADC region accounts
for a relatively small portion of the total planned FDI by South Africans, it is nevertheless growing in
importance.
From March 1995 until mid-September this year, approvals by the exchange control department of the
Reserve Bank for direct investment by South African companies in the SADC region totalled R7.85bn.
Globally, South African companies have received exchange control approval for a total of R74.5bn in
foreign direct investment, or FDI, all over the world.
The investment appetite of South African companies in SADC countries has been on the rise. Their
growing interest is apparent from the steady rise every year in exchange control approvals for FDI in
the SADC region – from less than R500m in 1996 to R1.5bn in  1997,  R2.5bn  last  year  and  almost
R2.9bn so far this year.
Based on net asset value, actual foreign direct investment – which differs from approved FDI which
has not necessarily taken place yet – by South African companies in the SADC region stood at R3.2bn
at the end of December 1997, the latest available figure. The net  asset  value  of  total  South  African
investments in the SADC region, including portfolio and fixed investments, was almost R6bn.
The investment flows to South Africa from other countries in the region are also fairly sizable. Based
on net asset value, total investment from SADC countries in South Africa was valued at R7bn at the
end of December 1997. So there is a good two-way flow in the relationship between South Africa as
the largest economy and the region as a whole.
Gathering of information
5.
A database comprising monetary and financial statistics of individual countries has been established
and is freely accessible on the Internet at the website www.sadcbankers.org. Each central bank takes
full responsibility for the updating and accuracy of its own data. The International Monetary Fund is
providing technical assistance for further development of the database.
In addition, an information bank has been compiled on the structures and policies of central banks in
the region as well as on the financial markets of member states. This information paves the way for
future cooperation on monetary policy in the region.
A project has also been undertaken to summarise the legal and operational frameworks of each of the
central  banks  in  the  region,  analysing  differences  in  their  structures  and  then  proposing  measures
towards greater compatibility.
Cooperation in the field of information
6.
The  committee  of  central  bank  governors  established  an  IT  Forum  which,  among  others,  aims  to
develop  a  common  application  architecture  for  bank  supervision.  The  Forum  which  has  obtained
BIS Review 98/1999
4
funding from the World Bank plans to begin developing common bank supervision models early next
year.
The Forum has also been keeping track of Year 2000 readiness in member states. Information on the
Y2K  bug  has  been  shared,  and  bank  supervisors  have  been  encouraged  to  participate  in  Y2K
certification of financial institutions in each country.
The development of financial markets
7.
The SADC Committee of Stock Exchanges, which reports to the SADC Ministers of Finance through
the  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors,  is  set  to  announce  the  harmonisation  of  listing
requirements in the region. Other projects include the introduction of automated trading into all SADC
exchanges, electronic clearing and settlement as well as education and training.
On the development of bond markets, agreement was reached that trading in equities and bonds should
be accommodated on the same exchange rather than that new bond exchanges be established. It was
also decided that stock exchanges that wished to implement bond listings requirements would use the
new listings requirements of the South African bond exchange.
The South African bond exchange has submitted a proposal for the establishment of a centralised debt
securities  market  for  the  region.  The  proposal  argued  against  allowing  the  development  of  separate
licensed bond exchanges and was in favour of building on existing infrastructure.
The  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors  has  studied  the  characteristics  of  money  markets  in
individual states, but no decision has yet been taken on further development of money markets.
A SADC Banking Association was established in July last year aimed at encouraging member states to
implement  internationally  accepted  banking  standards  and  uniformity  of  banking  legislation.  The
South African Banking Council is a member of the Association which is chaired at present by Malawi.
Conclusion
8.
From my report-back to you today on the work of the SADC Committee of Central Bank Governors it
should  hopefully  be  clear  that  the  vision  of  full  economic  integration,  with  free  and  unfettered
movement of goods and capital, is still a long way off. However, slowly but surely we are laying the
foundation for a robust regional economic bloc. The central banks of the region are working together
to  put  in  place  a  common  financial  architecture  which  can  form  the  basis  of  closer  economic
integration.
Before full economic integration can be attained,  we  need  to  have  sound  financial  systems  that can
withstand sudden international shocks and which can accommodate increased economic activity. We
need efficient and coordinated financial markets and reliable and compatible clearing and settlement
arrangements between our countries.
The  SADC  finance  and  investment  sector  is  convinced  that  it  has  already  laid  the  foundation  for
macroeconomic convergence and integration.
As the new chairperson of the SADC Committee of Central Bank Governors, I will make every effort
to ensure that we continue with the construction of a strong financial infrastructure for the region, so
that globalisation can work to the advantage of the Southern African region.
In conclusion, I would like to express the hope that the region will have confidence in its ability to
make  globalisation  work  in  its  favour.  To  illustrate  this  point,  I  would  like  to  quote  from  a  speech
made last year by President Thabo Mbeki, in which he talked of an African Renaissance and about the
weight that past enslavement has placed on Africans’ confidence:
“It continues still to weigh down the African mind and spirit, like the ton of lead that the African slave
carries on her own shoulders, producing in her and the rest a condition which, in itself, contests any
assertion that she is capable of initiative, creativity, individuality and entrepreneurship.”
5
BIS Review 98/1999
Initiative,  creativity,  individuality  and  entrepreneurship  –  we  in  the  Committee  of  Central  Bank
Governors know the people of the SADC region possess these qualities in abundance. We know that
Southern Africa has the potential to become a lasting success story.
BIS Review 98/1999
6
