Mr Yam presents the 1998 Hong Kong Monetary Authority’s annual report
Speech  by  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  Mr  Joseph  Yam,  on  the
occasion  of  the  presentation  of  the  1998  HKMA  annual  report  before  the  Legislative  Council
Financial Affairs Panel in Hong Kong on 3 May 1999.
Introduction
Mr Chairman, Honourable Members,
I  am  most  grateful  to  you  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  speak  to  you  on  the  occasion  of  the
publication  of  the  HKMA’s  Annual  Report  for  1998.  The  Report  is  tabled  at  this  meeting  of  the
Financial  Affairs  Panel;  it  is  also  being  distributed  to  all  Members  of  the  Legislative  Council  this
morning.  This  Report  covers  the  full  range  of  the  HKMA’s  work  for  the  calendar  year  1998,  in
addition to giving an assessment of the economic and banking environment for the year.
I have no need to remind Members that 1998 was, to put it mildly, an eventful year. The Report sets
out the many problems and challenges that the HKMA has had to grapple with during the course of
the year, and explains what actions and initiatives the HKMA has been taking to address them. You
are all familiar with these issues, and you have the details before you. So I do not wish to take up too
much time with a long description. My main focus in this presentation will be on the challenges for
the HKMA in the coming year, particularly in the light of current economic trends. Before I do that,
however, I should like just to highlight the challenges and achievements of the past year, and to touch
on an issue that I know is of concern to Members: the question of accountability and transparency.
The year in review
Nineteen-ninety-eight was an extremely tough year for  Hong  Kong.  The  Asian  financial  crisis,  and
eruptions in other parts of the world, brought continuing instability. The effects on Hong Kong’s open
and  outward-looking  economy  were  severe.  GDP  declined  by  5.1%,  the  sharpest  decline  shown  in
GDP statistics dating back to 1961. The unemployment rate more than doubled, to 5.7% at the end of
the year: it has, since then, increased still further. Property and share prices plummeted, though they
have  since  regained  some  of  their  lost  value.  The  strains  and  uncertainties  of  recession  have
penetrated into every home and every business. The distress has been all the more acutely felt because
the  recession  appeared  with  dramatic  suddenness  after  many  years  of  vigorous  and  uninterrupted
growth.
Hong Kong’s banking system, quite naturally, came under severe pressure, though it has handled the
downward  adjustment  in  asset  prices  and  the  volatilities  brought  on  by  the  financial  crisis  with
remarkable success. A much more disturbing feature of the larger crisis has been the succession of
opportunistic attacks on the Hong Kong dollar and on Hong Kong’s financial markets. These attacks
increased  the  pains  of  recession  by  pushing  up  interest  rates  and  by  corroding  confidence  in  our
financial  system,  both  locally  and  overseas.  They  reached  a  climax  in  the  sophisticated  assault  of
early August, which mobilised massive resources in an attempt to play off the currency board system
against  the  stock  and  futures  markets.  This  attack  was  unprecedented  in  scale  and  organisation.  It
posed  a  grave  threat  to  the  stability  and  integrity  of  our  whole  financial  system.  Decisive,  albeit
controversial,  action  by  the  Hong  Kong  SAR  Government  ensured  that  this  threat  was  averted.  In
combination with other factors, this action helped to ensure stability in our markets for the remainder
of the year and beyond.
The  HKMA’s  role  in  the  August  operation  is  well  known  to  Members.  For  my  part,  I  am  fully
convinced that what we did was necessary and right for Hong Kong, and that it delivered our financial
system from the brink of a profound and very dangerous crisis. The portfolio of shares acquired by the
1
BIS Review   48/1999
Government  as  a  result  of  operations  has  been  placed  under  the  management  of  EFIL,  which  will
draw up plans for disposing the majority of them in a gradual and orderly manner. But so much has
been said about this subject that the impression is sometimes given that that is all that the HKMA did
in  1998.  This  is  a  pity,  because  we  have  other  solid  achievements  to  place  on  record.  Among  the
achievements worth singling out are:
•  Effective supervision of the banking system to ensure stability and soundness during a period of
intense regional financial crisis and domestic slowdown.
•  A growth of 27.5% in the accumulated surplus of the Exchange Fund during the year, or 15% if
the gains from the equity portfolio acquired in August are excluded.
•  Continuing currency stability, within the framework of the linked exchange rate system, against
unprecedented speculative attacks, and during a year of currency instability in much of the rest of
the region.
•  Substantial improvements to the currency board system, which have made it more resilient, more
transparent, and less vulnerable to manipulation than it was before.
 Increased involvement in regional and global initiatives to promote Hong Kong as an international
financial  centre  and  to  seek  action  to  repair  defects  in  the  international  financial  architecture.
Progress in this field has been slow, but not for lack of any advocacy on Hong Kong’s part.
The three broad mandates of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority are to maintain currency stability, to
promote the safety and stability of the banking system, and to enhance the efficiency, integrity and
development  of  the  financial  system.  I  think  that  the  HKMA  can  justifiably  claim  that  it  has
successfully  delivered  on  all  of  these  mandates  during  1998,  and  in  the  face  of  considerable
difficulties.
Accountability and transparency
Monetary and banking stability is, of course, the result of efforts by the whole of the financial sector,
and  not  just  the  work  of  the  HKMA.  It  also  depends  on  international  faith  in  the  integrity  of  our
system, and, equally important, on the confidence of the community of Hong Kong. We believe that
community support for our monetary and banking policies, and confidence in our financial system are
strong. But we also know that confidence cannot be built on blind public faith in a remote monetary
authority carrying out its esoteric policies in a quiet and mysterious way: it must be nurtured through
explanation, through informed discussion, through a system that is both accountable and transparent.
The  safety  of  our  banks  and  the  stability  of  our  currency  are  everybody’s  business,  and  the  Asian
financial  crisis  has  brought  this  fact  home  to  the  people  of  Hong  Kong.  Economic  hardship  has
prompted more people to ask more questions about the way Hong Kong manages its  monetary  and
banking systems. Energetic policies, such as the operation in August, have also stimulated debate -
some of it heated - over the rights and wrongs of what we are doing.
Quite  properly,  the  Legislative  Council  has  been  the  focus  of  much  of  this  debate,  not  just  in  its
motion debates, but also in the many discussions organised by this panel on a variety of subjects. We
have seen more interest in our work from Members during the past year than in any other year since
the creation of the HKMA in 1993. I welcome this attention. It gives us the opportunity to enter into
productive  discussion  with  those  who  know  and  represent  the  community.  It  also  shows  that
accountability is alive and well. We might choose to explain this accountability in narrow legal terms,
by  referring  to  laws,  passed  by  the  Legislative  Council,  that  define  and  limit  our  powers  and
responsibilities,  or  by  setting  out  the  Monetary  Authority’s  accountability,  through  the  Financial
Secretary and the SAR Government, to the Legislative Council under Article 64  of  the  Basic  Law.
BIS Review   48/1999
2
But  we  also  recognise  a  broader  responsibility  to  the  community  of  Hong  Kong,  and  a  duty  to
promote an understanding of our role and objectives, and to keep ourselves informed of community
concerns and open to public debate.
To this end, the HKMA pursues a policy of transparency and accessibility. This policy has two main
objectives:  to  keep  the  financial  industry  and  the  general  public  as  fully  informed  of  the  HKMA’s
work as possible; and to ensure that the HKMA is in touch with, and responsive to, the community
that it serves. We have done a great deal over the past year to advance this policy. This applies not
just to technical matters, such as the greatly increased transparency of the currency board system or
the  daily  publication,  since  November,  of  the  size  and  composition  of  the  Monetary  Base  and  the
virtually real-time publication of the Aggregate Balance of the Banking System. It also applies to the
information  we  issue  for  general  public  consumption,  whether  in  print,  through  the  press,  on  the
Internet, or in our programmes of educational briefings and seminars.
Of course, considerations of market sensitivity, commercial confidentiality, and statutory restrictions
on disclosure of confidential information place some limits on the amount of material we can make
public.  Given  the  increasing  transparency  and  the  extremely  limited  discretion  over  the  currency
board arrangements, which draws its credibility from a strict rule-based system, a certain constructive
ambiguity  is  also  necessary  if  we  are  to  have  the  flexibility  to  deal  decisively  with  sudden  crises.
Within these limits, we are committed to developing our policy of transparency, and to increasing the
quality  and  comprehensibility,  and  not  just  the  quantity,  of  the  materials  we  put  out  for  public
consumption.
The challenges of this year
We see it as one of our challenges to seek to maintain public interest in our work, even though it is
possible  that  some  of  the  controversies  and  concerns  that  sustained  that  interest  in  1998  will  fade
away as economic recovery moves closer. This brings me to the prospects for the remainder of this
year and beyond. I leave the predictions and forecasts to others in the Government entrusted with this
task. But I think it appropriate to say something here about the monetary environment.
Recent  months  have  witnessed  the  return  to  a  more  stable  monetary  environment  in  Hong  Kong.
Speculative  pressures  on  our  currency  have  moderated  sharply,  allowing  a  significant  decline  in
interest  rates  from  the  peaks  last  year.  As  you  know,  under  the  linked  exchange  rate  system,  our
interest  rates  are  closely  tied  to  those  in  the  United  States  in  normal  circumstances.  In  last  year’s
exceptional environment, however, short-term interest rates, in the face of speculative attacks, rose at
times to around double those  for  the  US  dollar.  These  spreads  have  virtually  disappeared  in  recent
months,  testifying  to  the  failure  of  those  attacks  to  undermine  the  longer-term  credibility  of  our
exchange rate system. Combined with cuts in US interest rates last autumn, nominal interest rates in
Hong Kong now stand at or below pre-crisis levels.
Of course, real interest rates remain high, as prices have come down along with the sharp downturn in
economic activity. But I believe that this process of price adjustment,  although  painful  in  the  short
run, demonstrates the flexibility needed to restore our competitiveness in the region, setting the stage
for renewed growth in the period ahead. Indeed, asset markets are already responding to signs that the
worst of the downturn may be behind us, both here in Hong Kong and in the region as a whole.
Regarding the volume of financial activity in Hong Kong, domestic bank lending declined toward the
end of last year, as corporate loan demand fell and banks reassessed risk factors. Yet growth in bank
deposits  and  the  money  supply  recovered  at  the  same  time,  perhaps  reflecting  a  rise  in  household
savings  in  a  period  of  uncertainty.  Rising  deposits  and  weak  loan  growth  has  left  the  banks  well
equipped to meet an expansion in loan demand during the recovery phase of the cycle,  and  market
conditions  overall  seem  now  more  conducive  to  corporate  fund-raising.  More  generally,  the  sound
3
BIS Review   48/1999
position of our financial system as we exit the crisis is virtually unique in the region, and will be a key
pillar in ensuring a return to sustained growth.
A number of continuing issues, and new ones on the horizon, will provide the HKMA with a heavy
workload in the remainder of this year. These include:
•  The  possibility  of  further  attacks  on  the  currency,  despite  the  improved  stability  in  local  and
world markets: we need to be constantly on our guard for signs of trouble.
•  Further work to improve the currency board system, with the help of the EFAC Sub-Committee
on Currency Board Operations: much progress has been made in the past nine months or so, but
this is an on-going process, and a number of ideas for refining the system are in the pipeline.
•  The rest of this year will continue to be somewhat difficult for the banking sector - but it remains
as a whole in excellent shape to cope with the pressures ahead.
•  One  of  these  pressures  is  the  Year  2000  problem.  As  this  Panel  heard  a  few  weeks  ago,  Hong
Kong’s banks are internationally recognised as being among the best prepared in the region, if not
the world, and work continues on contingency planning and other issues. This has been, and will
continue to be in the months ahead, a priority task in the HKMA’s supervisory programme.
•  Decisions  will  also  be  taken  later  this  year  on  the  recommendations  in  the  Banking  Sector
Consultancy Study, with the aim of enabling Hong Kong’s banking system to make the best out of
the opportunities and challenges of the next century, without sacrificing the stability that has seen
it  through  these  years  of  crisis.  The  views  collected  in  the  public  consultation  exercise  will  be
announced in the next few days.
•  Beyond Hong Kong itself, we shall continue to work with our counterparts overseas to reform the
international financial system, so that it too is better able to cope with the kind of stresses  and
strains that have rocked the region in the past couple of years.
As I have said earlier, monetary and banking issues concern all of us, and stability in the international
financial system and in our own are essential to Hong Kong’s economic health. We intend to do our
best to ensure that the community is kept informed of what we are doing and that the concerns of the
community are taken into account. I feel sure that we can look to this Panel, and to the Legislative
Council generally, to continue to work with us in this task, and my colleagues and I look forward to
many further discussions with Members in the future.
BIS Review   48/1999
4
