Dr. Sabirin talks about efforts to save Indonesian banks
Presentation  by  the  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  Dr.  Syrahil  Sabirin,  at  The  Indonesian  Executive
Circle (IEC) Forum in Jakarta on 7 April, 1999.
 1. It is a great honor for me to be here today to speak before this forum, The Indonesian Executive
Circle. This afternoon, I would like to share with you some thoughts on the recent developments of the
Indonesian banking industry - how the current situation and problems came about, what alternatives
were available to deal with them, and how I see the prospect of our banking industry in the coming
future.
2. The problems we are currently facing, including the banking problems, came onto the surface after
and  as  a  result  of  the  currency  crisis  beginning  in  mid  1997.  The  magnitude  of  the  currency  crisis
perhaps has not been matched by any other countries in modern time. As you know, from a pre-crisis
level of around 2,430 rupiah per US dollar in early July 1997, the rupiah weakened to reach a low of
just under 17,000 in June 1998. This represents a loss of about 85% of the rupiah’s value at its worst
point.  Clearly,  no  economy  could  survive  such  a  hard  blow  without  serious  harmful  repercussions.
And it was only to be realized that a crisis of confidence, which was what Indonesia has really been
suffering  from,  could  do  such  a  dramatic  impact.  The  sharp  decline  in  national  output,  massive
increase  in  unemployment,  and  the  deterioration  of  confidence  on  Indonesia’s  financial  institutions,
corporations, and economy in general are among the impact.
3.  To  the  banking  sector,  the  currency  crisis,  and  subsequent  events,  have  produced  two  major
repercussions, directly or indirectly, namely:
Loss of confidence on banks that resulted in bank runs, loss of deposit base, and liquidity problems.
 closing down of 16 banks in November 97.
Run  down  of banks’  capital  base.  In  this case  the  effects  of the crisis  were transmitted  through  the
following ways:
‰  The  sharp  depreciation  of  the  Rupiah  suddenly  blew  up  the  Rupiah  value  of  banks’  liabilities
denominated in foreign currencies and put the banks with short position is serious problems;
‰  The  economic  crisis  put  banks’  customers  (debtors)  in  problems  which  depressed  the  value  of
banks’ assets; and
‰  The  tight  monetary  policy  to  stabilize  the  exchange  rates,  and  the  resulting  high  interest  rates
resulted in negative spreads for the banks.
Those effects further resulted in many other negative impact on the banks as well as on the economy at
large, such as the unwillingness of banks overseas to accept L/C issued by Indonesian banks, credit
crunch  resulted  from  the  low  capital  base,  etc.  And  such  declining  trend  in  the  banking  sector
reinforced the trend in the real sector, and vise versa.
4. Efforts to remedy the crisis of confidence on banks:
Long term; Undoubtedly, this would have to be dealt with by adopting some measures to improve the
confidence, both from within the country and from offshore. And, the comprehensive policy package
covering economic and non-economic areas was designed for that purpose. However, the recovery of
confidence  cannot  be  obtained  overnight.  It  takes  time  and  continues  efforts.  In  the  meantime,  the
economy would have to bear the cost., among other things the high interest rates and/or instability in
exchange rates. In this regards, in the short run, we do have a choice, i.e. either to aim at a stronger
1
BIS Review 40 /1999
ﬁ
and more stable exchange rate while bearing the cost of higher interest rate, or aiming at lower interest
rate while bearing the cost of weak and unstable exchange rate.
Short-term (emergency): the government provides guarantees to all depositors and creditors of locally
incorporated  banks.  This  is  designed  to  stabilize  the  situation  so  that  an  orderly  work-out  of  the
banking  system  problems  can  be  carried  out.  This  measure  enables  banks  suffering  form  lack  of
liquidity due to massive withdrawals to get liquidity support form the central bank as the lender of the
last resort.
5. On the low (mostly negative) capital base. Quite logically, something has to be done. The  banks
would  not  be  able  to  do  much,  to  say  the  least,  without  anything  being  done  to  help  recover  their
capital base. Therefore a re-capitalization program has been introduced, whereby the Government is
willing to subscribe to up to 80 percent of the additional capital needs of viable bank. This is likely be
a very expensive exercise, although in a longer run there is a chance that the money invested can be
largely recovered. The funds that need to be provided for the re-capitalization may exceed 25 percent
of GDP. Although the costs of similar restructuring process in other countries do not differ much from
what I cited earlier, and in fact the cost in some countries were much higher, the figure itself may raise
eyebrows. But, is there any alternative? There is apparently no workable alternative one could think
of. One extreme alternative is, of course, not to help the banks with re-capitalization. But, given the
blanket guarantee provided by the Government on deposits and other banks’ liabilities, this is certainly
much more costly. And it is more so since it will not provide any solution. Many of the banks will
likely go bankrupt, and the economy is left with no one to finance.
6. In the meantime, a question often raised to me as well to my colleagues in Bank Indonesia as to
why  the  bank  restructuring  program  came  much  later  in  the  process  to  heal  the  crisis,  since  –  the
argument goes - if the condition was dealt with much earlier when the problems in the banking sector
were not so deep, it would have been much easier to resolve the problem. The answer is clearly that
bank  restructuring  program  would  make  no  sense  if  the  exchange  rate  is  still  fluctuating  wildly,
inflation rates are very high, and interest rates are still producing large negative spreads. So we had to
undertake  the  program  of  macroeconomic  stability  first  before  being  able  to  produce  a  realistic
program on banking sector restructuring.
  inflation;  exchange  rates;  interest  rates;  ﬁ
7. As you know, the comprehensive program for macroeconomic stability, wherein monetary policy
played  a  very  important  role,  has  born  some  fruits.  ﬁ
conduct of monetary policy ﬁ
 prospect.] We attribute much of the progress made in stabilizing the
exchange rate and reducing inflation to the tight monetary policy and consistent set of macroeconomic
policies we have implemented. A tight monetary stance was required to control the excess supply of
money which entered the economy when Bank Indonesia had to provide extensive liquidity support to
commercial  banks,  particularly  in  late  1997  and  early  1998  when  many  banks  experienced  panic
withdrawals. We implemented a program under which all sources of central bank money creation were
carefully  monitored  and  controlled  and  the  excess  liquidity  already  in  the  system  was  reabsorbed
through  open  market  operations  using  Bank  Indonesia  Certificates  (SBIs).  Interest  rates  were  by
necessity  high  but  the  policy  has  been  a  success.  Since  July  currency  in  circulation  has  been  on  a
declining trend. Confidence in Bank Indonesia’s anti-inflation policy has steadily increased and, with
bank  deposit  rates  more  attractive,  holdings  of  currency  by  the  public  have  been  increasingly
converted into bank deposits. Bank Indonesia’s open market operations have since 29 th July 1998,
been conducted by a new system of SBI auctions under which a target amount of SBI instruments are
auctioned  weekly.  Another  positive  development  I  can  report  to  you  is  that  as  inflation  began  to
contract  and  the  Rupiah  strengthened,  we  have  been  able  to  gradually  ease  our  base  money  target
which has allowed interest rates to  gradually  decline. The  one-month  SBI  auction rate  has  declined
from a high of around 70% in early September to a low of 35% in early January. The rate has now
2
BIS Review  40/1999
nudged up a bit to around 37% at the last auction, but the overall significant decline in interest rates
has provided a much-needed boost to the real economy.
8.  I  should  also  attribute  the  increased  confidence  in  Bank  Indonesia’s  anti  inflation  policy  to  the
much-improved transparency in the conduct of our monetary policy. Beginning the second quarter of
1998  we  regularly  announce,  on a  weekly  basis, the  crucial  monetary  aggregate  data  and  how  they
compare to the pre-set targets. Mind you, these data, as well as many other information, are available
to everybody to access through our website.
9.  Turning  back  to  bank  restructuring.  First  on  the  recapitalization  program  that  was  announced  on
March 13 th . This program had to be designed and implemented very carefully to assure its success,
due to the following reasons:: (i) the re-capitalization program is likely to be costly; (ii) the recovery
of  the  economy  relies  upon  the  recovery  of  the  banking  system,  and  thus  on  the  re-capitalization
program; (iii) the failure of the re-capitalization program would amount to the very costly delays to
economic  recovery.  It  was  for  this  purpose  that  the  current  re-capitalization  program  carries  the
following  characteristics.  (i)  The  estimates  of  re-capitalization  needs  were  done  realistically,  or
perhaps conservatively through due diligence process conducted by international auditing firms. The
conservativeness of the estimate will provide some cushion to the changing environment during the
process of re-capitalization. (ii) The criteria for the banks to be eligible for re-capitalization were made
very clear and transparent. (iii) The process of evaluation was conducted by four layers of committees,
each layer to work independently of the others, and the meetings of the committees were attended by
observers from international financial institutions. This should assure the intensity of evaluation and
add transparency to the whole process. (iv) Among those evaluated by the committees, aside from the
workability of the business plans, the “fit and proper” of the management and the controlling owners
of the banks is a very important and determining aspect. This process will leave out bad managers as
well as bad and improper controlling owners from the post-restructuring banking sector of Indonesia.
10. I would like to reiterate at this juncture that it is not the intention of the Government to stay forever
and dominate the banking sector. The Government’s involvement in the capitalization of the banking
sector is only temporary to help the sector recover from the deep problems it is currently experiencing.
In three to five year time the government’s share in the private banks will be divested, and these banks
are expected to be mainly privately owned banks once again. During the three to five year time, it is
not the intention of the Government either to be involved in the day-to-day operation of the banks. We
only need to make sure that the banks are run properly and efficiently. And, the mechanism of the re-
capitalization program has been designed as such as to assure that these ideas are materialized.
11. Of course, our work on the banking sector did not stop with the recapitalization. We are still in the
middle  of  the  process.  Much  still  needs  to  be  done.  We  will  monitor  the  development  in  each
individual bank on a day to day basis. We will work with each of them on this, and discuss the way to
resolve  their  problems.  For  those  which  may  need  partners  to  strengthen  their  condition,  we  will
function as a match-maker. With regard to prudential regulations, we will continue to  monitor  their
effectiveness,  and  make  adjustments  whenever  necessary.  And,  very  importantly,  we  will  have  to
continue to work hard to maintain or improve monetary stability and to ultimately abolish the negative
spreads..
12. I should also stress that, along with banks’ restructuring, companies’ restructuring should also take
place at the same time. A number of actions in synergy are being conducted for this purpose. In this
regard, the government in June 1998 established the Indonesian Debt Restructuring Agency (INDRA)
to provide foreign exchange protection to those borrowers that had renegotiated their debts with their
creditors.  Strengthening  these  borrowers  by  reducing  their  residual  foreign  exchange  risk  improves
3
BIS Review  40/1999
their  creditworthiness,  thereby  creating  an  incentive  to  complete  a  restructuring.  Aside  from  the
INDRA scheme, the Jakarta Initiative was established to help facilitate the meetings between debtors
and creditors, and a special task force to help banks restructure their assets was also set up. We should
expect that the restructuring of companies will take place along with the restructuring of the banks,
and they should be strengthening each other’s progress.
13.  As  a  final  remark,  bank  restructuring  formed  a  complete  set  of  economic  recovery  program
together with: (i) the corporate debt restructuring, (ii) monetary and macroeconomic stability, and (iii)
improvement  of  public  and  private  sector  governance.  The  third  point  I  just  mentioned,  namely
improvement of governance is a very important aspect that needs to be worked out in the near future.
The task of restructuring banks and corporations, and improving crucial aspects of governance will be
made  much  easier  in  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment.  So,  managing  aggregate  demand  is  a
crucial task for the government. Here, Bank Indonesia needs to continue to play a very important role.
It is believed that as inflation declines, and the Rupiah remains stable, the interest rates will decline
gradually, easing the pressure on the corporate and banking sectors. We have seen some encouraging
signs. The road ahead may not be that smooth, but we are cautiously optimistic that the crisis has hit
its lowest level and we are beginning the climb back to a stable and healthy economy.
4
BIS Review  40/1999
5
BIS Review  40/1999
