Dr. Liebscher talks about European Economic and Monetary Union – Chances and Challenges
for Europe
Address by the Governor of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Dr. Klaus Liebscher, to the Eurogiro
Central and Eastern European Conference at the SAS Palais Hotel in Vienna on 9 April, 1999
 Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a great pleasure for me to share a few thoughts with you on the chances and challenges for Europe
that  arise  from  European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  As  you  may  know,  the  Oesterreichische
Nationalbank has a long tradition of close co-operation with Central and Eastern European countries
and central banks. It is  therefore  quite  natural  -  for  historical,  geographical  and  economic  reasons  -
that, within the newly established European System of Central Banks, the OeNB sees itself as a kind
of  interface  between  the  ESCB,  on  the  one  hand,  and  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  and
central  banks,  on  the  other.  This  is  particularly  relevant  at  the  present  juncture:  EU  accession
negotiations with Central and Eastern European countries are in full swing. The ESCB needs to build
up  expertise  on  the  prospective  new  EU  member  countries.  At  the  same  time,  Central  and  Eastern
European candidate countries might benefit from the OeNB’s practical experience with its own – still
quite recent - accession to the EU and its integration into the euro area and the ESCB. All those who
have been following EU politics, EU economic developments and the establishment of Economic and
Monetary Union, know that there are, indeed, many chances and challenges arising from EMU, which
could easily provide material for discussion for a whole series of conferences.
Let me therefore focus on just four areas which I believe might be of particular interest to you. The
first area concerns the Eurosystem’s monetary policy. The second area deals with the economic impact
of EMU on the euro area and the interplay between the Eurosystem’s monetary policy and the other
areas of economic policy. The third area relates to the chances and challenges EMU holds for banks.
The  fourth  area,  finally,  concerns  the  consequences  of  EMU  for  Central  and  Eastern  European
countries in their process towards EU accession.
The Eurosystem’s monetary policy
1.  Let  me  start  with  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy.  As  you  know,  the  Eurosystem,  i.e.  the
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  the  national  central  banks  which  take  part  in  the  euro  area,  has
1
BIS Review  41/1999
taken over responsibility for the euro area’s monetary policy as of January 1, 1999. Roughly a decade
of intensive preparations among EU central bankers led up to this historic step. The Maastricht Treaty
establishes a clear and transparent  institutional  framework  for the  euro area’s  monetary  policy. The
Eurosystem  is  structured  as a  federal system:  Monetary  policy  decisions  are taken jointly  at the  bi-
weekly  meetings  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  in  Frankfurt,  where  the  ECB  President,  Vice-
President, the other four members of the ECB Executive Board and the governors of the euro area’s 11
national  central  banks  participate,  each  with  one  vote.  The  Eurosystem  is  assigned  exclusive
responsibility to design and implement the euro area’s monetary policy with the primary objective of
maintaining  price  stability.  In  doing  so,  the  system  is  independent  from  political  interference  and
influence.  Without  prejudice  to  its  primary  objective,  the  Eurosystem  supports  the  broad  economic
objectives  as  laid  down  in  Article  3  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  which  include,  among  other  things,
growth and employment. By establishing this clear hierarchy between objectives, the Treaty legislator
acknowledged  that  the  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  economic  growth  and
employment in the medium and long run is to maintain price stability.
What does the primary objective of “price stability” mean in concrete terms? With a view to providing
a  firm  anchor  to  inflation  expectations  and  facilitating  public  assessment  of  the  Eurosystem’s
monetary policy performance, the ECB Governing Council has announced a quantitative definition of
its objective. Price stability has been defined as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonized Index of
Consumer Prices (HICP) of less than 2%, measured on the euro-area-wide average. Furthermore, the
Governing Council clarified that price stability is to be maintained over a medium-term horizon. Thus,
the possibility of short-term fluctuations generated by causes outside the Eurosystem’s influence has
been taken into account. Finally, it is noteworthy that the ECB Council also regards deflation, i.e. a
sustained fall in prices, as incompatible with price stability. The current annual rate of inflation in the
euro area of 0.8% is fully consistent with the ECB’s definition of price stability.
The  ESCB’s  strategy  to  achieve  its  objectives  rests  on  two  pillars:  First,  money  is  assigned  a
prominent role. Therefore, a reference value for the annual growth of M3 is announced. This reflects
the generally agreed notion that, in the medium and long run, “inflation is always and everywhere a
monetary phenomenon.” The ECB Governing Council has set the reference value for M3 growth at
4.5%. However, we do not react to any deviations in a “mechanistic” way. Only if a deviation is found
to signal threats to price stability, will the Eurosystem take monetary policy measures.  The second
pillar  is  a  broadly-based  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price  developments,  on  the  basis  of  a  wide
range  of  financial  and  other  economic  indicators,  including  economic  forecasts.  To  implement  its
monetary policy, the Eurosystem uses a full range of state-of-the-art, market-based monetary policy
BIS Review 41/1999
2
instruments.  The  operational  framework  comprises  minimum  reserves,  open  market  operations  and
standing  facilities.  Open  market  operations  are  the  main  instrument  to  steer  interest  rates,  manage
liquidity  and  signal  the  monetary  policy  stance.  The  two  standing  facilities  –  the  marginal  lending
facility and the deposit facility – are open to counterparties on their own initiative. Accordingly, they
usually form a corridor for euro area overnight money market rates.  I should also like to say a few
words on a subject which is particularly topical at this conference: payment systems. As you know, the
Eurosystem set up a European payments system – TARGET – to ensure the integration of the various
money markets and the emergence of a single interbank interest rate. TARGET links all the national
large-value payments systems in the EU. Except for some initial “teething problems” arising from the
necessity  for  commercial  banks  and  central  banks  to  adapt  to  the  new  system  and  environment,
TARGET has functioned well overall and has contributed substantially to the rapid integration of the
euro money market.
No treatment of monetary policy is complete without some remarks on the reverse side of monetary
policy:  exchange  rate  policy.  The  euro  area  is  a  fairly  closed  economic  area,  with  foreign  trade
representing  just  above  one  tenth  of  GDP.  Thus,  the  euro  area  should  be  less  concerned  with
international exchange rate fluctuations than its individual participating countries were hitherto. Given
its  economic  strength  and  the  depth  of  its  financial  markets,  the  euro  will,  over  time,  become  an
important international currency. The importance of the euro area and its economic policies is fully
recognized at the international level, as is evidenced by the rapid integration of ECB representatives in
the various fora responsible for international policy co-ordination. The challenge will be to  use  this
new influence and power wisely, and to withstand the temptation to distract from unpleasant domestic
economic policy requirements through misplaced activism at the international level.
3
BIS Review  41/1999
The economic impact of EMU on the euro area
2. This leads me to the second area, the economic impact of EMU on the euro area and the interplay
between the Eurosystem’s monetary policy and the other areas of economic policy.  In the short run,
EMU  means  substantial costs  -  one  only  has  to  think  of  all  the  activities  related  to  the  changeover
weekend  at  the  start  of  this  year  and  the  forthcoming  replacement  of  banknotes  and  coins.  At  the
macro level, there were also the unpleasant short-term effects of disinflation and fiscal consolidation
required in many member states to qualify for participation in the monetary union. Note, however, that
these measures would in any case have been necessary, with or without EMU.
Furthermore, I should like to emphasize that these short-term efforts are a necessary - and profitable -
investment  into  Europe’s  political  and  economic  future.  The  benefits  of  sound  fiscal  and  monetary
policies are already today reflected in the historically low level of inflation throughout the Union, in
low  interest  rates  and  in  stable  exchange  rates.  All  these  factors  are,  in  the  long  run,  conducive  to
growth and employment. The stabilizing impact of EMU was to be felt well ahead of its  inception.
Just think of the virtual absence of negative spill-over effects from the international emerging market
crises on EU financial and exchange markets. Contrary to the early 1990s, the EU is now generally
recognized as a safe-haven of stability, steadiness and economic reliability. The strong convergence,
observed in the run-up to EMU, of short and long-term interest rates to the levels of the most stable
EU  currencies  has  contributed  to  monetary  conditions  favorable  for  growth  and  employment.  Real
interest rates in the euro area are now considerably below their average levels observed over the past
decade.
While the benefits of EMU are quite obvious even in the short run, the real dividends from monetary
union are yet to come. The positive “shock” that EMU implies for our economies’ productive capacity
will  propel  European  long-term  growth,  allowing  higher  real  growth  and  employment,  while
maintaining price stability. The monetary discipline exemplified by the independent ESCB’s credible
monetary policy will fundamentally alter European agents’ price and wage setting behavior and thus
contribute  to  the  necessary  structural  reforms  in  factor  markets.  Price  transparency  will  be
dramatically  enhanced  through  the  introduction  of  a  single  unit  of  account  for  the  entire  area,  thus
giving an additional boost to the deepening of the single market. The creation of a single store of value
and the conduct of a single monetary policy operating in a unified European money market will lead to
the creation of large and deep European bond and stock markets, providing cheaper access to funds
and a greater variety  of liquid investment  opportunities. The  rules  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact
BIS Review 41/1999
4
will ensure that sound fiscal policies are pursued and that Member States’ public finances are put back
on a sustainable path.
Let me emphasize the importance of two fields of economic policy other than monetary policy for the
realization of EMU’s full benefits: fiscal policy, and wage and labor market policies. As regards fiscal
policy,  strict  adherence  to  the  prescriptions  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  –  in  particular  the
requirement to achieve zero or positive fiscal balances over the cycle – is of vital importance for the
monetary union to work smoothly  and  yield  its full  benefits.  It  is true  that the euro  area  economies
have undergone an impressive process of cyclical synchronization during the 1990s. Nevertheless, in
an  uncertain  world  full  of  unexpected  events  asymmetric  shocks  can  never  be  ruled  out.  Balanced
budgets  over  the  business  cycle  ensure  that  automatic  stabilizers  can  operate  freely  in  the  face  of
shocks and thus buffer, at the national level, de-synchronized cyclical fluctuations, which the single
monetary  policy  –  by  definition  –  can  no  longer  provide  for.  Strict  adherence  to  the  Stability  and
Growth Pact also allows an optimal policy mix between monetary and fiscal policies. In this way, the
Pact contributes to laying the groundwork for continued broad public support for the EMU project.
The second field of crucial importance is the situation on European labor markets. The high level of
unemployment  is  the  single  most  important  economic  and  social  problem  in  the  European  Union.
There is wide agreement that European unemployment is largely structural, i.e. it cannot be remedied
through  expansionary  monetary  and/or  fiscal  policies.  The  euro  makes  the  significant  wage
differentials  which  exist  within  the  euro  area  immediately  transparent.  Annual  wage  increases  also
become directly comparable. There is a risk that differentials in wage levels and growth rates which
are justified – and even necessary – due to productivity differentials, might be leveled out. This would
severely damage competitiveness in the less productive regions and companies in the euro area. Since
in the monetary union, by definition, the safety valve of a nominal exchange rate depreciation against
the  partner  countries  is  no  longer  available,  such  losses  in  competitiveness  would  cause
unemployment  or  migration.  Trade  unions  and  enterprises  should  therefore  orient  their  stances  in
wage  negotiations  on  productivity  and  its  development  over  time.  Consequently,  wage  formation
should  be  decentralized.  National  economic  policy  makers  should,  in  turn, take  up  the  challenge  of
making  labor  cheaper  by  reducing  non-wage  labor  costs.  At  a  more  general  level,  the  creation  of
sustainable  employment  on  a  large  scale  will  require  fundamental  changes  to  an  economic
environment which currently hampers private initiative, entrepreneurship and flexibility in the EU.
5
BIS Review  41/1999
The effects of EMU on European banks and financial markets
3. Let me now turn to the third area that I want to address, namely the effects of EMU on European
banks  and  financial  markets.  The  tasks  of  the  Eurosystem  include,  inter  alia,  to  contribute  to  the
smooth  conduct  of  banking  and  financial  market  supervision.  In  this  context,  the  Eurosystem
published a report in February of this year on the possible effects of EMU on the EU banking systems
in the medium and long term as well as on banks’ responses to the challenge so far. The main finding
of  this  report  is  that  EMU  will  likely  act  as  a  catalyst,  reinforcing  already  prevailing  trends.  In
particular, EMU will reinforce the need to reduce excess capacities and exert pressure on profits.  It
will furthermore favor internationalization and geographical diversification, also outside the euro area,
and provide an additional impetus for conglomeration as well as mergers and acquisitions. As a result,
overall  competition  in  banking  will  in all  likelihood  mount  considerably.  Let  me  elaborate  a  bit  on
these findings. EMU affects banking activities in various ways. Most obviously, banks lose their intra-
euro  area  foreign  exchange  business.  Banks  may  be  expected  to  compensate  this  loss  of  revenue
through other activities. They might increase their money and securities market activities, benefiting
from the deeper and more liquid euro financial markets. The reduction of Government debt, owing to
fiscal  consolidation,  might  boost  private  sector  securities  issues,  thus  opening  new  business
opportunities  for  banks.  At  the  same  time,  the  larger  euro  financial  market  might  imply  stronger
competition and lower margins in this business area; it will, furthermore, reinforce the trend towards
disintermediation, implying a relative shrinkage in banks’ traditional business segments.  However, in
the  long  run,  the  adjustment  process  triggered  by  these  challenges  should  make  European  banks
stronger and fitter, while benefiting customers through increased competition. In addition, the stable
monetary  environment,  ensured  by  the  Eurosystem,  should  generally  benefit  banks’  business.  For
Central and Eastern European banks this overall development means that they will face a streamlined,
competitive EU banking system, well experienced in surviving in the competitive environment of the
euro area.
The chances and challenges of EMU for Central and Eastern Europe
I  am  turning  now  to  the  final  issue:  the  chances  and  challenges  that  EMU  holds  for  Central  and
Eastern European countries in their process towards EU accession.  The creation of the euro will affect
Central  and  Eastern  European  economies  through  three  main  channels.  First,  it  should,  through  its
positive  medium  and  long-run  impact  on  euro  area  growth,  boost  demand  for imports from  Central
and Eastern European countries, and thus spur growth. The creation of a zone of stability in Europe
should  undoubtedly  have  positive  spillover  effects  on  the  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries
BIS Review 41/1999
6
closely  associated  with  the  European  Union.  Second,  euro  area  interest  and  exchange  rate
developments  will  be  critical  determinants  of  the  external  economic  environment  of  Central  and
Eastern European countries. The decline of long-term interest rates in Western Europe will reduce the
interest servicing costs of CEECs which hold sizeable foreign debt denominated in Western European
currencies  or  which  intend  to  tap  the  euro  credit  and  bond  markets.  Finally,  the  above-mentioned
structural changes that EMU brings about in euro area financial sectors, will also affect CEECs. The
creation of the euro area might have an impact on both FDI and portfolio investment flows from the
euro area countries to CEECs. However, the direction and size of such possible changes are uncertain
and  will  depend,  inter  alia,  on  how  attractive  the  investment  opportunities  and  macroeconomic
framework conditions in CEECs are.  The advent of the euro also has implications for macroeconomic
policies  in  the  CEECs. The  creation of  EMU  further  accentuates  the  need  for  sound  and  consistent
macroeconomic  policies.  Stability-oriented  policies  are  not  only  a  general  prerequisite  for  EU
accession. Healthy macroeconomic policies will become ever more important in the years to come, as
the CEECs will gradually remove the existing restrictions on capital movements. Tackling the existing
structural  problems  in  fiscal  policy  will  be  instrumental  in  assuring  and  further  reinforcing  the
sustainability of the  consolidation  achieved  so  far.  Reducing  inflation  to low  single-digit  levels  and
keeping it there will also be a major challenge in the advanced CEECs.  The creation of the euro has
already affected the exchange rate regimes of the countries in Central and Eastern Europe. The CEECs
are following a wide variety of monetary and exchange-rate strategies, ranging from free floating to
currency boards, and involving, more recently, inflation targeting policies. In the countries with some
form of exchange rate targeting, which is the vast majority of CEECs, the start of monetary union has
prompted both technical adjustments and, in some cases, also changes of substance. At the technical
level, the euro has replaced the Deutsche Mark (and, in some cases, also other European currencies) as
the  anchor  or reference  currency.  In  terms  of  substance,  some  countries took  the  opportunity  at  the
start of EMU to increase the weight of the European component at the expense of the U.S. dollar in
their reference basket. Furthermore, it can be expected that, over time, CEECs will increase their use
of  the  euro  both  in  transactions  and  as  a  reserve  asset.  Finally,  in  a  long-run  perspective,  all  the
countries that seek to join the European Union will have to organize their transition from the present
exchange  rate  regime  to  full  participation  in  monetary  union.  This  will  be  a  major  challenge.
Experience tells us that – even though exchange rate policy is a common concern - the exchange rate
must  be  adapted  to  the  economic  conditions  of  each  specific  country  and  to  its  authorities’  policy
commitments.  As  the  example  of  South-East  Asia  and  other  emerging  markets  has  again
demonstrated,  a  premature  adoption  of  an  overly  rigid  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  by  transition
countries is  fraught  with risks.  Therefore,  the  countries  of  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  will  have  to
adopt a gradual, step-by-step policy of approaching the definitive commitment EMU requires. Thus,
as regards a possible ERM II membership of selected Eastern European countries, one has to keep in
mind that the ERM II has been set up as a sort of “training ground” for EU member countries not yet
7
BIS Review  41/1999
ready to adopt a single currency. With its rather wide fluctuation margins of ±15%, it will not cause
very tight constraint. However, this system forms part of the institutional architecture of the European
Union and as such is intended for and consequently restricted to EU members. After all, it also entails,
inter  alia,  intervention  commitments  on  the  side  of  the  European  Central  Bank.    Once  the  most
advanced  CEECs  have  joined  the  European  Union,  participation  in  the  ERM  II  will  be  a  relevant
option for them until their economies will be ready to join the monetary union on a sustainable basis.
The built-in flexibility of the ERM II could be very helpful. It allows for a gradual reduction in the
fluctuation margins. In the meantime, many of the rules of EMU, like the prohibition of government
financing by the central bank, the independence of central banks from any political interference or the
clear stability-oriented mandate of the central bank, can serve as benchmarks for the CEEC countries.
I am well aware that considerable progress has already been made on this path in several countries but
some  work  still  remains  to  be  done.  EMU  can  work  as  a  catalyst  in  this  respect,  speeding  up  the
necessary political decisions within CEECs and helping the respective central banks.  A crucial point
on  the  path  towards  EU  and  EMU-membership  is  the  development  of  a  “stability  culture”,  i.e.  the
wide-ranging  consensus  within  a  country  that  the  principal  and  most  important  task  of  monetary
policy  is  to  ensure  price  stability  -  a  necessary  condition  for  sustainable  growth  and  hence  for  the
catching-up  process.  This  primacy  of  stability  has  to  be  recognized  and  accepted  by  all  relevant
political  forces,  which  in  turn  calls  for  the  respective  central  banks  to  do  a  lot  of  explaining  and
convincing - a process that has to start as early as possible. Without such a consensus, a successful
integration into the Union, and even more so into the euro area, cannot or at least is very difficult to be
achieved. Therefore, this “convergence of minds” is just as important as the other formal convergence
criteria. Thus,  membership  in the euro area  will be  a rather  long-term  perspective  for the transition
countries as the successful and sustainable adoption of a single currency will require more preparation
than the fulfillment of the well-known (nominal) convergence criteria. It will be in the interest of the
accession countries themselves to join monetary union well prepared.
Ladies and gentlemen,  let me summarize by extracting three key messages:
First, EMU took off very well. Both on the European and national levels, the relevant authorities and
the  private  sector  did  their  homework  in  the  preparatory  work.  The  Eurosystem  and  its  monetary
policy  are  well  on  track.  The  euro  area’s  important  role  in  the  world  economy  is  reflected  in  the
recognition shown by various international fora. Rules for sound national fiscal policies are in place.
Nevertheless there are important challenges: Governments need to reinforce their consolidation efforts
to  create  the  leeway  necessary  to  counteract  future  shocks  and  recessions.  The  unacceptably  high
European  unemployment  rates  need  to  be  reduced  sharply  by  clear-cut  labor  market  reforms  and
BIS Review 41/1999
8
responsible wage developments, which take into account productivity developments and international
competitiveness.  The  dialogue  between  the  Eurosystem  and  other  policy  makers  needs  to  be
intensified, while recognizing each others’ exclusive responsibilities. In this respect, we are just at the
beginning of a learning process. I am confident that, over time, informal fora, which have worked well
elsewhere,  will  also  evolve  at  the  European  level.  Central  and  Eastern  European  governments  and
central  banks  will  face  a  highly  complex  set  of  economic  policy  co-ordination  mechanisms  when
entering  the  Union  and,  at  a  later  stage,  the  euro  area.  They  will  need  to  gradually  build  up  the
institutional knowledge to move efficiently in this environment.
The second key  message is that EMU is a major regime shift for European financial markets and a
challenge  for  banks.  The  recent  wave  of  mergers,  strategic  alliances  and  cooperation  agreements
among banks and stock exchanges is testimony to the fact that institutions are taking up the challenge.
However,  I  believe  it  is  fair  to  say  that  we  have  by  far  not  reached  the  end  of  this  important
restructuring process, much more is yet to come. Eastern European banking systems will be faced with
very strong and experienced competitors upon entry into the Union.
The  third  message  is  that  EMU  increases  the  European  Union’s  political  and  economic  potential.
Thus, entering the EU becomes ever more attractive. However, this also means that the benchmark for
becoming fully integrated into all aspects of the Union – including participation in the euro area – has
shifted  one  important  step  higher.  Catching  up  by  the  candidate  countries  to  the  point  where
participation in EMU is mutually beneficial for them and for the euro area is a formidable task and can
only be achieved over the longer term. As the EU’s process towards EMU itself has shown, such a
task can only be achieved step-by-step, bit-by-bit, through persistent work and effort.  To conclude, let
me illustrate this with a little anecdote: In the late 1980s, when the idea of EMU was taking shape,
European Commission officials were sent to special time management training courses dealing with
the  issue  of  “How  to  eat  an  elephant.”  The  simple  strategy  presented  there  was:  piece  by  piece.
Apparently, this strategy worked out for EMU; I have no doubt it can work as well for Central and
Eastern European countries’ accession to the EU and their eventual participation in the euro area.
9
BIS Review  41/1999
BIS Review 41/1999
10
