Mr  Tietmeyer  reports  on  international  cooperation  and  coordination  in  the  area  of  financial
market supervision and surveillance
Report by the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Prof Hans Tietmeyer, on 11/02/99.
1.
Mandate issued by the G-7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors
In considering ways of strengthening the international financial system, the Finance Ministers
and Central Bank Governors of the G-7 countries asked me at their meeting in Washington on
October 3, 1998
“...  to  consult  with  other  appropriate  bodies  and  to  consider  with  them  the
arrangements  for  cooperation  and  coordination  between  the  various  international
financial  regulatory  and  supervisory  bodies  and 
financial
to  us  expeditiously
institutions 
recommendations for any new structures and arrangements that may be required”.
in  such  matters,  and 
the 
to  put 
international 
interested 
This mandate was restated and extended in the declaration by the G-7 Finance Ministers and
Central Bank Governors on October 30, 1998:
“We agree that better processes are needed for monitoring and promoting stability in
the  international  financial  system  and  for  the  International  Financial  Institutions,
working closely with the international supervisory and regulatory bodies, to conduct
surveillance  of  national  financial  sectors  and  their  regulatory  and  supervisory
regimes with all relevant information accessible to them.
We agree therefore that we will:
(i)
(ii)
support the establishment of a process for strengthened financial sector surveillance
using  national  and  international  regulatory  and  supervisory  expertise,  including
through a process of peer review, and the IMF’s regular surveillance of its member
countries under Article IV;
to  this  end  bring  together  the  key  international  institutions  and  key  national
authorities  involved  in  financial  sector  stability  better  to  co-operate  and  to
co-ordinate their activities in the management and development of policies to foster
stability  and  reduce  systemic  risk  in  the  international  financial  system  and  to
exchange  information  more  systematically  on  risks  in  the  international  financial
system.
(...) we asked Dr Tietmeyer to consult the relevant international bodies on these reforms ...”
In order to fulfil this mandate, I have held thorough consultations with representatives of all
the  G-7  countries,  the  international  financial  institutions,  and  various  international  bodies.
These consultations were helpful in identifying key areas in the international financial system
where improvements are essential in order to safeguard the proper functioning of the markets.
A broad consensus emerged during this consultation process and is reflected in this report.
This report first describes the current international arrangements for promoting the stability of
the financial system. It then sets out the areas in which improvements are needed and where
action appears necessary to strengthen the sustainable functioning of the markets. The final
section sets out a proposal for improved international cooperation and coordination in the area
of financial market supervision and surveillance.
2.
Current arrangements for the supervision and surveillance of the international financial
system
1
BIS Review   21/1999
There  are  various  international  organisations  which  share  responsibility  for  the  current
arrangements  concerning  the  supervision  and  surveillance  of  the  international  financial
system.
The International Financial Institutions (IFIs) contribute in various ways to strengthening the
global financial system:
-   the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  has  responsibility  under  its  Articles  for
surveillance of all member countries, and monitors  developments  in  the  global  economy
and financial markets;
-   the  IBRD  (World  Bank)  under  its  mandate  uses  its  expertise  to  assist  countries  in  the
design and implementation of reforms to strengthen financial systems, including banking,
capital markets and market infrastructure.
In addition,
-   the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) provides analytical, statistical and secretariat
support for various official groupings working to strengthen the  global  financial  system;
and
-   the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) participates in the
process  of  macroeconomic  and  financial  surveillance  and  formulates  guidelines  for
evaluating and improving the framework for corporate governance.
The  cooperation  and  coordination  of  supervisory  practices  are  effected  by  various  sector-
specific international groupings of regulators and supervisors. In particular, these are
-   the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), as an important rule-setting body in
the field of banking supervision;
-   the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO),  which  provides
mutual  assistance  in  order  to  promote  the  integrity  of  securities  and  futures  markets
worldwide; and
-   the  International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS),  which  cooperates  with
supervisors in promoting high standards in the field of insurance supervision.
Moreover, there are groupings of central bank experts concerned with market infrastructure
and functioning. In particular, these are
-   the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS),  which  analyses  payment
systems and makes recommendations with the aim of reducing the risks arising in this area,
and
-   the  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (CGFS;  formerly  the  Euro-currency
Standing  Committee),  which  analyses  global  financial  system  conditions  and  makes
recommendations for improving market functioning.
Current arrangements have made a significant contribution to raising standards of soundness
and risk awareness in financial systems. These are remarkable achievements even though they
are sector-specific in their approach. However, the pace of change in  markets  and  financial
intermediaries  brought  about  by  the  process  of  global  financial  integration  has  increasingly
exposed  the  limitations  of  such  an  approach.  The  establishment  of  the  Joint  Forum  on
Financial  Conglomerates  represented  an  initial  response  to  the  dichotomy  of  fragmented
supervisory  structures  and  increasingly  integrated  markets.  The  rationale  behind  such  an
approach now has to be applied in a comprehensive manner.
There are three aspects to this: firstly, overcoming the separate treatment of micro-prudential
and macro-prudential issues; secondly, bringing together the major  international  institutions
BIS Review   21/1999
2
and  key  national  authorities  involved  in  financial  sector  stability;  and  thirdly,  integrating
emerging markets more closely in this process.
Ultimately, the process of strengthening cooperation should make a significant contribution to
a better functioning of the financial markets. This will make possible a full utilisation of the
considerable benefits which free capital movements provide to all participants in the global
financial system.
3.
Areas in which improvement is needed
Recent  events  in  international  financial  markets  have  highlighted  three  areas  in  which
improvement is needed.
Firstly, strengthened efforts are necessary to help identify incipient vulnerabilities in national
and  international  financial  systems  and  concerted  procedures  are  needed  for  a  better
understanding of the sources of systemic risk and to formulate effective financial, regulatory
and supervisory policies to mitigate them.
Secondly,  more  effective  procedures  are  required  to  ensure  that  international  rules  and
standards of best practice are developed and implemented, and that gaps in such standards are
effectively identified and filled.
Thirdly, improved arrangements are necessary to ensure that consistent international rules and
arrangements apply across all types of significant financial institutions, and that procedures
exist  for  the  continuous  flow  of  information  among  authorities  having  responsibility  for
financial stability.
Some elaboration of each of these areas follows.
3.1
Identification of incipient vulnerabilities and concerted efforts to mitigate systemic risk
Recent  events  have  underscored  the  importance  of  assessing  domestic  vulnerabilities  in  the
light  of  evolving  global  conditions  and  vice  versa,  and  of  relaying  such  assessments  to
relevant  parties  to  forestall  delays  in  the  correction  of  inadequate  structures  and  of
destabilising trends.
While  the  national  authorities,  the  IFIs,  the  international  regulatory  bodies  and  the  central
bank  groupings  each  gather  and  assess  data  on  segments  or  the  whole  of  the  international
financial  system,  and  regularly  monitor  aspects  of  financial  system  stability,  none  has  the
breadth of information or the capacity to formulate a complete assessment of evolving risks.
In view of the many sources from which systemic risk can arise, better procedures are needed
for systematically pooling and efficiently using the information available  to  these  bodies  in
their assessment of domestic financial vulnerabilities and global conditions.
Recent  events  have  also  illustrated  the  potential  risks  to  the  world  economy  arising  from
financial market problems, and the threat of chain reactions in the financial sector. This has
demonstrated the paramount importance of mitigating systemic risk by better understanding
and alleviating the factors that bear on it. Disabling shocks to the global financial system can
arise from a variety of factors and circumstances, including macroeconomic weaknesses, the
collapse of major individual institutions, and weaknesses in the infrastructure that underpins
and  connects  financial  systems.  That  requires  transparency,  close  monitoring  and,  if
necessary, coherent and appropriate action to forestall accelerating developments.
The various regulatory groupings deal predominantly with micro-prudential issues pertaining
to  the  stability  of  the  individual  institutions  within  their  purview.  However,  the  greater
importance of financial markets for channelling funds from surplus to deficit sectors and for
managing a wide variety of different risks has made it increasingly important to focus on the
sustainable  functioning  of  markets,  which  includes  the  health  and  operation  of  individual
institutions.  This  implies  a  greater  need  to  consider  micro-prudential  policies  in  a  wider
3
BIS Review   21/1999
setting, including the ways in which such policies could be blunted or sharpened by market
practices  and  disciplines,  or  have  unintended  aggregation  effects.  Greater  efforts  are  also
needed  to  foster  improvements  in  the  functioning  of  markets,  including  systematically
overseeing the processes by which markets and market participants are adequately informed.
Systemic threats can also arise from unsupervised financial service providers, notably major
highly leveraged institutions (as has been underlined in a recent report by the BCBS entitled
“Sound Practices for Banks’ Interactions with Highly Leveraged Institutions”). Additionally,
spill-over  effects  could  arise  from  difficulties  at  non-bank  financial  institutions  and  large
insurance companies. Developing an appropriate response will require the involvement of the
various  regulatory  groupings  and  the  national  authorities  of  the  markets  in  which  these
entities are domiciled and operate.
3.2
Developing and implementing standards and codes of conduct
Strengthening financial systems will demand a systematic approach to ensuring that gaps in
international standards or codes of conduct are identified and effectively filled. This calls for
intensified  cooperation  and  coordination  between  the  national  authorities,  international
regulatory  bodies  and  the  IFIs  charged  with  monitoring  and  fostering  implementation.  In
particular, national authorities and the regulatory groupings need to ensure that the process of
developing standards benefits from the wide-ranging information obtained by the IFIs in their
surveillance  and  assistance  activities  in  individual  countries.  Greater  involvement  in  these
processes of the emerging market economies to which those standards would apply is needed
to augment their commitment to implementing them.
A significant challenge for the international community in the years ahead will be to foster
and  monitor  the  worldwide  implementation  of  accepted  best  practices  and,  in  particular,
compliance with the Core Principles issued by both the BCBS and IOSCO, and those being
developed by other international groupings. The IFIs, using their established procedures for
consultations,  will  need  to  assist  countries  in  strengthening  their  financial  systems.  The
information  and  expertise  available  to  national  authorities  and  international  supervisory
groupings can enhance the effectiveness of the IFIs in these tasks and vice versa.
National and international regulatory authorities must also develop procedures to ensure that
market  participants  pay  heed  to  the  standards  that  have  been  developed  in  managing  and
pricing the risks they incur with respect to their counterparties. Strengthened procedures will
be  needed  to  coordinate  and  promote  efficiency  in  this  effort,  as  well  as  to  avoid  overlaps
between  the  IFIs,  and  also  with  the  rule-making  capacities  of  the  international  supervisory
bodies.
3.3
Improvements in cross-sector financial supervision
The international regulatory groupings have made considerable progress in harmonising and
strengthening national financial regulation and supervision. Minimum standards have raised
levels  of  soundness  and  helped  to  create  a  more  level  playing  field,  and  the  continuing
issuance  of  risk-management  guidance  improves  defences  at  individual  institutions.  These
efforts, including the work of the Joint Forum, should be sustained. At the same time, further
efforts are required to address issues raised by the blurring of distinctions between different
types of financial operations and institutions. Advances on issues such as consistent rules for
the  treatment  of  risk,  arrangements  for  the  pooling  of  information,  and  closer  cooperation
between different supervisory authorities continue to be hampered by the fact that countries
have different financial and supervisory systems.
The  functional  bodies  also  need  to  take  account  of  the  work  being  done  by  private  sector
groupings  and  to  assess,  in  cooperation  with  national  authorities,  the  question  of  the
appropriate  prudential  and  regulatory  response  to  significant  players  operating  outside
BIS Review   21/1999
4
existing  regulatory  arrangements,  including  the  adjustment  of  prudential  policies  governing
those within their purview.
3.4
Specific issues to be addressed
From the current standpoint, action is required in the following areas:
-   improving  arrangements  for  the  surveillance  of  global  vulnerabilities,  including  the
pooling of information available to the IFIs and the international regulatory groupings, the
development  and  assessment  of  macro  early  warning  indicators,  and  the  creation  of
procedures to ensure that information reaches the relevant parties;
 – creating  procedures  for  coordinating  the  work  of  national  and  international  regulatory
groupings, and for the exchange and pooling of information among them;
-   assessing the need for the regulation of non-regulated entities;
-   strengthening and, where appropriate, encouraging the development and implementation of
international  best  practices  and  standards,  including  fostering  improved  in-house  risk
management at financial institutions in the wake of recent market events, and promoting
appropriate transparency and disclosure rules for all market participants.
4.
Proposal  for  improved  cooperation  in  the  area  of  international  financial  market
surveillance and supervision: convening a Financial Stability Forum
The previous sections set out a number of specific areas in which existing arrangements for
the supervision and surveillance of the international financial system could be strengthened.
Sweeping  institutional  changes  are  not  needed  to  realise  these  improvements.  Instead,  a
process  in  line  with  the  mandate  should  be  set  in  motion  to  ensure  that  national  and
international authorities and groupings can coordinate efforts to promote the stability of the
international financial system and to improve the functioning of the markets in order to reduce
systemic risk.
The following approach would appear to be suitable:
The G-7 should take the initiative in convening  a  Financial  Stability  Forum.  Such  a  Forum
should meet regularly to assess issues and vulnerabilities affecting the global financial system
and to identify and oversee the actions needed to address them. The Forum would report to
the G-7 Ministers and Central Bank Governors. It would replace the series of ad hoc groups
that have been convened by the G-7 over the past few years with a view to strengthening the
international financial system.
The Forum should be limited to a size that  permits  an  effective  exchange  of  views  and  the
achievement  of  action-oriented  results  within  a  reasonable  time  frame.  In  developing
objectives, priorities and programmes for action, the Forum would work through its members,
taking into account their comparative advantages.
The members of the Forum would be representatives of national and international authorities
responsible for questions of international financial stability. It would comprise the ministries
of finance, central banks and senior supervisory authorities – initially of the G-7 countries. In
addition, 
regulatory  groupings  would  participate.
Representation  should  be  at  a  high  level  (i.e.  Deputy  Ministers  and  Deputy  Governors,
Deputy Heads of the IFIs, Chairs and appointed members of international groupings).
IFIs  and  key 
international 
the 
Given  the  need  for  the  Forum  to  have  a  manageable  size,  national  representation  would  be
limited to three members; the IFIs (IMF and IBRD) would be represented by two participants
each,  the  other  international  organisations  (BIS  and  OECD)  by  one  member  each;  the
international  regulatory  groupings  (BCBS,  IOSCO  and  IAIS)  would  be  represented  by  two
members  each,  and  the  CGFS  and  CPSS  by  one  each.  Participation  could  over  time  be
5
BIS Review   21/1999
extended to include representatives from a small number of additional (i.e. non G-7) national
authorities  that  could  contribute  substantially  to  the  process,  or  to  invite  them  to  attend
meetings as guests.
The  chairperson  should  be  appointed  in  a  personal  capacity  for  a  period  of  time  which  is
adequate to ensure continuity in the work of the Forum. Experience would seem to indicate a
term of not less than three years.
I would like to suggest the appointment of Mr Andrew Crockett, General Manager of the BIS,
for a term of three years.
The Forum would meet as often as needed to achieve its objectives. Initially two meetings a
year could be envisaged. The first meeting of the Forum could be held in spring 1999.
The  Forum  could  ask  members  to  form  working  groups  in  order  to  facilitate  its  work  or
address  specific  ad  hoc  issues.  A  permanent  “Chairman’s  Group”  composed  of  the
representatives  of  the  IFIs  and  the  international  regulatory  groupings  and,  if  necessary,  of
national  supervisors  directly  involved  in  specific  issues  could  meet  around  or  between  the
Forum’s meetings to coordinate follow-up activities to the Forum’s outcome.
Support for the Forum would be provided by a small secretariat located at the BIS in Basle.
Members  of  the  secretariat  could  be  drawn  from  the  BIS  and  from  the  participating
international  financial  institutions.  Staff  from  the  IFIs  would  not  be  expected  to  move  to
Basle;  if  appropriate,  they  could  remain  based  in  Washington,  working  closely  with  their
colleagues in Basle.
This BIS Review is available on the BIS website at www.bis.org.
BIS Review   21/1999
6
