Mr  Duisenberg  reports  on  developments  in  the  financial  sector  in  Europe  following  the
introduction of the euro
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, delivered at the Third
European Financial Markets Convention in Milan on 3 June 1999.
1. Introduction
The period of the five months following the introduction of the euro has been very rich in new events,
with  significant  developments  taking  place  both  in  the  continental  securities  markets  and  in  the
financial system as a whole. Although experience has been gathered over a relatively short period of
time, I am tempted to make two observations of a fundamental nature.
The first observation is that developments following the introduction of the euro do not imply that the
euro area is set to become a financial fortress whose financial markets and institutions would be cut
off from the rest of the world. In fact, market participants residing outside the euro area seem to be
taking  a  keen  interest  in  the  financial  markets  of  the  euro  area.  “Core  Europe”,  so  to  speak,  has
become  more  interesting  to  outsiders  as  the  breadth  and  liquidity  of  its  financial  markets  have
increased.
The  second  observation  is  that  the  euro  can  be  expected  to  have  a  significant  influence  on  the
structure  of  the  financial  system  by  bringing  about  more  securitisation.  A  traditional  feature  of  the
financial system of continental Europe has been a marked dependency on the funds intermediated by
banks.  This  feature  contrasts  with  the  financial  system  of  the  United  States,  which  is  much  more
securitised. For instance, corporate bonds have not been very widely issued in the euro area, and stock
market capitalisation – relative to the size of the economy – is much lower in the euro area than in the
United States. There are good reasons to believe that a process of securitisation will gather pace in the
euro area now that the single currency is in use. This view seems to be shared by many observers and
I shall, in the course of my remarks, provide some arguments in its favour.
In  my  remarks  today,  I  should  like  to  discuss  the  structural  changes  in  the  financial  sector,  in
particular those that have occurred as a result of the launch of new product types and the changing
nature of public and private institutions. I shall address developments in the money markets, the bond
markets and the equity markets as well as the process of adaptation of banking  institutions  to  their
new environment.
2. Money markets
The  money  markets  of  the  euro  area  became  rapidly  integrated  after  the  introduction  of  the  euro
despite  the  fact  that  their  structures  had  previously  been  quite  different  at  the  national  level.
Transaction volumes and measures of bid-ask spreads on the various money market instruments both
indicate that the markets reached a very high level of liquidity very rapidly in the course of January
1999 and have subsequently retained it.
The high degree of integration of the euro area money markets is, first of all, a result of the single
monetary  policy,  which  is  conducted  through  the  harmonised  operational  framework  of  the
Eurosystem. This integration has also been made possible by the significant and increasing integration
of payment systems. Cross-border payments processed by TARGET accounted for more than 37% of
the  value  of  all  real-time  payments  (domestic  and  cross-border)  effected  by  credit  institutions  in
March  and  April  1999.  Moreover,  the  continuously  high  use  which  our  counterparties  make  of  the
correspondent  central  banking  model  (or  CCBM)  for  the  cross-border  transfer  of  collateral  in
monetary policy operations is an important indication of area-wide integration. This is evidenced by
the fact that cross-border collateral currently represents around 25% of the total amount of collateral
in custody in the context of the Êurosystem’s monetary policy operations.
1
BIS Review   68/1999
Taking a closer look at the various instruments traded in the money markets, a feature that is worthy
of  note  is  that  market  participants  in  the  11  countries  of  the  euro  area  have  shown  an  increasing
tendency  to  demonstrate  a  similar  reliance  on  each  instrument  type.  For  example,  what  we  call
“overnight indexed swaps”, which are swaps indexed on the overnight reference interest rate EONIA,
have become an important derivative instrument in the money markets of the euro area. This can be
seen  from  the  low  level  of  quoted  bid-ask  spreads  and  the  high  turnover  relative  to  other  major
international markets. Both indicators show a high level of liquidity in this instrument. Another type
of instrument of interest in the money market (but also at the fringe of the bond market) is that of the
repurchase  agreement.  The  development  of  more  integrated  repo  markets  in  the  euro  area  will
obviously  accompany  the  development  of  area-wide  securities  trading,  settlement  and  custody
systems.  This  will  reduce  transaction  costs  and  improve  efficiency  for  the  cross-border  transfer  of
securities through repurchase operations.
Looking ahead, other developments in the money markets are expected in the coming months. There
are aims to establish new area-wide standards for the repo markets, with a view to overcoming  the
separation between different models in the national markets. These new standards could obviously co-
exist with other standards and broader conventions for international transactions. In fact, over the last
few months the European Central Bank (ECB) has been examining whether this co-existence could
affect the integration of money markets. We have come to the conclusion that, in particular owing to
the efforts of the sponsors of the different standards, this should not be considered a threat.
Finally,  it  should  also  be  noted  that  national  and  international  central  securities  depositories  are
currently developing links with one another, which will enable participants in one country  to  make
direct  use  of  securities  deposited  in  other  countries.  Twenty-six  of  these  links  (concerning  mainly
Belgium, Germany, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Austria and Finland) may be used by the
Eurosystem.
3. Bond markets
I  should  now  like  to  turn  to  bond  markets  and  first  to  comment  on  the  position  of  euro  area  bond
markets in the global market. Some data sources on international securities issuance available so far
show  a  pattern  of  increased  reliance  on  euro-denominated  bonds  at  the  beginning  of  1999,  in
particular  as  opposed  to  US  dollar-denominated  bonds.  While  it  remains  difficult  to  draw  firm
conclusions  on  the  determinants  of  bond  denomination  choices  without  considering  information  on
the nature of bond holdings and trading patterns, recent bond issuance volumes indicate that the euro
has the potential to become an important currency for international bond issuance.
The  importance  of  the  euro  area  bond  market  is  also  apparent  in  measures  of  secondary  market
activity,  i.e. turnover  or  trading  volumes.  In  particular,  trading  volumes  on  exchange-traded  bond
futures are indicative of the overall degree of market activity. Volumes traded in euro-denominated
bond futures were low shortly before the changeover to the euro, when the bond markets in the euro
area were exceptionally quiet. Since then, volumes have increased markedly and they currently stand
at  consistently  high  levels,  which  indicates  a  continuously  high  degree  of  turnover  in  euro-
denominated bond markets in general.
Turning to the internal structure of the bond markets of the euro area, I should like to make an initial
observation  related  to  the  recent  marked  increase  in  euro-denominated  corporate  bond  issuance,
which  was  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  the  average  size  of  issues.  This  tendency  is  likely  to
continue in the future, in particular to the extent that bonds may be used by firms to finance increasing
mergers and acquisitions activity in the euro area. The underlying reasons for increased bond issuance
by euro area firms are clear, both on the supply and on the demand side. On the supply side, large
firms with good credit ratings will find opportunities in the increased depth and liquidity of the euro
area bond market. On the demand side, the respect by governments of the parameters of the Stability
and Growth Pact over the medium term should leave more room for the private sector to issue debt
securities. In addition, the euro area must be in a position to save in order to be able to take care of its
BIS Review   68/1999
2
future  pension  payments,  and  a  part  of  these  savings  is  likely  to  be  invested  in  corporate  debt
securities. An increase in global demand for euro-denominated debt securities is also expected as the
euro becomes a major reserve currency. Moreover, the demand for higher risk euro-denominated debt
securities  is  likely  to  increase,  particularly  as  the  current  low  level  of  sovereign  yields  increases
incentives to search for higher yields.
With regard to the government bond markets, an issue of importance for the euro area that I should
like to stress is the fact that governments now find themselves in a rather new position as issuers. This
reflects a number of developments, two of which I should particularly like to mention. First, the major
public  issuers  have  attempted  to  position  themselves  as  providers  of  benchmarks  for  euro-
denominated bond markets. Second, certain issues of government bonds have effectively gained larger
portions of secondary markets, in particular in relation to developments that have occurred on bond
futures markets.
Market  participants  have  responded  to  these  developments  in  the  bond  markets  with  a  range  of
concurring or competing initiatives and alliances. In the derivatives industry, market participants have
established new alliances. On the trading side, electronic cross-border platforms for bonds have been
created  or  are  in  the  process  of  being  developed.  On  the  clearing  side,  integrated  platforms  for
different markets have been launched or are being finalised, while, finally, on the securities settlement
side, initiatives have also been launched. It is important to note that while some of these developments
are internal to the euro area, others aim at creating links with financial markets outside the euro area.
One  may  reasonably  expect  that  all  of  these  new  circuits,  as  well  as  others,  may  in  the  future  be
enlarged to encompass a growing number of market participants.
4. Equity markets
Turning  to  equity  markets,  structural  developments  of  most  interest  relate  to  the  infrastructure  of
stock exchanges on the one hand and equity derivative exchanges on the other. First, within the euro
area, equity investment and trading activities appear to be less and less influenced by country-specific
factors and increasingly subject to area-wide considerations. Consistent with this development, area-
wide equity indices have been developing. Market participants are showing considerable interest in
these area-wide indices, in particular as they are also now adopting investment positions on area-wide
industrial sectors, using the sub-indices made available for that purpose. An indication of the degree
of interest raised by area-wide indices is the relatively fierce competition for benchmark status that
has developed between the various proponents of area-wide indices.
Second,  market  developments  in  relation  to  stock  index  futures  and  options  will  reflect  the  rise  of
area-wide  indices.  This  may  in  turn  lead  to  either  consolidation  or  product  specialisation  of  equity
derivative exchanges. For my part, I consider the development of fair competition between exchanges
to be a positive factor in terms of the improvement of the range of products and services available to
the financial industry.
Third, in the equity market the euro has also provided a powerful incentive for the creation of new –
and  possibly  competing  –  alliances  among  exchanges.  Before  the  launch  of  the  single  currency,
circuits had been created for the launch of integrated “new markets” within and beyond the euro area,
encompassing the shares of small and medium-sized companies with a high potential for growth. The
development in the integration of exchanges has also continued more recently, and, as you know, it
has not been limited to the euro area.
5. Banking
In  the  field  of  banking,  the  securitisation  trend  appears  to  demand  strategic  and  organisational
adjustment  on  the  part  of  banks.  The  relative  importance  of  the  more  traditional  types  of  banking
activity  can  be  seen  to  be  decreasing,  even  though  it  should  be  mentioned  that  traditional  banking
activities have nonetheless continued to grow at a rate exceeding that of growth of nominal GDP. In
3
BIS Review   68/1999
the euro area, growth in recent years has been much more rapid in assets under the management of
mutual  funds  and  other  institutional  investors  than  in  the  assets  of  banks.  This  reflects  a  tendency
towards decreasing the relative weight of bank deposits compared with securities in financial wealth.
The euro area banking industry has reacted to this development already by diversifying into the asset
management  area.  Banking  groups  have  been  able  to  “internalise”  a  significant  part  of  the
securitisation  tendency  as  they  control  a  large  majority  of  the  mutual  funds.  As  a  result  of  the
securitisation trend, there has been an increase in the share of security holdings among bank assets,
and an increase in the share of capital gains – although those are quite cyclically sensitive – as well as
in  fee  income  stemming  from  asset  management  services.  Meanwhile,  the  relative  importance  of
interest  income  has  declined  correspondingly.  At  the  bank  level,  dividend  income  from  equity
participations has generally become much more important, indicating an increase in the importance of
the profit generated by non-bank subsidiaries.
Beside the establishment of non-bank subsidiaries, there have been other strategic and organisational
changes  that  have  resulted  in  banks  strengthening  their  securities-related  activities.  In  particular,
significant motives behind the recent merger trend seem to include the desire to increase  bank  size
and  hence  to  be  able  to  operate  efficiently  in  wholesale  securities  markets  as  well  as  to  be  able  to
cater for the needs of large international corporations for investment banking services.
The trend towards securitisation can be regarded as one of the reasons for the structural changes in the
banking  system  that  appears  to  have  accelerated  recently.  There  have  naturally  also  been  other
reasons why banks have sought to merge, predominantly the need to cut capacity and to reduce costs.
These cost-driven mergers have taken place primarily among smaller banks.
6. Conclusion
In my remarks today, I have referred to a number of changes and market initiatives in the euro area
financial landscape. These developments point to the increasing importance of the fixed income and
equity  markets  that  many  expected  in  Stage  Three  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU),
providing new opportunities for borrowers and investors and causing pressure to adjust for financial
institutions.  In  this  respect,  I  should  like  to  mention  the  importance  of  removing  the  remaining
regulatory  barriers  to  the  further  development  of  the  securities  markets.  To  this  end,  the  European
Commission  has  recently  published  an  Action  Plan  of  regulatory  changes  to  improve  the  single
market  for  financial  services  that  would  certainly  –  when  implemented  –  boost  the  integration  and
market-driven development of the European securities markets.
Finally, I should like to conclude with some remarks about the role of the Eurosystem (the term that
we use to mean the ECB and the 11 national central banks of the Member States participating in Stage
Three  of  EMU)  in  the  developments  in  the  financial  sector  in  Europe.  First  of  all,  the  Eurosystem
contributes to developments in the financial sector by providing it with a stable and credible monetary
policy.  With  a  strong  and  credible  commitment  to  its  primary  objective,  price  stability,  the
Eurosystem has created a situation in which the financial sector can concentrate on those issues that
are of the greatest relevance to its activities.
The Eurosystem does not play a direct role in structural developments in the financial sector. With its
single  monetary  policy  framework  and  TARGET  in  particular,  the  Eurosystem  has  created  an
infrastructure that has proved to be useful for the establishment of an integrated money market in the
euro area.
In addition, the Eurosystem carefully monitors structural developments in the financial sector
to the extent that they might have an impact on the conduct of monetary policy. To make a
final point, in observing developments in the financial sector, the Eurosystem constantly takes
account  of  the  fact  that  one  of  its  tasks,  laid  down  in  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European
Community,  is  to  “contribute  to  the  smooth  conduct  of  policies  pursued  by  the  competent
BIS Review   68/1999
4
authorities relating to (…) the stability of the financial system” [(Article 105 (5))]. Analysis of
the common developments in the European financial system represents such a contribution.
5
BIS Review   68/1999
