Mr Macfarlane’s overview of monetary policy in Australia
Opening statement by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Mr I J Macfarlane, to the House
of  Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Finance  and  Public  Administration,  in
Melbourne, Australia on 17 June 1999.
Thank  you,  Mr  Chairman.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Melbourne  again  appearing  in  front  of  the
Committee.
Like  last  time,  the  Semi-Annual  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy  has  already  been  released  a  month
before the hearing. On this occasion, it was the Budget that caused the delay in the hearing, but I do
not  think  this  is  a  serious  matter  because  the  Statement  is  still  relevant.  If  anything,  the  advance
release of the Statement may have been helpful in giving more time to digest the material contained in
it. We have more recently sent to the Committee some new material in the form of a paper on bank
fees.
I would now like to start off in my customary manner by comparing what I told you last time with
what now appears to be the most likely outcome. I do this in the interests of accountability, but I also
think it has the advantage of drawing out the limitations of economic forecasting and the necessity of
seeing policy formulation as an iterative process.
Last time, I indicated our expectation that our growth rate was likely to be lower in 1998/99 and that
there would be some pick-up in inflation (though to a rate consistent with our target). I said that the
current account deficit would expand, and  would  probably  reach  6  per  cent  of  GDP  on  a  quarterly
basis  at  some  stage.  I  indicated  that  not  much  further  progress  could  be  expected  in  reducing
unemployment  from  the  rate  of  7.9  per  cent  which  had  prevailed  in  the  three  months  before  the
hearing.
It is now well known that growth has not, as yet, declined. In all likelihood, growth for the 1998/99
year has been in excess of 4 per cent, measured either in year average terms or for the four quarters to
June. This makes this expansion, which began in the middle of 1991, the longest continuous upswing
since the 1960s. Nor is there any sign yet that the expansion will come to an end soon.
We  are  still  of  the  view,  however,  that  some  decline  in  growth  is  likely,  but  from  a  considerably
stronger starting point (and, of course, more delayed) than earlier thought. The outcome for calendar
1999 will, in our judgement, be lower than the growth recorded in 1998 – something between 3 and 4
per cent.  This  is  a  fairly  mild  decline,  given  the  size  of  the  external  shock  to  which  we  have  been
subject.
More  importantly,  the  risks  of  a  sharp  slump  have  lessened  considerably  since  we  last  met.  Last
December,  we  had  just  been  through  a  period  in  which  confidence  in  the  prospects  for  the  global
economy,  including,  of  course,  the  US  economy,  had  reached  its  lowest  point.  Behind  this  were
concerns about extreme instability in global financial markets and the possibility of a “credit crunch”.
Since then, the US economy has continued its strong performance and concerns about credit crunches
have disappeared. Indeed, there is now a widespread expectation that the strength of the US economy
means  that  a  tightening  of  US  monetary  policy  is  on  the  cards.  Evidence  has  also  continued  to
accumulate of a turn for the better in the countries in East Asia which slumped so sharply during 1997
and 1998.
Inflation in Australia, meanwhile, has risen, but very slightly and considerably more slowly than our
central forecast of six months ago had suggested. A possibility which we flagged in our November
1998 Statement – that competitive pressures in international markets would have a dampening impact
on  the  rises  in  prices  for  imported  goods  –  has  in  fact  turned  out  to  be  the  case.  In  our  latest
Statement, we have forecast inflation to be about 2 per cent in underlying terms by the end of 1999. In
1
BIS Review  73/1999
headline terms, the CPI also is likely to be about 2 per cent. This is a little higher than we suggested in
the  Statement,  as  we  have  now  taken  full  account  of  higher  international  oil  prices,  which  roughly
offset the effect of the health care changes.
The current account deficit has turned out to be something like 5½ per cent of GDP for 1998/99, and
was almost 6 per cent in the March quarter. It is highly likely that a quarterly figure over 6 per cent
will be recorded in the June quarter. It seems to us that numbers something like that might well be
seen over the next few quarters, with the result that the outcome for 1999 as a whole will be about 6
per cent of GDP.
The  unemployment  rate  has  fallen  further,  in  line  with  the  stronger  than  expected  growth  in  the
economy,  and  over  the  past  three  months  has  averaged  7.5  per  cent,  its  lowest  for  about  a  decade.
Given  the  amount  of  growth  we  have  had  over  the  past  year,  some  further  moderate  decline  in
unemployment will probably be recorded, in net terms, over the remainder of this calendar year.
Even though the outcome has turned out  better  than  expected,  if  someone  wanted  to  score  a  point,
they  could  say  we  are  not  very  good  forecasters.  I  would  concede  that  we  have  been  a  little
conservative in our forecasts, but it has not led us astray in a policy sense, i.e. it has not jeopardised
the achievement of a good economic outcome.
As someone who has been involved in forecasting and economic policy in the lean years as well as
the  good,  there  is  a  more  interesting  question  that  has  to  be  asked.  It  is  this:  How  is  it  that  the
Australian economy has been able to grow at 4½ per cent plus per annum in the seventh and eighth
years of an economic expansion without generating significant wage and price pressures? It certainly
was not able to do so in earlier expansions.
I have already given part of the answer to this question in my December testimony, and in a couple of
speeches since. It is that the economy has achieved improved productivity growth as a result of the
micro-economic reforms of the past fifteen years. The main changes have been reductions in tariffs,
privatisations,  financial  deregulation,  competition  policy  and  labour  market  reforms.  Of  course,
businesses have also become much leaner and more  adaptable  as  they  have  responded  to  increased
competitive  pressure.  The  key  piece  of  evidence  for  this  is  the  higher  growth  of  multi-factor
productivity in  Australia  in  this  expansion  compared  with  previous  ones.  A  lot  more  could  be  said
about this subject, but I will leave it to others, and move on to a related subject.
It  seems  to  me  to  be  quite  possible  to  have  higher  productivity  growth  and  yet  to  still  encounter
macro-economic  imbalances  which  would  bring  an  economic  expansion  to  a  halt.  In  other  words,
higher productivity growth can explain why the economy’s average growth rate is faster, but I do not
think it can provide an adequate answer for why the expansion will last longer. To do this, I think a
macro-economic explanation is required.
Here I have to come back to low inflation and low inflationary expectations, which have characterised
the  1990s  expansion,  but  were  clearly  absent  from  earlier  expansions.  As  the  earlier  expansions
matured, inflationary pressures built up which simultaneously pushed up prices (requiring a monetary
policy response) and squeezed businesses and business confidence. In the mid-1970s and early 1980s
the expansions came to an end with a wage explosion, while in the late 1980s it was an asset price
boom and bust. This time we have had neither of these.
As I said, a recent history of low inflation has been crucial this time. It certainly has helped the wage
bargaining process. Employees have seen that quite modest nominal wage increases have translated
into  decent  real  wage  increases  because  inflation  has  been  contained.  They  have  not  had  to  build
anticipatory increases into their wage bargains to safeguard themselves against inflation getting away
from them. Increased flexibility in industrial relations arrangements has also helped.
BIS Review   73/1999
2
Similarly, low inflation and low interest rates have had a favourable impact on business behaviour.
An  important  reason  for  this  is  that  with  low  interest  rates,  there  is  little  or  no  scope  for  negative
gearing. Most of the reckless schemes of the entrepreneurs of the 1980s were simply negative gearing
writ large. This was the biggest contribution to the boom and bust in asset prices. It was not the only
UHDVRQ
,DFFHSWWKDWWKHUDSLGLQFUHDVHLQWKHQXPEHURIOHQGHUVDVVRFLDWHGZLWKWKHGHUHJXODWLRQRI
the finance sector also played a role. We could argue about the relative weights of these two factors if
we wish, but the relevant fact for today is that neither of these two factors is present in the current
expansion.
If we do not seem to be developing our usual ailments, as I have argued above, are there some new
ailments that may bring our progress to a halt? A number of possibilities could be identified, but one
that  has  attracted  a  fair  bit  of  attention  is  the  fall  in  the  household  saving  ratio.  In  contrast  to  the
business sector, which has become more cautious in the 1990s, the household sector has become less
cautious, as shown by:
 the household saving ratio falling from 12 per cent in the first half of the 1980s to about 1 per
cent at present. This has been a pretty steady trend (see Diagram 1).
•  Household borrowing rising as a percentage of annual income.
Household Saving Ratio
 12
8
4
0
 12
8
4
1981
1984
1987
1990
1993
1996
0
1999
Diagram 1
This less cautious attitude by households is a surprise to many people because it seems to be at odds
with the usual media depiction of a public worrying about its future, anxious about job security and
generally  insecure.  If  we  were  instead  to  judge  the  public  by  what  they  actually  do,  we  would
conclude  the  opposite.  Unlike  their  parents  and  grandparents,  who  saw  a  great  need  to  save  for  a
rainy day and who had the privations of the Depression still in their minds, the spending and saving
pattern of the current generation indicates a totally different attitude.
Of course, developments on the supply side have made this a lot easier. At today’s low interest rates,
it is possible to service a much bigger loan than it was at the start of the decade. Also banks and other
financial intermediaries have found new ways of providing credit based on previously inaccessible
collateral.
3
BIS Review   73/1999
The important issue is whether this trend change in household behaviour is going to cause problems
for the economy, particularly whether it is going to endanger the present expansion. I think there are
three possible problems that could arise, so I will discuss each one briefly.
1. 
2. 
The  first  possible  problem  is  that  if  inadequate  household  saving  persists,  it  could  mean
inadequate  provision  for  retirement.  This,  in  turn,  would  put  increased  demands  on  future
taxpayers. This is an issue of inter-generational equity. I do not want to suggest that this is not
a problem – it may well be a big one, but the solution to it would be found in improvements to
our policies regarding retirement income.
The second possible problem is that any reduction in saving, other things equal, would lead to
an increase in the current account deficit. Has the trend decline in household saving over the
past decade caused the balance of payments to deteriorate? The answer seems to be no: the
current account deficit has shown roughly the same cyclical movement that it has exhibited
over the past twenty  years  (Diagram  2),  but  no  change  in  trend.  The  reason  for  this  is  that
there  is  not  a  one-for-one  relationship  between  household  saving  and  the  current  account
deficit. We have to also take into account government sector saving, business sector saving
and, of course, investment before we get to the current account of the balance of payments,
and  movements  in  some  of  these  factors  have  offset  the  reduction  in  household  saving.
Cu rren t A cco u n t Balan ce*
P er cent of G D P
 -2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
-8
 -2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
1981
1987
* Exclud e s R BA go ld  tra n saction s.
1984
1990
1993
1996
-8
1999
Diagram 2
3. 
The third possible problem is that increased indebtedness makes the household sector more
vulnerable when interest rates rise. This is probably true, but the main implication is that to
achieve a given macro-economic effect, interest rates would not have to be raised as much as
formerly was the case. I now want to turn to a totally different subject, but one that will be
very  important  over  the  next  seven  months.  I  refer,  of  course,  to  the  issue  of  the  end  of
century date change — or Y2K as it is colloquially known.
The main point I want to make is that the Australian financial system is very well prepared for Y2K.
The formal processes of fixing and testing their systems began in the mid—1990s and it has been
under the scrutiny of APRA and the Reserve Bank since early 1997. Financial intermediaries have
devoted  over  a  billion  dollars  and  thousands  of  staff  to  checking  and  updating  computer  systems.
Where problems have been found, they have been fixed. Outmoded ATMs and EFTPOS machines
BIS Review   73/1999
4
have  been  replaced,  computer  programs  have  been  rewritten  or  new  software  has  been  installed.
With  all  this  effort,  the  Australian  financial  system  rightly  enjoys  a  world-class  reputation  for  its
high level of Y2K preparedness.
The  Reserve  Bank’s  own  computer  systems  are,  of  course,  Year  2000  ready.  In  particular,  the
systems that the Reserve Bank uses to distribute pensions and other government payments to banks,
building  societies  and  credit  unions  on  behalf  of  Centrelink  have  been  thoroughly  tested.  Pension
payments will be made on time.
So much work has now been completed to ensure that the system works, that the big issue facing us
is no longer a technical one – it is instead an issue of public reaction. While I am very confident that
the overwhelming majority of the Australian public will act sensibly, there are no doubt a few who
are inclined to believe doomsday scenarios. With this in mind, there are a few preparations that we
at the Reserve Bank have been putting into place to help reassure the community.
An important step was to talk to the banks, building societies and credit unions to make sure that
they were communicating with their customers in clear language to reassure them that their deposits
were safe. Because the simple fact is that their deposits are safe and their records are not at risk from
Y2K related problems.
All  financial  institutions  have  extensive  back-up  systems  to  ensure  that  each  night  they  keep
multiple  physical  records  of  all  account  information.  While  some  members  of  the  public  have
expressed concerns for the safety of their deposits because they think records might disappear, there
is  no  basis  for  this  type  of  concern.  The  safest  place  for  people  to  keep  their  savings  is  in  the
financial  institution  that  they  are  already  with.  Withdrawal  and  conversion  to  cash  would  expose
them to a lot of unnecessary risks.
The vast majority of people, I believe, do not have those concerns, but they probably still have a few
uncertainties. Many will wish to take more cash out to tide them over the New Year period than they
normally do. To this group, I just want to make a few points:
•  Do not, for a minute, fear that you need to take out more cash because there may not be enough
to go round. There will be. The Reserve Bank has printed, and is carrying in stock, a lot more
notes than usual so that it can meet any increased demand.
 If  you  are  worried  about  high-tech  systems  such  as  ATMs  or  EFTPOS  letting  you  down,
remember you are only dependent on them for the first three days of the new year. After that, the
banks, building societies and credit unions open their doors again and you can go back to the
old-fashioned ways of obtaining cash. You are really only dealing with a long weekend.
•  Even  in  those  three  days,  you  are  not  completely  dependent  on  cash  –  credit  cards  can,  if
necessary, still operate in their traditional paper-based mode and cheques can be used as normal.
Overall, our view is that the system will be able to operate on a “business as usual” basis and the
public  should  view  the  new  year  as  just  another  long  weekend.  That  is  what  I  will  be  doing.  For
those who want a little extra reassurance in the form of extra cash, they can be confident that it will
be readily available.
That is all I wish to say in general terms about Y2K at this stage, but I will be happy to answer any
detailed questions you wish to put to me. I am also conscious that I have been talking for quite a
while, so that I have not left any time to cover the subject of bank fees. But with a copy of our paper
at  your  disposal,  I  am  sure  you  will  find  plenty  of  material  to  supply  you  with  questions  on  that
subject also.
5
BIS Review   73/1999
BIS Review   73/1999
6
