Mr. Brash reviews inflation targeting: an alternative way of achieving price stability
Keynote address by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Dr Donald T. Brash, on
the occasion of the 50th anniversary of central banking in Manila on 5/1/99.
Introduction
Mr  Governor,  I  am  deeply  honoured  to  have  been  invited  to  give  one  of  the  two  keynote
addresses at this Symposium, convened to mark a very important milestone in the history of the
Philippines,  the  50th  anniversary  of  central  banking  in  this  country.  In  these  turbulent  times,
marking the 50th  anniversary  of  anything  sometimes  seems  like  a  considerable  achievement.  I
congratulate the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, and my good friend, Governor Gabriel Singson.
Indeed,  I  should  take  this  occasion  to  congratulate  you  on  more  than  the  50th  anniversary  of
central banking. In  a  region  where  there  has  in  recent  times  been  a  huge  amount  of  economic
turmoil and banking sector distress - indeed, in a world where in recent times there has been a
huge amount of turmoil and distress - the Philippines has weathered the storm a good deal better
than most, with its economy and its banks in relatively good shape. Central bankers are modest
of  course,  and  I  am  sure  you  would  not  claim  all  the  credit  for  that  happy  outcome,  but  I  am
equally  sure  that  Gabriel  Singson  and  his  colleagues  have  played  a  vital  role  in  steering  the
Philippines to this position.
Mr Governor, you have invited me to speak on the subject “Inflation targeting: an alternative way
of achieving price stability”, and in particular to speak of New Zealand’s experience in achieving
nearly  a  decade  of  very  low  inflation.  I  am  delighted  to  do  that.  But  let  me  say  at  the  very
beginning  that,  while  New  Zealand’s  experience  with  inflation  targeting  has,  I  believe,  been  a
positive one, I do not want to lecture you or anybody else about what is best for your country.
Every country has circumstances and traditions which are a little different and, while I believe
that  inflation  targeting  is  an  approach  to  monetary  policy  formulation  which  deserves  serious
consideration,  the  ultimate  decision  about  what  is  best  for  the  Philippines  must  obviously  be
yours.
The background to New Zealand’s move to explicit inflation targeting
To understand why we in New Zealand moved to inflation targeting, it is worth recalling some of
the history. It has some similarities to the experiences of other countries recently.
Prior to the mid-1980s, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand was closely modelled on the Bank of
England.  We  provided  advice  to  the  Minister  of  Finance,  but  the  day-to-day  decisions  on
monetary  policy  were  made  by  him.  The  legislation  under  which  we  operated  required  us,  in
formulating our advice, to have regard for the inflation rate, employment, growth, motherhood,
and a range of other good things.
And the result? We never experienced hyper-inflation, but we did have one of the worst inflation
rates among OECD countries (above 10 per cent per annum for more than a decade). Importantly
for the subsequent political recognition that such inflation did not enable us to grow any faster,
our growth rate was the lowest in the OECD. Monetary policy followed a cycle  which  looked
suspiciously like the three-yearly election cycle. And in 1984, the whole business culminated in a
foreign exchange crisis which looks in retrospect remarkably like some of those experienced in
this  region  in  recent  times  -  where  the  previously-pegged  exchange  rate  came  under  huge
pressure and eventually gave way. The economic damage inflicted by that crisis on the balance
sheets of banks and corporates was relatively mild compared with the damage which has been
BIS Review   4/1999
– 2 –
sustained in, say, Thailand or Indonesia, but that was partly because the Government itself had,
through the Reserve Bank, sold a lot of forward exchange contracts. Honouring those contracts
was very expensive for New Zealand taxpayers.
So what to do then? Initially, we devalued and began freeing up the financial sector. In March
1985, we floated the New Zealand dollar with the explicit objective of enabling monetary policy
to focus on the single objective of reducing inflation, without having that objective complicated
by concerns  for  maintaining  a  fixed  exchange  rate.  While  still  formally  simply  advisers  to  the
Minister of Finance, the Reserve Bank was given clear instructions by the Minister that we now
had the single objective of achieving price stability, and that he had no interest in knowing the
mechanics of how we achieved it. We were given de facto independence.
Not long afterwards, the Minister asked the Bank to suggest ways in which it might be possible
to  change  the  legislative  framework  in  order  to  prevent  the  cynical  manipulation  of  monetary
policy for short-term political objectives by any future government. So we set about studying the
literature on central banking, and examining the relationship between governments and central
banks in other parts of the world.
The 1989 Act
What emerged from this study was the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989, which became
law on 1 February 1990. It was based on six principles:
•  Monetary policy does affect the inflation rate, but can not successfully be used to engineer a
sustainably higher rate of economic growth or a sustainably higher level of employment. This
principle  was  fundamental,  and  of  course  was  totally  at  variance  with  the  assumption
underlying previous legislation. It was at variance also with much of the post-war orthodoxy,
which assumed that there was an enduring trade-off between inflation on the one hand and
employment and growth on the other, that countries could choose to have low inflation with
high unemployment or, more likely, could choose to have a bit more inflation in the interests
of  getting  a  bit  more  growth.  (This  view  had  been  deeply  entrenched  in  New  Zealand,
perhaps because the economist whose name is often, unfairly, associated with this belief, Bill
Phillips,  was  New  Zealand’s  best  known  economist.)  But  it  was  clear  well  before  our
legislation was passed that there is no such enduring trade-off, that, in the jargon, the long-
run Phillips curve is vertical. Our own experience prior to 1984 - of high inflation and very
poor growth - demonstrated the point conclusively.
•  Secondly, in these circumstances, where there is no enduring trade-off between inflation and
growth,  the  most  sensible  inflation  rate  for  monetary  policy  to  target  is  price  stability.  By
1989,  quite  a  lot  of  empirical  work  had  already  been  done  in  a  variety  of  countries  which
suggested that high inflation was damaging to economic performance, and that low inflation,
or price stability, was beneficial. We did not have the benefit of some of the recent studies of
course,  debating  the  relative  merits  of  price  stability  and  ‘low  but  positive’  inflation  rates
(often associated with the names of economists such as Paul Krugman, and Akerlof, Dickens,
and Perry). But price stability in some sense seemed the appropriate goal, and the 1989 Act
makes the Bank responsible for using monetary policy for the single objective of ‘achieving
and maintaining stability in the general level of prices’.
•  Thirdly, in a democratic society, it is appropriate that the elected government have an explicit
role in defining what ‘price stability’ means, and the speed at which it should be achieved.
This  seemed  to  follow  from  the  fact  that,  while  there  is  no  long-term  trade-off  between
BIS Review   4/1999
– 3 –
inflation  and  growth,  there  is  clearly  a  trade-off  in  the  short-term.  Hence,  the  1989  Act
required there to be a written agreement, a Policy Targets Agreement, between the Minister
of Finance and the Governor of the Bank, signed on the appointment or re-appointment of the
Governor,  giving  specific  content  to  ‘stability  in  the  general  level  of  prices’.  This  gave
government an explicit role in defining the objective of monetary policy, subject to the need
to  have  that  objective  consistent  with  some  reasonable  interpretation  of  the  statutory
objective  of  ‘stability  in  the  general  level  of  prices’.  Moreover,  the  Act  provided  that  the
Policy Targets Agreement could be changed during the course of a Governor’s term of office
by mutual agreement of the Minister and the Governor. Indeed, where Minister and Governor
can  not  agree,  the  Act  provides  for  an  ‘over-ride’  whereby,  if  the  government  feels
circumstances warrant the complete abandonment of the price stability objective, the Policy
Targets Agreement can be set aside, by the unilateral decision of the government, for a period
of 12 months. The first Policy Targets Agreement defined our target as inflation of between 0
and 2 per cent annually, as measured by the CPI, achieved before the end of 19921.
•  The fourth principle on which the 1989 Act was built was based on the observed fact that,
internationally,  central  banks  which  are  independent  of  political  control  seem  to  do  a  very
much better job of keeping inflation low than do central banks which are subject to political
direction. So the Act provides that, once the Policy Targets Agreement between Minister and
Governor has been signed, the Governor should be entirely independent in the formulation
and  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  The  Governor  has  absolutely  no  obligation  to
consult with the Minister, with the Treasury, or indeed with the Board of the Bank. Note that
the  combination  of  these  two  principles  -  of  political  involvement  in  the  definition  of  the
objective of monetary policy but complete independence on how that objective is achieved -
made the New Zealand approach internationally unique at that time. We were neither to enjoy
the  complete  independence  of  the  Federal  Reserve  or  the  Bundesbank  nor  to  suffer  the
complete political subservience of the Bank of England (at that time) or of our own history.
A clear distinction was made between goal independence and instrument independence - we
had the latter but not the former.
•  But,  fifthly,  it  was  taken  as  axiomatic  that,  with  total  instrument  independence  should  go
accountability,  and  the  1989  Act  required  that  in  two  main  ways.  First,  the  Governor  was
required  to  provide  a  comprehensive  report  to  Parliament  at  least  six-monthly,  explaining
how he saw the inflation situation and how monetary policy would be conducted to ensure
that  price  stability  was  maintained.  (We  now  produce  these  so-called  Monetary  Policy
Statements four times a year, and I am examined on them on almost every occasion by the
Finance  and  Expenditure  Committee  of  Parliament.)  Secondly,  the  Act  provided  that  the
Governor  can  be  dismissed  for  all  the  usual  reasons  (bankruptcy,  criminal  conviction,
insanity,  and  so  on)  and  for  ‘inadequate  performance’  in  meeting  the  terms  of  the  Policy
Targets  Agreement.  The  Act  does  not  provide  that  I  am  dismissed  automatically  for  the
slightest  breach  of  the  inflation  target,  but  the  threat  of  dismissal  for  breaching  the  target
                                                     
1
It is not entirely clear where our original target of 0 to 2 per cent annual inflation came from. It has been
said that its source was a capricious remark by the Minister of Finance who, when confronted by journalists
wanting to know whether he was ‘finally satisfied’ that price stability had been achieved when the CPI first
fell below 10 per cent, responded that ‘No, I’m aiming at genuine price stability - you know, something like
0 to 2 per cent’. That may or may not be true, but it is certainly clear that well before the 1989 legislation
was passed, in early 1988, the Minister was publicly espousing a target of 0 to 2 per cent inflation as the
Reserve  Bank’s  only  monetary  policy  objective.  By  1989,  the  Bank’s  Annual  Report  referred  to  our
objective of achieving such an inflation rate no later than the end of 1992. By then, the target was not the
capricious  observation  of  the  Minister  of  Finance  but  a  well-justified  definition  of  price  stability  in  a
situation where we suspected measurement bias in the CPI of about 1 per cent; in other words, 0 to 2 per
cent was regarded as ‘genuine price stability plus or minus 1 per cent’.
BIS Review   4/1999
– 4 –
certainly  focuses  the  mind!  (Incidentally,  as  already  mentioned,  the  Policy  Targets
Agreement  is  between  the  Minister  and  the  Governor,  not  between  the  Minister  and  the
Bank, and it is the Governor who has decision-making freedom not, technically, the Bank.
And that was quite deliberate. When I questioned the Minister on this when the legislation
was  being  drafted,  he  replied  ‘We  can’t  fire  the  Bank.  We  can’t  even  realistically  fire  the
whole Board. But we sure as hell can fire you!’)
•  Finally,  the  1989  Act  mandated  a  very  high  level  of  transparency.  The  Act  transparently
requires that monetary policy be focused on the single objective of achieving and maintaining
stability in the general level of prices. The Act transparently requires that the Minister and
Governor agree a Policy Targets Agreement, and that that Agreement immediately be made
public. The Act transparently requires that any change to  the  Policy  Targets  Agreement  be
made  public  immediately,  whether  agreed  by  Minister  and  Governor  or  arising  from  the
‘over-ride provision’. The Act transparently requires the Governor to report to Parliament on
a regular basis. And it is almost impossible to overstate the importance of this transparency.
It is this above all which prevents the cynical manipulation of monetary policy for political
ends. The Act explicitly allows the inflation target to be modified provided the government is
willing to tell the public that that is being done. The obligation to tell the public about any
change in the target effectively means that monetary policy can not be used for political ends,
because  monetary  policy  achieves  short-term  increases  in  economic  activity  largely  by
producing  surprise  inflation.  It  is  hard  to  see  what  political  gain  would  be  achieved  by  a
government  which  announced,  in  an  election  year,  that  the  inflation  target  was  to  be
increased to, say, 5 to 8 per cent. The effect on interest rates and the exchange rate would not
be conducive to winning votes!
The results
So  that  was  the  framework  established  by  the  1989  Act,  and  even  looking  back  from  the
experience  of  a  decade  I  believe  it  has  served  us  very  well.  It  clearly  makes  sense  to  focus
monetary  policy  on  delivering  price  stability.  It  clearly  makes  sense  in  my  view  to  give  the
elected  government  a  say  in  defining  what  price  stability  should  mean  during  the  Governor’s
term  of  office.  It  makes  sense  to  make  the  Governor  or  the  Bank  independent  to  make  the
technical judgements on how to deliver the agreed objective. It makes sense to hold the Bank or
the Governor accountable for the outcomes. And it certainly makes sense that both the objectives
and the modus operandi of policy are clearly understood by the public and financial markets.
It  is  not  possible,  of  course,  to  be  dogmatic  about  the  contribution  which  this  framework  has
made to the reduction of inflation in New Zealand. Many other countries have also maintained
inflation  at  very  low  levels  during  the  1990s.  Nobody  can  be  sure  how  inflation  would  have
evolved  in  New  Zealand  without  the  framework  established  by  that  Act.  Some  academic
commentators have pointed out that inflation was already falling quite strongly before the 1989
Act was enacted.
But in my own view, the framework was of major benefit in the New Zealand context, where we
had had two decades of very poor inflation performance. Yes, inflation was falling quite strongly
prior to the 1989 Act becoming law on 1 February 1990, but of course the Bank had been acting
under  instructions  from  the  Minister  to  focus  exclusively  on  reducing  inflation  since  at  least
1985, and to focus on achieving a 0 to 2 per cent target since at least early 1988. We had also
enjoyed  complete  operational  independence  since  the  mid-1980s.  Little  wonder,  then,  that
inflation  was  falling:  de  facto,  we  had  had  an  explicit  inflation-targeting  regime  several  years
before the 1989 law was enacted.
BIS Review   4/1999
– 5 –
As Figure 1 illustrates, inflation as measured by the CPI (excluding the estimated impact of our
Goods and Services Tax and of interest rates, which in New Zealand are still included in the CPI)
fell steadily in the late 1980s, and reached the inflation target by the end of 1991. The graph also
shows what until last year we referred to as ‘underlying inflation’, which was short-hand for the
measure  of  inflation  consistent  with  the  intention  of  the  Policy  Targets  Agreement  (which
permits us to disregard price shocks arising from certain changes in indirect taxation, significant
changes in the terms of trade, changes in mortgage rates, and so on). That measure of inflation
remained consistently within the then 0 to 2 per cent target from 1991 until June 1995, despite
economic  growth  in  1993-95  which,  by  New  Zealand  standards,  was  exceptionally  high.  We
exceeded the inflation target by 0.2 per cent in the year to June 1995, in part because of a very
sharp spike in the prices of fruit and vegetables, returned to the target for the next six months,
and  then  exceeded  the  target  by  a  small  margin  throughout  1996.  Our  target  was  changed,  by
mutual agreement, to 0 to 3 per cent in December 1996, and in the year to September 1998 actual
inflation  was  close  to  the  middle  of  that  target  (at  1.7  per  cent).  So  for  the  last  eight  years
consumer price inflation has been within a range of 0 to 3 per cent, and for most of that time it
has in fact been below 2 per cent.
Figure 1
I believe that the framework established by the 1989 Act has also played a useful role in reducing
inflationary  expectations  in  New  Zealand.  Again,  it  is  difficult  to  prove  this  point  because
nobody knows how inflationary expectations would have evolved in the absence of the Act. But I
believe it helped increase the credibility of the Bank’s commitment to low inflation that it was
widely understood that I ran a serious risk of losing my job if inflation fell outside the agreed and
publicly-recognised inflation target. On each of the occasions in 1995 and 1996 when inflation
slightly exceeded the 0 to 2 per cent target (and at its highest the excess was only 0.4 per cent),
the Minister of Finance formally wrote to the non-executive Directors of the Bank asking them
whether  they  felt  my  performance  under  the  terms  of  the  Policy  Targets  Agreement  had  been
adequate. Both the letters from the Minister and the replies from the Directors of the Bank were
made public, and everybody understood what was at stake.
BIS Review   4/1999
– 6 –
In  late  1990,  not  many  months  after  the  1989  Act  became  law,  the  head  of  the  New  Zealand
Council of Trade Unions wrote an article which appeared in one of the major newspapers2. The
article argued that the Reserve Bank was focused on an undesirably narrow inflation objective,
but that, as long as that was the case, unions would need to moderate wage demands to avoid
increases  in  unemployment.  In  the  weeks  which  followed,  he  actively,  and  with  very
considerable  courage,  campaigned  for  moderate  wage  settlements  as  a  way  of  reducing
unemployment. I myself have little doubt that the Reserve Bank Act played a part in encouraging
employers  and  unions  to  adjust  their  wage  settlements  to  levels  which  were  quite  quickly
consistent with the inflation target.
The same sort of effect on inflationary expectations was visible in financial markets. As Figure 2
shows, in early 1986 the yield on New Zealand government New Zealand dollar 10 year bonds
was roughly 1000 basis points above the yield on US Treasuries. By early 1990, that margin had
contracted to about 400 basis points. By early 1994, the yield on the New Zealand government
securities was marginally below that on US Treasuries. In the last few years, the yield on New
Zealand 10 year bonds has typically been a little higher than on US Treasuries, but the margin
looks trivial in relation to that in the mid-1980s.
Figure 2
Another of the interesting by-products of the inflation-targeting regime has, I believe, been some
stabilisation  of  the  New  Zealand  dollar  exchange  rate.  I  don’t  want  to  overstate  this:  the  New
Zealand dollar has been through some pretty big swings in recent years. Against the US dollar,
we appreciated by nearly 40 per cent between the beginning of 1993 and the beginning of 1997;
and then we lost all of that appreciation (which means that we declined in percentage terms by
nearly  30  per  cent)  over  the  next  18  months.  But  on  a  day-to-day  and  week-to-week  basis,
fluctuations in the New Zealand exchange rate have been rather less than those experienced by
other floating currencies - and this in a situation where the Reserve Bank has not intervened in
the foreign exchange market for almost 14 years (since we floated in March 1985).
Why is this? I think it is because financial markets understand that, with a very explicit inflation
target, there is a limit to how much movement we will accept in the exchange rate before we look
                                                     
2 
The Dominion, 31 October 1990.
BIS Review   4/1999
– 7 –
to see some offsetting change in interest rates. No, we do not have an exchange rate target. We
have  an  inflation  target.  But  in  a  small  open  economy  such  as  ours,  no  central  bank  with  a
commitment to low inflation can be indifferent to major movements in the exchange rate.
This is because the exchange rate has important direct and indirect influence over prices. Most
importantly,  a  change  in  the  exchange  rate  alters  the  demand  for  locally-produced  goods  and
services, thereby altering domestic inflation pressures. Of course, the difficulty for a central bank
is  to  know  exactly  why  the  exchange  rate  changes.  This  has  important  implications  for  the
appropriate monetary policy response. Thus, if a sharp movement in the exchange rate seems to
be related to, say, an adverse development in our external markets, as has been the case over the
last  18  months,  then  we  may  judge  that  the  adverse  external  development  will  have  sufficient
disinflationary  impact  on  the  economy  to  offset  the  inflationary  impact  of  an  exchange  rate
depreciation,  so  that  no  offsetting  increase  in  interest  rates  is  necessary.  Conversely,  if  the
exchange rate change simply reflects some shift in investor preferences, with no justification in
the real economy, then inflation pressures will have changed, and some adjustment in monetary
policy is appropriate.
Since  the  middle  of  1997,  this  indirect  influence  of  the  exchange  rate  on  prices  has  been
encapsulated in a Monetary Conditions Index in New Zealand. This broadly indicates the relative
pressures that interest rates and the exchange rate have on aggregate demand some one to two
years ahead. The MCI makes it quite clear to financial markets that, in the absence of some ‘real’
offset,  the  Bank  expects  to  see  some  interest  rate  offset  to  any  significant  exchange  rate
movement, to keep overall demand and inflation pressures stable.
A fourth contribution of the framework established by the 1989 Act was, I think it is fair to say,
an improvement in fiscal policy. Again, I don’t want to overstate this point: there were a number
of  factors  driving  an  improvement  in  New  Zealand’s  previously  rather  poor  record  of  fiscal
performance,  including  some  very  determined  Ministers  of  Finance.  But  the  monetary  policy
framework played a useful part. This first became apparent in 1990 when the then-Government
introduced an expansionary Budget not long before the general election that year. We judged that
that degree of fiscal stimulus would require us to tighten monetary policy somewhat if inflation
(then running at over 5 per cent) was to be brought down to the 0 to 2 per cent target by 1992; so
we did. Immediately, an editorial in New Zealand’s largest daily paper noted that the Budget had
‘rekindled  inflationary  expectations.  The  (Reserve  Bank)  was  bound  to  lift  interest  rates....
Electors are frequently bribed to their ultimate cost. This time the independence of responsible
monetary control quickly exposes a fiscal fraud.’3 The main Opposition party campaigned in the
election on a commitment to get interest rates reduced, not by leaning on the central bank but by
‘giving monetary policy some mates’ through tighter fiscal policy and deregulation of the labour
market.
Five  years  later,  with  several  years  of  fiscal  surplus  behind  it,  the  Government  undertook  to
reduce income taxes subject to several conditions, one of which was that the Reserve Bank was
satisfied that such tax cuts would not require a significant tightening of monetary policy.
To me, this is a good illustration of the benefit of having the precise specification of the objective
of  monetary  policy  a  matter  for  formal  and  public  agreement  between  Government  and  Bank.
The  Government  makes  a  public  commitment  to  the  agreed  inflation  objective.  It  implicitly
                                                     
3
New  Zealand  Herald  editorial,  3  August  1990.  Svensson,  Lars  E.O.,  ‘Inflation  forecast  targeting:
Implementing and monitoring inflation targets’, European Economic Review, Vol. 41, 1997, pp.1111-1146.
BIS Review   4/1999
– 8 –
accepts  that,  if  its  fiscal  policy  increases  inflationary  pressures,  the  Bank  will  need  to  tighten
monetary policy to ensure that the agreed objective is met. The Bank is protected from political
pressure to ease monetary policy as long as the inflation rate is, and looks likely to remain, above
the bottom of the inflation target range.
In contrast to these positive benefits from the 1989 Act, some people have noted that in the early
1990s New Zealand also saw quite a strong increase in unemployment and a downturn in output,
and have suggested that the Reserve Bank must accept the blame for that.
I know of no cases internationally where inflation has been reduced from a relatively high level
to a very low level without some temporary adverse impact on employment and output, and New
Zealand’s  experience  was  no  different.  Indeed,  I  have  often  acknowledged  that  the  process  of
reducing inflation from a high level to a low level almost certainly had the effect of temporarily
reducing  employment  and  output.  But  I  certainly  am  not  willing  to  accept  that  the  process  of
reducing inflation was the only factor in reducing employment and output in New Zealand in the
early 1990s, since a great many other policies had also been changed at about that time. While
most of those other policy changes were highly desirable in the interests of the long-term growth
of the New Zealand economy - reductions in protection against imports, reductions in subsidies
for  exports,  privatisation  and  rationalisation  of  many  heavily  over-staffed  government  trading
operations, for example - many of them also had adverse short-term impacts on employment and
output. For this reason, attempts to calculate the ‘sacrifice ratio’ involved in reducing inflation in
New Zealand are almost inevitably doomed to failure.
What we know is that employment and output both fell at the beginning of the 1990s. What we
acknowledge is that the process of reducing inflation was a part of the reason for that. What we
do not accept is that monetary policy was the only factor in that outcome. Moreover, as theory
suggested would be the case, once wage- and price-setting behaviour adjusted to the new, low,
level  of  inflation,  employment  and  output  both  recovered  quite  quickly,  with  unemployment
declining from almost 11 per cent in 1991 to 6 per cent in 1996. In other words, the increase in
unemployment was a result of the process of reducing inflation from a high level to a low level,
not a result of maintaining inflation at a low level. While unemployment has recently increased
somewhat, it remains well below its 1992 peak, and well below that in most of the countries of
Europe,  notwithstanding  the  impact  of  the  Asian  crisis  and  a  severe  El  Nino  drought  on
production  and  exports.  We  are  confident  that,  provided  inflation  expectations  remain  broadly
consistent with the inflation target, low inflation can be maintained without any ongoing cost in
terms of employment or output.
As  an  aside,  it  is  perhaps  worth  stressing  what  has  come  as  something  of  a  surprise  to  some
people in New Zealand and that is that our inflation range has both a top and a bottom. One of
our central banking colleagues once said to me that he thought that any fool could get inflation
below  2  per  cent  by  simply  keeping  monetary  policy  tight  at  all  times.  I  agreed.  But  that  is
assuredly  not  the  way  we  see  inflation  targeting,  and  of  course  it  is  not  the  way  our  inflation
target is specified. Our obligation, currently, is to keep inflation below 3 per cent and above zero.
I  would  not  expect  to  be  dismissed  the  instant  inflation  fell  below  zero,  any  more  than  I  was
dismissed  when  there  was  a  small  breach  of  the  top  of  the  target.  Indeed,  the  Policy  Targets
Agreement  recognises  that  there  may  be  quite  legitimate  reasons  why  inflation  may,  on
occasions, move outside the 0 to 3 per cent target range. But there would certainly be questions
asked if inflation fell below zero, and I would need to have a good explanation of that outcome.
We  have  been  easing  monetary  policy  since  December  1996  -  aggressively  throughout  1998  -
precisely because we take the bottom of the target as seriously as we take the top.
BIS Review   4/1999
The formulation of monetary policy
– 9 –
Finally, let me talk briefly about the actual achievement of the agreed inflation target, about the
formulation  of  monetary  policy.  Does  the  inflation-targeting  framework  help  in  the  actual
delivery of price stability? I think it does, in three ways.
First,  having  an  explicit  inflation  target  is  useful  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations  and  thus
affecting wage- and price-setting behaviour. I have already mentioned that in the discussion of
the  results  of  the  adoption  of  the  new  framework.  We  in  the  Reserve  Bank  devote  a  very
considerable amount of energy to explaining what we are doing and why, not just to the financial
markets but to the public more widely - groups of farmers, manufacturers, Rotarians, teachers,
lawyers, anybody who will listen. I myself do more than 100 speeches all over the country in an
average year, and my colleagues do a great many also. Perhaps six or eight of these speeches will
be on-the-record, and these we will post to an extensive mailing list of Parliamentarians, business
executives, school teachers, and so on. We produce our quarterly Monetary Policy Statements,
and a series of brochures and pamphlets, many of them written in question-and-answer format,
designed to deal with the monetary policy issues of greatest concern to the public. We have an
Internet site, quite comprehensive and regularly updated, receiving over 20,000 hits per week at
this  stage.  All  of  this  communications  work  is  designed  to  strengthen  the  credibility  of  the
inflation target and thus both to increase the likelihood of achieving the target and to minimise
any social cost in doing so.
Secondly,  having  an  explicit  inflation  target  provides  a  very  useful  discipline  on  the  Reserve
Bank itself, and helps considerably in keeping our deliberations focused. I have been at the Bank
for little more than 10 years, during all of which time we have had an inflation target. But I am
told by those of my colleagues who remember the days before we had an explicit inflation target
that prior to the introduction of that target monetary policy discussions, and decisions, were very
much more difficult. Those making the decisions and expressing the opinions often had a range
of  spoken  and  unspoken  objectives  in  mind,  some  of  them  consistent  and  some  of  them
inconsistent. Dr Mervyn King, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, has reported the same
change  in  discussions  at  the  Bank  of  England.  With  a  clear  directive  from  the  British
Government to keep inflation as close as possible to 2.5 per cent, the members of the Bank of
England’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  focus  on  that  objective.  It  matters  not  whether  the
Committee members are ‘doves’ or ‘hawks’. Indeed, the terms have no meaning in the context of
an inflation target agreed with government. The central bank decision-makers are being asked to
use their expertise and judgement to deliver an agreed target, not to express a view about whether
the target should be higher or lower.
Thirdly,  having  an  explicit  inflation  target  often  goes  hand  in  hand  with  public  inflation
forecasting, and does so in our case. This has led Dr Lars Svensson of Sweden to suggest that
central  banks  which  do  this  are  effectively  making  their  inflation  forecasts  into  a  kind  of
instrument of monetary policy4. This certainly seems to be a fair characterisation of the role of
our own inflation projections. Indeed, most of the time we find that our public projections for the
economy and for inflation move monetary conditions in a manner which seems consistent with
maintaining the price stability target, without our needing to move any formal policy instrument
at all. Moreover, because financial markets know that we will, if need be, move one of the formal
policy  instruments  whenever  we  judge  that  monetary  conditions  are  no  longer  consistent  with
maintaining the price stability target, markets are constantly weighing new economic data trying
to  assess  its  implications  for  the  inflation  target,  with  the  exchange  rate  and  interest  rates
adjusting on a real-time basis with the inflation objective in view.
BIS Review   4/1999
– 10 –
But alas, inflation targeting does not guarantee that a central bank practising it  will  be  able  to
deliver  consistently  low  inflation.  All  the  debates  about  how  to  formulate  monetary  policy  in
order to deliver the best outcomes are still relevant. Should we use monetary aggregates? Should
we use Taylor rules? Should we simply adjust interest rates so that the exchange rate moves in
such a way that the direct price effects of the change in the exchange rate produce the desired
effect on the domestic price level?
In our own case, we used to be rather strongly focused on the direct price effects of changes in
the exchange rate. This was early on in the disinflation process, at a time when inflation was high
and there was no ambiguity about the need to reduce it, at a time when we thought we could see
a clear relationship between movements in the exchange rate and domestic prices, and at a time
when, by contrast, we found it very difficult to measure the effects of interest rate changes on the
inflation rate. This did not mean that we had an exchange rate target in the conventional sense,
but rather that, after making our best estimate of all the factors affecting prices in the domestic
economy, we ‘solved’ for the exchange rate which would keep inflation within the target range.
So, for example, when inflationary pressures were strong we judged that there was a need for the
exchange rate to appreciate somewhat in order to reduce the prices of imports and exportables.
And vice versa. The financial markets understood this approach, and as a result the exchange rate
tended to move very much in line with the need to keep inflation on target.
In the early 1990s, this primary focus on the direct price effects of exchange rate movements got
us into some difficulty. Interest rates were allowed to fall to very low levels, in part because, as
indicated, we did not take interest rates as seriously as  we  took  the  exchange  rate  in  the  price
formation process. At least in part as a consequence, the economy accelerated somewhat above a
sustainable level, and inflation pushed to, and eventually slightly above, the top of the inflation
target. We recognised that we had to pay more attention to the impact of interest rates, and this in
turn caused us to start looking rather further into the future, in formulating policy, than had been
necessary  when  we  were  primarily  focused  on  the  direct  price  effects  of  exchange  rate
movements (most of which came through into consumer prices within two to four quarters).
In  recent  years,  we  have  developed  what  we  believe  to  be  a  sophisticated  model  of  the  New
Zealand economy which seeks to answer one question: given all we know about the structure of
the economy, about the present state of the economy (and in particular the gap between actual
and potential output), about the stance of fiscal policy, about wage behaviour, about prospects for
the  international  economy  (clearly  of  huge  importance  for  a  small  country  like  New  Zealand),
and so on, what are the monetary conditions required to deliver inflation to somewhere close to
the middle part of our inflation target in six to eight quarters’ time?
Nobody  pretends  that  that  is  an  easy  question  to  answer,  or  that  our  model  is  flawless,  but  it
seems  to  us  that  that  is  the  right  question.  Note  that  I  referred  to  the  ‘monetary  conditions
required to deliver inflation to somewhere close to the middle part of our inflation target in six to
eight quarters’ time’.
The reference to monetary conditions rather than to interest rates is a recognition that, in a small
open  economy,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,  a  central  bank  committed  to  delivering  price
stability has to be concerned with what is happening to the exchange rate, and not just what is
happening to interest rates, since both affect inflation. (Unfortunately, too much of the academic
literature on monetary policy has been written by economists in the United States, an economy
where, because of the relatively small share of international trade, the exchange rate can be, and
has been, largely ignored in thinking about monetary policy issues.)
BIS Review   4/1999
– 11 –
But the reference to delivering inflation to ‘somewhere close to the middle part of our inflation
target in six to eight quarters’ time’ is a recognition that what we should be mainly concerned
about is not the direct price effects of movements in the exchange rate but rather the longer term
effects which arise out of the way in which changes in the exchange rate affect the demand for
goods and services produced locally. Thus, for example, a depreciation in the exchange rate will
have  two  kinds  of  effects  on  local  prices.  First,  it  will  tend  to  push  up  prices  for  imports  and
exportables as the local currency equivalent of unchanged international prices increases. In New
Zealand, these price effects tend to come through into consumer prices within about a year. We
can not entirely ignore these price effects because of the risk that they spill over into inflationary
expectations and thus into wage- and price-setting behaviour.
But  the  more  enduring  impact  of  an  exchange  rate  depreciation  is  its  second  effect.  The
depreciation  makes  domestically-produced  goods  cheaper  relative  to  internationally-produced
goods, as already noted. As a result, local residents tend to buy domestically-produced goods in
preference  to  imports.  Foreigners  tend  to  buy  more  of  our  exports.  Both  factors  increase  the
demand  for  our  output  and  increase  local  production  relative  to  the  economy’s  sustainable
capacity to supply. This in turn has medium-term implications for the inflation rate.
Clearly, this approach does not guarantee that we will make no mistakes. No approach can do
that  for  the  obvious  reason  that  monetary  policy  works  with  ‘long  and  variable  lags’  and  the
future is inherently unknowable. But in a world where controlling inflation by targeting monetary
aggregates  has  been  abandoned  as  unworkable  by  many  central  banks  -  and  by  targeting
exchange rates has been abandoned as too dangerous by most of the rest - we believe that the
direct and explicit targeting of inflation has a great deal of merit. That does not mean, of course,
that we pay no attention to monetary aggregates, and it certainly does not mean that we pay no
attention to the exchange rate. It does mean, however, that we look at monetary aggregates and
movements in the exchange rate as two of many important influences on the inflation rate.
Conclusion
It is pleasing that in recent years explicit inflation targeting has become more and more common,
while  quite  a  few  countries  have  also  adopted  the  distinction  between  goal  independence  and
instrument  independence.  I  believe  that  both  developments  are  to  be  welcomed.  While  the
optimal  approach  will  clearly  depend  to  some  degree  on  the  traditions  and  constitutional
structure  of  individual  countries,  explicit  inflation  targeting  is  an  approach  to  achieving  price
stability which is worthy of serious consideration.
BIS Review   4/1999
