Mr George reports on the overall economic situation in the United Kingdom
Speech  given  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Mr  E.A.J.  George,  at  the  Institute  for
Manufacturing in London on 12/1/99.
I am only too well aware of the pressure currently facing large parts of the manufacturing sector
of the economy and I welcome this opportunity to explain the macro-economic context and say
something about the prospect.
Let me begin with the overall economic situation.
Since the trough of the last recession in 1992 – that’s 26 quarters up to the third quarter of last
year – total economic output in this country has grown at an average annual rate of around 3%.
That  is  well  above  any  plausible  estimate  of  the  underlying  rate  of  growth  of  capacity  in  the
economy as a whole – which is typically estimated at some 2-2½% - so that what we were in fact
doing  over  this  period  was  steadily  reabsorbing  the  economic  slack  created  by  the  earlier
recession. In the labour market, this was reflected in a rise in employment of some 1.6m to an
all-time  high  of  26.5m,  on  the  latest  LFS  figures.  It  was  reflected,  too,  in  a  fall  in  the  rate  of
unemployment, from a peak of 10.6%, again on LFS figures, to the current level of 6.2%, which
is the lowest rate for about 20 years. These developments in the labour market produced a fairly
gradual pick-up in pay settlements compared with past periods of labour market tightening; and
underlying  retail  price  inflation  –  measured  by  the  Government’s  target  inflation  measure,
RPIX – has averaged 2¾% a year through the expansion, and is currently precisely on target at
2½%.
By  around  the  beginning  of  1997,  it  was  becoming  clear  that  overall  output  growth  needed  to
moderate  if  we  were  not  to  run  up  against  overall  capacity  constraints.  In  fact,  output  growth
actually picked up during the course of 1997, from a rate of close to 3% to around 4%, partly
under  the  impact  of  the  windfall  effect  of  building  society  demutualisation  on  consumer
spending.  Aggregate  demand  growth,  in  other  words,  needed  to  slow  if  we  were  to  avoid
overheating.
That essentially was the background to the tightening of monetary policy during 1997.
But there was, of course, a major complication. In the autumn of 1996 sterling’s exchange rate
against  the  core  European  currencies  started  to  strengthen,  and  by  early  1997  it  had  already
appreciated  by  some  17%  against  the  deutschmark.  Although  sterling  appreciated  rather  less
against  the  dollar  –  which  also  strengthened  against  the  core  European  currencies  over  this
period, sterling’s effective exchange rate index (ERI) still rose by some 13.5%. Sterling went up
further against the deutschmark right up until the spring of last year.
It was never entirely clear just why sterling – and the dollar – strengthened in this way – or more
appropriately why the core European currencies weakened – when they did.
It  appeared  to  have  little  to  do  with  relative  monetary  conditions  between  the  Anglo-Saxon
countries and the Continent. It may have had more to do with market perceptions – or market
misperceptions – about the future prospects for the euro. Financial markets appeared at that time
to  take  the  view  that  European  Monetary  Union  was  being  driven  increasingly  by  political
determination  –  even  if  that  meant  softening  the  interpretation  of  the  economic  convergence
criteria; that this implied a broad rather than a narrow initial euro membership; and that this, in
turn, implied a weak rather than a strong euro.
BIS Review   5/1999
– 2 –
But whatever the reason – and whether it was valid or not – the effect of sterling’s appreciation
was  to  introduce  a  pronounced  imbalance  into  the  UK  economy.  It  dampened  net  external
demand, and had a restraining exchange rate influence on cost and price inflation, at a time when
domestic  demand  growth  remained  unsustainably  strong,  and  when  we  were  approaching  full
capacity.
On  the  one  hand,  we  understood  very  well  that,  after  a  relatively  favourable  exchange  rate
environment  following  our  exit  from  the  ERM,  the  abrupt  appreciation  meant  that  the
internationally exposed sectors of the economy, including large parts of manufacturing industry,
were  now  suddenly  confronted  with  much  harsher  trading  conditions.  That,  as  I  say,  had  a
dampening effect on the UK economy. But we couldn’t just rely on that to cool the economy for
us. Clearly at some point the exchange rate would stop appreciating, and this external dampening
effect  would  have  worked  its  way  through.  In  the  meantime,  we  needed  to  slow  the  rate  of
growth of  domestic  demand  sufficiently  to  avoid  overheating  in  the  economy  as  a  whole.  The
strong exchange rate gave us somewhat more time than otherwise to bring about the domestic
slowdown – it meant that monetary policy did not need to be tightened as much as would have
been necessary otherwise. But we could not avoid tightening policy altogether – even though we
realised that this would be likely to increase the pressures on the internationally exposed sectors,
because in anything other than the short term that would have put the whole economy – including
the internationally exposed sectors we were trying to shelter – at risk of accelerating inflation.
And  I  would  remind  you  that  right  up  until  the  spring  of  last  year  we  were  seeing  signs  of
increasing  pressures  in  the  labour  market,  even  in  the  manufacturing  sector  –  reflected  in
increasing  skills  shortages  and  recruitment  difficulties  as  well  as  pay  pressures.  The
uncomfortable reality, as I’ve said very often before, is that monetary policy can only target the
economy as a whole – it can’t seek to protect individual firms or sectors, or  regions,  however
much we might wish it otherwise. That – as I’ve discovered – is not exactly a popular idea, but
there’s no question that it is the reality of it.
Over the past year the world – and I mean the world – has changed very substantially.
In point of fact, the strong exchange rate against continental Europe – whatever effect it had on
margins and profitability, and I don’t underestimate that – had puzzingly little effect on our trade
with the rest of the EU. And goods trade volumes – both exports and imports - to the rest of the
EU have in fact continued to grow fairly steadily over the past two years.
But, of course, over the past year or so the internationally exposed sectors of the economy have
been dealt the further massive blow of global economic slowdown. This  started  with  financial
turmoil in Asia in the latter half of 1997, but even as late as last summer it was possible to argue
that it would have limited impact on the overall world economy. In May, for example, the IMF
was still looking for world economic output growth of over 3% in 1998 and over 3¾% in 1999.
That certainly was a slowdown compared with average expected growth of around 4¼% only six
months earlier – but it was not catastrophic.
Through last summer though, it became increasingly clear that things would be much worse than
that. The financial collapse in Russia, deepening recession in Japan and increasing nervousness
about  the  situation  in  Brazil,  coupled  with  fears  of  the  possible  knock-on  effects  on  major
industrial countries’ financial markets and hence on their economies, all created a sense of panic
by around the time of the IMF Annual Meeting such as I’ve rarely experienced – and don’t much
wish to experience again!
The mood has improved since that low point. Financial markets have recovered much of  their
nerve – helped by monetary policy easing in the US and Europe; the Yen has appreciated, easing
BIS Review   5/1999
– 3 –
some of the pressures on the rest of the Asian region; the IMF has organised support for Brazil
and  seen  its  resources  substantially  replenished.  Even  so,  the  forecasts  of  world  economic
activity continue to be revised downwards, so that the IMF’s latest (December) forecast for world
growth in 1998 and 1999 has been cut to under 2¼% – barely half the trend rate. And the risks
probably remain on the downside.
We are still not talking, in these forecasts, about global downturn or recession – though that is
exactly what we are seeing in a large part of the world economy. The expectation is that the US
and Europe will sustain domestic demand to accommodate the flood of goods imports from the
rest of the world which is necessary if the suffering economies, now facing substantially reduced
capital  inflows,  are  to  see  any  kind  of  recovery.  That  means  a  prospective  imbalance  between
domestic and external demand in the industrial world as a whole, which is somewhat similar to
that which we were already seeing in this country – but on a mega scale. In the UK there has
been a sharp deterioration in the overall balance of trade in goods, to a deficit of £18.3bn in the
past four quarters – about a 50% increase on what went  before.  This  deterioration  was  almost
entirely with countries other than the EU and North America. This picture has been mirrored in
the US, where the deficit on trade in goods has risen to around $65bn (3% of GDP). And this
picture of a weakening trade balance in goods is reflected in falling manufacturing employment
in both the UK and US.
In continental Europe the trade picture looks rather better at first sight, but that really reflects the
fact that these economies are at a different point in the cycle. But, here too, the outlook is not
particularly promising; in Germany, for instance, downward revisions to growth forecasts have
reflected  a  sharp  fall  in  the  forward-looking  survey  measures  of  export  expectations  in  the
manufacturing sector.
So the pressures on manufacturing are not confined to this country – cold comfort though that
may be.
This  global  economic  slowdown  represents,  as  I  say,  a  further  blow  to  the  internationally
exposed sectors of the UK economy, particularly the  commodity  and  goods-producing  sectors.
Even though the strength of sterling has tended to ease since last spring  as  the  euro  became  a
reality, what this means for us is that external demand will be even weaker – and remain weaker
for longer – than we’d previously expected, and that there will be a further dampening effect on
inflation  from  weak  world  prices.  So  we  have  even  more  time  than  before  to  bring  about  the
domestic  slowdown  –  in  fact  we  could  afford  for  the  time  being  to  act  to  sustain  domestic
demand.  So  the  worsening  global  economic  situation,  and  the  related  further  weakness  of
external  demand  that  became  apparent  through  last  summer,  pointed  to  an  easing  of  our
monetary policy stance.
But it was not the only factor. Domestic demand, too, particularly consumer goods spending, also
weakened more sharply in the latter part of last year than we expected, for reasons that we do not
fully understand. Continuing growth of employment, and higher pay settlements than last year,
suggested that labour income was also continuing to increase – and after a wobble in the autumn,
financial asset prices remained buoyant. At the same time consumer borrowing and the growth of
households’ money holdings remained fairly robust. So it’s not easy to explain the sudden drop
in consumer confidence reflected in retail spending – and not easy to predict how long it will in
fact  last.  In  any  event,  given  the  further  weakening  of  external  demand  we  surely  didn’t  need
such a sharp, simultaneous, slowdown in domestic demand, so the evident weakness of consumer
spending, too, pointed to an easing of policy.
BIS Review   5/1999
– 4 –
The arguments were not in fact entirely one way – they rarely are. The imbalance in the economy
remained a major complication, with the much larger services sector holding up much better than
manufacturing,  and  this  dichotomy  was  neatly  reflected  in  the  fact  that  while  overall  inflation
was on track – at 2½% – this outcome included 3½% inflation of services prices and only just
over  1%  inflation  of  goods  prices.  There  has  been  a  similar  divergence  between  services  and
goods price inflation for some time now in all the major economies. Moreover, the UK labour
market remained tight, although there have recently been some tentative – but not conclusive –
signs that it may now be beginning to ease. We have, of course, been unsighted for some months
as to what this has meant for average earnings in the economy.
But taken altogether the evidence was becoming pretty clear through the summer that we were
seeing the slowdown in the economy as a whole that we needed to see to keep inflation in line
with  the  target.  And  as  we  moved  through  the  autumn  the  downside  shocks  to  the  world
economy  –  and  to  consumer  spending  in  this  country  –  meant  that  we  were  at  risk  of
undershooting the inflation target. And that explains why we have moved quite aggressively to
reduce interest rates over the past few months.
So that’s where we are. What you’d like to know is where we go from here.
There is no doubt that we are currently seeing a slowdown in the overall economy – as I say, a
necessary slowdown. The effective choice was always between an earlier – and hopefully more
moderate – deceleration or a later, but almost certainly sharper, decline.
The issue is about the extent – and the duration – of the slowdown, which is much more difficult
to  assess.  In  fact,  given  the  uncertainties  about  the  global  economic  situation,  and  given  the
extent of the imbalance between the different sectors of the domestic economy, that assessment
is about as difficult as at any time that I can remember. Of course there are plenty of people who
claim  to  know  with  great  confidence  –  and  who  put  their  money,  or  their  mouth,  on  more
extreme possible outcomes. And it’s true that outside bets do sometimes win.
Our own approach is to attach varying degrees of probability to alternative possible outcomes,
which we reflect in our quarterly Inflation Report. I can’t predict what our next Inflation Report –
which  we  publish  next  month  –  will  in  fact  show,  but  frankly  I’d  be  surprised  if  our  central
projection  were  to  suggest  that  the  economy  as  a  whole  was  falling  into  steep  or  protracted
recession. But I can repeat to you the assurance that I have given elsewhere – which is that we
will  respond  symmetrically  to  the  prospect  as  we  see  it.  If,  on  the  balance  of  risks,  we  see  a
probability that inflation will undershoot the Government’s target, we will  not  hesitate  to  ease
policy further, just as we moved to tighten policy when the risks to inflation were in the other
direction.
That  is  in  fact  what  we  have  been  doing,  and  it  should  provide  some  reassurance  to  you.  But
there is not a lot more that we can do directly – through monetary policy – to affect the current
global economic weakness which is adversely affecting the prospect for manufacturing both in
this  country  and  more  generally  in  the  industrial  world.  It  remains  the  case  that,  if  we  were
tempted to go further in easing monetary policy and take significant risks with inflation on the
upside, we would be likely simply to make matters worse for you in anything but the short term.
I hope that I have provoked you to a lively discussion!
 BIS Review   5/1999
