Mr George offers an overview of the UK economy
Speech  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Mr  E  A  J  George,  at  a  dinner  hosted  by
Birmingham City 2000 in Birmingham, England, on 18 May 1999.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am delighted to have been invited to speak at this Birmingham
City 2000 Dinner on the evening before the first ever meeting of the Court of Directors of the
Bank of England at one of our Regional Agencies. We have decided to hold Court meetings
periodically  outside  London  for  two  reasons.  First,  we  want  to  emphasise  that  we  are  the
central  bank  for  the  whole  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  we  are  very  sensitive  to  that
responsibility.  Secondly,  we  want  to  draw  attention  to  the  existence  of  our  twelve  existing
regional  agencies  (and,  as  we  announced  on  Monday,  we  will  shortly  be  opening  a  further
agency  in  Northern  Ireland)  and  to  the  important  role  which  they  play  in  informing  the
monetary policy process in particular of real-world conditions on the ground in industry and
commerce in every part of the United Kingdom.
Our Agent here in the West Midlands, John Beverly, is well known to many of you. He will
be moving on, to the South West, in the autumn to be replaced by another John! John Bartlett
who is at present a Deputy Chief Cashier. I am sure you will quickly get to know him just as
well  –  and  I  am  equally  sure  that  he  will  represent  your  various  views  on  the  business
conditions  here  in  the  region  to  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  just  as  objectively  and
forcefully as John Beverly has done. I’d like to thank John publicly this evening  for  all  his
work, on both your and our behalf, over the past three years.
I thought that in my opening remarks I would talk about the state of the economy as a whole,
about  the  substantial  imbalance  between  the  domestic  and  the  internationally  –  exposed
sectors  of  the  economy  and  the  regional  impact  of  that  imbalance,  and  about  the  difficult
dilemma  which  that  poses  for  monetary  policy.  I  will  then  happily  try  to  answer  your
questions.
Let me start then with the overall economy. The economy as a whole has grown consistently
quarter by quarter now for over seven years – at an average annual rate of 3.2% which is well
above  its  long-term  trend  rate.  Consumer  price  inflation  has  averaged  some  2.7%  over  this
period. Employment has risen to a record level; and the rate of unemployment has fallen to a
near 30 year low. All of that is very encouraging.
But since the summer of 1996 our effective exchange rate has appreciated by about 12% and
we  have  been  affected  by  a  global  economic  slowdown  resulting  largely  from  the  financial
crisis that began in Asia two years ago. As a result our trade balance with the rest of the world
has  deteriorated  –  by  some  1¼%  of  total  GDP  between  1997  and  1998;  employment  in
manufacturing  has  fallen  by  around  2%  since  the  beginning  of  last  year;  and  business
confidence  fell  sharply  to  levels  last  seen  in  the  depths  of  recession  –  until  it  stabilised
following interest rate cuts in the autumn, albeit to levels which are almost twice as high as
those in the Eurozone.
Now you could be forgiven if you thought that all that was me describing the UK economy to
an  audience  in  Birmingham,  England.  In  fact  it  is  what  my  counterpart,  Alan  Greenspan,
might well have said if he were addressing his fellow Americans this evening in Birmingham,
Alabama, on the ‘Goldilocks’ economy of the United States! I tease you in this way to make
1
BIS Review   56/1999
the serious point that we are not alone in facing substantial imbalance within an economy that
is performing reasonably well in overall terms.
In  the  case  of  the  United  Kingdom  –  and  I’m  being  serious  now  –  the  facts  are  that  the
economy as a whole has grown consistently for 27 consecutive quarters – though I admit that
during the last six months it was a ‘damned close run thing’ – at an average annual rate of
2.9%, which is well above its long-term trend rate of around 2¼%. Consumer price inflation –
on  the  Government’s  target  measure  -  has  averaged  some  2.8%  over  this  period  –  or  2.2%
measured in terms of the European Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. Employment has
risen to an all-time high; and the rate of unemployment – despite a very small rise over the
past  couple  of  months  –  is  still  close  to  a  20  year  low.  And  all  of  that,  too,  is  very
encouraging.
But, beginning in the autumn of 1996, our effective exchange rate suddenly appreciated, by
almost 25% a year or so later. To complete the parallel with the US data, our trade balance
with the rest of the world deteriorated – by 1¾% of GDP between 1997 and 1998 – business
confidence  fell  back  in  the  Autumn  to  levels  last  seen  in  1990,  and  employment  in
manufacturing has fallen by 3.3% since the beginning of 1998.
Sterling’s  appreciation  –  largely  against  the  core  European  currencies  –  was  difficult  to
explain in terms of relative monetary conditions and appeared to have more to do with market
uncertainty about the prospects for the euro. But, whatever the cause, it seriously complicated
our task of monetary management by creating a suddenly much harsher business environment
for many of the internationally exposed sectors of the economy – including parts of industry,
but also much of agriculture and some of the services sectors. Domestic demand, on the other
hand, was growing strongly, so strongly in fact that we faced the danger of overheating in the
economy as a whole despite the dampening effect of the appreciation on domestic costs and
prices and despite the restraining effect on aggregate demand of the prospective worsening of
the external trade balance. That was the background to the tightening of monetary policy from
the  middle  of  1997  designed  to  moderate  the  pace  of  overall  demand  growth.  We  were  of
course well aware of the pressures on the internationally exposed sectors, and we made full
allowance for the twin effects of the strong exchange rate on the price level and on aggregate
demand in making our projections of future inflation. But if we had held off from tightening
policy to moderate the pace of the overall expansion at that stage – in order to try to protect
the  exposed  sectors  –  the  chances  were  that  inflation  would  have  accelerated,  and  that  we
would  then  eventually  have  had  to  bring  the  economy  as  a  whole  to  an  abrupt  standstill  in
order to bring inflation back under control. That would not have helped anybody.
By  the  late  summer  of  last  year  these  conflicting  pressures  in  the  economy  appeared  to  be
beginning to ease. Domestic demand growth was indeed moderating – as it needed to do; and
the exaggerated strength of sterling’s exchange rate was diminishing as the approach of the
introduction of the euro appeared to generate increased confidence in the new currency.
But we were all then hit by new shocks to the world economy. Russian default, followed by
the near collapse of a highly-geared US hedge fund, led to a flight of investment into only the
most secure and highly liquid assets, threatening not only a new round of financial crises in
the  emerging  markets  of  Asia,  Latin  America  and  elsewhere,  but  also,  for  the  first  time,  a
credit crunch in major industrial economies, most notably in the US. Meanwhile the Japanese
economy remained independently mired in recession.
BIS Review   56/1999
2
By the time of the annual IMF meetings in Washington last October the  public  atmosphere
was  close  to  panic  and  the  media  noise  was  of  impending  world  recession.  Business
confidence  slumped  pretty  well  everywhere,  and  so  too  in  this  country  did  consumer
confidence. We were faced in the Monetary Policy Committee with a situation in which the
overall  economic  slowdown  which  we  had  been  seeking  to  engineer,  in  order  to  prevent
accelerating  inflation,  threatened  to  become  an  unnecessary  economic  downturn  likely  to
produce an unwanted fall in the rate of inflation to significantly below the Government’s 2½%
inflation target.
At  the  Trades  Union  Congress  in  Blackpool  last  September  I  had  emphasised  that  our
inflation  objective  was  symmetrical,  and  promised  that  if  overall  demand  threatened  to  fall
significantly below the supply capacity of the economy, with the risk that we would fall short
of the inflation target, then we would be just as vigorous in reducing interest rates to stimulate
demand as we had been in raising them when the risks to inflation were on the upside. So, in
the  new  situation,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  promptly  reversed  engines  to  pump  up
demand, cutting rates by 2¼% over the next few months to as low as they have been since
1971. (This relatively aggressive response was not incidentally – as is sometimes suggested –
a sudden conversion to a more activist philosophy, simply a reflection of the rapid decline in
the economic prospect which required a strong response.)
Since last autumn the world financial and economic situation has certainly stabilised under the
impact  of  the  continuing  strength  of  domestic  demand  in  the  US  economy  and  of  the
beginnings of export-led recovery in a number of emerging markets, particularly in Asia. And
world  commodity  prices,  notably  the  price  of  oil,  have  shown  signs  of  strengthening.  But
global  imbalance  seems  likely  to  persist  for  some  time,  with  domestic  demand  growth  still
relatively sluggish in Japan, and in the Eurozone taken as a whole. This imbalance, in turn, is
a significant influence on the international pattern of interest and exchange rates. It is hugely
important for the future strength of the world economy that as domestic demand growth in the
US moderates – as it almost certainly will, one way or another – domestic demand growth in
the other industrial countries accelerates to take up the slack.
Here in the UK both business and consumer confidence have improved since the autumn and
overall  output  growth  seems  set  to  recover,  on  the  back  of  accelerating  domestic  demand
growth, to around its long term trend by about the middle of next year. But we, too, are having
to  continue  to  cope  with  the  imbalance  between  the  domestic  and  internationally  exposed
sectors  of  the  economy  as  a  result  of  continuing  relative  demand  weakness  in  some  key
overseas markets and of relative price effects resulting from a renewed rise in the exchange
rate,  which,  despite  the  sharp  reduction  in  interest  rates,  has  strengthened  against  the  euro
since  the  beginning  of  this  year.  These  external  factors  will  have  a  continuing  dampening
impact  on  our  domestic  inflation  rate  –  which  is  likely  to  remain  close  either  side  of  the
inflation target. Overall then, although the prospect is for renewed growth with continuing low
inflation  over  the  next  couple  of  years,  the  tension  between  the  different  sectors  of  our
economy has not for the time being disappeared.
Against the background of that brief description of recent and prospective developments in the
economy,  let  me  now  try  to  draw  out  what  we  can,  and  what  we  cannot,  hope  to  achieve
through monetary policy.
3
BIS Review   56/1999
Monetary policy operates on the demand side of  the  economy,  and  essentially  what  we  can
hope  to  do  –  and  what  we  are  aiming  to  do  -  is  to  keep  overall  demand  broadly  and
continuously  in  line  with  the  underlying  supply-side  capacity  of  the  economy  to  meet  that
demand.  How  close  we  come  –  on  average  and  over  time  –  to  meeting  the  2½%  inflation
target is in effect simply a measure of our success in achieving macro-economic stability in
this wider sense.
We  cannot  directly  affect  supply-side  capacity  –  the  underlying  rate  of  growth  that  we  can
expect to sustain. But, by operating symmetrically – as we have shown that we do – we can
provide  an  environment  in  which  supply-side  improvements  (for  example,  more  rapid
productivity growth which apparently explains the stronger performance of the US economy
in the past few years, but which we have yet to see in this country on anything like the same
scale) have the best chance of feeding through into faster sustained output growth. And, to the
extent  that  we  are  successful  in  maintaining  macro-economic  stability,  that  can  help  to
improve our supply-side performance indirectly by lowering real long-term interest rates and
encouraging  better  decision–making  in  the  economy  as  a  whole  with  less  distortion  from
unnecessary erratic movements, particularly in nominal values.
But we can only hope to maintain macro-economic stability for the economy as a whole. What
we  cannot  hope  to  do  is  to  provide  an  equally  stable  environment  for  every  sector  of  the
economy  or  for  every  business  enterprise,  nor  therefore  can  we  hope  to  maintain  a  stable
environment for those regions of the country with heavy concentrations of particular sectors or
businesses.
We cannot hope, for example, nor should we seek, to obstruct structural change. Consumer
demands  change  over  time,  and  so,  too,  do  technologies  and  management  and  production
techniques. Competition, to seek out such changes and to exploit them to meet social needs
more efficiently – however unwelcome it may be to establish producers – is a vital driver of
supply-side  improvement,  increasing  the  potentially  sustainable  growth  rate  at  the  macro-
economic level from which we all stand to benefit.
Nor  can  we  realistically  hope  to  avoid  all  shorter-term  fluctuations  associated  with  the
business cycle, for example, or as a result simply of random shocks - though we can aim to
moderate their impact rather than exaggerate it as we have done at times in the past.
Nor, finally, can we hope to insulate ourselves from shocks originating overseas. That does
not  mean  that  we  do  not  understand  the  painful  impact  of  the  recent  state  of  the  world
economy or of the strong exchange rate. Nor does it mean that we simply ignore the plight of
the adversely affected sectors. We are concerned – as you are – with the health of every sector
of the economy, we fully appreciate the interdependence of the different sectors, and we well
understand  the  part  that  greater  real  exchange  rate  stability  can  play  in  promoting  more
balanced  economic  growth.  But  the  harsh  reality  is  that  we  could  only  seek  to  achieve  a
particular exchange rate in order to protect the internationally exposed sectors at the risk of
destabilising the economy as a whole, and  there  would  –  as  we  have  recently  seen  –  be  no
assurance  even  so  that  we  would  be  successful  in  achieving  and  maintaining  a  particular
exchange rate. We do, as I say, take full account of the impact of world demand and of the
exchange  rate  on  the  likely  path  of  inflation,  and,  to  the  extent  that  these  influences  are
exerting  a  disinflationary  effect,  interest  rates  are  lower  than  would  otherwise  be  the  case.
That  was  the  reality  behind  the  statement  made  after  our  last  MPC  meeting  that  if  the
BIS Review   56/1999
4
exchange rate does not decline from its present high level, as we assume that it will, at least in
line with interest rate differentials,  then,  depending  on  other  developments  in  the  economy,
there might need to be further easing of interest rates to keep inflation on track. I stand by that
today.
But  let  me  be  quite  clear.  This  does  not  mean  that  we  have  any  particular  target  for  the
exchange  rate.  Nor  can  it  mean  that  we  set  interest  rates  simply  by  reference  to  those
prevailing elsewhere. It is naïve to complain that our interest rates are twice those in Europe
without recognising that we are operating closer to capacity than is the case in the Eurozone as
a whole – or that unemployment there is running at twice the rate in this country even if – and
I agree – much of that difference is to be explained by structural, supply-side, rigidities rather
than simply cyclical divergence.
No-one, Mr Chairman, is more conscious of the limits to what we can hope to achieve through
monetary policy than I am. But operating within those limits, we have been able to achieve
greater  macro-economic  stability,  reflected  in  the  rate  of  inflation,  than  we  have  seen  for  a
generation.  And  that  stability,  together  with  the  improved  supply-side  flexibility  of  the
economy, has delivered a rate of unemployment in the economy as a whole that, despite the
recent modest upturn, is still close to the lowest rate we have seen in almost 20 years. And
what is true for the UK as a whole is true for most of the individual regions of the economy.
That includes the West Midlands, where, on a claimant count basis, unemployment at 4.8% is
actually only marginally above the national average and still just about the lowest it has been
since 1980.
Macro-economic stability cannot solve all our problems. But it can certainly help, and is in
fact the best contribution that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  the  sustained  growth  of  output,
high  levels  of  employment,  and  rising  living  standards.  It  helps  particularly  where  there  is
supply-side flexibility and sectoral diversification. Birmingham, and the West Midlands more
generally, have made – and are making – considerable strides in those directions, building on
existing  strengths  certainly  but  also  developing  new  skills  and  new  activities.  Birmingham
City  2000  has,  I  know,  played  an  important  role  in  this  forward-looking  approach.  I
congratulate you and encourage you to persist in your endeavours – in conjunction with the
West Midlands Regional Development Agency – well into the next millennium, despite your
apparently non–Y2K–compliant title.
5
BIS Review   56/1999
