Mr Thiessen evaluates the performance of the Canadian economy at the end of the 20th
century
Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  Mr  Gordon  Thiessen,  before  the  Canada
Club in London on 2 June 1999.
As the curtain comes down on the twentieth century and we move on to the next millennium,
it is difficult to resist the temptation to be both retrospective and prospective.
Ask Canadians to think back and many will tell you that the economy and they, as individuals,
have been through some difficult times.
Those with longer memories, however, will recall the remarkably positive climate between the
end  of  the  Second  World  War  and  the  early  1970s.  Canada  came  out  of  the  war  with  a
relatively  strong  economy  compared  with  the  ravaged  European  countries.  Moreover,  there
were sizable and sustained gains in productivity through the 1950s and 1960s. These reflected
the revolution in agriculture and the forced modernization and expansion of Canadian industry
during  the  war  as  well  as  the  rapid  changes  in  technology  and  industrial  processes  that
followed.
All  this  led  to  a  substantial  rise  in  Canadian  standards  of  living  instead  of  the  post-war
depression  that  many  had  feared.  And  despite  the  exodus  of  workers  from  agriculture,  the
overall unemployment rate remained low. At the same time, rapid economic growth generated
rising tax revenues that governments could spend on an increasingly wider social safety net
without taxpayers feeling much of a pinch.
Compared  with  this  post-war  prosperity,  our  economic  performance  over  the  subsequent
quarter century has been the source of some disappointment and concern.
Various  explanations  have  been  advanced  for  this  less-favourable  record  since  the  early
1970s. There are four trends in particular that I would highlight in this regard: high inflation in
the 1970s and 1980s; large and rising fiscal deficits from the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s; a
slowdown in productivity growth; and a decline in the prices of primary commodities.
Tonight, I propose to comment on these four trends and their effect on the economy over the
past  25  years.  Much  of  the  sense  of  economic  disenchantment  that  Canadians  have  been
feeling  in  the  1990s  has  been  related  to  the  difficult  process  of  reversing  these  trends  or
adjusting to them. Fortunately, considerable progress has been made on several fronts. Hence,
there are grounds for optimism regarding Canada’s economic future.
The harmful effects of high inflation
The rate of inflation which, after getting through some of the post-war bottlenecks, averaged
just over 2 per cent in the period to 1972, more than tripled over the next two decades.
This  pickup  in  inflation  was  not  a  uniquely  Canadian  phenomenon.  In  many  countries,
monetary policy had become too expansionary during the late 1960s. This partly reflected a
misconception among policy-makers that, by fine-tuning the economy and taking advantage of
1
BIS Review  64/1999
a perceived trade-off between employment and inflation, overall economic well-being could
be improved.
One  of  the  initial  consequences  of  this  accumulating  worldwide  monetary  stimulus  was  a
sharp rise in the prices of oil and other primary products in the early 1970s. Countries, like
Canada, which are major producers of such commodities, experienced a surge in income and
wealth. But they also faced strong demand pressures and rising inflation. In Canada, the surge
in inflation was especially dramatic, reaching 12 per cent in 1974.
Once  inflation  had  risen  to  those  levels,  it  was  very  difficult  to  reverse.  With  each  passing
year, expectations of ongoing high inflation became increasingly entrenched.
High inflation exacts a heavy toll on an economy by making the future particularly uncertain.
Long-term financing becomes less available and more costly as interest rates go up because of
inflation and the higher risk premiums that lenders demand as compensation for the increased
uncertainty.  Inflation  diverts  resources  away  from  productive  investments  into  speculative
ventures in real estate and other financial assets. And in its interaction with the tax system,
high inflation encourages businesses to increase debt. These are the very types of excesses that
lead to, and indeed aggravate, the economic busts that inevitably follow. During the 1970s and
1980s, Canadians had first-hand experience with such complications.
The impact of persistent government deficits and rising debt
High inflation was also partly responsible for the move towards larger government deficits in
Canada that began in the mid-1970s.
Initially, inflation tended to generate increased revenues for governments, and this encouraged
additional  spending.  When  the  effects  of  inflation  became  more  evident,  however,  public
pressure  led  to  the  indexation  of  the  personal  income  tax  system  and  the  growth  in
government revenues slowed. Unfortunately, this was not offset by a tighter grip on spending.
For the government sector as a whole in Canada, on a national accounts basis, total program
expenditures  (not  counting  debt-servicing  costs),  rose  from  37  per  cent  of  gross  domestic
product (GDP) in 1975 to a peak of 43 per cent in 1992 (a year of recession). Over the same
period, the budget deficit more than tripled to 8 per cent of GDP. And the ratio of outstanding
net debt-to-GDP soared from less than 10 per cent to 60 per cent, and by the mid-1990s it had
climbed to 70 per cent.
Increasingly,  through  the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s,  the  growth  in  government  spending
raised  concerns  about  whether  this  represented  the  most  efficient  use  of  the  economy’s
resources.
From a policy perspective, the greatest concern was that persistent large deficits were pushing
Canada’s  debt-to-GDP  ratio  to  unsustainable  levels  and  driving  up  risk  premiums  in  our
interest rates.
The economic costs of Canada’s rising indebtedness became very clear after 1991, when our
inflation  rate  came  down  quickly,  but  medium-  and  longer-term  interest  rates  were  slow  to
respond. One important reason for that was the persistence of high risk premiums because of
BIS Review  64/1999
2
fears  that  governments  might  be  tempted  to  reduce  the  debt  burden  through  inflation  –  in
effect, by printing more money. Canada’s vulnerability to such concerns became particularly
evident during the Mexican currency crisis.
High  interest  rates  meant  that  we  had  to  pay  more  of  our  income  to  foreign  holders  of  our
public  and  private  sector  debt.  This  made  us  poorer  as  a  nation.  And  these  high  rates
discouraged investment which, to some extent, relates to the third “disappointing” trend of the
past quarter century – the slowdown in productivity growth.
The slowdown in productivity growth
Productivity has been at the centre of many public discussions in Canada recently. For good
reason, too, since productivity is critically important to growing incomes and rising standards
of living over time.
Unfortunately,  such  discussions  are  complicated  by  the  fact  that  there  is  more  than  one
measure of productivity, and there often seems to be some difficulty in distinguishing between
the growth and the level of productivity. Things become even more complicated as one gets
into cross-country comparisons.
After  a  strong  showing  from  the  end  of  the  Second  World  War  to  the  early  1970s,  our
productivity  growth  became  lacklustre.  Output  per  worker  slowed  from  an  average  rate  of
about 3 per cent in the 1950s and 1960s to 1 per cent in the 1980s and 1990s.
Productivity  growth  also  slowed  in  other  industrial  countries,  including  the  United  States,
over  this  period.  Indeed,  average  gains  in  labour  productivity  in  the  Canadian  and  U.S.
business sectors have been roughly similar in the past 25 years.  This  means  that  the  gap  in
productivity  levels  in  favour  of  the  United  States  has  not  really  widened;  but  neither  has  it
narrowed. Moreover, growth in U.S. productivity seems to have picked up strongly in the last
year or so.
I  do  not  have  a  complete  explanation  for  the  productivity  slowdown  in  Canada.  But  I  am
prepared to assert that high inflation and the large fiscal deficits through most of the past 25
years  were  not  conducive  to  productivity  growth.  They  led  to  high  interest  rates  and
considerable  uncertainty  about  the  future  –  both  of  which  discourage  the  investment  in
technology and new equipment that helps to advance productivity increases.
Declining primary commodity prices
The final factor on my list is the decline in the  prices  of  the  key  primary  commodities  that
Canada produces.
Calculated from the early 1970s to the present, this decline amounts to some 45 per cent when
the international prices of these commodities in U.S. dollars are adjusted for the increase in
the general price level during this period. A drop of that magnitude in the prices of some of
Canada’s major exports is bound to have a significant effect on our standard of living.
To look at the past 25 years in isolation, however, tends to magnify the extent of the decline
and leaves one with an exaggerated sense of the associated economic consequences. This is
3
BIS Review  64/1999
because  commodity  prices  jumped  to  historical  peaks  at  the  beginning  of  the  period,  in
response to the worldwide monetary stimulus that I mentioned, and remained generally high
for nearly a decade or so, before reversing.
To  put  things  in  perspective,  we  need  to  focus  on  the  longer-run  behaviour  of  commodity
prices. For only then does it become clear that these prices were exceptionally high through
the  first  decade  of  this  25-year  period,  and  that  a  good  part  of  the  subsequent  downward
movement represented a return to more “normal” levels. Indeed, between the late 1960s and
the late 1980s, the level of inflation-adjusted commodity prices showed little change overall.
We should also keep in mind that part of the decline in commodity prices has reflected new
discoveries of raw materials, more efficient ways of extraction, and reduced production costs.
Otherwise, we would have seen a much larger reduction in the importance of commodities,
and in the profits and share prices of Canadian resource industries.
When one allows for some of these factors, the downward movement in commodity prices in
the past 25 years is not as dramatic as it appears at first. But I can certainly appreciate that the
sharp drop in these prices in 1997-98, associated with the Asian financial crisis, has had an
especially  strong  impact  on  many  Canadians’  sense  of  well-being.  Adjusted  for  inflation,
commodity  prices  hit  a  new  post-war  low  during  this  period  and  led  to  a  substantial
depreciation of our currency.
What does the future hold?
So  far,  I  have  argued  that  high  inflation,  large  government  deficits,  slower  productivity
growth, and lower commodity prices have tended to complicate Canada’s economic situation
over the past 25 years. But as I said at the beginning, much of the greater sense of difficulty
and concern that Canadians have felt in the 1990s has to do with the after-effects of the strong
medicine we have had to take to turn our economic performance around. The success we have
had so far in this regard bodes well for our future.
Canada’s  inflation  rate  has  come  down  dramatically,  averaging  less  than  2  per  cent  since
1992. And there are now agreed targets between the Bank of Canada and the Government of
Canada to keep inflation low and stable in the future. More importantly, Canadians have come
to expect continued low inflation and to build that expectation into their plans.
The federal government and most provincial governments now have balanced budgets or are
running surpluses. The total government debt-to-GDP ratio, which peaked at 70 per cent  in
1996, has since fallen to 63 per cent. With present prudent fiscal policies, it should continue to
decline steadily.
Future  gains  in  productivity  are  difficult  to  predict.  Certainly,  our  improved  inflation  and
fiscal situation, together with the low interest rates that they have made possible, provide the
best climate for fostering productivity that we have had in a long time. Moreover, Canadian
businesses have undergone major restructuring during the 1990s in response to increasingly
competitive  world  markets.  Business  investment  has  been  rising  smartly  recently  and  more
firms have been adopting new production technologies.
BIS Review  64/1999
4
It is also interesting to note that, after eight years of economic expansion, productivity growth
in the United States has picked up, rather than falling off as usually happens at this stage of
the cycle. Tight labour markets seem to have encouraged a record level of investment in that
country  and  more  efficient  use  of  technology  than  before.  While  the  pickup  in  Canadian
investment  in  machinery  and  equipment  has  lagged  somewhat  behind  that  in  the  United
States, new technology is not the exclusive preserve of our U.S. neighbours. So I hope that in
Canada,  too,  we  will  see  a  similar  payoff  from  the  adoption  of  new  technology  and  a
comparable improvement in productivity.
As  for  commodity  prices,  there  has  already  been  some  turnaround  this  year,  but  a  firmer
recovery requires a strengthening world economy – in particular, a turnaround in Japan and
the rest of Asia.
The other point to note in this connection is that the relative importance of commodities in the
Canadian economy has declined. The share of primary products in total Canadian exports has
fallen from about 60 per cent in the 1970s and 1980s to about half as much presently.
I  should  also  add  that  our  flexible  exchange  rate  system  has  been  playing  the  role  that  it
should  in  helping  us  adjust  to  lower  commodity  prices.  The  decline  in  the  value  of  the
Canadian  dollar  in  1997-98  was  mainly  a  response  to  the  impact  of  the  Asian  crisis  on
commodity  prices.  A  weaker  currency  has  helped  to  cushion  the  negative  effect  on  our
resource sector. But, more importantly, it has helped to stimulate demand for other Canadian
exports and import substitutes, particularly of manufactured goods. In turn, this is encouraging
a shift in production from commodities towards other tradable goods.
While I believe that this shift is exactly right for the Canadian economy, I do not agree with
some  recent  suggestions  that  we  should  somehow  force  the  pace  of  the  movement  out  of
primary  products  and  into  the  so-called  more  modern,  knowledge-based  industries.  If
commodity prices do not recover from their current low levels and profits are squeezed as a
result, this will happen naturally. But for now, primary products are still an important source
of Canada’s wealth and high standard of living, and they are likely to remain so for some time.
To conclude, the past 25 years have not been easy. And they have been less prosperous overall
than many Canadians had come to expect, based on the experience of the 1950s and 1960s.
But,  as  we  stand  on  the  threshold  of  the  next  century,  we  can  take  comfort  from  the
remarkable progress we have made recently in strengthening the foundations of our economy.
This gives me reason to be positive about our capacity to improve our economic performance
and to meet tomorrow’s challenges with confidence.
5
BIS Review  64/1999
