Mr Stark discusses regional integration and stability in the context of global markets
Speech by the Deputy Governor of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Dr Jürgen Stark, presented at the
Central Bank of the Argentine Republic in Buenos Aires on 24 March 1999.
1. Introduction
Globalisation  of  markets  and  competition  has  been  a  major  driving  force  for  the  economic
development and policies of Latin America’s economies.
The  decisive  impetus  for  today’s  degree  of  globalisation  came  at  the  beginning  of  the  nineties
when  communism  finally  failed  and  the  door  was  opened  worldwide  to  a  market-oriented
economic system.
As a key element of an efficient system of allocating resources, the free movement of capital has
provided  the  precondition  for  increased  prosperity.  In  a  growing  number  of  countries  the
restrictions on trade in goods and on the provision of services have been reduced; the efforts of
the WTO have yielded fruit on a global scale.
Finally,  the  enormous  technical  progress  made  in  transport,  telecommunications  and  data
processing have radically changed the international division of labour.
However, the real momentum exerted by the process of globalisation can only be seen through the
interaction of the various factors. At the same time the retention of national barriers has become
more and more difficult technically and more and more expensive economically.
2. Aspects of globalisation in Latin America
Latin  America  has  used  the  changes  in  the  underlying  global  conditions  for  an  economic
reorientation. At the beginning of the nineties, if not before, a complete about-turn in economic
policy was made on this continent, spurred by the economic setback during what was termed the
decada perdida.
Many countries in the region implemented consistent macroeconomic stabilisation measures and
opened  themselves  up  to  the  international  goods  and  capital  markets.  The  state  retreated
progressively  from  economic  life,  and  substantial  parts  of  the  economy  and  the  infrastructure
were  privatised.  To  that  extent,  the  term  emerging  market  may  also  be  seen  as  an  offshoot  of
globalisation.
The  enormous  economic  potential  of  Latin  America,  especially  of  the  Mercosur  countries,
became  a  magnet  for  international  investors  seeking  higher  yields  for  their  capital;  direct
investment  flows  multiplied  during  the  past  ten  years.  Public  donors  of  capital  were  largely
replaced  by  private  investors.  The  growing  number  of  multinationals  in  Latin  America,  the
multilatinas, as they are called, is a clear indication of the new business landscape in the region.
The  technical  progress  that  accompanied  the  liberalisation  of  capital  movements  helped  to
diversify  foreign  trade  structures  and,  as  a  result  of  greater  efficiency,  to  improve  the
competitiveness of Latin America on the world market. The substantial dismantling of tariff and
non-tariff  trade  barriers  under  the  Mercosur  agreement  and  other  regional  and  international
agreements fostered the integration of Latin America into the world economy – even if there are
still significant differences from country to country.
1
BIS Review   38/1999
The  question  as  to  whether  the  change  of  tack  in  economic  policy  and  the  extensive  degree  to
which  the  economies  of  Latin  America  have  been  opened  up  have  paid  off  must  certainly  be
answered in the affirmative, given the trend in the real growth rates of GDP and the rise in per
capita income.
However,  one  must  also  face  the  fact  that  globalisation  also  entails  new  challenges  apart  from
opportunities  and  advantages.  Market  participants  –  either  in  the  public  sector  or  the  private
sector – must prepare themselves for the consequences of the changed environment.
One  of  these  consequences  is  more  intensive  competition – and  that  applies  not  only  to  the
corporate sector. In the course of globalisation a discernible degree of competition has likewise
emerged  between  the  economic,  monetary  and  social  systems  of  the  various  countries.  This
concerns foreign investment and jobs.
Consequently, globalisation requires smoothly operating markets that, in turn, ensure the efficient
allocation  of  the  factors  of  production.  The  structural  change  that  is  necessary  to  overcome
rigidities cannot be postponed for long under the conditions of global competition.
Another  factor  is  the  growing  degree  of  interdependence  worldwide.  It  is  no  longer  the  real
sectors  that  are  primarily  affected  by  this;  instead,  it  can  be  seen  first  and  foremost  in  the
integration of the financial markets. The effects of this interdependence are increased by the huge
volumes  of  readily  investible  capital,  new  financial  instruments  and  intermediaries  as  well  as
comprehensive computerisation.
3. Financial market crises and the danger of contagion
In  view  of  the  recent  financial  market  crises  in  South-East  Asia,  Russia  and  Brazil  and  their
detrimental effects on the real economy, globalisation and the market-oriented economic system
have now run into criticism in some quarters. There is no doubt that the changed environment has
increased the potential risk of contagion even though it is sometimes difficult to draw the dividing
line between contagion and political shortcomings.
The reassessment of a country’s  opportunities  and  risks,  of  its  potential  and  weaknesses  by  the
international  financial  markets,  can  result  in  a  sudden  reversal  of  international  capital  flows.
Market participants all around the world react to events with lightning speed – they pump money
into a country and then withdraw it again just as quickly.
Under  the  conditions  of  open  capital  markets  and  a  high  degree  of  capital  mobility  the
punishment for unsound policies is more rapid and severe than has been the case in the past.
The trend towards short-termism, which in the event of a crisis ensures that it is possible to retreat
from  the  market  concerned,  and  the  dominance  of  institutional  investors,  which  encourages  a
certain degree of herd behaviour, magnify the withdrawal of capital.
Nowadays,  investors  take  the  emergence  of  crises  in  one  country  as  a  signal  to  revise  their
investments  in  other  countries  or  regions  of  the  world  as  well,  even  when  macroeconomic
structures  are  comparable  only  to  a  very  limited  extent.  At  the  same  time  the  markets  have
become extremely sensitive to expectations. Credibility and confidence play a dominant role.
Nevertheless,  market  response  should  not  be  seen  in  an  entirely  negative  light.  It  may  actually
have a stabilising effect if this response induces economic policy makers to correct undesirable
trends in good time.
BIS Review   38/1999
2
However, the markets are often prone to exaggerations which are not justified by the economic
fundamentals. In my opinion, this also applies to the spillover effects which have been triggered
by  the  Russian  crisis  in  particular.  Markets  now  seem  to  differentiate  more  between  emerging
market countries than after Russia’s unilateral moratorium and devaluation in August 1998.
What  is  to  be  done  to  mitigate  the  severity  of  such  global  crises  and  to  minimise  the  risks  of
contagion? There are no simple solutions or ready-made remedies.
On  the  one  hand,  the  causes  of  the  recent  financial  market  crises  are  too  diverse,  even  though
there  are  a  few  common  features,  such  as  comparable  macroeconomic  situations  or  similar
exchange rate systems, which always seem to play a role.
In  Asia  it  was  primarily  the  inefficient  banking  system  that  encouraged  the  inappropriate
allocation  of  short-term  capital  inflows.  The  abrupt  withdrawal  of  funds  ultimately  led  to  the
collapse of the currencies.
Russia’s  problems  were  due  not  only  to  the  weakness  of  the  banking  sector  but  also  to  the
completely  inadequate  implementation  of  existing  legal  norms.  Owing  to  its  short-term  public
debt  and  its  excessive  budget  deficit,  Brazil  mainly  had  problems  with  its  credibility  following
some unsuccessful attempts at reform. On the other hand, it is very hard to identify the effective
transfer channels as a result of the many hybrid instruments and diverse financial intermediaries
involved. One thing is certain, however. In the interests of the longer-term outlook for growth, the
idea  of  turning  back  from  globalisation,  that  is  to  say,  reinstating  control  mechanisms,  is  not  a
sensible  alternative.  The  re-introduction  or  maintenance  of  administrative  controls  in  an
otherwise liberal environment is fundamentally problematical.
Firstly, market participants will always contrive to avoid these controls and, if anything, they are
more imaginative than the controlling authorities.
Secondly, capital restrictions are very expensive to implement in most cases. To be effective they
must be applied on a comparatively broad front and could therefore also hinder desirable capital
movements.  What  is  more,  they  may  also  delay  the  necessary  development  of  an  efficient
financial sector.
This is illustrated by what is now happening in Malaysia. The desperate measure that President
Mahathir took in introducing restrictions on capital movements in the middle of the crisis to stop
capital  outflows  did  bring  a  certain  degree  of  stability  in  the  short  term.  In  the  longer  term,
however, this had an adverse effect on the confidence of foreign investors. However, this does not
rule out considering in individual cases the opening-up of the domestic financial market based on
a sensible sequence that takes account of the given financial sector’s ability to cope with volatile
financial  flows.  Controls  to  alter  the  volume  and  composition  of  capital  inflows  can  help  to
prevent crises by limiting from the outset the potential withdrawals in the event of a change of
mood  in  the  markets.  Chile  has  devised  a  successful  approach  to  limiting  short-term  capital
imports in this respect. In addition to that there is a strong argument that Chile owes its stability to
improved and sounder banking regulations.
The route of limiting short-term capital imports can only be taken, however, if the right direction
is  followed,  if  it  is  an  interim  measure  and  if  it  is  complemented  by  strong  and  well  designed
prudential regulations. Otherwise, market confidence will be put at risk. And the breathing space
“bought” in this way must actually be used to achieve the structural change. Permanent controls
entail  the  danger  of  undesirable  developments  in  the  banking  sector  and  in  the  economy  as  a
whole.
3
BIS Review   38/1999
Payment moratoriums are not a feasible option either. In the wake of the Russian crisis the mere
announcement of no more than a 90-day moratorium by the Brazilian region of Minas Gerais vis-
à-vis the central government shook the confidence of market participants for quite some time and
provided  the  initial  spark  for  the  present  currency  crisis,  whose  spillover  effects  have  hit  your
country particularly hard.
These examples show that the particular challenges posed by global markets cannot be mastered
by  re-regulation  and  coercive  measures  but,  in  the  longer  term,  only  by  measures  and  political
strategies that are in keeping with market conditions.
4. Challenges of globalisation
Although a structured account of what is a necessarily incomplete set of options is not easy owing
to the large number of interdependent components, I would like to identify three different levels
of action: the international level, the national level and the regional level.
a) International level – new financial market architecture
Considerations  at  the  international  level  can  best  be  characterised  by  the  term  “strengthened
international financial architecture for the 21st century”. To say it upfront: this term should in no
way encourage expectations about the introduction of a completely new and comprehensive set of
rules for the financial world. The flexibility of the markets and the heterogeneity of interests are
too great for that.
The  key  components  of  the  present  multilateral  efforts  to  prevent  crisis  and  to  promote  the
stability  of  the  international  financial  system  are,  first,  the  improvement  of  financial  market
transparency and, second, a more efficient form of financial market supervision.
For  improving  financial  market  transparency,  it  is  important  that  financial  market  information
already  available  to  the  various  national  and  international  authorities  be  analysed  centrally  and
comprehensively. The data have to be evaluated first and foremost with systemic risk in mind and
must naturally be made available both to the countries concerned and to market participants.
The disclosure of data relevant to the financial markets will make  an  enormous  contribution  to
stabilising  the  global  financial  system.  The  operational  efficiency  of  the  markets  will  be
strengthened.  Investors  will  be  able  to  make  an  appropriate  assessment  of  risks.  The  risk  of
contagion and the herd instinct associated with this will be greatly reduced.
Ways  must  be  found  in  the  course  of  supervising  the  financial  markets  to  safeguard  the  global
implementation of internationally agreed standards, especially the fundamental principles of the
Basle  Committee  and  IOSCO.  Owing  to  the  enormous  dynamics  of  the  markets,  these
requirements must be continuously reviewed to ensure their adequacy and, if needed, adjusted.
In view of the large number of diverse financial intermediaries and the difficulty of distinguishing
between various financial transactions, improvements are needed in the cross-sectoral supervision
of financial markets.
The  future  “Forum  for  Financial  Stability”,  which  has  been  proposed  by  President  Hans
Tietmeyer  and  which  initially  is  to  be  composed  of  representatives  of  the  G-7  countries  and
various  international  organisations,  is  to  take  on  the  task  of  evaluating  the  problems  and
weaknesses  that  emerge  and  to  help  to  strengthen  the  global  financial  system  by  closer
coordination among regulatory bodies.
BIS Review   38/1999
4
(1)
(2)
Having learned from the experience and the specific requirements of the emerging markets I think
it will be essential to include representatives of the emerging markets in the discussion at as early
a stage as possible.
One thing must be made clear, however: improved supervision can never, and must never, release
the private agents from their responsibilities.
Role of the IMF and of the private sector
The  term  “strengthening  the  international  financial  architecture”  has  to  include  the  role  of  the
IMF in combating crises and the question of involving the private sector.
No matter how important short-term financial assistance from the IMF is in the event of a crisis,
both for the countries directly affected and, as a result of contagion, for the rest of the world, it
must  not  lead  to  a  bail-out  of  the  private  sector.  We  know  from  experience  that  excessively
generous financial packages have a detrimental effect on the risk awareness of private investors
and encourage moral hazard.
Those who run greater risks in the expectation of higher yields ought also to be ready to bear any
consequent losses. The modified economic programme newly agreed with the IMF for Brazil has
taken a step in the right direction by tightening the involvement of the banking sector.
With regard to the avoidance and solution of crises, the IMF should again concentrate more on its
catalytic  role.  Appropriate  involvement  of  the  private  sector  will  tend  to  increase  rather  than
reduce the IMF’s effectiveness.
b) National level – stability of the economies
Whatever  form  the  “strengthened  international  financial  architecture”  takes,  it  must  be  built  on
the solid foundations of consistent and thereby credible national economic policies.
Sound macroeconomic data, a healthy system of public finance, an appropriate monetary system,
an  efficient  banking  sector  and,  above  all,  the  ability  to  correct  any  undesirable  developments
create confidence and credibility.
These two qualities determine the expectations of market participants.
Confidence,  credibility  and  expectation  are  three  factors  which  seem  to  determine  the
international  capital  markets  these  days.  Sound  fundamentals  are  therefore  part  of  the  essential
tools needed to meet the challenges posed by globalisation.
With  the  establishment  of  the  Currency  Board  Regime  in  1991  Argentina  opted  for  a  very
consistent market-oriented economic policy. The salient features of the successful strategy were
the statutory pegging of the peso to the US dollar at a rate of 1:1, deregulation, privatisation and
the introduction of competition into economic life. Argentina has left the period of hyperinflation
(1989:  almost  5,000 %)  far  behind  it.  Its  present  rate  of  inflation  is  less  than  1 %,  and  the
economy has been restored to a sound path of growth despite the current downturn.
Yet I would like to refer briefly to three general points which have aroused greater public interest
as a result of the recent currency crises:
one, the importance of the banking sector;
5
BIS Review   38/1999
two, the choice of exchange rate system; and
three, the short-termism in financial transactions.
As  the  financial  crises  in  a  number  of  east  Asian  countries  have  clearly  illustrated,  the
(1)
smooth transformation of capital is primarily dependent on a sound and efficient national banking
sector.  Furthermore,  it  is  advisable  to  create  an  appropriate  safety  net  as  an  additional  buffer
against domestic or external financial shocks.
The  Argentinian  central  bank  has  been  very  successful  in  this  respect.  You  have  built  up  a
Contingent  Liquidity  Facility,  which  is  backed  by  international  banks  and  multinational
organisations, and the banking sector maintains high liquidity reserves with the central bank.
(2)
I  would  like  to  make  only  a  few  brief  comments  on  the  very  interesting  fixed-versus-
floating debate. This is an issue for which there are no simple yes or no, or fix or float, answers.
The  choice  of  exchange  rate  system  can  only  be  judged  with  reference  to  a  country’s  state  of
development, its economic benchmarks and its political circumstances.
Nevertheless, there is a fund of experience of a fundamental nature. There is no doubt that stable
exchange rates  are  desirable  for  economic  agents.  In  some  cases  exchange  rate  pegging  can  be
extremely  useful  for  getting  domestic  inflation  under  control  and  for  maintaining  financial
stability.
Over the longer term, however, a country must ascertain whether or not its internal flexibility is
sufficient to enable it to make any necessary adjustments to its real exchange rate by means of a
strict budgetary or labour market policy.
This  applies  all  the  more  when  what  is  involved  is  not  simply  the  firm  pegging  of  the
exchange  rate  of  the  domestic  currency  to  an  anchor  currency  but,  instead,  the  abolition  of  the
domestic currency and the adoption of a foreign one.
Triggered by the recent financial market turbulence, such a step, known as “dollarisation”,
has now become the topic of intense debate in your country.
Giving up the peso would eliminate the foreign exchange risk and tend to lead to a lower
interest  burden.  Moreover,  adopting  the  US  dollar  —  as  a  major  transaction  currency  —  could
make the further integration of Argentina into the world market easier.
It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  making  a  dollarisation  strategy  successful
permanently places severe demands on the flexibility of a country’s economic policy. The reason
for this is that the adoption of a stable currency alone cannot guarantee market confidence on a
lasting basis. It is precisely because domestic and external monetary policy will disappear as an
option for absorbing undesirable internal and external influences that it is particularly important
to maintain in the long term the efficiency of the domestic banking sector, sound public finance
and the flexibility of the labour market.
The  introduction  of  the  dollar  therefore  requires  both  a  comprehensive  economic
cost-benefit analysis and a very broad political consensus which takes account of the longer-term
national and international implications of such a step.
BIS Review   38/1999
6
The  success  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate  system  or  of  a  floating  system  as  well  as  the
adoption of an anchor currency are all dependent on the consistency and credibility of domestic
economic policy.
(3)
When  financial  markets  are  strained,  short-termism  may  present  those  responsible  for
monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate  policy  with  a  dilemma.  While  an  increase  in  interest  rates
does  stabilise  the  exchange  rate  up  to  a  point  and  hence  asset  prices,  too,  it  can  result  in  a
virtually unbearable interest rate  burden  if  short-term  debt  is  substantial,  and  vice  versa.  In  my
opinion,  the  only  effective  means  of  countering  the  general  trend  towards  short-termism  is
pursuing  a  medium-term-oriented  stability  policy  that  induces  investors  to  make  longer-term
investments.
c) Regional integration
With globalisation and economic recovery at the beginning of the nineties, the integration process
in  Latin  America  was  also  given  a  fresh  impetus  as  a  means  of  economic  and  political
consolidation.
There is no doubt that Mercosur has been the most important factor at the regional level. Within a
short  period  a  customs  union  has  been  developed  among  the  member  states  which  in  the  long
term is to be extended to form a common market.
Encouraging interregional and intra-regional trade in the sense of an open regionalism is playing a
major role in achieving greater integration. It can make a crucial contribution both to regional and
global stability. The creation of a free trade area between Mercosur and the EU will contribute
greatly  to  this.  Its  rapid  establishment  was  strongly  recommended  by  entrepreneurs  from  both
regions at the first Mercosur/EU business forum in Rio de Janeiro at the end of last month.
I would now like to report on the lessons we have learned so far from the European integration
process.
5. European integration
a) European monetary union: a new scenario for all parties
The process of regional economic and political integration that began in Europe with the signing
of the Treaty of Rome in 1957 recently reached a decisive point. On January 1, 1999, European
monetary  union  was  launched  by  introducing  the  euro  as  the  single  currency  in  11  of  the  15
member states of the European Union. At the same time, the European System of Central Banks,
consisting of the European Central Bank and the central banks of the participating member states,
assumed responsibility for conducting monetary policy.
Monetary union sets up a new economic architecture in Europe with far-reaching consequences
for  the  strategic  behaviour  of  all  parties.  The  delegation  of  national  powers  to  an  independent
monetary authority certainly requires a new common understanding of policy making within the
countries of the euro area. Owing to the abolition of national currencies, it is no longer possible
for  member  states  to  resort  to  individual  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies.  Interest  rate
differentials and currency fluctuations, hitherto devices for readjusting economic competitiveness
in the event of asymmetric shocks, will have to be replaced by more market flexibility.
At the same time, we are seeing signs of an ever-increasing degree of economic concentration in
terms of large-scale transnational mergers and acquisitions in virtually all sectors of the European
7
BIS Review   38/1999
economy. There is also an open contest between regions for corporate investors. Even at national
level, governments worry about the effect of fiscal policy on their country’s competitiveness.
These  developments  are  closely  linked  to  the  beneficial  characteristics  of  the  single  currency.
Exchange rate risks and the cost of foreign exchange transactions have ceased to burden European
economies.  In  combination  with  fundamental  structural  reforms  this  will  prove  a  stimulus  to
investment  and  economic  growth  as  well  as  help  to  ease  the  ailing  labour  market  situation  in
Europe. In addition, the exclusive use of the euro on most financial markets in Europe will make
capital allocation more efficient, thereby reducing volatility and enhancing the stability of a more
integrated European financial market.
b) The road to the euro in a historical perspective
On the road towards the single currency legal and economic hurdles had to be cleared. Besides
the necessary ratification of the amended Treaty by national parliaments, a process of economic
convergence  indispensable  for  exchange  rate  stability  had  to  be  initiated.  The  so-called
convergence criteria embedded in the Treaty provided a clear incentive for national governments
to exercise fiscal restraint. Specifically, four economic criteria had to be met before joining the
single currency:
the achievement of a high degree of price stability,1 a sustainable government financial position,
that is to say, the absence of an excessive deficit,2 membership of the European Monetary System
for at least two years without devaluation while keeping the exchange rate within the fluctuation
margins and, finally, a moderate long-term interest rate level.3
No  doubt,  for  some  member  states  economic  convergence  has  represented  a  long  and  painful
process  that  required  a  stronger  dedication  to  improving  and  maintaining  government  budget
discipline.  In  the  end,  however,  those  continuous  efforts  are  bearing  fruit.  We  are  now  seeing
unprecedentedly low levels of inflation and interest rates throughout the euro area. Preserving this
state has become the responsibility of the ECB, the European Central Bank.
c) Strategic approach of the ECB
The ECB Governing Council, consisting of the President, the Vice-President and the four other
members of the Executive Board as well as the governors of the national central banks of the euro
area,  has  adopted  a  monetary  policy  strategy  in  accordance  with  its  primary  objective  of
maintaining price stability as mandated by the EU Treaty.
Besides a quantitative definition of price stability – consumer prices in the euro area should over
the  medium  term  on  a  year-on-year  basis  increase  by  less  than  2  %  –  two  main  pillars  were
established:
One, a reference value for the growth rate of broad money is announced in advance — at present
a rate of 4½ %.
                                                          
1 Average inflation rate no more than 1.5 % above the inflation rates of the three member
states that achieved the highest degree of price stability.
2 Reference values are 3 % of GDP for the general government deficit and 60 % of GDP for
general government gross debt.
3 Average long-term interest rate no more than 2 % above the respective rate in those three
member states that achieved the highest degree of price stability.
BIS Review   38/1999
8
Two, a broadly based assessment of the outlook for price developments and risks to price stability
in the euro area as a whole is conducted on an ongoing basis.
This  approach  to  monetary  policy  reflects  a  medium-term  orientation  and  by  no  means  a
willingness to fine-tune the economy. The ECB acknowledges that during the first few years of
monetary union it will not be sufficient to rely exclusively on the development of broad money.
Initially, the transmission mechanism may vary because of differences in the process of financial
intermediation. In other words: it is not yet clear whether there is a stable relationship between
the broad money aggregate and price developments in the euro area. The ECB therefore considers
a number of general economic indicators.
d) Apparent tension between centralised monetary policy and decentralised fiscal policies
There  is  an  apparent  tension  between  centralised  monetary  policy  and  decentralised  national
fiscal and structural policies. With a single currency, it is crucial for maintaining price stability
that monetary policy is denationalised and depoliticised. That means that the monetary decisions
of the ECB Governing Council are implemented by using the same instruments and methods in
all  countries  participating  in  monetary  union.  At  the  same  time,  fiscal  and  structural  policies
remain the responsibility of the member states. While this, in principle, leaves room for disparate
policies, the EU Treaty mandates coordination in these policy areas to ensure a proper functioning
of  the  common  market.  Greater  centralisation  of  fiscal  and  economic  policies  is  not  desirable
because it would undermine the possibility of beneficial institutional competition within Europe
and the notion of subsidiarity.
However,  closer  coordination  is  necessary.  According  to  the  Maastricht  Treaty  national
sovereignty in fiscal policy must not lead to excessive deficits of more than 3 % of GDP, possibly
creating  financial  difficulties  that  may  spill  over  to  other  member  states  and  may  undermine
monetary policy.
While the selection of participating member states by the European Council was a “once-and-for-
all”  decision,  maintaining  fiscal  discipline  is  and  must  be  an  ongoing  process.  To  continue
preventing  member  states  from  running  excessive  deficits,  a  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  was
enacted in 1997. Under the Pact, euro area countries will aim for medium-term fiscal positions
close  to  balance  or  in  surplus  so  as  to  allow  an  adequate  safety  margin.  It  is  hoped  that  the
Stability and Growth Pact will serve as a stabilising device, keeping member states from pursuing
countercyclical fiscal policies which — if effective — would most likely compromise the price
stability goal of the ECB.
6. Is European integration a model for Latin America?
Integration  in  Europe  promoted  by  the  establishment  of  its  own  institution  has  been  a  rather
lengthy process that also had to deal with setbacks along the way. Integration in South America is
in my view on a promising path as trade flows within Mercosur have been enlarged over recent
years.  It  must  be  remembered  that  in  its  founding  period  the  EU  was  also  primarily  concerned
with removing barriers to trade before further integration steps could be taken.
The  tensions  currently  evident  within  Mercosur  should  not  lead  to  protective  tendencies.  This
holds true not only in view of our experience with European integration but also in the light of the
benefits that political and economic integration brings in the form of greater stability in the region
and ultimately in other parts of the so-called global village.
9
BIS Review   38/1999
I would like to encourage all parties to Mercosur to stay on the path towards the desired goal of a
common market. Specifically, unhampered mobility of capital, goods and services would likely
lead to more growth and employment in the region.
Could  monetary  union  serve  to  foster  the  ongoing  integration  process,  as  has  been  suggested
recently?  There  is  no  single  answer  to  that.  In  Europe,  we  have  chosen  to  bring  about  a  high
degree of economic convergence before introducing a common currency. In general, each country
or region has to decide for itself what the “best way” is. The decision to adopt a single currency is
inevitably a political one.
The  necessity  of  a  sound  and  consistent  economic  policy  does  not  diminish  whatever  the
particular currency or exchange rate arrangement. This becomes obvious when we consider the
strenuous efforts that were necessary on the road from the Maastricht Treaty to the establishment
of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks.  There  should  be  no  doubt  that  monetary  union
represents the final stage in a long-lasting process of modified economic behaviour. Only if the
underlying  philosophy  becomes  second  nature  to  all  concerned  will  the  desired  outcome  be
attained.
7. Conclusion
Despite  the  current  difficulties,  the  prospects  for  Latin  America  and,  more  especially,  for  your
own country are good. With its enormous primary resources and the highly motivated population,
the continent has tremendous economic potential and has embarked on an economic policy course
that is worth pursuing.
I  am  certain  that  Latin  America,  and  above  all  Argentina,  will  meet  the  challenges  of
globalisation and be well equipped for the 21st century.
BIS Review   38/1999
10
