Mr Schieber looks at the stability of the euro as an economic
and political challenge from the perspective of the Deutsche Bundesbank
Lecture  given  by  Mr  Helmut  Schieber,  Member  of  the  Board  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the
invitation of the America-European Community Association in London on 23 September 1999.
 At  first  glance,  the  title  of  my  lecture  seems  to  be  a  “non-subject”,  or  at  least  a  completely
anachronistic  subject:  given  an  inflation  rate  of  1.1  percentage  points  in  July,  the  absolute  limit  of
under 2% set by  the  ECB  Governing  Council  still looks  far  away.  Hence,  despite  a  number  of  risk
factors (such as the steep upturn in oil prices) the stability of the euro is presumably not currently in
jeopardy. This optimistic conclusion is suggested by the following factors:
(1) 
the low interest-rate level by historical standards. The recent rise in longer-term interest rates
no  doubt  mirrors  more  favourable  expectations  for  business  activity;  it  is  rather  to  be
regarded  as  a  rejection  of  the  spectre  of  deflation  than  as  a  reflection  of  latent  inflation
expectations;
(2) 
(3) 
the keen competition on the factor and goods markets (due to globalisation and the launch of
the euro) results, on the one hand, in a substantial growth of productivity but, on the other,
also  in  strong  downward  price  pressure  in  some  sectors  (in  Germany,  for  instance,  in  the
areas of telecommunications and electricity);
In view of the substantial unutilised capacity, the emerging revitalisation of business activity
may well make non-inflationary growth possible for the production factors capital and labour
alike.
Regardless of the prevailing macroeconomic setting, the excellent underlying institutional conditions
for the euro should always be borne in mind in any discussion of the stability of the euro: to enable it
to perform its primary task of maintaining monetary stability, the ECB was endowed, under the Treaty
of Maastricht, with a high  degree  of independence.  Notwithstanding  a  number  of  dissenting  voices,
especially  from  the  English-speaking  area,  the  ECB  has  a  convincing  monetary  policy  strategy.  In
addition,  the  Eurosystem  possesses  a  comprehensive,  up-to-date  and  market-oriented  range  of
monetary policy instruments, which have already proved their worth in the short period since the euro
was launched. Finally, it is worth pointing out that the ECB Governing Council has swiftly grown into
a  body  with  common  convictions  and  perceptions;  in  the  process,  it  has  increasingly  generated  a
European “stability culture” distinct from particular national interests.
In  view  of  these  auspicious  underlying  economic  and institutional  conditions,  it  appears  completely
misplaced  to  worry  about  the  stability  of  the  euro.  And  yet,  it  is  a  long-standing  experience  of  the
Bundesbank that inflation has often been declared dead, but has never actually died. Nothing is more
dangerous than complacency and slackening vigilance.
Where  might  any  future  risks  to  the  stability  of  the  euro  lie?  Well,  in  the  first  place,  a  number  of
unavoidable problems arise in connection with the transition to a larger common monetary area.
It is doubtful, for instance, whether the demand for, and the velocity of circulation of, money in the
new  monetary  area  will  be  sufficiently  stable  from  the  outset.  What  will  be  the  impact  of,  say,
structural changes in the financial sector (catchwords are: the trend towards securitisation and towards
disintermediation)? What will be the implications for the monetary policy of the ECB of the differing
monetary policy transmission channels within the eurozone?
These transitional difficulties should not be made light of, by any means. Even so, they will diminish
in significance – albeit not in the short run – as increasing experience is gained within the Eurosystem.
1
BIS Review 100/1999
It will certainly be interesting to see how the ECB responds the first time that it feels a “head wind”. It
is a long-standing experience of the Bundesbank that the acid test of monetary policy comes when a
restrictive policy stance has to be pursued. In this context, the prevailing structure of the Eurosystem
naturally raises a variety of special questions:
1.
2.
3.
4.
Will the ECB Governing Council act quickly and resolutely even if it were to be confronted
with massive political opposition?
Will the general public in Europe support the ECB just as unreservedly as German citizens
backed  the  Bundesbank,  i.e.  will  the  ECB  enjoy  comparable  backing  for  its  stabilisation
policy?
Will the ECB Governing Council abide by its orientation towards the euro area even if that
policy no longer seems appropriate for particular parts of that area?
How  will  the  monetary  policy  of  the  ECB  respond  if  the  ECOFIN  Council  exercises  its
powers under Article 111 of the EC Treaty, for  instance by formulating general orientations
or exchange-rate policy? Will the stability reservation laid down in that clause actually hold
up?
In my opinion, the ECB deserves our full confidence in all of these questions. But on the other hand, it
is obvious that the ECB, as a new institution, initially has to earn public confidence (and thus at the
same time due scope for the formulation of current monetary policy), even though it is likely to have
inherited a certain “advance” of confidence from the Bundesbank.
But the crucial issue affecting the stability of the euro will  be that  of  how  the  relationship  between
national fiscal, economic, structural and wage policy, on the one hand, and supranational monetary
policy, on the other, will evolve in the euro area.
for real economic growth at stable prices, or
The fundamental problem is the same as in every country. A central bank can control the expansion of
the money stock, at least over the medium term. But it depends on the other policy areas whether the
leeway thus gained is exploited
• 
• 
Thus, for preserving monetary stability, a central bank is always dependent on the cooperation of the
government in power and of the parties to wage settlements; it is only by means of a policy-mix that is
compatible with stability that non-inflationary growth can ultimately be achieved.
for raising prices, accompanied by stagnating or even declining economic performance.
In the euro area we are now facing a special problem: a single monetary policy  for  eleven  member
states is accompanied by national responsibility for wage policy, fiscal policy and economic policy.
It is true that a closer coordination of fiscal and economic policies is envisaged by Articles 98, 99 and
104 of the EC Treaty, and by what is known as the Stability and Growth Pact (i.e. above all: decisions
on  common  features  of  economic  policy  and  mutual  budget  surveillance),  but  these  coordination
mechanisms  still  have  to  prove  their  worth  in  practice.  A  great  deal  will  depend  on  policymakers
behaving with sufficient discipline in the interests of the stability of the single currency.
In  order  to  shed  more  light  on  this  dilemma,  permit  me  briefly  to  address  a  particularly  ticklish
problem: assuming that a restrictive policy is being pursued, an increase in interest rates would have
widely  differing  effects  on  the  budget  situations  of  the  various  member  states,  since  the  levels  and
maturity patterns of public debt diverge vastly. As this naturally also affects compliance with the rules
of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  a  restrictive  monetary  policy  also  involves  additional  conflict
potential.
In this context, the important question of the durability of the internal cohesion of the euro area must
not be disregarded, either.
On  the  one  hand,  in  view  of  the  continued  convergence  and  integration  of  the  eurozone,  optimism
certainly  seems  warranted:  that  is  suggested  by  the  increasing  cyclical  synchrony,  the  progressive
integration  of  the  financial  markets  (and  especially  of  the  European  money  market),  and  the
BIS Review 100/1999
2
divergent pay settlements,
asymmetric external shocks,
completion  of  the  single  European  market.  On  the  other  hand,  substantial  regional  differences  and
divergences cannot be ruled out (just think, for instance, of the North/South divide in Italy, and the
East/West divide in Germany due to reunification). The range of possible causes could not be wider,
for example
• 
• 
• 
• 
Generally speaking, it is true to say that, the more flexible national goods, services and labour markets
are, the lower will be the demand for compensatory measures on the part of national fiscal, economic
and structural policies. But precisely market flexibility is a weak link in many European member states
(and that goes particularly for Germany). In many cases there is a considerable need for reform, e.g.
with  respect  to  reducing  the  government  expenditure  ratio,  deregulation,  restructuring  of  social
security systems or adjusting tax legislation.
diverse national structural conditions.
differing national policy priorities, or
There  are,  however,  good  grounds  for  hoping  that  the  pressure  exerted  by  the  single  currency  will
greatly  foster  the  reform  process.  Yet  even  if  major  steps  are  taken  towards  flexibility,  the  risk  of
national or regional special developments can never be ruled out altogether.
Whereas it used to be possible, at least to a certain degree, to respond to special national problems by
modifying the interest rate and/or the exchange rate, this option is no longer available in the monetary
union.  The  consequence  is  that  the  demands  made  on  political  compensatory  measures,  on  the
willingness and ability of national policymakers to respond, and on the European coordination process
have  definitely  risen.  National  failure,  especially  on  the  part  of  a  major  country,  may  have  a
pronounced impact on the common interest-rate level and/or on the external value of the euro.
Finally,  this  state  of  affairs  also  gives  rise  to  the  question  of  the  suitability  of  the  underlying
institutional conditions, i.e. of the EC Treaty. Considerable doubts exist as to whether, in the light of
the demands described above on a policy compatible with the euro, the demarcation of responsibilities
between  the  European  level  and  the  national  level,  the  rules  for  coordinating  Community  decisions
and the structures of the European institutions are appropriate and efficient. That is particularly true if
the planned enlargement of the EU, and also of EMU, is taken into account. There is a lot of evidence
suggesting  that  the  latest  amendment  of  the  EC  Treaty  by  the  Treaty  of  Amsterdam  (known  as  the
Maastricht II Treaty) has failed to solve these major problems.
All this makes two things very clear:
1.
2.
The launch of the euro is a political act, and far more than a mere technical development. It
has  substantial  implications  for  economic  and  political  structures  and  responsibilities  in
Europe.
The stability of the euro is a major challenge not only to the Eurosystem but likewise to the
economic and fiscal policies of member states and to the coordination of those policies.
To sum up, I should like to emphasise once again that, all in all, the euro has got off to a good start,
also in the light of the counterinflationary policy setting. But the acid test still lies ahead. The major
opportunities afforded by the euro are accompanied by corresponding risks and challenges. The fate of
the euro in the years ahead will hinge crucially on whether member states become aware of this task,
and on how they address it. This issue will certainly also play a major role in the forthcoming debates
in the UK and other countries on joining the Eurosystem. I very much hope that the behaviour of the
euro  member  states  will  make  it  easier  for  the  nations  and  governments  in  question  to  reach  a
favourable decision.
3
BIS Review 100/1999
