Mr McDonough comments on Capital Markets, Securities and Government Sponsored
Enterprises
Statement  by  the  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Mr  William  J.
McDonough,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking  and  Financial  Services,  U.S.  House  of
Representatives, Washington, D.C., on 3 March 1999.
Good  morning  Chairmen  Leach  and  Baker  and  members  of  the  Subcommittee.  When  I
appeared before the full Committee in October, I spoke about the near-collapse of Long-Term
Capital  Management  and  the  events  leading  up  to  the  private-sector  recapitalization  of  its
fund, Long-Term Capital Portfolio. At that time, I promised you that we would take a hard
look  at  the  issues  growing  out  of  that  experience,  particularly  as  they  affect  our
responsibilities as bank supervisors. I am pleased to appear before you today to report on the
lessons we have learned and the actions we have taken to reduce the possibility that such an
episode could repeat itself in the future.
As I indicated last fall, three issues require particular attention by banks and their supervisors
in  the  wake  of  LTCM.  These  are,  first,  the  adequacy  of  banks’  credit  analysis  processes;
second,  the  effectiveness  of  exposure  measurement;  and  third,  the  role  of  stress  testing  of
counterparty exposure. In my remarks today I will detail the substantial progress that has been
made, both domestically and internationally, to address each of these supervisory concerns.
But  before  I  get  into  the  details,  let  me  say  that  I  believe  the  LTCM  episode  and  the
supervisory  response  to  it  is  fundamentally  about  two  things:  leverage  and  good  judgment.
Leverage is a fact of life in our financial world, and is a key part of the risk-taking necessary
for  the  creation  of  wealth.  But  sometimes  banks  go  too  far  in  extending  credit  to  their
customers and counterparties. That’ s where good judgment comes in. I know - - I’ ve been
there. I was a commercial banker for 22 years before becoming President of the  New  York
Fed, and I can tell you that the most important decisions a banker makes are how to lend and
to whom. Those decisions are not easy, and often involve many shades of gray. One of our
aims  as  supervisors  should  be  to  see  that  banks  are  using  the  right  tools  to  make  those
judgments.
The  importance  of  these  issues  extends  beyond  banks  and  their  supervisors.  Sound  credit
policies and procedures are essential not only for the stability of individual banks, but also –
and more importantly – for the health of the financial system and the economy  as  a  whole.
This is because banks play a pivotal role in our economy as providers of credit. If banks make
poor  credit  decisions  with  respect  to  a  borrower,  including  a  hedge  fund  like  LTCM,  the
financial system and our economy will suffer.
Basle Report Findings
As  you  know,  I  chair  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  comprised  of  bank
supervisors  from  the  G-10  countries  who  coordinate  supervisory  policy  for  internationally
active  banks.  While  the  Committee  does  not  have  formal  legal  enforcement  powers,  its
conclusions and recommendations are widely implemented, both in G-10 countries and many
others. In late January, the Committee issued a report dealing with the relationship between
1
BIS Review  27/1999
banks  and  highly-leveraged  institutions,  or  “HLIs”.  The  Committee’  s  report  provides  a
framework  for  addressing  the  broader  issues  raised  by  the  LTCM  episode,  the  policy
responses of supervisors, and some key risk management challenges for the banking industry
going forward.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve System, the New York State Banking Department,
and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency have conducted target reviews of a number
of large-bank dealings with hedge funds. These reviews contributed to the Committee’ s work,
to  the  Federal  Reserve  System’  s  issuance  on  February  1  of  new  guidance  to  financial
examiners and banks, and to similar guidance from the Comptroller of the Currency issued in
January.  These  new  standards  emphasize  the  need  for  improvements  in  the  credit  risk
management process at banks. The new standards will likely be complemented by a study of
the  implications  of  the  LTCM  episode  by  the  President’  s  Working  Group  on  Financial
Markets.
Because the Basle Committee’ s jurisdiction is limited to matters of banking supervision and
regulation, its primary emphasis has been on ensuring that the major banks prudently manage
their risk exposures to HLIs. The best way to achieve this is through the adoption of sound
practices  by  the  industry,  perhaps  supplemented  by  incentives  created  through  capital
requirements. While it is primarily the responsibility of each banking organization to manage
its  risks,  sound  practice  standards  give  banks  and  supervisors  a  tool  to  measure  industry
progress. If banks themselves do not follow sound practices, then supervisors must step in and
take the necessary action.
The  Committee’  s  report  revealed  a  number  of  deficiencies.  In  particular,  the  Committee
observed an imbalance among the key elements of the credit risk management process, with
too  strong  a  reliance  upon  collateral.  This  undue  emphasis,  in  turn,  caused  many  banks  to
neglect other critical elements of effective credit risk management, including in-depth credit
analyses of counterparties, effective exposure measurement and management techniques, and
the use of stress testing.
Credit Approval Process
For a bank to make sound lending decisions, it needs to obtain sufficient information about
the  borrower.  Supervisors  routinely  stress  the  need  for  banks  to  have  an  effective  credit
approval  process  consisting  of 
formal  policies  and  procedures,  accompanied  by
documentation of actual credit decisions. When dealing with an HLI, a bank also must obtain
comprehensive  and  timely  financial  information  about  that  HLI’  s  risk  profile  and  credit
quality, and it must engage in an ongoing credit analysis of that HLI. In addition, a bank must
have  a  clear  understanding  of  an  HLI’  s  operations  and  risk  management  capabilities.  The
Committee observed weaknesses in each of these areas. Let me give a few examples.
The Committee found that banks did not obtain sufficient financial information to allow for a
full  assessment  of  how  much  and  what  types  of  risk  had  been  assumed  by  large  HLIs.  In
particular, banks did not obtain the information needed to measure leverage. They also did not
have sufficient information to understand HLIs’ concentrations in particular markets and risk
categories, or their exposure to broad trading strategies.
BIS Review   27/1999
2
Similarly, banks generally did not sufficiently understand the ability of HLIs to manage their
risks.  Because  risk  profiles  can  change  from  one  day  to  the  next,  or  even  from  moment  to
moment, it is necessary for a bank to be sure that the HLI can effectively manage its business
operations  and  risks  on  an  ongoing  basis.  In  general,  we  did  not  find  sufficient  reviews  of
HLIs’ risk management systems and their underlying assumptions, back office systems used to
manage  daily  operations  such  as  collateral  and  liquidity,  and  the  major  accounting  and
valuation policies.
Exposure Measurement
The Committee also thought that banks need to develop better measures for determining the
credit exposure resulting from different types of trading activities. In particular, banks must
develop more effective measures of what is called “potential future exposure.” Potential future
exposure  measures  the  credit  exposure  between  a  counterparty  and  a  bank,  and  how  this
exposure could change in the future as market prices fluctuate. As we have seen, such price
movements can be substantial during periods of market stress. The ability of banks to measure
potential future exposure is crucial when dealing with HLIs.
Unfortunately, methods for calculating potential future exposure had not kept pace with the
growth  and  complexity  of  HLIs.  Banks’  potential  future  exposure  measures  have  been
particularly ineffective in measuring exposures not covered by collateral. For example, under
highly  volatile  market  conditions,  a  bank’  s  potential  future  exposure  can  grow  beyond  the
value of any collateral. We expect the industry to develop more effective ways to measure and
limit potential future exposure, and supervisors will closely  monitor  progress  to  ensure  that
this occurs.
Stress Testing
The Committee’ s report also shows that banks must develop measures that better account for
credit risk under highly volatile market conditions. This can be achieved through what we call
“stress tests”, where a bank conducts “what if” analyses of how credit exposures to a single
counterparty could grow under extreme market conditions. These might include a large rise or
fall in interest rates, a major change in an exchange rate, or a flight to quality by investors. In
the case of LTCM, stress testing could have given banks at least some warning of the types of
exposures  they  could  have  faced  last  fall.  The  critical  importance  of  stress  testing  is  noted
very explicitly in our new supervisory guidance.
Sound Practice Guidance
The  sound  practices  document  accompanying  the  Basle  report  presents  an  important  set  of
standards that will guide both banks and their supervisors. It appears that banks generally have
tightened the credit risk management standards for their HLI exposures since the collapse of
LTCM.  However,  it  is  important  that  supervisors  try  to  ensure  that  progress  continues.
Memories tend to be short, and we want to make sure that as markets calm down, as they have
in the past months, banks do not return to the old ways of doing business.
The  adoption  and  rigorous  enforcement  of  enhanced  risk  management  practices  should
contribute substantially to limiting excessive risk-taking and leverage at HLIs. This is the case
because HLIs cannot trade without access to financing and liquidity from banks and securities
3
BIS Review   27/1999
firms. If each counterparty manages its risks appropriately, the chance of contagion to other
institutions and the financial markets more broadly would be reduced substantially. It is this
risk of contagion and financial market instability that is the principal concern of central banks
and supervisors.
Along  with  other  federal  banking  supervisors,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  moved  quickly  to
implement the recommendations of the Basle Committee’ s report. As I mentioned earlier, we
recently  issued  guidance  to  the  institutions  we  supervise  detailing  sound  risk  management
practices for the credit risk management of trading and derivatives activities. This document
identifies  the  areas  that  our  examiners  will  review  during  their  examination  of  trading
activities. It is important to note that the Federal Reserve’ s guidance to banks and examiners
covers not only HLI and hedge fund counterparties, but all other counterparty relationships.
We  want  to  ensure  that  banks  carry  forward  the  lessons  of  the  LTCM  experience  to  all
potentially high-risk trading activities.
In  this  regard,  our  examiners  will  devote  particular  attention  to  the  risks  associated  with
rapidly growing, highly profitable and potentially high-risk activities and product lines. They
will  assess  the  adequacy  of  banks’  reviews  of  counterparty  creditworthiness,  exposure
measurement and monitoring techniques, stress testing, limit setting, and the appropriate use
of collateral and other credit enhancements. Our examiners will also look at internal policies
and  the  degree  to  which  behavior  conforms  to  stated  policies.  We  have  already  conducted
meetings with the major banks to reinforce these  messages  and  our  examiners  will  conduct
follow-up reviews in the course of this year.
Other Possible Policy Responses
leveraged,  unregulated  financial 
Over the past few months, there has been significant debate about other measures that could
be taken to limit the potential risks to the financial system arising from the activities of large,
highly 
institutions.  The  Basle  Committee  carefully
considered all the ideas that have surfaced. Our report discusses a variety of options beyond
the  implementation  of  sound  practice  standards.  One  possibility  is  to  require  higher  capital
charges for bank exposures to HLIs. Indeed, a primary objective of our current review of the
Basle Capital Accord is to determine how to align regulatory capital charges better with the
economic risks of different classes of counterparties.
We also recognize the critical need to enhance market transparency for the activities of HLIs
and  other  major  market  participants.  The  Committee  already  is  working  to  enhance
accounting and disclosure practices at banking institutions worldwide. Extending these efforts
to all global players that have the potential to destabilize the financial system, including HLIs,
is of particular importance. An international group of central bankers is now studying various
approaches to strengthening disclosure in this area.
The  Committee  also  considered  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  imposing  direct
regulation on the HLI industry. There are a number of critical obstacles that would have to be
overcome  before  a  direct  regulatory  approach  could  be  implemented.  To  be  effective,  any
regulation would have to extend to jurisdictions around the world where HLIs are chartered,
some  of  which  have  more  highly  developed  and  more  stringent  supervisory  structures  than
others. This would require a high level of coordination involving the political, legislative, and
judicial  bodies  of  many  countries.  There  is  also  the  difficulty  of  establishing  a  regulatory
BIS Review   27/1999
4
regime for HLIs that is not easily circumvented. For these reasons, I believe the most practical
approach  is  to  focus  on  financial  institutions’  lending  activities,  because  such  an  approach
offers a near-term and cost-effective remedy to the systemic risks posed by HLIs.
Challenges for the Banking Industry
I  strongly  believe  that  both  the  official  and  private  sectors  have  important  roles  to  play  in
addressing  the  challenges  arising  from  an  increasingly  complex  and  dynamic  financial
services  industry.  First  and  foremost,  we  hold  banks  accountable  for  ensuring  that  sound
credit risk management standards are upheld and that these keep pace with financial market
innovation.  If  competitive  pressures  lead  to  bad  practices  in  one  bank  or  the  industry  as  a
whole, our job as supervisors is to raise standards and ensure that sound practices are restored.
In  my  remarks  today,  I  highlighted  a  number  of  areas  where  progress  has  been  made.  Of
course, there is more work to be done by banks and supervisors. High on the agenda should be
the development of more meaningful measurement of risk exposure and
the implementation of effective stress-testing techniques. Another important area that requires
further industry attention is the measurement of leverage. Finally, I believe that the industry
should devote more thought to the appropriate valuation of positions during periods of market
stress and illiquidity – which is particularly relevant to the use of collateral to protect against
credit risk.
These are just some of the broader issues arising from the LTCM experience and the market
turbulence last fall. But I believe that we are meeting the challenge and have made quick and
significant short-term progress.
I look forward to your questions.
5
BIS Review   27/1999
