Mr Fazio considers the world economy and finance in 1999
Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  Dott.  Antonio  Fazio,  at  a  conference  organised  by
AIAF-AIOTE-ASSOBAT-ATIC-FOREX in Verona on 30/1/99.
The  effects  of  the  collapse  of  the  Asian  currencies  in  1997  spilled  over  to  the  world  economy  in
1998; the crisis spread to Russia and other East European countries and to Latin America.
The crisis in Asia followed the sharp decline in domestic demand in Japan. The sudden change in
expectations generated rapid capital outflows and currency depreciations that exceeded some 50% in
Korea  and  Thailand  and  40%  in  Malaysia  and  the  Philippines.  In  1998  the  Korean  and  Thai
currencies recouped half the value they had lost. The Indonesian rupiah lost half its value in 1997
and another 20% of its initial value in 1998.
The economies of Latin America withstood the wave of instability from Asia in 1997 but in 1998
were  caught  up  in  the  crisis  following  the  devaluation  of  the  rouble.  The  currencies  of  Brazil,
Mexico, Venezuela and Chile came under strong downward pressure. The speculative attack of mid-
January 1999 initially focused on the Brazilian Real.
Argentina has  stuck  to  the  exchange  rate  fixed  with  the  dollar  under  the  institutional  arrangement
adopted for the peso. Since the devaluation of 1994, China has maintained a close link with the US
currency.
The swings in share prices in the countries hit by the crisis have paralleled those in exchange rates
but have generally been more pronounced.
In Japan, the stock market fell by a quarter in the last two years and has fallen further in the last few
weeks; the yen first weakened then strengthened considerably in the last part of 1998. Last year the
Korean stock exchange gained as much as it had lost in 1997.
The falls in the currencies and stock exchanges of Asia have been mirrored by rises in the US and
European currencies and stock markets, fuelled in part by the outflow of funds from Asia. Despite its
high  initial  level,  the  S&P  index  rose  by  60%  in  the  two  years  1997–98.  The  gains  on  some
European exchanges were even larger.
The crisis in Latin America
All  the  major  countries  of  Latin  America  continued  to  run  large  current  account  deficits  in  1998.
Brazil’s deficit grew to 4.2% of GDP, and the pattern in Mexico, Argentina and Chile was similar,
with the deficit rising to 3.5, 4.5 and 6.8% of GDP respectively.
The  ratio  of  Brazil’s  net  external  debt  to  GDP  is  of  the  order  of  25%.  In  Mexico,  Venezuela  and
Chile, the ratio is close to 40%, in Argentina to 30%. The debts are mainly denominated in dollars.
In the last few years these economies were marked by rapid rates of growth and lower inflation than
in earlier decades. In several cases budget deficits were substantial.
In some respects there was a repeat of the experience of the Asian countries. A prolonged period of
growth was financed with imports of foreign capital, mostly at short term.
In Asia, the capital inflows had financed investment that in many cases exceeded 30% of  GDP  in
1997.  In  Latin  America,  by  contrast,  foreign  capital  also  financed  the  current  expenditure  of  the
private and public sectors; investment fell to around 20% of GDP.
In  summer  1998  the  stock  markets  of  Brazil,  Mexico,  Argentina  and  Chile  had  already  turned
bearish. Interest rates were raised steeply to defend the exchange rate.
BIS Review   14/1999
– 2 –
The tensions subsequently abated, thanks in part to the reduction in US official interest rates and the
approval  of  the  stabilisation  plan  agreed  by  Brazil  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  It  was
possible for interest rates to come down and shares recouped some of the earlier losses.
Confidence  in  the  exchange  rates  and  stock  markets  of  Latin  America  and  some  Asian  and  East
European countries was undermined in 1998 by the uncertainty surrounding the solution of Russia’s
financial problems and the effectiveness of Brazil’s stabilisation policies.
The  sharp  fall  on  the  stock  market  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  and  the  collapse  of  the  Real
following the decision to allow it to float halved the dollar value of Brazilian shares. In the days that
followed their prices rebounded, rising by 30% in a single day; subsequently, however, there have
been further falls in the exchange rate and share prices have gyrated.
The world economy
The slowdown in effective demand that began in Asia in mid-1997 gradually affected the rest of the
world.
The  Japanese  economy,  which  had  been  recovering  in  1996,  grew  by  only  1.4%  in  1997.  Growth
remained  rapid  in  North  America  and  the  United  Kingdom  and  satisfactory  in  the  continental
European countries. It was particularly slow in Italy: 0.7% in 1996 and 1.5% in 1997.
The crisis that struck in Asia in mid-1997 did not prevent an appreciable increase in consumption,
investment and GDP in the area for the year as a whole; the exception was Thailand, where strains in
the external accounts had already emerged at the end of 1996. Growth in Latin America continued at
a  very  rapid  pace  in  1997:  8.6%  in  Argentina  and  7%  in  Mexico.  In  Brazil  the  loss  of
competitiveness and subsequently the tensions in the financial and foreign exchange markets slowed
down growth.
In  1997  world  exports  recorded  a  particularly  large  increase  of  9.9%,  compared  with  7%  in  the
previous  year.  The  demand  of  the  emerging  economies,  still  buoyant,  sustained  the  cycle  in  the
Anglo-Saxon countries and continental Europe.
The full force of the crisis was felt in 1998 when expansion in world trade fell to 3.3%.
Growth turned sharply negative in Asia, with GDP contracting by 7% in Korea, 7.5% in Malaysia
and 8% in Thailand. The fall in imports and to a lesser extent the rise in exports inverted the sign of
external current account balances for the first time in many years and generated sizable surpluses.
The crisis took on political and institutional overtones in Indonesia, where GDP is estimated to have
contracted by 15%. On the basis of the data available, the Chinese economy appears to have suffered
only a slowdown in growth; the deceleration in the Philippines was more pronounced. Throughout
the area, economic activity tended to stagnate.
Partly  owing  to  the  depressed  conditions  in  the  rest  of  Asia,  the  performance  of  the  Japanese
economy continued to deteriorate in 1998. Investment contracted further, by more than 10%. Signs
of deflation became increasingly evident in prices, domestic demand and business expectations.
In Latin America, too, domestic demand and economic activity gradually slowed down during 1998.
The problems afflicting the Asian, Latin American and Russian economies and the improvement in
their competitiveness as a result of currency devaluations adversely affected demand in the industrial
countries.
BIS Review   14/1999
– 3 –
The impact on domestic demand and growth was already visible in the exports of the G7 and euro
area countries.
Effective demand remained high in the United States, where the increase in domestic spending was
easily financed with growing imports of saving from the rest of the world and the supply of dollars
on the international market. US demand for goods helped attenuate the crisis in Asia; it has so far
prevented the economies of Latin America from declining faster.
Business  confidence  nonetheless  waned;  after  rising  by  20%  in  the  first  quarter  and  13%  in  the
second, investment slowed down further in the second half of the year.
In Japan expectations regarding the economy had already turned down in mid-1997.
In  continental  Europe,  business  expectations  deteriorated  steadily  in  1998.  The  recovery  of
investment  that  had  begun  in  the  second  quarter  of  1997  continued  until  the  early  months  of  last
year; it was brought to a halt in the spring by the persistence of the crisis in Asia and its propagation
to  the  East  European  transition  economies  and  Latin  America.  The  growth  in  GDP  also  slowed
sharply before recovering slightly.
The climate of households’ confidence was less negative.
According to the IMF, output in Germany, France and Italy was well its potential level from 1993
onwards.
The current account of the balance of payments of the euro area continued to show a surplus of 0.8%
of the area’s GDP. After rising substantially in 1997, the volume of exports slowed sharply during
1998; the volume of imports also declined markedly.
The cyclical recovery expected in the second part of this year is still uncertain.
The  low  level  of  interest  rates  does  not  appear  sufficient  to  trigger  a  widespread  increase  in
investment. There are still no signs in the area of expectations of a vigorous and sustained recovery
in economic activity in the medium term.
The uncertainty surrounding the recovery of international trade in 1999 is related to the prospect of
only  modest  growth  or  even  continued  recession  in  the  Asian  countries  affected  by  the  crisis,  the
possibility  of  mounting  difficulties  in  the  transition  economies  and  the  halt  in  growth  in  Latin
America.
Notwithstanding the sharp deceleration in economic growth in some regions, the international trade
imbalances  that  have  contributed  to  the  abnormal  increase  in  world  finance  and  to  the  recurrent
crises of recent years have not yet been corrected.
The  decline  in  demand  and  economic  activity  in  1998  means  that  many  Asian  countries  risk
performing  poorly  again  in  1999.  They  will  continue  to  record  large  surpluses  on  their  external
current  accounts.  Growth  in  Latin  America  will  continue,  but  much  more  slowly  than  last  year;
current accounts will remain in deficit.
The  euro  area  still  has  a  current  account  surplus;  the  US  deficit  and  Japanese  surplus  are  still
growing.
The slowdown of the world economy is stretching into 1999.
Unemployment  in  Japan,  although  extremely  low  in  comparison  with  that  of  other  industrial
countries,  is  rising  sharply.  Economic  activity  was  still  weak  at  the  end  of  1998.  The  support
provided  by  monetary  policy  ceased  to  be  effective  a  good  while  ago.  Monetary  expansion  is
BIS Review   14/1999
– 4 –
nonetheless  providing  the  liquidity  needed  by  the  banking  system,  where  the  quality  of  credit
continues  to  decline.  The  rescue  operation  prepared  by  the  Government  provides  an  assurance  of
solvency.
It  is  essential  that  the  planned  massive  reflation  by  means  of  budgetary  policy  revive  domestic
demand and set the economy back on a growth path this year.
It is essential, as indicated by the G7 finance ministers and central bank governors at their meeting in
Washington  last  October,  that  the  growth  in  the  United  States  be  accompanied  by  a  substantial
recovery of domestic demand in Europe.
It was emphasised that, in order to create expectations favourable to a recovery of investment, far-
reaching structural reforms are needed in the labour market and public expenditure.
The United States and Canada, Europe and Japan produce approximately half of gross world output.
They have the resources, or can attract them from the rest of the world, to sustain domestic demand
and  strengthen  economic  activity.  There  are  clear  signs  of  a  deficiency  of  demand,  especially  for
investment goods, in Europe and Japan.
Only a faster rate of economic expansion in the industrial countries can prevent the world economy
from stagnating and ensure a return to growth.
The growth of money and world finance
In the mid-1980s the bonds circulating in the G10 countries, issued almost entirely by governments,
amounted to $6.3 trillion, or 70% of these countries’ domestic product. In 1996 the stock of bonds
had tripled to reach $21.7 trillion; output at current prices had doubled., the ratio had risen to 105%.
The stock of shares increased faster; the value of bonds and shares rose from 116% of GDP in 1985
to 220% in 1996.
The  growth  in  the  quantity  of  money  also  exceeded  that  in  output;  the  reduction  in  the  income
velocity  of  circulation  was  concentrated  in  the  second  half  of  the  1980s.  The  rigorous  monetary
policies  of  the  1990s  have  kept  the  ratio  of  the  quantity  of  money  to  GDP  in  the  G10  countries
unchanged at close to 60%.
The  picture  changes,  with  a  larger  increase  in  liquidity,  if  account  is  taken  of  cross-border  bank
deposits. Interbank deposits and those held by nonbanks grew at an annual rate of 11%. According to
data reported to the Bank for international Settlements, the former amounted to 21% of world GDP
in 1996 and the latter to 6%.
Derivative products have made a decisive contribution to the increase in the liquidity of the world
economy since the early 1990s, when the growth in the quantity of money was brought under tighter
control. Their notional value rose from 25% of world output in 1990 to more than 100% in 1996.
The use of derivatives increases the volume of transactions in financial assets that can be carried out
with the existing money balances: the demand for and supply of securities increases by a multiple of
the  available  liquidity.  Derivatives  permit  more  efficient  risk  management;  but,  used  improperly,
they entail the risk of instability for market participants.
One fundamental reason for the increase in the market value of shares has been the growth in the
actual and potential liquidity of national and international financial markets.
The reduction in long-term interest rates, fostered by low inflation and a curbing of budget deficits,
can also be traced to the same cause.
BIS Review   14/1999
– 5 –
The abundant supply of liquidity in the markets is the consequence of the US balance-of-payments
deficit  and  the  monetary  expansion  in  Japan,  which  accelerated  in  mid-1995  in  the  wake  of  the
Mexican  crisis.  Following  the  Asian  crisis,  large  liquid  balances  were  channelled  into  dollar-
denominated instruments and into the European markets.
The Italian economy
The exports of the United States, Japan and the United Kingdom declined in the first half of 1998.
Those  of  the  euro  area  countries  continued  to  rise,  although  this  was  largely  due  to  France  and
Germany,  which  recorded  annualised  increases  of  respectively  3.4  and  2.8%  compared  with  the
second half of 1997.
In Italy, the volume of exports contracted in late 1997 and the first few months of 1998, followed by
a  temporary  recovery.  The  trend  at  the  end  of  the  year  appears  to  have  been  downward  again.
Imports did not decline until the second half of the year; prices fell significantly.
The surplus on the current account of the balance of payments was to 2.2% of GDP, as against 3.2%
in 1997.
The  recovery  in  investment  that  had  begun  in  spring  1997  faltered  in  1998.  Investment  in
construction  has  continued  its  downward  trend.  The  pick-up  in  household  consumption  has
proceeded regularly but at a pace that remains modest.
Industrial  production  remained  broadly  unchanged  for  most  of  the  year.  Preliminary  estimates  for
January 1999 indicate that output will be at about the same level as in January 1998.
Firms’  expectations  of  new  orders  deteriorated  steadily  for  most  of  last  year.  Households’
confidence, though lower in the second half than in the first, remains relatively high.
Thanks to the introduction and extension of forms of flexibility in labour practices, employment has
staged a recovery; the number of part-time and fixed-term contracts has increased considerably. On
the basis of labour force survey data, the number of people employed increased by 0.5% on average
for  the  year  in  the  Centre  and  North  and  by  0.6%  in  the  South.  The  increase  was  accounted  for
mainly by the weakest groups, women and young people.
Given  Italy’s  low  participation  rate,  however,  the  number  of  job  seekers  has  also  increased.  The
unemployment rate in the Centre and North declined marginally in the 12 months to October, from
7.7 to 7.6%. In the South, unhappily, it increased further, from 22.6 to 23.2%; youth unemployment
in the region rose to a new peak.
The use of saving
Saving is the raw material of investment and growth. The large quantity generated is not all put to
use domestically; it is  necessary  to  create  the  conditions  for  it  to  be  turned  into  investment  to  the
benefit of employment in Italy.
Analysis  of  the  balance  between  the  formation  and  use  of  saving,  in  a  period  marked  by  high
unemployment and sluggish investment, highlights the lack of domestic demand and, indirectly, the
shortfall in competitiveness.
A succession of current account surpluses in the six years from 1993 to 1998 enabled Italy to bring
its net external position into balance. A high level of foreign debt is inappropriate for an advanced
industrial  economy  and  the  primary  cause  of  continuous  weakening  of  the  exchange  rate  and
inflation.
BIS Review   14/1999
– 6 –
The achievement of a sound external position was a necessary condition for stabilising the exchange
rate and consolidating the value of the currency.
In the private sector, the flow of saving declined further in relation to disposable income in 1998; its
use in the domestic economy to the benefit of growth and employment remained inadequate.
The external current account surplus amounted to 45 trillion lire in 1998; in absolute terms it was in
line with the figure for 1995; it was one third less than in 1996 and 1997.
A  substantial  part  of  the  surplus  is  regularly  reinvested  abroad,  passing  through  Italy’s  financial
accounts.
The  “errors  and  omissions”  item  of  the  balance  of  payments  resulted  in  about  half  the  current
account surplus recorded in 1996 and 1997 not appearing in the national accounts. In 1998 revenues
not officially brought into the country or not recorded in the financial accounts amounted to around
50 trillion lire; they cancelled out the entire current account surplus.
Analysis  of  officially  recorded  cross-border  capital  movements  also  highlights  a  reduction  in  the
surplus  and  the  progressive  emergence  in  1998  of  a  deficit  of  foreign  investment  in  the  Italian
financial market.
Inward investment in Italian bonds and shares amounted to 61.5 trillion lire in 1995; in 1996, owing
mainly to the increased liquidity of the international market, the inflow of funds rose to 125 trillion
lire. It remained at about that level in 1997 and then rose to 165 trillion lire last year.
Funds  were  attracted  from  abroad  by  the  steady  improvement  in  inflation  and  the  consequent
expectation of lower interest rates. These factors were consolidated and reinforced in 1998, inter alia
by Italy’s imminent adoption of the single currency.
Italian portfolio investment abroad has increased more rapidly. Portfolio investment outflows were
substantially  less  than  inflows  in  both  1995  and  1996.  With  the  reduction  in  official  and  market
interest rates, investment abroad increased; owing to the less favourable outlook for profits, inward
investment tended to slow down. In 1997 there was still a net inflow of 7 trillion lire, but in 1998
there was a net outflow of 18 trillion lire.
The  proportion  of  foreign  securities  in  Italians’  investment  portfolios  is  still  smaller  than  in  other
countries. The process of diversification is bound to continue.
The volume of listed shares in the Italian market is  comparatively  small.  The  alignment  of  Italian
interest rates with those prevailing abroad is beneficial for its effects on the real economy but tends
to reduce the attractiveness of the national financial market for Italian and foreign investors alike.
The presence of a large number of foreign intermediaries in Italy is highly positive considering the
benefits they bring for Italian saving and their role in modernising the market. Accordingly, we have
taken a favourable view of the entry of foreign intermediaries and the additional intensification of
competition within Italy. However, in the absence of profitable domestic investment opportunities,
the export of saving is also facilitated. The relative weakness from which the Italian banking system
still suffers in terms of size and range of business is a handicap.
In the context of the single currency the abundance of saving, which for many decades was one of
the  great  strengths  of  the  Italian  economy,  loses  part  of  its  value  as  a  comparative  advantage  in
fostering growth.
The new situation created by greater openness to cross-border financial flows calls in the first place
for a strengthening of the efficiency and competitiveness of the banking system.
BIS Review   14/1999
– 7 –
The  response  must  be  prompt  and  adequate  in  order  to  grasp  the  opportunities  for  growth  and  to
finance profitable projects in Italy. We have encouraged the privatisation of the banking system and
the formation of groups large enough to compete more effectively in Europe.
The competition for saving at the global  level  depends  ultimately  on  growth  and  efficiency  of  the
economy.
Foreign direct investment in Italy amounted to respectively 5.5 and 6.3 trillion lire in 1996 and 1997;
in 1998 it rose to 6.9 trillion lire. Direct outward investment by Italian firms was 10 trillion lire in
1996 and rose to 18 trillion lire in 1997. In 1998 it amounted to 30 trillion lire. The Italian economy
attracts considerably less foreign direct investment than France, Spain or the United Kingdom. Only
Germany is more or less on a par with Italy in this respect.
In a developed economy, exports of capital by firms investing abroad are normal. In Italy, however,
there are still large parts of the country where development is insufficient and unemployment very
high.
Some 10% of all the employment generated by Italian industry is created outside the country.
Together with the weakness of investment activity, the situation of Italy’s external accounts I have
described  and,  in  particular,  the  balance  on  foreign  direct  investment  all  point  to  the  necessity  of
improving  the  competitiveness  of  Italy’s  productive  system  within  the  global  and  especially  the
European economy.
Competitiveness
With  the  complete  international  opening  of  trade  and  capital  movements  and  the  adoption  of  the
single currency, competitiveness is directly reflected in employment and growth.
In the new international and European context, the advantage of banking and financial systems and
their ability to contribute to growth are in large part the result of the efficient use of the funds they
raise.
In an open system, however, what ultimately counts is the demand for funds; this in  turn  depends
crucially on the conditions of employment of the factors of production, above all the profitability of
the corporate sector.
In Italy, high taxation and the high level of labour costs relative to productivity in some areas hold
back growth in investment and employment; they contribute to the expansion of the black economy,
which  harms  the  public  finances  and  the  efficiency  of  the  productive  system,  distorts  competition
and has pernicious effects on the orderly life of the community.
Between 1990 and 1997 the ratio of total general government revenue to GDP rose by 6%. In 1997
the tax burden in Italy was almost 1% above the European average; it was 13 and 14.5% higher than
in the United States and Japan respectively. In 1998 the tax burden decreased by 1% as the result of
the expiry of some temporary measures and the reduction in the yield from taxes on financial income
owing to the fall in interest rates.
Public investment fell from 3.3 to 2.4% of GDP between 1990 and 1997.
In a medium-term perspective, there are reforms, many of which have been initiated, that remain to
be completed in order to curb current spending, above all on pensions and welfare, and to enhance
the effectiveness of expenditure, especially for education and healthcare.
BIS Review   14/1999
– 8 –
The efficiency of public services and the stock of infrastructure are not as high in Italy as they are in
the industrial economies with which we compare ourselves.
It  is  estimated  that  9%  of  the  workers  in  manufacturing  industry  are  in  an  irregular  position  with
respect to tax, social security and work safety rules. In the building industry the ratio rises to 34%.
Irregular employment is much more widespread in the South, where in some sectors it reaches 50%.
At the root of the grey economy are insufficient differentials in labour costs between areas and firms
with very different levels of productivity and profitability; the phenomenon also leads to the evasion
of taxes and social security contributions. Through the black economy, the market tends to achieve a
de facto closer alignment between labour costs and productivity.
The  improvement  of  competitiveness  is  to  be  pursued  by  increasing  the  efficiency  of  the  public
sector. It is important to proceed with the full operational implementation of the legislative reforms
enacted.
Frequently,  the  limited  project  development  capability  of  local  authorities  and  the  lack  of
coordination with central government are far from secondary causes of the slowdown in expenditure
on public investment and the failure to use the funds and resources available.
Outlook
At the root of the instability and recurrent crises of the world economy is the  very  rapid,  at  times
chaotic,  growth  of  finance,  inconsistent  with  the  growth  in  productive  activity.  This  has
consequences for the stability of exchange rates, the purchasing power of currencies, interest rates
and securities prices. It has adverse effects on the financial position of banks and intermediaries, the
business cycle and employment.
The development of the international monetary system and its current configuration are the product
of market forces. The institutional context does not permit quantitative limits to be set on the growth
of flows. Transparent and widely accepted prudential rules for the management of intermediaries are
not always applied.
The  liberalisation  of  capital  movements  and  finance  has  greatly  contributed  to  the  growth  of
worldwide investment and saving.
The gains from the liberalisation of trade in goods and services are certain at the global level and not
distributed too unevenly, thanks to the operation of relative prices in response to the availability of
factors.  With  the  expansion  of  purely  fiduciary  money,  there  are  no  binding  limits  to  quantities;
monetary  and  financial  expansion  can  be  very  uneven  across  the  world  and  create  tension  and
instability.
Monetary and financial instability is detrimental to the efficient allocation of saving and the regular
growth  of  economic  activity.  It  gives  rise  to  inflation,  sometimes  to  recession.  It  can  lead  to  an
excessive  concentration  of  financial  resources  in  some  countries  and  areas  and  an  inequitable
distribution of wealth, possibly producing tension and political conflict.
The experience of the decades since the collapse of the gold exchange standard has no precedent in
history. The free circulation of capital under the gold standard took place in a context in which the
growth of money and finance had an ultimate reference, a quantitative anchor in the gold reserves of
governments and central banks.
The Bretton Woods system, based on the reserve currency role of the dollar, considerably increased
the  scope  for  monetary  expansion  and  multiplication.  An  ultimate  quantitative  limit  still  existed.
Flows of bank capital were subject to rigid rules; the International Monetary Fund adopted forms of
BIS Review   14/1999
– 9 –
control  designed  to  ensure  compliance  with  equilibrium  conditions  by  each  national  monetary
system.
The absence from 1971 onwards of the link between gold and the international reserve currency and
the elimination, partly in response to the ideology of liberalisation and the interests of multinational
firms and banks, of every rule concerning the transnational expansion of credit and the transnational
circulation  of  money  meant  that  the  growth  of  money  and  credit  became  theoretically  unlimited.
Initially,  during  the  1970s,  this  resulted  in  a  long  period  of  rapid  inflation  worldwide  and  high
interest rates and, ultimately, in a severe slowdown in the industrial economies.
The return to tighter monetary control in the 1980s, first in the leading industrial economy and then
in the others, led to a gradual reduction in inflation, but at the cost of a further rise in interest rates
and a prolonged drag on economic growth.
International liquidity expansion continued, partly as a result of progressive liberalisation of short-
term capital movements.
It  was  only  in  the  1990s  that  more  vigorous  and  coordinated  monetary  control  efforts  by  all  the
industrial countries made it possible to rein in the expansion of money, at the international as well as
the national level, and curb inflation.
The  growth  in  the  supply  of  securities  continued,  however;  the  complete  liberalisation  of  capital
flows encouraged the illusion of unlimited scope for financing public sector deficits and countries’
external  imbalances.  The  market  reacted  to  the  monetary  restriction  by  developing  derivative
products,  which  in  practice  act  as  an  additional  multiplier  of  the  liquidity  created  by  banking
systems.
Financial  globalisation  is  not  a  zero-sum  game;  it  brings  major  benefits  for  world  economic
development  but  it  can  also  generate  instability  and  substantial  losses  for  smaller  and  weaker
economies.
It is necessary to proceed resolutely with the action initiated by the International Monetary Fund and
the World Bank to relieve the heavily indebted poor countries of a burden contracted years ago in
conditions of extreme need.
The conditions exist for this relief to be completed by the end of 2000, fulfilling the hope expressed
by the Roman Catholic Church, international organisations and prominent political personalities.
On several occasions we have insisted in the appropriate official fora on the need for the activity of
the International Monetary Fund to be refocused on the prevention of crises, over and above its valid
performance of crisis management, albeit in the midst of difficulties and with some failures.
Even  though  the  external  constraint  is  less  immediately  binding,  in  view  of  the  greater  scope  for
raising  finance  offered  by  the  global  market,  it  is  necessary  to  place  renewed  emphasis  on  the
external  equilibrium  of  each  country  and  each  monetary  system.  The  macroeconomic  surveillance
carried out by the International Monetary Fund under the gold exchange standard must be revived in
the new institutional and market conditions.
The main causes of the crisis in Asia in 1997 and of the more recent events in Latin America were
the failure to satisfy the conditions of external equilibrium and excessively rigid exchange rates of
local currencies.
The crisis cannot be overcome without a recovery in the growth of the world economy supported by
the domestic demand of the developed countries, as called for by the G7 at its meeting last October.
BIS Review   14/1999
– 10 –
In that forum a start was also made on studies and actions aimed at  reforming  the  working  of  the
international monetary system.
The creation of a European currency  common  to  11  countries  is  a  major  event  for  the  stability  of
world finance.
The  ground  was  prepared  for  the  single  European  currency  by  the  stabilisation  carried  out  by  the
participating  countries  in  the  1990s.  Inflation  was  tamed  but  the  rigidities  and  competitive
weaknesses of Europe’s economies also emerged clearly.
The  monetary  stability  that  has  been  regained  can  and  must  provide  the  basis  for  a  new  phase  of
growth;  appropriate  economic  policies  and  consistent  behaviour  by  employers  and  workers  can
produce  new  confidence  in  the  ability  of  Europe’s  economies  to  achieve  rapid  and  sustainable
growth.
Structural  policies  are  required  in  all  the  countries  of  the  area  to  reduce  the  rigidity  of  public
expenditure  on  current  account,  allow  an  easing  of  the  tax  burden  and  introduce  elements  of
flexibility in a labour market that still responds to the logic of closed economies.
The measures are needed in order to bring down the high rate of unemployment and to give, through
the vigour of the productive economy, greater force to the single European currency.
Money is largely the product of credit granted to private productive activity. Its strength depends not
only  on  the  prudent  management  of  interest  rates  and  quantities  but  also  on  the  prosperity  of  the
economy and the quality of lending.
Where currencies are firmly anchored to productive activity, the setting of objectives for exchange
rates appears logically extraneous to the system.
The halt in the growth of the emerging economies and financial instability have led to a worldwide
slowdown in economic activity that is tending to carry over into 1999.
In  Italy,  the  structural  problems  of  the  public  finances,  the  large  public  debt  and  the  level  of  the
competitiveness of the financial system and the economy influence investment and employment.
The  adjustment  of  the  public  finances,  intensified  from  1993  onwards,  the  cooperation  between
employers and the unions, and the restrictive stance of monetary policy from 1995 to 1997 made it
possible  to  recoup  the  serious  fall  in  the  value  of  the  lira  and  to  root  out  both  expectations  of
inflation and inflation.
Italy’s re-entry into the ERM and the restrictive fiscal policy of the latter years have consolidated the
results of the stabilisation.
Partly  owing  to  the  efforts  required  to  reduce  the  budget  deficit,  the  Italian  economy  grew  at  an
annual average rate of 1.2% in the period 1996–98, or about half as fast as the German and French
economies. The problems in the world economy contributed to growth in 1998 being much slower
than expected. There is the risk that the trends of demand and output in the last part of the year will
lead to unsatisfactory results for 1999.
The  large  volume  of  saving  available,  of  which  a  part  flows  abroad  in  the  absence  of  profitable
investment  opportunities  within  Italy,  and  the  unemployed  labour  force  reveal  the  plentiful
availability of resources for a return to rapid growth.
Expectations must be modified, the climate of confidence improved.
BIS Review   14/1999
– 11 –
Determined  progress  must  be  made,  by  means  of  extraordinary  measures  where  necessary,  in  the
reform of the working of the machinery of government by improving the efficiency and efficacy of
the procedures. The plans for reviving investment in the South must be implemented, construction
sites  must  be  opened.  The  level  of  transport  and  water  supply  infrastructure  must  be  raised.  The
funds and credit available at Community level must be utilised to the full. The process will gain from
improvements in the project development and decision-making capability of local authorities, in part
as  a  result  of  advances  along  the  federalist-oriented  path  indicated  in  the  proposed  reforms  of  the
Constitution.
The medium-term policy of achieving equilibrium in the size and composition of the budget must be
perceived by the market and business as a certainty. Tax competition is bound to intensify in Europe
in the coming years; it will result in investment tending to be concentrated where the tax regime and
the social environment conditions are most favourable and the cost of labour lowest.
In the context of Europe and the global economy, flexibility in the conditions governing the supply
of  labour  is  necessary  in  order  to  enhance  competitiveness;  it  can  help  support  and  increase
employment both in large firms and in small and medium-sized enterprises.
The broad consensus on the two sides of industry on the definition of the recently signed social pact
can  provide  the  foundation  for  a  new  incomes  policy,  for  a  lasting  reduction  in  unit  labour  costs
where unemployment is highest and illegal work most common, to the point of becoming the norm.
If flexibility brings increased and more stable employment, the dignity of workers is defended and
the participation in productive activity widened.
The  lofty  issues  concerning  the  orientation  and  development  of  society  lie  within  the  sphere  of
politics. What is needed is an underlying stability in the country’s institutions and in society based
on convictions that are shared by all. The objective of more rapid growth, increased employment and
better  prospects  for  the  young  is  universally  accepted.  It  can  serve  as  a  reference  point,  without
detracting from the debate that is inherent to democracy, for strengthening the social and  political
fabric.
 BIS Review   14/1999
