Mr Stals discusses the impact of the international financial crisis on the South African
economy
Speech  by  the  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  Dr  Chris  Stals,  at  the  52nd
Congress of the South African Nurserymen’s Association in Johannesburg on 17 May 1999.
The process of financial globalisation
The financial markets of the world are progressively becoming more integrated in a process
that has become known as “financial globalisation”. National stock and bond exchanges and
money and foreign exchange markets are being opened up for international participation. Fund
managers located in the major financial centres of the world operate across borders in many
countries at the same time, dealing in securities, funds and foreign currencies.
The process of financial globalisation, or the integration of world financial markets, was made
possible  and  is  being  driven  mainly  by  the  following  four  developments  of  the  past  two
decades:
Firstly, the vast improvement of communication systems that has made it possible for markets
throughout the world to be linked through satellite communication on a 24-hour basis and on
real-time with each other.
Secondly, the astounding developments in electronic data processing techniques that make it
possible to store, analyse and transmit a massive amount of information on financial markets,
financial  assets  and  financial  results  of  individual  institutions  to  all  destinations  around  the
globe.
Thirdly, a growing amount of saving, surplus to the investment needs of the major developed
and  fully  industrialised  countries.  This  development  enticed  investment  fund  managers  in
these countries to look for alternative places for investment. At the same time, there is a huge
recognised need for, and big shortages of, investment funds in the developing countries of the
world.
Fourthly,  there  is  a  world-wide  tendency  towards  economic  liberalisation,  particularly  after
the collapse of the communist systems of Eastern Europe, and of the self-sufficiency strategies
of countries in East Asia.
The  process  of  globalisation  is  not  restricted  to  the  financial  markets.  Trade  in  goods  and
services  is  also  being  liberalised  at  the  same  time,  and  cross-border  labour  mobility  is
increasing, albeit at a much slower pace. The world-wide web network provides not only for
the introduction of electronic financial transactions and of e-mail, e-funds, and e-money, but
also  for  e-trade  or  e-commerce.  Globalisation  is  indeed  a  process  of  overall  economic
integration,  and  not  only  the  integration  of  financial  markets.  However,  in  the  financial
markets,  the  process  of  globalisation  is,  at  this  stage,  a  few  steps  ahead  and  perhaps  much
more advanced than in the markets for goods, services and labour.
South Africa’s position in the globalisation process
1
BIS Review   55/1999
Particularly  since  1994,  South  Africa  has  adopted  a  clearly  defined  policy  of  actively
participating in the process of financial globalisation. Recognising the low level of saving (or
high  level  of  consumption)  in  this  country,  combined  with  the  massive  need  of  funds  for
financing  of  economic  development,  South  Africa  must  obviously  encourage  the  inflow  of
foreign  investment  capital  into  the  country.  The  low  level  of  domestic  saving  must  be
supplemented with funds from the excess saving of the industrial countries, otherwise it will
not be possible to create sufficient jobs for the relatively large number of new work-seekers
that  come  to  the  market  on  a  regular  basis.  The  alternative  solution,  that  is  to  reduce  total
consumption in the country, will not be easy to accomplish.
South  Africa  has  therefore  over  the  past  five  years  implemented  a  number  of  economic
policies  to  facilitate  the  process  of  its  participation  in  globalisation.  These  efforts  were
particularly effective in the area of financial integration. The measures introduced included:
•  The gradual phasing out of exchange controls. At this stage, non-residents are completely
free to bring funds into South Africa, and to take funds out of the country, for whatever
purpose. Residents may invest limited amounts of their own funds outside of the country.
These limits now apply to private individuals, corporates and institutional investors.
•  The restructuring of the capital market to provide for more specialised trading in equities
(shares),  bonds  and  derivatives.  The  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange  changed  its  total
character  by  providing  for  corporate  ownership,  foreign  participation,  screen  trading,
paper  dematerialisation,  and  for  an  electronically  controlled  centralised  securities
depository.  The  volume  of  transactions  on  the  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange  increased
from R117 billion in 1996 to R319 billion in 1998. In the Bond Exchange, the volume of
transactions increased from R3 trillion in 1996 to R8.5 trillion in 1998. Non-residents now
account for about 20 per cent of all these transactions.
•  The  upgrading  of  the  national  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  system  to  provide  for
much  faster  settlement  of  claims  between  banking  institutions,  and  a  more  efficient
transfer  of  funds  between  the  clients  of  the  banks.  The  upgraded  system  has  also  been
linked  to  international  payment  and  settlement  systems  (such  as  SWIFT)  to  provide  for
easier cross-border or foreign currency payments.
•  Finally,  the  more  active  participation  by  South  Africa  in  multinational  economic  co-
operation  arrangements,  such  as  the  International  Monetary  fund,  the  World  Bank,  the
Bank for International Settlements and the African Development Bank.
All these actions paid off, and South Africa is at this stage already integrated to an important
extent in the global financial markets.
The consequences of globalisation for South Africa
As already mentioned, the main advantage for South Africa in financial globalisation lies in
the opportunity it affords of attracting more foreign investment funds into the country. From
this point of view, South Africa was relatively successful and attracted more than R200 billion
in  foreign  investment  funds  over  the  five-year  period  from  1994  to  1998.  This  enabled  the
country to:
BIS Review   55/1999
2
  relax  exchange  controls  and  allow  South  African  residents  to  invest  about  R130  billion
outside of the country;
finance an accumulated deficit on the current account of the balance of payments of about
R40 billion; and
•  add about R30 billion to the country’s official foreign reserves.
These statistical aggregates, however, disguise one important weakness in the capital inflows
into South Africa, and that is the fact that about 80 per cent of the total foreign funds invested
in South Africa came in the form of portfolio investments, that is investment in paper assets,
and not in bricks and mortar. The disadvantage of this type of investment is that it can be very
volatile. Funds can flow out of the country as easily as it flows into the country, and both in-
and outflows can at times be very disrupting for the domestic economy.
The global financial crisis of 1998
South Africa, and many other countries of the world, experienced the adverse consequences of
such sudden capital outflows back to the industrial countries of its origin last year.  The
(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:27)
SUREOHP(cid:3)IRU(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)JOREDOLVHG(cid:3)ILQDQFLDO(cid:3)PDUNHWV(cid:3)VWDUWHG(cid:3)LQ(cid:3)(DVW(cid:3)$VLD(cid:3)ZKHUH(cid:3)D(cid:3)QXPEHU(cid:3)RI
countries  such  as  Japan,  Korea,  Thailand,  the  Philippines,  Indonesia  and  Malaysia,
experienced problems with their domestic economies. These problems led to a decline in the
confidence of foreign investors in emerging markets which led to the large-scale withdrawal
of investment funds from these countries back to the countries of origin, that is back to the
major industrial countries of the West. There was a flight from more risky investments in the
emerging  markets  into  higher  quality  but  lower  yielding  financial  assets  of  the  industrial
countries, in this case, mainly of the United States of America.
Although  South  Africa  did  not  experience  the  same  economic  problems  as  the  East  Asian
countries,  the  contagion  effect  spilled  over  into  the  South  African  economy  in  May  1998
when foreign fund managers were withdrawing portfolio investments from all the emerging
markets of the world, and not only from the East Asian countries. South Africa, with its well-
developed  capital  markets  with  large  turnovers  and  unrestricted  convertibility  for  non-
residents, provided an easy source of liquidity for the fund managers who needed to transfer
funds back to their countries of origin.
During the first four months of 1998, non-residents increased their holdings of South African
bonds by no less than R16 billion. From May up to December 1998, however, non-residents
reduced their holdings of South African bonds again by R26 billion. It was indeed difficult for
the South African economy to absorb the effect of this switch-around of R42 billion within
the same calendar year of the in and outflows of non-resident portfolio investment capital.
The  large  outflow  of  non-resident  funds  from  May  to  December  1998  had  the  following
adverse consequences for the South African economy:
•  The yield on long-term government bonds increased from below 13 per cent in April 1998
to over 20 per cent in September 1998.
3
BIS Review   55/1999
•  The outflow of capital forced a depreciation of the rand against foreign currencies of about
20 per cent.
•  Liquidity  was  drained  from  the  South  African  banking  sector  to  such  an  extent  that  the
banks had to borrow large amounts from the Reserve Bank on a daily basis, and also had
to curtail their credit extension to the private sector.
•  The  shortage  of  funds  in  the  markets  pushed  up  short-term  interest  rates,  including  the
prime overdraft and mortgage lending rates of the banks by about 7 full percentage points
to levels of about 25 per cent.
•  The rate of inflation in South Africa increased from 5 per cent in April 1998 to 9.3 per
cent in November last year.
These  adverse  developments  in  the  financial  markets  gradually  depressed  real  economic
activity  in  the  country.  In  both  the  third  and  fourth  quarters  of  last  year,  South  Africa
accordingly  experienced  declines  in  total  economic  activity  (that  is,  experienced  negative
economic growth rates). On a temporary basis, the financial globalisation and South Africa’s
participation in the process, therefore had a negative or adverse effect on the South African
economy.
Recovery of global financial conditions
The deterioration in the South African economy in the second half of last year found its origin
in the problems of the international financial markets. Nothing changed in the South African
domestic situation in May 1998 to justify the sudden switch-around in the non-resident capital
inflows to outflows from the South African Bond Exchange.
The  adverse  conditions  in  world  financial  markets  continued  into  the  fourth  quarter  of  last
year. It was only after some stabilisation was reintroduced in East Asia and after the collapse
of  the  Russian  economy  was  discounted  in  the  financial  markets,  and  after  a  credible
international financial rescue package was put together for Brazil, that markets calmed down
again. The South African financial markets were quick to follow. Since about November last
year, the outflow of capital through the Bond Exchange came to an end; the exchange rate of
the  rand  stabilised  and  even  appreciated  slightly;  liquidity  of  the  banking  sector  increased
again; the yield on government bonds declined, and short-term interest rates declined. Most of
the  banking  institutions  now  quote  prime  and  mortgage  lending  rates  at  the  level  of  19  per
cent.  The  rate  of  inflation  also  peaked  in  November  1998  at  9.3  per  cent  and  has  since
declined to 7.9 per cent in March 1999.
In line with the rest of the world, the improved conditions in the financial markets have not
succeeded in improving real economic activity up to this stage. There is a growing optimism,
however, that a recovery in overall economic conditions will commence before the end of this
\HDU(cid:15)(cid:3) DQG(cid:3) WKDW(cid:3) QH[W(cid:3) \HDU(cid:3) ZLOO(cid:15)(cid:3) RQ(cid:3) D(cid:3) ZRUOG(cid:16)ZLGH(cid:3) EDVLV(cid:15)(cid:3) EH(cid:3) D(cid:3) EHWWHU(cid:3) \HDU(cid:3) WKDQ(cid:3) (cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:3)
(cid:3) WKDW(cid:3) LV(cid:15)
provided that no further major shocks will occur in the global financial markets in the near
future.
BIS Review   55/1999
4
