Mr George outlines monetary and exchange rate policies for sustainable growth
Speech  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Mr  E  A  J  George,  at  The  Central  Bank
Policies Conference, Macau, 17 May 1999.
Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me begin by saying that it is a real pleasure to be
here  with  you  today  in  Macau  and  to  participate  with  such  distinguished  central  bank
colleagues in your conference.
One of the very agreeable things about coming to the other side of the world to participate in
an event like this is that it enables me to step back from the daily hubbub of my office, the
financial markets in the City of London, and the media, and reflect in a broader way on what it
is we are all actually trying to do. It is in fact much more agreeable than working!
In a broad sense, of course, our ultimate objective as central bankers is clear, and it is reflected
in your conference title when you talk about “leading the way to sustainable growth”. I would
add high rates of employment and rising living standards to that objective.
Very  often  in  the  past,  certainly  in  my  own  country,  but  not  just  in  my  own  country,  that
fundamental objective was seen to be largely a matter of demand management – of pumping
up  demand  by  expansionary  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  –  with  too  little  regard  to  the
structural, supply-side, capacity of our economies to meet that demand. There is not much that
overall  fiscal  policy,  still  less  monetary  policy,  can  do  directly  to  affect  the  supply-side
capacity  of  the  economy:  they  operate  essentially  on  the  demand  side.  And  our  recurrent
experience showed that excessive demand growth spilled over into inflation and a worsening
balance  of  payments  which  ultimately  had  to  be  corrected  –  the  infamous  boom  and  bust
cycle. This macro-economic instability damaged the supply side of the economy, with a worse
outcome over time in terms of our ultimate policy objective. It is now very widely understood
that “stability is a necessary condition for sustainable growth” and that, of course, has become
the universal central banker’s mantra.
But  the  question  is  stability  of  what?  You  obviously  cannot  sensibly  aim  to  stabilise
everything. The aim has to be sustainable growth of the economy as a whole. But that cannot
mean  stable  growth  for  every  sector  of  the  economy  or  for  every  business  enterprise.
Consumer demands change over time and so, too, do technologies and production techniques.
Open market competition to identify such changes, and to exploit them to meet social needs
more efficiently, is a vital driver of improvement on the supply side of the economy. At the
micro-economic  level,  that  means  that  particular  sectors  and  individual  businesses  will
continually  rise  and  fall;  and  that  is  why  established  producers  everywhere  often  see  new
competition, perhaps especially international competition, as an unwelcome threat. But at the
macro-economic  level  what  we  have  to  remember  is  that  every  dollar  earned  is  a  dollar
available to be spent or reinvested back into the economy, whoever earns it. So, at the macro-
economic level, competition – the driver of economic progress – is a positive sum game; it
increases  the  potentially  sustainable  growth  rate  nationally,  regionally,  and  internationally.
How  far  each  country  individually  is  able  to  take  advantage  of  this  increased  potential
depends  upon  how  flexibly  it  can  adapt  to  changes  in  comparative  productive  advantage  –
which  in  turn  depends  upon  the  supply–side  characteristics  of  our  separate  economies.  But
there  is  no  doubt  that  we  all  stand  to  benefit.  That  is  why  I  have  always  believed
fundamentally  in  the  principle  of  free  trade  and  open  capital  markets  which  enhance
1
BIS Review   54/1999
competition. It is why I have always welcomed the rapid growth we have seen in the emerging
market economies – and why incidentally I look forward to China’s accession to the WTO.
We cannot then sensibly aim to obstruct structural changes. But nor can we realistically hope
to avoid all shorter-term fluctuations, associated with the business cycle for example or as a
result  simply  of  random  shocks.  What  we  are  looking  for  is  a  stable  macro-economic
framework  for  the  economy  as  a  whole,  which  will  help  to  moderate  rather  than  aggravate
shorter-term fluctuations, and one within which change can occur in response to longer-term
real economic factors, undistorted by unnecessary, erratic, movements particularly in nominal
values.
In a totally closed, national, economy I suspect that the most effective way of achieving this
would  be  to  aim  to  stabilise  the  rate  of  consumer  price  inflation  –  at  some  very  low  level
representing  effective  price  stability.  We  might,  certainly,  as  an  intermediate  step  aim  to
stabilise  the  rate  of  growth  of  the  money  supply,  if  we  were  confident  that  the  demand  for
money was sufficiently stable and predictable, but the reason for targeting the growth of the
money  supply  would  ultimately  be  to  stabilise  the  rate  of  inflation,  so  the  distinction  is
operational rather than substantive.
But it is important to understand that effective price stability would not be intended simply as
an end in itself. In order to maintain price stability, what in fact we would need to do is to
keep overall demand in the economy continuously broadly in line with supply-side capacity,
so that the actual rate of inflation is really a measure, or barometer if you like, of our success
in maintaining macro-economic stability in a much wider sense. If we succeed in maintaining
such  stability,  that  would  also  contribute,  indirectly,  to  improving  the  supply  side  of  the
economy  by  reducing  nominal  uncertainty  as  a  factor  in  spending  or  saving  or  investment
decisions and thereby improving resource allocation.
Macro-economic stability in this sense can of course be affected by either overall fiscal policy
or  by  monetary  policy.  But  frequent  fiscal  policy  changes  -  to  tax  rates  or  expenditure
programs  –  can  generate  micro-economic  uncertainties  so  that  short-run  macro-economic
stabilisation is normally left primarily to monetary policy. It is important nevertheless that the
two arms of policy pull in the same general direction to avoid  unwanted  sectoral  or  related
regional distortions.
In a totally closed economy therefore the objective of macro-economic stabilisation and the
respective roles of fiscal and monetary policy would be reasonably clear.
But none of us – very fortunately in any wider context – actually lives in a closed economy.
We are all vulnerable to external shocks to varying degrees, including of course, increasingly,
shocks resulting from international capital flows. Free trade and open capital markets do, as I
noted earlier, bring huge benefits in terms of supply-side improvements from which we all,
potentially,  stand  to  gain.  But  there  is  no  doubt  that  economic  globalisation  can  at  times
massively  complicate  our  national  efforts  at  macro-economic  stabilisation  and  it  is  this
problem which I should like to address in the rest of my remarks.
A  key  issue  is  how  far  we  can  protect  our  internal  macro-economic  stability  through  our
choice of exchange rate regime. My short answer to that question – from the UK’s experience
– is that there is, sadly, no ideal solution!
BIS Review   54/1999
2
The effective options range from floating, through some form of adjustable peg, to a quasi-
fixed  exchange  rate  by  way  of  a  currency  board  or,  ultimately,  full  monetary  union.  Each
option has its pros and cons.
Let  me  start  with  floating.  At  first  blush  the  idea  of  allowing  the  exchange  rate  to  take  the
strain,  as  a  kind  of  buffer,  insulating  the  domestic  economy  from  shocks  emanating  abroad
appears  very  attractive.  Unfortunately  it  does  not  necessarily  work  like  that.  A  floating
exchange  rate  may  move  erratically  in  response  to  market  news,  causing  unwarranted
movements  in  the  real  exchange  rate.  That,  of  course,  may  be  an  important  influence  on
domestic  costs  and  prices;  it  may  affect  the  relative  competitiveness  of  domestically  and
foreign-produced  goods  and  services  leading  to  changes  in  the  net  external  trade  position,
affecting aggregate demand in the domestic economy. So the insulation provided by a floating
exchange rate may prove to be more apparent than real.
The  UK  has  been  floating  since  1992.  For  some  years  we  experienced  very  little  tension
between our domestic and external policy needs. But then, from the autumn of 1996 we saw a
sudden  appreciation  of  some  20-25%  in  our  Effective  Exchange  Rate  against  the  core
European  currencies,  and  seemingly,  largely  related  to  uncertainties  about  the  future
characteristics of the European single currency. Whatever the reason the strengthening of the
exchange  rate  had  a  dampening  effect  on  the  domestic  price  level,  and  a  subsequent
deterioration of our trade balance (accentuated over the past year or so by the global economic
slowdown) reduced aggregate demand in the economy. Monetary policy accordingly needed
to  be  less  restrictive  than  would  otherwise  have  been  appropriate  to  offset  these  effects  on
domestic demand. The aim was not to achieve a particular level of the exchange rate but to
compensate for its deflationary impact. When the exchange rate weakens – as we anticipate
that  it  will  in  due  course  –  then  monetary  policy  will  at  some  point  need  to  offset  that
influence in the opposite direction. But in the meantime we have had to manage as best we
can  a  severe  imbalance  between  different  sectors  of  the  economy,  with  the  internationally
exposed  sectors  taking  a  considerable  hammering.  Despite  reasonable  macro-economic
stability in the economy as a whole, the environment has been anything but stable for those
sectors.
For  a  period  before  1992  we  sought  to  manage  the  exchange  rate,  initially  by  informally
shadowing  the  DM  and  subsequently  by  pegging  sterling  within  the  framework  of  the
European Exchange Rate Mechanism. Both these episodes ended in tears, essentially for the
same reasons: attempting to manage the exchange rate required us to pursue macro-economic
policies which were inconsistent with our own domestic macro-economic needs. In the first
case  shadowing  the  DM  involved  accentuating  a  domestic  boom;  in  the  second  case  our
membership  of  the  ERM,  at  a  time  when  reunification  required  abnormally  tight  monetary
policy  in  Germany,  involved  us  in  pursuing  an  unnecessarily  restrictive  monetary  policy
deepening and prolonging recession. In that case, too, the formal commitment made exit more
difficult, the exchange rate fell very sharply, and we made a very substantial financial loss as a
result of massive foreign exchange intervention seeking to defend the ultimately indefensible.
While they lasted these regimes provided a degree of nominal exchange rate stability which
no doubt helped the internationally exposed sectors of the economy. But the price ultimately
was substantially increased instability in the economy as a whole.
3
BIS Review   54/1999
Of course, some commentators have argued that the problem we had within the ERM was the
exchange  rate  at  which  we  entered  rather  than  the  form  of  the  arrangements.  I  am  not
convinced.  The  divergence  between  our  domestic  policy  needs  and  those  in  Germany  was
such that it seems unlikely to me that any plausible difference in the exchange rate initially
chosen  for  the  peg  would  have  made  very  much  difference.  But  in  any  event  the  range  of
uncertainty surrounding the choice of a sustainable peg  is  an  important  part  of  the  problem
with any pegged or fixed rate regime.
The UK has not recently experienced a fully fixed exchange rate regime – although we remain
a potential member of European Monetary Union. But the basic economic pros and cons of a
fixed  rate  regime  are  somewhat  similar.  Essentially  the  very  real  advantages  are  nominal
exchange rate certainty within the Euro-zone – which accounts for some 50% of our external
trade as well as participation of the domestic economy in broader, more liquid, pan-European
financial markets. (The City of London is, of course, already a full participant in the European
financial markets – indeed it is the major contribution that we can make at this stage in the
development of the new currency.) These are very considerable potential economic  benefits
which  will  lead  to  more  efficient  resource  allocation  across  the  euro  area.  The  potential
downside  is  the  risk  that  at  times  the  single  European  monetary  policy  will  not  meet  the
domestic monetary policy needs in all the individual participating countries – in other words
that  there  will  be  problems  of  sectoral  and  regional  divergence  which  are  very  familiar  in
larger economies at the national level, but on a larger, regional European, scale. The jury is
still out on this question.
Based on our experience it seems clear, as I say, that there is no clear best solution, applicable
at all times for all currencies, to reconciling the inherent problem of potential conflict between
the needs of domestic and external stability.
The choice depends very much upon the country’s particular circumstances.
Floating may be more attractive to a country which has a small tradeable sector relative to the
size  of  its  domestic  economy,  but  in  that  case  it  will  need  an  effective  nominal  domestic
anchor, such as a money supply or inflation target; and it will need an institutional structure –
typically an independent central bank – to reinforce the credibility of the commitment to that
nominal anchor.
At  the  other  extreme  a  fixed  rate  regime  may  be  more  attractive  to  smaller,  more  open,
economies or where a credible domestic macro-economic framework is difficult to establish,
for example, for historical or political reasons. But in this case it is crucial to recognise that
domestic  policy  must  be  totally  and  unreservedly  committed  to  maintaining  the  fixed
exchange  rate.  It  is  an  extremely  demanding  regime  but  one  which  can  work  well  –  as  we
have seen in Hong Kong – where there is a high degree of supply-side flexibility to act as an
alternative external shock absorber.
It  has  become  increasingly  fashionable  recently  to  exclude  anything  between  these  two
extreme positions – an actively managed float or a pegged rate regime – as an unviable middle
ground. It is argued essentially that because they do not exert a sufficient discipline on policy
in either direction, or therefore represent a sufficiently clear policy framework, they tend  to
intensify  market  tensions  when  a  divergence  between  the  policy  needs  of  domestic  and
external stability does in fact arise.
BIS Review   54/1999
4
I am reluctant to accept that so-called “corner” view in any absolute sense. When tension does
arise  between  external  and  domestic  objectives,  you  cannot  avoid  the  impact  on  domestic
policy altogether even with a floating exchange rate regime – as I explained in the context of
our own recent experience. It may help to reduce that tension to attempt to manage the float to
some  degree,  by  supporting  appropriate  domestic  policy  action  with  exchange  market
intervention, though I agree that such intervention may serve as little more than a signal where
a  currency  is  internationally  widely  traded  and  held.  Similarly  there  can,  I  believe,  be
circumstances in which domestic discipline may be reinforced by an exchange rate peg, but it
is  vital  in  that  case  that  the  authorities  should  identify  a  clear  exit  strategy  before  serious
tensions are allowed to emerge. That – I know from our own experience – is much easier said
than done!
Mr  Chairman,  these  dilemmas  are  certainly  not  new.  But  clearly  they  are  liable  to  be
accentuated by the massive increase in global capital flows over recent years, which has not
only complicated the choice between alternative possible exchange rate regimes but also made
the management of any of those regimes substantially more difficult.
So there is a further question we need to address which is whether there is anything we can do
to  reduce  the  volatility  of  these  massive  capital  flows  beyond  pursuing  disciplined  macro-
economic policies. That of course is the subject of a whole series of conferences on its own;
and there is certainly a good deal that we can do. Let me conclude by mentioning some of the
items on my own shopping list in this context.
First,  at  the  recipient  end,  a  crucial  condition  for  living  with  financial  globalisation  is
improvement of market structures  to  ensure  that  capital  inflows  are  productively  employed.
That involves attention to structural issues, such as accountancy standards, bankruptcy laws,
and governance questions. It involves appropriate sequencing of capital account liberalisation
– and arrangements to ensure that the particular risks to the borrowing country, for example,
attaching  to  volatile  short-term  inflows  are  properly  recognised  –  and  reflected  in  the  price
paid by the borrower. That in turn involves effective management of foreign currency assets
and  liabilities  in  particular,  including  management  of  their  relative  liquidity,  by  both  the
public and private sectors. It involves, also, ensuring that borrowers, and their creditors, are
unambiguously clear as to who is ultimately responsible for the liability at the time it is taken
on.  It  involves  increased  attention  more  generally  to  the  soundness  of  financial  systems  –
which is to be the subject of our discussion this afternoon. And perhaps above all it involves
improved  transparency  –  of  policies,  of  standards,  and  of  financial  and  economic  data  -  to
enable investors and lenders to make informed assessments of risks.
But there is a great deal too that the international financial community can do, as it were from
the provider end. This includes the intensive efforts being made, particularly by the IMF, to
encourage sound macro-economic and structural policies – and greater transparency – in all
IMF member countries. It includes intensified efforts by financial regulators particularly – at
the national level but also working collectively through the new Financial Stability Forum, the
Basle  Committee  and  IOSCO  for  example  –  to  improve  prudential  standards  of  financial
behaviour.  And  it  includes  the  provision  of  official  financial  support  to  countries  that  are
pursuing  sound  policies  –  in  parallel  with  continuing  private  finance,  on  which  the  risks
would have been reduced both through the parallel official finance itself and through official
international endorsement of the borrowing country’ s policies. In this context I think we in
5
BIS Review   54/1999
the official sector may have placed too much emphasis in international discussions on “bailing
in” the private sector – which can sound ominous, even threatening – where what we really
need is recognition of our mutual interest in public-private sector partnership.
It  is  a  heavy  and  complex  agenda  which  is  being  very  actively  pursued  in  many  different
international groupings, involving both the industrial and emerging countries, across a broad
front. We are I believe steadily moving towards consensus or many of the issues and this is
“leading  the  way  towards  sustainable  economic  growth”  into  the  next  millennium.  In  the
meantime  we  are  collectively  having  to  manage  the  consequences  of  the  recent  global
financial disturbances and their economic after-effects. Happily we have recently been making
progress on that too, particularly in many of the emerging countries here in Asia.
BIS Review   54/1999
6
