Mr Brash addresses the question: What can New Zealanders expect of monetary policy in
the long term?
Address  by  Donald  T  Brash,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Northern
Club, Auckland on 25 March 1999.
Introduction
Mr Chairman
Too often, both in the Reserve Bank and, I suspect, in financial markets, we are inclined to lose
sight of the longer-term, or strategic, issues of relevance to monetary policy. We get preoccupied
with whether the Official Cash Rate should really have been set  at  4.50  per  cent  rather  than  at
4.25 per cent, as if this detail had any enduring significance for the real economy and the lives of
ordinary  New  Zealanders.  I  don’t  want  to  imply  that  the  short-term  tactics  are  irrelevant  –  far
from it – but they are very much less relevant than the longer-term issues, particularly when the
Official Cash Rate itself is explicitly up for review on a regular basis.
So today I want to address the question, What can New Zealanders expect of monetary policy in
the long term?
The monetary policy framework is profoundly democratic
The first point to note in answering that question is that the answer depends on what Parliament
wants monetary policy to deliver. It is sometimes suggested that the Reserve Bank seems to be a
law unto itself, and that Don Brash seems to run the country. Nothing could be further from the
truth. In New Zealand, the Reserve Bank is subject to an Act of Parliament, and Parliament can
change that legislation by simple majority. This is also true in Australia, the United Kingdom, the
United  States  and  many  other  countries,  of  course,  but  it  is  not  now  true  in  much  of  Europe
(where the European Central Bank is a creature of  the  Maastricht  Treaty)  or  in  those  countries
where the central bank has been given essentially unlimited independence under the constitution.
Moreover, that Act of Parliament requires that, within the general directive prescribed by the Act,
the  Governor  of  the  Bank  must  sign  a  written  agreement  with  the  Treasurer  setting  out  quite
explicitly what the Governor must achieve during his or her term of office, the so-called Policy
Targets Agreement. That Agreement can be changed by mutual agreement at any time during the
Governor’s term of office, and can be overridden by Order-in-Council if the Government wants a
change and the Governor does not.
So  what  monetary  policy  will  deliver  in  the  years  ahead  is  essentially  a  matter  for  the  public,
through  Parliament,  to  determine.  The  Reserve  Bank  and  I  as  the  Bank’s  Governor  are  held
accountable for our performance in delivering the objectives which Government and Parliament
have chosen, through a requirement to produce regular Monetary Policy Statements and to appear
regularly before the Finance and Expenditure Committee of Parliament.
Having  said  that,  as  long  as  the  present  Act  remains  in  place  at  least,  the  Government  can  not
change the objective laid down for monetary policy without telling the public. In other words, any
change in the objective must be totally transparent and, given that inflation is essentially a form of
theft, that seems entirely appropriate. All this seems profoundly democratic, and makes it clear
that the Reserve Bank and Don Brash are servants of Parliament.
Since 1989, the Reserve Bank Act has made it clear that monetary policy must be used to achieve
and  maintain  ‘stability  in  the  general  level  of  prices’,  with  the  meaning  of  this  defined  in  the
1
BIS Review   33/1999
Policy Targets Agreement. The present Agreement, signed when I was reappointed Governor at
the end of 1997, defines ‘stability in the general level of prices’ as meaning that monetary policy
should be aimed at keeping inflation as measured by the CPI excluding credit charges, or CPIX,
between  0  and  3  per  cent  over  each  12-monthly  period,  though  the  Agreement  also  recognises
that there will be some circumstances where inflation may legitimately be allowed to fall outside
that range.
But what, I am often asked, happens after the election? Fundamentally, that depends on what the
next Parliament decides. It is not inevitable that anything (related to monetary policy) will change
after the election. Almost all political parties are on record as supporting the present legislation,
and  indeed  supporting  the  present  0  to  3  per  cent  target.  While  the  Policy  Targets  Agreement
could  be  changed  by  agreement  between  Governor  and  any  new  Treasurer,  there  should  be  no
presumption that that will occur. Consistency and continuity are attractive in monetary policy as
elsewhere, and I shall certainly not be promoting a change. It is perhaps worth noting that other
central banks with a price stability objective and a quantitative inflation target all have targets that
fall within the 0 to 3 per cent range – and to the best of my knowledge, there are none that fall
outside it. But, to repeat, it is for Parliament to decide in the final analysis.
The present Policy Targets Agreement
What does the present Policy Targets Agreement imply about the way in which the Reserve Bank
will formulate monetary policy in the years ahead? Without going into great detail, it means that
we will be aiming to keep CPIX inflation close to the midpoint of the 0 to 3 per cent target one to
two years ahead.
We aim close to the midpoint because we recognise that, in an uncertain and fast-changing world,
aiming at the midpoint maximises the chance that we will be able to keep inflation in the target
range.  Aiming  near  either  edge  of  the  target  would  run  too  high  a  risk  that  unexpected  shocks
would throw us outside the target.
And we aim to keep inflation near the midpoint not this quarter or next, but in one to two years’
time, because we recognise that monetary policy has most of its impact on  trend  inflation  over
this kind of time horizon.
It follows that in implementing policy we would in principle be willing to accept the prospect of
inflation outcomes close to the edges of the target, and conceivably even outside the target, in the
next few quarters if we were reasonably confident that inflation would be back near the centre of
the  target  within  one  to  two  years.  Clearly,  we  will  not  lightly  sanction  breaches  of  the  agreed
target – indeed, we will do our utmost to avoid such breaches, of either side of the target – but to
pretend that we can at all times and in all circumstances keep inflation within the target would be
to promise more than we can deliver. Indeed, we learnt that in the mid-nineties.
As an aside, we are reasonably certain that headline inflation, the CPI including interest rates, will
fall  below  zero  for  several  quarters  this  year.  In  the  12  months  to  December  1998,  headline
inflation was only 0.4  per  cent,  the  lowest  level  for  several  decades.  We  expect  the  12  months
‘increase’ to be negative very shortly.
But  it  is  important  that  nobody  misunderstands  the  significance  of  this.  Having  the  headline
inflation figure go below zero is not a breach of the Policy Targets Agreement, any more than it
was a breach when the headline figure rose to 4.6 per cent in mid-1995. The inflation target in the
Policy Targets Agreement is explicitly defined in terms of the CPI excluding interest rates, for the
very  good  reason  that  an  interest-inclusive  CPI  target  would  quickly  have  the  Reserve  Bank
chasing  its  own  tail,  tightening  monetary  policy  (increasing  interest  rates)  in  response  to  an
BIS Review   33/1999
2
increase in measured inflation which was itself caused by increasing interest rates earlier in the
year,  and  vice  versa.  Both  the  negative  headline  inflation  figure  we  now  project  and  the  high
figure  experienced  in  the  mid-nineties  are  simply  the  result  of  the  inclusion  in  New  Zealand’s
headline inflation figure of interest rates.
Most  economists  are  agreed  that  interest  rates  should  not  be  in  the  inflation  figure  and  many
major countries already exclude them. The Government Statistician has agreed to remove them
from  the  official  CPI  from  later  this  year.  Thankfully,  this  will  end  the  potential  for  public
confusion inherent in the present situation. But in the meantime we ignore the interest-inclusive
headline figure, as we have done all decade. Of course, we could prevent the headline inflation
figure  turning  negative  very  easily  –  by  aggressively  increasing  interest  rates!  I  don’t  think
anybody is strongly arguing for this!
Growth and inflation
Why not add a growth objective for monetary policy? Surely, the most important objective for all
economic policy must be to encourage growth, so why isn’t the same true for monetary policy? In
a  fundamental  sense,  it  is.  It’s  just  that  we  now  realise  that  the  most  constructive  thing  that
monetary  policy  can  do  to  encourage  growth  is  to  deliver  price  stability,  so  that  businesses
planning  what  products  to  produce  can  distinguish  relative  price  movements  from  the  noise  of
general inflation, so  that  savers  can  sensibly  plan  how  to  invest  their  savings,  so  that  the  gross
distortions  created  by  the  interaction  of  inflation  and  a  tax  system  geared  to  historical  cost
accounting can be avoided, and all the rest.
We now know that  inflation  damages  economic  growth,  to  say  nothing  of  the  social  damage  it
also does through the capricious redistribution of income and wealth which it produces.
It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  present  Policy  Targets  Agreement  makes  it  clear  that  the  Reserve
Bank is to deliver price stability ‘so that monetary policy can make its maximum contribution to
sustainable  economic  growth,  employment  and  development  opportunities  within  the  New
Zealand economy’.
In other words, price stability is not simply an end in itself but a means to an end, and that end is
better growth, better employment, and indeed a more just society.
The Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Mr Ian Macfarlane, expressed it well late in 1996
when he said that ‘the other way of expressing an inflation target is to say that monetary policy is
set  in  a  way  which  lets  the  economy  grow  as  fast  as  possible  without  breaking  the  inflation
objective, but no faster.’1
The Governor of the Bank of England, Mr Eddie George, also put it very clearly in a speech last
month:
‘We’re  often  described  as  a  lot  of  “inflation  nutters”,  or  even  as  “pointy-headed  industrial
hooligans”  who  don’t  care  at  all  about  real  economic  activity  or  jobs  …  That  view  …  is
profoundly and fundamentally wrong.
‘The  implication,  of  those  who  take  that  view,  is  that  they  think  there  is  a  trade-off  between
inflation  and  the  rate  of  economic  growth;  they  think  that  if  only  we  would  let  up  a  bit  on
controlling inflation then we could all enjoy higher activity and lower unemployment and rising
1
Speech by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the CEDA annual general meeting
dinner, Melbourne, 28 November 1996.
3
BIS Review   33/1999
living standards, which are, of course, the really good things of economic life. At the very least,
they say, if you were a bit less manic in your pursuit of low inflation, we could avoid some of the
worst  damage  that  is  currently  being  inflicted  upon  agriculture,  upon  large  parts  of
manufacturing, and even some service sectors.
‘And that might even be true for a time. The trouble is that, in anything other than the short term,
it would be likely to mean more rather than less economic damage, and lower rather than higher
growth and employment …
‘We are every bit as concerned with growth and employment as we are about price stability – as
anyone in their right mind must be. Permanently low inflation is a necessary means of achieving
growth and employment sustained into the medium and long term.’2
I totally agree.
The control of inflation, and output variability
Most  of  us  now  accept  that  monetary  policy  can  not,  by  tolerating  a  little  more  inflation,  buy
sustainably  faster  growth.  In  other  words,  keeping  inflation  low  is  the  best  contribution  which
monetary policy can make to growth in the longer term.
But it is also widely accepted that there may be a trade-off between the variability of inflation and
the variability of output. In other words, it may be that attempting to keep inflation at precisely
1.5 per cent at all times might lead the Bank to throw interest and exchange rates around quite
vigorously – and output around quite vigorously as a result.
In recent years, the distinction between ‘strict’ inflation targeting and ‘flexible’ inflation targeting
has grown up in the economic literature, with ‘strict’ inflation targeters being those who aim to
keep inflation very close to a narrow target at all times, and ‘flexible’ targeters being those who
are willing to accept a little more variability in inflation outcomes  for  the  sake  of  reducing  the
variability of interest and exchange rates, and of economic output.3 I am not sure that any central
banks  are  in  fact  ‘strict’  inflation  targeters,  but  the  distinction  is  useful  in  highlighting  why  all
central banks are more or less ‘flexible’ inflation targeters.
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand has never been a ‘strict’ inflation targeter. From the very first
Policy Targets Agreement, reasons why actual inflation might legitimately fall outside the target
band  –  the  so-called  caveats  –  were  recognised.  At  no  stage  have  we  treated  the  centre  of  the
inflation target band as a fetish.
Early in 1996, after inflation fell outside the then 0 to 2 per cent target by 0.1 per cent in the year
to March 1996, I wrote to the Minister of Finance and explained that, although we were confident
that inflation would be back within range by the following year, I was not confident that further
breaches of the target could be avoided in the immediate future without a very aggressive further
tightening  of  monetary  policy.  I  noted  that  under  all  the  circumstances  I  could  not  recommend
such an aggressive further tightening, and indeed noted that tightening to the extent which would
have been needed to reduce the risk of further breaches of the top of the  inflation  target  in  the
2
3
Speech by Mr E A J George, Governor of the Bank of England, at Hertfordshire University, 18 February 1999.
See  Lars  Svensson,  ‘Inflation  targeting  in  an  open  economy:  strict  or  flexible  inflation  targeting?’,  Reserve
Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper, G97/8.
BIS Review   33/1999
4
immediate  future  ran  the  risk  of  throwing  the  inflation  rate  through  the  bottom  of  the  inflation
target further into the future.4
So there is plenty of evidence that we have been ‘flexible’ inflation targeters from the beginning.
But I suspect that we may be even more willing to be ‘flexible’ inflation targeters now than we
were  in  the  late  eighties  and  early  nineties,  when  we  were  at  the  beginning  of  our  inflation
targeting experience. This is a direct result of the fact that inflation and inflation expectations are
now much more firmly anchored at a low level than was the case a decade ago. At that time, we
were coming out of a period of nearly two decades of high and variable inflation, a period during
which governments had repeatedly promised to reduce inflation and had repeatedly broken those
promises. It was hardly surprising that, initially at least, the public greeted the news of one more
approach to delivering low inflation with a high degree of scepticism.
Today,  by  contrast,  even  those  who  criticised  the  commitment  to  low  inflation  initially  are
persuaded that low inflation is likely to be around for a considerable time to come. Businesses no
longer  assume  that  they  will  be  able  to  increase  prices  more  or  less  automatically  each  year.
Consumers no longer assume that they must buy this month because next month prices will  be
higher.  Those  negotiating  wage  and  salary  increases  strike  agreements  consistent  with  stable
prices. Long-term interest rates are nearly back to their levels in the sixties. Even home-buyers
are beginning to realise that house prices go down as well as up. As a consequence of these more
firmly-anchored inflation expectations, the Bank can afford to respond rather more moderately to
the  prospect  of  small  changes  in  the  inflation  rate,  confident  that,  even  if  inflation  does
temporarily  depart  from  the  midpoint  of  the  target,  this  is  not  likely  to  produce  any  damaging
longer-term changes in pricing and wage-setting behaviour.
We live in an uncertain world
This anchoring of inflation expectations is of considerable assistance in the way monetary policy
operates, and should mean that interest rates may not need to move around as strongly as at times
in the past.
But  does  that  mean  that  the  Bank  will  be  able  to  formulate  policy  with  perfect  foresight,  and
without  controversy,  in  the  future?  Of  course  not.  Inevitably,  sometimes  things  turn  out
differently than expected.
For example, 90 day interest rates rose from an average of 4.6 per cent in February 1994 to 9.5
per cent in December that year. At the time, that increase in rates seemed to be ample to contain
inflationary  pressures.  But  with  the  wisdom  of  hindsight  it  is  probable  that  we  should  have
tightened  policy  earlier  and  more  aggressively  than  we  did;  had  we  done  so,  we  might  have
nipped inflationary pressures in the bud at an earlier stage, and it may have been possible to ease
policy earlier than was in fact the case. Not many people complained, in 1993, that we were not
tightening policy sufficiently quickly.
Late in 1995, we thought we could see inflationary pressures abating in 1996, and so advised the
Government that there seemed no reason from a monetary policy perspective to abandon the tax
reductions proposed for mid-1996; in retrospect, we were rather too optimistic, and inflationary
pressures  continued  throughout  that  year,  with  the  tax  cuts  and,  later,  additional  government
spending adding to those pressures. Again, not many people complained at the time.
4
Letter to the Minister of Finance dated 19 April 1996, published in Monetary Policy Statement, June 1996.
5
BIS Review   33/1999
As President Harry Truman once said, ‘Any schoolboy’s hindsight is better than the President’s
foresight.’
You  would  be  disappointed  if  I  did  not  mention  the  introduction  of  the  Monetary  Conditions
Index  with  ‘bands’  at  the  end  of  June  1997  as  another  innovation  which,  with  the  benefit  of
experience, has proved less useful than we had hoped. In the extreme test provided by the Asian
crisis, we believe that the MCI with ‘bands’ produced unnecessary volatility in short-term interest
rates in the 12 months or so after it was first introduced (that volatility began to diminish in the
second half of 1998 as we more explicitly relaxed the ‘bands’ around desired conditions), so in
that  sense  we  believe  that  the  MCI  was  not  as  helpful  in  the  implementation  of  policy  as  we
believe the Official Cash Rate will be.
But  we  have  not  abandoned  the  MCI  as  an  indicator  of  monetary  conditions,  and  we  intend  to
continue using it to illustrate how we see monetary conditions evolving over the period covered
by our projections.
Moreover, we do not accept that the MCI ‘caused’ the brief recession in the first  half  of  1998.
The monetary conditions relevant to the level of activity in the first half of 1998 were those in
1996 and early 1997, not those in the second half of 1997. If monetary policy carries any part of
the blame for that early 1998 recession, it was monetary policy in 1996 and the first part of 1997
which was to blame; the MCI was introduced at the end of June 1997. In 1996, notwithstanding
that inflation was slightly above the then 0 to 2 per cent target and notwithstanding the tax cuts
and  increased  government  expenditure,  we  were  projecting  inflationary  pressures  to  abate  over
1997  and  1998,  with  a  period  of  positive  but  below-trend  growth.  In  other  words,  we  were
projecting the proverbial soft landing. On this basis, we began easing, in December 1996. What
turned  a  soft  landing  into  something  much  harsher  was  the  Asian  crisis  and  the  drought,  both
unpredicted and unpredictable in 1996.
In fact, judging from the inflation outcomes it is not at all obvious that monetary policy in 1996
was too tight. CPIX inflation has been close to the middle of the inflation target since the June
quarter of 1997, and indeed, had it not been for the widening of the target from 0 to 2 per cent to
0  to  3  per  cent  at  the  very  end  of  1996,  inflation  outcomes  in  much  of  1998  would  have  been
rather uncomfortably close to the top of the band. On this basis, it is certainly hard to argue that
policy in 1996 was too tight.
But there have been mistakes in the past, as I have indicated. And there will be mistakes in the
future. Without a crystal ball, this is quite inevitable, given the huge amount of uncertainty which
surrounds  the  way  in  which  policy  must  of  necessity  be  implemented,  namely  looking  forward
one to two years.
There is uncertainty about where the economy is when we begin each projection. The projection
which we published last week was finalised on 1 March, and yet the latest comprehensive data we
have on economic activity is for a quarter which finished five months earlier, and we know that
data for that quarter may be revised, and revised again, for many quarters to come. Of course, we
try  hard  to  offset  this  problem  by  studying  a  very  large  number  of  more  up-to-date  statistical
series,  by  talking  to  scores  of  businesses  all  over  the  country,  by  talking  to  audiences  in  many
parts of the country, by assessing the implications of several surveys of business and consumer
confidence, and by asking our seven non-executive Directors for their assessment of the economy.
As I remarked on a previous occasion, I sometimes suspect that God made economic forecasters
to make weather forecasters look good, but at least weather forecasters can look out the window
and see what the weather is like today! Economic forecasters do not have that luxury.
BIS Review   33/1999
6
There is also a great deal of uncertainty about ‘how the economy works’, in other words about
how  people  and  businesses  react  to  circumstances.  For  example,  our  latest  projections  assume
that household expenditure will grow more slowly as the economy grows out of the early 1998
recession  than  it  did  as  we  grew  out  of  the  recession  of  1991/92.  We  made  that  assumption
because people now carry a great deal more debt, relative to their incomes, than was the case a
decade ago. We are assuming that they will take on rather less additional debt over the next few
years. That seems an entirely reasonable assumption, but of course  nobody  can  know  that  with
certainty,  particularly  given  that  low  interest  rates  of  the  kind  now  prevailing  have  not  been
experienced in New Zealand for many years. There is perhaps even more uncertainty about ‘what
lies  around  the  corner’.  Will  the  US  share  market  continue  rising  over  the  next  year  or  two,
stabilise at present levels, or fall substantially? The answer to that question, on which we all have
views  no  doubt,  will  almost  certainly  have  a  material  bearing  on  the  growth  of  US  consumer
spending and potentially therefore on world economic growth. But should we formulate monetary
policy on the basis that the US share market will correct downwards, or will not? Similarly for
developments  in  the  Japanese  economy.  Even  within  New  Zealand,  there  may  be  all  kinds  of
totally  unpredictable  events.  Another  drought  perhaps?  Unlikely  surely,  but  certainly  not
impossible.
All  these  sources  of  uncertainty  mean  that,  when  we  look  back  on  the  way  in  which  monetary
policy  was  formulated  in  March  1999  from  the  vantage  point  of,  say,  2002,  what  seemed  like
well-founded  decisions  as  we  finalised  our  decision  on  the  Official  Cash  Rate  last  week  may
seem hard to justify. Because of the delay between monetary policy action and the effects of that
action on the real economy and, through those effects, on inflation, we have no alternative than to
formulate policy in full recognition of this inherent uncertainty.
This  has  several  implications,  and  this  is  not  the  place  to  spell  out  all  of  them.  But  one  of  the
ways  in  which  we  try  to  reduce  the  risks  associated  with  the  inherent  uncertainty  of  monetary
policy formulation is by publishing our quarterly projections and the key assumptions on which
they are based. (Indeed, we have published considerable information about the model on which
our projections are based.) This helps markets to interpret new information as it emerges, and to
adjust  monetary  conditions  even  before  we  adjust  the  Official  Cash  Rate.  Of  course  this  only
works because financial market participants understand the objective of monetary policy in New
Zealand and, on the basis of our track record over the last decade and more, understand also that
we are committed to delivering that objective.
What  this  means  in  practice  will  no  doubt  be  illustrated  tomorrow.  In  our  Monetary  Policy
Statement last week, we indicated that when we finalised our projection on 1 March we expected
that  GDP  would  have  increased  by  0.6  per  cent  in  the  December  1998  quarter  (seasonally
adjusted). It is possible that, when the figure for December 1998 quarter GDP is released by the
Government  Statistician  tomorrow,  it  will  show  growth  of  exactly  0.6  per  cent.  Possible,  but
unlikely. But in an important sense that doesn’t really matter. Not only is there ample time for us
to  adjust  policy  long  before  any  mis-assessment  has  the  slightest  relevance  to  inflation  in  the
second half of next year, but financial markets themselves may adjust conditions within minutes
of  the  announcement.  Thus  if  the  December  quarter  GDP  figure  turns  out  to  be  appreciably
stronger than the Bank projected, and if this is seen by markets as being relevant to the inflation
outlook, monetary conditions might well tighten quickly. And vice versa. This is precisely what
happened, for example, on the announcement of the GDP figures for the March quarter of 1998 at
the end of June, for the June quarter at the end of September, and for the September quarter near
the end of December. In each case, monetary conditions moved in a broadly appropriate direction.
7
BIS Review   33/1999
Conclusion
At the beginning of my address I asked what New Zealanders can expect of monetary policy in
the long term. I would hope that they can expect monetary policy to become so totally predictable
as  to  be  boring  –  stable  average  prices  year  after  year  after  year  –  because  that  is  the  best
environment for growth in output and employment.
Interest  rates  will  still  move  up  and  down  to  some  degree  of  course,  reflecting  changes  in  the
balance  between  savers  and  borrowers.  But  the  week-to-week  volatility  of  short-term  interest
rates should be diminished by our move to implement monetary policy through an Official Cash
Rate, and our progressively longer track record of low inflation should make it unnecessary ever
to push interest rates to the levels seen in the early stages of disinflation in the mid-eighties.
The New Zealand dollar will also fluctuate of course, certainly against individual currencies and
even against the trade-weighted index. As I discussed in a speech to the Canterbury Employers’
Chamber of Commerce at the end of January, that appears to be a fact of life which nobody has
yet found a way of avoiding.
So I suppose that, with interest rates and the exchange rate still moving up and down, monetary
policy will never seem totally boring. But with luck monetary policy will at least come to be seen
for what it is when it is formulated with skill, namely a useful contributor to a prosperous society,
but not nearly as important as a whole host of other matters – policies on education, policies on
the  labour  market,  policies  on  taxation,  our  access  to  international  markets,  the  quality  of  our
managers,  and  all  the  rest.  Those  are  the  things  which  will  really  determine  our  longer-term
prosperity.
BIS Review   33/1999
8
