Mr Stals reviews the 1998 IMF and World Bank annual meetings
Presentation  by  the  Govenor  of  the  South  African  Resrve  Bank,  Mr  Chris  Stals,  to  the  Portfolio
Committee on Finance in Cape Town, South Africa on 04/02/99
South Africa’s position in the Fund
South Africa is one of the more than 180 member countries of the IMF and the World Bank Group.
At this stage, South Africa holds a quota in the IMF equal to SDR 1,365 million (R9.3 billion). The
Fund is now in the process of raising all quotas by approximately 45 per cent. South Africa’s quota
will increase to SDR 1,868 million (R12.7 billion). The total new quotas for all members add up to
SDR 212 billion. South Africa therefore holds about 0.87 per cent of the total voting rights in the
Fund.
Under  certain  conditions,  South  Africa  can  borrow  its  total  quota  (R12.7  billion)  from  the  Fund
under  normal  Fund  policies,  but,  of  course,  subject  to  the  implementation  of  certain  prescribed
macroeconomic policies. The Fund also provides a number of other specific credit facilities, e.g. the
Supplemental Reserve Facility, the  Compensatory  Financing  Facility,  and  the  Enhanced  Structural
Adjustment  Facility,  that  members  can  make  use  of  under  certain  conditions.  At  this  stage,  South
Africa has no borrowings outstanding from the Fund.
The  size  of  a  country’s  quota  also  determines  its  participation  in  the  Special  Drawing  Rights
Scheme. Up to now, South Africa has been allocated a total of SDR 220 million. Under the terms of
a decision of last year, there will be a further allocation of SDRs later this year, when South Africa
will receive a further amount of SDR 180 million (R1.2 billion).
As a member of the IMF, South Africa has the right to be represented on the Executive Board of the
Fund  (24  Executive  Directors  represent  all  members).  South  Africa  joined  the  English  Speaking
Group of African countries for this purpose (20 countries), and is given an opportunity on a rotation
basis amongst the members of this Group to appoint an Executive Director to the Fund. (This Group
is now represented by Mr Jose Pedro de Morais of Angola, with Mr C.D.R. Rustomjee from South
Africa as the Alternative Executive Director for the Group. Two years from now, i.e. in September
2000, South Africa will provide the Executive Director for the Group for a two-year period.)
The  main  controlling  body  of  the  IMF  is  the  Board  of  Governors  (Ministers  of  Finance  and
Governors of Central Banks of all participating countries). The Board meets once a year (the Annual
General Meeting).
The Interim Committee of the Board of Governors is an advisory board and has 24 members (one for
each  constituency).  This  Committee  meets  twice  a  year  and  advises  the  Board  of  Governors  on
major policy issues. South Africa’s Minister of Finance was elected in October 1998 to represent the
English Speaking Group of African countries on the Interim Committee for the next two years.
There is also a Development Committee, constituted on the same basis as the Interim Committee,
but with the task of advising the Fund and the World Bank on developmental issues.
South Africa is also a contributing member to the capital of the World Bank and its affiliates. The
World  Bank  has  a  similar  institutional  structure  to  the  IMF.  Our  constituency  is  at  this  stage
represented  on  the  Board  of  Executive  Directors  of  the  World  Bank  by  Namibia.  Loans  from  the
World  Bank  are,  however,  granted  to  countries  on  a  completely  different  basis  and  are  normally
project linked. The Annual Meetings of the Board of Governors of the World Bank and of the IMF
take place at the same time (Joint Annual General Meetings).
At the Annual Meetings, the South African delegation participates actively in:
BIS Review   16/1999
– 2 –
the Interim Committee Meeting;
the plenary sessions (three days);
• 
• 
• 
•  many bilaterally arranged private meetings, and
•  a series of social functions and receptions.
the Africa Constituency Meeting;
Other meetings at the time of the Annual Meetings
The confusion for any new participant in this annual event  is  substantially  increased  by  numerous
other conferences and meetings that take place at the same time. Of great importance are meetings
of:
• 
• 
the Group of Seven, and
the Group of Ten.
South Africa obviously does not participate in these meetings.
In  addition,  there  is  also  a  Group  of  Twenty-four,  representing  mainly  developing  countries  from
Africa, South America and Asia. This group is officially known as The Intergovernmental Group of
Twenty-four on International Monetary Affairs. South Africa is not a member of this Group, but has
been given observer status with an open invitation to participate in the activities of the Group.
Many other (regional) groups also make use of the occasion to hold meetings in Washington. Last
year, the South African Minister of Finance invited all the SADC countries for a short discussion in
Washington.
A new grouping that is now in the making is the so-called Willard Group, called together earlier last
year by the American Secretary of the Treasury and the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, for a special discussion on the world financial crisis. The Group originally
included 22 countries, being the major industrial countries and leading emerging market countries,
including South Africa. At a meeting in Washington on 5 October 1998, three more countries from
Europe  were  also  invited  to  participate.  This  Group,  working  through  sub-committees  in  which
South Africa also participates, produced three interesting  documents  with  proposals  for  improving
the international financial system in respect of:
•  Transparency and Accountability;
•  Strengthening of Financial Systems (Regulation and Supervision), and
•  Managing International Financial Crises.
The nature of the current debate
Last year’s Annual Meetings took place against the background of:
• 
the East Asian crisis and its contagion effect, first on other emerging markets, and later on the
world economy;
 the serious eco-political situation in Russia;
the collapse of a major hedge fund in New York – Long Term Capital Management;
BIS Review   16/1999
– 3 –
• 
the growing threat of a collapse of the Brazilian economy; and
•  growing concern about a slow-down in world economic growth.
At the Washington meetings, these economic problems were dissected from all angles; the causes of
the problems were linked to: bad macroeconomic management; ineffective financial regulation and
supervision;  the  current  non-system  of  international  exchange  rates;  excessive  gearing  within
financial institutions; etc. Steps taken by countries and by the multinational institutions to manage
the problem and to find solutions were criticised, sometimes for good reason, but often also on the
basis of illusory perceptions. The search for measures to prevent the recurrence of a similar situation
in future started in all earnest.
It is not possible to summarise all the discussions in this short presentation of today. I am therefore
taking  a  cue  from  summaries  published  by  the  IMF  itself  (after  the  meetings)  of  some  consensus
reached in the discussions (from IMF Survey of 19 October 1998).
Apart from stressing the need for sound macroeconomic policies at the national level, a programme
was  agreed  to  for  further  studies  on  the  strengthening  of  the  international  financial  system  (the
“architecture”). These further studies would be undertaken within the Executive Board of the Fund
and would cover:
•  a possibility of strengthening or transforming the Interim Committee;
•  a code of conduct for fiscal policy, as well as the ongoing work on the code of monetary and
financial policies (standards);
 the need for greater transparency at all levels, beginning with the IMF itself. The IMF’s Special
Data Dissemination Standard should be expanded; systems for reporting external debt should be
improved;  the  operations  of  international  investors  should  be  disclosed  in  more  detail;  the
Fund’s surveillance operations should be expanded;
•  plans for an increase in private sector involvement in preventing and resolving financial crises;
• 
introducing  or  tightening  capital  controls  is  not  regarded  as  appropriate  in  dealing  with
fundamental  economic  imbalances.  The  IMF’s  Executive  Board  was  nevertheless  asked  to
review  experience  with  the  use  of  controls  and  the  circumstances  under  which  they  may  be
appropriate;
  the Interim Committee expressed its serious concern over the IMF’s tight liquidity position. It
stressed the critical importance of augmenting IMF resources; and
there was general support for expanding  the  Enhanced  Structural  Adjustment  Facility  (ESAF)
and the Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative. South Africa does not qualify for any
one  of  these  facilities,  although  we  have  a  vested  interest  in  the  proposal  because  of  our
sympathy for other countries in our constituency.
It will be noted that none of these proposals are very revolutionary and are intended to work mostly
through the existing framework of institutions and systems. More radical proposals are nevertheless
also being thrown around in the global debate, e.g.:
• 
for a major revision of the present floating exchange rate system and a return to a more stable
system for the global structure;
 for  a  merger  of  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  in  one  organisation  (a  merger  of  the  Interim
Committee and the Development Committee);
BIS Review  16/1999
– 4 –
  for the conversion of the IMF into a world central bank with a lender-of-last-resort facility; and
even
for a close-down and termination of the role of the IMF.
South Africa’s role in the debate
Over the past year the South African economy was severely affected by the adverse world financial
conditions.  Our  approach  has  been  to  manage  our  economy  as  best  as  we  could  in  this  adverse
environment, and to work with the international community to seek for a global solution. As one of
the leading emerging market economies, South Africa has many opportunities to make a constructive
contribution to the ongoing debate on the reform of the international financial system. Unfortunately,
we do not have the resources to participate more actively in all the discussions that are now taking
place.
 BIS Review   16/1999
