Mr  Noyer  focuses  on  the  benefits  of  EMU  and  on  the  euro  as  an  accelerator  for  economic
growth in europe
Speech  by  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  lunch-meeting  of
Cercle d’Union Interalliée in Paris on 23 June 1999.
Introduction
On  1  January  of  this  year,  the  euro  was  introduced  in  11  countries  (EU-11  countries)  with  a  total
population of almost 300 million. The start of Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU)
established a combined economy that is only slightly smaller than that of the United States. So, both
in  human  and  economic  resources,  the  euro  area  can  be  compared  with  the  largest  economy  in  the
world. Furthermore, eventual participation of the four countries which have not yet adopted the single
European  currency  –  Denmark,  Greece,  Sweden  and  the  United  Kingdom  –  would  only  further
enhance  the  economic  weight  of  the  euro  area  and  promote  the  contribution  of  Europe  to  world
economic development. In this sense, the euro is truly an accelerator of economic growth, as the use
of the same currency in the euro area will increase cross-border competition and market integration,
thereby enlarging economic prosperity for European citizens that will spillover to other European and
non-European  countries  as  well.  It  is  my  conviction  that  EMU  could  be  a  catalyst  for  economic
progress in Europe, and could fundamentally re-shape the contours of the world economic order in the
21st century. Today I shall deal with the benefits of EMU and the stability-oriented policies that have
to be implemented in order to reap the full potential of EMU. Making EMU a success is a process
which requires the efforts of all of us.
Economic Growth – The Benefits of EMU
I should now like to address the benefits of EMU and why I believe that the introduction of the euro
and the single monetary policy should result in higher economic growth in the euro area and thereby
contribute positively to the development of the world economy. The degree to which these benefits
are  achieved  depends  not  only  on  the  monetary  policy  of  the  Eurosystem,  but  even  more  so  on
accompanying stability-oriented fiscal and appropriate labour market policies. When speaking of the
Eurosystem,  I  refer  to  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  the  eleven  national  central  banks
(NCBs) of the participating Member States.
The most important contribution that the Eurosystem’s monetary policy can make towards exploiting
to the maximum the benefits of EMU is to fulfil its primary objective to maintain price stability, as
stipulated in the Treaty on European Union. As has long been argued by central bankers and academic
economists, inflation is costly, both economically and socially.1 Nobel prize-winner Milton Friedman
expressed this well in 1980, when he said : “Inflation is a disease, a dangerous and sometimes fatal
disease, a disease that if not checked in time can destroy a society”2. The same could be said about
deflation. In my view, EMU is a tool to consolidate the progress made towards price stability in recent
years and to firmly anchor expectations in line with price stability, and thereby establish the necessary
framework to seize the opportunities of monetary union. The Eurosystem enjoys full independence to
determine  the  appropriate  level  of  interest  rates  in  order  to  satisfy  its  primary  objective  of  price
stability. Moreover, the members of the ECB Governing Council have long terms of office and are
only dismissible for serious misconduct or inability to perform their duties. These provisions imply
that the concept of monetary stability benefits from explicit legal statutes and that the credibility of
the Eurosystem will be safeguarded by protecting the monetary policymaking process from political
interference.
                                                     
1 S. Fisher, “Why are central banks pursuing long-run price stability?,” revised version of a paper prepared for
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium (Achieving Price Stability), August 1996.
2 M. Friedman and R. Friedman, Free to Choose: A Personal Statement, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1980,
p.253.
1
BIS Review   75/1999
A  further  important  benefit  of  EMU  is  that  it  has  greatly  reduced  the  risk  of  real  exchange  rate
misalignments  within  the  euro  area.  This  fosters  economic  growth  and  avoids  a  misallocation  of
resources.  In  fact,  it  enables  the  European  Single  Market  to  function  smoothly  to  the  advantage  of
producers  and  consumers.  EMU  has  eliminated  nominal  exchange  rate  volatility  and  exchange  rate
risks within the euro area. This benefits  not  only  trade  between,  and  economic  growth  in,  the  euro
area countries but also the economic development of other European and non-European countries. In
addition,  foreign  direct  investments  into  the  euro  area  economies  should  be  promoted,  as  these
investments are negatively affected by exchange rate volatility.
The advantages of economic integration afforded by the Single Market process are enhanced by the
elimination  of  the  transaction  costs  of  exchanging  different  currencies,  the  direct  result  of  the
introduction  of  the  euro.  Furthermore,  the  single  currency  will  make  prices  across  the  euro  area
directly comparable, which should increase competition and hence efficiency and economic growth in
the euro area.
A  number  of  further  positive  effects  on  economic  growth  flow  from  the  elimination  of  separate
currencies in the euro area countries. One benefit is the potential for the reduction of risk premia built
into real interest rates. This in turn will stimulate investment. By facilitating the development of deep
and  integrated  capital  markets,  the  single  currency  should  further  reduce  long-term  rates  via  the
elimination of premia resulting from less liquid markets. For example, empirical research has shown
that  due  to  more  liquid  markets,  US  long-term  interest  rates  are  25  to  50  basis  points  lower  than
comparable European interest rates3. In addition, a wider and deeper capital market in the euro area
will improve intermediation between savers and investors.
Finally,  EMU  may  stimulate  further  political  integration  of  Europe.  In  general,  the  process  of
European integration has been driven and continues to be driven by the political conviction that an
integrated Europe will be safer, more stable and more prosperous than a fragmented Europe. In this
sense,  the  introduction  of  a  single  currency  in  the  euro  area  could  become  an  important  symbol  of
political and social integration in Europe. It could serve as a catalyst for further integration in other
areas.
Ensuring the Benefits (I): A Stability-Oriented Monetary Policy
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  most  important  contribution  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  to
economic growth in the euro area is achieving its primary objective of maintaining price stability. The
specific way in which the ECB should pursue this primary objective is laid down by what is called the
monetary policy strategy. I should like to address now the main aspects of the Eurosystem’s strategy.
First,  in  order  to  guide  expectations  of  future  price  developments  and  to  facilitate  the  public’s
assessment  of  the  success  of  the  single  monetary  policy,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has
announced a quantitative definition of its primary objective. That is, price stability has been defined
as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of
below 2%. Price stability is to be maintained over the medium term.
Second, to maintain price stability according to this published definition, we have chosen a distinct
monetary policy strategy, one that reflects the special circumstances that exist at present as well as
those  likely  to  prevail  in  the  foreseeable  future.  It  ensures  as  much  continuity  as  possible  with  the
strategies previously pursued by the NCBs. At the same time, it gives due consideration to the unique
situation  that  prevails  in  the  early  years  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  Our  strategy  rests  on  two
                                                     
3 G. Alogoskoufis, R. Portes and H. Rey, “The Emergence of the Euro as an International Currency”, 1997, as
discussed in A. Bénassy-Quéré, B. Mojon and A.D. Schor, The Role of the Euro, CEPII, document de travail no.
98-03, January 1998.
BIS Review   75/1999
2
“pillars”: a prominent role for money as expressed by the announcement of a reference value for the
annual growth of M3 and a broadly based assessment of the outlook for price developments, and the
risks to price stability in the euro area as a whole.
In the context of the first pillar of the monetary policy strategy, the Governing Council of the ECB has
announced a quantitative reference value for the growth of a broad monetary aggregate (M3), which
has been set at an annual rate of 4½%. Under normal circumstances, substantial deviations from the
reference value would tend to indicate future risks to price stability. However, monetary policy does
not react to deviations of monetary growth from the reference value in a “mechanistic” way. In the
first instance, such deviations will be thoroughly analysed to infer any signals which they may send
about  the  prospects  for  price  developments.  If  this  analysis  points  to  a  threat  to  price  stability,
monetary  policy  will  react  in  a  manner  appropriate  to  counter  this  threat,  rather  than  attempt  to
eliminate the deviation of monetary growth from the reference value in the short term.
Although  monetary  data  contain  information  which  is  vital  for  monetary  policy  decision-making,
monetary  developments  alone  will  clearly  not  constitute  a  complete  summary  of  all  the  economic
information necessary to enable appropriate policy decisions to be taken. That is why it is important
to  monitor  simultaneously  a  wide  range  of  financial  and  other  economic  indicators,  including
economic  forecasts.  This  broadly  based  assessment  constitutes  the  second  pillar  of  our  monetary
policy strategy.
All  in  all,  the  combination  of  the  two  pillars  of  the  Eurosystem’s  strategy  ensures  that  monetary,
financial  and  economic  developments  are  closely  monitored  and  analysed.  On  the  basis  of  this
thorough  analysis,  the  interest  rate  will  be  set  in  a  way  that  best  serves  the  maintenance  of  price
stability.
Ensuring the Benefits (II): Stability-Oriented Non-Monetary Policies
Let me now turn to the importance of prudent and stability-oriented non-monetary policies in order to
reap the fruits of the single currency. I should like to emphasise that the true benefits of EMU derive
from the unique opportunity to shape a  macroeconomic  environment  conducive  to  stability,  growth
and employment, and to foster structural change which is needed to  maintain  medium  to  long-term
dynamism in the European economies. The full benefits of the single currency will arise only if there
is  appropriate  support  from  other  stability-oriented  policies,  especially  fiscal  and  labour  market
policies, and if structural reforms are carried out in these areas. Thus, price stability is a necessary,
but not a sufficient condition for grasping all the opportunities of EMU.
As regards fiscal policy, it is of the utmost importance that the governments of the EU Member States
pursue in implementing fiscal policies that aim at a budgetary position close to balance or in surplus.
This condition is stipulated by the Stability and Growth Pact, to ensure lasting compliance of fiscal
policies  with  the  requirement  of  budgetary  prudence.  From  the  perspective  of  a  central  banker,  a
prime  reason  for  the  establishment  of  the  Pact  is  that  a  lack  of  fiscal  discipline  would  negatively
impact  on  the  Eurosystem’s  policies  to  maintain  price  stability.  Let  me  elaborate  on  this.  The
institutional framework of EMU and the Eurosystem has been designed so as  to  prevent  any  direct
link  between  an  increase  in  public  sector  deficits  and  a  monetary  expansion,  and  thereby  inflation.
This is ensured by assigning to the Eurosystem the primary objective of price stability, banning direct
financing  of  government  deficits  by  central  banks  and  precluding  any  influence  by  governments  or
other institutions on monetary policy decisions. However, even in this setting, the conduct of fiscal
policies  has  a  clear  bearing  on  the  objective  of  price  stability.  In  particular,  doubts  about  the
soundness  of  fiscal  policy  can  influence  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  instruments  and
undermine the credibility of monetary policy.
For decades – and until very recently – fiscal policies have followed a trend of ever-growing public
sector and government debt levels. In EMU, without binding fiscal rules, countries might have even
3
BIS Review   75/1999
less incentive to pursue prudent fiscal policies. The main reason is that risk premia offsetting inflation
and exchange rate expectations disappear on a country-specific basis and may not be fully outweighed
by default risk premia. Hence, the Treaty establishing the European Community contains a number of
provisions  on  the  conduct  of  fiscal  policies,  which  have  been  further  clarified  by  the  Stability  and
Growth Pact. In this sense, the Stability and Growth Pact is an essential safeguard to ensure that price
and  fiscal  stability  remain  the  cornerstones  of  EMU.  Therefore,  we  attach  great  importance  to  the
implementation of this Pact.
It is a misunderstanding to believe that the Stability and Growth Pact is imposed on countries only as
a price they have to pay for entry into EMU. In fact the Pact just stipulates what had to be achieved in
any case, with or without EMU. The need for addressing budgetary imbalances is clear, in particular,
from  the  costs  associated  with  the  ageing  of  the  population,  which  will  soon  require  additional
budgetary room for manoeuvre. According to long-term projections and estimates, current trends in
birth rates and life expectancy, together with unfunded public pension and health care schemes, result
in very high implicit government liabilities in most euro area countries. In many cases these implicit
liabilities appear to be far in excess of official government debt levels.
Let me turn now to the contribution that structural reforms, particularly of euro area labour markets,
can  play  in  reducing  unemployment  and  in  supporting  the  stability  of  the  euro.  The  high  level  of
European unemployment is rightly a source of deep  concern.  Clearly,  the  approaches  that  are  most
likely  to  have  a  lasting  effect  are  those  that  address  the  root  cause  of  the  problem,  not  just  the
symptoms. The root causes of high unemployment in the European Union are structural rigidities in
labour markets as well as tax and public transfer policies. This view is supported by a wide body of
academic literature and was also a key finding of the OECD Jobs Study.
The underlying structural nature of the European unemployment problem can be seen most strikingly
if one compares developments in Europe with those in the United States over the last three decades. In
1970, the unemployment rate in the United States, at around 4%, was at least twice as large as that
prevailing in most European economies. Since 1970 there has been significant cyclical variation in the
unemployment  rate  in  the  United  States,  but  no  upward  trend.  At  4.2%  in  May  1999,  the
unemployment  rate  in  the  United  States  is  almost  the  same  as  it  was  in  1970.  In  contrast,  average
European unemployment appears to have risen with each passing economic cycle. By the early 1980s
the  unemployment  rates  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  had  broadly  converged.  Since  then  the
unemployment rate in the United States has been below the average for the European Union. Despite
recording some decline last year, the euro area unemployment rate was 10.4% in April 1999, more
than  double  the  corresponding  rate  in  the  United  States.  However,  some  European  countries,
particularly those with more flexible labour markets, have managed to avoid the trend of ever-rising
unemployment. For example, the Netherlands, Ireland, Portugal, Austria and Luxembourg at present
have unemployment rates well below the euro area average.
If one examines the duration of unemployment, it is immediately apparent that Europe’s problem is
principally  one  of  long-term  unemployment.  According  to  OECD  figures,  around  half  of  the
unemployed  of  the  European  Union  has  been  out  of  work  for  at  least  a  year,  while  in  the  United
States,  under  10%  of  the  unemployed  have  been  without  work  for  this  long.  This  suggests  that  in
Europe there is an urgent need to improve incentives aimed at getting the long-term unemployed back
to work.
There are many good examples of what can be done - and is currently being done in some euro area
countries  –  in  terms  of  structural  reforms.  First,  there  are  measures  to  ensure  that  low-productivity
workers are not forced out of the labour market. To this end, the burden of taxes and non-wage labour
costs  could  be  reduced  for  low-paid  workers.  In  addition,  minimum  wage  schemes  and  wage
agreements  reached  by  collective  bargaining  need  to  take  account  of  the  need  to  preserve  jobs  for
low-productivity workers by reducing labour costs. Second, there are “active labour market measures”
which  provide  programmes  of  education,  training  and  work  experience  targeted  at  the  long-term
BIS Review   75/1999
4
unemployed. Third, reforms to the tax and benefit systems could be implemented which ensure that
people are significantly better off in work than out of it.
I recognise that structural reforms are not always easy to implement. The benefits are often enjoyed in
the  medium  term,  while  short-term  costs  for  some  groups  may  mean  that  reforms  are  vigorously
opposed by interest groups. Although there is a common objective of reducing unemployment, there is
no common programme of reforms that will work in all countries. While it is possible to learn from
the experience of others, each Member State will wish to develop workable  policies  that  reflect  its
own particular circumstances. Although the path of structural reform is not always an easy one, it is
the only way in which we can achieve the lasting reductions in unemployment  that  are  so  urgently
required. Only structural reforms that aim at stable labour markets where supply and demand meet in
a flexible way will ensure that the benefits of EMU for economic growth are really achieved.
Conclusions
I  am  convinced  that  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  provides  a  great  opportunity  to  create  and
maintain  a  large  zone  of  price  stability  and  economic  prosperity  in  Europe,  including  a  substantial
reduction of unemployment. However, while price stability is a necessary condition for fully grasping
the  opportunities  of  EMU,  it  is  not  in  itself  sufficient.  Stability-oriented  polices  regarding  the
development  of  national  fiscal  positions  and  the  functioning  of  labour  markets  are  of  crucial
importance as well. As I have explained, the benefits of EMU will not arise in a quasi automatic way.
While monetary policy will deliver its contribution by following policies that maintain price stability,
other economic policies must be implemented to ensure that the opportunities of the single currency
will be fully utilised. Monetary policy alone - however well designed and implemented - cannot solve
Europe’s  economic  problems.  Policy-makers  in  all  areas  must  be  determined  to  take  the  new
environment of Stage Three of EMU and its consequences appropriately into account when forming
their policies. Only then will the euro be able to function as a truly accelerator of economic growth in
Europe.
5
BIS Review   75/1999
