Mr  McDonough  focuses  on  the  importance  of  risk  management  techniques  and  the
enhancement of market discipline
Remarks by the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Mr William J McDonough,
before the Bond Market Association in New York on 21/1/99.
Good  morning.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today  and  I  thank  the  Bond  Market  Association  for
giving  me  this  opportunity  to  share  some  of  my  thoughts  about  supporting  the  resiliency  and
liquidity of our capital markets.
As  you  recall,  last  August  the  Russian  government  announced  an  effective  devaluation  of  the
ruble and declared a debt moratorium, shocking investor confidence all over the world. Against
the backdrop of weakened economies and financial markets in many developing countries, global
equity and debt markets became increasingly volatile. In the U.S., a number of market observers
had anticipated a correction in stock prices. However, the simultaneous and abrupt widening of
credit spreads went far beyond the expectations of investors and financial intermediaries.
We  are  all  familiar  with  the  immediate  consequences  of  these  dramatic  events.  What  is  most
important, it seems to me, is to try to understand what public and private entities can potentially
do to prevent, mitigate, and manage financial uncertainty in the future.
In the face of the recent events in Brazil, the launch of the euro, the countdown to Y2K, and the
extraordinary market volatility of the last 18 months, all of us are obliged to think carefully about
our  responsibility  to  support  the  functioning  of  liquid  and  efficient  financial  markets.  One
conclusion seems clear: prudent risk management by a critical mass of firms will not only help to
ensure a safe and sound financial system, but also will reward individual institutions with long-
term profitability.
In  my  view,  market  discipline,  enhanced  by  appropriate  regulation  and  supervision,  offers  the
only realistic path for us to achieve our goals of a strong and stable marketplace. Today, I would
like to focus my comments on the importance of risk management techniques and how market
discipline can be enhanced to the benefit of public and private sector participants alike.
A series of market events over the past year and a half, beginning with  the  devaluation  of  the
Thai  baht  in  July  1997,  had  a  major  impact  on  many  lenders  and  investors,  revealing  in  the
process  several  shortcomings  in  risk  management  techniques.  One  lesson  financial  institutions
learned  from  these  events  was  the  need  to  continuously  reassess  both  counterparty  credit  risk
management techniques and assumptions about market liquidity. Broadly, financial institutions
learned that reliable estimates of the size and portfolio composition of major counterparties were
lacking  and  that  improved  credit  risk  management  techniques  were  needed  in  two  key  areas:
credit and market exposure measurement, and counterparty due diligence.
Let me be a bit more specific about some of  the  weaknesses  found  in  credit  risk  management
techniques. For example, some institutions routinely performed credit assessments using sparse,
often  unaudited  financial  information  from  valued  customers,  some  of  which  had  recorded
substantial  profits  in  previous  years.  Moreover,  institutions  that  received  intermittent  financial
statements and had infrequent contacts with these counterparties were left to make periodic credit
assessments using stale information in a rapidly changing market. This insufficient information
impeded  the  setting  of  prudent  credit  limits  and  terms,  including  collateral  requirements  and
contract covenants.
Many risk managers also failed to account fully for the risks involved in new financial products.
Non-traditional products, such as equity repos and credit derivatives, challenged existing credit
BIS Review   8/1999
– 2 –
analysis systems and methodologies. In addition, relatively few financial institutions attempted to
stress test credit exposures and even fewer anticipated a market environment as adverse as what
we experienced in the third quarter.
For these and most other institutions, the rush to mitigate and reduce their exposures, particularly
to  highly  leveraged  institutions  such  as  hedge  funds,  quickly  resulted  in  the  widespread
withdrawal  of  all  lending  activity  to  some  troubled  sectors,  regardless  of  an  individual
counterparty’s  financial  condition.  While  these  decisions  undoubtedly  were  intended  to  reduce
risk  and  avert  losses,  they  also  served  to  exacerbate  already  extraordinary  financial  market
fragility.
Given that the task of assessing and managing risk is not going to get any easier as we move into
the  21st  century,  let  me  now  turn  to  some  of  the  issues  that  I  believe  will  challenge  financial
institution managers in the coming year and beyond. One issue is the increasing integration of
banking, securities and insurance services; a second is the increasing pace at which capital moves
across  international  borders;  a  third,  the  Year  2000  problem;  and  a  fourth,  the  challenge  of
bringing improved risk management techniques to business operations as a whole, including the
trading  rooms.  This  is  particularly  important  for  participants  in  the  rapidly  changing  fixed-
income markets.
First,  the  integration  of  previously  separate  financial  services  means  that  institutions  must  be
prepared to manage risks across a far wider range of products, business units, and counterparties
than  they  have  been  accustomed  to  doing.  In  the  securities  lending  markets,  for  example,  an
increasing  number  of  firms  are  accepting  equities  as  collateral  for  financing  arrangements,  or
structuring securities lending transactions off-balance-sheet through total return swaps and other
derivative  structures.  Thus,  corporate  treasurers  must  develop  greater  expertise  in  equity  and
derivatives markets.
More  broadly,  the  potential  economies  of  scale  and  scope,  as  well  as  the  potential  benefits  of
reducing  risk  through  sectoral  and  geographic  diversification,  have  fueled  the  trend  towards
consolidation  in  varied  financial  industry  sectors.  As  this  trend  continues,  we  must  meet  the
challenge of merging the risk management practices of previously separate financial firms. These
readjustments are likely to be far more complex for firms consolidating across the spectrum of
financial service providers.
A second issue that has an important bearing on risk management techniques is the increasing
pace at which capital moves across international borders. The proliferation of electronic trading
and banking may not only improve the efficiency with which transactions are executed, but also
may accelerate the rate at which capital flows through global financial markets. The rewards of
increasingly  open  financial  markets  may  be  great,  but  the  punishment  for  poor  investment
decisions and lapses in public policies may be comparably severe. Thus, global financial markets
are likely to place a greater premium on robust risk management practices.
The  Year  2000  computer  problem  is  a  third  issue  that  needs  to  be  a  top  priority  for  risk
managers. One need only look at the price action in interest-rate futures markets to note the high
degree  of  uncertainty  surrounding  this  issue.  While  an  organization  may  have  prepared  its
internal systems, it still may be exposed to credit risk from less-prepared counterparties in both
the public and private sector. Thus, I fully support the contingency plans a number of institutions
are putting in place.
I think it is important to make clear that it is the boards of directors and senior management of
financial  institutions  –  not  the  regulators  –  who  must  be  responsible  for  ensuring  that  their
BIS Review   8/1999
– 3 –
companies provide seamless and high-quality service through the year end. The Federal Reserve
System  has  completed  the  internal  testing  of  almost  all  of  its  applications.  In  addition,  the
governments of various industrialized nations stepped up their internal Y2K remediation efforts
last summer. At the official level, international cooperation is intensifying through groups such
as the Joint Year 2000 Council, chaired by my Federal Reserve colleague, Governor Ferguson.
However, it is plausible that time will simply run out for some countries and some institutions.
While I certainly don’t expect a financial system breakdown, the potential for some disruption to
international trade and capital flows exists and that puts a premium on maximizing our efforts
now.
Finally, the practice of risk management must permeate all levels of your institutions, from the
executive  offices  to  the  trading  rooms.  The  senior  management  of  most  large  financial
institutions now have a variety of sophisticated measures and reports on their firms’ exposures,
making it possible for them to track credit and market risks on a daily basis. But if the insights
gleaned from these risk management tools are not incorporated into the operations of the front
line, where both trading and credit decisions are made, they will be of little help when they are
needed most.
This is especially true for this audience because of the constant and rapid evolution of the fixed-
income  markets.  Against  the  backdrop  of  the  budget  surplus  in  the  United  States,  there  are
expectations for a continued reduction in the supply of U.S. Treasury securities. Borrowers in a
variety of markets – including corporate, agency, and, to a lesser extent,  emerging  market  and
mortgage-backed securities – have taken this opportunity to meet investor demand with a greater
volume of new issues and larger offering sizes.
In  addition,  expectations  for  increased  investor  demand  for  euro-denominated  investments,
together  with  the  possibility  of  reduced  participation  by  speculative  and  arbitrage  trading
accounts, are likely to have an effect on spreads of fixed-income securities to Treasuries. Traders
in various fixed-income markets already have begun to note increased levels of spread volatility
and  expectations  for  higher  absolute  spreads  relative  to  historical  levels  in  response  to  these
market dynamics.
In  this  environment,  managing  market  risk  will  become  more  difficult  as  the  nature  of  fixed-
income  spread  products  changes.  As  we  recently  have  learned,  spread  relationships  that  had
endured for many years can break down suddenly, thereby increasing the already complex task of
hedging positions. The increase in the liquidity premium for on-the-run Treasury securities last
fall  resulted  in  increased  hedge-related  activity  in  both  the  interest-rate  swap  and  Treasury
futures markets. Traders have continued to explore the usefulness of non-Treasury fixed-income
securities as hedging vehicles. Risk managers must, therefore, be especially rigorous in analyzing
their firms’ positions and hedging strategies, particularly when historical experience may not be
as predictive a guide as it once seemed to be.
I  am  encouraged  by  some  recent  market  efforts  to  improve  risk  management  practices.  In
lending, the risk-return discipline has been greatly enhanced at some international banks. These
institutions have introduced measures to compare credit spreads with historical loss rates on well
defined categories of credit. They also have enhanced the methods they use to assign internal risk
ratings to individual credit exposures. The development of credit models by a number of banks
has  led  to  a  deeper  understanding  and  analysis  of  the  relationship  between  risk  and  return  in
credit  activities  at  the  portfolio  level.  In  addition,  some  banks  are  exploring  the  possibility  of
validating their internal ratings using information from the equities markets.
BIS Review   8/1999
– 4 –
With  respect  to  securities  financing,  several  institutions  have  discussed  and,  in  certain  cases,
already  have  implemented  instrument  specific  collateral  haircuts.  Many  institutions  also  have
acted  to  ensure  the  adequacy  of  their  current  collateral  holdings  and  developed  procedures  for
accessing additional collateral when necessary. Finally, I applaud recent efforts by the securities
lending community in the U.S. to begin publishing aggregated cash-collateral reinvestment data
that reflect reinvestment return, interest-rate sensitivity, and liquidity and credit tiering. These are
all positive developments.
However, along with many of my colleagues in the private sector, I believe there still is a need
for the market  to  develop  and  implement  additional  risk  management  techniques.  Let  me  give
you some examples of what I am thinking about.
First, financial institutions must have the discipline to consistently apply robust risk management
techniques through all phases of the business cycle. A concern for supervisors is the tendency of
credit markets to steadily bid down spreads in the optimistic phase of the cycle, often to the point
where returns no longer seem commensurate with risk. Then, as problems emerge, lenders in the
credit markets pull back, causing spreads to reverse sharply.
In  addition  to  the  most  recent  cycle,  examples  of  such  behavior  include  high-yield  bond  and
leveraged buyout lending in the 1980s, and Latin American investment and lending in the mid-
1980s. Too often, management edicts to reduce risk occur during the latter phase of the credit
cycle, after substantial losses have already occurred.
Second, I would argue that targeting returns commensurate with risk over an appropriately long
time horizon probably is the single most important defense against violent swings in the credit
cycle. Individual banks can protect themselves if they recognize when margins become too thin
to cover risk by restraining their credit activities at those rates. They can benefit by expanding
their credit activities when returns  have  risen  enough  to  cover  risk  once  again.  To  limit  credit
cycle  volatility,  appropriate  risk  and  return  analysis  must  be  practiced  widely  and  consistently
throughout the financial system.
Third,  more  attention  must  be  directed  at  stress  testing,  the  leading  technique  in  assessing  the
direct  and  indirect  effects  of  unusual  market  and  economic  events.  Stress  testing  is  a
fundamentally  qualitative  and  judgmental  process,  typically  used  in  conjunction  with  more
formal, statistical approaches to risk measurement, such as risk modeling. The primary goal of
stress  testing  is  to  identify  scenarios,  usually  low  probability,  high-stress  events,  that  could
jeopardize the health of a financial institution.
Stress  testing  of  market  risk  exposures  is  not  a  recent  development.  However,  the  analysis  of
distinct classes of fixed-income securities all too often occurs in isolation. What we learned from
the  crisis  last  fall  is  that  markets  that  previously  did  not  move  together  can  suddenly  do  so,
reversing  trends  that  had  been  under  way  for  several  years.  Moreover,  we  became  aware  that
liquidity  in  even  the  most  widely  traded  securities  can  be  interrupted,  primarily  when  many
traders  attempt  to  enter  or  exit  positions  at  the  same  time.  Thus,  simultaneous  stress  testing
across diverse fixed-income portfolios may help to identify high-risk market scenarios.
Finally,  I  am  convinced  that  there  is  a  need  for  improved  disclosure.  In  my  view,  the
transparency derived from more open disclosure of risk management practices, risk profiles, and
risk management performance cannot help but facilitate market discipline. Timely disclosure of
such  information  would  enable  market  participants  to  better  assess  how  much  risk  market
participants are taking, how well they manage it, and how much capital and liquidity they may
need to survive adverse markets.
BIS Review   8/1999
– 5 –
The desirability of improved disclosure is made clear in a report issued by the Basle Committee
on  Banking  Supervision  in  September  on  enhancing  bank  transparency.  This  report  set  out  a
framework for the disclosure of key risks and performance measures for banks. In my view, the
availability of more detailed data on international exposures would enhance the ability of both
supervisors and counterparties to assess the vulnerability of domestic banks and banking systems
to financial shocks from abroad. Better information about the credit risk profiles of the largest,
internationally  active  banks,  including  the  composition  of  their  portfolio  by  internal  ratings,
would also be useful.
A commitment to the use of advanced  analytical  tools,  stress  testing,  and  improved  disclosure
comes  under  the  widely  discussed  rubric  of  seeking  out  and  adopting  industry-wide  best
practices.  It  is,  perhaps,  most  important  to  note  that  the  development  of  best  practices  is  a
dynamic, not a static, process that can only be enhanced by consistent risk management efforts
over a long time horizon.
In  sum,  I  am  led  to  conclude  that  diligent  market  discipline  using  techniques  such  as  those  I
suggest here is in the long run the essential element needed to achieve both public and private
goals.  All  market  participants  bear  the  difficult  responsibility  of  determining  and  exacting
adequate  compensation  for  risk.  While  the  public  sector  has  a  responsibility  to  increase  the
effectiveness  of  its  overall  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework,  it  is  the  private  sector’s
continuous reassessment of risk and advancement of risk management techniques that ultimately
will  serve  to  preserve  a  safe  and  sound  financial  system  while  simultaneously  rewarding
individual institutions with long-term profitability.
In  the  public  sector,  we  can  help  markets  work  more  effectively  by  ensuring  that  regulated
financial institutions support the trading process by making sound credit decisions. We can also
work to improve bank supervision by our ongoing examinations of bank risk measurement and
management processes, a major focus of the examination process.
On  the  international  level,  we  are  working  hard  at  rethinking  the  Basle  Capital  Accord,  an
international  agreement  on  minimum  capital  standards,  developed  by  the  Basle  Committee  on
Banking Supervision, first put in place in 1988. The Committee, which I have chaired since June
1998, is attempting to make certain that banks hold an optimal level of capital based on their risk
appetite and their demonstrated ability to manage risk. Also, with the help of many of you in this
room,  central  bankers  and  security  regulators  from  around  the  world  are  working  together
through  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  and  the  G-10  central  bank
Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  to  develop  a  clearer  understanding  of  global
securities lending markets.
At the end of the day, however, it is market discipline that will make the crucial difference. In my
view,  market  discipline  involves  three  key  elements,  each  of  which  is  equally  important:  the
continuous  questioning  of  market  assumptions  regarding  adequate  compensation  for  risk,  the
relentless  pursuit  of  more  advanced  risk  management  techniques,  and  the  conviction  to  assess
business  decisions  over  an  appropriately  long  time  horizon.  My  experience  with  financial
markets and institutions has convinced me that diligent market discipline – rather than increased
regulation  –  is  the  essential  variable  in  ensuring  the  future  health  and  efficiency  of  the  global
capital markets. I believe that it is in the mutual interest of private and public sector participants
alike to support this effort.
 BIS Review   8/1999
