Mr Carse tackles the subject of “restructuring and workouts” in Hong Kong
Speech by Mr David Carse, a Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, to the
American  Chamber  of  Commerce  YPC/Financial  Services  Committees  Luncheon  Meeting,  held  in
Hong Kong on 29 April 1999.
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am very grateful to Amcham for giving me the opportunity to speak to you today on the subject of
restructuring and workouts. I am conscious of the fact that I am following in the footsteps of Chris
Barlow  of  PriceWaterhouseCoopers  who  spoke  to  a  different  gathering  of  Amcham  on  the  same
subject only a month ago. To return to the subject so soon may seem like overkill, but I think that it is
a reflection of the fact that there are few more important issues for Hong Kong and indeed the region
as  a  whole  at  present.  As  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Thailand  has  rightly  said:  “Debt
restructuring  is  the  key  to  an  early  economic  recovery  based  on  the  survival  of  viable  business
operations, while providing creditors the opportunity for maximum loan recovery.” In this speech, I
intend to offer some thoughts on how the process is going in Hong Kong and how perhaps it might be
improved, as well as explaining the role of the HKMA in workouts.
A workout can be defined simply as a private contractual arrangement to assist companies in financial
difficulties. The number of companies in this position has risen to unprecedented levels as a result of
the  recession  of  the  last  18  months.  A  drop  in  economic  activity  on  the  scale  we  have  witnessed
would be sufficient to put the finances of even well managed companies under some stress. But it was
made  worse  by  the  shift  from  relationship  banking  during  the  1990s  which  meant  that  too  much
indebtedness  was  incurred  from  too  many  banks.  One  of  the  features  of  the  recent  well-publicized
financial difficulties of some Mainland-related companies has been the sheer number of lending banks
involved - for example, over 80 in the case of Guangdong Enterprises. That is a big company, but it
has been not unusual to find even medium size companies in Hong Kong with dozens of bankers. In
this situation, troubled companies find it difficult to maintain the loyalty and support of their banks.
Those lenders that have no long-term relationship with the company in difficulties may try to protect
themselves by pulling their lines at the first sign of trouble.
This  is  particularly  so  at  a  time  when  some  foreign  banks  are  reducing  their  commitment  to  Hong
Kong because of problems back home or losses elsewhere in Asia. In 1998 domestic lending in Hong
Kong fell by 5.5% after rising by a compound annual rate of 13% in the previous five years. The 1998
fall  in  domestic  lending  amounted  to  HK$122  billion  in  absolute  terms,  of  which  over  60%  was
accounted for by the Japanese and Continental European banks combined. This withdrawal of credit
drastically  reduced  the  funding  available  to  Hong  Kong  corporates  and  increased  their  financial
difficulties. This in turn has fed through to increased bad debts for the banks.
Hopefully, the economy has now bottomed out and economic growth will resume this year as forecast
by the Government. The stock and property markets certainly seem to be indicating an improvement
in confidence and if sustained this will reverse the negative wealth effect of 1997/98 and encourage a
revival in consumer spending that is necessary to take Hong Kong out of recession. However, in the
initial  stages  of  the  recovery  the  financial  position  of  many  companies  will  remain  under  pressure,
particularly as the upturn in the economy will increase their need for working capital.
In  the  meantime,  an  increasing  number  of  companies  are  going  into  liquidation.  The  number  of
compulsory winding-up orders jumped to 763 in the financial year 1998/99. This is an all-time high
that  compares  with  the  average  of  480  in  the  previous  five  years.  It  is  certain  that  without  the
alternative  of  workouts  the  number  of  liquidations  would  have  been  much  higher.  The  role  of  the
workout  is  to  provide  an  alternative  to  insolvency  and  receivership  which  will  allow  commercially
viable companies to survive as going concerns, thus preserving employment and productive capacity.
1
BIS Review   45/1999
It is important to note that workouts should not be seen as a soft option for the debtor or an act of
charity on the part of the creditors. Banks will generally only be prepared to embark on a workout if
the  prospect  of  eventual  recovery  is  greater  than  it  would  be  in  a  liquidation.  Bearing  in  mind  the
generally low recovery rate that unsecured creditors obtain from liquidations, workouts will usually
be the better option. But the threat of liquidation must always be there as a last resort to provide an
incentive for the debtor to face up to its problems and to agree to cooperate with the banks.
Workouts have a long history in Hong Kong but the principles that govern them were only recently
codified in the form of the Guidelines on Corporate Difficulties issued by the Hong Kong Association
of Banks in April 1998. These are generally known as the “HKAB Guidelines”. The Guidelines are
non-statutory, but they are supported by both HKAB and the HKMA and all banks are expected to use
their best endeavours to comply. In my view, this represents one of the most important initiatives of
HKAB  in  recent  years,  taken  as  it  was  at  a  time  when  the  economy  was  in  the  early  stages  of
recession and when the need for workouts would inevitably rise. The Guidelines are in turn based on
the London Approach that was formulated by the Bank of England when the UK market was going
through similar strains at the beginning of the 1990s. The underlying principles of the Guidelines are
as follows:
   When  it  becomes  public  knowledge  that  a  debtor  company  may  be  experiencing  financial
problems and the borrower has approached its banks, banks’ initial attitude should be one of
support. They should not withdraw facilities or hastily put the company into receivership, or
issue writs demanding repayment.
Further decisions should only be based on information that is reliable and shared fully with all
the creditor banks (after obtaining the debtor’s permission).
The decision to offer the company financial assistance - or not - should be a collective one by
creditor banks.
It will be seen that the process begins when the debtor takes the initiative to approach the banks and to
call what is  known  as  an  “all  banks”  meeting.  This  is  the  first  psychological  barrier  to  be  crossed,
since companies are often reluctant to own up to their difficulties. The meeting with the banks offers
the company the opportunity to explain the nature of its problems and to ask the banks to agree to a
standstill on repayments of principal and possibly also of interest. The standstill provides an essential
breathing  space  during  which  accountants  appointed  by  the  company  can  report  on  its  financial
problems  and  prospects  for  survival,  and  the  company  can  try  to  reorganize  its  business  and
management.  Assuming  that  the  company  looks  as  if  it  is  salvageable,  the  banks  will  normally  be
prepared  to  continue  the  standstill  to  allow  proposals  to  be  presented  by  the  company’s  financial
advisers to restructure its debt, by for example extending its term, reducing the interest rate or even
the principal amount and swapping debt for equity. If the shareholders are able and willing, it may
also be possible for fresh capital or assets to be injected into the company to fill a hole in the balance
sheet and to improve its income earning capacity.
During the period of the standstill and while the restructuring plans are being formulated, it will be
the responsibility of the lead bank appointed at the first all banks meeting to enforce the standstill, to
negotiate with the company and its financial advisers and to share information with the other lending
banks. The lead bank will be assisted in this process by a steering committee, normally consisting of
about  4-6  banks.  It  is  important  to  note  that  while  the  steering  committee  may  recommend  a
restructuring  plan  to  the  bank  group  as  a  whole,  it  cannot  commit  them  to  it.  This  means  that  a
workout can only go ahead if there is unanimous agreement among all the banks involved. Obviously
this can delay the whole process - a point to which I will return later.
This is only a very short description of the mechanics of a workout and hardly does justice to what
can be an enormously complicated exercise involving banks with widely different levels of security as
BIS Review   45/1999
2
well as non-bank creditors whose interests also need to be taken into account. But I hope that I have
given  you  enough  to  illustrate  the  central  principles  of  the  process:  a  willingness  by  the  debtor  to
recognize that there is a problem and to approach the banks to seek assistance, matched by support
and forbearance by the banks and a willingness to  work  together  to  reach  a  solution  by  consensus.
That solution may not be the optimum one for every individual bank but the objective should be that
each bank is at least better off than it would be in a liquidation and is treated fairly vis-à-vis others.
In  the  course  of  preparing  this  speech  I  have  had  the  benefit  of  talking  to  a  number  of  market
participants about how effectively the workout process in Hong Kong and the HKAB Guidelines are
working. It is fair to say that there are varying shades of opinion on this point, but there is general
agreement that the Guidelines have made an important contribution in codifying what is expected of
banks  in  Hong  Kong.  It  is  equally  true  that  there  may  be  room  for  improvement  in  the  workout
process. Let me highlight some of the main areas of concern about the current arrangements:
     First,  the  sheer  number  and  diversity  of  banks  involved  in  some  workouts  can  make  it
extremely  difficult  to  achieve  the  necessary  consensus  on  restructuring  proposals.  This  is
compounded  by  the  point  I  have  already  mentioned  that  a  number  of  foreign  banks  are
reducing  their  commitment  to  Hong  Kong.  This  increases  the  possibility  that  some  banks,
particularly those with a small  exposure  may  be  tempted  to  take  a  hard  line  by  threatening
legal action or refusing to sign restructuring agreements in the hope of extracting better terms
for  themselves  or  being  bought  out  by  the  other  banks.  Head  offices  sometimes  encourage
such an attitude. This indicates a lack of understanding of the spirit of cooperation that should
underlie the HKAB Guidelines. Negotiation should not be by ultimatum.
Second, the growing number of workouts is stretching resources. This is holding up progress
in some workouts and is leading to concerns that more and more smaller companies could end
up in liquidation because the banks lack the resources to deal with their problems. Banks may
therefore need to strengthen their workout teams, though I admit that this is easier said than
done.
Third, there is a view that burden of handling workouts could be more evenly spread among
the  banks.  The  role  of  lead  bank  in  Hong  Kong  is  generally  conducted  by  only  two  of  the
larger  banks.  While  these  banks  have  the  skills  and  experience  to  do  the  job,  even  their
resources  are  not  inexhaustible.  There  may  be  a  case  to  spread  the  role  of  lead  bank  more
widely, or at least for banks to make a bigger contribution in steering committees. Steering
committee  members  should  strive  to  represent  the  interests  of  the  bank  group  as  a  whole
rather than their own interests. The representatives of  banks  on  steering  committees  should
also have the right level of knowledge and experience to understand the issues and to make a
real contribution to driving the process along. They should also of course turn up to meetings
in the first place.
Fourth,  banks  need  to  be  able  to  respond  more  quickly  to  restructuring  proposals  that  are
presented to them for approval. At present, it seems that the decision-making process can get
bogged down in internal bureaucracies within banks, particularly when proposals have to be
sent to head office for approval. While decisions are delayed, companies can bleed to death.
Finally, and I realize that this is a contentious point, banks should be realistic and pragmatic
about what they can expect to get out of restructuring. While they should obviously be trying
to extract the best possible deal from the company and its shareholders, this should not be at
the expense of jeopardizing the company’s future business viability.
All this results in a process which is often more protracted than it need be. The company suffers an
escalation  of  legal  and  advisory  costs  and  can  hardly  operate  normally  while  its  survival  is  being
negotiated.
3
BIS Review   45/1999
Let me turn to what the HKMA can do to assist in easing some of these difficulties. I should stress
first of all that the HKMA is a strong supporter of the workout concept and of the HKAB Guidelines.
As set out in the Guidelines, we have indicated that we are prepared to help to resolve differences of
views that would threaten a workout and to achieve an acceptable compromise. To this end, we are
ready to listen to any involved party, irrespective of size or national affiliation.
In taking on this role, we are following the example of the Bank of England in offering to act as an
“honest  broker”  or  impartial  mediator  to  help  to  bring  negotiations  to  a  satisfactory  conclusion.  I
should emphasize however that we do not get involved in the detailed negotiations on the workout.
That is the job of the lead bank, the steering committee and the company and its advisers. Similarly, it
should  be  the  task  of  these  parties  to  make  every  effort  to  resolve  disagreements  before  they  are
brought to the attention of the HKMA. In other words, the HKMA should only become involved as a
last resort. Some people have suggested that the HKMA should become involved earlier and play a
more visible role in workouts. There is a risk however that this would detract from the role of the lead
bank and the financial advisers and reduce the impact of the contribution that the HKMA can make -
familiarity can breed contempt.
The HKMA has been involved in about 10 cases since the HKAB Guidelines were issued. Typically
these will involve situations where a small minority of banks, sometimes only one, are refusing to sign
a  restructuring  agreement  or  are  threatening  to  take  action,  such  as  realize  security,  which  would
cause the workout to collapse. Our practice in such cases is to listen to both sides and to understand
their respective positions. Where a small number of banks are holding out against the majority view,
we  will  ask  them  to  explain  their  position  and  to  weigh  the  costs  of  their  behaviour  against  the
potential benefits. Where the position of the minority banks seems to lack sound justification, we will
usually try to persuade them to accept the majority view or at least make every effort to work towards
a  compromise.  At  the  very  least,  we  would  request  the  banks  to  reach  decisions  on  restructuring
proposals within a reasonable period of time and try to adhere to the deadlines which are set for these
decisions.
The  HKMA’s  role  in  the  workout  process  is,  I  believe,  consistent  with  the  Monetary  Authority’s
principal  function  under  the  Banking  Ordinance,  which  is  to  “promote  the  general  stability  and
effective working of the banking system”. The banking system can only work effectively if there is an
effective means of restructuring corporate debt. It is not however our practice to use our powers under
the  Banking  Ordinance  to  force  banks  to  take  decision  on  workouts  which  are  against  their
commercial judgment. Instead, we try to achieve our objectives through moral suasion.
Looking ahead, it is essential that the process of corporate debt restructuring in Hong Kong should
operate as effectively and smoothly as possible. This is particularly the case as we contemplate the
task  of  restructuring  the  Mainland-related  companies  such  as  Guangdong  Enterprises  which  are
currently in financial difficulties. The scale of these problems and the unfamiliarity with the workout
concept  on  the  Mainland  will  pose  particular  challenges.  The  lending  banks  will  need  to  exercise
patience  while  the  borrowers  and  their  shareholders  must  face  up  to  the  need  for  transparency  and
openness  with  their  creditors.  This  is  going  to  be  a  long  and  arduous  process  which  has  only  just
begun,  but  the  GITIC  liquidation  provides  a  clear  example  that  the  alternative  is  even  more
unpalatable.
I  will  close  with  some  thoughts  on  how  we  might  take  forward  the  task  of  improving  the  workout
process in Hong Kong to deal with the challenges ahead. One thing that will help is the proposal to
introduce provisional supervision in Hong Kong. The aim of the proposal is to facilitate a company in
working  out  a  voluntary  arrangement  with  creditors.  It  would  do  so  by  imposing  a  moratorium  on
legal proceedings against the company which could be extended for up to 6 months or even beyond
with the consent of the creditors. During this time a provisional supervisor would take control of the
company  and  formulate  a  restructuring  proposal  to  be  put  to  creditors  which  are  bound  by  the
moratorium. A statutory framework of this kind has its own drawbacks, but the general view seems to
BIS Review   45/1999
4
be that it would be particularly useful in giving a breathing space to smaller companies and freeing
the lead banks from the effort of having to keep creditor banks in line in such cases.
The non-statutory form of workout will however still be required even if the proposed legislation on
provisional supervision goes ahead. To make this work more effectively, it would appear to be timely
to review the operation of the HKAB Guidelines a year after they were launched. It may be desirable
to issue additional guidelines on various aspects of the workout process, for example on the role of
the steering committee, the operation of a standstill or the provision of new money. There may also be
scope for clarification of the role of the investigating accountants, in particular whether they should
be appointed by the borrower, as at present, or by the banks.
Even if the Guidelines themselves remain as they are, and there is some merit in the flexibility which
their current brevity provides, it may be appropriate to re-launch the Guidelines as part of an initiative
to  improve  the  familiarity  of  banks  with  the  Hong  Kong  approach  to  workouts.  This  would  stress
among other things the need for a spirit of give and take, and a recognition on the part of the banks
that “united we stand, divided we fall”. One way of doing this would be for HKAB and the HKMA to
host a joint seminar on the Guidelines to which the chief executives of all banks in Hong Kong would
be invited. However, it is clear from what I have said earlier that the head offices of foreign banks
may  also  have  to  be  brought  more  into  the  picture,  in  particular  to  try  to  ensure  that  decisions  on
workouts can be made in a more timely manner. One possibility would be for the HKMA to write to
the head offices of all  the  foreign  banks  in  Hong  Kong  to  describe  the  thinking  behind  the  HKAB
Guidelines  and  to  explain  that  we  expect  banks  in  Hong  Kong  to  comply  with  them  to  the  fullest
extent possible.
I intend to write to HKAB to seek its views on these initiatives. The preparation of this speech has
helped to concentrate my thoughts on the issues involved, and I would like to thank Amcham once
again for giving me the opportunity to speak to you today.
5
BIS Review   45/1999
