Mr Thiessen reports on the future of the Canadian financial sector, the economy and monetary
policy
Remarks by Mr Gordon Thiessen, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Mennonite  Savings  and
Credit Union Kitchener, Ontario 22 March 1999.
I  am  delighted  to  be  with  you  this  evening  to  celebrate  the  35th  annual  meeting  of  the  Mennonite
Savings  and  Credit  Union.  On  this  occasion,  I  propose  to  speak  about  the  Canadian  economy  and
monetary policy. But given this audience, I thought I might start with some remarks on the future of
the Canadian financial sector – a subject that has certainly grabbed its share of headlines over the past
year!
In December 1996 the Minister of Finance appointed a Task Force to assess the current situation and
the  future  prospects  of  the  Canadian  financial  services  sector,  and  to  make  recommendations  for
change. In early 1998, while this inquiry was still on, four of Canada’s six largest banks announced
plans  to  merge.  The  Task  Force  submitted  its  report  (the  MacKay  Report)  last  September.  In
December 1998 the Minister of Finance, having taken into account that report as well as assessments
of  the  proposed  mergers  by  the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions  and  the
Competition Bureau, decided not to allow the mergers. The Government is now examining the issues
facing the financial services sector and, in the course of 1999, it intends to present its proposals for
modifying the relevant regulatory framework.
The  Bank  of  Canada  is  one  of  several  agencies  in  Ottawa  that  provide  advice  to  the  Minister  of
Finance on the appropriate legislative framework for the financial industry. Because of this, I am not
in a position to comment on specific proposals for change. But what I can do is offer some general
comments  on  the  broad  issues  involved  in  ensuring  an  efficient  and  sound  financial  industry  in
Canada as we strive to adapt to ongoing worldwide changes in the provision of financial services.
Potential reforms of the Canadian financial system
Canadian financial institutions are among the best providers of financial services in the world. These
days, they are operating in an intensely competitive global marketplace, teeming with change spawned
by rapid advances in technology and innovative new financial products. These powerful forces have
transformed  the  way  financial  institutions  around  the  world  operate  and  the  way  they  market  and
deliver their services.
Globalization creates both opportunities and challenges. We must make sure that Canadian financial
institutions  can  compete  effectively  in  both  domestic  and  international  markets,  and  that  they  can
offer Canadians innovative, world-class financial services. The MacKay Task Force says this means
we  should  enhance  competition  in  the  financial  services  industry.  How?  Primarily  by  reducing
restrictions on existing providers of those services and by encouraging new players to enter the field.
Members of this audience know that one of the proposals for strengthening the position of existing
participants is to give credit unions the option to form cooperative banks. More generally, provided
prudential concerns can be resolved, the Task Force suggests that the regulation of credit unions be
re-examined  to  encourage  them  to  become  more  active,  dynamic  competitors  within  the  financial
industry.
We  would  all  agree  that  consumers  of  financial  services  are  best  served  when  there  is  effective
competition  among  financial  institutions.  A  strongly  competitive  financial  industry  will  provide
customers with the best deals for loans, deposits, insurance, and so on. Such an industry would also be
more innovative and should provide a wider range of services.
But the appropriate legislative framework for financial services cannot be one that simply maximizes
competition without regard for the safety and soundness of the industry.
1
BIS Review   34/1999
Why all this concern about safety? And why do we regulate this particular industry more closely than
virtually all others?
There  are  two  main  reasons.  First,  the  financial  industry  is  the  repository  for  the  wealth  of  a  large
number of small savers. For most of these savers, it is very difficult and costly to make a personal
judgment  of  the  risks  involved  in  doing  business  with  a  particular  bank,  credit  union,  or  insurance
company.
The second reason has to do with what we call systemic risk, or contagion. This refers to the risk that
problems  in  one  particular  financial  institution  will  be  transmitted  to  others.  Contagion  can  occur
when  depositor  nervousness  about  one  institution  spreads  to  others.  As  well,  since  the  payments
system links financial institutions closely together, the failure of one institution can potentially lead to
serious losses for others.
Governments  have  addressed  safety  concerns  by  imposing  capital  requirements  on  financial
institutions, restricting their ability to engage in risky activities, supervising their adherence to risk-
reducing practices, and setting up deposit insurance. To limit contagion, central banks have the power
to make liquidity loans to  financial  institutions  in  the  payments  system.  And  most  central  banks  in
industrial  countries  have  been  involved  in  initiatives  to  minimize  the  potential  for  systemic  risk  in
their payments systems.1
When depositors feel ‘protected’, however, they are less inclined to monitor the riskiness of financial
institutions.  Thus,  governments  feel  a  greater  need  to  regulate  to  reduce  the  risks  of  institutional
failure. This tends to have side effects which could potentially restrict competition.
What  then  is  the  scope  of  increasing  competition,  by  encouraging  new  players  and  by  reducing
restrictions  on  existing  ones,  without  undermining  the  safety  and  stability  of  the  system?  Clearly,
there can be a tension between the goals of fostering greater competition within the financial sector
and of preserving safety and stability. To find a balance between the twin objectives of efficiency and
safety  has  always  been  a  challenge  for  governments  when  they  examine  proposals  to  change  the
regulatory framework for the financial system.
I do not mean to make this sound like an impossible task. There are bound to be some changes that
can help promote competition without adding substantial risk to the system. More generally, though, I
believe that we need to examine ways that could ease the tension between efficiency and safety. For
example,  if  we  are  to  encourage  the  entry  of  new  financial  institutions  as  a  means  of  promoting
greater  competition,  perhaps  we  should  also  consider  a  more  formal,  explicit  policy  of  ‘early  exit’
when an institution runs into trouble.
One  possible  approach  would  be  that  when  institutions  reach  some  minimum  level  of  capital,  they
would be required to recapitalize themselves or find a merger partner within a short period of time.
Otherwise, and well before they became insolvent, they would be sold or wound up by the regulatory
authorities. Such an approach might help reduce risks to depositors, to the deposit insurance system,
and to other creditors of financial institutions. This is not a new idea. The United States has already
moved in that direction and so have we in Canada, to a certain extent. But there may be room to move
further down this path and, in so  doing,  to  provide  managers  of  financial  institutions  with  stronger
incentives to avoid getting into financial difficulties.
To summarize, I agree with the MacKay Task Force that encouraging new participants and reducing
restrictions  on  existing  players  in  the  financial  industry  would  benefit  customers  through  improved
service and lower costs. But this may have the potential to increase risks for the financial system. So
we need to look at ways to avoid having these risks add to the costs of deposit insurance and to the
1
In  Canada,  under  the  Payment  Clearing  and  Settlement  Act,  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  been  given  formal
oversight responsibility for ensuring that appropriate arrangements are in place to manage and control systemic
risk in major clearing and settlement systems.
BIS Review   34/1999
2
costs for other users of financial services. One approach, as I mentioned, is to move further towards
‘early exit’ arrangements for troubled financial institutions. Such arrangements might not be easy to
implement.  But  if  we  could  move  in  this  direction,  there  might  be  more  scope  to  benefit  from
enhanced  competition  without  exposing  users  of  financial  services  to  unacceptable  risks  or
compromising the stability of the system.
I would now like to turn to our economic situation and monetary policy.
The state of our economy
The past year has been a trying one, both for the world economy and for Canada. Still, considering the
seriousness  of  the  global  difficulties  we  have  been  facing,  the  Canadian  economy  has  coped  much
better than expected, and certainly better than in the past. This is because it is in sounder shape now
than  it  has  been  for  many  years.  Canadian  businesses  have  been  investing  in  new  technology  to
increase productivity and efficiency. Governments are no longer draining national savings to finance
huge  budget  deficits.  And  with  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  commitment  to  inflation  control  targets,
inflation is low and stable.
But what about our economic prospects as we look ahead?
Let me start with the financial climate. Global financial markets have been calmer recently compared
with the turbulence last autumn after Russia declared a debt moratorium. Cuts in official interest rates
around the world since then, and the success of some emerging market economies in addressing their
problems, have clearly helped. International investors’ fears have abated, and markets seem to have
regained a sense of their ability to assess risks and discriminate among borrowers.
When it comes to the world economic environment, there is still uncertainty out there. But there are
also positive elements in the picture.
One  area  of  uncertainty  is  the  financial  problems  in  Brazil  and  the  extent  of  related  economic
weakness in Latin America more generally. If the Brazilians follow through on their fiscal adjustment
program  and  limit  the  inflationary  fallout  from  the  depreciation  of  their  currency,  financial  market
pressures should ease, and growth in Brazil should resume next year.
But the foremost uncertainty in the outlook continues to centre on Japan, where the economy remains
in a slump. Nevertheless, if present efforts at bank reform continue, and if stimulative macroeconomic
initiatives are pursued systematically, the Japanese economy should begin a gradual recovery, perhaps
by late 1999.
The economic expansion in the other industrial countries, which  together  account  for  about  half  of
world output, should remain relatively well sustained. In Europe, economic activity has softened, but
interest  rate  cuts  since  the  autumn  and  the  easing  of  global  financial  strains  should  help  support
confidence and domestic spending in coming months.
The  most  positive  element,  certainly  from  a  Canadian  perspective,  has  been  the  remarkable
performance of the United States. That economy ended 1998 on a much stronger note than had been
expected,  growing  at  an  annual  rate  of  6%  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1998.  Thus,  its  underlying
momentum going into 1999 is much greater than most had supposed. This is confirmed by some of the
advance data for early 1999. So even if growth slows, as expected, the US economy should continue
to operate at high levels.
There are also signs that the sharp economic downturns in some of the Asian countries most affected
by the financial crisis are bottoming out. The economy of South Korea has started to expand, and in
Thailand economic activity seems to have stabilized. However, a broad-based recovery in the region
has yet to take hold and will depend, to an important degree, on economic conditions in Japan.
3
BIS Review   34/1999
Here  in  Canada,  the  impact  of  the  global  turbulence  since  the  summer  of  1997  was  felt  mainly
through the lower demand for the key primary commodities we produce and the 20% decline in their
prices between mid-1997 and end-1998. But  consumer  and  business  confidence  were  also  affected,
and that dampened domestic spending. Consequently, the Canadian economy expanded by just under
3% through 1998 (fourth quarter over fourth quarter) compared with over 4% in 1997.
However, after some weakness through last summer and early autumn, our economy showed renewed
strength  recently.  Helped  by  buoyant  US  demand,  easing  global  financial  strains,  and  the  rebound
from major labour disruptions, economic activity grew at an annual rate of 4.6% in the final quarter of
1998.  And  this  was  accompanied  by  robust,  broad-based  employment  gains  through  the  closing
months of 1998 and into early 1999.
With  world  economic  and  financial  conditions  still  fragile  and  the  timing  of  a  firm  recovery  in
primary commodity prices uncertain, projections for 1999 remain tentative. But with recent healthy
employment growth, domestic spending should continue to contribute to an expanding economy. And
sustained  US  demand,  coupled  with  our  improved  competitiveness,  should  continue  to  bolster  our
exports. Altogether, we are looking at a somewhat more positive scenario than seemed possible last
autumn.
The response of monetary policy to international turbulence
Let me now say a few words about how the Bank responded to the exceptional global events of the
past couple of years.
As commodity prices tumbled, we became less well-off as a nation. Distressing as that is, it is a reality
Canada had to face. And our currency moved downwards, reflecting – not causing – the drop in our
economic prosperity and the need to adjust.
When  shocks  like  this  hit  us  from  time  to  time,  movements  in  the  external  value  of  the  Canadian
dollar help ‘buffer’ the shock and smooth the process of adjustment. If the currency is not allowed to
move, the adjustment will drag out and cost more in terms of losses in output and employment.
However,  the  relatively  orderly  depreciation  of  our  currency  through  to  July  1998  accelerated
following  the  Russian  crisis  last  August.  And  Canadian  longer-term  interest  rates  rose  sharply  at  a
time  when  comparable  US  rates  were  falling.  To  us  at  the  Bank,  this  signalled  a  potential  loss  of
confidence in Canadian dollar assets, which we moved to head off by raising the Bank Rate by 100
basis points. In so doing, we sought to limit the harmful effects of financial volatility on confidence
by temporarily placing particular emphasis on calming markets.
The situation has improved since then. Interest rates have been cut in all major industrial countries,
and a measure of stability has returned to world financial markets. With this, concerns in Canadian
markets have diminished, allowing us to unwind three-quarters of last August’s increase in the Bank
Rate. Calmer financial markets should now make it possible for the Bank to refocus attention on its
medium-term policy objective of keeping the underlying trend of inflation inside the target range of
1% to 3%.
In conclusion, let me say that, given the financial market volatility and the global economic slowdown
of the past couple of years, our economy has coped relatively well. And we begin 1999 on a positive
note. This is testament to Canada’s improved basic economic foundation these days. And it gives me
reason to remain positive about our future despite lingering international uncertainties.
BIS Review   34/1999
4
