Mr  Duisenberg  outlines  the  benefits  of  European  Monetary  Union,  growth  and  stability  for
Europe
Speech by the President of the European Central Bank, Dr W F Duisenberg, at the Global Economy
conference organised by the Economic Strategy Institute in Washington, D C on 27 April 1999.
 Introduction
 Following  almost  a  decade  of  meticulous  preparation  and  economic  convergence,  1  January  1999
saw the start of Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), with the introduction of the
euro  and  a  single  monetary  policy  for  the  euro  area.  This  area  constitutes  an  economic  region  that
roughly  equals  the  United  States  in  terms  of  both  its  economic  strength  and  its  degree  of
macroeconomic openness. The euro area has a population of 292 million, which is slightly larger than
that  of  the  United  States,  at  270  million,  and  a  somewhat  smaller  GDP  of  EUR  5,800  billion
compared with the EUR 7,600 billion of the United States. As will be clear from these figures, the
euro area economy is of a formidable magnitude, and indeed is one of the largest economies in the
world, with a purchasing power matched only by that of the United States. It is my conviction that
EMU has the potential to stimulate further the growth of the euro area economy and to increase the
prosperity of its participants. At the same time, a successful EMU is also in the interest of the United
States  and  the  world  economy  in  general,  creating  opportunities  for  trade,  direct  and  portfolio
investment.
 Before I address the benefits of EMU and the stability-oriented policies that have to be implemented
to  ensure  that  these  benefits  are  achieved,  let  me  briefly  mention  the  main  institutional  bodies
involved  in  the  formulation  and  implementation  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  Monetary  policy  is
determined  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  which  consists  of  the
eleven governors of the national central banks (NCBs) of the participating Member States and the six
members of the Executive Board of the ECB. The implementation of the single monetary policy is the
responsibility  of  the  Eurosystem,  which  is  comprised  of  the  ECB  and  the  eleven  NCBs  of  the
participating Member States. The Executive Board of the ECB is a separate decision-making body. Its
role  is  to  ensure  that  the  tasks  conferred  upon  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB)  are
implemented, either through its own activities or through the NCBs.
 Economic growth - the benefits of EMU
 I should now like to address the benefits of EMU and why I believe that the introduction of the euro
and  the  single  monetary  policy  can  result  in  higher  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  and  thereby
contribute positively to the development of the world economy. Of course, the degree to which these
benefits are achieved depends not only on the monetary policy of the Eurosystem but even more so on
accompanying stability-oriented fiscal policies and appropriate labour market policies.
 The most important contribution that the Eurosystem’s monetary policy can make to maximising the
benefits of EMU is to fulfil its primary objective of maintaining price stability, as laid down in the so-
called Maastricht Treaty; the Treaty on European Union. As has long been argued by central bankers
and  is  increasingly  accepted  by  academic  economists,  inflation  and  deflation  are  economically  and
socially costly. EMU is a tool with which to consolidate the progress made towards price stability in
recent  years  and  to  firmly  anchor  expectations  in  line  with  price  stability,  thereby  establishing  the
framework  necessary  to  fully  exploit  the  opportunities  of  Monetary  Union.  The  Eurosystem  enjoys
full  independence  in  determining  the  appropriate  level  of  interest  rates  so  as  to  satisfy  its  primary
objective of price stability. Moreover, the members of the Governing Council of the ECB have long
terms of office and may only be dismissed on grounds of serious misconduct or inability to perform
their duties. These provisions imply that the concept of monetary stability benefits from explicit legal
protection.
1
BIS Review   50/1999
 A  further  important  benefit  of  EMU  is  that  it  has  removed  the  risk  of  serious  real  exchange  rate
misalignments  within  the  euro  area.  This  contributes  to  economic  growth  and  helps  to  avoid  any
misallocation of resources. In fact, it enables the European Single Market to function smoothly and
thereby makes it possible to reap all the rewards, to the benefit of producers and consumers.
 Furthermore, the start of Stage Three of EMU has also eliminated short-term intra-EU exchange rate
volatility and exchange rate risks, and has thereby encouraged trade and investment.
 In addition, the benefits of economic integration afforded by the development of the Single Market
are enhanced by the elimination of the transaction costs of exchanging different currencies, a direct
result of the introduction of the  euro.  While  they  are  difficult  to  measure,  they  effectively  form  an
additional  layer  of  protection  for  domestic  producers.  The  single  currency  makes  prices  across  the
euro area directly comparable, which should increase competition and hence efficiency and economic
growth in the area.
 A  number  of  further  positive  effects  on  economic  growth  flow  from  the  elimination  of  separate
currencies in the euro area countries. One benefit is the potential for the reduction of risk premia built
into real interest rates, which, in turn, will stimulate productive investment. Another benefit is that by
facilitating the development of deep and integrated capital markets, the single currency should further
reduce long-term rates via the elimination of an illiquidity premium. In addition, a wider and deeper
capital market in the euro area will improve intermediation between savers and investors.
 Ensuring the benefits: stability-oriented policies
 It  should  be  emphasised,  however,  that  the  true  benefits  of  EMU  derive  from  the  fact  that  it  is  a
unique  opportunity  to  shape  a  macroeconomic  environment  conducive  to  stability,  growth  and
employment, and to foster structural change which is needed to maintain or restore medium to long-
term  dynamism  in  the  European  economies.  It  will  be  clear  that  this  is  not  an  easy  process  and
monetary policy alone cannot achieve this. The full benefits of the single currency will come only if
there is appropriate support from other stability-oriented policies, especially fiscal and labour market
policies, and if structural reforms are carried out in these areas. Thus, price stability is a necessary,
but not a sufficient condition for grasping all the opportunities of EMU.
 In this regard, it is of the utmost importance that the governments of the EU Member States continue
to  implement  sound  and  stability-oriented  fiscal  policies,  by  which  I  mean  policies  aiming  at  the
medium-term objective of a budgetary position close to balance or in surplus. As you will know, this
condition  is  stipulated  by  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  ensures  the  lasting  compliance  of
fiscal policies with the requirement of budgetary prudence. From the perspective of a central banker, a
prime reason for the establishment of the Pact was that a lack of fiscal discipline would negatively
affect the ability of the Eurosystem to achieve its primary objective to maintain price stability. In this
sense, the Stability and Growth Pact is one of the most important safeguards that will ensure that price
and fiscal stability remains the cornerstone of EMU.
 Therefore,  it  should  be  clear  that  I  regard  it  as  crucial  for  governments  to  make  further  structural
improvements to their fiscal positions, as this would allow them to regain sufficient flexibility in their
budgets and, most importantly, could effectively contribute to supporting stability and growth in the
euro  area.  In  this  regard,  I  should  like  to  note  that  only  moderate  fiscal  consolidation  is  currently
envisaged  for  the  medium  term.  A  number  of  national  stability  programmes  only  aim  to  attain  the
necessary flexibility at a relatively late date. It is important that we see a commitment from policy-
makers either to ensuring the swift achievement of this aim or to going beyond the aims envisaged in
these programmes once economic growth has picked up.
BIS Review   50/1999
2
 Let me turn now to the contribution that stability-oriented structural reforms, particularly of euro area
labour markets, can play in reducing unemployment and in supporting the stability of the euro. The
high  level  of  European  unemployment  is  quite  rightly  a  source  of  deep  concern  and  should  be
addressed at a fundamental level. Clearly, the approaches that are most likely to have a lasting effect
are those that address the root causes of the problem, not just the symptoms. The root causes of high
unemployment in the European Union are structural rigidities in the labour market as well as tax and
public transfer policies. This view is supported by a wide body of academic literature and was also a
key  finding  of  the  OECD  Jobs  Study.  It  is  obvious  that  structural  problems  require  structural
solutions.  Implementing  an  inflationary  monetary  policy  would  not  result  in  lasting  reductions  in
unemployment, but would actually serve to exacerbate the problem over the medium term.
 I recognise that structural reforms are not always easy to implement. The benefits are often enjoyed
in the medium term, while short-term costs for some groups may mean that reforms are  vigorously
opposed by interest groups. Although there is a common objective of reducing unemployment, there is
no common programme of reforms that will work in all countries. While it is possible to learn from
the experience of others, each Member State will wish to develop workable  policies  that  reflect  its
own particular circumstances. Although the path of structural reform is not always an easy one, it is
the only way in which we can achieve the lasting reductions in unemployment  that  are  so  urgently
needed.  Only  structural  reforms  that  aim  to  create  stable  labour  markets  in  which  there  is  flexible
interaction between supply and demand will ensure that the benefits of EMU in terms of economic
growth are achieved to the maximum extent possible.
Conclusions
 To conclude, Economic and Monetary Union provides a great opportunity to create and maintain a
large zone of price stability and economic prosperity in Europe. However, while price stability is a
necessary  condition  for  fully  grasping  the  opportunities  of  EMU,  it  is  not,  in  itself,  sufficient.
Stability-oriented polices regarding the development of national fiscal positions and the functioning
of labour markets are also of crucial importance. As I have explained, the benefits of EMU will not
come  in  a  quasi-automatic  way.  While  monetary  policy  will  make  its  contribution  by  following
policies that maintain price stability, other economic policies must be implemented to ensure that the
opportunities of the single currency are achieved. Monetary policy alone - however well designed and
implemented  -  cannot  solve  Europe’  s  economic  problems.  Policy-makers  in  all  areas  must  be
determined  to  take  proper  account  of  the  new  environment  of  Stage  Three  of  EMU  and  its
consequences when forming their policies.
3
BIS Review   50/1999
