Mr Bäckström discusses the monetary policy situation in Sweden
Speech by the Governor of the Bank of Sweden, Mr Urban Bäckström,  at  Stockholm  Chamber  of
Commerce and Veckans Affärer on 2/2/99.
Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  attend  this  conference  and  talk  about  “The  krona  and  the  interest
rate”. I shall be speaking mainly about the current monetary policy situation and the factors that may
be crucial for the policy’s future formulation. However, now that the Riksbank is directed by the six
members  of  the  new  Executive  Board,  which  also  makes  the  monetary  policy  decisions,  the
decision-making process has  changed.  So  I  shall  begin  by  briefly  describing  how  monetary  policy
will be decided and presented in this new environment.
The new process for monetary policy decisions
At 1pm on Thursday 11 February, the new Executive Board of the Riksbank will be convening for
its  first  meeting  specifically  devoted  to  monetary  policy.  Compared  with  the  Board’s  ordinary
sessions,  the  discussion  at  what  are  called  monetary  policy  meetings  is  to  cover  monetary  policy
more comprehensively  and  conclude  with  a  decision  on  the  policy’s  future  stance.  The  discussion
will be minuted and published in this form on 6April, around eight weeks after the event. Moreover,
a brief account of the grounds for the decision will be presented in a communiqué on the day after
the meeting, in this case at 9.30am on Friday 12 February.
These monetary policy meetings will be held 8–10 times a year and the minutes will be published
with a time lag of 6–8 weeks. Monetary policy matters may, of course, appear on the agenda in the
intervals  between  these  meetings,  particularly  as  repo  rate  decisions  are  normally  made  once  a
fortnight and announced for the coming two weeks. In the normal course of events, however, it is
envisaged that repo rate decisions will be based on the discussions at monetary policy meetings. So it
is  only  under  special  circumstances  that  monetary  policy  will  need  to  be  discussed  more
comprehensively in between the meetings specifically reserved for this.
For the Riksbank, this is a new procedure. The time when decisions will be announced is also new.
In future, monetary policy decisions will be published on Fridays at 9.30am,  though  there  may  be
exceptions to this rule in certain cases, such as the publication of the Inflation Report. Judging from
their  newsletters,  it  seems  to  me  that  so  far  most  market  players  have  understood  our  new
arrangements. That is a good thing and also important.
There may be situations in which members of the Executive Board reach divergent conclusions. That
will necessitate a more formal voting procedure. The outcome will be recorded in the minutes. No
mention of a vote indicates that the Board agreed unanimously; otherwise, members with dissenting
opinions will be named.
Disagreement on the Executive Board is clearly not something that is desirable as such. I am, indeed,
convinced that each of the six members will aim for as collegiate an attitude as possible. To me, this
is already evident from the work to date. But it is also the case that, in making monetary policy, a
variety  of  factors  have  to  be  weighted  into  an  overall  assessment  of  inflation’s  future  path.  In
weighing  up  the  odds,  different  people  may  reach  different  conclusions,  which  need  not  be  an
entirely bad thing. It might even have the advantage of demonstrating that decisions on the monetary
policy stance tend to involve assessments that are complex and tricky.
From  interviews  and  comments  in  the  press,  it  is  already  evident  that  members  of  the  Executive
Board  voice  somewhat  different  shades  of  opinion  in  their  inflation  assessments.  This,  too,  is
something  that  all  those  who  follow  monetary  policy  will  have  to  get  used  to.  It  is,  moreover,  an
assurance  that  our  discussions  in  the  Riksbank  will  be  properly  informed  about  aspects  of  the
BIS Review   14/1999
– 2 –
monetary policy stance. It is also consistent with the transparency that the Riksbank is striving for
and which is a basic condition for the new legislation.
The monetary policy situation
Sweden’s economy in perspective
In the years since the crisis  in  the  early  1990s,  economic  development  in  Sweden  has  been  rather
good.  Growth  has  been  relatively  high,  yet  inflation  has  been  kept  at  a  low  level.  Since  summer
1993, annual GDP growth has averaged almost 3%. In other words, Sweden is now in the sixth year
of  favourable  economic  growth.  The  3%  average  is  much  the  same  as  during  the  upswing  in  the
1980s but clearly above the annual average of 2% achieved in the 20 years from 1970 to  1990.  It
may be more than we can expect to sustain in the long run.
An important reason why it has still been possible to keep inflation down in recent years has been
the existence of unutilised capacity. This in turn has to do with the deep recession from which the
recovery  started  and  the  comparatively  rapid  expansion  of  capacity  since  then.  Medium-term
inflation expectations have gradually stabilised around the 2% inflation target.
At times, however, including the recent period, transitory price movements have brought the annual
average change in the CPI just outside the lower limit of the target’s tolerance interval. There have
even been periods when trend inflation  has  been  lower  than  expected.  For  the  decision-making  of
monetary policy, as the Riksbank has pointed out earlier, transitory effects on inflation are normally
a secondary consideration. We are working to clarify how the target formulation is applied in order
to dispel any uncertainty about how we should appraise direct effects on consumer prices that come
from movements in, for example, house mortgage interest costs and indirect taxes.
Altered conditions for international developments
Last autumn, in the September Inflation Report, the Riksbank pointed to a growing risk of a weaker
international  trend  on  account  of  the  crisis  in  Asia.  However,  the  outlook  was  complicated  by  a
marked weakening of the krona, which could have a contrary effect on inflation.
The exchange rate influences inflation via the level of resource utilisation and via the development
of  import  prices;  in  the  past  two  years  the  impact  has  come  mainly  from  the  first  of  these  two
mechanisms. As the effects on import prices should be regarded as transitory, they are of secondary
importance  for  the  monetary  stance  provided  they  do  not  alter  expectations  of  inflation  in  the
medium term. In other words, exchange rate movements are relevant only if they affect inflation’s
future trend though, for a small, open economy, exchange rate stability is, indeed, desirable.
In  September  and  part  of  October  last  year,  immediately  before  and  after  the  publication  of  the
Report,  the  monetary  policy  environment  was  turbulent  and  difficult  to  assess.  Besides  the
international  unrest,  it  was  uncertain  how  fiscal  policy  would  be  constructed  after  the  general
election. All this prompted the Riksbank to keep the repo rate unchanged. The possibility of a repo
rate cut would be considered when inflation prospects had become clearer.
During  the  autumn  the  financial  unrest  grew.  The  suspension  of  debt  payments  by  the  Russian
government  in  mid-August,  followed  by  the  problems  in  the  US  hedge  fund  Long-Term  Capital
Management that came to light at the end of September, contributed to the markedly more nervous
mood. Stock markets fell around the world and the financial crisis spread to other emerging markets
that had previously not been hit. The lower share prices and the contagious spread of the crisis to
other  markets  were  liable  to  have  consequences  via  decreased  demand  for  exports  from  the
industrialised countries, as well as via more cautious behaviour among their consumers and firms.
BIS Review   14/1999
– 3 –
The problems in LTCM also aroused fears of a considerably more serious scenario where banks in
the industrialised countries became so cautious about granting credit that this would paralyse global
economic activity.
As the signs of an international slowdown became increasingly clear and were accentuated  by  the
growing  turbulence  in  financial  markets,  the  Riksbank  revised  its  assessment  of  the  Swedish
economy and the path of inflation. This warranted some easing of the monetary stance. In November
the repo rate was therefore lowered in two steps, from 4.10 to 3.60%.
In  the  December  Inflation  Report  it  was  still  considered  that  in  one  to  two  years’  time,  both  the
change in the CPI and the underlying rate of inflation would be below the Riksbank’s 2% target for
price stability. On 16 December the repo rate was therefore lowered another 0.2 percentage points, to
3.40%. After this adjustment, responsibility for the future formulation of monetary policy passed to
the Riksbank’s new Executive Board, which would be taking over from the turn of the year.
Strong finish to 1998
Most signs suggest that activity in the Swedish economy was fairly strong in the latter part of 1998.
GDP figures have still to be published but the available statistics point to a good fourth quarter. The
strong  trend  is  mainly  due  to  the  expansion  of  domestic  sectors,  not  least  in  retailing.  The
development is not dramatic but Statistics Sweden does report a 12-month increase in retail sales of
3.3% in November. According to the Wholesale & Retail Research Institute, this was followed by a
good  Christmas  season.  The  contribution  to  growth  from  investment  also  seems  to  have  been
favourable. As a result of all this, employment is rising more markedly than in recent years and this
in turn led to a drop in unemployment during 1998.
Current  inflationary  pressure  is  still  low.  The  rate  of  CPI  inflation  remains  negative  and  the
December  out-turn  was  lower  than  expected:  the  level  of  consumer  prices  dropped  0.6%  from
December 1997, as against the fall of 0.3% that had been foreseen in the Riksbank’s latest Inflation
Report. However, this is partly a consequence of the Riksbank’s repo rate cuts, which have brought
house mortgage rates down. So while we lowered the repo rate in the light of favourable inflation
prospects, the cuts have had the initial effect of depressing CPI inflation even more. This has been
accompanied  by  a  further  decline  in  commodity  prices.  But  underlying  domestic  inflation
(UNDINHX) in December was unchanged from the preceding month at 1.6%, though this was still
somewhat below our forecast.
US equity prices a possible risk
The  global  financial  unrest  subsided  towards  the  end  of  1998.  Interest  rate  differentials  between
different  market  segments  narrowed  again  and  stock  markets  stopped  falling.  This  made  it  less
probable that the global economy would remain weak for a number of years.
Recent  developments  in  Brazil  have  contributed  to  some  recurrence  of  unrest  in  international
financial markets. Once again there has been an international flight to securer assets but it has been
more limited than last autumn. There has, however, been a substantial depreciation of the Brazilian
currency.
It is still difficult to tell just how crisis in Brazil may affect the world economy. The future course in
Brazil, with the attendant risks of knock-on effects in Latin American and other parts of the globe,
will depend on what the national authorities do to construct a sound foundation for the economy. It
has been shown, not least by our own economic experience in the early 1990s, that changing from a
fixed to a floating exchange rate does not by itself provide a lasting solution to economic problems.
What is needed is rather a comprehensive programme for enhancing confidence, with budget policy
as not the least important component. A clear target and a consistent approach in monetary policy
BIS Review   14/1999
– 4 –
can  also  contribute  to  economic  policy’s  credibility.  But  it  does  seem  likely  that  developments  to
date in Brazil will tend to subdue growth in Latin America and even to some extent in the OECD
area as a whole.
Despite the unusually long duration of the US economy’s upward phase, the situation there is still
buoyant.  Growth  in  the  closing  months  of  1998  was  very  strong.  However,  some  slowdown  is
foreseen,  partly  because  of  a  weak  international  trend  but  also  due  to  subdued  consumption.  The
high level of equity prices has been cited as a risk to US economic development. US stock markets
have recovered completely from last autumn’s fall and new all-time highs have been noted. Equity
prices  are  considered  by  many  observers  to  be  unduly  high  in  relation  to  the  companies’  profit
expectations and there has been talk of a future correction. Given the importance of the share price
rise for the US economy’s upward trend, a price fall could by the same token lead to a slowdown.
Prospects  for  the  euro  area  as  well  as  for  the  Japanese  economy  seem  to  have  become  somewhat
poorer  since  the  December  Report,  at  least  for  the  coming  year.  In  the  euro  area,  it  is  mainly
manufacturing which has weakened, while the consumption trend still looks relatively good. At the
same time, household sentiment is closely  related  to  the  development  of  employment,  not  least  in
Germany.
Thus,  the  international  outlook  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  improved  since  the  publication  of  the
December Report and there still seem to be risks of a development that is weaker.
Industrial activity weaker but domestic demand good so far
Turning to the Swedish economy, the statistics suggest that industrial activity may go on weakening.
But households’ expectations of their own economy indicate that private consumption may remain
relatively strong. Increased employment and a good development of real disposable income, not least
as a consequence of low inflation, are grounds for households’ optimism.
The  duration  of  this  trend  is,  however,  uncertain,  as  it  was  last  autumn.  One  question  lies  in  the
differences between households and firms in their assessments of the future. Negative news from the
corporate  sector  could  make  households  more  pessimistic.  Recently,  moreover,  there  have  been
certain  tendencies  for  households  to  become  somewhat  less  optimistic  about  their  own  economic
future.
The  picture  of  total  resource  utilisation  suggests  that  the  Swedish  economy  still  has  unutilised
resources. This in turn acts as a damper on inflation.
The weaker activity in manufacturing has led to a fall-off in net exports. If earlier cyclical patterns
still hold, stockbuilding may be heading for a downturn. Moreover, if manufacturing remains weak,
there could be some slackening of investment later this year. The rate of GDP growth this and next
year  will  thus  depend  on  the  extent  to  which  domestic  demand  makes  up  for  the  development  of
foreign trade and industrial activity.
When assessing future inflationary pressure, however, a point to bear in mind is that the past year’s
comparatively  sharp  fall  in  market  interest  rates  is  exerting  a  stimulatory  effect  on  the  Swedish
economy. Since January last year the 10-year bond rate has moved down almost 2% and the short-
term interest rate  has  fallen  more  than  1%.  As  only  part  of  the  effects  of  this  have  probably  been
transmitted to date by various mechanisms, allowance should still be made for some effects in the
future.
The Executive Board’s monetary policy discussion on 11 February will thus focus to a large extent
on  assessing  global  economic  prospects  and  their  consequences  for  Sweden’s  economy.  Other
BIS Review   14/1999
– 5 –
questions will be the durability of the positive trend for domestic sectors and how the relationship
between demand and supply will affect the development of prices.
Monetary policy’s focus on price stability is important in the context of economic stability. While
the  possibility  of  fine-tuning  an  economy  should  not  be  exaggerated,  a  policy  for  price  stability
should normally lead to a real economic development that is also balanced.
The  Riksbank’s  representatives  continuously  talk  about  the  prospects  for  inflation;  however,  the
question  we  are  trying  to  analyse  could  equally  well  be  put  like  this:  how  should  the  Riksbank
handle the repo rate so that the Swedish economy’s favourable path in recent years is maintained?
 BIS Review   14/1999
