Mr. Yam talks about the implementation of financial policies in the HKSAR.
Address  by  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  Mr.  Joseph  Yam,  at  a
symposium  in  commemoration  of  the  9th  anniversary  of  the  promulgation  of  the  Basic  Law  of  the
HKSAR in Hong Kong on 10 April 1999.
__________________________________________________________________________________
Ms Ko, Ladies and Gentlemen,
1. I am very honoured to be invited today to address this Seminar. The Basic Law is the constitutional
instrument of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR). The legal protection offered
by the Basic Law has, to a very great extent, contributed to Hong Kong’s monetary stability during
the political transition and has enabled Hong Kong to withstand the severe challenges brought about
by  the  unprecedented  financial  crisis.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  examine  the
implementation  of  financial  policies  in  the  HKSAR.  I  shall  discuss  with  you  the  two  main  areas
relating  to  financial  policies  under  the  concepts  of  “one  country,  two  systems”  and  “Hong  Kong
people ruling Hong Kong” as well as the legal protection offered by the Basic Law. The first of these
is the monetary autonomy enjoyed by the HKSAR. The second is the monetary relationship between
Hong Kong and the Mainland. I should stress that the experience of the HKSAR Government since its
establishment shows that Hong Kong not only enjoys an even higher degree of monetary autonomy
handled strictly in accordance with the “one country, two systems” principle. I hope that this will also
be your conclusion at the end of this seminar.
Hong Kong’s autonomy in formulating its own financial and monetary policies
2.  First,  let  me  talk  about  Hong  Kong’s  monetary  autonomy.  Prior  to  the  handover,  some  people
feared that Hong Kong’s monetary autonomy would be eroded. This was quite understandable, since
the  “one  country,  two  systems”  principle  was  a  completely  novel  concept.  However,  a  comparison
between the relevant provisions in the two constitutional instruments applied  to  Hong  Kong  before
and after the transfer of sovereignty respectively, i.e. the Royal Instructions to the Governor of Hong
Kong and the Basic Law, illustrates that Hong Kong’s monetary autonomy has not and will not be
eroded.  In  fact,  Hong  Kong  has  enjoyed  an  even  higher  degree  of  monetary  autonomy  after  the
transfer of sovereignty.
3. Under the Royal Instructions, the Governor could not assent to “any Bill affecting the Currency of
the Colony or relating to the issue of Bank notes”, or “any Bill establishing any Banking Association,
or amending or altering the constitution, powers, or privileges of any Banking Association” without
previously  obtained  the  approval  of  the  Secretary  of  State.  Under  the  Basic  Law,  however,  there
appears only a corresponding general requirement. Article 76 states that once a bill has been passed
by the Legislative Council, all that is required for it to take effect is signing and promulgation by the
Chief Executive. In addition, Article 17 states that “laws enacted by the legislature of the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region must be reported to the Standing Committee of the National People’s
Congress for the record.” But this article also states that “the reporting for record shall not affect the
entry into force of such laws.”
4.  On  the  other  hand,  unlike  the  Royal  Instructions,  the  Basic  Law  also  prescribes  in  considerable
detail the financial systems to be practised in the HKSAR. For example, Article 109 provides that the
HKSAR  government  shall  maintain  the  status  of  Hong  Kong  as  an  international  financial  centre.
Article 110 provides that the HKSAR government shall, on its own, formulate monetary and financial
policies. Article 111 prescribes that the Hong Kong dollar, as the legal tender in the HKSAR, shall
continue to circulate. Article 112 states that no foreign exchange control policies shall be applied in
the HKSAR and that the Hong Kong dollar shall be freely convertible. Article 113 stipulates that the
Exchange Fund of the HKSAR shall be managed and controlled by the government of the HKSAR. It
is unusual to have such detailed specifications in a constitutional law, but the transfer of sovereignty
is  a  significant  change  and  it  is  helpful  to  retain  those  effective  features  that  contribute  to  Hong
1
BIS Review 39/1999
Kong’s success as an international financial centre in the form of constitutional law. These provisions
have, of course, provided adequate safeguards for Hong Kong’s monetary autonomy. The reliability,
credibility  and  transparency  of  our  monetary  policies  are  also  greatly  enhanced.  The  efficiency  of
market  operations,  which  may  be  required  from  time  to  time  for  achieving  our  monetary  policy
objectives,  has  also  been  improved.  As  a  result,  our  efforts  to  maintain  monetary  stability  have
become more effective. We should also note, however, that, theoretically, when monetary policies are
constitutionalised,  the  flexibility  in  addressing  problems,  especially  the  unpredictable  ones,  will  be
reduced. Nevertheless, during the 20 months or so after the transfer of sovereignty when we have seen
extreme  conditions  of  the  financial  environment,  we  have  not  experienced  any  constraints  in  our
handling of monetary issues. This serves as evidence of the success of the Basic Law in the area of
monetary affairs.
5. The higher degree of monetary autonomy that Hong Kong enjoys is also reflected in the changes to
Hong Kong’s monetary legislation over the past nine  years.  To  ensure  that  Hong  Kong’s  monetary
legislation is in full compliance with the Basic Law, we carried out, where necessary, adaptation and
localisation  of  relevant  monetary  legislation  prior  to  the  transfer  of  sovereignty.  For  example,
amendments were introduced to the Exchange Fund Ordinance and the Bank Notes Issue Ordinance in
1995.  The  Coinage  Order  was  revoked  and  the  Coinage  Ordinance  was  promulgated  in  1994.  One
significant amendment common to this exercise was the removal of the need to refer matters to the
Secretary of State. Let me give a few examples:
(a) the investment of the Exchange Fund in securities; (b) the determination of the limit for borrowing
using the assets of the Exchange Fund or fiscal revenue as security; (c) the transfer of assets from the
Exchange Fund to the fiscal and other government accounts; (d) the authority to appoint note issuing
banks; and (e) the authority to proclaim coins as legal tender, mint coins and appoint minting agencies
were  all  subject  to  the  prior  approval  of  the  Secretary  of  State  before  amendment  of  the  relevant
ordinances.
6.  After  amendment,  these  powers  formerly  rested  in  the  Secretary  of  State  are  now  rested  in  the
Chief Executive in Council or the Financial Secretary. This means that, in terms of the management
of  monetary  and  financial  affairs,  Hong  Kong  enjoys  even  greater  autonomy  after  the  transfer  of
sovereignty.
7. The high level of monetary autonomy enjoyed by Hong Kong, as provided in the Basic Law and the
monetary  legislation,  is  not  just  something  written  into  laws:  it  is  also  realised  in  our  actual
implementation  of  monetary  policies.  The  financial  turmoil  that  erupted  just  after  the  transfer  of
sovereignty has subjected Hong Kong’s monetary autonomy to a rigorous testing. Yet, even when the
Hong  Kong  dollar  and  the  financial  markets  were  under  great  pressure,  and  the  economic  and
monetary  conditions  were  extremely  difficult,  all  the  measures  to  address  the  financial  crisis,
including  the  market  operation  undertaken  last  August  for  the  purpose  of  preserving  order  in  our
financial markets, were entirely formulated by the government of the HKSAR on its own. During this
period of financial turmoil, the Central Government has strictly adhered to the provisions of the Basic
Law. The Central Government has shown confidence in the ability of the HKSAR government and
has  not  interfered  in  Hong  Kong’s  monetary  affairs.  Furthermore,  the  success  of  the  HKSAR
government  in  addressing  the  financial  turmoil  has  fully  demonstrated  the  effectiveness  of  “Hong
Kong  people  ruling  Hong  Kong”.  The  confidence  of  the  international  financial  community  and  the
Central Government in the ability of Hong Kong to maintain monetary stability and to continue the
development of Hong Kong as an international financial centre have also been enhanced.
The Monetary relationship between Hong Kong and the Mainland
8. An issue related to monetary autonomy is the handling of the monetary relationship between Hong
Kong  and  the  Mainland  under  the  “one  country,  two  systems”  principle,  especially  given  that  the
economic  relationship  between  the  two  places  has  become  increasingly  close.  A  precise  and  clear
approach to the monetary relationship between both places is one of the key factors in maintaining
Hong Kong’s status as a financial centre. At the same time, it will enable Hong Kong to give full play
to its status as an international financial centre, and enable it to play a role in the promotion of reform
and liberalisation, and the development of economic infrastructure on the Mainland.
BIS Review  39/1999
2
9. Prior to the transfer of sovereignty, there were many doubts and myths surrounding this subject.
The popular myths were: that the Hong Kong dollar would be replaced by the Renminbi; that Hong
Kong’s  foreign  reserves  would  be  absorbed  by  the  Mainland;  that  the  PBOC  would  replace  the
HKMA or would interfere in the operation of the HKMA; or that Hong Kong’s regulatory standards
would deteriorate as a result of the need to grant special privileges to influential interests  from  the
Mainland.  Of  course,  those  who  believed  these  myths  would  have  done  well  to  have  familiarized
themselves  with  the  Basic  Law.  But  even  those  who  were  familiar  with  the  Basic  Law  had  other
concerns  to  raise.  For  example,  under  the  “one  country,  two  systems”  arrangement,  there  are  two
monetary  systems  within  one  country.  Which  monetary  system  should  be  more  important  from  the
nation’s perspective? Since this is not answered in the Basic Law, should we apply the relationship
between the Central Government and the local government, that is, a local government subordinate to
the Central Government, when we study the two monetary systems? Obviously, Hong Kong and its
status as an international financial centre would be adversely affected were this the case. In order to
address these myths and remove investors’ doubts and anxiety, the PBOC, clearly stated in 1996 the
monetary  relationship  between  Hong  Kong  and  the  Mainland.  The  relationship  can  be  best
summarised  as  “one  country,  two  currencies,  two  monetary  systems  and  two  mutually  independent
monetary authorities”.
10.  The  “mutually  independent  monetary  systems”  of  Hong  Kong  and  the  Mainland  reflect  the
differences in economic and financial developments between the two places. The two systems operate
in  a  mutually  independent  manner.  One  does  not  precede  or  follow  the  other.  Their  relationship  is
different  from  the  administrative  relationship  between  the  Central  Government  and  the  local
government.  In  my  view,  the  basic  principles  and  policies  governing  the  monetary  relationship
between Hong Kong and the Mainland can be summarized in the following ways.
(A) Laws, regulations, policies and management rules relating to monetary affairs promulgated on the
Mainland  are  not  applicable  to  Hong  Kong.  The  HKSAR  government,  on  its  own,  formulates
monetary  legislation  and  regulations  as  well  as  draws  up  and  implements  financial  and  monetary
policies.
11. The fact that mainland monetary laws and regulations are not applicable in Hong  Kong  mainly
reflects  the  difference  in  social  and  economic  systems,  economic  and  financial  developments  and
regulatory  standards  between  the  two.  The  Mainland  is  in  transition  from  a  planned  economy  to  a
market-oriented  economy.  The  legal  framework  relating  to  monetary  affairs  is  still  being  modified.
There are still a lot of restrictions in respect of monetary and financial issues. As for Hong Kong, our
main task is to maintain the various monetary and financial laws that have been put in place before
July  1997.  Of  course,  we  need  to  review  and  improve  the  legal  framework  in  the  light  of  the
developments  in  the  financial  markets.  The  formulation  and  amendment  of  monetary  laws  are
proposed by the executive body of the HKSAR and passed by the legislature.
(B)  Mainland  authorities  do  not  interfere  in  the  monetary  affairs  of  the  HKSAR.  The  monetary
authorities of the Mainland and the HKSAR are mutually independent and one is not subordinate to
the  other.  The  monetary  authority  in  the  Mainland  does  not  set  up  any  office  in  Hong  Kong  to
exercise monetary management.
12.  Under  the  Exchange  Fund  Ordinance,  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  HKMA,  i.e.  the  Monetary
Authority,  is  accountable  to  the  Financial  Secretary  of  the  HKSAR  government.  According  to  the
Law of the People’s Bank of China, the PBOC is accountable to the State Council and the branches of
the PBOC are accountable to the headquarters. As mentioned earlier, although Hong Kong has been
subject  to  a  severe  ordeal  during  the  financial  turmoil,  the  PBOC  and  other  Mainland  government
departments have not interfered in Hong Kong’s monetary affairs. Furthermore, our autonomy in the
management  of  Hong  Kong’s  foreign  reserves  is  an  important  element  in  the  mutual  independence
between the two monetary authorities.
13.  While  maintaining  a  mutually  independent  relationship,  the  two  monetary  authorities  will
continue to maintain and strengthen further the existing sound co-operation between the two places.
Both  parties  have  held  several  regular  and  ad  hoc  discussions  about  monetary  management,  cross-
border supervision of financial institutions and linkages between payment and settlement systems, and
the achievements in these fields have been many. The mutual trust between the HKMA and the PBOC
has contributed to exchanges and co-operation between the two places in relation to monetary affairs.
3
BIS Review  39 /1999
(C)  Financial  business  between  the  Mainland  and  Hong  Kong  are  treated  as  international  financial
affairs  and  are  conducted  in  accordance  with  the  rules  and  practices  of  international  financial
activities.
14.  All  financial  transactions  between  the  two  places  after  the  handover  have  been  conducted
according to the rules and practices of international financial activities. Claims and liabilities between
banks and companies from the mainland and those in Hong Kong are regarded as external claims and
liabilities. Investment by Hong Kong companies in the mainland is regarded  as  foreign  investment.
When  raising  funds  in  Hong  Kong,  mainland  entities  are  treated  as  other  international  and  local
market participants. Mainland companies listed in Hong Kong are required to abide by security laws
of  Hong  Kong  and  are  regulated  by  the  relevant  regulatory  authorities  in  Hong  Kong.  Disputes
relating to financial transactions are handled in accordance with international practice. Where China’s
Arbitration Law  and  other  relevant  laws  and  regulations  are  applicable  according  to  the  terms  of  a
contract, the provisions relating to arbitration involving foreign parties are applied.
(D)  The  HKSAR  maintains  its  existing  system  of  currency  issuance  and  management.  The  Hong
Kong dollar and the Renminbi continue to circulate as legal tender in Hong Kong and the mainland
respectively. The Hong Kong dollar is treated as a foreign currency  in  the  mainland.  Likewise,  the
Renminbi is treated as a foreign currency in Hong Kong.
15. The Basic Law has provided for the legal status of the Hong Kong dollar. The Renminbi is still
not yet freely convertible. However, even if it becomes freely convertible, it will only be one of the
many foreign currencies traded in Hong Kong’s forex market. As for the cross-border circulation of
the banknotes of the Hong Kong dollar and the Renminbi, this is a natural consequences of the close
relationship  between  the  two  places.  This  phenomenon  was  in  existence  long  before  the  handover.
The legal status of the Hong Kong dollar will not be affected and the Hong Kong dollar will not be
replaced as a result.
16. The issuance arrangements for the Hong Kong dollar remain independent. Hong Kong dollar bank
notes  continue  to  be  issued  by  the  three  note-issuing  banks  under  the  authorisation  of  the  HKSAR
government. Under the linked exchange rate system, the note-issuing banks provide 100% backing in
US dollar according to the fixed rate of US$1 to HK$7.80. In order to ensure that all the Hong Kong
dollar notes and coins in circulation comply with the monetary rule of the Currency Board System, we
have improved our coins issuance mechanism so that it operates in exactly the same way as the notes
issuance mechanism. From 1 April onwards, all coins issued are 100% backed by US dollar.
17.  Before  China’s  resumption  of  the  exercise  of  sovereignty  over  Hong  Kong,  the  PBOC  and  the
HKMA  reached  the  following  consensus  on  licensing  procedures  and  supervision  for  each  other’s
financial institutions:
• 
Financial  institutions  based  on  the  Mainland  or  Hong  Kong  that  set  up  offices  in  each
other’s territory shall be approved on the same basis as foreign financial institutions.
The mainland offices of Hong Kong-based financial institutions shall continue to enjoy the
same preferential treatment in the Mainland as other foreign financial institutions.
Mainland  financial  institutions  in  Hong  Kong  shall  be  regulated  by  the  HKMA  in
accordance with the same set of requirements; they shall not enjoy any privileges.
  18.  Following  the  handover,  the  HKMA  has  followed  the  Banking  Ordinance  and  international
standards  in  ensuring  a  high  degree  of  professional  and  prudential  supervision  of  authorized
institutions.  We  are  pleased  that  various  international  credit  rating  agencies  have,  in  their  recent
reports, continued to commend Hong Kong’s banking system as being the safest and most stable in
the  region.  The  hardest  financial  turmoil  in  decades  has  not  imperiled  the  stable  foundation  of  our
banking sector. During a process of market adjustments and recession, and under a harder operating
environment, in which banks’ bad debts increase and profits drop, Hong Kong still boasts one of the
world’s safest and most stable banking systems. To further enhance the competitiveness of our banks
and step up our supervisory efforts, the HKMA commissioned a large-scale consultancy study of the
local banking sector. The study was completed in 1998 and the recommendations contained in it are
being carefully considered by the HKMA.
(E) Hong Kong continues its participation in international financial activities in accordance with the
provisions in the Basic Law
BIS Review  39/1999
4
19. The Basic Law provides that the HKSAR may, using the name of “Hong Kong, China”, maintain
and  develop  financial  ties  with  different  countries  and  regions.  This  includes  entering  into  and
implementing multilateral and bilateral financial agreements, setting up overseas official and quasi-
official financial representative offices, and handling external financial relations.
20. Following the handover, Hong Kong has become even more active in the international financial
scene.  In  addition  to  further  developing  co-operation  with  regional  central  banks,  the  HKMA  has
strengthened its ties with multilateral and international financial institutions. In September 1997 the
Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund/World Bank were staged with great success. As
the  first  major  international  event  in  Hong  Kong  after  the  handover,  the  Meetings  became  an
important  landmark  in  Hong  Kong’s  financial  history.  In  1996  both  HKMA  and  the  PBOC  were
admitted to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in their own right. Since then, Hong Kong
has begun to play an active role in the activities of the BIS, including attending its regular meetings
and participating in committees focusing on global financial issues, in particular, the Committee on
Banking Supervision and the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems. In July 1998, the BIS
established  in  Hong  Kong  its  Asia  Pacific  office,  which  is  also  the  Bank’s  first  overseas  office.  In
addition,  Hong  Kong  continued  to  attend  the  annual  meetings  of  the  Asian  Development  Bank,
International  Monetary  Fund  and  World  Bank,  as  well  as  maintaining  close  technical  co-operation
with these bodies. Since the outbreak of the Asian financial turmoil, the issues of financial stability
and new global financial architecture have become increasingly important. In addition to voicing our
views on these topical issues under the name of “Hong Kong, China”, Hong Kong has also actively
participated in the lending arrangements organised by international financial agencies. In 1998, we co-
chaired  the  G22  Working  Group  on  Transparency  and  Accountability  and  actively  promoted  the
disclosure standards in both public and private sectors. At present we have been invited to attend the
BIS  Committee  on  Global  Financial  System  and  its  working  group  meetings.  While  the  above
underscore  Hong  Kong’s  status  as  an  international  financial  centre,  it  also  demonstrates  to  the
international financial community the successful implementation of the “one country, two systems”
principle.
Conclusion
21. Time flies. Nine years have passed since the Basic Law was promulgated. Some 600 days have
also passed since the establishment of the HKSAR government and the Basic Law came into effect.
During  this  period  we  encountered  the  severest  financial  crisis  in  many  years,  sustaining  the  great
pain brought on by the economic adjustments. Nevertheless we are also pleased that with the smooth
implementation of the Basic Law, the “one country, two systems” principle has gained recognition not
only  from  the  local  public,  but  also  the  international  community  and  overseas  investors.  This
constitutes an essential basis for Hong Kong’s continued prosperity and stability as well as our status
as an international financial centre. The Chinese government has also gained extensive recognition for
its firm commitment to the “one country, two systems” policy for Hong Kong.
22. The Basic Law ensures that Hong Kong will enjoy financial autonomy. Article 109 of the Basic
Law  further  requires  that  the  HKSAR  government  should  provide  a  suitable  economic  and  legal
environment  in  order  to  maintain  Hong  Kong’s  status  as  an  international  financial  centre.  Within
these two broad guidelines, we shall continue to make efforts in the following tasks:
(a)  implementing  credible  financial  and  monetary  policies  and  further  strengthening  the  linked
exchange rate system; (b) engaging in market operations and managing Hong Kong’s reserves with a
high  level  of  transparency  and  accountancy;  (c)  further  improving  the  banking  supervision  system,
ensuring the integrity, and increasing the  competitiveness,  of  the  banking  sector;  (d)  promoting  the
development  of  the  financial  infrastructure,  including  the  debt  market  and  payment  systems,
heightening  Hong  Kong’s  status  as  an  international  financial  centre;  (e)  actively  participating  in
international  co-operation  and  seek  to  improve  the  international  financial  architecture;  and  (f)
discharging our duties with a high degree of professionalism to gain confidence from both the public
and international community.
23. The 21st century is fast approaching, with just some 200 days to go. The financial sector will then
also  embark  on  a  new  era.  All  that  we  have  done  in  the  past  and  are  working  on  now,  including
5
BIS Review  39 /1999
organising this seminar on the Basic Law, will help prepare us with a firm foundation for taking on
the  next  century’s  challenges.  I  strongly  believe  that  the  “one  country,  two  systems”  principle  will
continue to play an important role in the 21st century, and that both the Mainland, one of the world’s
largest economies, and Hong Kong, one the world’s freest and most open economies, stand to reap
immense benefits from it.
Thank you.
BIS Review  39/1999
6
