Mr McDonough discusses the changing nature of banking, risk and capital regulation
Speech  by  the  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Mr  William  J
McDonough,  at  the  29th  Annual  Banking  Symposium,  Bank  and  Financial  Analysts
Association, New York City, on 17 March 1999.
Good afternoon. I am pleased to be here today to discuss the changing nature of banking, risk
and capital regulation. With the new millennium on the horizon, it seems a particularly fitting
time to discuss some of the key trends that are affecting the way both bankers and supervisors
think about these issues. Also, as I’m sure many of you are aware, the Basle Committee on
Banking Supervision currently is engaged in a fundamental review of the Accord, which is the
cornerstone of existing capital standards. In many ways, the changing nature of banking and
its risks have led supervisors to revisit the current capital framework, and so I welcome this
opportunity  to  provide  my  perspective  on  these  risks  and  how  they  relate  to  the  future  of
capital regulation more generally.
In  the  last  several  years,  we  have  witnessed  an  increase  in  the  diversity  and  complexity  of
businesses  in  which  banks  are  engaged.  While  lending  and  deposit-taking  are  still  the
mainstays  for  a  majority  of  commercial  banks,  many  banks  have  grown  their  derivatives
trading,  securities  underwriting  and  corporate  advisory  businesses.  Some  banks  have
expanded  their  traditional  credit  product  lines  to  include  asset  securitizations  and  credit
derivatives.  Still  other  banks  have  greatly  increased  their  transaction  processing,  custody  or
asset management businesses, in the pursuit of fee income.
Looking  forward  to  the  next  century,  I  believe  we  will  see  major  strides  in  the  area  that  I
suggest we call “e-finance”. More banks will venture into the relatively new world of on-line
PC  banking  or  will  expand  electronic  bill  presentment  and  paying  services.  Banks  will  be
motivated  to  overcome  obstacles  such  as  systems  incompatibility  and  consumer  privacy
concerns,  to  achieve  greater  operating  efficiencies  and  to  protect  their  valuable  payments
franchise.  Going  forward,  on-line  purchases  and  sales  of  securities  by  individuals  also  will
continue to increase, producing a growing source of commissions for financial institutions.
For  most  banks,  these  developments  will  mean  a  further  increase  in  the  diversity  and
complexity of risks to which they are exposed, including, but not limited to, credit, market and
operational risks. The challenge for these banks will be to develop risk management systems
that are rigorous and comprehensive, yet flexible enough to address the newer risks they take
on as they expand into less familiar product areas. Today, I would like to highlight these risks
and  focus  on  how  important  it  is  for  banks  to  integrate  their  risk  management  and  capital
planning  processes.  Also,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  how  the  changing  nature  of  banking  is
challenging supervisors to rethink their approach to capital regulation and supervision.
Despite  changes  in  banking  over  the  last  few  years,  many  of  which  already  have  been
discussed today, credit risk remains the predominant risk for most banks. However, credit risk
clearly extends beyond conventional credit products such as loans and letters of credit. Today,
banks are taking on credit risk in the form of margin lending and transactions in the over-the-
counter derivatives markets that expose them to large amounts of counterparty risk and can be
difficult  to  measure.  They  also  may  be  engaged  in  taking  on  credit  risk  in  its  more  subtle
forms.  The  short-term  credit  risks  in  futures  brokerage,  where  the  clearing  broker  stands
between the customer and the exchange, or  the  often  underestimated,  but  substantial,  credit
1
BIS Review   32/1999
risks that arise in settling foreign exchange contracts, are examples. Credit risk also may exist
in  more  complicated,  less  conventional  forms,  such  as  credit  derivatives  or  tranches  of
securitized assets.
Market risk also remains prominent. The upheavals in both global fixed income and equities
markets  over  the  last  year  led  to  a  great  deal  of  volatility  in  spreads  and  asset  prices  and
caused  large  swings  in  bank  profitability.  These  events  demonstrate  that  the  world  doesn’t
necessarily work the way we thought it did, that there are correlations between markets that
we had previously thought were unrelated. As banks continue to expand their global trading
operations, the need to understand the relationships between markets increases. This challenge
is  amplified  by  technological  advances  and  financial  product  innovations  that  contribute  to
ever-more complex market instruments.
But clearly, banks are exposed to more than just credit and market risk. Operational risk also
is a growing concern for the banking industry. The looming issue of Year 2000 remediation is
just  one  example.  With  the  continuing  diversification  of  banking,  the  fast  pace  of  financial
innovation  and  the  growing  concentration  of  crucial  payments,  settlements  and  custody
businesses, the importance of operational risk is rising, especially at many larger institutions.
These institutions find that the probability of a financial loss resulting from a breakdown in
internal controls or systems is greater than ever. As banks expand into new lines of business,
such as electronic banking, this trend is likely to continue. For instance, consider the risk of a
breach  in  electronic  security  controls  that  leads  to  unauthorized  access  to  confidential
customer  information.  Should  this  breach  be  severe  and  pervasive,  it  could  lead  to
considerable  legal  and  reputational  problems  for  a  bank.  Further,  the  overall  rapid  pace  of
technological change in this area means there is a substantial risk of obsolescence.
These are just some of the risks that banks must manage, and clearly the list I have set forth is
not exhaustive. In particular, consider banks in emerging market countries that are subject to a
unique set of risks as a result of the financing and investment cycles in their countries. Those
banks that fund their domestic assets with foreign currencies may be particularly susceptible
to  liquidity  risk  when  sharp  fluctuations  in  exchange  rates  and  market  turbulence  make  it
difficult to retain sources of financing.
While I have presented to you some of the major risks as separate and discrete, we recently
have discovered that they are, in fact, inter-related. For instance, we have seen that market risk
frequently  drives  credit  risk.  In  the  second  half  of  last  year,  we  saw  turbulence  in  fixed-
income  markets  produce  severe  liquidity  and  solvency  risks  for  hedge  fund  market
participants.  Also,  we  have  learned  that  credit  risk  may  derive  from  operational  risks,
embedded  in  complex  systems  for  managing  collateral  or  intra-day  funding,  both  of  which
require rigorous internal control environments.
Regardless of the nature or form of risk, the best way for all banks to protect themselves is to
identify risk correctly, accurately measure and price it, appropriately control it and maintain
high levels of reserves and capital, in both good times and bad. However, many banks are not
finding  it  easy  to  develop  a  holistic  approach  to  assessing  and  managing  the  many  inter-
related risks they face. A particular challenge is to relate such risk assessments to appropriate
capital levels, especially given the dynamic nature of their businesses.
BIS Review   32/1999
2
Before  I  discuss  how  some  banks  are  tackling  this  issue,  let  me  first  consider  the  role  of
capital more generally and how it relates to risk and strategy.
Fundamentally,  the  role  of  capital  is  to  act  as  a  buffer  against  unidentified,  even  relatively
remote losses that a bank may incur in the future. A bank must hold enough capital to cushion
both  depositors  and  senior  lenders  against  losses,  while  leaving  the  bank  able  to  meet  the
needs of its customers. Banks must maintain capital commensurate with the amount of risks
that they take and hold enough to weather financial storms, which can at times be severe and
of  considerable  duration.  Banks  with  low  equity  capital  ratios  and  a  high  variability  of
operating earnings have proven particularly vulnerable to financial distress.
However,  banks  do  not  just  hold  capital  to  overcome  distress,  but  also  because  it  provides
them  with  financial  flexibility.  Banks  that  are  strongly  capitalized  can  take  advantage  of
growth opportunities. Also, strongly capitalized banks are better able to promote innovation,
whether in the form of new products, new services or new distribution channels. This is not
just a capital resource issue, but a human resource issue. Bank managers who are able to focus
on the business of banking, strategy and competition, rather than on financial difficulties, can
create and innovate and, therefore, add value for shareholders.
Banks also hold capital as a sign of strength to their customers. Clearly we know this to be
true with depositors on the retail side, but it is equally true on the wholesale side. When an
institution or corporation enters into letter of credit guarantees or swap contracts, it needs to
be confident that its bank will be around in three or five years, at the maturity of the contract.
A bank that is well capitalized can credibly state to its customers and clients that it can make
good  on  its  promise  to  pay.  More  and  more,  clients  recognize  this  and  differentiate  among
various  banks  on  this  basis.  As  financial  services  converge  and  competitive  pressures
increase, banks find that they must vie for capital, not only with their domestic and foreign
counterparts, but also with investment funds, asset management firms, investment banks and
insurance companies.
This  is  equally  true  for  emerging  market  banks  that  find  they  must  compete  with
internationally active banks in what were previously thought to be solely domestic markets.
These  banks  recognize  that  an  adequately  capitalized  institution  is  a  necessary,  but  not
sufficient, condition to compete globally and to attract international funds and clients. It will
be  a  challenge  for  these  banks,  and  particularly  those  with  high-risk  profiles  and  opaque
financial  statements,  to  prove  to  clients,  counterparties  and  stakeholders  that  they  are
operating safely and soundly.
In the face of increasing competitive pressures, banks are focusing more of their attention on
the  role  of  capital,  capital  levels  and  targets,  and  how  they  relate  to  strategic  plans  and
objectives.  Many  banks  also  are  spending  more  time  assessing  their  own  risk  profiles  and
evaluating the amount of capital they need to cope with adverse outcomes in normal times and
under  reasonable  stress  scenarios.  The  more  sophisticated  banks  are  in  the  process  of
developing  internal  systems  and  methodologies,  including  formal  analytical  models,  that
enable them to do this better. Some of these banks rely on capital allocation methodologies
typically used for pricing and performance measurement across business and product lines as
a  basis  for  their  analysis.  These  methodologies  frequently  incorporate  different  kinds  of
volatility-based measures that include a view of unexpected loss, along with more subjective
measures of risk. While many of these systems and methodologies are still in their early stages
3
BIS Review   32/1999
and require refinement, I am encouraged by their development, and hope that the assessment
of  capital  adequacy  will  continue  to  be  a  primary  focus  of  risk  management  at  banking
institutions.
The senior management of banks can take this further by evaluating not only the adequacy of
their current capital levels, but also the appropriateness of their capital structure. Ideally, this
analysis would lead to a process that integrates decisions about business strategy, risk profile
and future capital needs.
As  banks  become  better  at  identifying  and  quantifying  their  risks,  they  should  be  well
positioned to enhance risk disclosures and inform investors more fully. While bank investors
ultimately bear the risks of the institution, too frequently they are not  in  a  good  position  to
make knowledgeable business decisions about a bank’s prospects. Certainly, investors are less
well informed than bank management. In many countries, accounting and disclosure standards
do not provide users of financial statements with the necessary information to appropriately
assess  risks  and  determine  soundness.  A  lack  of  transparency  discourages  capital  from
flowing efficiently and, in effect, reduces or even destroys value.
However, on a positive note, I am encouraged by progress in numerous countries to promote
disclosure  and  transparency,  for  instance  with  regard  to  non-performing  loans.  The  Basle
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  the  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System,  the
International  Accounting  Standards  Committee  and  other  organizations  have  put  forth
initiatives to enhance the relevance, reliability and comparability of information disclosed by
the financial sector. The most important initiatives will be those of national governments to
apply these accounting and transparency frameworks, as well as the voluntary disclosures of
financial institutions.
Now that I have discussed the changing risk environment and how banks are responding to
that challenge, let me turn to what this means for the current regulatory capital regime.
Today,  a  major  challenge  for  regulators  is  to  develop  capital  standards  that  address  more
comprehensively  the  full  range  of  risks  to  which  banking  institutions  are  exposed.  These
standards must also improve the differentiation among high-risk and low-risk exposures and
between  weak  and  strong  institutions.  Additionally,  they  must  be  flexible  enough  to
accommodate the risks of newer and emerging activities, some that I have mentioned today.
As you know, the primary tool of capital regulation currently is the set of minimum capital
ratios that were devised in 1988 by the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision. They were
set forth in an agreement known as the Basle Accord, and were adopted, among other reasons,
to address the slide in international capital levels that was occurring over a decade ago. While
these ratios were relatively basic, they have proved very effective at achieving their goal over
the last decade.
Over  the  years,  risk  management  approaches  have  evolved  rapidly,  while  the  Basle  Accord
has  evolved  relatively  slowly.  As  market  risk  management  techniques  developed,  we  were
able  to  incorporate  a  state-of-the-art  value-at-risk  approach,  in  a  1996  Market  Risk
Amendment. As credit risk management techniques have advanced, and as a new discipline of
operational risk has emerged, it has become apparent that the long-run relevance and efficacy
of the Basle Accord is waning for the most sophisticated institutions.
BIS Review   32/1999
4
Supervisors  have  long  known  that  analyzing  simple  capital  ratios  in  isolation  can  lead  to
incorrect conclusions about the relative strengths of institutions. Thus, they also have relied on
a review of banks’ capital plans and on market discipline to assess bank capital adequacy. As
we go forward, banking supervisors are building a capital framework on these three pillars –
capital supervision, capital regulation and market discipline – and we look to strengthen each
of them.
Let  me  start  with  capital  supervision.  The  cornerstone  of  supervisory  review  is  the  bank’s
process for assessing its overall capital adequacy in relation to its risk profile and its strategy
for  capital  level  and  structure.  Supervisors  believe  they  should  review  and  evaluate  bank-
internal  capital  adequacy  assessments  and  strategies,  in  addition  to  bank  compliance  with
regulatory capital ratios. The better the bank’s own capital adequacy assessment, the better the
supervisor will understand the bank’s capital strategy. Inevitably, this aspect takes on greater
importance. For one reason, supervisors expect banks to operate above minimum regulatory
capital ratios included in the Basle Accord – and prudent assessments can help to inform by
how  much.  For  another,  supervisors  seek  to  intervene  early  enough  to  prevent  capital  from
falling  below  prudent  levels  –  and  bank  assessments  can  provide  another  useful  tool  in
identifying  key  issues  before  they  become  major  problems.  With  these  thoughts  in  mind,
supervisors are tackling the challenge of developing a more systematic approach to the review
of capital adequacy.
Supervisors  also  are  discussing  ways  to  enhance  market-based  discipline.  Most  agree  there
should be a greater role for private-sector monitoring of banks. Of course, there already exists
a fair amount of market-based monitoring; however, the collection and use of these kinds of
information usually are not systematic or complete. The first goal is to improve information
available to the market. With enhanced risk disclosure, supervisors will be more able to rely
on the opinion of market investors. These opinions are reflected quickly in the price of bank
debt and share prices, and the ease with which banks can access capital. By relying more on
these  market  signals,  supervisors  will  be  better  able  to  identify  and  address  waning  capital
levels at problem institutions.
To  the  extent  banks  develop  disciplined  internal  approaches  to  evaluating  capital  adequacy
and capital plans, and enhance disclosures, supervisors will be able to place greater reliance
on  all  three  pillars  and  meet  the  challenges  of  a  more  complex  financial  marketplace.  The
common  interest  is  to  keep  the  Basle  standards  at  a  level  sufficient  to  ensure  financial
soundness, a minimum above which banks will choose to operate. To achieve this, we must
fashion a set of standards that does not greatly distort incentives.
Supervisors acknowledge that the current regulations and ratios need to be updated to be more
meaningful, given the full range of risks banks face today. Supervisors are always challenged
to keep pace with financial innovation and improvements in risk management practices, and
this suggests that we will need a frequent monitoring and maintenance program for the present
and future Accord.
In closing, I would like to summarize the key supervisory objectives that we are mindful of as
we look to revise the Accord and enhance the overall capital framework. Our first objective,
of course, is to  promote  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  financial  system.  Our  second  is  to
enhance  competitive  equality,  while  allowing  for  differences  among  banks  based  on
5
BIS Review   32/1999
differences in their risk profiles. These were the original goals of the Accord. Our third is to
develop standards that are fundamentally applicable to banks of varying levels of complexity
and sophistication, including those in emerging market nations.
In developing this capital framework over the next year, we plan to consult closely with the
financial and supervisory community and communicate openly about our progress. By year-
end, we hope to have made great strides in furthering our objectives. Clearly, beyond 2000, a
sound  capital  framework  will  help  to  ensure  that  banks  are  well  positioned  to  face  the
challenges and exciting opportunities that the new millennium has to offer.
BIS Review   32/1999
6
