Mr Tietmeyer focuses on economic convergence and EMU
Lecture by the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Prof Hans Tietmeyer, in the series “Builders of
the  Millennium”  in  celebration  of  the  750th  anniversary  of  the  foundation  of  University  College,
Oxford in Oxford on 3 June 1999.
I
First of all, I should like to express my sincere gratitude for honouring me with your invitation. I am
delighted and indeed honoured to be here. Oxford: the university, its colleges and facilities stand, on
the one hand, for achievement and competitiveness in the modern world and, on the other, for history,
tradition and heritage. They are part of Britain’s history and part of its future. And that means — I
would quite expressly like to add — that they are also part of Europe’s history and its future. Great
Britain  and  Europe  are  not  separate,  mutually  independent  entities  —  either  economically  or
culturally.
That  leads  me  straightaway  to  the  subject  of  Europe  and  its  future.  I  am  naturally  aware  that  this
country is in the middle of a major process of clarification. How does it perceive its future position in
Europe? How can it influence future developments in Europe? And, not least, what are the conditions
of, and prospects for, future entry into monetary union? Like many others in Europe, I am following
this process with keen interest. And I have the impression that this debate in the United Kingdom has
made  significant  progress  over  the  past  two  years.  Of  course,  it  is  ultimately  only  the  British
themselves  who  can  decide  how  they  wish  to  shape  their  relations  with  Europe  and  European
integration. Even so, I do not wish to conceal the fact that I have a great deal of sympathy with the
idea  of  the  United  Kingdom  playing  a  crucial  role  in  the  future  development  of  Europe  and  of  it
bringing  not  only  its  great  traditions  but  also  its  criticism  and  economic  performance  to  bear  in  a
constructive role in Europe and, hopefully, one day also into monetary union.
But that is a prospect on which the United Kingdom — its government, its parliament and its people
—  must  take  its  own  sovereign  decision.  I  do  not  presume  to  be  able  to  offer  you  advice  on  that
matter. Instead, what I would like to do today is to draw your attention, in particular, to those aspects
of monetary union which have played — and, in some cases, are still playing — a major role in our
debate in Germany. There will probably be very little of this that is really new to you. However, it
might be valuable for you to know the points on which particular emphasis was — and is still being
—  placed  in  the  German  debate.  Perhaps  there  will  be  some  aspects  which  might  provide  a
stimulating talking point for your own discussion.
II
Let me start with a simple, but fundamental, analysis: What does monetary union mean? What kind of
environment  does  it  create?  It  seems  to  me  that  it  possesses  three  essential  characteristics:  Firstly:
membership  of  monetary  union  implies  relinquishing  monetary  sovereignty.  Monetary  policy
becomes European. Naturally enough, that concerns the level of the official interest rates. But it goes
further  than  that.  European  monetary  policy  includes  the  framework  in  which  monetary  policy  is
conducted,  embracing  not  only  its  structure  and  the  way  in  which  the  central  banking  system
perceives  its  own  role,  but  also  the  strategy  and  instruments  used,  as  well  as  much  else  besides.
Secondly: the monetary union is designed to last. Entry into it is a road on which there is no turning
back. In monetary union, a “trial marriage” is no longer possible. Reversing that decision would entail
incalculable  economic  and  political  costs.  No  one  ought  to  place  any  faith  in  that  being  a  realistic
option.  And  thirdly:  the  euro  area  is  unlike  every  other  currency  area,  which  is  defined  —  at  least
usually — by the area of a single sovereign nation state. There is a single monetary policy for the euro
area.  However,  the  other  areas  of  policy,  such  as  budget,  tax  and  social  policies,  are  still  largely
decentralised. Fiscal policy, in particular, must abide by the rules set down in the Maastricht Treaty
and in the supplementary Stability and Growth Pact.
These  three  characteristics  appear  straightforward  and  self-evident.  But  they  have  important
implications:  One  key  implication  is  that  the  euro  area  requires  lasting  economic  convergence  —
convergence  in  the  sense  that  each  single  country  must  be  able  to  keep  up  with  the  others  on  a
1
BIS Review   67/1999
permanent basis, without recourse to national monetary policy or changes in the exchange rate. That
necessity  of  lasting  convergence  has  to  be  seen  against  the  backdrop  of  unrestricted  capital
movements and supranational monetary policy. A traditional nation state with its own currency has
several  options  available  for  fostering  convergence  within  its  own  currency  area.  There  are  largely
uniform  economic  and  taxation  policies  to  prevent  excessive  deviations  in  politically-induced
conditions for investment. There is a national budgetary policy which can give financial support to
regions which are lagging behind the general trend. And there is a largely similar and similarly funded
system of welfare. These are all things which the euro area does not have at a supranational level —
or, at least, not to anything like the same extent.
There  are  some  —  mainly  on  the  continent  —  who  regret  this  because  it  means  that  economic
convergence cannot be created or, at least, actively promoted by a centralised policy. Others — and I
suspect that the overwhelming majority of the British people belong to this camp — believe this to be
a good thing. Europe should not be a dominant centralised entity, nor should  it  have  an  egalitarian
public-sector  system  of  adjustment.  It  should  be  decentralised,  organised  on  the  principles  of
subsidiarity and geared to competition. Your Prime Minister put this in a nutshell: “Integrate where
necessary.  Decentralise  where  possible.”  I  would  add  that  I  have  a  great  deal  of  sympathy  for  that
position.
However, one also has to see the other side of the coin. One problem remains: how can a politically
decentralised monetary union safeguard the necessary lasting convergence of all its member states?
Ultimately,  there  is  only  one  way  of  doing  this.  Safeguarding  lasting  convergence  in  a  politically
decentralised  monetary  union  must  rest  on  two  pillars:  firstly,  on  each  country’s  own  sustained
competitiveness and on each country’s own efforts; and, secondly, on a fundamental willingness to
accept certain binding rules and abide by them on a permanent basis. That is the only way in which a
monetary union with a decentralised political structure can succeed — not only economically, but also
politically: in other words, without excessive conflict among the participating countries.
III
The competitiveness of each single country is obviously initially one economic condition for a kind of
optimum currency area. Basically, an optimum currency area means that, in the longer term, there is
no  need  for  adjustment  of  the  nominal  exchange  rate  because  other  adjustment  mechanisms  are
effective, say, as a result of internal flexibility or a high degree of labour mobility.
That is clear in theory. In practice, there is a fundamental problem: how can the ability to “keep up”
be  assessed?  And  how  is  it  possible  to  safeguard  that  ability  and  the  willingness  to  utilise  it  on  a
lasting basis? Now, in some way or another, the track record and the basic situation in the countries
concerned have to be taken into account. The Maastricht Treaty does that and stipulates convergence
criteria for that purpose. These may not have been the final pearl of wisdom in the strict economic
sense,  but  that  should  not  make  us  overlook  what  fundamental  pillars  the  convergence  criteria
represent in terms of the logic of a politically decentralised currency union.
I am aware of the fact that we Germans, by insisting on a strict interpretation of those criteria, have
not always been given a good press internationally in the past. It may also be the case that the debate
in  Germany  did  not  always  take  the  best  possible  course,  especially  when  somewhat  too  much
emphasis was being placed on the decimal place in the budgetary policy for the test year, for example.
But the key element — taking the convergence criteria seriously — was — and still is — correct. The
criteria  were,  and  remain,  a  test  of  ability  and  political  will,  at  least  at  the  time  of  entry.  Basic
conditions for passing a test are undoubtedly the abilities to keep the internal value of the currency
stable and to maintain the exchange rate without tensions  —  an  exchange  rate,  moreover,  which  is
determined a priori as a central rate, not one which is defined at a later stage. For that reason, the
Treaty  calls  —  and,  in  our  opinion,  unquestionably  calls  —  for  a  two-year  membership  in  ERM
without tensions.
In this interpretation of convergence  — which has determined the German debate —  there  are  two
ideas which play a key role: the idea of the permanence of sufficient convergence and the idea that the
present and the past are a test of the future ability to stay the pace on a lasting basis.
BIS Review   67/1999
2
Perhaps you feel the debate  in  Germany  has  a  different  emphasis  from  the  one  here.  In  the  United
Kingdom,  convergence  is  sometimes  understood  more  in  the  sense  of  convergence  in  the  business
cycle. By no means do I wish to disparage that. Naturally enough, I am aware of the current economic
background  in  the  United  Kingdom.  And  we  do  already  have  this  problem  in  the  euro  area  at  the
moment.  The  cyclical  position  of  Ireland,  for  instance,  is  obviously  different  from  that  in  some
countries on the continent. There can be no question at all: if a country believes that it is in its own
longer-term interests to enter, it will look for a time which it feels to be opportune. That is no more
than an act of human reason.
I would only like to point out that what we have here is a case of the debate being weighted somewhat
differently. And, naturally, one has to perceive the backdrop to this: in other words, the fact that the
tie which is created is a permanent one. It is not least for this reason that it is right  for  the  British
government, in particular, to place repeated stress on the subject of internal flexibility.
I  believe  that  there  is  unanimity  in  the  debate  both  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  in  Germany  that
economic convergence does not imply uniformity.
Firstly:  it  does  not  imply  uniform  structures.  It  is  true  that  competition  —  precisely  in  a  monetary
union — exerts pressure to find efficient solutions, but they do not have to be the same everywhere.
Even  in  monetary  union,  there  will  still  be  room  for  different  economic  traditions  and  styles.
However,  the  competitiveness  of  all  the  participating  economies  must  be  ensured  on  an  enduring
basis.
Secondly: convergence does not imply uniform policies in all areas. On the contrary: a decentralised
monetary union calls on national policy to exercise its own responsibility for maintaining competitive
economic structures. In key areas, too, powers can indeed remain with the nation states. Nevertheless,
individual approaches, say in the area of taxes, must not lead to distortions on the markets.
Thirdly:  convergence  least  of  all  implies  uniform  living  conditions  or  equal  prosperity  in  all  the
participating countries and regions. It may very well be that the way in which the single market and
the single currency work will assist less well-developed regions that face up resolutely to competition
in catching up quickly and sustainably. But that must happen on the basis of competition. There can
be no a priori guarantee of that.
IV
Lasting economic convergence based primarily on market forces is one fundamental precondition for
a  politically  decentralised  monetary  union.  The  second  fundamental  precondition  is  that  the
participating countries agree binding rules for certain areas and are prepared to abide by them on an
enduring basis. There are rules of this kind — in addition to the general rules for the single market —
principally for budgetary policy, where it has a particular direct relevance to the financial markets.
Some of the rules for budgetary policy are: Firstly, the central banks must not finance the budgets.
Secondly,  there  is  a  no-bail-out  clause.  The  Community  is  not  liable  for  the  commitments  of
individual member states. Thirdly, the governments have committed themselves to avoiding excessive
deficits and, where they exist, to reducing them immediately. Fourthly, in normal circumstances the
deficit should be close to balance.
These  rules  are  not  undisputed.  Some  ask  whether  the  no-bail-out  clause  is  not  sufficient.  Is  the
reference  to  the  inherent  responsibility  of  national  budgetary  policy  not  enough  on  its  own?  In  my
view, these objections put matters too simply. Firstly, we do not know under what financial market
conditions  a  financial  crisis  in  one  EMU  country  might  break  out.  (To  be  honest,  I  hope  that  is
something  we  shall  never  learn.)  However,  we  can  tell  from  the  recent  national  financial  crises  in
other regions that systemic risk can easily arise. Or, at least, the argument is advanced that there is the
possibility of systemic risk — and who would want to let it come to that? Of course, the markets are
aware of that, too. For that reason, there is always likely to be a certain problem of credibility with
regard to the no-bail-out clause.
3
BIS Review   67/1999
Secondly,  it  is  true  that  a  single  currency  does  not  imply  the  same  long-term  interest  rates  for  all
issuers.  Certainly  not.  The  quality  of  the  borrowers  and  liquidity  aspects  also  play  a  role.  But,
naturally, the foreign exchange risk is shared equally by all the participating countries. For that reason
alone,  there  exists  an  interdependence  among  the  participating  countries.  And  there  naturally  also
exists  an  interdependence  in  macroeconomic  terms.  If  the  budgets  of  individual  participating
countries  —  especially  the  large  ones  —  have  excessive  recourse  to  the  capital  markets,  this  will
obviously be a burden on the other countries. An excessive government deficit eats up private savings.
That is a factor which uses up internal capital resources and/or has an impact on the euro’s external
relations  —  quite  apart  from  an  overburdening  of  monetary  policy  as  a  result  of  an  excessively
expansionary fiscal policy.
For  these  reasons,  there  is  undoubted  justification  not  only  for  a  no-bail-out  clause  but  also  for
defining limits for the national budget deficit and for the general government debt ratio. I wish that
the  national  budgetary  policymakers  in  the  participating  countries  would  perceive  these  rules  not
merely as a constraint but also as an opportunity of pursuing a rational policy on a sustained basis.
One thing is clear, of course: setting the rules is not enough. The rules also have to be accepted by the
countries involved. And they have to be enforced if the need arises. That is not an easy matter, as we
learnt only last week in Brussels.
V
The second area in which rules are set is within the framework of monetary policy. One of the key
elements  of  monetary  union  as  provided  for  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  is,  without  doubt,  the
independence of the European Central Bank and of the participating national central banks: in other
words,  the  independence  of  the  Eurosystem.  The  economic  rationale  for  a  central  bank  which  is
independent  of  the  instructions  and  influence  of  political  bodies  is  rooted  in  the  finding  that  it  is
generally easier for such a central bank to keep the value of the currency stable on a lasting basis.
That  higher  degree  of  monetary  stability  benefits  the  economy  and  society  in  various  ways.  It
increases  planning  certainty  in  the  economy,  which  fosters  a  culture  of  long-termism.  It  makes  it
easier  for  enterprises  to  fund  investment  decisions  in  the  longer  term.  That  generally  results  in  a
stronger  long-term  orientation  in  economic  decision-making.  Incidentally,  that  was  one  of  the  key
considerations when the new government gave greater autonomy to the Bank of England two years
ago. A stable currency is, at the same time, an element of social policy. It is often precisely those who
are not so well off in economic terms who find it difficult — or impossible — to protect themselves
against  inflation.  Finally,  money  which  has  a  stable  value  is  also  a  factor  of  political  philosophy.
Confidence in the currency is, to some extent, confidence in the state and its institutions. That is, at
least, the case in Germany; partly owing to our experience of galloping inflation in the first half of
this century, but also partly on account of the ideas of economists such as Alfred Müller-Armack and
Ludwig  Erhard,  who  introduced  into  German  economic  policy  the  leitmotif  of  the  social  market
economy, with a stable currency as one key element. This economic rationale has now resulted in a
trend towards greater central bank independence outside of Europe as well. That is perhaps also one
factor —  among  others  — which  helps  to  explain  the  high  degree  of  price  stability  that  prevails
worldwide at present.
One fundamental objection to central bank independence raises the question of democratic legitimacy.
Is  a  central  bank  which  is  independent  of  political  instructions  and  influence  in  keeping  with  a
democracy? I believe that there are two preconditions which have to be fulfilled for an independent
central bank to be unquestionably compatible with a democratic system.
Firstly: the assigning of independence and the mandate has to have been arrived at democratically: at
the least, by virtue of an implicit consensus and on an explicit foundation provided either by law, a
constitution  or  by  a  treaty  —  like  that  of  Maastricht  —  to  which  the  parliaments  have  given  their
consent.
Secondly:  the  mandate  of  the  independent  central  bank  must  be  unambiguous.  Political  value
judgements  among  various  competing  aims  may  be  made  only  by  those  who  have  acquired  direct
democratic  legitimacy  as  a  result  of  elections.  It  is  precisely  for  that  purpose  that  elections  give  a
BIS Review   67/1999
4
mandate.  The  decision-making  body  of  an  independent  central  bank,  which  is  not  elected  directly,
may  not  make  any  autonomous  value  judgements  among  various  competing  aims.  An  overriding
objective  has  to  be  specified  in  advance.  That  is  precisely  what  the  Maastricht  Treaty  does.  It
specifies  the  primary  objective  of  price  stability.  Hence,  the  independent  central  bank  remains
anchored in the democratic structure of the state.
In  my  view,  the  limitedness  of  the  central  bank’s  mandate  is  thus  a  corollary  of  its  political,
democratic and constitutional legitimacy. For that reason alone, I believe that broadening the mandate
would lead to problems for the European System of Central Banks. That applies, for example, to the
idea of extending the scope of the central bank’s mandate beyond price stability to include growth and
full employment as additional objectives. That is quite apart from the fact that I do not perceive any
trade-off  between  those  aims  —  at  least  in  the  longer  term.  Assigning  other  tasks  can  also  cause
difficulties  for  an  independent  central  bank,  however.  Assigning  sole  responsibility  for  banking
supervision  or  a  lender-of-last-resort  function,  for  instance,  may  give  rise  to  difficulties.  Such  a
plurality  of  mandates  might  give  rise  to  a  situation  in  which  the  independent  ECB  has  to  choose
among  different  objectives,  say  between  the  objective  of  stable  prices,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the
consolidation  of  individual  financial  institutions,  on  the  other.  Fundamentally,  that  would  be  a
political value judgement. Therefore, caution — at least — should be exercised in terms of delegating
additional tasks to the ECB.
In  addition  to  those  two  basic  preconditions  —  the  democratic  assignment  of  tasks  and  an
unambiguous  mandate  —  tying  the  independent  central  bank  into  a  democratic  system  naturally
requires  something  more:  it  calls  for  transparency  and  accountability.  Independent  monetary  policy
cannot and must not be remote from the general public.
In saying that, it is essential to distinguish precisely what is meant by transparency. Does transparency
mean full disclosure of the deliberations, arguments and motives behind a decision: in other words,
transparency of  the  situation  in  which  a  decision  is  taken?  Or  does  transparency  principally  aim  at
disclosure of the process by which is a decision is made?
In terms of the transparency of the overall situation in which a decision is taken, the ECB endeavours
to do this by a comprehensive disclosure of its judgements and the assessments which determine its
decisions. Of course, I do not rule out the possibility of improvement in one respect or another. It is
not yet even six months that the ECB has borne responsibility for monetary policy. We are therefore
all  still  involved  in  a  learning  process.  Incidentally,  I  personally  would  have  nothing  against  also
identifying arguments pointing to a decision other than the one that was ultimately taken but which
happened to be rejected after taking other arguments into account.
Transparency concerning the internal process of consultation and decision-making is another matter,
however. I regard that as problematic since it may ultimately imperil the efficiency of monetary policy
decision-making. Why? Firstly, it puts the frankness and confidentiality of the discussion at risk. It
can, at least, lead to confidential discussions being shifted to other circles. And that undermines the
unity  of  the  decision-making  body.  Secondly,  it  may  endanger  the  credibility  and  standing  of
individual  members,  who  are  open  to  argument  and,  on  account  of  new  insights,  may  alter  their
position  during  the  discussions.  I  therefore  feel  that  this  second  approach  to  greater  public
transparency is not without problems. And I also have doubts as to whether it really introduces more
clarity and calculability in monetary policy for the markets.
I admit that my reservations also have to do with the idea that the decision-making body should have a
feeling of collective responsibility. And that also includes the attempt to seek an internal consensus
and  demonstrate  it  externally.  Now,  it  may  be  that  some  people  find  the  desire  to  seek  consensus
stuffy and old-fashioned. In the final analysis, I believe it is not. Allow me to make a few remarks in
this  connection:  I  come  from  a  central  bank  which  —  together  with  its  predecessor  institution,  the
Bank  deutscher  Länder  —  has  been  independent  for  over  50  years.  During  that  period,  it  was
necessary to fend off several attacks from the political field. In saying that, it has to be borne in mind
that a simple parliamentary majority would have sufficed for a legislative amendment to remove the
Bundesbank’s independence.
5
BIS Review   67/1999
In  situations  of  conflict,  an  independent  central  bank  needs  the  support  of  as  broad  a  segment  of
public opinion as possible. That will also be the case for the ECB, even though its independence is
anchored in the Maastricht Treaty. But to be given that support, a central bank needs more than just a
good record over the longer term. What is also important is that it can demonstrate a minimum degree
of unanimity. That applies anyway in the event of a conflict. In that situation, if the central bank gives
disparate  signals  to  the  outside  world,  the  general  public  does  not  know  at  all  what  it  is  actually
supposed to be supporting. Admittedly, it is comparatively easy to create unanimity in the event of a
conflict. But the central bank’s standing with the general public, which is intended to be a protection
in the event of a conflict — that is something which it has to have earned and built up beforehand.
And it has that standing only if the general public is aware of what the central bank stands for. If the
general  public  asks  what  the  bank’s  standpoint  is,  it  wants  a  clear-cut  answer  and  not  a  response
enumerating the various possibilities of position 1, position 2, position 3, and so on. A central bank
must  be  identifiable  by  its  basic  stance.  That  can  scarcely  be  achieved  without  a  minimum  of
collective awareness.
I fully understand the objection that this must not lead to individual responsibility becoming lost in
the decision-making bodies. There is something in that. I wish, however, that critics who have never
had to withstand a serious attack on the independence of the central bank would have somewhat more
respect for the concepts of consensus and unanimity.
VI
Finally, allow me to indulge in a reflection of a fundamental nature. We are certainly all in agreement
that  the  euro  has  to  be  a  success.  And  that  is  a  permanent  challenge.  Whether  the  euro  becomes  a
success  story  is  something  on  which  it  is  impossible  to  make  a  final  judgement  after  less  than  six
months. The euro certainly has a great potential. Recent exchange rate movements have not altered
that fact.
Clearly, the decline in the euro’s external value over the last few days has not been good news. We
shall  study  developments  carefully.  Yesterday  the  Governing  Council  had  a  serious  discussion  on
that.  We  came  to  the  following  conclusion  which  was  presented  to  the  press  after  the  meeting  by
President Duisenberg: “The euro is a currency firmly based on internal price stability and therefore
has a clear potential for a stronger external value. Since the start of Stage Three of EMU the euro has
become  the  second  most  important  international  currency  in  the  world,  and  the  policy  of  the
Eurosystem  will  safeguard  its  internal  purchasing  power,  thereby  also  supporting  the  international
role of the euro.”
But  in  making  a  reasonable  assessment  of  the  opportunities  and  risks  inherent  in  the  project  of
monetary union, we shall maintain a longer-term perspective.  In  the  eyes  of  future  generations,  the
ultimate test of the success of monetary union will one day consist of three questions: Has monetary
union been able to safeguard lasting monetary stability? Have the participating economies coped with
the conditions of monetary union? And: has the euro brought the people and peoples of Europe closer
together?
The answers to those questions have a lot to do with convergence, although not only with economic
convergence in the narrow sense of parallel trends in the hard data on productivity, labour costs, or
whatever. It also has much to do with convergence in values, in beliefs and in aims. That is something
which cannot be measured mathematically, but it is nevertheless important. I feel that it is precisely
this  convergence  in  thinking  which  has  increased  over  the  past  few  years  between  the  United
Kingdom and Germany, with both sides having learnt from each other. That is not intended to be a
sixth test for your entry into monetary union, but no harm can come from it either.
BIS Review   67/1999
6
