Mr Latter gives an overview from Hong Kong of eight Asian economies
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Tony  Latter,  a  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority, at the Asian Financial Markets Conference held in Hong Kong on 26-27 April 1999.
Thank you for inviting me to address your conference today. It is encouraging to see such a wide and
distinguished  representation  here  from  the  financial  and  commercial  communities.  Indeed,  when  I
looked  down  the  advance  attendance  list,  I  quickly  realised  that  there  would  be  very  little  which  I
could tell you about market developments in Hong Kong that you didn’t know already.
So, if you will allow me, I should like to spend some of my time standing back a little from specific
market  topics  and  looking  instead  of  some  of  the  macroeconomic  forces  which  shape  their
development.
I shall focus my analysis on eight Asian economies [see table]. You will note that the list does not
include  Japan,  Hong  Kong  or  Singapore.  That  is  because  they  can  already  be  regarded  as  having
relatively  mature  financial  infrastructures  and  they  are  largely  free  of  capital  controls.  Thus,  for
reasons which will become apparent as I proceed, they do not fit into the story.
The  table  shows  the  level  of  physical  capital  investment  within  each  economy  (specifically,  gross
domestic fixed capital formation as a percentage of gross domestic product) for the ten years to 1997.
In  most  cases  this  was  at  a  very  respectable  level;  all  figures  fall  in  the  range  22-38%  of  GDP  on
average for the period; by way of comparison, 1997 figures for USA, Japan and Germany were 18%,
26% and 19% respectively.
Also  shown  is  the  level  of  total  domestic  savings;  this  is  the  sum  of  savings  by  the  household,
corporate and government sectors (and may of course include dissaving by one or more of those). For
certain purposes I would have liked to show the household component of the total, but sufficient data
are not available. The third column displays second minus the first - i.e. the excess of savings over
investment on these measures.
For all but two of the economies, domestic saving has outstripped fixed capital investment - in some
cases  by  a  substantial  margin.  But  these  figures  tell  us  nothing  about  the  intermediation  process
between saving and investment or about the role of financial institutions and markets. Much of the
investment may take place within the same economic unit as where the savings arise, or be directed by
government, without any requirement for third-party intermediation. Of course, if domestic saving is
channelled into domestic investment mainly through government or other routes which are not subject
to market discipline, allocative efficiency within the economy is likely to be impaired.
But  a  significant  amount  of  investment  may  have  no  identifiable  link  at  all  to  domestic  saving,
because  savings  have  flowed  out  of  the  country  through  one  channel  and  investment  funds  have
flowed in through a completely different one. I shall return to this point in a minute.
Returning to the behaviour of domestic saving and investment, the chart shows the excess of saving
over  investment  in  graphic  form.  I  have  then  added  a  column  representing  the  recorded  inflow  of
foreign direct investment. The latter may perhaps be regarded as the category of inflow likely to be
most  closely  associated  with  physical  investment.  If  you  add  that  to  the  surplus  of  saving  over
investment (i.e. the two columns together), you can visualise in the majority of instances a significant
potential over-funding of investment, even before taking account of any inflows of portfolio funds or
bank finance which may head to the same destination.
Does this mean that there has in practice been more than enough money around in these countries to
finance  all  desired  investment?  Of  course  not.  As  hinted  earlier,  I  have  failed  so  far  to  take  any
account of capital outflows. Part - in many cases perhaps a substantial part - of domestic savings is
1
BIS Review   52/1999
exported. Unfortunately I do not think that it makes much sense to try to show specific statistics for
such  outflows,  since  in  this  field  data  are  notoriously  unreliable  -  the  more  so  in  instances  where
controls exist which encourage outflows through what are euphemistically called informal channels.
But in general terms the existence of such outflows is strongly implied, if not actually identified, in
the overall balance of payments figures.
Regarding capital outflows, allow me, for purposes of exposition, to make the following exaggerated
distinction. In respect of advanced economies, outflows of direct investment tend to reflect the global
workings of comparative advantage, as businesses seek to exploit particular strengths or niches; and
portfolio outflows tend to reflect the search by each investor for a  balanced  international  portfolio,
within  the  total  of  which,  however,  domestic  investments  will  typically  tend  to  predominate.  By
contrast, in the  less  advanced  economies  there  will  be  less  wealth  to  provide  the  springboard  for  a
large amount of direct overseas investment, and a large part of the leakage of funds from the country
will be through what I have referred to as informal channels - which others may describe as capital
flight.  The  position  of  any  particular  country  in  the  spectrum  between  these  two  extreme
characterisations  will  depend  on,  among  other  things,  the  stage  of  economic  development  that  the
country  has  reached,  and  on  the  degree  of  confidence  that  the  population  has  in  the  government’s
policies and in the financial institutions.
The  problem  in  many  cases  of  the  less  developed  economies  is  that  firms  and  households  tend  to
regard  foreign  assets  as  the  habitat  of  first  choice  for  any  savings,  reluctantly  accepting  domestic
instruments as an - often enforced - alternative. The aim of the authorities must be to make domestic
instruments the first choice, leaving foreign assets as the route towards subsequent more sophisticated
or  mature  portfolio  diversification.  In  this  way,  dependence  on  foreign  inflows  can  be  reduced,
although  there  will  always  be  an  important  and  necessary  role  for  them,  especially  in  view  of  the
technology and know-how transfer which may accompany them.
The  1997  Asian  crisis,  along  with  various  subsequent  problems  with  liabilities  to  foreign  investors
and lenders, have once again highlighted the vulnerabilities and volatilities which may be associated
with  overdependence  on  foreign  capital,  particularly  that  which  is  structured  as  debt.  Yet  in  many
countries there appears to be, as I have tried to demonstrate, a high rate of domestic saving which, if
kept more at home and if, ideally, permitted to find a haven under the pull of market forces, could
satisfy part of the funding needs for which foreign finance has in recent years been used.
Of course, not all countries enjoy a high savings rate in the first place and there may often be a need
to  encourage  more  domestic  saving.  But  that  question  goes  beyond  the  scope  of  my  focus  today,
which is on what happens to those savings rather than on their scale itself.
The challenge to make the domestic employment of savings both more efficient and more attractive is
one  which  must  in  part  be  addressed  at  the  macroeconomic  and  political  level.  But  it  is  also  be
necessary  to  develop  the  financial  instruments  and  institutions  to  facilitate  better  intermediation
within the domestic economy. In scope this might include anything or everything from basic deposit-
based  savings  schemes  for  the  small  saver,  through  collective  investment  instruments,  to  the
development or enhancement of the wholesale stock and bond markets. And, as I have already noted,
there is a strong argument that the disposition of funds should be on a voluntary basis and according
to market principles.
All of this leads me, by what has been an extremely circuitous route, to the point which I would wish
to highlight to this audience today. Getting your firm’s name onto the next tombstone for some high-
profile international syndication, which may even qualify you for a photograph in one of those glossy
monthlies, is all very well. But what about business opportunities to improve domestic intermediation
in various countries? Of course, I am yet again exaggerating in order to make the point, for I know
that  most  of  you  are  already  involved  closely  in  domestic  markets,  not  least  Hong  Kong’s;  but  the
BIS Review   52/1999
2
need for improved domestic intermediation in this region as a whole is being voiced with increasing
frequency by officials of governments and international agencies, financiers and academics.
I have conducted here a fairly superficial analysis of a particular set of countries, in order to make a
general point, which may be more relevant in some cases than in others. I am not going to be drawn
into commenting on specific cases, since more thorough analysis would be required before reaching
definitive conclusions. I leave you with, I hope, an incentive to explore some of the issues further if
you wish. The challenge which I have identified - that of raising the efficiency and attractiveness of
domestic financial intermediation - is not a new one, but an old one which has perhaps remained with
us for too long. And I should add that the problem is one that is probably very much more serious in
certain other parts of the world -for example, in some countries of the former Soviet Union - than in
Asia.
I  have  managed  to  get  this  far  without  saying  anything  about  Hong  Kong,  other  than  to  exclude  it
from the preceding analysis. I ought now to redress the balance.
You  will  recall  that  one  of  my  reasons  for  excluding  Hong  Kong  was  that  I  judged  it  to  possess  a
relatively  mature  financial  infrastructure.  That  certainly  does  not  mean  that  we  are  necessarily
satisfied with things as they stand. Indeed, I know of no financial centre in which the authorities are in
that  happy  position.  Given  the  speed  at  which  product  innovation  takes  place,  often  spurred  by
exponential  leaps  in  the  dimensions  of  technical  feasibility,  and  the  concomitant  growth  in  global
financial flows, which impinges relentlessly on an economy such as ours where capital controls are
prohibited constitutionally, those of us who are charged with the task of ensuring the soundness and
competitive efficiency of the financial system need continuously to evolve our stance on supervision
and regulation, as well as to keep a watchful eye for any communal actions desirable to improve the
workings of the financial system, where we might helpfully serve some catalytic function.
Let me mention just two areas of special attention in Hong Kong at present -  without  denying  that
there may be others too.
The first concerns the stock and futures exchanges, where there is a major agenda for change. Notable
components of this agenda are the 30-point programme announced last September for strengthening
discipline  and  transparency  in  the  markets  -  most  of  which  have  now  been  implemented  -  and  the
proposals  announced  by  the  Financial  Secretary  in  March  to  reform  and  unify  the  ownership
structures of the stock and futures exchanges and their clearing houses. A tight timetable has been set
and progress should be visible later this year.
The  second  concerns  the  development  of  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  debt  market.  This  market  has
progressed considerably in recent years, with the evolution  of  the  markets  for  Exchange  Fund  bills
and notes, borrowing programmes by public sector bodies, fundraising by multinational agencies and
sizeable  funding  programmes  -  mainly  at  the  short  end  -  by  Hong  Kong  financial  institutions.  But,
except for Exchange Fund bills, the secondary markets are not greatly active and there has been little
activity  by  local  private  sector  corporate  entities  to  raise  longer-term  funds  directly  from  the  debt
market. Perhaps the difficulty is simply that market conditions are seldom regarded as propitious on
all  fronts  simultaneously  -  at  present,  for  instance,  the  general  level  of  interest  rates  may  tend  to
discourage  issuance  at  term.  And  there  is  definitely  a  chicken-and-egg  problem  in  that  prospective
investors would like prior evidence of a liquid market, but liquidity cannot be tested until there has
been issuance. Dilemmas such as these are certainly not unique to Hong Kong.
I acknowledge also that there are perceived obstacles concerning the tax regime, but it is worth noting
that  Hong  Kong  does  have  a  low  overall  tax  environment.  It  is  hard  to  find  solutions  which  fully
satisfy all parties in such matters. It is also worth noting that, in normal market conditions, there is
perhaps less incentive to exploit the potential of the local currency debt market than there might be in
other  centres,  because  of  our  pegged  exchange  rate:  some  borrowers  may  consider  the  US  dollar
3
BIS Review   52/1999
market a satisfactory surrogate, especially given its established liquidity. In that sense we may be a
victim of our own success on the exchange rate front, although I would not wish to place too much
weight on this point - it may be a viable alternative only for a minority. However, if funding needs can
be  properly  satisfied  via  alternative  routes,  we  ought  perhaps  to  rest  content.  Our  role  at  the  Hong
Kong Monetary Authority is to help ensure that the infrastructure will allow the market to develop if
borrowers and lenders wish it to, rather than to force the pace artificially.
I  believe,  however,  that  there  may  be  a  stronger  underlying  interest  in  debt  instruments  among
prospective borrowers and lenders than is currently visible on the surface. The move to list Exchange
Fund notes on the Stock Exchange and the advent of the Mandatory Provident Fund are examples of
potential  significant  new  sources  of  demand  for  debt  instruments.  It  is  a  challenge  for  all  of  us  to
identify  and  exploit  these  and  any  other  pockets  of  latent  interest.  The  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority is in regular dialogue with the Hong Kong Capital Markets Association and we maintain an
open  mind,  and  an  even  more  open  ear,  to  ideas  which  people  like  you  may  have  about  the
development of our markets. I should mention that we have regular contact also with the authorities of
other centres in the region in order that we can gain from each other’s experience in such matters.
Summing up, although I described our market infrastructure in Hong Kong as relatively mature, you
will have realised - if you were ever in any doubt - that there is no shortage of change and of potential
new opportunities, although possibly not so many as in one or two of the other economies, which I
reviewed earlier. I hope that all of you will participate in the continuing evolution of Hong Kong’s
capital markets, and use Hong Kong as your base for incursions into other territories where similar or
greater opportunities exist.
Our  aim  in  Hong  Kong  is  to  provide  an  open  and  welcoming  environment  for  business,  and  to  be
judged on our merits as a truly international centre which possesses that all important critical mass
across the full range of financial, professional and commercial services and is ideally located as a hub
for the region’s future development.
Note: FDI=inward foreign direct investment; for India the first three columns are 1988-
96, and
the fourth 1991-96.
BIS Review   52/1999
4
5
BIS Review   52/1999
