Mr  Greenspan  offers  some  suggestions  to 
architecture
improve  the 
international  financial
Testimony  by  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,
Alan Greenspan, before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the US House of
Representatives on 20 May 1999.
Mr Chairman, Mr. LaFalce, and Members of the Committee, we at the Federal Reserve are in
broad  agreement  with  the  approach  outlined  by  Secretary  Rubin,  and  expect  to  continue  to
work closely with the Treasury in this area.
As  I  have  indicated  previously  before  this  committee,  dramatic  advances  in  computer  and
telecommunications  technologies  in  recent  years  have  enabled  a  broad  unbundling  of  risks
through innovative financial engineering. The financial instruments of a bygone era, common
stocks and debt obligations, have been augmented by a vast array of complex hybrid financial
products that has led to a far more efficient financial system. These same new technologies
and  financial  products,  however,  have  challenged  the  ability  of  inward-looking  and
protectionist  economies  to  maintain  effective  barriers,  which,  along  with  the  superior
performance  of  their  more  open  trading  partners,  has  led,  over  the  past  decade,  to  a  major
dismantling  of  impediments  to  the  free  flow  of  trade  and  capital.  The  new  international
financial system that has evolved as a consequence has been, despite recent setbacks, a major
factor  in  the  marked  increase  in  living  standards  for  those  economies  that  have  chosen  to
participate in it.
Notwithstanding the demonstrable advantages of the new international  financial  system,  the
Mexican  financial  breakdown  in  late  1994  and,  of  course,  the  most  recent  episodes  in  East
Asia and elsewhere have raised questions about the inherent stability of this new system.
These  newly  open  markets  were  exposed  to  a  huge  expansion  in  capital  inflows  that  their
economic  and  financial  systems  were  not  ready  to  absorb.  These  flows  in  turn  were
engendered  by  the  increasing  diversification  out  of  industrial  country  investment  portfolios,
augmented  by  huge  capital  gains  through  1997.  Net  private  capital  inflows  into  emerging
markets  roughly  quadrupled  between  1990  and  the  onset  of  the  Asian  crisis.  Such
diversification was particularly directed at those economies in Asia that had been growing so
vigorously through the 1970s, 1980s, and into the 1990s – the so-called “Asian tigers.” In the
event, these economies were ill prepared to absorb such volumes of funds. There were simply
not enough productive investment opportunities to yield the returns that investors in the West
were seeking. It was perhaps inevitable then that the excess cash found its way in too many
instances into ill conceived and unwisely financed real estate ventures.
What appeared to be a successful locking of currencies onto the dollar over a period of years
in East Asia, led, perhaps inevitably, to large borrowings of cheaper dollars to lend, unhedged,
at elevated domestic interest rates that reflected unheeded devaluation risk premiums. When
the  amount  of  such  unhedged  dollar  borrowings  finally  became  excessive,  as  was  almost
inevitable, the exchange rate broke.
While it might seem that the consequences were easily discernible, they were not. Problems
with imprudently financed real estate investments emerge with chronic frequency around the
globe without triggering the size of the collapse experienced in East Asia in 1997. The size of
1
BIS Review   56/1999
the crisis became evident only when the normal buffers that any economy builds up to absorb
shocks were, in the case of the East Asian economies, so readily breached under pressure.
It  has  taken  the  longstanding  participants  in  the  international  financial  community  many
decades  to  build  sophisticated  financial  and  legal  infrastructures  that  buffer  shocks.  Those
infrastructures  discourage  speculative  attacks  against  a  well  entrenched  currency  because
financial  systems  are  robust  and  are  able  to  withstand  the  consequences  of  vigorous  policy
responses to such attacks. For the newer participants in global finance, their institutions, until
recently,  had  not  been  tested  against  the  rigors  of  major  league  pitching,  to  use  a  baseball
analogy.
The heightened sensitivity of exchange rates of emerging economies under stress would be of
less concern if banks and other financial institutions in those economies were strong and well
capitalized.  Developed  countries’  banks  are  highly  leveraged,  but  subject  to  sufficiently
effective  supervision  both  by  counterparties  and  regulatory  authorities,  so  that,  in  most
countries, banking problems do not escalate into international financial crises. Most banks in
emerging  market  economies  are  also  highly  leveraged,  but  their  supervision  often  has  not
proved adequate to forestall failures and a general financial crisis. The failure of some banks
is highly contagious to other banks and businesses that deal with them, as the Asian crisis has
so effectively demonstrated.
This  weakness  in  banking  supervision  in  emerging  market  economies  was  not  a  major
problem  for  the  rest  of  the  world  prior  to  those  economies’  growing  participation  in  the
international financial system over the past decade or so. Exposure of an economy to short-
term  capital  inflows,  before  its  financial  system  is  sufficiently  sturdy  to  handle  a  large
unanticipated withdrawal, is a highly risky venture.
It thus seems clear that some set of suggested standards that countries should strive to meet
would help the new highly sensitive international financial system function effectively. There
are  many  ways  to  promote  such  standards  without  developing  an  inappropriately  exclusive
and restrictive club of participants.
For example, in any set of standards there should surely be an enhanced level of transparency
in  the  way  domestic  finance  operates  and  is  supervised.  This  is  essential  if  investors  are  to
make more knowledgeable commitments and supervisors are to judge the soundness of such
commitments by their financial institutions. A better understanding of financial regimes as yet
unseasoned  in  the  vicissitudes  of  our  international  financial  system  also  will  enable
counterparties  to  more  appropriately  evaluate  the  credit  standing  of  institutions  investing  in
such financial systems. There should be no mechanism, however, to insulate investors from
making foolish decisions, but some of the ill-advised investing of recent years can be avoided
in  the  future  if  investors,  their  supervisors,  and  counterparties,  are  more  appropriately
forewarned.
To be sure, counterparties often exchange otherwise confidential information as a condition of
a  transaction.  But  broader  dissemination  of  detailed  disclosures  by  governments,  financial
institutions, and firms is required if the greater risks inherent in our vastly expanded global
financial  structure  are  to  be  contained.  A  market  system  can  approach  an  appropriate
equilibrium only if the signals to which individual  market  participants  respond  are  accurate
and adequate to the needs of the adjustment process. Product and asset prices, interest rates,
BIS Review   56/1999
2
debt by maturity, and detailed accounts of central banks and private enterprises are among the
signals  so  essential  to  the  effective  functioning  of  a  global  economy.  I  find  it  difficult  to
believe, for example, that the crises that arose in Thailand and Korea would have been nearly
so virulent had their central banks published data prior to the crises on net reserves instead of
the  not  very  informative  gross  reserve  positions  only.  Some  inappropriate  capital  inflows
would almost surely have been withheld and policymakers would have been forced to make
difficult choices more promptly if earlier evidence of difficulty had emerged.
As  a  consequence,  the  G-10  central  banks  and  the  IMF  initiated  an  effort  to  establish
standards for disclosure of on- and off-balance-sheet foreign currency activities of the public
sector  by  countries  that  participate,  or  aspire  to  participate,  in  international  capital  markets.
The focus of this work was the authorities’ foreign currency liquidity position, which consists
of foreign exchange resources that can be  easily  mobilized,  adjusted  for  potential  drains  on
those resources. This work was part of a larger effort to enhance disclosure of a broader set of
economic and financial data under the IMF Special Data Dissemination Standard.
Such  transparency  suggests  a  second  standard  worth  considering.  Countries  that  lack  the
seasoning of a long history of dealing in international  finance  should  manage  their  external
assets  and  liabilities  in  such  a  way  that  they  are  always  able  to  live  without  new  foreign
borrowing for up to, for example, one year. That is, usable foreign exchange reserves should
exceed scheduled amortizations of foreign currency debts (assuming no rollovers) during the
following  year.  This  rule  could  be  readily  augmented  to  meet  the  additional  test  that  the
average maturity of a country’s external liabilities should exceed a certain threshold, such as
three  years.  This  could  be  accomplished  directly,  or  through  the  myriad  innovations  to
augment maturities through rollover options. The constraint on the average maturity ensures a
degree of private sector “burden sharing” in times of crisis, since in the event of a crisis, the
market value of longer maturities would doubtless fall sharply. Clearly few, if any, locked-in
holders  of  long-term  investments  could  escape  without  significant  loss.  Short-term  foreign
creditors,  on  the  other  hand,  are  able  to  exit  without  significant  loss  as  their  instruments
mature. If the preponderance of a country’ s liabilities are short term, the entire burden of a
crisis would fall on the emerging market economy in the form of a run on reserves.
Some  emerging  market  countries  may  argue  that  they  have  difficulty  selling  long-term
maturities.  If  that  is  indeed  the  case,  their  economies  are  being  exposed  to  too  high  a  risk
generally. For too long, too  many  emerging  market  economies  have  managed  their  external
liabilities so as to minimize their current borrowing cost. This short-sighted approach ignores
the  insurance  imbedded  in  long-term  debt,  insurance  that  is  almost  always  well  worth  the
price.
Adherence  to  such  a  rule  is  no  guarantee  that  all  financial  crises  can  be  avoided.  If  the
confidence  of  domestic  residents  is  undermined,  they  can  generate  demands  for  foreign
exchange that would not be captured in this analysis. But controlling the structure of external
assets and liabilities nonetheless could make a significant contribution to stability.
Considerable  progress  has  been  made  in  recent  years  in  developing  sophisticated  financial
instruments.  These  developments  create  added  complexity  that  all  financial  market
participants,  including  policymakers  from  emerging  market  economies,  must  manage.
However,  they  also  create  opportunities  that  emerging  market  economies  should  seek  to
3
BIS Review   56/1999
exploit.  In  doing  so  there  are  lessons  they  can  learn  from  advances  in  risk  management
strategies developed by major financial institutions.
To the extent that policymakers are unable to anticipate or evaluate the types of complex risks
that the newer financial technologies are producing, the answer, as it always has been, is less
leverage,  i.e.  less  debt,  more  equity,  and,  hence,  a  larger  buffer  against  adversity  and
contagion.
A third standard could be a legal infrastructure that enables the inevitable bankruptcies that
will  occur  in  today’  s  complex  world  to  be  adjudicated  in  a  manner  that  minimizes  the
disruption and contagion that can surface if ready resolutions to default are not available.
A  fourth  standard  is  the  obvious  necessity  of  sound  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  whose
absence  was  so  often  the  cause  of  earlier  international  financial  crises.  With  increased
emphasis  on  private  international  capital  flows,  especially  interbank  flows,  private
misjudgments within flawed economic structures have been the major contributors to recent
problems. But inappropriate macropolicies also have been a factor for some emerging market
economies in the current crisis.
There are, of course, numerous other elements of sound international finance that are worthy
of  detailed  consideration,  but  the  aforementioned  would  constitute  a  good  start.  Even  so,
improvements in transparency, commercial and legal structures, as well as supervision cannot
be implemented quickly. Such improvements and the transition to a more effective and stable
international  financial  system  will  take  time.  The  current  crisis,  accordingly,  has  had  to  be
addressed with ad hoc remedies. It is essential, however, that those remedies not conflict with
a broader vision of how our new international financial system will function as we enter the
next century.
BIS Review   56/1999
4
