Mr Noyer covers several topics on the euro: six months after its introduction
Speech  delivered  by  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
Institute  for  International  Monetary  Affairs’  (IIMA)  seventh  symposium  on  “The  euro:  its
promise and challenge to the world economy” in Tokyo on 6 July 1999.
First, let me thank the organisers of this conference for inviting me to participate in this panel.
Indeed, in my view, the title of this symposium, “The euro: its promise and challenge to the
world economy”, has been well chosen. The introduction of the euro, which was successfully
launched just over six months ago, marks a significant milestone in the process of European
integration and will bring considerable benefits to the nearly 300 million citizens of the euro
area. The introduction of the euro will have a profound impact on the world economy, as well
as  the  euro  area  itself,  in  years  to  come.  However,  the  euro  area  also  faces  a  number  of
challenges if the full potential of the single currency is to be realised.
The organisers have specifically asked me to cover several topics. Therefore, I should like to
start my remarks by considering the current economic situation and the outlook for the euro
area. I shall then explain the relationship between monetary and fiscal policy in the euro area
and deal briefly with the issue of differing economic situations in Member States. Finally, I
should also like to comment briefly on the question of structural reforms.
1. The current economic situation and outlook for the euro area
Real economy
According  to  a  preliminary  estimate  released  by  EUROSTAT  in  mid-June,  overall  output
growth in the euro area stabilised in the first quarter of this year. Real GDP in the first quarter
was  up  0.4%  on  the  previous  quarter,  following  a  gradual  slowdown  from  0.7%  to  0.3%
during the course of 1998.
Even though caution should be exercised when interpreting these figures, since they combine
data compiled partly in accordance with the old methodology and partly with the new (ESA
95), two broad conclusions may be drawn:
1.  While previous data had suggested a rather sharp slowdown in the last quarter of 1998, the
revised data imply a pattern of slowing real GDP growth which was spread more evenly
over the course of 1998.
2.  The weakening of output growth came to a halt during the first quarter of 1999. Data for
industrial production for April 1999 confirm this picture.
Although there is not yet a clear sign of a recovery in the industrial sector, it appears that the
level  of  industrial  production  stabilised  over  the  first  few  months  of  1999;  a  clear
improvement compared with the pronounced decline of around 1% in the last quarter of 1998.
There  have  also  been  positive  indications  of  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  in  recent
business  and  consumer  surveys.  In  particular,  there  was  a  further  slight  rise  in  business
confidence, supported by an improvement in production expectations and a more favourable
assessment  of  export  order  books,  which  may  be  seen  as  representing  the  more  forward-
looking  components  of  the  survey.  At  the  same  time,  consumer  confidence  remains  at  an
1
BIS Review   80/1999
extremely high level; this is consistent with the fact  that  private  consumption  has  remained
robust, supported by real income growth and higher employment.
With regard  to  developments  in  the  external  environment  of  the  euro  area,  there  have  been
some  positive  signs.  US  growth  is  expected  to  remain  strong  in  the  near  term,  forecasts  of
growth for the United Kingdom (a significant trading partner for the euro area) have recently
tended to be revised upwards and, of course, the Kosovo conflict has ended. There are also
indications that prospects for several emerging economies have improved as financial turmoil
has  subsided  and  access  to  international  capital  markets  has  become  easier.  Overall,  recent
forecasts for the world economy suggest that the outlook has stabilised and the risk of a global
recession has receded.
In  all,  there  have  been  some  indications  of  a  turnaround  in  the  industrial  sector  and  of  an
improvement  in  the  external  environment.  Overall,  growth  is  expected  to  strengthen  in  the
course of this year and next. Most observers now expect that real GDP growth in the euro area
will be around 2% this year (compared with close to 3% in 1998) and 2.5% or more in 2000.
Prices
In response to these new data indicating a stabilisation of overall output growth in early 1999
and  an  economic  recovery  during  the  second  part  of  1999  into  the  year  2000,  market
participants  appear  to  have  shifted  their  expectations  towards  a  faster  pace  of  economic
growth.  Combined  with  recent  monetary  and  credit  developments,  this  suggests  that
downward risks to future price stability have receded further. On the other hand, all indicators
we use in  our  monetary  policy  strategy  do  not  signal  upward  inflationary  pressures.  This  is
true for money, with a development of M3 that remains close to the reference value, and also
for  the  other  indicators  (combining  financial  market  and  real  economy  indicators  including
wage  developments)  that  we  use  in  our  broadly-based  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price
developments.
The  euro  area  yield  curve  has  steepened  somewhat  more  recently,  as  a  result  of  a  partial
spillover  of  the  sharp  rise  in  long-term  bond  yields  in  the  United  States  and  the  release  of
slightly  higher-than-expected  real  GDP  data  for  the  euro  area  for  the  first  quarter  of  1999.
However, long-term nominal bond yields in the euro area remain low by historical standards.
Annual consumer price increases in the euro area rose slightly from 0.8% in January 1999 to
1.0% in May. This small increase is mainly due to the impact of higher oil prices. Excluding
seasonal food and energy, which are two of the more volatile components of the Harmonised
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), the rate of increase in consumer prices has continued to fall
slightly  in  recent  months,  to  stand  at  0.9%  in  May.  Recent  forecasts  of  international
organisations for inflation in the euro area over the next one to two years generally point to a
range of around 1.0-1.2% this year and 1.4% in 2000.
Hence, all available evidence points to the conclusion that both in the short and medium term,
price developments should be compatible with the Eurosystem’s definition of price stability,
i.e. with increases in the area-wide HICP remaining below 2%.
Against  this  background,  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  during  its  recent  meetings  to
keep interest rates on the monetary policy instruments unchanged.
BIS Review   80/1999
2
Foreign exchange rate developments
Let me refer briefly to recent exchange rate developments. Since its launch in January 1999
the euro has fluctuated significantly against the currencies of our major trading partners but
currently  stands  at  a  level  that  is  broadly  corresponding  to  the  level  of  its  constituent
currencies that was observed in summer 1997.
This  fluctuation  has  reflected  a  cyclical  divergence  between  the  euro  area  and  the  United
States that is expected to diminish over the course of this year and thereafter. Given that the
euro is a currency firmly based on internal price stability, it therefore has a clear potential for a
stronger  external  value.  Since  the  start  of  Stage  Three  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union
(EMU) the euro has become the second most important international currency in the world,
and the policy of the Eurosystem will safeguard its internal purchasing power, which is a basis
for a solid and stable currency over the medium term.
2. The Eurosystem’s monetary policy and fiscal policies of Member States
I should like to emphasise that the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy is geared towards
the maintenance of price stability for the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Before  the  establishment  of
Monetary Union, monetary policies in the countries that have now formed the euro area could,
at  least  in  principle,  have  reacted  to  country-specific  developments.  However,  with  the
introduction  of  the  single  currency  monetary  policy  decisions  must  be  based  on  area-wide,
rather than national, considerations. Clearly, to the extent that national developments have an
impact  on  area-wide  developments,  the  single  monetary  policy  takes  these  factors  into
account, but the focus of monetary policy is on area-wide indicators.
The Treaty on European Union provides a fundamentally sound allocation of objectives and
instruments  between  the  single  monetary  policy  and  national  fiscal  policies  in  Europe.  The
Eurosystem is responsible for maintaining price stability. The Treaty also states that it shall
support the general economic policies in the Community without prejudice to the objective of
price  stability.  There  is  a  widely  shared  view  that  maintaining  price  stability  is  the  best
contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  a  high  level  of  output  and  employment  in  the
medium term.
As  regards  fiscal  policy,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  was  agreed  by  EU  Member
States in order to avoid excessive deficits, provides countries in the euro area with a common
code  of  fiscal  conduct  that  requires  discipline  in  the  management  of  government  finances.
Member States are committed to respecting the medium-term budgetary objective of positions
close  to  balance  or  in  surplus.  Safeguarding  sound  government  finances  is  a  means  of
strengthening  the  conditions  for  price  stability  and  of  achieving  strong  sustainable  growth,
which is conducive to employment creation. An open exchange of information among policy-
makers  is  helpful  for  a  proper  assessment  of  the  impact  that  fiscal  policies  have  on
developments in the euro area as a whole. This assessment will form one input - among others
- into monetary policy decisions aimed at maintaining price stability over the medium term.
One  of  the  fora  via  which  such  an  exchange  of  views  is  carried  out  is  the  regular  Euro-11
meetings with the Ministers of Finance of the euro area in which the President of the ECB and
I  participate.  Other  exchanges  will  in  the  future  take  place  in  the  macroeconomic  dialogue
established  in  the  context  of  the  European  Employment  Pact,  which  will  bring  together
representatives of the Council of Ministers, the Commission, the ECB and the social partners
in  the  form  of  a  “macroeconomic  dialogue”.  However,  I  should  emphasise  that  these  other
3
BIS Review   80/1999
exchanges  remain  limited  to  an  exchange  of  information  and  do  not  interfere  with  the
responsibility of individual policy areas.
3. The need for structural reforms to promote high and sustainable economic growth
I should like to emphasise how important it is that monetary policy is supported by structural
measures to improve the functioning of labour, product and capital markets. This would also
enable the economies of the euro area to operate at a higher degree of resource utilisation and
thus make better use of the available productive capacity. In particular, it is widely recognised
that  the  euro  area  faces  a  problem  of  high  and  persistent  unemployment,  which  is  largely
structural in nature. There is therefore, a pressing need for measures targeted at making labour
and  product  markets  work  more  flexibly.  Furthermore,  flexible  labour  and  product  markets
are also important to enable national economies to adapt to shocks, particularly those that do
not  affect  the  countries  of  the  euro  area  equally.  Monetary  policy  has  to  maintain  price
stability  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  so  national  labour  and  product  markets  need  to  be
flexible enough to adjust to such shocks.
Although some countries have adopted a wide range of measures, the progress made so far in
pursuing structural reforms has been uneven and not yet satisfactory overall. However, there
are some encouraging signs. Over the past few years, the European Community has stepped
up its efforts in this field, aiming to co-ordinate and improve Member States’ policies in the
field  of  employment  and  labour  market  reform  and  to  initiate  reforms  that  improve  the
functioning  of  goods,  services  and  capital  markets.  The  experience  of  countries  that  have
undertaken  significant  reform  programmes  shows  that  it  takes  time  to  implement  structural
reforms and even longer for the benefits of these reforms to materialise in full, but that these
reforms  bring  about  swift  progress  in  employment  creation  and  the  reduction  of
unemployment.
Finally,  let  me  stress  that  while  there  are  challenges  ahead,  the  independence  of  the
Eurosystem,  together  with  the  clear  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area,
provides  a  solid  foundation  for  the  long-term  stability  of  the  euro.  The  first  six  months  of
1999 have seen the successful launch of the new currency. In the coming years the euro will
make  an  important  contribution  to  further  economic  and  financial  integration,  helping  to
improve the growth potential of European economies.
BIS Review   80/1999
4
