Mr Duisenberg presents a few observations about the
challenges facing the European Union in the years ahead
Speech  given  by  Dr Willem F Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Edmond
Israel Foundation in Luxembourg on 11 November 1999.
 Dear Mr Israel, dear Mr Waigel, Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a great honour to be here today to receive the prestigious “Vision of Europe” award. It is with
great pleasure that I accept this honour. I perceive this award as encouragement for the continued work
of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  towards  making  our  new  common  currency  a  success  and
delivering its benefits to business, consumers and to European citizens in general.
As  a  central  banker,  my  business  is  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  which  is  an  inherently
forward-looking task. Given the long time-lags with which monetary policy decisions impact on price
levels,  the  very  essence  of  our  work  is  to  estimate  today  what  risks  there  will  be  to  price  stability
tomorrow - and to act accordingly. While it appears that the Governing Council of the ECB has so far
shown  sound  judgement  and  a  steady  hand  in  the  conduct  of  its  forward-looking  policy,  as  central
bankers we do not pretend to be able to see into the future. What we can do is to assess future trends
and their potential impact on price stability on the basis of a thorough examination of past and current
developments,  using  a  comprehensive  range  of  analytical  and  empirical  tools.  It  is  with  this  acute
awareness of the limitations of our ability to discern future developments, not only in the monetary
and economic spheres,  but  also in  the  political  realm,  that  I  shall  present  to  you  some  observations
about  the  challenges  facing  the  European  Union  in  the  years  ahead.  Using  the  “central  banker’s
toolkit”, I shall attempt to make a modest contribution to the endeavour which gave its name to this
award - to shape a “Vision of Europe”.
The European Union today - integration in “small steps” and “great leaps”
The  European  Union  at  the  end  of  this  century  represents  an  unprecedented,  imaginative  and
successful model for the management of international relations. Not only have the original objectives
of  European  integration  so  far  been  achieved,  namely  to  ensure  peace  and  prosperity  in  what  has
historically been a conflict-ridden part of the world, but also the European Community - and later the
European Union - has managed to adjust to the manifold challenges of its more than 40-year history.
Such  is  its  attractiveness  that  there  are  now  many  non-member  countries  keen  to  join,  and  it  now
represents the predominant European framework to such an extent that the European Union has almost
become a synonym for “Europe”.
Of course, “Rome was not built in a day”, and likewise the progress of European integration has been
a long and gradual process, with many obstacles, detours and setbacks on the way. I do not have time
to recall the entire history of European integration from Winston Churchill’s famous Zürich speech to
the most recent decisions at the Tampere European Council. However, allow me to share with you a
few  observations  about  the  method  and  manner  in  which  European  integration  has  moved  forward
and, in this way, joined together European states and their economies. It is by discerning past trends
and developments that we can shed light on the prospects for Europe in the coming years.
The Treaty establishing the European Community stipulates an “ever closer union of the peoples of
Europe”  as  one  of  its  principal  objectives.  In  doing  so,  the  founding  fathers  of  the  Community
formulated a dynamic, comprehensive, and purposely equivocal “vision of Europe” as the centrepiece
of  the  integration  project.  In  pursuing  this  objective,  Europe  has  often  followed  a  process  of
incremental  steps.  Having  placed  the  ambition  to  create  a  common  market  without  frontiers  at  the
heart of the integration project, the European Community has made continuous progress, frequently in
1
BIS Review 125/1999
response to the functional needs of the integrating economies. In this way, the EC has now reached an
advanced  stage  of economic  integration,  with a  functioning  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)
and a common currency, the euro.
Throughout this process, national policymakers, economic actors and the general public have had to
undergo a learning process, a change of perception, whereby the previous, narrowly defined, national
perspective had to be gradually superseded. This did not mean an end to conflicts of interest, but the
structures  and  policies  of  the  Community  have  helped  to  build  a  climate  of  mutual  trust  and
understanding, allowing differences to be resolved in a spirit of compromise, albeit not always easily.
At times, however, the integration process was propelled forward in “great leaps”, as in the case of the
agreement on the Treaty on European Union. Who knows whether the ECB would exist today, had it
not been for the far-reaching institutional changes agreed at Maastricht. External developments have
repeatedly galvanised Europeans into bold moves. In the early 1990s, for instance, the historic changes
in Central and Eastern Europe, and in particular the unification of Germany, undoubtedly contributed
to focusing the minds of European leaders on the Maastricht project.
In  retrospect,  it  appears  that  the  complementarity  of  these  two  methods - continuous  incremental
change and exceptional bold steps - has been a recurring element in the integration process so far. By
using  these insights  from  the  history  of  European  integration  and  by  observing  the  behavioural  and
institutional patterns established over the past decades, one can endeavour to identify the challenges
ahead and assess the EU’s capacity to deal with them.
Allow  me  to  turn  now  to  these  very  challenges  faced  by  the  Europe  of  the  future.  From  a  central
banker’s perspective, three main challenges can be identified, and I shall address them in turn. I should
like to begin with the challenge closest to the heart of the President of the ECB, namely that of making
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  a  success.  Thereafter  I  shall  turn  to  the  challenge  of  extending  the
“European project” within Europe, and finally touch upon Europe’s role in the wider world.
Making Economic and Monetary Union a success
1.
Economic  and  monetary  union  as  set  out  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  transfers  the  competence  for  the
conduct of a single monetary policy into the hands of a new supranational institution, the Eurosystem,
with  the  ECB  at  its  centre.  At  the  same  time,  economic  policies  have  essentially  remained  the
competence  of  the  Member  States.  With  this  particular  distribution  of  responsibilities,  all  involved
- central bankers, governments, businesses, and trade unions - indeed face a very special challenge.
The Eurosystem, for its part, contributes to the success of EMU by pursuing its Treaty mandate, which
is to maintain price stability in the euro area over the medium term. While we can look back on the
first  10 months  of  the  operation  of  our  monetary  policy  with  considerable  satisfaction,  we  cannot
afford  to  sit  back  in  idle  contentment.  The  ECB  is  a  novel  and  unique  institution,  and  in  the
performance  of  its  tasks  it  is  still  navigating  uncharted  waters.  The  ECB  must  formulate  a  single
monetary policy for an economic area made up of 11 distinct national economic policy jurisdictions.
Our monetary policy decisions must thus always be oriented towards the conditions of this currency
zone as a whole, since monetary policy by its nature is one and indivisible. Precisely this is our Treaty
mandate. The ECB must develop into a truly European institution and we are making good progress in
that direction.
EMU has already proved to be a success in the financial markets. A unified, euro area-wide money
market, which is essential for the smooth functioning of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations,
was successfully established right from the start of Stage Three of EMU. In this process, the successful
operation  of  cross-border  transfer  and  payment  systems  has  certainly  contributed  to  the  proper
functioning,  depth  and  liquidity  of  the  unified  money  market.  We are  also  witnessing  a  widespread
acceptance of our new currency in the bond markets, where both sovereign and corporate borrowers
are making use of the more favourable financing conditions created by the introduction of the euro.
Thus, the emergence of a deep and liquid bond market is already well advanced. Furthermore, the new
currency  appears  to  be  lending  urgency  to  the  increasing  integration  of  equity  markets,  where  the
BIS Review 125/1999
2
ongoing process of consolidation in the financial services and banking industries is exerting pressure
to cut costs and enhance liquidity.
While the financial markets have adapted relatively quickly and successfully to the reality of EMU,
this complex adjustment process will necessarily take longer in some other areas of economic policy.
The new conditions brought about by the single currency - where monetary policy is exogenously set
by the Eurosystem - will demand a steep learning curve on the part of policymakers, businesses, trade
unions  and  the  public  at  large.  In  this  context,  it  has  often  been  questioned,  also  from  within  the
central  banking  community,  whether  EMU  can  be  made  a  success  in  the  absence  of  some  form  of
“political union”.
Can EMU work without a “political union”?
From the very outset, monetary union in Europe has been conceived as a complement to the Single
Market, a logic neatly encapsulated in the title of the Delors Report study: “One market, one money”.
Europe’s Single Market already represents a remarkable degree of economic integration. A plethora of
common rules govern economic life in the 15 Member States and create, to a large extent at least, a
unified market serving more than 350 million people. The realisation of the free movement of goods,
services,  capital  and  people  has  integrated  national  economies  and  rendered  national  borders
increasingly obsolete. A common competition policy works towards creating a level playing-field, and
common  norms  and  standards  guarantee  Europe-wide  market  access.  Certainly,  Europe’s  Single
Market  is  yet  to  be  fully  completed  and  a  number  of  sectors  have  yet  to  be  fully  liberalised  and
brought into the remit of common rules. Nevertheless, the notion of a unified  “European economy”
has undoubtedly acquired real substance.
A functioning Economic and Monetary Union will require an increased awareness on the part of all
Member States of the spillover effect of their national policies, especially their budgetary policies. In
order  to  anchor  responsible  policies  in  the  EMU  rule  book,  the  Treaty  itself  contains  stipulations
which oblige Member States to treat national economic policies “as a matter of common concern” and
subject  them  to  a  multilateral  surveillance  procedure.  More  specific  and  detailed  rules  apply  to
budgetary policies, such as those enshrined in the 1997  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  (the  existence  of
which  is  to  a  considerable  degree  due  to  the  impetus  of  Theo Waigel).  These  provisions  derive
additional force from the existence of sanctions in the event of persistent excessive deficits.
Our first experiences with these EU-level economic policy instruments show that the consolidation of
public finances has indeed become a priority for all Member States, and that efforts, although as yet
not always sufficiently ambitious, have been undertaken to achieve balanced budgets in the medium
term. Given Member States’ high overall debt burden, the Eurosystem continues to call for heightened
efforts to this end, especially in times of cyclical upturn such as that which we are experiencing at the
current juncture.
One of the main challenges for the longer-term success of EMU - and the European integration project
as  a  whole - is  to  achieve  a  significant  and  lasting  reduction  in  unemployment,  which  remains
persistently high in large parts of the euro area. While the current upswing should help to cut cyclical
unemployment,  the  euro  area  economy  will  only  create  more  employment  in  the  longer  term - and
achieve  sustainably  higher  rates  of  non-inflationary  growth - if  the  necessary  structural  reforms  are
enacted. However, it is encouraging to see a growing recognition among policymakers in Europe that
over-regulation  of  labour  markets,  perverse  incentives  created  by  certain  elements  of  the  welfare
systems and rigidities throughout the economy urgently need to be addressed. In so doing, Member
States  are  increasingly  willing  to  learn  from  each  other,  to  accept  “peer  pressure”  and  to  follow
examples of “best practice”. Ultimately, EMU will be a success if all policymakers learn, in their areas
of  competence,  to  pursue  policies  which  respect  the  common  rules,  and  take  full  account  of  their
responsibility  for  the  euro  area  economy  as  a  whole.  If  we  understand  the  somewhat  indeterminate
notion of “political union” in terms of such a comprehensive system of common principles, rules and
commitments, then the future success of Economic and Monetary Union can already be said to rest on
a solid foundation.
3
BIS Review 125/1999
While  central  bankers  and  politicians  can  make  a  weighty  contribution to  the  proper  functioning  of
EMU,  our  common  currency  will  only  become  a  long-term  success  if  it  is  accepted  by  European
citizens.  For  this  to  happen,  the  Eurosystem  will  have  to  acquire  a  track  record  of  stability  which
clearly demonstrates to the public the benefits of stable prices. As a new generation grows up without
the experiences of the detrimental effects of inflation on growth, employment, savings and investment
the  Eurosystem  will  have  to  communicate  effectively  the  significance  of  maintaining  price  stability
and explain how monetary policy operates towards achieving this goal.
A currency is a powerful symbol of identity. In order to make our common currency a symbol of a
shared  European  identity,  all  policymakers  involved  will  have  to  make  efforts  to  demonstrate  its
benefits  to  all  citizens.  This  will  be  especially  important  when  a  particular  region  of  the  euro  area
suffers  an  economic  downturn.  In  such  circumstances,  it  might  become  a  difficult  political  task  to
maintain public support for EMU and to explain its fundamentally positive effects. The Eurosystem
will for  its  part  continue to  make  its  contribution  by  providing  stable  money  for  the  euro  area  as  a
whole.
Learning to live under the new conditions of Economic and Monetary Union is necessarily a gradual
process. However, momentous changes in Europe and in the wider world might well require the EU to
undertake  bolder  endeavours  in  order  to  successfully  meet  the  challenges  ahead.  I  am  referring  in
particular to the forthcoming enlargement of the EU on an unprecedented scale.
Taking on the responsibility for the “Greater Europe”
2.
The  principal  objective  of  European  integration  remains  as  valid  today  as  it  was  50 years  ago,
although the dimensions of this endeavour have certainly changed. Today, the European Union faces
the challenge of “exporting” to the eastern half of our continent its model for a zone of peace, stability
and prosperity.
The fall of the Berlin Wall 10 years ago prepared the ground for the countries of Central and Eastern
Europe to “return to Europe”. The clearest expression of the redirection of the foreign policy of those
countries was their application for membership of the European Union. This intention was supported
by  the  dynamics  of  increasing  trade  integration  with  the  EU,  and - I  should  like  to  add - the  moral
force  of  the  historical  and  cultural  claim  of  those  countries  to  regain  their  place  in  the  family  of
Europe.
Creating the right economic and political conditions, preparing the European institutions and adjusting
common  policies  in  anticipation  of  the  eventual  integration  into  the  European  Union  of  up  to
12 countries from Central, Eastern and Southern Europe is a task of great historical magnitude. It will
require great efforts and sometimes difficult adjustment both on the part of the EU itself and on the
part of the applicant countries.
The  greatest  challenge  which  the  accession  countries  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  are  facing  is
certainly  the  transformation  of  their  formerly  centrally  planned  economies  to  functioning  market
economies able to withstand the competitive pressures of European and global markets, while at the
same time establishing stable and democratic political systems. While a successful mastering of these
challenges is certainly a desirable goal in itself, their importance has been reinforced by the fact that
the  EU  has  stipulated  their  attainment  as  conditions  for  accession  in  the  so-called  “Copenhagen
criteria”.  The  third  of  these  criteria  relates  to  the  capacity  of  the  applicant  countries  to  adopt  and
implement the “acquis communautaire”. On the latter issue, the Eurosystem naturally has a particular
interest in the provisions relating to the activities falling within its field of competence.
EU enlargement and the Eurosytem
Upon  accession  to  the  EU,  the  new  Member  States  will  have  to  comply  with  the  EMU-related
“acquis”. In fact, they will join EMU with the status of a “Member State with a derogation”. From
this  point  onwards,  they  will  be  expected  not  only  to  treat  their  economic  policies  as  a  matter  of
common concern, but also to be committed to the eventual adoption of the euro, which should be an
objective both of monetary and of other economic policies. The new entrants  would be  expected to
BIS Review 125/1999
4
participate in the exchange rate mechanism (ERM II) which will link their currencies to the euro as
soon as their economic and financial situation allows. Once the new Member States are judged to have
fulfilled the Maastricht criteria in a sustainable manner, they would become full participants in EMU.
As these explanations already indicate, the Eurosystem takes an open and positive attitude towards the
accession  of  new  Member  States  and  their  eventual  adoption  of  the  euro.  Over  and  above  its
aforementioned  interest  in  the  applicant  countries’  EMU-related  accession  preparations,  the
Eurosystem  stands  ready  to  provide  technical  assistance.  The  actual  accession  process  should  be
guided  by  the  principle  of  equal  treatment,  whereby  objective  and  uniform  criteria  should  apply  to
accession, to participation in ERM II and adoption of the euro. In this regard, a plurality of approaches
should  be  feasible  without  compromising  equality  of  treatment.  Given  the  accession  countries’
different  starting-points  and  degrees  of  economic  transition,  they  could  justifiably  apply  differing
approaches to the timing of EU accession, to ERM  II  membership, to  their  monetary  and  exchange
rate strategies and the necessary development of sound financial market infrastructures.
Internal reform and deepening of the EU as a precondition for enlargement
While the accession preparations certainly constitute an extremely demanding adjustment and reform
programme for the applicant countries, there should be no denying that the European Union, too, will
have to reform its institutions and decision-making structures in order to be able to welcome the new
Member  States.  By  agreeing  to  convene  an  Intergovernmental  Conference  next  year,  the  Member
States  have  taken  the  first  steps  in  this  direction.  However,  it  remains  to  be  seen  whether  this
forthcoming renegotiation of the Treaty will be an example of the aforementioned incremental change
with a strictly limited scope for reform; or, alternatively, whether Member States opt to take a “leap
forward”, by embarking on an ambitious root-and-branch  overhaul  of  institutions and  procedures in
order to prepare the Union for a large-scale enlargement and guarantee its capacity for action way into
the next century.
More fundamentally, in an enlarged Community, all Member States will have to recognise that they
form part of a multi-layered system of commitments and interdependencies, of rights and obligations,
now reinforced by the introduction of the single currency. The immense body of common legislation,
EMU and the euro, the financial transfers through structural funds and, more recently, ambitious plans
to  cooperate  more  closely  in  foreign  and  security  policies  as  well  as  on  justice  and  home  affairs
represent the “cement” which safeguards the European Union as a whole against the centrifugal forces
which are likely to increase as it grows wider and more diverse. In this context, past experiences - such
as  the  use  of the  EMU  convergence  criteria as  a  means  of  exerting  “peer  pressure” - might  provide
lessons for the successful pursuit of ambitious integration projects in other areas.
Allow  me  now  to  turn  to  challenges  which  lie  beyond  the  borders  of  a  future  enlarged  European
Union. The recent conflict in Kosovo raised an acute awareness of the EU’s responsibility to project
stability onto more volatile regions of Europe and beyond. As set out above, it was again the force of
external  events  which  led  European  leaders  to  reach  a  new  consensus  on  the  necessity  to  give  the
Union  effective  capacity  for  action  in  the  foreign  policy  and  security  fields.  A  number  of  political
initiatives  and  institutional  innovations  are  being  prepared  in  this  context.  Extending  the  European
zone  of  stability  and  prosperity  also  requires  sound  economic  and  monetary  conditions, including  a
functioning  financial  system  in  the  regions  concerned.  The  Eurosystem  has  noted  the  unilateral
decision of the Montenegrin government to introduce the Deutsche Mark - effectively the euro - as a
parallel  currency  in  its  territory,  following  on  from  a  similar  decision  by  the  United  Nations
Administration in Kosovo. In this context, I should like to make it absolutely clear that such unilateral
action in no way commits the Eurosystem. It is rather the case that in our monetary policy decisions
we will always follow the precise mandate given by the Treaty - namely to maintain price stability in
the euro area over the medium term.
In  the  past,  the  European  Union  has  often  been  accused  of  being  “obsessed  with  its  own  internal
dynamics”  and  having  little  regard  for  the  outside  world.  However,  not  least  as  a  result  of  the
introduction of the euro, the EU must increasingly look beyond the confines of the European continent
and  shoulder  its  responsibilities  with  regard  to  securing  a  well-functioning  world  economy.  It  is  to
these external challenges that I shall now turn.
5
BIS Review 125/1999
Europe and the Eurosystem in the world economy
3.
The  euro  is  the  currency  of  an  economic  area  with  a  population  of  nearly  300 million  people  and
one-sixth of the world’s gross domestic product. Both figures will increase as new countries adopt the
euro.  After  the  US dollar,  but  ahead  of  the  Japanese  yen,  the  euro  is  the  second  most  widely  used
currency  on  a  worldwide  scale.  With  these  facts  in  mind,  it  can  be  expected  that  the  euro  and  the
Eurosystem will hold a significant position in the world economy. What is more, I believe it would not
be an exaggeration to state that, with its single currency, the European economy is set to play a role of
systemic importance.
That said, the Eurosystem does not actively promote an international role for the euro, nor do we seek
to hinder it. There is and shall be no policy of challenging the position of the dollar, nor that of any
other  currency.  By  adopting  this  neutral  stance,  the  development  of  the  euro  into  an  international
currency is left to market forces. If the Eurosystem is successful in maintaining price stability it will
almost automatically foster the euro’s international role. It is difficult to predict precisely at what pace
the  euro  will  acquire  its  international  role.  If  history  is  any  guide,  it  may  well  be  a  rather  gradual
process,  although  I  would  not  rule  out  that  this  time  it  may  well  evolve  faster  than  historical
experience might suggest. As a consequence, European policymakers will have to recognise that this
newly found global importance also brings with it new responsibilities and challenges.
Europe can and should be a strong advocate of a functioning world economy. This entails a credible
commitment  to  trade  and  capital  account  liberalisation.  While  it  is  not  for  me  to  comment  on  the
EU stance with regard to the forthcoming Millennium Round on trade liberalisation, it is obvious that
it is in the interests of the European Union that the various international organisations devoted to the
management of the world economy function smoothly. Given its economic and financial weight, the
EU  should  play  a  constructive  role  in,  inter  alia,  the  World  Trade  Organisation (WTO),  the
International  Monetary  Fund (IMF)  and  the  Group  of  Seven (G7).  As  for  the  Eurosystem,  the
institutional changes brought about by EMU have made it possible for the first time for Europeans to
speak with one voice on monetary and financial matters. As the President of the ECB, I participate in
parts of the G7 meetings; the ECB will be represented at the newly established G20, and we also enjoy
observer status at the IMF. In addition, we are to become a shareholder of the Bank for International
Settlements (BIS).
The Eurosystem considers the various fora for international cooperation as important instruments for
managing  the  increasing  trend  towards  globalised  economy  and  finance.  The  high  degree  of
international  capital  mobility  and  technological  advances  have  created  interdependencies  which  call
for  new  forms  of  global “governance”.  In  this  vein,  we  support  efforts to improve  the  international
financial system and to enhance the transparency of financial institutions as proposed, inter alia, by
the  IMF,  to  coordinate the  work  of  banking  supervisors  as  advocated  by  the  Bank  for  International
Settlements, and to work towards greater systemic stability with emerging countries as instituted by
the G20.
As  already  mentioned  above,  EMU  is  set  to  propel  the  EU  economy  into  a  role  of  systemic
importance. Assuming this new responsibility for the stability of the international financial system as a
whole, however, should not be misinterpreted as a move towards managing exchange rates between
the world’s three leading currencies. In our view, exchange rates are primarily the outcome of current
and  expected  monetary,  fiscal  and  structural  policies  as  well  as  cyclical  and  other  economic
developments, rather than an objective or target of monetary policy. Having said that, the Eurosystem
does not regard the exchange rate with “benign neglect”. The external value of the euro is an important
policy indicator insofar as it influences the outlook for price stability in the euro area.
I shall now come to a conclusion.
Conclusion
4.
As has become clear from my observations, the EU is facing a demanding but equally exciting agenda
for the years and decades to come. I am confident that Europe will cope with the challenges ahead by
continuing its clearly focused but nevertheless flexible approach. While some bold, integrative steps
BIS Review 125/1999
6
may  at  times  be  required  in  response  to  external  developments,  Europe’s  policymakers,  economic
agents, and most importantly, its citizens must be given the time to gradually adapt to the conditions
brought about by the single currency, to cope with the dynamics of the “Greater Europe” and to realise
the increased responsibility of an integrated Europe in the wider world. It is in this way, and with a
substantial effort on the part of all those involved - bodies, institutions and citizens alike - that Europe
will be ready to face the challenges ahead.
7
BIS Review 125/1999
