Mr Bäckström reviews some topical
monetary policy issues in Sweden
Speech given by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board
of Directors and President of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Swedish Bond Promotion,
Stockholm, on 4 October 1999.
 This  year’s  economic  growth  in  Sweden  has  been  impressively  strong.  GDP  growth  in  the  first
half-year, on the first half of 1998, was 3.4%. The number in employment has risen by approximately
100,000 persons. As many people are returning to the labour market now that more jobs are becoming
available,  the  reduction  of  unemployment  has  not  been  as  marked.  But  total  as  well  as  registered
unemployment is falling from the previously high levels.
This  has  been  accompanied  by  price  increases  that  are  moderate.  To  date  this  year,  inflation’s
underlying  rate  –  measured  by  UNDIX,  which  excludes  interest  expenditure,  indirect  taxes  and
subsidies – has fluctuated between 1.0 and 1.5%.
The picture since the summer seems to point to a continuation of favourable growth and employment,
with  no  immediate  threats  to  price  stability.  But  we  have  to  be  on  our  guard,  particularly  as  the
economy is now in an upward phase. Due to the time lag in monetary policy, the Riksbank’s interest
rate  decisions  have  to  be  based  on  the  prospects  fairly  far  ahead.  The  most  relevant  period  for  our
deliberations is the outlook for inflation twelve to twenty-four months ahead.
Looking back
The  current  picture  of  the  Swedish  economy  is  very  different  from  the  situation  at  the  time  of  this
assembly  last  year.  The  mood  was  then  clouded  by  the  Asian  crisis,  Russia’s  suspension  of  debt
payments,  the  problems  with  the  hedge  fund  Long  Term  Capital  Management  and  an  international
share price fall.
The  hedge  fund  problems  aroused  fears  that  banks  in  general  would  become  so  cautious  about
providing credit that this by itself would paralyse the global economy. That such a credit crunch was
in fact imminent last autumn  was  indicated  by  the  widening  interest  rate  spreads to  borrowers  with
good and less good credit ratings.
Last  autumn’s  financial  crisis  accordingly  added  to  the  negative  real  economic  effects  that  were
expected  to  come  from  the  crisis  in  Asia.  Forecasters  reassessed  the  world  economic  outlook  and
revised their growth and inflation forecasts downwards. Central banks around the world did the same
and  the  Riksbank  was  no  exception.  Instrumental  rates  were  cut  in  many  countries.  Between  June
1998 and spring 1999 the Riksbank reduced the repo rate in a number of steps from 4.40 to 2.90%,
that is, by a total of 150 basis points.
The  repercussions  of the  financial  disturbances  that  have  hit  the  world  economy  in  recent  years  do
seem to have been moderated by the actions taken by central banks. To some extent, the process also
tends to rectify itself. So all in all, the economic prospects for the coming years have brightened again,
for the world in general as well as for Sweden.
But this does not mean that the international economy has been inoculated against new, unexpected
shocks.  Remember  that  noone  predicted the extent and  course  of  the  Asian  crisis.  Neither  were  the
risks that led to last autumn’s international financial turbulence highlighted in advance.
Our knowledge of phenomena of this kind is limited. It may be asked whether it will ever be possible
to predict such matters accurately. The models with leading indicators that are being tested at present
1
BIS Review 106/1999
tend to be too blunt. They are liable to sound the alarm about things that never occur and miss those
that do happen.
The picture is bright at present but we know that some countries are in a vulnerable position that can
suddenly deteriorate. Stock market prices are notably high, not least in the United States. The existing
imbalances  in  the  US  economy  may  have  effects  in  the  future.  But  as  the  course  of  such  events  is
genuinely difficult to foresee, central banks have little option but to deal with a new situation if and
when it arises.
Repo rate too low in a longer perspective
After the series of reductions, the repo rate is currently 2.90%. Over a complete business cycle, such a
level would probably be too low, even in an economy where inflation expectations have settled down
around the targeted rate of 2%.
So the present monetary stance can be said to be relatively expansionary. With the budgetary measures
that  have  been  proposed,  the  fiscal  stance  will  also  exert  an  effect  on  demand  that  is  more
expansionary  in  the  future.  In  the  absence  of  negative  shocks,  such  a  direction  of  policy  normally
tends to generate GDP growth above the rate that the economy is capable of sustaining in the longer
run. If such a situation is allowed to continue for too long, it can lead to problems with bottlenecks and
inflationary  tendencies.  In  time,  expectations  of  inflation’s  level  in  the  longer  run  may  be  adjusted
upwards and this can result in a price and wage spiral that brings inflation above the targeted rate.
Such  a  course  of  events  has  to  be  prevented  by  the  Riksbank,  which  the  Riksdag  (Sweden’s
parliament) has made accountable for maintaining price stability. So sooner or later the level of the
repo  rate  will  have  to  be  normalised  in  order  to  counter  an  acceleration  of  inflation  in  an  upward
cyclical phase. This is something that the Riksbank is discussing, as was evident from the published
minute of the Executive Board meeting on 12 August. In the present circumstances what we have to
do is decide when – not whether – the time has come to initiate the shift towards a less expansionary
monetary stance.
As regards the timing of this type of monetary policy measure, it is generally true to say that if the
Riksbank waits too long before making a necessary repo rate adjustment, when the increase does come
it may have to be larger than otherwise in order to arrest the overheating and inflationary tendencies.
That could introduce undue instability into output and employment.
A  higher  repo  rate  does  not  necessarily  impede  the  continuation  of  a  favourable  economic  trend;  it
may  even  be  required  for  a  good  and  sustained  development  of  employment  and  growth,  as  is
illustrated by how the Federal Reserve has acted in the United States. A judicious series of increases in
the federal funds rate seems to have contributed to the longest post-war period of growth in the United
States. Since it was raised by degrees from 3% from 1994 to 1995, the American instrumental rate has
moved between 4.5 and 6%.
Having said this, it must be realised that there is no simple answer to the question of what constitutes a
judicious timing or magnitude of a repo rate increase. One alternative, of course, is to act early and
make  a  small  increase  even  though  indications  of  growing  inflationary  pressure  have  not  actually
shown  up.  Such  a line  can  be seen  as insuring  against  the  adverse  consequences  an  acceleration  of
inflation might entail. In my opinion, however, there are other aspects that it is important to analyse
and incorporate in the assessment.
Lower inflation propensity?
One reason for greater circumspection today in monetary policy is that the trade-off between growth
and inflation may have changed. During the 1990s the paths of inflation and real economic activity in
many countries, Sweden included, have not followed the pattern that their earlier relationship suggests.
This  has  started  a  discussion,  in  the  United  States  and  elsewhere,  of  whether  macroeconomic
structures  have  changed  so  that  higher  growth  is  now  feasible  without  inflationary  tendencies.  It  is
BIS Review 106/1999
2
sometimes argued, for example, that one of the forces behind today’s improved economic performance
in the United States is the rapid advances in computer technology and telecommunications; this has
led to more efficient processes for production and distribution and thereby paved the way for higher
productivity growth.
Productivity  in  the  United  States  does  appear  to  have  been  rising  more  strongly.  Some  observers
consider that the potential annual growth rate may have moved up from 2% to up to 3%, perhaps even
more.
In  Sweden,  too,  there  are  many  indications  that  the  growth  of  labour  productivity  in  the  1990s  has
been higher than in the 1980s. The upward shift may perhaps amount to half of a percentage point. It
is this that has prompted the common, but not entirely certain, estimate that the Swedish economy can
now sustain an annual growth rate between 2 and 2.5%. But Swedish statistics do not yet confirm that
productivity and thereby potential growth have increased fairly appreciably, as has been the case in the
United States. In time, however, the pace of developments in computerisation and telecommunications
will probably also have a major impact on production and distribution systems in Sweden. Sweden is
well to the fore in the use of the Internet. Still, it is not yet clear when these developments will exert a
more general effect on growth.
A  point  worth  noting  is  that  the  upward  shift  in  US  productivity  growth  occurred  fairly  late  in  the
business cycle. The Swedish economy has not reached that stage. Over a normal cycle, without any
impulses  from  an  improvement  in  potential  growth,  statistics  show  that  productivity  gains  tend  to
slacken towards the end of the upward phase. That was the case in Sweden, for example, in the late
1980s.
Now  that  low  inflation  has  been  established,  it  is  conceivable  that  the  Swedish  economy  functions
differently, so that productivity growth might also be better here in the coming years. The example of
the United Kingdom, however, suggests otherwise. Activity there has been relatively stronger than in
most other European countries but clear signs of better productivity growth are still not discernible.
If there is no direct evidence that it is appreciably higher productivity that lies behind the decreased
inflation  propensity  in  Sweden  in  the  1990’s,  where  should  we  look  for  an  explanation?  I  want  to
discuss  two  possibilities:  the  inflation  process  as  such  and  the  level  of  unutilised  resources.  At  the
same time I shall consider their significance for future inflation.
Has the inflation process changed?
Perhaps the most natural explanation for the fact that inflation in the 1990s has been lower  than its
historical  relationship  with  growth  suggests,  seems  to  be  the  markedly  lower  inflation  expectations.
This is also indicated by data from studies at the Riksbank.
From a level between 6 and 8% in the 1970s and 1980s, in recent years expectations of longer-term
inflation have gradually moved down to about 2%. This is an impressive change that stems in the main
from regime shifts in various fields that have been achieved since the late 1980s. Furthermore, it looks
as though expectations are now anchored relatively firmly in the vicinity of that level.
Once a low-inflation regime has been established and people count on price increases being low in the
longer run, the rate of inflation is determined mainly by the demand situation in relation to production
capacity.  During  a  process  of  disinflation,  however,  low  capacity  utilisation  and  falling  inflation
expectations both exert a downward effect on actual inflation. This can give the impression that the
relationship  between  demand  and  inflation  has  changed.  In  that  the  pattern  in  the  1990s  has  been
dominated  by  the  reduction  in  expected  inflation,  the  partial  relationship  between  demand  and
inflation has been difficult to analyse, not least because it is hard to arrive at statistical measurements
of the output gap, structural unemployment and their impact on the inflation process.
Still, the hypothesis that inflation’s sensitivity to resource utilisation has changed from the 1980s to
the 1990s does seem to have some support. Anecdotal information as well as more structured studies
point in that direction. Perhaps it is the case that the inflation process is being influenced by the low-
inflation  environment  that  now  prevails  in  Sweden.  Many  studies  have  found  that  low  inflation  is
3
BIS Review 106/1999
associated  with  a  low  variability  in  the  rate  of  inflation.  What  we  do  not  yet  know  is  whether  this
lower sensitivity to demand variations is completely symmetric. It could, of course, be bound up with
low resource utilisation, so that the situation is different when GDP is closer to the potential growth
rate.
What is the level of unutilised resources?
While the downward shift in inflation expectations seems to have predominated, another factor behind
the  reduction  of  inflation  has  been  the  low  level  of  resource  utilisation  after  the  crisis  in  the  early
1990s. Demand growth is now above the rate that is sustainable in the longer run. This naturally brings
the level of unutilised resources into the centre of the inflation analysis.
In an economy that is expanding rapidly, problems with bottlenecks may occur temporarily because
new production facilities are not always available just when they are needed to cope with increased
demand. However, experience in the 1990s suggests that firms are more flexible than before, both in
the  utilisation  of  existing  capital  stocks  and  in  the  procurement  of  new  technology,  machinery  and
plant  when  demand  rises.  So,  if  anything,  it  is  not  the  level  of  unutilised  capital  resources  that  is
critical at present.
Instead it is probably  the  labour  market  that  should be  focused  when analysing  resource  utilisation.
Another reason for doing so is that in a price analysis at macro level, the weightiest item in costs is
wages: total wage costs are equivalent to over two-thirds of GDP.
The level of unemployment, although it has been reduced, is still high, particularly compared with the
post-war  period  up  to  the  early  1990s.  Seen  from  that  angle,  some  might  say  that  the  Swedish
economy has plenty of unutilised resources.
Experience from other European countries has taught us, however, that when an  economy  has  been
through a severe shock, as happened in the early 1990s, unemployment tends to stick at a high level, at
least  for  a  while.  This  structural  or  equilibrium  unemployment  cannot  be  reduced  by  means  of
expansionary economic policies. Attempts to do so simply lead in the end to a higher inflation trend
and  probably  an  economy  that  functions  less  efficiently.  This  is  because  wage  costs  tend  to  adjust
upwards as the expansionary policy acts on the economy and higher long-term inflation expectations
are established.
Viewed in this way, unemployment could be divided into two components, structural and cyclical. If
the level  of  structural  unemployment  could  be  identified  with  some  precision, it  would be  easier to
gauge how much room the Swedish economy still has for expansion above its potential growth trend.
As  always  when  one  turns  from  theory  to  practical  policy,  things  immediately  become  much  more
difficult. You have to make do with estimates, which in the nature of things are uncertain and therefore
have to be interpreted with caution.
Still, the available estimates do suggest that in Sweden the equilibrium level of unemployment rose in
the  early  1990s  and  is  somewhere  in  the  interval  4.5  to  7.5%,  expressed  in  terms  of  registered
unemployment.1  The  OECD  also  concludes  that  the  level  has  increased  markedly  in  the  1990s  and
judges that in Sweden equilibrium unemployment is around 6%.2
Not everyone agrees, however, that equilibrium unemployment is markedly higher than before.3 But
even  though  we  cannot  be  certain  about  its  exact  level,  an  increase  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that
1
See e.g. Calmfors, L (1995), Will high unemployment in Sweden become persistent?, Swedish Economic Policy Review
2:1.
2 Economic Surveys – Sweden 1999, OECD, Paris.
3
See e.g. Åberg, R (1997), Är stigande jämviktsarbetslöshet huvudproblemet på arbetsmarknaden? (Is rising equilibrium
unemployment the principle labour market problem?), Ekonomisk Debatt 25:1.
BIS Review 106/1999
4
otherwise the currently high unemployment would be acting as a strong restraint in wage formation.
Instead, the wage level in Sweden is still rising somewhat faster than in our main competitor countries.
Considering  that  the  rate  of  registered  unemployment  is  currently  around  6%  and  thus  inside  the
estimated  interval  for  structural  or  equilibrium  unemployment,  this  might  suggest  that  the  Swedish
economy is relatively close to full capacity utilisation. It is important, however, that the Riksbank’s
monetary policy does not unnecessarily hamper decreased unemployment, particularly as the estimates
of  equilibrium  unemployment  are  somewhat  uncertain.  So  all  the  other  information  about  labour
market tendencies should also be considered.
When  the  economy  is  moving  closer  to  its  capacity  ceiling,  certain  statistical  phenomena  can  be
expected to occur more clearly and frequently. The same applies to anecdotal information in such a
situation. What I have in mind is, for example, bottleneck problems in the labour market and signs of
difficulties  in  recruiting  skilled labour.  Another  phenomenon  is  an  increased  propensity  to  resort  to
labour  disputes,  in  the  form  of  regular  strikes  or  wildcat  behaviour.  Moreover,  firms  may  have  to
compromise over job qualifications and take on less skilled personnel in order to cope with demand
for their goods or services.
Some such signs have been observed in recent months. Firms are already finding it difficult to recruit
computer  consultants,  for  instance,  as  well  as  some  other  categories  of  personnel.  The  situation  in
some  parts  of  Sweden  is  also  more  strained  than  in  other  parts.  This  suggests  that  the  economy  is
moving towards a situation where firms find it increasingly hard to keep up with demand for goods
and services; a situation, in other words, where demand is rising  too  rapidly.  At  the  same  time,  the
bottleneck problems are still fairly limited. There are no  signs  as  yet  of  more  widespread shortages
that might generate unsettling inflationary impulses. The matching of job applicants and vacancies is
still proceeding relatively smoothly and the wage statistics to date this year show increases that are a
little lower, if anything, than expected. This may imply some respite for monetary policy.
Conclusion
Tomorrow  the  Riksbank’s  Executive  Board  will  be  meeting  to  make  three  decisions.  The  first
concerns the adoption of this year’s third Inflation Report. Then we are to agree on what I shall say to
the  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on  Finance  on  Wednesday  when  I  present  the  Board’s
appraisal  of  monetary  policy.  Last  but  not  least  we  will  discuss  the  significance  of  the  inflation
analysis for the future repo rate.
Our third decision is whether to raise the repo rate or still leave it unchanged for the time being. Today
I have discussed some issues that I am sure will also be raised at the Board’s meeting tomorrow. It will
be a matter, as always, of composing an overall picture out of all the indicators of inflationary pressure
that  the  Riksbank  studies.  With  the  new  Executive  Board,  this  also  involves  combining  how  six
individuals view this picture so that we arrive at a joint monetary policy decision.
But I will not anticipate the outcome of those discussions and compositions – that is something that
will have to wait until Wednesday.
5
BIS Review 106/1999
