Mr Schmidhuber comments on the
introduction of the euro and consumer protection
Speech  delivered  by  Mr  Peter  M  Schmidhuber,  Member  of  the  Directorate  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the conference organised by the Kangaroo Group in collaboration with the European
Parliament/European  Commission  entitled  “Europe  of  the  People:  Towards  the  European  Home
Market” held in Rome on 30 September and 1 October 1999.
 I.
From 1 January 2002, euro banknotes and coins will be put into circulation. Depending on the national
terms, the current national currencies will maintain their status as legal tender up to 30 June 2002 at
the latest and will be accepted as a medium of payment at least by retailers. But consumers will be
confronted with great changes from 1 July 2002, if not beforehand. Then they will finally have to get
accustomed to the new medium of payment and to seeing prices denominated in euro.
It is common wisdom that the acceptance of the euro as legal tender by the public is crucial for the
success of monetary union despite the fact that the single currency and its national denominations have
been managed by the ECB since 1 January 1999.
The psychological test of the new currency will be in 2002, when the euro will replace the national
currencies.
• 
In countries which had a stable currency, confidence in the old currency grew over the years.
Now consumers must give up a currency with a proven stability record and exchange it for a
new currency for which, of course, there cannot be any long-term proof of its  stability.  In
addition, the introduction of the new currency is not limited to the consumers’ own country,
but instead involves another ten countries. For that reason, many consumers suspect that they
will have  made  a  bad  bargain  with  the  euro  if  the  other  economies  do  not  prove  to  be  as
stability and growth-oriented as their own country.
  There are also fears that prices might be driven upwards through the changeover to the new
currency without the consumers being able to figure out how or why.
In  some  cases  consumers  are  afraid  of  becoming  victims  of  crime  in  connection  with  the
introduction of euro notes and coins.
These quite understandable uncertainties in the minds of the people are being taken quite seriously. In
the following, I would like to show you how a smooth transition to the euro will be made possible for
consumers.
II.
As I already mentioned, people first have to become confident about the new currency. Maintaining
price stability is the best way of convincing the people of the solidity of the new currency. After all,
consumers  are  interested  first  and  foremost  in  whether  the  new  currency  has  the  same  purchasing
power as the old one. A currency’s purchasing power is closely linked to the currency’s stability: the
purchasing power does not  change  if the  money  remains  stable.  Purchasing  power  would  decline if
there were inflation in the euro area. Since inflation is a phenomenon of monetary policy, it is the task
of the central bank to maintain price stability: if the central bank keeps the money stock in circulation
under control, prices will not rise continuously. In other words, they will remain stable.
1
BIS Review 104/1999
The  stability  of  the  new  single  currency  has  been  enshrined  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  The  relevant
regulations (article 105 (1) sentence 1 of the EC Treaty, article 2 (1) sentence 1 of the ESCB Statute)
commit the European System of Central Banks to the primary objective of maintaining price stability.
The goal is to achieve a state of zero inflation. Since the interpretation of what is to be understood by
stable prices is quite flexible, the ECB Governing Council defined price stability as a situation where
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area is less than 2% below the preceding year’s
level.
The  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  is  based  on  a  specific  basket  of  goods.  A  common
minimum  standard  of  consumer  goods  has  been  agreed  upon.  The  range  of  the  consumer  goods
included in the price index ranges from food, drink and tobacco products to clothing and household
appliances to spending on health care, transport, education, leisure and specific services. As a result,
the consumers’ needs are already taken into account in the definition of price stability.
Let me mention briefly at this juncture that the stability of the euro is additionally supported by the
governments of the Member States through their adherence to the Stability and Growth Pact.
Purchasing power depends mostly on the internal value, but also to a certain degree on the external
value of the currency. The internal value reflects purchasing power within the currency area, whereas
the  external  value  –  in  our  case  the  exchange  rate  versus  the  US$,  the  world’s  leading  currency  –
reflects purchasing power outside the euro area.
What  can  be  said  about  the  internal  and  external  values  of  the  euro  less  than  one  year  after  the
introduction of the single currency?
• 
The internal value, i.e. the value within the euro area, is measured by the rate of inflation.
The  inflation  rate  in  the  euro  area  is  as  low  as  around  1%,  and  hence  in  line  with  the
objective  defined  by  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  according  to  which  the  rise  in  the
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area must be less than 2% compared with
the previous year. Hence, price stability has been virtually achieved in the euro area.
What are the reasons for this high internal value?
In monetary union, the advantages of the single market can be exploited in full. In the single market,
the euro area countries conduct more than half of their trade with each other. Since enterprises are able
to conclude contracts and invoice in the single currency, the fluctuations in the exchange rates between
the individual national currencies no longer have the same effect they once had.
The  effect  of  a  stable  internal  value  is  thus  not  limited  to  the  currency  area.  It  is  also  a  major
precondition for the stability of the euro exchange rate.
• 
Compared  with  the  internal  value,  the  euro’s  external  value  is  far  less  important  for  the
individual countries of the euro area than before the start of Stage Three of monetary union.
Imports account for only around 13% of euro area GDP.
For consumers, the external value has little or no immediate impact. It is true that the exchange rate of
the euro vis-à-vis the US$ influences the euro area’s competitiveness on third markets and the prices
of  imported  goods.  Nevertheless,  the  external  value  of  the  euro  may  only  play  a  role  in  the  ECB’s
decisions insofar as it affects the general rate of price increases via import prices.
The euro’s external value only has a direct effect on consumers if they have to spend either more or
less  money  on  their  holidays  outside  the  euro  area  or  if  they  buy  goods  imported  from  the  United
States.  But  this  situation  already  existed  prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  However,  the  only
difference is that at that time, the currency area was much smaller, and the external value hence much
more important.
Having spoken about purchasing power, I would now like to talk about another important aspect for
consumers. Stable prices make it easier for consumers to assess the development of prices. However,
III.
BIS Review 104/1999
2
prices  in  the  new  currency,  which  products  must  display  from  2002,  will  be  less  transparent  than
before. Consumers must initially become accustomed to the new pricing in euro. Only then will they
be able to assess whether they are receiving the same amount of goods as in the period of the former
national currencies.
With the abolition of the national currencies, the people in the participating countries will lose their
feel for prices established and trained since childhood. They will have to learn to live with the new
currency.  In  the  beginning,  consumers  will  behave  as  if  they  were  on  a  trip  abroad  and  will
continuously convert prices into the familiar old currency. Since the irrevocably fixed conversion rates
are crooked numbers, they will normally not convert exactly. But for customers to be able to retrain
their feel for prices, they need the help of retailers and banks in the form of a dual display of prices.
In surveys, consumers have repeatedly voiced concern that the changeover to the new currency will be
taken as an opportunity by retailers to raise prices. This holds true for the popular signal prices like
DM0.49 or DM1.99, for example, by which a clean price threshold is avoided. Owing to the crooked
conversion rate, the conversion will result in crooked prices. But adjustments cannot be avoided for
even prices, either. Market surveys have found that prices will go down by 5% at least in the creation
of  new  signal  prices.  Consumers  thus  do  not  generally  have  to  fear  rises  in  prices  –  but  there  are
always exceptions.
The currency conversion thus is a question of adequate information. This problem has been recognised
at  both  the  European  and  national  levels,  and  several  measures  to  inform  the  public  have  been
initiated. The European Commission has assumed a pivotal role here. It initiated the following steps
through several recommendations:
• 
For  example,  the  Commission  issued  a  recommendation  concerning  the  dual  display  of
prices and other monetary amounts which is applicable up to the end  of  2001.  Consumers
should be able to slowly become accustomed to the euro prices and to gain a feel for prices
so that conversion scopes in signal prices and adjustments of even prices cannot be exploited
by retailers. This will create more transparency, and customers can ascertain that nothing has
become  more  expensive  as  a  result  of  monetary  union.  The  Commission  called  upon  the
respective associations to implement its recommendation. For the dual display of prices, it
proposed a minimum standard for the exactness of the prices. Retailers are also to indicate
clearly whether they are prepared to accept payments in euro during the transitional period.
  Another  recommendation  by  the  Commission  specifically  addresses  the  fees  charged  by
banks for the conversion of the euro. Accordingly, banks should follow a standard of good
practice. In addition to converting national currencies into euro free of charge at the end of
the transition period, it was recommended that banks envisage the conversion of “household
amounts” of banknotes and coins from the national currency unit to euro for account holders.
The  recommendation  was  accepted  by  the  umbrella  associations  of  the  individual
participating  countries’  banking  industry.  Some  countries  have  already  defined  which
amounts are considered to be normal household amounts. The amounts range from national
currency  to  the  equivalent  of  EUR500  in  Portugal  up  to  unlimited  amounts  in  Finland,
Luxembourg and Spain. In France, Germany, Italy and the Netherlands, the level considered
to be a household amount has not yet been defined.
Since  banks’  actual  compliance  with  the  recommendation  cannot  be  monitored  with
certainty,  the  Commission  called  upon  consumers’  help  in  their  own  interest.  Consumer
associations and representatives at the European level and, if necessary, at the national level,
were  asked  to  inform  the  Commission  of  any  events  where  it  is  likely  that  the  banks’
practices will deviate from the recommendation and the suggested measures.
The Commission’s appeal to retailers has already borne fruit. Dual display of prices can now be seen
in most shops. Thus, a sound basis has been created for consumers to gain a new feel for prices.
3
BIS Review 104/1999
IV.
As  I  already  stated at the beginning,  some  people fear  that once  the  euro  is  introduced,  they  might
become the victim of an offence against property.
Indeed, the introduction of the euro represents a vast area for criminal activity. It offers great potential,
especially  for  money  counterfeiters.  Particularly  in  the  starting  phase,  it  can  be  assumed  that
consumers are not yet that familiar with the design of the euro banknotes and coins. There will hence
be plenty of opportunities to bring counterfeit euro into circulation.
But  there  is  no  reason  to  assess  the  situation  that  pessimistically,  since  there  are  effective  ways  of
counteracting these risks.
1.
Information measures can be used preventively at this stage. Consumers are to be  informed  already
prior to the introduction of the currency about the design of the euro and especially about the security
features.  However,  in  addition,  the  conversion  procedure,  which  at  present  has  not  been  fixed
completely, should also be published.
Several information campaigns introducing the design of the euro banknotes and coins have already
been launched. I will only give a few examples:
The German Federal Ministry of Finance displays postcards depicting euro banknotes and coins free
of  charge  in  post  offices.  The  ECB  recently  published  a  brochure  titled  “The  euro  banknotes  and
coins”.  In  some  municipalities  of  the  participating  countries,  people  even  used  symbolic  euro
banknotes  and  coins  for  their  daily  transactions  during  a  specific  period.  Although  numerous
information campaigns are already under way, most of them will take place in the second half of 2001,
without much time left to go before the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins.
2.
Further measures for counterfeit deterrence include instructing the appropriate authorities to examine
counterfeits and to support criminal prosecution.
• 
• 
A  central  analysis  centre  for  currency  counterfeits,  the  Centre  for  Analysis  of  Counterfeit
Banknotes (CAC) will be established at the ECB.
Europol received an expanded mandate for counterfeit deterrence.
  A  counterpart  authority  for  coins  –  the  European  Technical  and  Scientific  Centre  for  the
Analysis of Counterfeit Euro Coins – will be established at the French State Mint.
Finally,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  agreed  to  establish  a  database,  the  Counterfeit
Monitoring  System  and  Counterfeit  Currency  Database,  which  will  gather  technical  and
statistical data on the counterfeits.
You  will  certainly  agree  with  me  that  the  information  campaigns,  together  with  the  counterfeit
deterrence activities, are effective measures to curb the feared criminality.
Let me conclude this statement by addressing some aspects of consumer protection in the conception
of the currency conversion and the banknotes and coins themselves.
• 
National legislation will make the procedure for the conversion of the banknotes and coins as
simple as possible so that they meet the requirements of the cash payment systems and the
national  infrastructure  in  the  participating  countries.  How  the  currency  conversion  will  be
executed in the individual countries will be announced in due time.
In the people’s interest, it will be possible to exchange national banknotes at the respective
national central banks even after the end of the transitional period for an unlimited or at least
very long period.
BIS Review 104/1999
4
 Consumer  protection  aspects  were  also  taken  into  account  in  the  decision  on  the
denominations and the technical features of the euro banknotes and coins.
The banknote denominations range from EUR5 to EUR500. The coin denominations are 1, 2, 5, 10, 20
and 50 cents as well as EUR1 and 2. These denominations make it easy for consumers to make pay
euro and cent amounts in cash.
To gain the public’s confidence, a reliable and efficient banknote and coin system has been developed.
Since  confidence  also  depends  largely  on  the  technical  features  of  the  banknotes  and  coins,  efforts
were taken to make their design as user-friendly as possible. For example, consumer associations, the
European Blind Union and representatives of the manufacturers of vending machines were consulted
in order to meet the specific requirements of these important currency user groups. Consumer aspects
were taken into account even in the alloying of the coins: for the protection of persons suffering from
allergies, the nickel content in the coins was substantially reduced.
This was motivated by the reasoning that the changeover to the euro and the acceptance of the new
banknotes and coins will be made easier if banknotes and coins are distinguishable by optical features
and features identifiable by touch. Creating a link between the diameter and the face value of the euro
coins has also make it easier to tell them apart.
Anyhow, consumers will quickly become accustomed to the new banknotes and coins in their daily
operations.
Let me sum up my statement as follows:
VI.
The EC Treaty commits the European Central Bank to ensuring a euro which is  conducive  to  price
stability. Consumers are able to become accustomed to the prices in the new currency thanks to the
dual  display  of  prices.  Likewise,  people  will  be  comprehensively  informed  about  the  design  of  the
euro banknotes  and coins.  Finally  structures  are  being  created to  curb  crime  in  connection  with the
introduction of the euro as much as possible.
The basis for a smooth transition  to  the  new  medium  of  payment  has  been  created.  Consumers  can
hence look forward to a stable and counterfeit-proof euro in the next millennium.
5
BIS Review 104/1999
