Mr Noyer focuses on the challenges in Europe
as seen from the point of view of the European Central Bank
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  University  of
Antwerp on 26 October 1999.
 Introduction
First of all, I should like to thank the organisers of the Kekulé Cyclus for inviting me to participate in
such  an 
together  experts  from  different  professional
backgrounds.  I  will  contribute  to  your  discussions  by  focusing  on  the  challenges  we  are  facing  in
Europe, as seen from the point of view of the European Central Bank (ECB).
interdisciplinary  conference  bringing 
Let me briefly recall that it was just a little over a year ago that the ECB was established and that for
almost ten months now the Eurosystem – which consists of the ECB and the eleven national central
banks of the Member States which have adopted the euro – has been responsible for monetary policy
in the euro area. The introduction of the euro has been a historic event for the countries concerned,
since  it  is  the  first  time  in  monetary  history  that  sovereign  states  have  replaced  their  national
currencies  with  a  common  currency  and  transferred  their  monetary  policy  competencies  to  a  newly
established supranational institution.
The new monetary policy regime in the European Union (EU) is not only an important further step in
European  integration.  It  will  also  have  far-reaching  implications  for  the  world  economy  and  the
international monetary system. In this context, the ECB, together with other policymakers in Europe,
has a particular responsibility in setting the right conditions for sustainable non-inflationary growth in
the euro area so as to contribute to long-term economic welfare of the world economy.
Thus, in my presentation today, I should like to concentrate on three aspects related to the challenges
we are facing in Europe today and in the future and, in that context, on the contribution of the ECB
and the Eurosystem: first, I shall reflect on how we can seize the opportunity to ensure that the current
economic recovery in the euro area becomes a prolonged phase of sustainable non-inflationary growth
and employment creation. Second, turning to Europe as a whole, I shall refer to the challenges related
to the accession of new countries to the EU and, eventually, to the euro area. Finally, broadening the
perspective, I will discuss the role of Europe, the euro and the ECB in the world economy.
1.
Challenges in the euro area: how can the ECB and the Eurosystem contribute to
sustainable non-inflationary growth and employment creation?
Starting with the euro area, recent economic developments point to a much brighter outlook than was
expected  earlier  this  year.  An  improved  international  environment  should  support  these  positive
prospects. As shown by the IMF’s recent World Economic Outlook, the growth prospects in individual
countries and for the global economy in 1999 and 2000 are now much better and more balanced than
expected.
While  the  risk  of  a  pronounced  slowdown  of  the  US  economy,  with  negative  repercussions  on  the
world economy, cannot be ruled out, such a scenario appears unlikely at present. However, a major
challenge for the US authorities over the next few months is engineering a “soft landing” of the US
economy. The Japanese economy now shows clearer signs that the protracted weakness of the last few
years could come to an end. An economic consolidation and a resumption of capital flows to crisis-hit
emerging market economies, especially in Asia, also contribute to this favourable outlook.
Against this positive background, the challenge now is to ensure that the current recovery in the euro
area  becomes  a  period  of  prolonged  non-inflationary  and  employment-generating  growth.  I  will
1
BIS Review 116/1999
elaborate  on  the  possible  contribution  of  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem,  but  also  on  the  limitations
thereof, pointing to the necessary contributions of other policymakers.
Looking back at the past ten months, I would like to recall that the introduction of the euro took place
in  an  environment  of  price  stability  that  only  few  observers  would  have  predicted  some  years  ago.
This was the result of a process of economic convergence, in the course of which European inflation
rates were reduced significantly.
This  development  is  very  encouraging,  since  theoretical  arguments  and  empirical  evidence  over
several  decades  suggest  that  high  and  variable  rates  of  inflation  are  detrimental  to  growth  and
employment in the long term. Against  this background,  the  predominant  view  has emerged  that  the
best and most lasting contribution that monetary policy can make to  long-term  economic  welfare  is
that of safeguarding price stability. Therefore, central banks throughout the world have been moving
towards adopting long-term price stability as their primary goal.
In order to achieve this goal most successfully, independence from political interference and a clear
legal  mandate  for  price  stability  are  of  the  utmost  importance.  A  lack  of  independence  and  an
ambiguous mandate can easily force central banks to focus on the short term, and thus to fail to adopt
the forward-looking, medium-term orientation that is crucial for a successful monetary strategy. These
aspects were taken into consideration by policymakers when drafting the Maastricht Treaty.
The mandate to maintain price stability cannot be seen in isolation. The Treaty assigns other tasks to
the Eurosystem. Article 105 requires that the Eurosystem “without prejudice to the objective of price
stability … shall support the general economic policies in the Community, with a view to contributing
to  the  achievement  of  the  objectives  of  the  Community.”  These  Community  objectives  include
“sustainable  and  non-inflationary  growth”  and  “a  high  level  of  employment”.  But,  given  the
qualification  “without  prejudice”,  the  Treaty  also  clearly  states  how  the  Eurosystem  shall  set  its
priorities. A contribution to the achievement of the other objectives of the European Community can
only be made if the Eurosystem’s primary objective is not compromised. However, there is ultimately
no  incompatibility  between  maintaining  price  stability  and  pursuing  these  other  objectives  at
Community level. It is by maintaining price stability that the ECB will contribute to the achievement
of growth and employment creation.
Of  course,  this  contribution  is  a  necessary,  but  not  the  sole  pre-condition.  A  central  bank  can  set
monetary conditions in a way that helps the economy to grow at its potential. Even if this condition is
met, monetary policy is not enough to reduce significantly the high level of unemployment in Europe.
This high level of unemployment reflects mainly structural rigidities within the European labour and
product  markets.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  European  unemployment  rate  has  remained
high and broadly stable over business cycles in the past decade. Only comprehensive structural reform
can therefore remove the underlying impediments to higher employment. In particular, further reforms
of the tax and welfare systems are required in many EU countries in order to increase the incentives to
create new jobs and to accept them. Wage moderation can also have a significant beneficial impact.
National governments bear the main responsibility for structural reform designed to enhance market
flexibility.  I  recognise  that  these  reforms  may  imply  difficult  political  decisions,  especially  since
necessary changes are felt directly, whereas the benefits only become apparent over time. The success,
however, of past structural reforms is already visible in those countries where appropriate measures
have been implemented and wage growth has been moderate.
Another  argument  supporting  better  functioning  labour  and  product  markets  is  that  the  monetary
policy of the Eurosystem is and can only be geared to the euro area as a whole. It can thus not take
into  account  purely  national  or  regional  developments.  The  cyclical  positions  of  participating
countries  have  not  yet  completely  converged,  although  –  with  the  single  currency  in  place  –  some
national  differences  may  disappear  over  time.  This  requires  national  policies  and  labour  and  good
markets to be increasingly flexible in order to be able to respond effectively to economic shocks that
can affect any monetary union. A single currency does not call for uniform wage developments or for
uniform economic and social policies in general. On the contrary, where national or regional economic
and productivity developments are different, this should be reflected in different policy responses and
wage developments.
BIS Review 116/1999
2
Budgetary  policies,  too,  are  crucial  for  setting  the  necessary  conditions  conducive  to  growth  and
employment creation. Sound public finances, with lower public debt and tax burdens, contribute to a
reduction of long-term interest rates, reduce uncertainty and increase private capital formation. Thus,
they not only facilitate the task of monetary policy to maintain price stability, but also strengthen the
conditions  for  sustainable  growth  conducive  to  employment  creation.  Conversely,  unsound  fiscal
policies tend to increase inflation expectations and force monetary policy to keep short-term interest
rates  higher  than  would  otherwise  be  necessary.  Therefore,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which
encourages the pursuit of disciplined and sustainable fiscal policies by Member States’ governments,
is  a  crucial  element  for  sustainable  non-inflationary  growth  in  the  euro  area.  The  consolidation  of
public finances, which has made considerable progress in the past few years, has to be continued and,
in some cases, intensified.
Setting  the  monetary  conditions required  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area is  certainly  the
best  contribution  that  the  Eurosystem  and  monetary  policy  can  make.  To  achieve  this  aim,  the
Eurosystem  has  adopted  a  monetary  policy  strategy  which  is  tailored  to  the  unique  conditions  of
introducing a new currency. Our two-pillar strategy takes into account that economic behaviour may
change  as  a  result  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro  itself.  The  first  pillar  lends  a  prominent  role  to
money,  as  signalled  by  the  announcement  of  a  reference  value  for  the  growth  rate  of  the  broad
monetary aggregate M3, which is regarded as being compatible with price stability; within the second
pillar, the outlook for price developments is assessed on a broad basis, using a variety of financial and
economic indicators.
This  strategy  thus  takes  into  account  that  the  start  of  EMU  constitutes  a  structural  break.  A  better
knowledge  of  the  structure  and  functioning  of  the  euro  area  economy,  and  of  the  transmission
mechanism  of  monetary  policy  within  it,  will  be  gained  over  time.  Similarly,  the  availability  and
quality of economic statistics will improve. As experience is gained, our strategy will be reviewed and
may evolve, possibly in the direction of greater emphasis on one of the two pillars. However, this has
to be a prudent process, since one of the main functions of a strategy is to provide a tool to facilitate
the  communication  of  monetary  policy  preparations  and  decisions.  Continuity  is  therefore  a  major
feature of any monetary policy strategy.
The effectiveness of a monetary policy strategy and related decisions depend to a large degree on the
credibility  of  the  institution.  Transparent  and  accountable  policymaking  can  help  to  build  up  a
reputation and, hence, credibility. Openness, transparency and predictability therefore rank high on the
agenda of the ECB and the Eurosystem. Monthly press conferences given by the ECB’s President and
myself are an important part of our communication policy. They take place immediately after the first
Governing Council meeting each month, thus providing an opportunity to explain our decisions and
the basis on which we have taken them, and to answer questions from journalists. As far as I know, no
other central bank communicates with the public in such a prompt manner.
Communication  is  and  should  not  be  a  one-way  street.  The  ECB  must  also  take  note  of  and  be
sensitive to its environment in order to be effective in its own polices. But, still, monetary policy has
to be conducted independently of short-term political considerations. In this context, the ECB cannot
commit itself to move its interest rates in a certain way in response to specific actions or plans of other
policymakers.  Monetary  policy  has  to  take  the  overall  economic  situation  into  account  in  its
assessment  of the risks  to  price  stability.  For  a  monetary  union to  be  viable,  the  fact that  monetary
conditions may not be tailored to the specific needs of each individual component of the euro area has
to be accepted.
Explaining  this  properly  to  eleven  countries  with  different  economic,  political  and  cultural
backgrounds is also one of the challenges we are facing.  It  will  probably  be  better  understood  over
time,  subject  to  further  progress  being  made  towards  a  positive  attitude  regarding  European
integration. Such a positive attitude – that is seeing Europe as a positive opportunity – will also help to
cope  with  the  challenges  posed  by  the  accession  of  new  countries  to  the  EU.  This  leads  me  to  the
second part of my presentation.
3
BIS Review 116/1999
Looking ahead – the accession of new countries to the EU and, eventually, the euro area
2.
European integration as well as monetary union is an ongoing process and will continue to be so in the
future. Four EU countries have, for different reasons, not yet adopted the euro. Without elaborating on
that, let me simply state that they may well join in the coming years.
A  greater  challenge  is  the  potential  accession  of  still  more  countries  to  the  European  Union  and,
ultimately, the euro area. Negotiations are currently being conducted with six countries. Negotiations
with another six candidates may start soon. The eligibility criteria for their accession to the EU were
formulated by the European Heads of States and Government at their summit in Copenhagen in 1993.
These criteria set out what should be required of a future Member State of the European Union and
thus ensure equal treatment of all applicant states. Let me briefly recall the three criteria that have to
be fulfilled:
• 
first, the political criterion requires stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule
of law, human rights and respect for and protection of minorities;
  second,  the  economic  criterion  requires  the  existence  of  a  functioning  market  economy  as
well as the capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the EU; and
third,  the  so-called  “acquis  communautaire”  criterion  requires  the  ability  to  take  on  the
obligations  of  membership,  including  adherence  to  the  aims  of  political,  economic  and
monetary union.
While accession is a political decision, it is clear that extending the EU to include new members will
have  consequences for the  ECB and  the  Eurosystem.  Following  their  accession  to  the  EU,  the  new
Member States will also – in a second step – become members of the exchange rate system ERM II
and – in a third step, if and when the Maastricht convergence criteria are met – adopt the euro.
In view of the implications for its own tasks and objectives and of the advisory role it can play, it is
only natural that the Eurosystem will become more involved in this process.
The  Eurosystem  should  be  involved  in  all  issues  falling  within  its  exclusive  or  shared  areas  of
competence: monetary policy, exchange rate policy, foreign  reserve  management,  payment  systems,
financial stability and the impact of enlargement on the Eurosystem itself.
The  Eurosystem  is  currently  in  the  process  of  defining  its  position.  Let  me  briefly  outline  some
preliminary observations. The Eurosystem needs to have a positive attitude towards the prospects for
an enlargement of the EU. This also applies to subsequent participation in ERM II and the eventual
adoption  of  the  euro.  The  Eurosystem  should  be  prepared  to  advise  these  countries  in  pursuing
appropriate structural reforms and stability-oriented policies in  line  with  accession  and  convergence
criteria. The Eurosystem should stand ready to provide technical assistance to accession countries, in
particular to their central banks.
Equal  treatment  should  be  a  key  feature  of  the  accession  process.  Objective  and  uniform  criteria
should apply both to the countries’ accession and to their participation in ERM II and adoption of the
euro. These criteria, related to each step of the process, should be implemented in a strict and effective
manner, in order to provide the countries concerned with the external constraints necessary to bring
their economies into line with the respective standards and the final goal of EMU, while also avoiding
any discrimination.
Against  the  background  of  different  starting  points  and  possibly  different  lead-times  for  progress
towards  real  and  nominal  convergence,  a  plurality  of  approaches  should  be  feasible  without
compromising equality of treatment. This may apply, in particular, to the timing of the individual steps
towards accession.
In  accordance  with  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community,  the  Eurosystem  will  always
focus on the maintenance of price stability in the euro area. Hence, our involvement in the accession
process, including our technical assistance, and any arrangement or other forms of cooperation with
accession  countries,  must  be  without  prejudice  to  the  Eurosystem’s  independence  and  its  primary
objective.
BIS Review 116/1999
4
Over  time,  the  Eurosystem  –  like  other  EU  institutions  –  will  face  the  necessity  of  institutional
adjustments required by enlargement. These adjustments should preserve the efficient functioning of
the  Eurosystem  and  its  ability  to  maintain  price  stability  in  an  enlarged  euro  area.  In  the  case  of
previous enlargements,  the  entry  of new  Member  States  often  brought  about so-called  “arithmetical
adjustments” to the composition of EU institutions. However, an enlargement by as many as 12 new
countries  may  require  more  substantial  adjustments.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  a  new
Intergovernmental Conference on enlargement-related issues will be convened by the end of this year.
In this regard, as provided for in the Treaty on European Union, the Eurosystem would stand ready to
take  part  in  any  initiative  taken  by  the  competent  EU  institutions  on  issues  falling  within  its
competence. Such institutional adjustments should be without prejudice to the fundamental features of
the Statute of the ESCB, namely the Eurosystem’s mandate and its independence.
The Eurosystem is closely monitoring developments in accession countries, which are directly related
to its own areas of competence. Of course, this is done in cooperation with the countries concerned. A
network  of  contacts  has  been  established  with  the  relevant  central  banks,  and  several  bilateral  and
multilateral meetings have been convened in recent months. This process will be intensified over the
coming  months and years, with a view to deepening cooperation in areas of  mutual  interest.  In  this
regard,  I  should  like  to  mention  the  high-level  meeting  with  the  central  banks  of  the  accession
countries to be held in Helsinki next month.
Let me now turn to the role of the euro, the ECB and the Eurosystem in the world economy.
The role of the euro, the ECB and the Eurosystem in the world economy
3.
The introduction of the euro certainly represents one of the most profound changes in the international
monetary system since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s. The euro is the
currency of an economic area with a population of nearly 300 million people and one-sixth of world
GDP, which is significantly higher than that of Japan, although smaller than that of the United States.
The euro area is the largest trade partner in the world economy with a share of 20.1% in world exports,
followed  by  the  United  States  with  a  share  of  16.3%  and  Japan  with  a  share  of  7.6%.  Given  these
facts, it is stating the obvious to say that the euro and the Eurosystem are likely to play an important
role in the world economy.
By reducing the number of key players in the international arena and by strengthening the awareness
of  each  player  to  take  up  its  respective  responsibility,  the  euro  will  contribute  –  over  time  –  to
facilitating  international  cooperation.  But  the  transfer  of  competence  for  monetary  policy  from  the
national to the Community level also implied that new arrangements had to be found in order to allow
the Eurosystem to participate and represent the euro area in matters of its competence.
Devising  the  appropriate  arrangements  was  complicated  because  of  two  specific  features:  the  first
relates to the fact that membership in different fora (for example, the G7 or the G10) varies across euro
area  Member  States.  The  second  derives  from  the  fact  that  full  membership  in  intergovernmental
institutions  such  as  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  or  the  Organisation  for  Economic
Cooperation  and  Development  (OECD)  is  restricted  to  countries  only.  Therefore,  in  all  of  these
instances,  specific  arrangements  had  to  be  devised  in  order  to  provide  for  the  representation  of  the
Eurosystem and the ECB. We have now reached formal and informal agreements with the IMF, the
OECD and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) as well as in the G7 and G10 context. Let me
briefly comment on two of these arrangements:
• 
In December last year, the ECB was granted permanent observer status in the IMF. This was
a  particularly  important  step.  The  IMF,  as  the  cornerstone  of  the  international  monetary
system, plays a key role in the process of multilateral surveillance of economic policies. The
ECB Observer attends all meetings of the IMF Executive Board that are of relevance to the
Eurosystem,  such  as  discussions  on  multilateral  surveillance  or  the  Fund’s  surveillance  of
euro area monetary and exchange rate policies. As far as the Interim Committee of the IMF
is concerned, which has recently been given the new name of the  “International  Monetary
5
BIS Review 116/1999
 and  Financial  Committee”,  the  President  of  the  ECB  participates  in  its  meetings  as  an
observer.
Regarding meetings of the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, it was agreed
that the President of the ECB will be the sole representative of the Eurosystem in discussions
on multilateral surveillance and exchange rate issues. This part of the G7 meetings will also
be attended by the Presidency of the Euro-11 Group.
These  arrangements  will  enable  the  Eurosystem  and  the  ECB  to  participate  fully  in  international
cooperation. This is all the more important since the international agenda contains important items for
the future. The  generally  improved  outlook  for  the  world  economy  should  not  lead  to  complacency
and to a diminishing of the reform efforts initiated in the aftermath of the financial crises of the past
two years.  Strengthening  the  architecture  of the international financial  system  remains  an  important
topic  on  the  international  agenda.  The  financial  crises  in  Asia,  Russia  and  Brazil,  with  risks  of
contagion to other emerging market economies and spill-over effects into capital markets of matured
economies (e.g. LTCM in the United States), highlighted the need substantially to improve the ability
to prevent and resolve crises. Against this background, a wide range of proposals was put forward and
reviewed. One important aspect concerns the strengthening of the soundness of the banking systems
and  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  in  emerging  market  economies.  Another  reform
initiative relates to the transparency of the private and public sectors. The main objective here is to
improve  available  information through  the  elaboration  of  international  standards  and  codes  of  good
practices.  Further  progress  in  that  area  will  contribute  significantly  to  crisis  prevention,  since
improved information will enable a better risk assessment by market participants.
The challenge now is to keep the political momentum for reform and to pursue the implementation of
the envisaged measures in order to strengthen the resilience of the international financial system. The
Eurosystem  is  actively  participating  in  these  ongoing  discussions.  Our  focus  in  these  discussions  is
clearly on crisis prevention. If, however, another financial crisis was to occur in the future, it should be
handled  in  a  way  that  will not create  incentives for both creditor countries  and  investors  which  are
incompatible with the future stability of the international financial system.
Again, the best contribution the Eurosystem can provide to international stability is to maintain price
stability  in  the  euro  area.  International  policy  cooperation  which  goes  beyond  the  exchange  of
information  and  views  on  issues  of  mutual  interest  could  easily  become  counterproductive,
compromising both the Eurosystem’s mandate and international financial stability itself.
With  the  creation  of  the  euro,  there  has  been  a  renewed  interest  in  the  concept  of  target  zones  for
exchange  rates  among  the  main  currency  areas,  namely  the  Unites  States,  the  euro  area  and  Japan.
But,  in a  world  characterised  by  highly  integrated  and  sophisticated  international  financial  markets,
there is serious doubt as to whether target zones for exchange rates are feasible or even desirable. Such
exchange rate targets would imply that domestic policy objectives would have to be subordinated to
external requirements. This would – in certain circumstances – conflict with the primary objective of
price stability and result in a greater volatility of business cycles, as the burden of adjustment would be
transferred to domestic policies and developments.
But  the  fact that the  Eurosystem  does  not  have  an  exchange  rate  target  does  not  imply  that  we  are
indifferent to exchange rate developments or that we will neglect them. The exchange rate of the euro
is monitored within the second pillar of our monetary strategy as a potentially important indicator for
monetary policy. If its development poses a threat to price stability in the euro area, the causes of this
development will be assessed and appropriate measures taken.
With regard to the use of the euro as an international currency, the Eurosystem has adopted a neutral
stance:  we  will  neither  hinder  nor  actively  promote  the  international  role  of  the  euro,  but  leave  its
development to market forces. We observe that the euro is already second only to the US dollar as the
most widely used currency in the world, ahead of the Japanese yen. In general, the international use of
a currency is determined by several factors. Private agents may use a currency for international trade
and investment, as well as for pricing and denomination purposes. In the official sector, it is used as an
BIS Review 116/1999
6
anchor for exchange rate pegs, for holding foreign exchange reserves and for the conduct of foreign
exchange intervention.
The  successful  changeover  to  Stage  Three  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  played  an
important role in promoting the role of the euro. During the so-called changeover weekend, the bulk of
bonds,  shares  and  other  financial  instruments  were  re-denominated  in  euro.  The  same  applies  to
outstanding  government  debt.  Thus,  since  the  start  of  EMU,  investors  have  been  able  without  any
difficulty to borrow and lend funds in euro, and to trade their euro securities on the secondary market.
Looking ahead, it is likely that over time international investors will start to hold a greater proportion
of their portfolios in euro-denominated assets than they held in the former national currencies. In other
words, the role of the euro as an international currency is likely to be greater than that of the sum of its
components.  One  reason  why  this  may  be  the  case  is  that  the  economy  and  the  financial  markets
backing  the  euro  are  large  relative  to  the  world  economy.  In  this  regard,  one  of  the  key  elements
influencing  the  international  use  of  the  euro  is  the  creation  of  a  large,  liquid  and  integrated  capital
market in the euro area.
As for trade, the existence of a large capital market will also encourage and facilitate the use of the
euro in international transactions. In particular, many euro area exporters and importers, who did not
previously use their own domestic currency for invoicing, may now take the opportunity to do so with
the euro. The same tendency could gain ground in those countries that have close economic ties with
the euro area or which have chosen to peg their currencies to the euro.
This brings me to some considerations on the use of the euro in the official sector. Apart from the EU
countries participating in ERM II, a number of countries – mainly in Central and Eastern Europe and
in Africa – have unilaterally decided to peg their currencies either to the euro or to one of its legacy
currencies. Other countries are pursuing managed-float policies, with the euro as the main reference
currency, whereas another group of countries is pegging their currencies to baskets of currencies, such
as  the  Special  Drawing  Rights  containing  the  euro.  Against  this  background,  the  use  of  the  euro  is
likely to increase both as an intervention currency and as a reserve currency. As a matter of fact, just
like private international investors, central banks may find it convenient to diversify their portfolios to
incorporate a currency offering broader investment opportunities than its legacy currencies.
Apart from the existence of a large, liquid and integrated capital market, another major prerequisite for
the  substantial  use  of  a  currency  by  foreign  investors  is  confidence  in  the  long-run  stability  of  its
purchasing  power.  In  this  regard,  internal  price  stability  should  provide  a  sound  basis  for  the
development  of  the  euro’s  external  value  in  the  medium  term.  By  maintaining  price  stability,  the
Eurosystem  is  contributing  to  the  emergence  of  a  solid  and  stable  currency  over  the  medium  term,
thereby fostering the euro’s international role.
Conclusions
Coming  to  the  end  of  my  speech,  let  me  quote  Mark  Twain  by  saying  that  predictions  should  be
avoided, particularly those about the future. However, there is little doubt that Europe’s agenda for the
immediate and longer-term future will be full of challenging tasks. I have outlined the three areas in
which Europe will have actively to shape its future: the euro area, the enlargement of the EU and its
role at the international level. The fact that these areas are interlinked and that progress will have to be
achieved  simultaneously  adds  to  the  challenges  we  are  facing.  From  a  more  general  point  of  view,
Europe should aim at becoming a stronger partner in international cooperation and, as far as possible,
at  speaking  with  one  voice.  Such  an  ideal  cannot  be  realised  overnight,  but  every  effort  possible
should be made to move in this direction. A stronger, more integrated and coherent Europe is in the
interests of the world at large. In order to be able to play this role on the international scene, Europe
should keep an eye on the rest of the world and, in spite of the many challenges it will face internally
in the years and even decades ahead, it should avoid adopting an exclusively inward-looking stance.
7
BIS Review 116/1999
