Mr Wellink speaks about trends in the
European banking industry and in banking supervision
Speech  held  by  Dr  A  H  E  M  Wellink,  President  of  De  Nederlandsche  Bank,  at  the  launch  of  the
Netherlands Society of Investment Professionals on 6 October 1999.
 I.
Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
It was with great pleasure that I accepted the invitation to deliver a speech on banking supervision at
this official launch of the Netherlands Society of Investment Professionals. On this occasion, I would
like to give you a broad picture of the major trends in the European banking industry. After having
discussed the key driving forces for change, I shall present the strategic responses of banks to these
forces. I will then describe the reactions of banking supervisors to these changes. At the end of my
speech,  I  shall  share  my  views  on  the  future  of  banking  with  you.  You  will  understand  that  it  is
impossible for me to tackle all relevant issues due to time constraints.
Forces for change in European banking
II.
The European banking landscape is generally expected to undergo drastic changes over the next few
years. Perhaps the most fundamental force for change in the financial sector has been the evolution of
technology, particularly computing and telecommunications. Technological innovations affect banking
capacity  by  changing  production  costs.  They  also  spur  disintermediation,  increase  competition  by
lowering  entry  and  exit  barriers,  help  the  internationalisation  process,  and  so  on.  Technological
developments have shaped banking business both internally and externally. Internally by means of the
reconstruction  of  banks’  internal  organisation  and  production  processes  and  externally  by  spurring
product  innovation  and  establishing  new  distribution  channels.  The  fruits  of  developments  in
information technology are, of course, available to non-banks as well as banks.
Another  driving  force  behind  structural  changes  in  the  European  banking  sector  is  undoubtedly  the
introduction of the euro. It is assumed that the euro capital markets will be deeper, more transparent
and more liquid than the previously existing national capital markets. This could make it cheaper for
large  corporations  to  raise  money  directly  in  these  markets  than  to  borrow  from  banks.  The
privatisation  of  banks  is  another  force  for  change.  It  is  also  argued  that  the  deregulation  of  the
financial sector will further erode the obstacles that deny new providers of financial products access to
the market. Demographic factors are also shaping the European banking industry.
The  widely  held  view thus  appears  to  be  that  European  banks  are  heading  for  turbulent  times.  The
driving  forces  just  mentioned  will  lead  to  intensified  competition  not  only  among  banks  but  also
between banks and other, new financial intermediaries. This is generally expected to increase the need
for a restructuring of the banking sector. The general tenor seems to be that banks are specialised in an
economic  activity  that  can,  to  a  growing  extent,  be  performed  by  non-specialist  players.  If  so,  the
demand for bank loans will decline and the structure of the balance sheets of banks will alter.
This  envisaged  disintermediation  and  securitisation  is  expected  to  pose  a  threat  to  relationship
banking, which still occupies a prominent position in the banking industry. It even raises the question
of the continued viability of banks. It should, however, be realised that any shrinkage of the banking
industry as a result of market forces is not by definition cause for concern. That would be different if
the  decline  of  the  banking  industry  were  due  to  excessive  regulation.  Excessive  regulation  would
prevent  banks  from  operating  more  efficiently  and  from  offering  new  products.  This  in  turn  would
allow other or new  providers  of  financial  services,  which  are subject  to less  stringent regulation,  to
push banks out of the market. Such a situation would, of course, be highly undesirable.
1
BIS Review 107/1999
Strategic responses of banks
III.
As you  may  have  guessed  by  now,  I  myself  do  not  believe  in the  gloomy  scenarios. The  structural
trends  I  have  just  identified  have  obviously  prompted  banks  to  reconsider  their  activities  and  their
distribution channels. In the following, I will emphasise that the driving forces have not only posed
threats but have also offered banks new opportunities.
Consolidation in the European banking industry
The driving factors mentioned before have changed the perceptions with respect to the efficiencies to
be  achieved  through  consolidation  in  the  banking  industry.  Indeed,  the  number  of  mergers  and
acquisitions  has  increased  considerably  since  the  mid-1980s.  Mergers  and  acquisitions  are,  in  turn,
partly  responsible  for  the  reduction  in  capacity  and  the  slight  increase  in  concentration  in  the  EU
banking industry over the past decade. So far, the recent wave of consolidation has developed mainly
within  national  industries.  Cross-border  mergers  or  acquisitions  still  seem  to  be  the  exception,
although things have started to change.
Looking at simple capacity indicators like the number of banks or branches per inhabitant, it can be
expected  that  consolidation  will  continue  in  the  French,  German,  and  Italian  banking  sectors  in
particular. It is questionable, though, whether this process will follow the same pattern as, for example,
in the Netherlands or Sweden, because the share of publicly owned banks has always been much larger
in France, Germany and Italy. It is also unlikely that the expected consolidation process will ultimately
lead to concentrated banking sectors such as that in the Netherlands. Indeed, the domestic markets in
France, Germany and Italy are bigger and, consequently,  offer  room  for  a  greater  number  of  viable
banks. It will also become increasingly difficult to interpret national concentration ratios in the euro
area.
Conglomeration
A second manifestation of the forces for change is conglomeration in the financial sector. Largely due
to the deregulation of previously segmented financial markets, different types of financial institutions
have entered each other’s territory over the past decade. A familiar example of this is the provision of
typically traditional banking products like mortgages by pension funds and insurance  companies.  In
parallel  with this  development,  banks,  securities  institutions, and  insurance  companies  have  merged
into financial conglomerates. In the Netherlands, 10 out of the 15 largest banks are part of a financial
conglomerate, which makes our country the undisputed leader in this field. The recent acquisition of
the Nationale Investeringsbank by the PGGM and  ABP  pension  funds is  the first  major  partnership
involving institutional investors and commercial banks.
New products, markets and distribution channels
The driving forces identified earlier also have major implications for the type of business conducted
by banks, and the way that business is conducted. The information technology and the deregulation of
the financial services sector have enabled banks to develop an entire range of new, complex financial
products and new distribution channels. Technological innovations have recently been instrumental in
the creation of various derivative products – including credit derivatives – and the application of credit
scoring  techniques to  consumer  finance,  credit  cards and  mortgages.  It  has  also  become  possible to
unbundle the various risks implicit in any single financial instrument – for example market risk, credit
risk and liquidity risk – and to trade these risks separately.
As for disintermediation and securitisation, it is true that securities markets have become increasingly
important  in  providing  funding  to  businesses.  However,  banks  are  closely  involved  in  the  issue  of
securities by large corporations and institutions. Investment banks possess the expertise necessary to
manage issues successfully, to attract potential investors, to maintain a securities market, and to hedge
or underwrite possible risks. As regards the trade in shares, bonds, and derivatives, banks increasingly
focus their activities on executing customers’ orders, speculate on market developments, and engage in
proprietary trading. Activities of this kind generate commission income for the banks.
BIS Review 107/1999
2
So,  how  much  truth  is  there  in  the  pessimistic  view  that  the  position  of  banks  in  the  financial
intermediation  process  is  being  gradually  eroded?  Indeed,  one  could  say  that  the  banks’  role  in
supplying credit has been steadily declining, as evidenced by their falling share in total financial debt.
The decreasing reliance on bank loans seems to be  most  pronounced  among  large  firms  with  credit
ratings, which can resort to public capital markets to meet their funding needs. By accessing the public
capital markets, these firms can bypass the usual screening by banks to some extent.
However, I think that this view on banks’ disintermediation must be nuanced and put into perspective.
Bank  loans,  savings  accounts,  and  deposits  continue  to  grow  when  expressed  in  terms  of  national
income.  Therefore,  I  am  sure  banks  will  continue  to  play  an  important  role  in  solving  asymmetric
information problems in the financial markets. Some businesses can rely only on bank loans because
they  are  unable  or  unwilling  to  reveal  their  financial  position  to  the  outside  world.  If  insufficient
information  is  disclosed,  rating  agencies  are  unable  to  form  an  accurate  opinion  of  the  financial
position of a particular company and the attendant risks. Such companies are thus only able to obtain
external funds in the form of bank loans after screening and monitoring by banks. Recent international
experience  has  shown  that,  particularly  during  periods  of  economic  stress,  banks  perform  a  critical
function in providing large corporations, too, with liquidity. In other words, large firms also need to
and want to maintain relationships with banks.
Besides,  conclusions  with  respect  to  the  position  of  banks  in  the  financial  system  which  are  based
solely on balance sheet activities are misleading. In recent years, banks have developed an extensive
range of off-balance sheet operations. By offering instruments like financial derivatives, banks have
been able to tap new sources of income. If one ignores these activities, one may wrongfully conclude
that banks are a dying breed. For Dutch banks, the credit equivalents of off-balance activities already
amount to between 15 and 20% of their on-balance sheet operations.
Even  taking  balance  sheet  and  off-balance  sheet  operations  together  does  not  present  an  accurate
picture  of  the  true  position  of  banks  in  the  economic  system.  Banks  are,  for  example,  also  closely
involved in setting up, managing and marketing investment funds. In most EU countries, more than
80% of all investment funds are controlled by banks. In the Netherlands, half of all investment funds
are  associated  with  banks.  Banks  have  thus  been  successful  in  internalising  at  least  part  of  the
supposed disintermediation on their liabilities side, which indicates their capacity to adapt to altered
market conditions.
Developments in information technology also offer potentially important commercial uses in the retail
distribution  channels.  In  the  development  of,  and  participation  in  these  new  distribution  channels,
banks are leading the way. Through alliances with supermarket chains, banks in some EU countries
are  already  marketing  simple  banking  products  in-store.  Banks  are  closely  involved  in  the
development of e-commerce, too, and have established a sound position in remote banking.
Developments in banking supervision
IV.
As  indicated  earlier,  the  driving  forces  have  enabled  banks  to  venture  into  many  new  areas.  Many
banks have seized the opportunity to diversify their activities, both geographically and in terms of their
product mix. This obviously increases the burden on regulation and supervision. Bank supervision has
always focused on the assessment of the quality of a bank’s balance sheet at some point in time, and
on  whether  it  complied  with  capital  requirements  and  restrictions  on  portfolio  composition.  This
approach,  however,  has  become  less  adequate  in  a  world  where  banks  are  active  players  in
international  capital  markets  and  can,  because  of  potential  trading  losses,  be  driven  into  financial
problems extremely rapidly. Thus, the emphasis in banking supervision has shifted toward risk control
and market discipline. Take, for example, disclosure requirements to improve transparency as well as
reliance on internal risk models that are more flexible than capital requirements.
The  process  of  mergers  and  acquisitions  in  banking  mentioned  earlier  raises  supervisory  questions
with respect to concentration and market power. It is difficult, however, to draw conclusions about the
competitive  nature  of  banking  markets  on  the  basis  of  concentration  ratios.  The  reason  is  that  the
figures  for  the  banking  industry  as  a  whole  can  mask  sharply  different  degrees  of  concentration  in
3
BIS Review 107/1999
specific segments of the market. In wholesale markets, competition may be fiercer and a critical mass
may  be  required  which  exceeds  that  appropriate  for  national  markets.  In  the  retail  markets,  on  the
other hand, banks still operate in fairly fragmented national markets.
It is also true that for a proper evaluation of the relationship between concentration and competition,
the volume of intermediation activities by non-banks in specific segments of the retail markets should
be taken into consideration. The high concentration index for the banking industry must be interpreted
differently if other financial institutions also have a significant market share. As you know, non-banks
also perform an important function in the intermediation process in the Netherlands.
Another supervisory issue related to mergers and acquisitions, internationalisation and conglomeration
in the financial sector is systemic stability. Here, a distinction should be made between the national
and  international  dimension.  Nationally,  the  issue  of  systemic  stability  is  particularly  relevant  for
small countries where very large banks or financial conglomerates have emerged. In the Netherlands,
systemic  supervision,  aimed  at  safeguarding  overall  financial  stability,  is  the  domain  of  the
Nederlandsche Bank, especially where banks and payment systems are concerned. Internationally, the
trends just sketched stress the increasing importance of coordination and cooperation between national
supervisory authorities and further harmonisation of regulatory rules. These elements are effected by
various  sector-specific  international  groupings  of  regulators  and  supervisors,  such  as  the  Basel
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  the  Joint  Forum  on  Financial  Conglomerates,  the  Financial
Stability Forum, and  the  Banking  Supervision  Committee  of  the  European  Central  Bank.  Given  the
responsibility of national central banks for fostering financial stability in the eurosystem, this Banking
Supervision Committee could, in principle, develop as a forum for strengthening the multilateral mode
of supervisory cooperation within EMU.
Yet another supervisory issue is raised by the increasingly blurred distinction between different types
of financial institutions and the growing importance of financial conglomerates. These developments
have recently led to the establishment of a Council of Financial Supervisors in the Netherlands. This
Council  consists  of  Board  members  of  the  Securities  Board,  the  Insurance  Board  and  the
Nederlandsche Bank. I consider the establishment of the Council as an accurate and logical reaction to
the  structural  developments  in  the  financial  services  industry.  It  seals  the  long-standing  close  and
harmonious relationships between the Dutch financial supervisors.
The Council of Financial Supervisors will not execute supervisory functions itself, but leaves that to
its constituents. It deals with regulatory issues that go across boundaries of specific financial sectors.
The  first  issue  concerns  the  supervision  of  financial  sector  integrity.  The  second  field  of  operation
deals  with  the  supervision  of  financial  conglomerates.  The  third  subject  is  related  to  customer
protection,  focusing  on  adequate  product  information.  In  this  respect,  the  Nederlandsche  Bank  has
recently  established  a  Consumer  Protection  unit.  This  unit  deals  with  the  supply  of  information  to
consumers on the supervisory role of the Nederlandsche Bank. The unit will also stimulate the supply
of information by institutions under supervision regarding their products, and will inform consumers
on the possible procedures and competent authorities to settle disputes.
Concluding remarks
V.
Let me now briefly summarise the key insights emerging from my speech. Banks now conduct a much
wider range  of  business  than simply  taking  in  deposits  and  making  loans,  which  is  their  traditional
financial  intermediation  business,  and  have  become  financial  services  firms.  In  many  countries
off-balance  sheet  income  of  banks  now  exceeds  income  earned  from  their  traditional  activities.
Moreover, profound changes in the distribution channels for banking products and in bank-customer
relationships can be observed.
The  driving  forces  identified  in  this  speech  may  have  put  the  industry  under  pressure  but,  more
importantly, they have also created new opportunities. One is left with the undeniable impression that
the regulation of banks has not prevented them from developing new activities and entering into new
markets.  In  this  respect,  it  may  be  noted  that  banking  supervision  and  regulation  are  naturally
frequently  re-assessed  in  light  of  new  developments.  The  recent  suggestions  for  adaptations  in  the
BIS Review 107/1999
4
regulatory framework for banks by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision mirror the genuine
intention  and  proactive  attitude  of  supervisors  to  ensure  sound  market  conditions  in  the  financial
services industry, and to safeguard the stability of the global financial system.
Having  said  all  this,  I  cannot  but  finish  with  an  optimistic  observation.  The  banking  industry  has
shown  ingenuity  in  coping  with  many  challenges.  This  is  mirrored  in  the  diversification  of  its
activities.  By  continuously  aiming  at  a  high  level  of  ethics  and  professionalism  within  the  Dutch
investment community, the Netherlands Society of Investment Professionals will certainly contribute
to the health and integrity of the financial sector in general, and the banking industry in particular.
5
BIS Review 107/1999
