Mr Heikensten reviews
policy developments and changes affecting Sveriges Riksbank,
and assesses the current situation and outlook
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Risksbank,  at  the  Autumn
Conference Centre for Business and Policy Studies on 12 October 1999.
 The autumn conference, arranged by the Centre for Business and Policy Studies, is a tradition I have
come to enjoy and an opportunity of looking back on the course of monetary policy and considering
future challenges.
My review last autumn began with the observation that a good deal had happened as regards economic
developments and the conditions for monetary policy. Much the same applies on this occasion.
Two  years  ago  we  were  in  the  throes  of  what  looked  like  being  a  strong  cyclical  upswing  with
attendant price increases. My remarks at the autumn conference caused short interest rates to move up
about  0.10  percentage  points  in  expectation  of  a  tighter  policy.  Little  more  than  a  month  later  the
Riksbank did in fact raise the repo rate. Last year the situation was very different, with an international
financial  crisis  and  great  uncertainty  about  its  effects  on  the  real  economy.  The  krona  had  become
markedly  weaker  and  there  was  some  discussion  at  the  conference  about  the  Riksbank’s  recent
currency  market  intervention.  Later  that  autumn  the  Riksbank  reduced  the  repo  rate  in  two  steps.
Today  the  prospects  for  growth  and  employment  are  bright  again  and  the  krona  is  substantially
stronger. The debate is focussed once more on the risks of overheating.
The setting for our activities is evidently liable to change at short notice. I shall begin, as usual, by
talking about what has happened since we last met and commenting on the public debate. One of the
changes this time has to do with the set-up for the Riksbank. New legislation from the beginning of
this year has given the Riksbank a more independent status and a new managerial structure. So I shall
also be saying something about the new conditions for the Riksbank’s communications. Finally I shall
be looking ahead and commenting on our appraisal of the coming years. In doing so I shall consider a
matter that has attracted a lively discussion recently: has the trade-off between growth and inflation in
Sweden changed? This is an issue we have had to consider carefully in recent years.
1.
Monetary policy in the past twelve months
Weaker international course in the wake of the crisis
The international financial markets were very turbulent last autumn after Russia’s suspension of debt
payments  and the  problems  with  the  hedge  fund  Long-Term  Capital  Management.  Analyses  at  that
time  suggested  that  the  financial  turmoil  would  have  considerable  global  consequences  for  the  real
economy. The Riksbank judged that even with good domestic demand and a weaker exchange rate, the
slacker  international  trend  would  cause  inflation  in  Sweden  to  be  below  the  target  in  twelve  to
twenty-four months’ time. In November we therefore reduced the repo rate in two steps from 4.10 to
3.60%.
In December it was considered that both CPI and underlying inflation would be below the target in the
coming  one  to  two  years.  The  downside  risks  were  judged  to  predominate,  mainly  due  to  the
uncertainty  about the future course  of  international  activity.  The  repo  rate  was  reduced  again,  from
3.60 to 2.40%, accompanied by signals that no further interest rate adjustments would be made before
the changeover to the new Executive Board.
1
BIS Review 111/1999
New  statistics  during  the  winter  continued  to  show  a  weak  international  tendency.  The  Riksbank
perceived a clear risk of this having negative effects on growth in Sweden, so that inflation prospects
would  also  be  affected.  In  February  and  March the new  Executive  Board therefore  made  two  more
repo rate cuts, from 3.60 to 2.90%.
Improved prospects
The mood swung as winter gave way to spring. The financial market unrest subsided, accompanied by
the first signs that  the  development  of  activity  was  better than had  been  expected.  At  the  monetary
policy meeting on 22 April the Executive Board decided to keep the repo rate unchanged. A majority
of the Board wanted to wait for a more comprehensive assessment of inflation prospects in connection
with the June forecast before making any further interest rate adjustments.
In the late spring and the summer it became clear that economic trends were more favourable than had
been predicted earlier. Economic growth in the United States had been higher than expected and the
first  signs  of  a  recovery  in  Europe  were  now  visible.  Meanwhile,  a  distinct  upturn  in  the  Swedish
economy was increasingly apparent. The forecasts were revised upwards and the Executive Board now
agreed that further interest rate reductions were no longer on the agenda.
By  the  middle  of  August,  at  the  monetary  policy  meeting  on  the  12th,  the  picture  of  a  stronger
economic development in Sweden was even clearer. The Board therefore concurred on a high future
growth  rate  that  would  call  for  a  tighter  monetary  stance.  But  price  increases  were  low  and  the
available statistics, on capacity utilisation and the labour market, for example, did not point to a rapid
future increase in inflation. The Board’s  majority  therefore considered that  an  immediate  tightening
was not needed. With inflation expectations firmly anchored around the 2% target, we judged there
was scope for waiting with an interest rate increase.
Calmer monetary policy discussion
Some  of  the  earlier  autumn  conferences  were  preceded  by  monetary  policy  discussions  that  were
rather intensive. In that respect the past year has been relatively calm, even though the situation has
changed so rapidly.
Last autumn there was, of course, considerable anxiety but the Riksbank’s quick succession of interest
rate cuts was well received. In Sweden, moreover, we were spared most of the European discussion
about political pressure on monetary policy. As I see it, this was partly because our policy framework
provided such clear arguments for our actions – inflation would turn out to be below the target if the
interest rate was not reduced.
During the past year the Riksbank’s appraisal of economic activity and inflation prospects has been
revised  about  as  much  as  and  more  or  less  concurrently  with  the  opinions  of  other  observers.  The
sizeable  changes  in  economic  assessments  are  thus  something  we  have  in  common  with  others.
Individual economists and analysts have naturally voiced views or criticism from time to time but I at
least  have  not  encountered  more  concerted  criticism  of  our  economic  and  inflation  assessments.
(Figure 1).
The  path  of  the  krona  last  autumn  generated  more  heated  discussions.  The  Riksbank  saw  the
depreciation as essentially connected with the international financial unrest. This made investors more
averse to risk, with effects that hit small markets in particular. Other observers attached greater weight
both to what they perceived as a lack of clarity in monetary policy and to structural problems in the
Swedish economy  and  Sweden’s  position outside  the  euro  area. The risks in  the  latter  respect  were
presented in a rather lurid light.
As regards interventions, the Riksbank has been very restrictive in recent years but early last October
we found they were called for. The marked depreciation of the krona did not reflect the fundamental
situation in the Swedish economy. It is seldom possible to demonstrate clear effects of interventions
and  that could  not  be  done  on  this  occasion,  though  the  depreciation  was  broken  during  the  day  in
question. Later in the autumn the krona appreciated again.
BIS Review 111/1999
2
It seems to me that two main factors lie behind the krona’s appreciation in the past twelve months.
One is a normal rebound from last autumn’s excessive weakening. This happened during the winter
and was particularly pronounced because the euro’s introduction at the beginning of the year had made
some investors concerned about the krona. The other factor is the increasingly clear picture of a strong
economy  with  a  budget  surplus,  low  inflation  and  high  growth.  Moreover,  the  higher  growth  in
Sweden compared with the euro area has influenced appraisals of the respective levels of interest rates.
Specific events and statements may have played a part in the timing of the appreciation but it seems to
me that the crucial influence has come from more fundamental economic considerations.
The discussion of monetary policy has also acquired a new dimension. The procedure with the new
Executive Board from the  beginning  of  this  year  enables  Board  members  to  differ from  the current
majority  view  of  inflation  prospects  and  monetary  policy  measures.  Board  members  have  in  fact
differed on a number of occasions, as is clear from the published minutes. On two occasions, divergent
opinions  have  also  been  registered  regarding  the  level  of  the  repo  rate.  This  has  naturally  affected
analyses  of  the  Riksbank’s  behaviour  and  resulted  in  a  somewhat  new  type  of  discussion  about
monetary policy and, not least, the Riksbank’s communications. That brings me to the next point.
2.
New Executive Board means new conditions
Transparency desirable
The  new  Riksbank  legislation  has  altered  the  conditions  for  how  the  Riksbank  operates  and
communicates externally. The strong statutory independence makes it extra important that openness is
practised as much as possible and that what we do can be examined and evaluated. These are basic
arguments in the interests of democracy. The law makes the Executive Board collectively accountable
for running the Riksbank as well as for its monetary policy decisions. The Board concluded that the
important discussion ought to be held in session, not in corridors, and ought also to be minuted in such
a way that it can be assessed.
Having established this, the way in which we should communicate externally more or less presented
itself.  Each  Board  member  should  be  answerable  for  her/his  opinion.  The  members’  individual
responsibility  is  thereby  clarified.  So  when  one  of  us  makes  a  speech,  it  is  not  normally  a  joint
monetary  policy  signal  but  the  expression  of  a  personal  opinion.  I  willingly  admit  that  this  was
accompanied  by  purely  practical  considerations  to  do  with  the  difficulty  of  coordinating  six  strong
wills before every speech or interview.
There probably are not many other collective decision-making assemblies that publish their members’
positions so openly or so soon after decisions have been made. That is probably not happenstance. It
may  jeopardise  internal  cohesion  and  besides  making  monetary  policy  decisions,  we  have  to  work
together in running an organisation. Then there is the risk that a policy of openness inhibits the internal
discussion. (That is the background to the published minutes not reporting exactly what each member
said at the meeting.) A third problem and the one that has attracted most attention has to do with our
external communication.
Before commenting more on the third point, it is perhaps advisable to point out that these problems
had already been recognised when the new system was launched. That I mention them here should not
be taken to mean that they have caused concern since then.
More personification
The changes from the beginning of this year were prepared at the Riksbank last autumn. After contacts
with the Bundesbank, the Bank of England and others, a structure was drafted for the communication
of monetary policy. Eight to ten monetary policy  meetings a year would be held at set times.  Press
notices  and  inflation  reports  in  connection  with  these  meetings  would  form  the  corpus  of  our  joint
communications. Divergent opinions would not be revealed before the minutes have been published
some time after each meeting.
3
BIS Review 111/1999
This  arrangement  does  impose  some  restrictions  on  the  outspokenness  of  Board  members.  In  the
interval  between  a  meeting  and  the  publication  of  the  minutes,  members  have  to  refrain  from
commenting on what happened at the meeting and may not express an opinion that differs from the
majority view of the forward-looking monetary policy. That is why we made it clear from the start that
we aimed to shorten this interval, as we have now begun to do.
My impression is that this system has worked quite well. There are no indications that the market as  a
whole misinterprets the Riksbank more than before. What we do see is a greater personification of the
monetary  policy  debate;  but  that  was  predictable.  It  tallies  with  the  media  tendency,  particularly  in
broadcasting, to dramatise events by presenting conflicting opinions. Today, different points of view
can be clearly attached to particular individuals.
One feature of this discussion is the classification of Board members as doves or hawks. It so happens
that  when  I  joined  the  Riksbank,  one  of  the  largest  business  journals  actually  described  me  as  a
dove-hawk (the literal translation of the Swedish for goshawk). I wonder whether the writer was aware
that the goshawk is the most murderous of all the hawks and preys mostly on doves. With a central
bank that clearly targets inflation, however, this way of classifying board members is not particularly
apt. A member who consistently strives for an unduly low interest rate will find, if he or she gets their
way, that sooner or later the inflation target is exceeded. The opposite holds, of course, for those who
always prefer a higher interest rate.
I expect we shall have to learn to live with this type of monetary policy personification. But I hope that
in  time  the  discussion  that  follows  our  decisions  and  published  minutes  will  still  lead  to  a  wider
understanding,  among  people  in  general  as  well  as  in  markets,  of  the  deliberations  and  choices  the
Executive Board has to make.
For market players I continue to believe that fundamentally it is most important to arrive at their own
sound  assessments  of  inflation.  Those  who  do  so  are  likely  to  be  fairly  close  to  the  mark  in  their
predictions of the repo rate, at least in the somewhat longer perspective.
The current monetary policy situation
3.
Let me now consider the present situation, starting from the Inflation Report the Riksbank presented
last week.
The assessment in the Inflation Report
The signs of a global recovery have been confirmed and also become stronger since the June Report.
The Riksbank has accordingly made an upward revision to the forecast for GDP growth in the OECD
area, to an annual rate of not quite 2.5% up to the end of 2001. The growth is occurring on a wide
front.  The  Asian  and  European  economies  are  recovering,  from  different  initial  situations,  and  the
slowdown in the United States is expected to be milder than we counted on earlier.
Even with the prospect of higher global economic growth, international price pressure is assumed to
remain relatively low. One reason for this is that after the Asian crisis and its repercussions, there is
still  unutilised  capacity  in  the  world  economy.  Another  important  factor  is  increased  price
competition. In addition, the pass-through from external price increases to prices in Sweden will be
dampened by an appreciating krona. In our main scenario, moreover, the barrel price of crude oil is
assumed to fall back from the present level around US$23 to just over US$17.
The  stronger  international  growth  has  also  contributed  to  an  upward  revision  of  the  Riksbank’s
forecast for the domestic economy. Growth is now expected to be 3.6% this year, followed by 3.8%
and 3.0% in 2000 and 2001. The upward revision also mirrors higher domestic demand growth. Firms
as  well  as  households  are  optimistic  about  the  future.  Real  wages  and  employment  are  now  rising
rapidly and so is household income, particularly as fiscal policy is less restrictive. This is accompanied
by rising corporate investment in the coming years. (Figure 2).
BIS Review 111/1999
4
One  component  of  the  present  picture  that  warrants  the  Riksbank’s  attention  is  the  development  of
asset prices. Share  prices  are  high  and  a  nationwide  increase  in house  prices  has  started in the  past
year. House prices in Greater Stockholm, for example, had already risen substantially before that. This
increases the consumption and investment propensities of households and firms. To date, however, the
levels reached by asset prices in Sweden are hardly a risk for economic development and stability in
the way that some observers perceive to be the case in the United States.
All in all, the rate and breadth of the economic upswing in Sweden suggest that unutilised resources
will be activated for production relatively quickly. Various indicators of resource utilisation suggest
that certain capacity shortages may arise at the end of the forecast period. Unemployment falls to 4.6%
next year and to 4% the year after, which means that we count on a higher rate of wage increases than
before.  In  the  coming  years  wages  are  now  expected  to  rise  4–4.5%.  With  the  rapid  increase  in
employment,  moreover,  registered  productivity  growth  will  be  lower,  particularly  as  most  of  the
upswing is occurring in the services sector, where productivity is relatively lower. The forecast for this
year has therefore been revised downwards and for the coming years the Riksbank counts on labour
productivity rising in annual terms by just over 1.5%. (Figure 3).
Against  this  background  it  has  to  be said  that inflation  expectations  look  good.  There  has  naturally
been some increase in the shorter run in the light of stronger economic statistics but the level remains
low. Expectations for the medium and longer run are anchored around 2%. (Figure 4).
The combination of all these factors led to the conclusion in the Inflation Report that in the forecast
period  inflationary  pressure  will  be  somewhat  stronger.  UNDIX  inflation,  which  excludes  indirect
taxes,  subsidies  and  interest  expenditure,  is  judged  to  be  1.8%  one  year  ahead  and  2.1%  after  two
years. (Figure 5).
The Riksbank also attempts to identify any risks of developments that differ from the path in our main
scenario.  This  time  round  we  saw  somewhat  greater  risks  of  inflation  being  above  the  target  than
below. The main reason for this is the uncertainty about how the stronger growth will affect the labour
market and wages. To this I want to add another evident risk—that the price of oil does not fall back
as  we    ave  envisaged.  An  oil  price  around  US$20  in  the  coming  years  would  lift  inflation
0.1-0.2 percentage points above the main scenario. On the downside the main risk is a more marked
slowdown in the US economy.
Lower trade-off between growth and inflation?
Now  I want to touch on a matter that  has  been  prominent in  the  debate  after  the  publication  of the
Inflation  Report.  How  will  inflation  be  affected  by  the  higher  growth  we  foresee?  The  attention
accorded to this question is only natural, for several reasons. The Riksbank now counts on growth that
is  clearly  higher  than  we  expected  in  June  but  has  not  made  much  of  an  upward  revision  to  its
assessment  of  inflation.  Moreover,  good  growth  is  foreseen  by  virtually  all  observers  and  the
consequences  of  this  for  inflation  are  therefore  a  central  concern  for  everyone.  But  no  one  has  the
answer and that is what usually fuels a lively discussion.
The relationship between growth and inflation is a question that has occupied us at the Riksbank in
recent years. Our inflation forecasts, as well as those of other observers, have almost consistently been
above the outcome. The difficulty lies, however, in determining to what extent the lower outcome is
attributable to transitory factors rather than to more fundamental behavioural changes in the Swedish
economy.
In  the  simplest  type  of  model,  inflation  is  explained  in  terms  of  resource  utilisation  (however
measured) and expected inflation.
One reason why the analysis of the relation between growth and inflation is complex is that the actual
level  of  total  resource  utilisation  is  so  difficult  to  assess.  One  approach  involves  estimating  the
long-term  level  of  potential  output  and  use  the  difference  between  this  and  actual  production  (the
output gap) for conclusions about the relationship with trend inflation. In recent years the Riksbank,
along with other observers, has revised its assessment of potential growth. We believe an improvement
in  the  productivity  trend  has helped to  raise  the  potential  growth  rate so that  this is  now somewhat
5
BIS Review 111/1999
above 2%. We have also altered our assessment of unutilised resources; the largest revision was made
during 1996, partly in the light of new information and better estimation methods.
The  Riksbank’s  assessment  of  resource  utilisation  is  appraised  continuously  as  new  information  is
obtained about, for example, shortages in various sectors, prices and wage formation. An improvement
in the workings of the economy can show up just as a larger supply of resources, be they capital or
labour. To date in 1999, for instance, employment has been provided for more than 100,000 people
without any signs of appreciable shortages. To me at least this is a welcome surprise. But one should
not make too much of it; if we have in fact seriously misjudged how the labour market is functioning,
one would expect wage increases to be lower than has been the case. It is also worth noting that the
rate of wage increases in Sweden continues to be higher than elsewhere.
Another difficult matter is the effect on inflation from a given level of resource utilisation. This was
examined in a box in the latest Inflation Report. The results suggest that the Swedish economy  can
cope with somewhat higher resource utilisation than before without an acceleration of inflation. There
is  also  a  good  a  priori  case  for  this.  Raising  prices,  for  example,  should  be  more  difficult  in  an
economy where prices fluctuate less. It follows that firms should then put up more resistance in wage
negotiations. It is also conceivable that increased international competition, for instance, has left firms
with less room for price increases, at least for a time.
Finally, then, what about the role of inflation expectations? They have indeed come down substantially
in the 1990s, from 6–8% to 2%. The Riksbank’s picture of what this could mean for inflation is partly
based on empirical studies that have been presented in earlier Inflation Reports. These results likewise
suggest  that  the  economy  is  somewhat  less  inflation  prone,  though  the  picture  should  not  be
over-interpreted. In a world with low and stable inflation, it is conceivable that wage demands may be
formulated differently. A given level of real wages can be attained with considerably smaller nominal
wage increases and perhaps with greater precision.
Another factor that is often mentioned in the discussion is the concept of a new economy, that is to say,
how  the  trade-off  between  growth  and  inflation  may  have  been  modified  by  increased  global
competition and information technology. This theme has been stimulated not least by the example of
the United States, where high growth has been achieved year after year without boosting inflation; but
that is a topic for a separate address. Today I shall simply make two points. One is that effects of this
type  can  enable  the  economy  to  cope  with  higher  resource  utilisation  without  an  acceleration  of
inflation,  that  they  can  raise  potential  growth  or  they  can  lower  the  inflation  propensity.  Thus,  the
so-called new economy can conceivably affect the inflation assessment in the ways I discussed earlier.
The other point is that demonstrating effects of this type on inflation empirically is presumably even
more difficult in Sweden than it is in the United States. This is because insofar as such effects have
been at work, this has happened in a period when inflation expectations shifted downwards, making it
difficult to separate the one from the other.
The inflation assessment in the latest Inflation Report incorporates a marginal downward revision of
the trade-off between growth and inflation compared with the June Report. This could stand for some
change in the appraisal of resource utilisation as well as a somewhat lower inflation propensity, though
perhaps we have placed more emphasis on the latter. At the end of the two-year period we discuss, the
effect on inflation amounts to some tenths of a percentage point. The Riksbank considered the revision
was  called  for  in  the  light  of  the  available  information  about  the  labour  market  situation  and  price
tendencies, for instance. The IMF has made similar downward revisions for the advanced economies
and they are mirrored in OECD area forecasts compiled by Consensus.
Conclusions for monetary policy
4.
In connection with the publication of the Inflation Report, the Riksbank decided to keep the repo rate
unchanged. The  reasons  were  much  the same  as  in  August.  Economic  growth  is  admittedly  higher,
which  reduces  the  unutilised  capacity  and  thereby  leads  to  an  increase  in  underlying  inflationary
pressure. But inflation is still below the target and is judged to rise relatively slowly in the future, so
BIS Review 111/1999
6
that twelve to twenty-four months ahead it will be in line with the target. It is only towards the end of
the period that the 2% target is marginally exceeded if the repo rate is not increased.
A  notable  problem  in  the  assessment  of  inflation  concerns  the  future  development  of  wages:  it  is
difficult to predict, yet its significance for future inflation is crucial. Our wage forecast is in line with
those  of  other  observers;  at  the  same  time,  we  see  a  higher  wage  outcome  as  the  biggest  risk  for
inflation. A lower wage outcome would provide room for quicker growth and higher employment.
The decision to defer an increase in the interest rate is naturally based on our assessment of inflation in
the coming years. It also enables us to collect additional information. At the same time, the conditions
will  be  better  for  getting  people  in  general  to  accept  the  step  we  are  taking,  which  is  ultimately
essential for the Riksbank’s legitimacy and credibility. Neither did we see a need at present to make
our mark by raising interest rates. There appears to be confidence in the Riksbank’s commitment to
maintaining  low  inflation  and  the  results  of  surveys  and  other  work  we  do  to  see  how  various
economic agents are assessing future inflation give no cause for concern.
In connection with the publication of the Inflation Report we made it clear that the repo rate will need
to be increased in the future if there is no new information that clearly alters the perspective. Even if
inflation expectations continue to be low and there are certain signs that the economy is functioning
more efficiently, the growth rate will have to be brought into line with the long-term potential. That
we shall do in good time. We can thereby contribute to good, stable growth in the Swedish economy
for a long time to come.
Figure 1. GDP growth and inflation in
Sweden, forecasts for 1999
Per cent
GDP growth, forecasts for 1999
Inflation, forecasts for 1999
Riksbank forecast
Consensus forecast
Consensus forecast
Riksbank forecast
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Autumn
1998
Spring
1999
Autumn
Autumn
1999
1998
Spring
1999
Autumn
1999
Sources: Consensus and the Riksbank
7
BIS Review 111/1999
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
Figure 2. Contributions to GDP growth
Percentage points; 1999-2001 forecast
 (main scenario)
Final domestic consumption
Net exports
Stock building
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
Sources: Statistics Sweden and The Riksbank
Figure 3. Output Gap estimates
Moving 4-quarter average, per cent
W-H
PF
UC
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-8
1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999
Source: The Riksbank
BIS Review 111/1999
8
Figure 4. Money market agents’  inflation
expectations
Per cent
3
2
1
0
-1
Feb’96
Feb’97
Feb.’98
Nov.’98*
CPI
May’99*
Sept.’99
Aug.’99
April ’99
Mar.’99
3
2
1
0
-1
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
* From Statistics Sweden (otherwise Prospera)
Sources: Prospera Reserarch AB and Statistics Sweden
Figure 5. UNDIX with Uncertainty
Interval
Percentage 12-month changes
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
1995
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
Sources: Statistics Sweden and The Riksbank
9
BIS Review 111/1999
