Mr Bäckström gives his perspective on Sweden’s economy
and looks at factors that contribute to long-term growth
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  given  at  the  University  of
Gothenburg on 27 October 1999.
 A  current  topic,  in  the  United  States  and  elsewhere,  is  whether  structural  changes  have  made  it
possible to achieve stronger economic growth than before without generating inflationary tendencies.
The term – a new economy – has been coined for this phenomenon.
The  US  economy’s  new,  improved  performance  is  sometimes  said  to  be  due  in  part  to  the  rapid
advances in computer technology and telecommunications. Internet is a part of this. Progress in these
fields has led to better and more efficient processes for production and distribution. This in turn has
paved  the  way  for  stronger  competition,  higher  productivity  growth  and  thereby  lower  inflation.
Consumers, moreover, are better informed than they used to be.
Productivity growth in the United States does seem to have risen. The IMF, to mention one observer,
considers  that  the  potential  growth  rate  –  the  annual  growth  that  can  be  achieved  without  boosting
inflation – has moved up from 2.25% to 2.75%. An even higher potential rate has been estimated by
others.
In Sweden, too, most things suggest that labour productivity has risen somewhat faster in the present
decade than it did in the 1980s. The shift may be in the order of one-half of a percentage point. This is
the change that lies behind the common, but not entirely certain, estimate that nowadays the Swedish
economy  can  maintain  an  annual  growth  rate  between  2%  and  2.5%.  But  Swedish  data  do  not  yet
provide any definite evidence of an improvement in productivity, and hence in potential growth, that
corresponds to what has happened in America.
It does seem likely, however, that the rapid advances in information technology will also have a major
impact  on  future  production  and  distribution  processes  in  Sweden.  Sweden  is  well  to  the  fore  in
Internet applications. Still, when and to what extent these factors will affect growth in general is not
yet clear.
But  even  though  appreciable  general  economic  consequences  cannot  be  discerned  at  present,  the
tendencies  are  worth  considering.  Some  parallels  can  perhaps  be  drawn  with  the  situation  over  a
century ago, when Sweden was being transformed fairly rapidly from a poor European country into a
dynamic  and  strongly  expanding  industrialised  economy.  There  are  also  lessons  to  be  learned  from
developments in recent decades.
Monetary policy’s task well defined
The current monetary policy conclusion is unequivocal and there seems to be broad agreement about
the task  that  monetary  policy  faces.  So today  I  should  like  to  discuss  developments  in  the  Swedish
economy in a wider perspective that is not an immediate concern for monetary policy but may have to
be considered some time after the turn of the millennium.
In order to formulate monetary policy, the Riksbank needs an approximate assessment of how rapidly
the economy can expand without causing inflation to take off; in other words, an assessment of the
long-term  growth  trend.  This  trend  is  affected  by  population  changes,  growth  of  the  capital  stock,
technical advances and the efficiency with which the economic resources are utilised in production.
These are not factors the Riksbank can control directly. So monetary policy has to use the repo rate to
keep demand in line with the growth path the factors make feasible. That leads to stable, low inflation.
If demand deviates from the growth path, inflation may be higher or lower.
1
BIS Review 118/1999
A problem here is that the long-term growth path is not something that can be measured. In day-to-day
monetary policy we therefore have to rely on various indicators and adjust the repo rate successively.
It is consequently instructive to pause from time to time and study factors that contribute to growth’s
long-term path. That is what I shall be doing this evening.
Internet’s 30th anniversary
While many of us have woken up to the Internet only recently, it is now actually thirty years, almost to
the day, since the Internet was born by linking up two computers, one at the University of California
and  the  other  at  Stanford  University.  The  project,  designated  Arpa  (Advanced  Research  Projects
Agency), was a part of the cold war strategy of creating alternative communications facilities.
That project, however, had little in common with today’s world wide web. It had no pictures, links or
e-mail. It was also cumbersome. E-mail was in fact introduced three years later but it was not until the
turn of the 1980s that we got the world wide web, which is what we now think of when we talk about
the Internet. That was what made it possible to click on a word and move quickly from page to page
on the net. At much the same time it also became possible to dispense with complicated manuals and
commands in favour of simple graphics and clicking with a mouse.
Introduction underestimated
All forecasts to date about the spread of the Internet have been on the low side. In the United States it
was 38 years before 50 million households had radio sets, while the intervals for television sets and
cable television were 13 and 10 years. The Internet, however, had reached 50 million households after
only  5  years  and  according  to  some  estimates  the  number  of  users  next  year  will  be  up  around
160 million. But, as I said, the outcome has been consistently underestimated.
It has been said that whereas conventional telephony in Sweden is growing by 7% a year, traffic on the
Internet  is  currently  rising  at  this  rate  every  week.  It  is  not  just  that  more  and  more  people  are
subscribing;  those  who  surf  on  the  Internet  are  doing  so  more  and  more.  The  number  of  surfers  is
measured  by  Sifo  Research  &  Consulting;  the  figures  for  September  this  year  show  that  almost
3.5 million people in Sweden surfed, which is not quite half of the population aged 12 to 79. Of these,
as many as 2 million stated that they surfed on a daily basis. Another noteworthy figure is that in the
age group 50 to 79 years, almost 20% are active users of the Internet. So the Internet is not something
that only young people find attractive.
Furthermore, Sweden is one of the absolute  leaders in information technology  (IT),  both  as regards
Internet  users  and  in  broader  terms  such  as  the  number  of  computers  and  mobile  phones.  In  such
surveys, the United States usually comes out top.
The Internet makes it simple to obtain information, communicate with others and trade in goods and
services. Price comparisons are already feasible and one can buy some goods and services, not least
bank  services.  In  these  ways  the  Internet  cuts  distances,  overcomes  borders,  contributes  to  a  more
competitive  environment  and  enables  consumers  to  be  better  informed.  Everyone  can  get  the
information he or she needs, easily and painlessly, often dispensing with intermediaries.
Besides  affecting  consumer  behaviour,  the  Internet  and  information  technology  in  general  have
consequences for production processes. In addition to more informed consumers, we have firms with a
better oversight of production, material inputs, distribution processes and sales.
Internet compared with railways
Simplifying  somewhat,  the  advent  of  the  Internet  can  be  compared  with  the  era  of  railroad
construction in Sweden in the second half of the nineteenth century.
In the initial phase there was a boom for those who constructed the railways and manufactured rolling
stock. In the closing decade of the century Swedish firms began to produce locomotives; previously
BIS Review 118/1999
2
that had been the preserve of British manufacturers. The Swedish firms took over the domestic market
and  were  even  able  to  export  their  products.  Much  the  same  happened  with  the  manufacture  of
passenger carriages and goods wagons.
Today we can see similar developments in the IT industry. Besides the giant, Ericsson, Sweden has
many  different  IT  enterprises.  But  growth  is  still  being  driven  not  so  much  by  users  of  the  new
communication facilities as by the production of new possibilities.
To continue with the comparison, in the next phase people started to travel by rail. A journey from
Stockholm  to  Gothenburg  admittedly  took  11  hours  and  45  minutes  in  1865,  but  that  was  nothing
compared with a horse-drawn carriage. Travelling became quicker and more efficient; people gained
new impressions and learned new things. Sweden became smaller.
Today  we  travel  on  the  Internet  by  gathering  information  simply  and  efficiently  from  all  over  the
world, largely for the price of a local telephone call. Millions of people in all parts of the world are
indeed using this facility and in that sense the world has now become smaller.
The really important phase, however, was when railways began to affect processes for production and
distribution. Previously, production in Sweden had been located in the vicinity of iron ore and forests.
The  units  were  numerous  and  not  particularly  efficient;  transportation  was  slow.  In  the  county  of
Värmland, for example, there were sixty different sites for the production of iron in 1870. When the
railways had been constructed, it was easier to concentrate production to fewer sites; by around 1900
there  were  only  six  sites  and  they  were  accordingly  considerably  more  efficient.  This  is  just  an
example to illustrate how the railways played a major part in Sweden’s industrial upswing in the late
19th century. Productivity and growth rose.
For  the  Internet,  this  phase  of  the  process  probably  lies  ahead.  The  new  technology  has  not  yet
seriously altered either production and distribution processes or consumer behaviour. Progress is still a
little  hesitant  as  more  and  more  people  use  the  new  technique  for  surfing  and  learn  the  new
technology. The potential will also be limited as long as the technique is not entirely user-friendly.
IT generates pressure for change
When the new information technology really catches on, it will probably lead to a rapid expansion and
transformation of capital stocks. The entire economy will then be involved in intensive investment and
high productivity growth. Old technology will be replaced by new and each unit of capital equipment
will  then  require  a  smaller  input  of  labour.  Unprofitable  units  or  firms  will  be  closed  down,
accompanied by new establishments. Structural changes generate developments that are often referred
to  at  present  as  a  “new  economy”.  The  marked  improvement  in  productivity  maintains  profits  and
keeps prices down. During the transformation, a good circle is created  but  it is  difficult  to  tell  how
long it will last. It can be described, if you like, as a period of extensive rationalisation and heightened
efficiency. The growth trend is raised for an indefinite period, enabling the economy to expand more
rapidly without inflation taking off.
It  should  be  born  in  mind  that  the  adaptation  to  the  new  information  technology  does  not  occur
automatically. It is not the case that one day we suddenly find the new technology has begun to be
implemented in ways that are leaving their mark on economic developments in general.
The late 19th century provides important lessons about the necessary conditions for this good circle.
At the beginning of the 1800s Sweden was still a poor country with an unstable form of government, a
chaotic  monetary  system  and  a  general  shortage  of  credit  facilities.  Ninety  years  later  the  Swedish
economy  had  undergone  a  dramatic  transformation.  Inflation  was  low,  with  an  orderly  monetary
system. The nation was bursting with vitality in every field. An impressive range of products, many of
them  world  leaders,  were  being  developed  on  the  basis  of  Swedish  inventions.  Swedish  financial
experts were engaged in the exploitation of the inventions at an early stage. Employment was provided
for more and more people, living standards rose and growth was among the highest in the world.
3
BIS Review 118/1999
Opinions  about  the  causes  of  the  pronounced  change  in  the  Swedish  economy  are  not  completely
unanimous.  The  stable  prices  presumably  played  a  part.  When  inflation  is  low  or  the  price  level  is
stable, those who have to plan for the longer run face less uncertainty.
Another  significant  factor  was  probably  the  credit  system’s  development  in  the  1800s.  Banks  were
established and the abolition of interest controls was followed by more financial expertise. That made
it possible to exploit the inventions and finance investments in the emerging industries.
An  increasingly  stable  form  of  government  presumably  contributed,  too.  A  series  of  constitutional
reforms provided a guarantee of stability.
Economic activities benefited from the abolition of trade guilds, freedom to trade and the reform of
joint-stock companies. The reform of elementary education was, of course, another important step that
ultimately promoted human capital.
This  catalogue  is  not  intended  to  be  a  complete  account  of  all  the  factors  behind  Sweden’s
transformation  from  a  poor  country  into  a  rapidly  expanding  industrial  nation.  The  point  I  want  to
make is that a variety of institutional changes seem to have been needed to provide a stable framework
for the subsequent process of industrialisation. It is just this stability in the fundamental conditions for
economic  activities  that  was  no  doubt  important  for  the  process  that  resulted  in  the  industrial
revolution, which in itself was full of commercial risks and uncertainties.
Improvement in opportunities for change but …
A  similar  gloss  can  be  applied  to  the  realignment  of  economic  policy  from  the  second  half  of  the
1980s to the middle of the 1990s. There have been a number of reforms aimed at creating stability and
opportunities.  The  credit  and  currency  markets  have  been  deregulated,  components  of  the  social
security system have been reformed, a tax reform has been implemented, targets have been established
for  government  finances,  price  stability  is  enshrined  in  law  and  the  Riksbank  has  been  given  an
independent status.
All this represents good possibilities of the Swedish economy facing a stable future as we step over the
threshold  to  a  new  millennium.  The  question  is,  however,  whether  the  new  information  technology
will  be  implemented  in  the  far-reaching  ways  that  are  necessary  in  order  to  reap  the  really  large
benefits. Let us look at another period in Sweden’s economic history when things did not go quite as
well.
After  World  War  II,  when  activity  in  the  industrialised  countries  recovered  and  competition  grew,
partly because trade barriers were lowered, it became necessary to realign production in Sweden. The
need for change resembled what we are beginning to discern on the horizon today.
For much of this post-war period, however, wage costs rose at a rapid rate. Profitability in Swedish
business was accordingly under pressure from  two  fronts:  growing  competition from  the rest  of  the
world and rising wage costs.
Firms countered the pressure on profits by rationalising in an attempt to cut production costs  rather
than by investing in new products. The diminishing profits simply did not provide the stimulus that
was needed for a prompt renewal of the capital stock in response to the pressure for change. A process
of change involves shedding, but development is equally important.
Most  things  still  looked  good  to  begin  with.  The  1960s  was  a  fantastic  decade  for  growth.  But  the
strategy proved to be defensive and stagnation set in during the 1970s. Rationalisation has its limits as
a means for growth. Without renewal, growth normally slows sooner or later. Measures are called for
in  periods  of  growth  but  it  is  easy  to  be  deceived  and  lean  back  to  enjoy  the  fruits.  The  long-term
growth trend did indeed begin to turn downwards more markedly than in other countries.
Economic  policy  responded  with  a  series  of  devaluations  in  an  attempt  to  maintain  growth  in  the
traditional industries. The latest devaluation was invariably described as the last, but the cycle of rising
wage costs and a devaluation was repeated time and again. The endeavour to compensate for the lack
BIS Review 118/1999
4
of  change  in  Sweden’s  corporate  sector,  which  had  its  roots  in  the  1960s,  simply  did  not  work.  If
anything, the devaluations meant that the problems persisted and were accentuated.
The  lack  of  investments  in  new  products and the  dependence  on  a  gradually  outmoded  structure  of
production helped to impose an adjustment of the entire nation’s material standard. For  many  years
growth in Sweden was weaker than in the world around us.
This example shows how a “new economy” at that time resulted in problems for the Swedish economy
rather than opportunities. The lack of change, because wage formation did not function properly, led to
a  weaker  economy  that  was  more  inflation  prone.  The  period  clearly  illustrates  how  globalisation,
increased competition and new technology can result in lower growth and higher inflation if changes
are  not  made  in  time.  If  the  economy  is  under  pressure  from  strong  competition  as  well  as  poorly
functioning wage formation, there is a risk of economic renewal lagging behind.
Concluding remarks
As I have said, the new information technology is making rapid progress. As far as we can see today,
it will affect production and distribution processes as well as consumer behaviour. That in turn makes
the environment more competitive and calls for changes in Sweden’s corporate sector.
Put  to  good  use,  this  transformation  can  probably  create  stronger  potential  growth,  lead  to  higher
productivity growth and lower inflation,  and  favour  employment.  The  favourable  changes  that  have
occurred  over  a  number  of  years  in  the  Swedish  economy  since  the  1980s  suggest  that  such  a
development is within our grasp.
But as I just mentioned, if wage formation does not function properly, firms will be under pressure
from  two  fronts.  Profitability  will  be  depressed  both  by  increased  competition  and  by  rising  wage
costs. Investment will be held back and the transformation will proceed too slowly or not at all. There
will then be no quick renewal of capital stocks. Firms will not make good use of the new information
technology.
I have cited wage formation as a conceivable factor that may hamper a transformation, but of course
there  are  other  factors  as  well,  for  example  the  tax  system,  the  educational  system,  etc.  It  is  not  a
function of the Riksbank to point out specific factors that can affect the pace of structural change. But
perhaps we can contribute to a broader discussion of the new economy.
Various  factors  that  hamper  or  check  an  adjustment  could  thus  result  in  the  Swedish  economy
following  a lower, not a  higher,  path  for long-term  growth,  with a  stronger, not a  weaker,  inflation
propensity and a continuation of high unemployment instead of a reduction to the low level that most
people want. These risks seldom feature in the general discussion about the new economy.
The  changes  that  many  people  refer  to  as  the  new  economy  unquestionably  present  a  number  of
challenges to the Swedish economy in the present situation. My comments have indicated, moreover,
that the notion of a new economy is not correct; that is not what it is all about. It is rather a matter of a
new challenge in the long series of challenges the Swedish economy has had to face ever  since  the
dawn of the industrial era more than a century ago.
5
BIS Review 118/1999
