European Central Bank Press Conference introductory statements
Introductory statements given by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank,
and Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Press Conference, held
in Frankfurt on 2 December 1999.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
The Vice-President and I are here today to report on the outcome of today’s meetings of the General
Council  and  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  the  latter  of  which  was  attended  by  Mr  Niinistö,
President of the EU Council.
Let me first report that the Governing Council decided to confirm the reference value  for  monetary
growth, namely an annual growth rate of 4½% for the broad aggregate M3. This decision was taken on
the  grounds  that the components  underlying  the  derivation  of  the  first reference  value  in  December
1998, namely the Eurosystem’s definition of price stability and  the  assumptions  for  trend  real  GDP
growth and the trend decline in M3 income velocity, have remained unchanged.
As before, the Governing Council will assess monetary developments in relation to the reference value
on  the  basis  of  a  three-month  moving  average  of  annual  growth  rates.  The  Governing  Council  has
decided henceforth to review the reference value on a regular  annual basis,  with the next  review  to
take place in December 2000.
Against this background, the Governing Council wishes to emphasise that the trend growth potential
of the euro area could be considerably enhanced by structural reform in the labour and goods markets.
The Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy would take such changes into account, as appropriate. The
derivation of the reference value of 4½% is an expression of a medium-term-oriented approach. The
generous liquidity situation in 1999 will have to be borne in mind.
The ECB will issue a press release today providing some background information on the review of the
reference value carried out today by the Governing Council. The press release will also recall the role
of the reference value within the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy.
The Governing Council also conducted its regular review of the outlook for price developments and
the risks to price stability in the euro area, this time including a review of the most recent forecasts and
projections.  After  this  examination,  the  interest  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  of  the
Eurosystem was left at 3.0% and the interest rates on the marginal lending facility and on the deposit
facility were maintained at 4.0% and 2.0% respectively.
Allow  me  to  outline  the  main  elements  of  our  assessment  of  the  latest  information  on  monetary,
financial market and other economic developments.
With regard to monetary developments in the euro area, the data up to October 1999 - which still refer
to the period before our decision to raise interest rates - confirmed the picture of a generous liquidity
situation in the euro area. The annual growth rate of M3 in October 1999 was 6.0%. This compares
with 6.2% in the previous month. The three-month average of the annual growth rates of M3, covering
the period from August to October 1999, was unchanged at 6.0%, and thus stood 1½ percentage points
above the reference value of 4½%. The growth of the most liquid components of M3 remained very
dynamic. In addition, the annual growth rate of credit to the private sector continued to exceed 10%.
As we have noted on previous occasions, these monetary and credit developments are considered to
have  been  driven  mainly  by  the  low  level  of  interest  rates,  as  well  as  by  the  pick-up  in  economic
activity in the euro area.
The initial reaction of euro area financial markets to the Eurosystem’s monetary policy move of last
month  was  favourable.  In  particular,  this  was  signalled  by  the  continued  decline  in  long-term
government bond yields and the immediate substantial reduction in market uncertainty regarding the
1
BIS Review 132/1999
evolution of future long-term interest rates. Later in November, long-term bond yields in the euro area
began  to  rise  again  gradually,  in  connection  with  developments  in  international  bond  markets  and
favourable expectations for world growth.
Indeed, the global economic outlook remains positive, and the view that the world economy is set for
higher  growth  appears  to  be  shared  by  the  major  international  organisations.  At  the  same  time,  the
expectation that growth differentials between the main economic regions will narrow in the course of
time is widespread. While real GDP growth in the United States is  generally  expected to ease,  it  is
expected to accelerate in the euro area. Overall, relatively wide growth differentials between the major
world economies will give way to a more balanced scenario, thereby underlining the potential for the
euro to appreciate.
With  regard  to  developments  in  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area,  the  latest  data  confirm  a
strengthening of growth in the course of the second half of 1999. In particular, production growth in
the industrial sector saw a further upturn in the third quarter and various survey data suggest that this
will continue in the final quarter. All available projections indicate that this upward momentum will
lead to an acceleration in real GDP growth, from around 2% this year to close to 3% in both 2000 and
2001.
Consumer price increases, as measured by the  Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), have
recently resumed their upward trend, as expected. In October the annual rate of change in the overall
HICP was 1.4%, up from 1.2% in September and August owing to higher price increases for food and
non-energy industrial goods. The impact of higher oil prices on energy prices in the HICP, which had
accounted  for  most  of  the  upward  pressure  since  June  1999,  was  countered  in  October  by  more
moderate  increases  in  other  energy  components.  Some  additional  counterweight  to  the  upward
movement in goods prices came from a further moderation of increases in prices in the services sector.
In general, the overall upward trend is expected to continue until early 2000 as a result of the increase
in  oil  prices  since  spring  1999.  Forecasts  available  suggest  that  price  increases  will  nevertheless
remain below 2% in the course of 2000 and 2001. However, the actual developments will very much
depend on the behaviour of a number of factors, and in particular on wage developments remaining in
line with price stability. In addition, our assessment has to take due account of prevailing uncertainties.
On  the  upside,  these  relate  to,  inter  alia,  the  behaviour  of  money  and  credit  aggregates,  the
developments  in  oil  prices  and  the  path  of  the  effective  exchange  rate,  all  of  which  are  closely
monitored with regard to their impact on price stability. On the downside, main factors are linked to
the effects of deregulation and liberalisation.
In  conclusion,  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  should  ensure  a  sustainable  expansion  of
non-inflationary  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area.  In  line  with  its  monetary  policy  strategy,  the
Governing Council will remain vigilant with regard to any risks to price stability arising either from
domestic or from external sources and act in a timely manner.
Let  me  now  give  the  floor  to  the  Vice-President  to  introduce  some  of  the  additional  topics  we
discussed during our meetings.
The Governing Council today also took a decision on the subject of the minimum reserve system. As
you  may  be  aware,  interbank  liabilities  are  not  subject  to  reserve  requirements.  In  this  respect,  the
ECB allows those credit institutions which cannot provide evidence of their interbank liabilities - in
the form of debt securities issued with an agreed maturity of up to two years or money market paper -
to apply a standardised deduction to the aforementioned liabilities in the computation of their reserve
base. Since January 1999 this standardised deduction has been set at 10% for both types of securities.
Today,  following  a  review  of  new  statistical  evidence  available,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to
increase the standardised deduction to 30%. This decision shall have effect as from the determination
of the reserve requirement to be fulfilled in the maintenance  period starting  on  24 January  2000.  A
separate  press  release  presenting  this  decision  and  some  background  information  on  standardised
deductions from the reserve base will be issued to you here today.
The Governing Council today approved the ECB’s budget for 2000, which gives the ECB the green
light to recruit further staff needed to support the ongoing activities of the ECB. This will bring the
ECB’s staff to slightly over 1,000; the number of staff employed to date stands at 750.
BIS Review 132/1999
2
At its meeting on 18 November 1999 the Governing Council approved the publication of an update of
the  book  on  “European  Union  balance  of  payments  statistical  methods”  (the  “B.o.p.  Book”).  This
important  book  documents  the  statistical  methodologies  applied  in  Member  States  in  compiling
balance of payments statistics and, as such, improves the transparency of the compilation of euro area
statistics.  This  new  version  includes  additional  chapters  on:  (i)  investment  income;  (ii)  estimation
methods, especially for goods, investment income and portfolio investment; (iii) financial derivatives;
and (iv) the stocks compiled for international investment position statistics. The book was published
on the ECB’s Web site at 4 p.m. yesterday and will be available from the ECB in hard copy format
during the course of next week.
Finally,  let  me  inform  you  that  the  General  Council  discussed  the  monetary  policy  objectives,
strategies and intentions of the non-participating EU central banks against the background set by the
monetary policy of the Eurosystem. This is the second time that such an exercise has been undertaken
since the ECB was established.
3
BIS Review 132/1999
