Mr Noyer considers some consequences of
globalisation for policymakers and the conduct of monetary policy
Introductory  statement  by  Mr Christian Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
Fifth International Financial and Economic Forum: “Impact of globally  liberalised  capital  markets”,
organised by IFW in Vienna on 11 November 1999.
 Introduction
Globalisation - understood as the internationalisation of political, social and economic affairs - affects
both policymaking as well as our daily  lives. The idea that  we live  in  a  “global  village”  is  perhaps
suggested  by  the  fact  that  on  our  satellite  television  we  can  immediately  watch  events  which  are
unfolding  in  very  distant  places.  Or  perhaps  it  is  a  subtler  feeling  gradually  coming  into  our  minds
while we fill in an e-mail order to buy a new book listed in a far-off country.
However,  there  is  ample  evidence  that  the  world  we  live  in  is  not  yet  the  fully  globally  integrated
system often portrayed in economics textbooks. For example, the prices of tradable goods in different
countries  expressed  in  a  common  currency  sometimes  converge  to  a  common  level  rather  slowly.
Asset  portfolios  tend  to  exhibit  “home  bias”.  Thus,  in  a  fundamental  sense,  it  seems  that  there  is
“some” globalisation yet to come.
Nevertheless,  the  internationalisation  of  markets,  in  particular  those  in  the  financial  sphere,  has
important  implications  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  As  international  investors  thoroughly
scrutinise national economic and political developments, unexpected changes in the latter, or “news”,
may trigger the reassessment of investment strategies. These, in turn, may have an impact on exchange
rates, interest rates and equity prices.
Against  this  background  it  is  understandable  that  it  sometimes  appears  more  convenient  to  blame
“foreign speculators” or “global markets” for all kinds of economic and social problems, rather than
acknowledge their domestic origin, which quite often lies in unsustainable domestic economic policies
and a lack of structural reforms.
Of course, it goes without saying that financial markets can also be wrong in their assessment of the
fundamental determinants of asset prices. International investors can sometimes be influenced by fads
and self-fulfilling beliefs which drive prices away  from  their  fundamental  determinants.  Asset  price
“bubbles” can emerge. However, it is very difficult for policymakers to identify such misalignments
and  bubbles.  Moreover,  increased  volatility  of  financial  markets  and  perceived  misalignments  are
often related to fundamental factors such as policy failures and to a lack of transparency and clarity in
policymaking.
In the remainder of my presentation I shall focus on monetary policymaking in a global market. The
subject is naturally too vast to be fully covered in my introductory statement. Thus, I shall focus my
attention on two issues which I think are relevant to our discussion today. First, I shall mention some
of  the  consequences  of  globalisation  for  policymakers.  Second,  I  shall  explain  why  I  think  that  the
monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  European  Central  Bank  is  well  designed  to  face  the  challenges
stemming from globalisation.
Some consequences of globalisation for policymakers
With regard to the first issue, let me emphasise that I do not believe that globalisation has eliminated
policymakers’  influence  over  domestic  political,  social  and  economic  developments,  particularly  in
larger industrialised countries (or areas). On the contrary, the fact that people and  capital  can  move
more freely and quickly across borders makes the consequences of national policy decisions for the
1
BIS Review 125/1999
respective economies much more immediate and visible. Obviously, this makes national policymaking
and its presentation to the public more demanding.
Naturally, there is a disciplinary effect which comes from globalisation but this does not necessarily
run counter to the national interest. The influence of domestic policymakers can be used for good or
evil. Globalisation improves the incentives for national politicians to implement good policies, such as
structural  reforms,  which  increase  the  flexibility  of  the  economy.  This  is  demanded  by  the  Treaty
establishing  the  European  Community,  which  requires  Member  States  and  the  ESCB  to  “act  in
accordance with the principles of an open-market economy with free competition”. These policies will
contribute to improved growth and employment perspectives. I believe in the idea that all nations gain
from trade, including trade in financial assets. Notwithstanding possible imperfections in the financial
markets,  international  capital  market  integration  can  yield  considerable  benefits.  However,  it  is
important to stress that without flexible markets, countries will not be able to reap the full benefits of
globalisation.
Moreover,  it  is  well  known  that  national  authorities  would  face  an  impossible  task  if  they  had  to
reconcile in a sustained manner the objectives of what  has been called  the  “inconsistent  quartet”  of
(1) free  trade,  (2) complete  international  capital  mobility,  (3) fixed  or  managed  exchange  rates  and
(4) national  autonomy  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  painful  lesson  to  be  learned  from
economic theory and historical experience is that these four elements cannot coexist, and that at least
one  will  have  to  give  way.  This  is  of  course  one  of  the  major  insights  which  Robert Mundell,  this
year’s Nobel prize winner, taught us more than 30 years ago.
Globalisation also implies that certain types of policy measures become less effective. This refers in
particular  to  all  regulations  which  can  easily  be  circumvented  by  the  private  sector  by  redirecting
business activities to foreign countries or by transferring funds abroad.
The Eurosystem took this into account in elaborating its operational framework, which was set up in
line  with  the  market  principle.  For  example,  there  is  no  facility  which  explicitly  or  implicitly
subsidises counterparties. Moreover, the remuneration of reserve requirements eliminates the danger
that domestic residents will hold deposits outside the euro area in order to avoid the costs related to
non-remuneration.
The monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem and globalisation
As regards the conduct of monetary policy, I think that, in particular in large economies, central banks
continue to be able to influence liquidity conditions and thus short-term market rates, irrespective of
globalisation  and  of  whether  the  currency  is  widely  used  outside  the  currency  area  concerned  (or
national boundaries). Monetary policy - by adjusting short-term interest rates - will therefore still be in
a  position  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  respective  currency  area.  However,  globalisation
sometimes  makes  it  more  difficult  to  analyse  monetary  policy  indicators  and  to  investigate  and
understand the transmission mechanism.
An important precondition for monetary policy to remain effective in a  globalised  environment  is a
high degree  of  credibility.  If  international  markets  lose  confidence in  monetary  policy,  the  negative
implications  for  the  domestic  economy  are  likely  to  be  significantly  larger  in  an  environment  of
closely  integrated  financial  markets.  The  need  to  remain  credible  in  a  globalised  market  requires  a
convincing strategy and transparent communication. In this respect the Eurosystem is well equipped,
as I shall now explain.
The primary objective of the Eurosystem is to maintain price stability in the euro area, as laid down in
the Treaty establishing the European Community. To fulfil its mandate, the Governing Council of the
European  Central  Bank  has  adopted  a  monetary  policy  strategy  which  is  neither  conventional
monetary  targeting,  nor  direct  inflation  targeting,  nor  a  simple  mixture  of  the  two.  Rather  the
Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  is  new,  reflecting  the  unique  circumstances  surrounding  the
birth of the euro.
BIS Review 125/1999
2
The  adoption  of  the  single  monetary  policy  by  11 European  countries  marked  a  significant  shift  of
regime. Under these circumstances, the uncertainty facing the Eurosystem in respect of the indicator
properties of monetary, financial and other economic variables for future price developments, and with
regard to the reaction of the private sector to monetary policy measures, is greater than has typically
been the case in national contexts in the past.
Against  this  background,  the  Eurosystem  explicitly  eschews  placing  reliance  solely  on  a  single
indicator or intermediate target for the conduct of monetary policy. The strategy aims to identify those
economic disturbances which threaten price stability and to prompt a monetary policy response which
is  appropriate  for  maintaining  price  stability  taking  into  account  both  the  prevailing  economic
circumstances and the nature of the threat.
Given that the Eurosystem’s strategy has been designed in this way, globalisation and the uncertainties
and changes which it implies will not impair the ability of the Eurosystem to maintain price stability.
The  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  is  based  on  a  clear  framework  which  is  able  to  cope  with  the
possible impact of external developments on the economic situation in the euro area. In particular, one
of the strengths of this strategy is that it allows for all relevant indicators to be taken into account over
time.
By assigning overriding priority to the maintenance of price stability, the Eurosystem seeks to avoid
adding to uncertainty. In a global market, this orientation provides the world with an invaluable public
good. However, focusing on domestic price stability will necessitate flexibility in the long run. This
flexibility includes exchange rate flexibility. As indicated by Mundell’s famous quartet, if three of the
four  conditions  are  fulfilled - free  trade,  international  capital  mobility  and  an  independent  domestic
monetary  policy  focusing  on  the  maintenance  of  price  stability - it  is  not  possible  to  maintain  fixed
exchange rates.
There is widespread agreement that inflation in the medium to long term is a monetary phenomenon.
The relationship between money and prices is one of the more strongly stylised facts in economics.
There  are  good  reasons  to  believe  that  this  relationship  will  remain  robust  in  the  face  of  structural
changes  and  globalisation,  as  it  proved  to  be  in  the  past.  In  its  monetary  policy  strategy  the
Eurosystem therefore  gives  a  prominent  role to  money.  This  is  signalled  by  the announcement  of  a
reference value for the growth of a broad monetary aggregate (M3). M3 includes a wide spectrum of
conventional bank deposits, as well as close substitutes for these, such as marketable short-term bank
liabilities. Consequently, it is less likely to be affected by portfolio shifts.
When  devising  its  strategy,  the  Eurosystem  took  into  account  the fact  that the  relationship  between
money and prices might be affected, in the short term, by the structural changes and behavioural and
statistical  uncertainties  linked  to  the  shift  of  regime  associated  with  the  move  to  Stage  Three  of
Economic and Monetary Union. Therefore, the concept of a reference value does not mean  that  the
Eurosystem  will  change  its  policy  stance  or  react  in  a  mechanical  way  to  deviations  of  M3 growth
from  the  reference  value.  A  careful  analysis  of  the  reasons  behind  monetary  developments  must
always be carried out before drawing policy conclusions. The prominent role for money implies that
monetary developments are thoroughly assessed for the information which they provide with regard to
the outlook for price developments. Monetary policy will react in such a way as to address the threats
to price stability revealed by this analysis.
In parallel with the analysis of monetary developments, a broadly based assessment of a wide range of
economic  indicators,  including  foreign  and  international  developments,  will  help  to  inform  the
Governing Council of the specific nature of the macroeconomic environment and the disturbances to
the economy on which monetary policy decisions normally depend. A reliance on a single indicator
variable or intermediate target would not prompt the appropriate response in all circumstances. This is
all the more true in view of the increasing role of external developments resulting from globalisation
and financial market spillovers.
The  euro  exchange  rate  plays  an  important  role  as  it  can  have  an  impact  on  consumer  prices,  both
directly via import prices and indirectly via exports and real activity. However, the strategy eschews
mechanistic reactions to exchange rate movements.
3
BIS Review 125/1999
The emergence of the euro as an international currency with the concomitant reduction in the number
of key players in international monetary relations requires an intensified exchange of information on
international  monetary  issues.  However,  it  should  be  recognised  that  international  monetary  policy
coordination  such  as  exchange  rate  targeting  or  the  coordination  of  the  “global  policy-mix”  could
jeopardise the goal of price stability and endanger the credibility of monetary policy. It could also risk
decreasing accountability and reducing transparency. This would clearly be very undesirable.
It seems plausible that in the future further countries will consider anchoring, or decide to anchor, their
currency either formally or informally to the euro or to a basket of currencies in which the euro would
be a major component. Given the prospects of EU enlargement, visible changes are likely to take place
in this area in the near future. The sustainability of pegs to the euro will require that these countries
have a sound banking system, follow  credible and  sound  monetary  and  fiscal  policies and  enhance,
through structural reforms, the flexibility of their product and labour markets. Normally, the closer the
exchange  rate  link,  the  more  important  it  is  that  these  preconditions  should  be  fulfilled.  This  is
particularly the case for currency boards.
We  are  convinced  that  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  in  a  way  which  is  credible,
irrespective  of  the  role  that  the  euro  plays  in  third  countries,  is  the  best  contribution  which  the
monetary policy of the Eurosystem can make to favourable developments in the global economy.
Conclusion
Let me conclude by saying that  globalisation  makes  the assessment  of  the  economic  environment  a
more intricate task and the transmission mechanism of monetary policy more uncertain. There will be
an increased risk of exposure to the spillover effects of economic and financial disturbances,  which
will necessitate  closer  analysis of  economic  developments  from  a  worldwide  perspective.  However,
we are convinced that we have a monetary policy strategy which is designed in such a way that it can
be adapted to varying situations and the new challenges arising from globalisation.
BIS Review 125/1999
4
