Mr McDonough focuses on issues related to his
responsibilities as Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
Remarks by Mr William J McDonough, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, before the Foreign Policy Association Conference on Global Capital Markets and
a New International Financial Architecture, held in New York on 17 November 1999.
 I am delighted to take part this afternoon in the  Foreign  Policy  Association’s conference on  Global
Capital  Markets  and  a  New  International  Financial  Architecture.  It  is  a  special  pleasure  to  be  here
among so many old friends and colleagues.
In my remarks today, I will focus primarily on issues related to my responsibilities as Chairman of the
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. First, I’d like to give you a brief update on the Committee’s
efforts to implement globally an agreement reached initially in September 1997 on Core Principles for
Effective Banking Supervision. Second, I’ll describe the Committee’s work to promote improvements
in  risk  management,  including  some  related  lessons  drawn  from  the  LTCM  episode.  Third,  I  will
discuss the Committee’s proposal for a new capital adequacy framework to replace the 1988 Capital
Accord and give you some idea of what on our timetable is going forward. Many of these efforts were
initiated prior to the Russian financial collapse in the summer of 1998. There is no doubt, however,
that all went into significantly higher gear thereafter.
Let  me  turn  first  to  updating  you  on  the  status  of  the  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking
Supervision. This is an initiative the Basel Committee embarked on in the mid-1990s in the belief that
there was a need to foster more effective banking supervision throughout the global financial markets.
In  developing  the  Core  Principles,  the  Committee  sought  to  craft  a  document  that  would  have  the
legitimacy,  quality,  and  flexibility  to  meet  the  needs  of  bank  supervisors  around  the  world.  To  this
end,  the  Committee  made  it  a  key  point  to  consult  broadly  with  other  supervisors  throughout  the
various stages of the project, particularly those from emerging market countries.
The Core Principles document that resulted from this process brings together concisely in one place all
of  the  fundamental  elements  needed  to  carry  out  effective  banking  supervision  -  a  remarkable
achievement in its own right. Equally important, in my view, the document also balances the desire to
set high standards for supervisory practices with a pragmatic recognition that not all countries are in
the  same  stage  of  financial  market  development.  As  such,  the  Core  Principles  document  is  of
particular  importance  for  emerging  market  countries  because  it  establishes  a  clear  set  of  standards
against which each country’s current approaches and progress can be measured.
I  am  convinced  that  the  flexibility  embodied  in  the  Core  Principles  -  combined  with  the  valuable
substantive  guidance  the  principles  provide  -  is  the  right  model  for  achieving  sustainable
improvements in financial market practices. The fact that a number of other international groups have
in recent years also developed “core principles” in their respective areas of expertise confirms to me
the value of the Basel Committee’s approach.
Today,  approximately  120  countries  endorse  the  Core  Principles.  Just  last  month,  I  am  pleased  to
report, the Basel Committee, in cooperation with the IMF and the World Bank, produced a follow-up
report  called  the  Core  Principles  Methodology.  This  follow-up  report  was  initiated  in  response  to
requests from a number of countries for additional guidance on how to interpret and implement  the
Core Principles. What the methodology report does is to develop specific criteria to evaluate how the
Core Principles are being  implemented  in individual countries. The  new  methodology  provides two
sets of criteria for each Core Principle. One set of criteria focuses on issues deemed essential for the
minimum  implementation  of  the  Core  Principles;  the  other  focuses  on  those  issues  deemed  to
represent “best practice.”
1
BIS Review 126/1999
The  IMF  and  the World  Bank  currently  use  this  new  methodology  to  assess  the  banking  sectors  in
individual countries. Looking ahead, the Basel Committee plans to bring together some time next year
supervisors  from  emerging  market  countries  and  representatives  from  the  IMF  and  World  Bank  to
discuss the lessons learned from this initiative. The projected meeting is part of the Basel Committee’s
ongoing  commitment  to  ensure  that  the  Core  Principles  remain  on  point  and  relevant  to  banking
supervisors worldwide.
I must stress, however, that the most important efforts to implement the Core Principles continues to
be  the  job  of  the  individual  countries.  Without  the  support  and  backing  of  national  authorities  to
follow  through  with  the  implementation  of  these  principles,  our  broader  efforts  simply  cannot  be
effective.
In  this  connection,  the  Basel  Committee  has  long  recognized  the  need  for  effective  training  and
seminars for participants in the global bank supervision community. Over the years it has sponsored
numerous  programs  which  have  been  beneficial  in  allowing  supervisors  from  different  countries  to
share  experiences  and  exchange  ideas  for  improved  practices.  Building  on  its  longstanding
commitment to these outreach efforts, the Basel Committee, together with the Bank for International
Settlements,  jointly  established  the  Financial  Stability  Institute  in  1998.  The  Institute  currently
conducts leadership training targeted to supervisors in emerging market countries, facilitates technical
assistance in individual countries, and provides training on a regional basis.
The Basel Committee also plays a key role in the Financial Stability Forum that was established by the
G7 Finance Ministers and Governors in early 1999. Through the Forum, the Basel Committee is able
to  share  its  experience  in  implementing  the  Core  Principles  with  other  organizations  that  have
embarked  on  similar  initiatives,  such  as  IOSCO,  the  International  Organization  of  Securities
Commissions.  More  broadly,  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  is  coordinating  an  effort  to  improve
awareness of and accessibility to training for regulators and supervisors worldwide.
Turning  to  the  Basel  Committee’s  efforts  to  promote  improvements  in  risk  management,  let  me
comment  first  on  the  work  related  to  highly  leveraged  institutions.  As  I  have  discussed  in  other
settings,  the  LTCM  episode  and  the  proper  supervisory  response  to  it  are  fundamentally  about  two
things: leverage and good judgment. Leverage is an important part of our financial system and most of
the time it plays a positive role in enhancing market liquidity and ensuring a more efficient allocation
of resources. At times, however, financial institutions can go too far in extending credit. This is where
the  critical  role  of  good  judgment  comes  in.  Let’s  not  forget  that  a  banker’s  two  most  important
decisions are whom to do business with and how far that business relationship should be pursued.
One of the fundamental aims of supervisors is to ensure that banks are using the right tools to make
these  difficult  decisions.  These  tools  include  risk  measurement  methods  and  risk  management
techniques that are appropriate to the nature of the risks involved.
Following  the  LTCM  episode,  the  Basel  Committee  put  together  a  working  group  to  focus  on  the
relationship between banks and highly leveraged institutions. Our goal was to provide a framework for
identifying the broader issues raised by LTCM, the policy responses for supervisors, and the key risk
management challenges for the industry going forward.
Under the leadership of Jan Brockmeijer of the Netherlands Bank, the Basel Committee’s report was
completed in January 1999. It revealed a number of deficiencies in banks’ risk management practices.
In  particular,  we  observed  an  imbalance  among  the  key  elements  of  the  credit  risk  management
process, with too strong an emphasis on the role of collateral to protect against credit loss. This undue
emphasis  caused  many  banks  to  neglect  other  critical  elements  of  effective  risk  management,
including in-depth credit analyses of counterparties, effective exposure measurement, and the use of
stress testing.
To  make  sound  credit  decisions,  banks  need  to  obtain  sufficient  information  about  the  borrower  to
provide a comprehensive and timely picture of its risk profile and credit quality. This is true regardless
of whether the extension of credit occurs via a loan or through a counterparty trading relationship. Yet
the Basel Committee’s report found that banks did not obtain sufficient financial information to assess
the types and extent of risk assumed by large, highly leveraged institutions. In particular, banks did not
BIS Review 126/1999
2
obtain  the  information  needed  to  assess  leverage,  risk  concentrations  in  particular  markets,  or  the
liquidity risk profile of individual institutions.
The  Basel  Committee  report  also  concluded  that  banks  should  develop  more  effective  measures  of
potential future exposure, which refers to the possibility that credit exposures can change over time as
market conditions fluctuate. The ability to measure potential future exposure is critical when dealing
with  large  trading  counterparties  such  as  highly  leveraged  institutions,  especially  in  volatile  market
conditions. Unfortunately, methods for measuring potential future exposure have not kept pace with
the growth and composition of trading activity.
The Basel Committee’s report also showed that banks must develop approaches that better account for
credit risk under distressed market conditions. A key lesson of the LTCM episode is that credit and
market risk cannot be seen as completely distinct, but are liable to interact and reinforce each other
under highly stressful conditions. The use of more rigorous stress testing, therefore, could have given
banks better warning of the types of exposures they faced.
Together  with  this  January  1999  report,  the  Basel  Committee  issued  a  sound  practices  document
setting forth guidance for banks and supervisors on these topics. For example, these sound practices
called upon banks to:
• 
• 
• 
establish clear policies governing their involvement with highly leveraged institutions;
adopt credit standards addressing the specific risks associated with these institutions;
establish  meaningful  measures  of  potential  future  exposure  as  well  as  credit  limits
incorporating the results of stress testing; and
monitor exposure on a frequent basis.
• 
I am pleased to report that the Basel Committee’s recommendations on highly leveraged institutions
have  been  reinforced  by  the  recommendations  of  subsequent  efforts,  including  reports  by  the
President’s  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets  and  the  Counterparty  Risk  Management  Policy
Group.  There  is  clearly  widespread  agreement  among  both  the  private  sector  and  the  official
community  about  the  steps  that  firms  need  to  take  to  address  the  weaknesses  in  risk  management
identified in the LTCM episode. The key remaining issue is the strength of the private sector’s resolve
to implement these measures.
For its part, the supervisory community is carefully monitoring the efforts of banks to follow through
with the implementation of improved risk management practices for highly leveraged institutions. The
Basel Committee intends to prepare a follow-up report on the progress banks are making. In my view,
the  degree  of  improvement  will  signal  whether  the  industry  has  truly  absorbed  the  lessons  of  the
LTCM episode.
The approach the Basel Committee has taken with respect to highly leveraged institutions mirrors its
efforts in addressing other risk management issues. A primary aim of the Committee is to describe and
promote prudent risk assessment and control practices by banks. By setting out the current state of the
art  in  key  areas,  the  Committee  provides  banks  and  their  supervisors  worldwide  with  the  tools  to
measure industry progress toward the goal of effective risk management.
the management of credit risk;
loan accounting and credit risk disclosure;
In recent years, the Basel Committee has engaged in a sustained effort to develop and publicize sound
practices in a variety of areas. These have included papers on such topics as:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
a framework for internal control systems in banking organizations;
enhancing corporate governance in banking organizations;
guidance for managing foreign exchange settlement risk;
operational risk management; and
3
BIS Review 126/1999
risk management for electronic banking and electronic money activities.
• 
For anyone interested, the details of these reports are available on the website of the BIS.
Before turning to capital adequacy issues, I would like to highlight some key elements from two recent
papers  on  sound  practice.  In  July,  the  Basel  Committee  issued  for  comment  a  report  on  the
management  of  credit  risk.  This  is  a  particularly  important  topic  since  the  major  cause  of  serious
banking problems continues to be directly related to poor practices regarding credit risk management.
A  key  focus  of  the  report  is  on  the  need  for  banking  organizations  to  develop  an  overall  business
strategy for credit risk that incorporates the tolerance for risk and the level of profitability the bank
expects to achieve from incurring various credit risks. A strategic approach to credit risk provides a
coherent framework for practices in such areas as credit-granting criteria, credit limits, and credit risk
monitoring.
The  Basel  Committee  issued  a  second  paper  in  September  that  addresses  the  subject  of  corporate
governance  in  banking  organizations.  As  you  know,  corporate  governance,  especially  the  role  of
boards of directors, is of particular interest in this country. More intense competition, rapid change,
and increased complexity in many business activities mean that responsible and independent oversight
by boards of directors plays a more crucial role in ensuring that the firm’s business strategy is sound
and its leadership effective.
I  am  convinced  that  the  need  for  strong  corporate  governance  is  equally  great  in  emerging  market
countries,  where  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  face  comparable  pressures.  The  Basel
Committee’s  September  paper  outlines  several  elements  that  are  critical  to  a  sound  corporate
governance  process.  These  elements  include  the  installation  of  qualified  boards  of  directors  with
clearly defined responsibilities, the importance of oversight by directors and senior management, the
need for clear lines of management responsibility and accountability, and the effective use of internal
and external auditors.
Both  the  July  and  September  reports  provide  a  flavor  of  the  Basel  Committee’s  efforts  to  promote
stronger  risk  management  practices  within  the  global  banking  community.  Although  these  efforts
sometimes  receive  less  public  attention than  our  work  on  capital adequacy,  I  believe  that  they  play
significant roles in helping to set standards for prudent risk-taking that can be used by banks and their
supervisors worldwide.
Lastly, I would like to update you on the Basel Committee’s major effort to revise the 1988 Capital
Accord. In June, the Committee released a Consultative Paper laying out our vision for a new capital
adequacy framework. Our proposed timetable is to seek comments from both supervisors and industry
participants through 31 March 2000 and then to publish, hopefully by late next year, a comprehensive
set of proposals which are responsive to the comments and industry input we have received.
During the comment period, the Committee and its subgroups are working hard to refine and further
develop  a  number  of  the  proposals  put  forth  in  the  consultative  document.  The  Committee  also
continues to consult actively with banking industry representatives and organizations through holding
seminars, inviting presentations at working meetings, and conducting surveys on various topics.
The  Consultative  Paper  represents  an  evolution  in  the  Basel  Committee’s  approach  to  capital
adequacy.  In  addition  to  establishing  minimum  capital  requirements,  the  paper  places  an  increased
emphasis on the supervisory review of capital adequacy and the role of market discipline. We refer to
these  elements  as  the  “three  pillars”  of  our  proposed  capital  adequacy  framework,  which  together
promote safety and soundness. This evolution in the Committee’s thinking about capital follows from
much of our recent work on risk management and the surveys we have conducted on banks’ disclosure
practices.
In our view, the three pillars to assess capital adequacy are mutually reinforcing, each addressing the
challenge  of  aligning  capital  relative  to  risk  in  banking  organizations  somewhat  differently.  The
Committee’s belief is that by combining the approaches of the three pillars, we can better achieve our
overall objective of ensuring an adequate capital cushion across the banking system that at the same
time recognizes and encourages prudent risk management.
BIS Review 126/1999
4
Let me highlight briefly each of the three pillars and provide some perspective on the key challenges
that  the  Committee  faces  in  relation  to  each.  The  first  pillar  has  to  do  with  minimum  capital
requirements. The 1988 Capital Accord allowed supervisors in the G10 countries for the first time to
use a common yardstick for measuring the capital adequacy of banks. While the 1988 Accord was a
milestone achievement, its simple risk-weighting scheme has had difficulty incorporating innovations
in the way banks today manage and mitigate credit risks.
More fundamentally, the 1988 Accord does not adequately differentiate among degrees of credit risk.
As a result, banks have had incentives to take on higher risk exposures within each of the Accord’s
broad risk categories. Banks have also tended to engage in transactions that lower capital requirements
without reducing economic risk. The effect of these developments has been to erode the significance
of  the  Basel  ratios  as  an  indicator  of  a  financial  institution’s  capital  adequacy,  particularly  for  the
large, internationally active institutions which were the original targets of the Accord.
To  address  these  shortcomings  in  the  1988  Accord,  the  Basel  Committee  proposes  two  primary
approaches: (1) a standardized approach that ties risk weightings to external credit assessments such as
credit ratings, and (2) an internal ratings-based approach that  would  begin  by  mapping  internal  risk
ratings into standardized risk weightings but might eventually evolve into something closer to the full
use  of  credit  risk  models.  Each  approach  treats  the  trade-off  between  simplicity  versus  accuracy
somewhat differently and thus one or the other is likely to be relevant to banks with different levels of
sophistication.
Importantly, both proposed approaches attempt to introduce greater risk sensitivity into the minimum
capital standards. In my view, it is essential that we move forward in this fashion in order to enhance
the responsiveness of required capital to risk and to address the unfortunate incentive problems that
have evolved from the 1988 Accord.
Because of the Committee’s desire to produce a capital adequacy framework with a greater sensitivity
to risk, some observers may note that we inevitably introduce a dynamic element into our standards.
That is, the capital requirements for loans to troubled borrowers will tend to increase at just the point
when such trouble is becoming apparent. I see an important positive aspect to such an outcome.
I  would argue that the global financial system needs  to  become  better  prepared to address potential
credit problems pre-emptively, before these problems have time to grow from minor disturbances into
major  disruptions.  Implementing  capital  standards  that  are  more  responsive  to  the  dynamics  of  risk
could help move us in this direction and away from a mindset that waits too long to address problems.
In particular, the Committee is interested in hearing views on how we should think about these issues.
The  second  pillar  in  the  proposed  new  capital  adequacy  framework  has  to  do  with  the  supervisory
review  of  capital,  a  critical  complement  to  minimum  capital  requirements.  The  Consultative  Paper
calls  on  supervisors  to  ensure  that  each  bank  has  sound  internal  processes  in  place  to  assess  the
adequacy of its capital based on a thorough evaluation of its risks and capital structure, thus moving
the  Accord  beyond  a  ratio-driven  minimum  capital  standard  to  a  comprehensive  approach  for
assessing capital adequacy. In general, supervisors have expected and continue to expect banks to hold
more than the regulatory minimum amount of capital. In proposing this supervisory review of capital,
the Basel Committee intends to foster a more active dialogue between banks and their supervisors with
respect to the actual level of capital banks choose to hold.
I want to stress, however, that this proposed approach to assessing capital adequacy in no way intends
to  replace  the  judgment  and  expertise  of  bank  management.  Nor  is  this  approach  meant  to  shift
ultimate responsibility for the adequacy of bank capital to the supervisors. On the contrary, I believe
that  managers  are  the  ones  with  the  most  complete  understanding  of  the  risks  that  their  institutions
face and it is they who must have the primary responsibility for overseeing these risks.
The  task  for  supervisors  in  this  framework  is  to  evaluate  how  well  banks  are  assessing  their  own
capital  needs  relative  to  their  risks,  including  whether  banks  are  appropriately  addressing  the
relationship between different types of risks. To this end, the Basel Committee is currently developing
guidance to help supervisors evaluate internal  capital assessments conducted  by  banks.  In  the  event
5
BIS Review 126/1999
that a bank’s internal capital adequacy process is lacking, supervisors must have the knowledge and
authority to take corrective action.
There can be no doubt that implementing the supervisory review of capital will require considerable
insight  and flexibility  on the  part  of  supervisors  because they  will  have  to tailor their efforts to  the
unique risk profiles of particular institutions. At the same time, this approach should allow supervisors
to draw on their cross-institutional knowledge as they assess the strengths and weaknesses of a bank’s
risk management and capital allocation processes relative to those of its peers.
The G10 supervisors recognize the obvious implications that this approach will have for supervisory
resources. In order to keep pace with industry innovation, it is clear that we will have to step up our
training  and  consider  effective  ways  for  making  the  most  use  of  our  limited  resources.  The  Basel
Committee also recognizes the importance of these issues for the non-G10 countries and is working
toward  providing  the  training  and  other  types  of  support  needed  to  allow  these  countries  and  their
supervisors to move in this direction.
The third element in the proposed new capital adequacy framework has to do with market discipline
- another critical  component  of  a  safer  and  more  stable financial  system.  More  extensive  disclosure
and  greater  dependence  on  market  forces  complement  improvements  in  risk  management,  banking
supervision,  and  minimum  capital  standards.  Of  course,  to  add  value  over  and  above  the  minimum
capital standards, improved disclosure must go beyond the simple reporting of minimum capital ratios.
When banks disclose timely and accurate information about their capital structure and risk exposures,
market participants can better evaluate risks and act accordingly. The disclosure of timely and accurate
information, in turn,  is  an incentive  for banks  to ensure  that  the  market  perceives  them  not  only  as
effectively  managing  their  risks,  but  also  as  being  adequately  capitalized.  Market  reactions  to  the
public disclosures of banks can also play an important signaling role for supervisors in assessing the
adequacy of a bank’s capital.
A further reason to encourage disclosure beyond the reporting of regulatory capital ratios is that these
ratios have become the primary focal point for investors and industry analysts. The result has been that
bank managements have had an incentive to focus solely on improvements in these ratios, even when
the ratios are not fully reflective of risks. More comprehensive disclosure could lessen this incentive.
With  these  considerations  in  mind,  the  Basel  Committee  is  seeking  to  design  an  expanded  set  of
disclosure  guidelines,  taking  into  account the  proprietary  information needs  of banks.  I  believe  that
fuller  disclosure  for  all  banks  can  take  us  a  long  way  towards  effective  market  discipline.  We  also
encourage banks to include in their fuller disclosures information specific to their risk profile.
The timeliness and the quality of disclosure are important. The frequency of disclosure should reflect
the nature of the risks involved. Moreover, as transactions that shift risk become more common and
complex, disclosing the associated residual exposures takes on added importance. Such reporting, in
turn, requires that banks have in place the appropriate systems to identify and measure these risks so
that  the  risks  can  be  documented  for  the  marketplace.  Finally,  as  we  move  toward  improved
disclosure, we must keep in mind that the goal is useful and reliable information - not simply a large
volume of information. More is not necessarily better.
In  the  area  of  disclosure,  I  should  also  mention  that  my  colleague,  Peter  Fisher,  is  chairing  a
Multidisciplinary  Working  Group  on  Enhanced  Disclosure,  comprised  of  representatives  from  the
banking,  securities,  and  insurance  industries  in  a  pilot  effort  to  formulate  a  set  of  public  disclosure
guidelines  that  make  sense  for  an  increasingly  integrated  financial  market.  The  working  group  will
assess  the  extent  to  which  the  pilot  data  can  provide  a  meaningful  basis  for  comparing  risk
management practices as well as the level and types of risk across institutions and across countries.
The Basel Committee supports this pilot approach. It limits the burden on the banking industry and at
the same time makes clear that the private sector has a key role to play in improving disclosure and
enhancing market discipline. Firms participating in this program will have the opportunity to shape the
exercise and influence the interpretation of its results. Through their participation, these firms will be
sending a clear signal about their willingness to improve market discipline.
BIS Review 126/1999
6
These have not been easy times for banks. As a regulator, I cannot help but underscore the essential
role banks play in the global marketplace. By intermediating credit between savers and investors and
providing liquidity to the financial sector, banks are the essential link in well-functioning economies.
Thus, while capital levels and risk management policies are without question important, they do not
take precedence over the responsibilities of bankers to serve their purpose in a Schumpeterian world of
creative destruction. This most fundamental of responsibilities involves the use of credit judgment. By
this I mean that bankers must not lend to excess when times seem good and then lend too little when
times appear more difficult. This is an ongoing obligation of banks and is no less so as we approach
the century date change.
With roughly six weeks to go before year-end, I believe it critical that banks approach the new year
with  these  thoughts  in  mind  and  I  call  on  them  to  be  attentive  to  providing  for  their  customers’
reasonable  needs.  By  reasonable  needs,  I  have  in  mind  that  banks  should  think  twice  about  huge
demands based on what seems to be customers’ excessive concern about Y2K, but grant appropriate
credit for realistic needs, even if this involves somewhat greater use of their own balance sheets than
would usually be the case.
To aid in the year-end transition period, the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York have announced a variety of steps to assure adequate liquidity in wholesale markets  and
promote financial market stability. We approved last month an expanded range of acceptable collateral
for discount window and payments system risk purposes. In addition, there are in place a number of
measures to ensure that an ample supply of cash will be available  to  meet  possible  increases in  the
demand for cash over the transition period. Further, the Federal Reserve created a century date change
Special  Liquidity  Facility  for  lending  to  depository  institutions  from  1  October  1999  through
7 April 2000. Among other things, this facility should help institutions to commit more confidently to
supplying loans to other financial institutions and businesses through the rollover period.
Finally, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York announced a number of measures in early September
intended by  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  to promote the  smooth functioning  of  money  and
financing  markets  and  to  gain  greater  assurance  that  we  will  be  able  to  manage  banking  system
reserves during the century date change. The measures include the expansion of collateral accepted in
repurchase transactions, the extension of the maximum term of the Bank’s repurchase transactions to
90 days, and the introduction of a Standby Financing Facility.
The next several weeks will be a challenging period, for private and public sector participants alike.
By  working  together  in  the  short  term  to  ensure  a  smooth  transition  and  over  the  longer  term  to
improve risk management practices for banks and develop a meaningful international capital adequacy
framework, I am confident that we can be successful in not only preserving, but also enhancing, our
global financial system as we enter the next century.
7
BIS Review 126/1999
