Mr Grenville looks at the international reform agenda
and focuses on bailing-in the private sector
Talk  by  Mr  Stephen  Grenville,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  World
Economic Forum 1999 East Asia Economic Summit, held in Singapore on 20 October 1999.
 I would like to leaf with you through the photo album of a baby, whose name is euro. He is now nine.
In the two years since the Asian crisis broke, there has been quite a bit of rethinking. As time went on,
there was a growing acceptance that - whatever the mistakes and deficiencies of domestic policy - the
problem was wider in scope: something was wrong with the international financial framework. If the
crisis  could  be  distilled  down  to  two  principal  elements,  it  was  the  deadly  interaction  of  huge  and
volatile international capital flows with fragile domestic financial sectors.
It would be nice to say that the international community has now worked out what needs to be done,
and are on the way to doing it. In practice, there is a greater consensus about what needs to be done,
but a fair shortfall in actually implementing it.
What are the specific achievements?
•  With the Financial Stability Forum and the G20, there are the makings of a more representative set
of forums, more appropriate than the G10-type groups for discussions of this type. If all countries
are to be subject to the “Golden Straitjacket” - the rules imposed by the international marketplace -
then the process of setting those rules should be more democratic.
•  The early emphasis was on transparency. A higher degree of transparency has been achieved in the
official  sector.  This  is  a  distortion  of  the  original  concept,  which  was  that  markets  would  work
better if there was greater transparency all round, i.e. including from major private sector players.
But, by-and-large, progress has been made.
•  Until  the  near-death  experience  of  LTCM  in  August 1998,  there  had  not  been  any  widespread
acknowledgement of the role of hedge funds in exacerbating the problems. As LTCM pulled back
from the brink, the urgency to address the question of hedge funds faded somewhat, but it looks
like there will be some progress, at least in learning what hedge funds do.
•  And when it comes to the reform of domestic policies, there is now a wide measure of agreement
that very considerable resources need to be put into ensuring financial stability and the health of the
financial sector, and that there were aspects to exchange  rate  management  in the crisis  countries
which made them more vulnerable.
So on all of these issues, there has been a fair degree of progress on the financial reform agenda. But
today, I want to talk about one aspect where there has been a bit of progress in changing thinking, but
not much in terms of actual action - this is in bailing-in the private sector.
The  case  for  addressing  this  problem  seems  overwhelming.  To  illustrate  with  reference  to  just  one
component  of private  capital  flow,  the  annual  average  inflows  of  bank-to-bank  capital  into  the  five
badly-affected Asian countries was around US$50 billion. In the nine months following the crisis, the
outflow was US$70 billion. It was the speed of this capital departure which was so devastating, and
was reflected in such dramatic falls in the exchange rates. The starting point is to identify the nature of
the problem. The reversals of capital flow had all the hallmarks of a bank run - the sudden change of
opinion and the perfectly rational desire to get out ahead of the crowd (or at least not to be left behind).
The case for doing something about it is threefold:
•  Mexico in 1994/95 was a successful example of how to deal with the equivalent of a bank run. As
Bagehot  advised  a  century  ago:  the  authorities  should  “lend  freely”.  But  it  is  not  realistic  (nor,
many  would  argue,  desirable)  to  go  on  repeating  this  formula  for  succeeding  crises.  The
1
BIS Review 114/1999
US$50 billion  package  which  was  put  together  for  Mexico  was,  substantively,  far  greater  than
anything  made  available  for  the  Asian  crisis  countries -  Mexico  was  seen  as  a  unique  once-off
event, affecting America’s vital interests. So if the funds are not available to fully meet the bank
run, then somehow the runs have to be avoided or greatly lessened;
•  to bail-in the private sector seems fair. The private-sector inflows have, invariably, come at interest
rates  which  embody  a  significant  risk  premium  and  it  seems  eminently  fair  that,  where  a  risk
premium has been paid, the lenders should be faced with the consequences of their actions when
things  do  go  wrong.  It  is  fair,  too,  that  the  authorities  impose  some  modifications  to  private
contracts. Bail-outs are, after all, bail-outs of the creditors at least as much as they are bail-outs for
debtors, and the authorities are putting taxpayers’ money on  the line  to achieve  a  socially-more-
optimal outcome. This gives them the right to have a big say in the arrangements;
•  bailing-in  would  also  directly  address  the  problems  of  moral  hazard.  In  the  Mexican  bail-out,
creditors  were  paid  back  quickly  in  full  by  the  rescue  package,  and  this  left  a  legacy  of  moral
hazard.  Whatever  existing  problems  of  moral  hazard  had  existed  before  Mexico,  these  were
substantially  exacerbated  by  what  was  otherwise  a  very  successful  rescue.  Unless  private  sector
creditors pay some price when things go wrong (either in terms of delayed repayment or some kind
of  “hair-cut”),  then  the  market  will  not  make  the  correct  risk  assessments,  nor  will  capital  be
allocated  in  the  right  way  and,  most  serious  of  all,  we  will  get  repeats  of  these  enormous  and
disruptive influxes of capital, with the resulting problems.
There has been quite a bit of progress in shifting the debate on the desirability of bailing-in the private
sector.  When  the  IMF  convened  the  Tokyo  meeting  in  August 1997  following  the  Thai  crisis,  the
chairman made it clear that bailing-in the private sector was not only off the agenda, but could not be
put on the agenda. The IMF has now moved a long way on this, exploring the issues in great detail,
and searching (through experience in a number of individual countries since then) for practical ways to
achieve this.
It would have to be said that the private sector, generally speaking, is still some distance away from
sharing this view. I have described their general attitude as being one of “bewildered resentment” at
the idea of compulsory bailing-in in the course of an orderly debt arrangement: they talk in terms of
“consenting  adults”,  who  have  freely  made  a  contract  which  no-one  else  should  rend  asunder.  The
curious thing, when we hear them talking about the sanctity of contracts, is that the idea of domestic
bankruptcy is routinely accepted as an in extremis response when things go wrong - and this is, after
all, exactly the circumstances in which a bail-in would be envisaged.
What are the elements of a bail-in? Just as with domestic bankruptcy, there are two critical elements:
someone in authority needs to “blow the whistle” (i.e. declare the bankruptcy a legitimate one). This
cannot, of course, simply be the debtor acting alone - you cannot expect the protection of some form
of bankruptcy simply by declaring it yourself, and similarly a country claiming to be unable to pay its
debts will need something more than its own word to convince the international community that it is
not  unnecessarily  defaulting  on  its  debts.  The  second  element  is  that  you  need  some  method  of
“closing  the  door” -  ensuring  that,  once  the  bankruptcy  has  been  declared,  no  creditors  get  any
preferential treatment, but instead “sit around the table” to work out a fair division of the assets which
remain.
One way of moving forward on this issue is to confine and define the issue more specifically. If we
were  to  take  the  Asian  crisis  as  our  benchmark,  then  the  most  important  element  is  to  bail-in  the
bank-to-bank debt. Why is this the proper focus of attention? The short answer is that most other types
of debt were resolved in ways that may not be satisfactory, but at least did not exacerbate the crisis
greatly.  Sovereign-to-sovereign  debt  has  an  existing  forum  of  resolution -  the  Paris  Club.  Debt  of
non-bank borrowers - to a considerable degree - experienced a de facto stand-still and at least did not
exacerbate the outflows (although it had big effects in harming confidence and needs to be resolved if
normal  business  relations  are  to  be  restored).  This  left  the  bank-to-bank  outflows  as  the  principal
problem -  the  US$70 billion  of  outflows  mentioned  earlier.  Domestic  banks  had  the  local-currency
liquidity  to  make  the  repayment  because  they  were  guaranteed  by  the  government.  While  ever  the
foreign exchange markets were open, therefore, they were in a position to repay. The issue cannot be
BIS Review 114/1999
2
resolved simply by removing bank guarantees: no government, anywhere, will stand idly by while a
systemic  problem  destroys  its  banking  system,  so  absence  of  guarantees (no  matter  how  vigorously
asserted) is simply not credible.
The  Asian  crisis  gave  us  an  example  of  the  sort  of  thing  that  might  be  done -  the  Korean  bank
rescheduling  of  December 1997/January 1998.  This  had  the  two  necessary  elements -  “blowing  the
whistle”  and  “closing  the  doors”.  The  blowing  of  the  whistle  took  place  when  foreign  exchange
reserves were, essentially, exhausted. The closing of the doors took place in a very low-key way: there
was no formal declaration of any capital controls, but the Korean banks could obtain foreign exchange
only by going to the central bank, so the central bank could strengthen the banks’ bargaining position
vis-à-vis the creditors by simply not making foreign exchange available to them. The outcome looks to
have been a good one, from the point of view of debtor and creditor. As soon as the rescheduling was
made public, the climate in financial markets markedly  improved.  Who,  among  the  creditors,  could
now complain, as they received the certainty of getting their money back plus a higher interest rate?
Looking back on it, the only element that might, with hindsight, have been done differently - and this
is the forward-looking lesson that might be learnt from this experience - is that there might have been
a case for a “hair-cut”.
These issues are far from settled and there is certainly no acceptance on the part of the private sector,
in general, that they should be bailed-in. But, having shifted its position quite a bit over the past couple
of years, the IMF is working quietly and steadily to establish precedents - and case studies - for how
this might occur. The present focus is on a number of cases where the private sector holds sovereign
debt, with Ecuador providing perhaps the most interesting example. There is a belief that the Fund, if
not actually encouraging Ecuador to force another rescheduling, has accepted this as the way to go.
This is still quite a big step away from the sort of rescheduling of bank-to-bank private debt that would
have been relevant in the Asian case. But at least this is moving in the right direction. We all should
support these efforts.
Will this, together with the other changes which have been made to the international architecture, be a
sufficient change to do the job? If “doing the job” means that future crises will be averted, clearly not.
But the real issue is not whether crises can be averted, but whether we have done as much as possible.
On this, it would be easy to share the views of Dr Sakakibara who says that it will take a couple more
crises before we put in place an adequate system of international financial architecture. I have an open
mind on this, partly because a lot can be done within the existing architecture to make it much more
stable. The  biggest  contribution  would  be  for  the  capital-receiving  countries  to  put  great  effort  into
strengthening  their  own financial  systems,  and  their  legal  and  accounting  frameworks  as  well.  This
will take quite a bit longer than might have been apparent from the reform timetables laid down for a
number of these countries - it is a matter of decades or even generations, rather than a year or two. But
quite  a  bit can be  done,  within  a relatively  short  time  horizon, to  make  these  economies  much  less
vulnerable than they were. As well, there is  now a  better  understanding  of  the  balance  between the
benefits of foreign capital flows and their dangers. This will not do away with crises - nothing can. But
it would make them less common.
3
BIS Review 114/1999
