Mr Fazio gives an address on the Italian capital
markets and the need for new strategies in Euroland
Address given by Mr Antonio Fazio, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Euromoney Conference,
held in Rome on 23 November 1999.
 Between  1985  and  1998  the  stock  of  public  and  private-sector  bonds  issued  in  the  Group  of  Ten
countries rose from 90% to 130% of their combined GDP; the market value of listed shares rose from
30% to 100%. The use of derivatives grew even faster: between 1990 and 1997 the notional value of
those traded in organized markets rose from 40% to 200% of GDP.
The  flow  of  loans  granted  to  non-residents  by  banks  of  the  countries  reporting  to  the  Bank  for
International Settlements amounted to $1,100 billion in 1997, or 5% of the reporting countries’ GDP.
The  integration  of  financial  markets,  the  prospects  for  growth  in  the  emerging  countries  and  the
transformation of the economies in transition have created the conditions for an increase in allocative
efficiency  at  the  global  level.  The  constraint  imposed  by  the  scarcity  of  financial  resources  for
investment has been eased, especially in the developing countries.
The  growing  dissociation  between  the  generation  and  use  of  savings  may  nonetheless  increase  the
riskiness  of  investments.  Strategies  aimed  at  maximizing  profits  in  the  short  run  and  herding  have
added  to  the  volatility  of  prices.  Large-scale  recourse  to  derivatives,  which  are  extremely  useful  in
controlling  financial  risks,  has  aggravated  the  adverse  effects  of  speculative  behaviour  in  some
instances.
The new context calls for careful assessment of the adequacy of national economic policies and the
efficiency of the financial system, as well as careful control of borrowers’ creditworthiness and the use
to which they actually put the resources they raise. In recent years intermediaries sometimes persisted
in  directing  large  volumes  of  resources  towards  countries  with  serious  imbalances.  This  behaviour
generated tensions and in the end led to crises.
Italy’s financial system is increasingly integrated into the global economy; the adoption of the single
European  currency  has  intensified  the  process  of  integration.  The  return  to  monetary  stability  has
created macroeconomnic conditions conducive to the expansion of the securities market. The size gap
with respect to the other leading industrial countries remains to be closed.
Bonds
The reduction at the global level in the volume of savings absorbed by public debt issues has freed
resources for productive investment and contributed to the decline in interest rates.
In  Europe,  the  elimination  of  exchange  risk  has  lent  special  vigour  to  the  growth  of  the  market  in
private-sector securities. The volume of corporate bond issues has grown enormously both in national
markets  and  in  the  Euromarket.  The  larger  average  size  of  issues  and  the  standardization  of  their
features  have  fostered  the  growth  of the  secondary  market.  In  1998,  with  the  approach  of  the  euro,
issues  denominated  in  ecus  once  more  became  substantial  while  the  share  of  dollar-denominated
issues declined.
In Italy, in the first ten months of 1999 virtually all bond issues were denominated in euros. In France
and Germany, the euro’s share of corporate bond issues remained somewhat lower, at 86% and 73%
respectively. In the same period, the volume of bonds issued in the Euromarket by German, French
and Italian residents between January and October this year was considerably larger than that recorded
in 1998. This reflects the interest of issuers in gaining visibility in this new segment. The tendency for
companies to make very large issues was encouraged by investors’ preference for liquid assets.
1
BIS Review 131/1999
The volume of corporate bond issues  by  Italian firms  has  also been boosted  by  the  need  to  finance
takeovers of listed firms. The issues of Italian enterprises  have  mostly  been  made through  financial
subsidiaries.
The  additional  scope  provided  by  the  adjustment  of  the  public  finances  is  greater  in  Italy  than
elsewhere. The growth prospects of the private-sector bond market are enhanced by the efficiency of
the secondary market and the opening of new regulated wholesale and retail markets for private-sector
securities. A further contribution to the development of this segment will come as banks increasingly
securitize their loans.
The  money  market  is  highly  efficient.  The  possibility  of  screen-based  trading  enables  the  Italian
interbank deposit market to play an important role in Europe.
Italy’s screen-based secondary market in government securities, MTS, is one of the most advanced of
its  kind.  Created  to  facilitate  the  management  of  the  public  debt,  this  market  has  grown  without
interruption and average daily turnover has risen from Lit300 trillion in 1988 to over Lit19,000 trillion
in the first nine months of 1999.
MTS bid-ask spreads are extremely narrow, averaging around 4 basis points in 1999. The operational
efficiency of this market and its privatization have been conducive to its international opening: trading
involves some 200 Italian and foreign intermediaries, including some with remote access.
MTS has served as a model for other European countries’ government securities markets.
Equities
The  capitalization  of  the  Italian  stock  market  rose  from  18%  of  GDP  in  1994  to  50%  in  1999,  as
against 75% in  France  and  56%  in  Germany.  The  gap  compared  with  the  United Kingdom  and  the
United States is very large.
At  the  end  of  1998  there  were  223  listed  companies  in  Italy,  the  same  number  as  in  1994.  The
composition of the official list has improved: many of the private-sector companies that have turned to
the  market  are  industrial  firms  and  do  not  belong  to  groups  that  were  already  present  on  the  stock
exchange.  In  the  same  period  the  number  of  listed  domestic  companies  rose  from  423  to  740  in
Germany, from 489 to 754 in France, and from 2,070 to 2,399 in the United Kingdom.
The development of the Italian stock market has been influenced by the large proportion of small firms
and the still limited propensity of medium-sized and large companies to seek a listing.
The rise in share prices since 1994 has been partly due to the fall in nominal and real interest rates.
Privatizations have accounted for  the  greater part  of  the  contribution  new listings  have  made  to  the
market’s growth.
The success of the offerings of state-owned companies’ equity on the market testifies to Italian savers’
lively interest in equity investment.
With domestic supply still limited, Italian savers’ demand for shares has also given rise to substantial
investment in foreign securities. In 1998 purchases of foreign shares amounted to around  ELOOLRQ
in  1999  they  have  increased  further,  rising  to  around   ELOOLRQ LQ WKH ILUVW QLQH PRQWKV Savings
pooled in investment funds contributed substantially to the outflow of capital.
Pension funds continue to be of limited importance in Italy, whereas they play a pre-eminent role in
the countries with more highly developed financial systems. Their equity portfolios are equal to about
one third of total market capitalization in the United States and the United Kingdom.
The  growth  of  the  stock  market  in  Italy  over  the  last  five  years  has  benefited  from  legislative
innovations and tax incentives. Far-reaching measures have improved the organization of the market,
considerably increasing the liquidity and transparency of trading. In 1998 the ratio of market turnover
to capitalization was close to 100%.
BIS Review 131/1999
2
The growth of derivative products contributed to the increase. Last year the Italian market in equity
futures ranked second in Europe in terms of trading volume. The use of derivatives has enhanced the
efficiency of spot prices, whose daily volatility has declined compared with the first half of the 1990s
and is approaching the levels recorded in more mature markets.
Borsa Italiana has reached an agreement permitting its participants access to other European financial
centres;  interconnection  will  enable  each  market  to  exploit  to  the  full  the  benefits  of  the  massive
investment  that  has  already  been  made  in  technology  while  maintaining  a  close  relationship  with
domestic firms.
Foreign investors hold just over 10% of listed Italian shares; they are more active in derivatives, where
they are involved in one third of all trades.
Compared  with  the  leading  stock  markets,  Italy’s  includes  a  smaller  proportion  of  non-financial
companies. Although they account for more than 90% of the value added at factor cost of the private
sector  in  Italy,  their  share  of  market  capitalization  was  54%  at  the  end  of  1998.  Non-financial
companies account for more than 70% of total market capitalization in Germany, more than 75% in
the United Kingdom and more than 85% in France.
By  contrast,  the  propensity  of  banks  to  go  public  is  higher  in  Italy  than  in  other  leading  countries.
Banks account for 27% of the stock market in Italy, compared with values of between 10% and 15%
elsewhere.
A contribution to increasing the number of listed Italian shares may come from the Euro-NM circuit,
reserved for innovative small and medium-sized firms with high growth potential. A few months after
its inauguration it has 330 securities, listed jointly on several European exchanges, and a total market
capitalization of  ELOOLRQ%RUVD,WDOLDQDMRLQHGWKHFLUFXLWLQ-XQHWKHILYH,WDOLDQFRPSDQLHVQRZ
listed account for about 3% of the total capitalization.
Conclusion
The global financial market has seen a marked increase in the activity of institutional investors, able to
deploy advanced techniques that reduce the costs and risks associated with their investments. Stronger
competition  sometimes  prompts  asset  managers  to  pursue  short-term  objectives,  thereby  tending  to
accentuate the variance of securities prices around their long-term values.
The  disappearance  of  the  segmentation  caused  by  exchange  risk  will  foster  the  creation  of  a
Europe-wide stock market. Financial intermediaries can look forward to an increase in their volume
business. Their task is to allocate the flows of savings between countries.
In Italy, a substantial increase in the role of pension funds is needed.
It  is  becoming  increasingly  important  to  monitor  not  only  the  performance  of  economies  but  also
single  sectors  and  investment  projects.  Careful  selection  in  the  allocation  of  resources  fosters  the
expansion of the global economy.
Italy  is  endowed  with  professional  and  entrepreneurial  expertise,  labour  and  savings  allowing  it  to
compete  successfully  with  other  economies  in  the  new  and  more  competitive  European  and  global
environment.
The many small firms present in the Italian economy can be a strong point, in view of their ability to
use  new  technology  and  adapt  rapidly  to  changes  in  external  conditions.  However,  the  increase  in
competition  requires  a  major  expansion  in  innovative  sectors,  something  that  larger  companies  are
better able to achieve.
The financial system can make a fundamental contribution by making finance available to the most
viable  investment  projects,  helping  to  keep  domestic  savings  in  Italy  and  attracting  resources  from
abroad.
The  restructuring  of  the  credit  system  under  way  and  the  formation  of  major  banking  groups  will
support the activity of medium-sized and large firms and their growth. It is these firms, together with
3
BIS Review 131/1999
the multitude of highly flexible and productive small enterprises, that can make a decisive contribution
to  the  achievement  of  higher  levels  of  investment,  to  the  introduction  of  advanced  technology  in
companies’ modus operandi and production processes and to the growth of savings and employment.
BIS Review 131/1999
4
