Mr Duisenberg gives some views from the European Central Bank
on EU enlargement
Text  of  the  Zolotas  Lecture  given  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central
Bank, held at the Bank of Greece, Athens on 15 October 1999.
 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
Let me begin by saying that it is a great honour to be invited here to speak to you on such a prestigious
occasion. This is particularly so given Governor Zolotas’ – or should I say Professor Zolotas’ – stature
as  perhaps  the  most  significant  contributor  to  Greek  monetary  history  over  the  past  few  decades.
Indeed, during Professor Zolotas’ time as Governor of the Bank of Greece, a period which, as we are
all  aware,  extended  well  beyond  two  decades,  the  achievements  of  monetary  policy  were  certainly
quite impressive.
The  Greece  of  the  early  1950s  was  certainly  not  the  same  as  it  is  today.  At  that  time  the  Greek
economy,  suffering  from  large  fiscal  deficits  and  high  inflation,  was  in  urgent  need  of  a  stable
currency. It is thus a great tribute to Governor Zolotas that, for many years following his arrival at the
Bank  of  Greece,  the  monetary  stability  that  had  only  just  been  achieved  was  both  maintained  and
combined  with  a  particularly  rapid  rate  of  economic  growth.  It  is  therefore  not  surprising  that  this
period in Greece’s economic history has so often been referred to as the “golden era of the drachma”.
Of course, times change, and with them the economic and monetary environment. This was certainly
the case in the 1970s when, following the collapse of the Bretton Woods exchange rate system and the
explosion  of  oil  prices,  monetary  authorities  around  the  world  were  faced  with  new  and  difficult
challenges.  In  many  countries,  attempting  to  meet these  challenges  was  accompanied  by  a  move  to
flexible  exchange  rates.  However,  for  the  most  part,  we  Europeans  attempted  and  eventually
succeeded in treading a different path.
This was also the case here, when, in the latter years of Governor Zolotas’ time in charge at the Bank
of  Greece,  exchange  rate  stability  was  sought  by  pegging  the  drachma  to  the  US  dollar.  As  we  all
know, at that time Greece was not yet a member of the European Community. But this was also soon
to change. Indeed, assisting in the successful preparation for membership of the European Community
is yet another notable contribution that Governor Zolotas made to Greece’s economic history.
Since that time Greece has continued to face challenges as a member of the European Community, and
now of course of the European Union (EU). Greece is one of the four EU Member States which have
not yet adopted the euro. It has announced its willingness to do so in 2001. In order to join the euro
area,  the  convergence  criteria  with respect  to  inflation,  long-term  interest  rates,  public  finances  and
exchange rate stability have to be fulfilled. Sustainable convergence is a prerequisite for adopting the
euro. This is in the interest of the countries which have already introduced the euro, but even more so
in  the  interest  of  new  countries  entering  the  euro  area.  Without  having  achieved  sustainable
convergence, the loss of the exchange rate and interest rate instrument could cause costly tensions in
the economy at the expense of growth and employment. The determined efforts of Greece to achieve
such convergence have to be commended. However, it is too early to reach a firm conclusion. Next
year, the European Central Bank (ECB) will produce a convergence report to analyse what has been
accomplished. Let me  repeat and  underline  that  achieving  convergence is  not  a process  which  ends
with adopting the euro. On the contrary, being a member of the euro area and being able to benefit
from the potentially great opportunities that offers call for ongoing adaptation to the new environment
and the new rules of the game. It is like in sports: reaching the top is difficult, but staying there is even
harder.
1
BIS Review 113/1999
Integrating one or more of the EU Member States which have not previously introduced the euro will
be a challenge for the euro area. However, an even greater challenge for Europe as a whole lies ahead.
I  am  referring  to  the  enlargement  of  the  European  Union.  First,  I  shall  deal  with  that  process  in
general. Then, I should like to say a few words about how the Eurosystem (i.e. the ECB and the 11
national central banks of the Member States which have adopted the euro) is meeting this challenge, in
particular  since  EU  enlargement  also  implies  the  eventual  adoption  of  the  euro  by  the  accession
countries. Before doing so, however, I should like to make clear that I am not able to repeat Governor
Zolotas’  remarkable  performances  at  the  World  Bank  some  years  ago,  when  he  made  speeches  in
English using only Greek words.
Enlargement of the European Union
Let me begin generally by saying that the forces and motivations driving the enlargement process are
the very same as those that have driven the process of European integration over the past 50 years.
Moreover,  these  forces  have  shown  themselves  to  be  extremely  powerful,  as  can  be  seen  from  the
remarkable events that have taken place since the Schuman declaration nearly half a century ago.
Some 50 years ago, it was already clear to Europe’s political leaders that they needed to overcome the
nationalism which had ultimately led to two world wars and devastated much of Europe in the first
half of this century. In order to ensure a future of peace and stability they needed instead to pursue
policies  which  would  bring  European  nations  closer  together  and  in  so  doing  eliminate  the  risk  of
future conflicts. This, as I believe we are all aware, was one of the original “political” motives behind
European integration.
Of  course,  the  world  has  changed  a  great  deal  since  the  Treaty  of  Paris,  and  with  it  the  political
motives driving the integration process. Nevertheless, if one draws a parallel between the world of 50
years ago and the world of today, one cannot deny that the current enlargement process is driven, at
least in part, by the desire to ensure a future of peace and stability for the whole of Europe, and not
just for the 15 nations which currently comprise the European Union.
Of perhaps even greater significance in today’s globalising world are the “economic” forces driving
European integration. This is not to say that they were not already important in the early years of the
process. Indeed, just as it became apparent 50 years ago that  Europe  needed to  break  free from  the
ghost of nationalism, so too it became clear that the protectionism of the inter-war period also had to
be abandoned. This was an essential prerequisite for restoring economic growth and improving social
conditions in post-war Europe. And so it is for the accession countries today, which no doubt see their
integration  into  the  EU  as  a  way  of  ensuring  that  the  necessary  conditions  are  created  for  the
sustainable, long-term growth of their economies.
Of course, these political and economic forces to which I refer are very closely linked. So much so,
that it is hard to imagine one without the other. This is no doubt one of the reasons  why  economic
integration and political integration are often seen as going hand in hand.
Indeed, the lessons of history tell us that political objectives are rarely met unless they are supported
by  a  sound  economic  footing.  And  this  is  where  the  role  of  a  central  banker  comes  in.  As  central
bankers we are not politicians and nor should we try to be. Our role is to support wider economic and
political  objectives  by  creating  the  monetary  conditions  conducive  to  prolonged  non-inflationary
economic growth. In this way we can exert a positive influence on the overall external environment.
But it is also true that the nature of our tasks is heavily influenced by economic and political events,
and not least at present, the ongoing integration and enlargement process.
I shall return to this point in a short while. Before doing so, however, I should like to point out that
there is a third factor which is not entirely political or economic, but which has nevertheless tended to
reinforce the seemingly unstoppable momentum towards ever closer European integration and, more
recently,  enlargement.  This  third  force  stems  from  our  common  European  identity,  which  has
developed out of many centuries of shared history and cultural heritage. Here in Greece one only has
to look, as it were, outside the window to see and understand this.
BIS Review 113/1999
2
Until  a  decade  ago,  one  might  have  been  fooled  into  thinking  that  there  were  in  fact  two  separate
European identities supported by two distinct economic systems. However, this would be to deny the
close  ties  which  still  existed,  even  under  the  difficult  circumstances  of  the  time,  between  countries
both east and west of the Iron Curtain.
Events since the fall of the Berlin Wall have now shown that this difficult period did not destroy but
merely delayed a process of further European integration – including both East and West – which is a
natural consequence of our shared political and economic interests and our common cultural heritage.
Ever since the velvet revolutions which swept across central and eastern Europe a decade ago, it has
been apparent that, as part of their difficult transition to properly functioning market economies, these
countries would become increasingly integrated with the economies of western Europe. Moreover, it
was clear that this process, with its ultimate objective of accession to the European Union, could not
be achieved instantaneously, but would have to be extended over a  period  of time,  in some  cases  a
considerable  period  of  time.  No  other  scenario  could  be  foreseen,  given  the  largely  uncharted  path
which these countries had to tread in dismantling the old system of central planning and replacing it
with the structures necessary to support a properly functioning market economy.
It goes without saying that, at the beginning of the 1990s, neither an immediate nor rapid accession of
these  countries  to  the  EU  would have  been feasible.  Nor  would  it  have  been  in  the  interests  of  the
transition  countries  themselves,  in  particular  since  their  economies  would  not  have  been  able  to
survive in a competitive Single European Market. Nevertheless, there was an obvious need, even then,
both to make it known that the door would be open for these countries to join when the time was right
and the conditions were met, and also to give guidance and add impetus to the transition process.
For these reasons the gradual approach which has been pursued since that time has indeed been the
right one with a view to successfully achieving the final objective of full accession to the EU. In this
regard,  agreements  have  been  signed,  institutions  have  been  created  and  initiatives  have  been
undertaken as part of a general framework for supporting the transition and accession process. Some
of these have certainly played an important  role and it  would  seem  worth  mentioning just  a  few  of
them.
First  of  all,  the  Europe  Agreements  which  were  signed  between  the  EU  and  each  of  the  applicant
countries provide a sound and legitimate basis for economic cooperation in a large number of sectors.
Since then, the Association Councils have been keeping the transition process on track by regularly
examining  the  accomplishments  of  economic  reforms  in  the  candidate  countries.  The  Joint
Assessments also play a crucial role in identifying the medium-term economic policy priorities and the
Accession  Partnerships  do  likewise  with  regard  to  the  establishment  of  priorities  for  EU  technical
assistance.
Following the tremendous efforts of the last few years, we have now arrived at a stage in which there
are no less than 12 applications for EU membership currently under consideration, ten of these from
transition countries. Moreover six of the 12 have already begun accession negotiations.
When addressing the issue of enlargement, we may ask ourselves what exactly should be required of a
member state of the European Union and on what criteria should the eligibility of a candidate country
be assessed? Of course, these are not usually questions asked of central bankers and it is certainly not
my intention to provide answers to them. As I mentioned earlier, central bankers are not politicians.
But,  fortunately,  there  is  no  need  for  me  to  provide  answers,  since  these  issues  have  already  been
addressed within the context of the current enlargement process. I am referring here to the so-called
“Copenhagen criteria”. As I am sure you are aware, these criteria were formulated at the Copenhagen
European  Council  in  1993  with  a  view  to  defining  a  level  playing  field  and  ensuring  the  equal
treatment of applicant states.
3
BIS Review 113/1999
The first of these criteria, generally known as the “political criterion” calls for a candidate country to
have stable institutions which guarantee democracy, the rule of law, human rights, and respect for and
the protection of minorities. I shall not comment on this criterion as its purpose and meaning are quite
clear to us all.
The  “economic  criterion”,  as  the  second  of  these  criteria  is  termed,  requires  the  existence  of  a
functioning market economy as well as  the  capacity  to  cope  with competitive  pressures  and  market
forces  within  the  European  Union.  The  economic  reasoning  which  lies  behind  this  criterion  is  also
quite  straightforward  and  requires  little  elaboration.  However,  I  should  like  to  add  that  for  the
accession countries, while it is no doubt a difficult and sometimes painful task, fulfilling this criterion
is an essential step towards creating a solid basis for future non-inflationary economic growth.
And,  finally,  there  is  the  third  criterion  concerning  the  adoption  of  the  so-called  “acquis
communautaire”.  This  requires  that  a  candidate  country  be  able  to  take  on  the  obligations  of  EU
membership, including the adherence to the aims of political, economic and monetary integration. It is
this last point which is of course most relevant to the Eurosystem.
EU enlargement and the Eurosystem
As I understand it, it has been decided that no new “opt-out” clauses, such as those negotiated by the
United  Kingdom  and  Denmark,  shall  be  available  to  new  Member  States.  This  implies  that,  when
joining the EU, the new Member States will have to comply with all of the requirements outlined in
the  acquis  communautaire  which  relate  to  European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU).
Moreover, following accession, they shall each have to prepare themselves for the eventual adoption
of the euro. Thus it is clear that the accession process and the entry of new members into the EU will
have deep and wide-ranging consequences for the ECB and the Eurosystem.
Of  course,  meeting  the  Maastricht  convergence  criteria  is  not  a  prerequisite  for  joining  the  EU.
However,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  certainly  puts  some  pressure  on  accession  countries  to  make
progress towards fulfilling the convergence criteria.
In  fact,  we  might  consider  their  progress  towards  adopting  the  euro  as  part  of  a  continuum,
encompassing  three  distinct  stages  and  crucial  steps.  These  are:  EU  membership,  participation  in
ERM II,  and  eventual  adoption  of  the  euro.  The  first  of  these  steps  requires  implementation  of  the
EMU-related  acquis  communautaire.  Then,  on  the  date  of  accession,  new  Member  States  will  join
EMU with the status of “countries with a derogation”. From this point onwards, they will be expected
not only to treat their economic policies as a matter of common concern, but also to be committed to
the  eventual  adoption  of  the  euro,  which  should  be  an  objective  both  of  monetary  and  of  other
economic policies. This is a direct result of the fact that, as I mentioned earlier, no new opt-out clauses
are to be granted to the accession countries.
With  the  ultimate  goal  of  adopting  the  euro  in  mind,  the  new  Member  States  will,  once  they  have
achieved  a  sufficent  degree  of  convergence,  be  expected  to  participate  in  ERM  II.  Following  this,
when the Maastricht criteria are met, the new Member States can then be expected to exchange their
national currencies for the euro and become full participants in Economic and Monetary Union.
Our role as central bankers is heavily influenced by the external economic and political environment.
Moreover, it is essential that we remain aware of the changes taking place and that we seek to play an
active and constructive role. This must certainly be the case as far as EU enlargement is concerned.
As a result of this process, the competencies of the Eurosystem, namely  monetary policy, exchange
rate policy, the smooth functioning of payment systems and financial stability, will become directly
relevant as soon as the applicant countries join the EU. Thus, if the challenge of EU enlargement and
the  subsequent  enlargement  of  the  euro  area  is  to  be  successfully  met,  it  is  essential  that  we  are
prepared for it when the time comes.
BIS Review 113/1999
4
For  this  reason  the  Eurosystem  is  already  closely  monitoring  developments  in  accession  countries
which are directly related to its areas of competence. Naturally this is being done in cooperation with
the accession countries themselves. A network of contacts has already been set up with the relevant
central banks, and several bilateral as well as multilateral meetings at expert level have been convened
in recent months. It goes without saying that these working relationships will be intensified over the
coming months and years with a view to deepening such cooperation in areas of specific interest to the
Eurosystem. In this regard, for example, a high-level meeting with the central banks of the accession
countries will be held in Helsinki as early as next month.
Since the successful integration of the accession countries into the euro area will ultimately depend on
the policy strategies which they adopt, the Eurosystem is already taking a particular interest in these
strategies.
In  this  regard,  it  is  quite  encouraging  that,  in  most  cases,  the  monetary  policies  pursued  are
increasingly  similar  to  those  of  the  Eurosystem.  First,  they  aim  at  achieving  and  maintaining  price
stability by supporting a disinflation process which is in some cases already fairly advanced, even if
performance generally still remains out of line with EMU standards. And second, their strategies are
increasingly  based  upon  the  process  of  using  indirect  and  market-based  instruments  to  control  the
degree of liquidity of the banking system. More precisely, these strategies include the use of standing
facilities, repurchase agreements and other open market operations, and deposit reserve requirements.
With regard to exchange rate policy, the accession countries currently pursue a variety of strategies. It
is not for me to comment at this stage on what might be the most appropriate exchange rate strategy
for individual candidate countries. This is clearly an issue on our research agenda. However, it is clear
that  with  their  entry  into  the  EU  and  the  consequent  liberalisation  of  capital  movements,  accession
countries  will  become  less  and  less  able  to  target  their  exchange  rate  without  “importing”  their
monetary policy from the euro area. One may therefore expect that the monetary strategies of these
countries will increasingly be conducted with a view to an orderly entry into ERM II and the adoption
of the euro.
The Eurosystem also has a  vital  interest  in  the  proper  functioning  of  financial  systems  in  accession
countries.  This  is  not  least  the  case  because  integration  into  EU  structures  will  entail  increased
competition for banks and other financial institutions. Thus, our interest in this area concerns not only
the general need for financial sector reform, but also, more specifically, the need to ensure the stability
of the financial systems. To this end, we have already begun monitoring developments in the banking
and financial sectors of accession countries, as well as their general payment systems.
Of course, in the context of  compliance  with  EU  legal  and institutional requirements,  the  accession
countries  will  be  expected to adopt  EU  legislation  in  the  area  of  financial  services,  including  those
related  to  banking,  insurance  and  investment  firms.  Moreover,  against  the  background  of  the
Copenhagen criteria, they will also be required to meet the broader set of structural and institutional
requirements necessary for the establishment of an efficient and competitive banking sector.
Nevertheless, I should like to emphasise that establishing sound and efficient banking, financial and
payment  systems  is  also  an  essential  requirement  for  a  proper  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and
therefore also for successful participation in the euro area. This is true for a number of reasons.
First, the creation of deep and liquid capital markets is a necessary step if indirect and market-based
instruments  involving  a  number  of  counterparts  are  to  be  used  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.
Second, in the  absence  of  sufficiently  developed  capital  markets,  it  might  be  difficult  for  accession
countries  to  comply  with  the  rules  relating  to  the  prohibition  of  privileged  access  to  the  financial
system  of  governments.  And  finally,  structural  weaknesses  in  the  financial  system  could  also  have
implications for the monetary policy transmission mechanism, since poor competition and soft budget
constraints may affect the responsiveness of banks to changes in the monetary policy stance. It is not
surprising  therefore  that  the  Eurosystem  has  a  particular  interest  in  keeping  banking  and  financial
sector developments in accession countries under close review.
5
BIS Review 113/1999
At this point I should like to recall that the Eurosystem is not part of the EU institutional framework
which has been set up for the current enlargement process. Enlargement is a political decision which
concerns the Member States of the European Union. However, it seems natural that the Eurosystem
will  become  more  and  more  involved  in  this  process  in  the  near  future,  in  particular  given  the
implications  of  enlargement  for  our  main  tasks  and  objectives.  Moreover,  it  is  clear  that  the
Eurosystem will play an important advisory role in areas related to its competencies.
How should the Eurosystem address and view the enlargement process? Let me make a few general
remarks.  First,  it  is  my  view  that  the  Eurosystem  should  adopt  a  constructive  attitude  towards  the
prospect of EU enlargement. This applies also to the participation of new EU Member States in ERM
II and their eventual adoption of the euro. The Eurosystem should be prepared to advise the accession
countries  both  in  undertaking  necessary  structural  reforms  and  in  pursuing  the  stability-oriented
policies  which  are  required  in  order  to  fulfil  the  accession  and  convergence  criteria.  Moreover,  the
Eurosystem should also stand ready to cope with additional requests to provide technical assistance to
these countries and, in particular, to their central banks.
A second observation is that the Eurosystem should support equal treatment as a  key  feature  of  the
accession process. This implies that objective and uniform criteria should apply, in turn, to accession,
participation in ERM II and adoption of the euro. The criteria related to each step of the process should
be implemented in a strict and effective manner, in order to provide the countries concerned with the
external constraints necessary to bring their economies in line with the respective standards, while at
the same time avoiding any discrimination.
Of  course,  against  a  background  of  different  starting  points  and  varying  degrees  of  economic
transition, a plurality of approaches should  be feasible  without compromising  equality  of treatment.
Indeed, we do not expect the candidate countries to join the EU or to adopt the euro in a single wave.
However, irrespective of the individual time frames pursued, what is clear is that the accession process
requires a significant amount of preparatory work on the part of all involved.
Conclusion
It is probably unnecessary for me to remind you that, whatever the Eurosystem’s involvement in the
enlargement  process,  our  primary  objective  is  and  will  continue  to  be  the  maintenance  of  price
stability  in  the  euro  area.  Hence,  any  arrangements  or  other  forms  of  cooperation  with  accession
countries must be without prejudice to the Eurosystem’s independence and its primary objective.
Nonetheless, I hope that I have conveyed the message that we at the ECB and the Eurosystem at large
are  also  aware  of  how  the  wider  economic  and  political  environment  can  have  implications  for  the
fulfilment of our tasks and objectives. As central bankers we do not operate in a vacuum and this is
certainly  the  case  with  regard  to  the  Eurosystem  and  the  prospect  of  EU  enlargement.  As  the
Eurosystem, we stand ready to take part in initiatives on issues falling within our fields of competence.
I should like to end my remarks here. However, before I do, let me once again express my gratitude
for being invited to give this lecture today. It has indeed been a great honour, in particular in view of
Governor Zolotas’ long and distinguished career at the Bank of Greece.
BIS Review 113/1999
6
