Mr Duisenberg discusses the challenges posed by economic
divergences in the euro area: the consequences for economic policies
Speech  delivered  by  Dr Willem F Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at
‘Nieuwspoort’ in The Hague, Netherlands, on 5 November 1999.
 First,  let  me  thank  you  for  this  rather  special  calendar  for  the  year 2000.  As  you  are  undoubtedly
aware,  the  President  of  the  ECB  has  a  very  full  schedule,  not  least  in  explaining  the  role  of  the
Eurosystem and communicating its decisions to the general public (through the media). It is therefore
a very suitable gift. It is also, however, if I may say so, a very symbolic gift. Next year marks the start
of  a  new  millennium.  The  introduction  of  the  euro  also  marks  the  beginning  of  an  important  and
historic step forward in European integration.
The  introduction  of  the  euro  poses  some  new  questions  and  challenges  for  the  ECB  and  other
economic policymakers in the  euro  area,  and  I  would  like  to take  this  opportunity  to  deal  with  one
particular  issue  which  has  been  raised  on  a  number  of  occasions  in  the  past  year - also  here  in  the
Netherlands - that is the challenges posed by economic divergences across regions or countries within
the euro area.
The single monetary policy and economic conditions in the euro area as a whole
The primary objective of the single monetary policy is to maintain price stability. The ECB has only
one  instrument  at  its  disposal – short-term  official  interest  rates - and  can  therefore  only  aim  at  one
objective.  This  has  been  defined  by  the  Governing  Council  as  “a  year-on-year  increase  in  the
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%”. The objective of price
stability “is to be maintained over the medium term”, emphasising that monetary policy needs to be
forward-looking.  But  this  definition  also  stresses  the  fact  that  the  focus  of  the  ECB  is  on  price
developments “in the euro area”. In reaching its decisions on monetary policy, the Governing Council
is concerned with economic conditions in the euro area  as a  whole,  rather than specific regional  or
national developments.
It is sometimes said that while the single monetary policy may be “right” for the euro area as a whole,
it  is  “wrong”  for  many  individual  countries  within  the  area.  I  disagree  with  this  view.  First,  it
overlooks  the  fact  that  within  a  single  currency  area  adjustment  can  occur  via  prices  and  wages.
Second, it infers a very narrow perspective on the costs and benefits of a single monetary policy, in
isolation from the broader arguments. These  broader  considerations  can be  assessed in  my  view,  as
being  very  clearly  positive  in  the  medium  to  long  term  for  growth  as  well  as  employment.
Nevertheless, an analysis of the causes of and policy responses to the differences across countries is
useful.
National differences will not entirely disappear
While  monetary  policy  is  determined  by  developments  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  there  will
inevitably be some differences in the performances of individual countries and also regions within the
euro area. Since the start of the year, the  focus  of  attention in the  media  has rightly  switched  more
towards looking at the euro area as a whole, but this also provides a natural benchmark against which
to  compare  national  developments.  That  is  why  some  attention  has  been  directed  towards  the
differences that exist in some areas between euro area countries, particularly differences in economic
growth and inflation rate differentials. The latter is true for the Netherlands, which currently has an
inflation rate which is about 1 percentage point higher than that of the euro area.
1
BIS Review 123/1999
There  are  a  number  of  reasons  why  such  differences  will  occur.  These  may  broadly  be  considered
under two headings. First, there are a number of reasons why, over relatively short periods of time,
there may be clear differences in economic performances. Second, national rates of output growth and
inflation may also differ within a single currency area over longer periods of time as a result of more
structural factors.
Short-term divergences among euro area countries
Considering  the  short-term  factors,  with  regard  to  price  developments,  there  are  various
“country-specific” factors of a very temporary nature. Among these, government policies are perhaps
the  most  obvious.  These  may  lead  to  different  price  developments  across  countries  within  the
Monetary Union in the short run via indirect tax changes, liberalisation measures and administrative
price changes. These are generally not of the same magnitude and timing across countries.
Differences in growth and inflation may also occur over relatively short periods due to the occurrence
of “asymmetric shocks” or differences in the responses to common shocks. A very clear example of
such an asymmetric shock was German reunification.
Other shocks affect countries in a more or less similar fashion - for example, recent increases in oil
prices have tended to lead to higher consumer prices in all euro area countries in the past few months.
Shocks may affect countries in a diverse way due to different structures of the economy, patterns of
trade  and/or  production  for  example.  Evidence  tends  to  suggest,  however,  that  the  industrial
specialisation  of  the  euro  area  countries  is  not  one-sided,  so  that  there  is  no  risk  of  significant
asymmetric  effects.  Moreover,  the  high  degree  of  trade  between  euro  area  countries  means  that
country-  or  region-specific  developments  tend  to  have  significant  spillover  effects  within  the  euro
area.
Nevertheless,  a  common  shock  may  have  different  consequences,  depending  on  the  precise
institutional frameworks within the different countries. The possible so-called “second-round effects”
of oil prices on wage and price developments may be considered to fall into this category.
Short-term  or  cyclical  differences  in  demand  pressures - though  difficult 
to  measure  with
precision - are an important cause of short-term variations in price increases. There is a relatively high
degree of correlation in the cyclical developments of euro area countries over a longer time period, and
recent differences in growth rates have not been particularly unusual. Nevertheless, different cyclical
positions may lead to variations in price pressures.
Longer-term factors leading to national differences
Turning to the longer-term factors, the trend rate of growth may be higher in some countries due to the
process of “catching-up” in terms of productivity and living standards with other euro area countries.
It  is  likely  that  this  has  been  happening  in  some  euro  area  countries  over  the  past  few  decades.  In
others, the trend rate of growth may be higher due to the fact that the economy is at a more advanced
state of liberalisation and deregulation.
In  terms  of  the  current  differences  in  inflation  rates  across  euro  area  Member  States,  longer-term
factors are important. It  may first be noted that  even  if inflation rates for  all individual  goods  were
identical across countries, the overall rate of increase in consumer prices would differ because there
are differences in tastes and preferences across countries and therefore the bundle of goods consumed,
and thus the weights of the various goods in the overall price index, differs from country to country.
This can also, of course, have consequences for short-term divergences in inflation rates across euro
area countries.
The “catching-up” effect for countries whose living standards are rising towards the average euro area
level  also  has  consequences  for  inflation  differentials.  The  convergence  of  productivity  and  living
standards gives rise to differentials in inflation rates via the rate of increase of non-traded goods prices.
Countries with higher levels of economic development tend to have higher prices of non-traded goods.
BIS Review 123/1999
2
Higher  living  standards  mostly  reflect  high  productivity  in  the  traded  goods  sectors  but,  given
integrated  national  labour  markets,  wages  are  generally  higher  in  the  economy  as  a  whole  and
although  the  scope  for  productivity  gains  may  be  more  limited  in  the  non-traded  sectors  of  the
economy,  a  general  rise  in  wages tends  to  lead to  higher  relative  prices in  the  non-traded  to  traded
goods  sectors.  The  euro  area  countries  undergoing  this  catch-up  process  will,  therefore,  in  general
have higher inflation.
As an ultimately temporary but nevertheless protracted phenomenon, there is also an ongoing process
of convergence of prices of individual goods. Price differences across countries will tend to be reduced
for  goods and  services  which  are  widely  traded  across  national boundaries as  a  result  of  increasing
integration  of  the  single  market.  The  introduction  of  the  euro  can,  of  course,  be  expected  only  to
intensify this process through increased price transparency and the elimination of exchange rate risk.
Are national differences a cause of concern?
Are differences in growth and inflation among euro area countries a matter of concern? In terms of
growth,  there  are  no  indications  that  the  differences  are  particularly  large  or  unusual.  Harmonised
prices data do not exist over a longer time period, but available national figures point to the fact that
differences are much smaller than they  were in  some  other  periods  in the past.  For  example, in the
early  1990s,  the  differences  between  the  highest  and  lowest  inflation  rates  were  of  the  order  of
magnitude of over 10 percentage points. Thus, a more stable price environment in the euro area as a
whole has also been accompanied by a considerable degree of narrowing in inflation rate differentials.
The  move  to  a  single  currency  and  the  introduction  of  the  euro  are  based  on  the  success  of  this
convergence process towards low inflation rates in all participating countries. It may be recalled that
the achievement of a high degree of price stability is one of the convergence criteria established in the
Treaty to be used to assess whether countries have fulfilled their obligations regarding participation in
Monetary Union. However, this does not mean that after countries have joined the Monetary Union
they will - at all times - have the same rate of inflation.
To  put  the  current  differences  in  inflation  in  the  euro  area  into  context,  it  is  useful  to  compare
developments in the euro area with variations in inflation in the United States, a large single currency
area which has been established for a long period of time and which is highly integrated in terms of
labour and product markets. Analysis of data for price developments in various US cities over the past
suggests  not  only  that  significant  inflation  differences  occur  within  a  monetary  union,  but  also  that
they  are  at  least  as  great  as  those  currently  prevailing  between  euro  area  countries.  Thus,  recent
divergences  in  the  euro  area  are  by  no  means  unusual.  A  further  feature  of  the  US data  is  that  the
observed  divergences  in  inflation  rates  among  these  cities,  although  persistent,  are  not  permanent.
There is a tendency for price levels in individual cities to converge back towards their initial levels
relative  to  the  national  average.  It  can  be  assumed  that  similar  adjustment  processes  would  also
operate in the euro area.
The role of other economic policies
Differences  in  economic  developments  between  countries  within  the  euro  area  do  not,  therefore,
always warrant an economic policy response. Action may, however, be necessary. For instance, when
developments diverging from those in other countries threaten to trigger painful adjustment processes
in the form of increasing unemployment. This can be avoided. If action is required it must be taken
through other, national economic policies, in particular wage developments and fiscal policy. As said
before, “Frankfurt” has no role to play in this area.
As regards labour and product market developments, it is important, also for this reason, to reduce as
far as possible existing rigidities, so as to allow wages and prices to adjust. This is as important for
countries  which  are  performing  above  the  euro  area  average  as  for  those  whose  economies  are
performing below the average. In circumstances where, for example, the economy is weaker than the
euro area - and where  monetary  policy  may  be  regarded  as too tight - a  high  degree  of flexibility  is
required in order to avoid significant increases in unemployment. Should, for example, the economy
3
BIS Review 123/1999
be growing strongly and unemployment be falling more rapidly than in the euro area, a more flexible
labour market could help to contain the upward pressures on prices that could emerge sooner than in
the euro area as a whole. The current recovery in the euro area provides a good opportunity to initiate
new policies designed to improve the functioning of markets. The Netherlands has shown that this can
bring about positive results. Although inactivity still remains high, the rate of unemployment is now
one of the lowest in the euro area. It would be a good thing if the Netherlands could show that the
dialectics of progress do not apply in this case.
It is also necessary for fiscal policy to play its part. The Stability and Growth Pact is sometimes seen
as constraining the role of fiscal authorities, but this is a misconception. The Pact is required in order
to ensure that responsible fiscal policies are pursued by all participating Member States. In the longer
term,  an  unbalanced  fiscal  policy  has  a  negative  effect  on  economic  efficiency  and  on  price
developments. It increases the strains on the monetary policy and, in a monetary union, there may be
significant  adverse  spillover  effects  on  other  euro  area  countries.  An  institutional  framework  that
guarantees sound government finances is an important contribution to macroeconomic stability and is
conducive to sustained output growth and employment. It also helps to underpin the monetary policy.
The implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact provides sufficient scope in the medium term for
a stabilising role for fiscal policy in Monetary Union. While, on the one hand, an unbalanced fiscal
position creates difficulties for the economy concerned, if the government debt level is reduced to a
reasonable level and fiscal deficits are close to zero or in surplus, this creates room for manoeuvre in
economic downturns for fiscal policy to act as an automatic stabiliser. But this should then also apply
if the ecomony grows rapidly or inflation is relatively high. Windfalls occurring in such cases should
then  lead  to  lower  deficits.  Of  course,  in  making  this  remark  I  am  not  addressing  one  country  in
particular. Fortunately, however, the Dutch language gives me the opportunity to say: “If the shoe fits,
wear it”.
Concluding remarks
To summarise, national differences in growth and inflation observed in the euro area in the recent past
do  not  appear  to  be  unusual  either  in  a  longer-term  perspective,  nor  compared  with  that  which  has
been seen in the United States. Looking into the future, it is of course difficult to predict how these
differences  may  evolve.  The  experience  of  the  United  States  suggests  that  they  will  not  disappear
completely.  The  further  development  of  the  single  market  is  likely  to  lead  to  some  sources  of
divergence becoming less significant, while others may become more important. Divergences across
countries  will  be  monitored  closely  by  the  ECB  but,  given  that  monetary  policy  is  geared  towards
maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  this  means  that  other  economic  policies  are
required  in  circumstances  where  country  or  regional  developments  differ  significantly,  or  over  too
long a period of time, from area-wide developments. In particular, this means that wage developments,
backed by structural reform in labour and product markets, have a significant role to play while fiscal
policy,  within  the  framework  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  must  also  make  a  significant
contribution.
BIS Review 123/1999
4
