Mr Duisenberg discusses prospects, challenges and opportunities
for the euro area and gives a brief overview of developments in Latin America
Speech  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  conference
“Resilience and Resurgence in Latin America”, held in New York on 1 October 1999.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
Europe’s  strong  ties  and  close affinity  with  Latin  America  stem  from  its  people’s  common  origins,
culture, and trade. I am particularly pleased, therefore, to be able to participate in this conference.
During the past few months, the prospects for the global economy have gradually improved and the
world economy appears to be heading towards a more balanced growth path. While uncertainties still
remain as to the strength of the recovery, especially in regions which were most affected by the global
slowdown  in  1998,  the  risks  of  a  worldwide  recession  have  receded  and  inflationary  pressures
generally remain subdued.
A more optimistic view of the global economy is warranted, as macroeconomic policies around the
world have become more stability-oriented over the past decade. A general consensus has emerged on
the need for monetary policy to focus on the achievement and maintenance of price stability. In many
countries,  a  higher  level  of  fiscal  discipline  has  also  favoured  the  pursuit  of  a  stability-oriented
monetary policy and has set the conditions for a more sustainable economic growth.
While these are certainly important policy achievements, still, as emphasised by the IMF in its latest
World Economic Outlook, important challenges lie ahead and need to be addressed by policymakers
around the world if a long-lasting and sustainable recovery is to be ensured.
The growing international integration of capital markets offers great opportunities for a more efficient
allocation  of  global  resources.  As  recent  experience  has  shown,  however,  it  also  carries  risks  of
destabilisation, especially in countries where domestic financial systems are fragile or macroeconomic
imbalances  are  still  present.  In  such  a  situation,  economic  policy  faces  new  and  more  complex
challenges.
It  is  important  to  stress,  however,  that  the  improved  outlook  for  the  global  economy  points  to  the
possibility of addressing old problems and facing new challenges with a higher probability of success.
This  is  particularly  true  for  the  euro  area  economy  where  the  outlook  for  growth  has  recently
improved, contributing to more optimistic prospects at the global level. The euro area comprises the
economies of the eleven countries which, at the beginning of this year, introduced the euro, the new
single European currency. In the euro area, a slowdown in output growth was observed around the turn
of  the  year  1998-99.  Today,  most  of  the  available  information,  from  both  coincident  and  leading
indicators  for  the  euro  area,  supports  a  picture  of  ongoing  cyclical  improvement.  Against  this
background, most forecasts point to a strengthening of economic activity in the remaining part of this
year and in the course of next year.
The  European  Central  Bank’s  (ECB’s)  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  for  the  euro  area  is
contributing to these developments by aiming, in fulfilment of its mandate, to maintain price stability,
thereby fostering a favourable environment for business activity. The ECB has defined price stability
as a year-on-year increase in the harmonised index of consumer prices of below 2% in the euro area,
and has stated that price stability is to be maintained over the medium term.
In the euro area, consumer prices increases have indicated some upward pressure recently, rising from
0.9%  in  June  to  1.2%  in  August.  The  recent  increases  in  oil  prices  and  the  lagged  effects  of  the
developments of the exchange rate in the first  half  of  1999  are  the  main  factors behind  the  upward
movement  of  prices.  Overall,  however,  the  upward  pressure  has  so  far  turned  out  to  be  moderate
1
BIS Review 105/1999
because  the  increase  in  import  prices  has  been  partially  offset  by  a  favourable  development  in
domestic  factors,  such  as  the  increased  competition  in  the  services  sector  and  the  success  of
deregulation  in  some  markets.  Yet,  in  the  immediate  future  further  upward  pressures  on  consumer
prices  can  be  expected  as  a  result  of  the  above-mentioned  external  factors.  In  the  short-term,  price
developments  should  remain  below  2%.  Looking  further  ahead,  however,  upward  risks  to  price
stability should not be overlooked. Monetary growth in terms of the three-month moving average of
the annual growth rates of the broad aggregate M3 has been following a moderately rising trend since
the start of this year, moving gradually away from the reference value of 4½% set by the Governing
Council  of  the  ECB.  The  Governing  Council  is  the  main  decision-making  body  of  the  ECB.  Its
members are the six members of the ECB Executive Board and the eleven governors of the national
central banks of the countries which have adopted the euro. Monetary policy decisions are taken on a
one  person-one  vote  basis  and  from  a  euro  area-wide  perspective.  The  rising  trend  in  M3  mainly
reflects a continued, strong demand for its most liquid components, which to a large extent is due to
the low opportunity costs of holding these monetary assets, but probably also to improving economic
conditions in the euro area. As you may know, monetary developments play a prominent role in our
monetary  policy  strategy.  The  reference  value  announced  by  the  Eurosystem  (i.e.  the  ECB  and  the
eleven  national  central  banks  in  the  euro  area)  has  a  medium-term  orientation,  as  M3  has  a  stable
relationship  with  the  price  level  in  the  euro  area  over  the  medium  term.  The  short-run  relationship
between  money  supply  and  prices  is  more  complex  to  interpret.  While  monetary  policy  cannot
therefore  react  mechanically  to  every  deviation  from  the  reference  value,  deviations  of  monetary
growth from the reference value need to be carefully analysed.
Other upward risks to price stability in the euro area may be indicated by the fact that the annual rate
of growth of credit granted to the private sector remains substantial, at around 10%. The demand for
credit is broadly based, originating from both households and corporations. The main factors behind
this  development appear to  be  the  low  levels  of  bank  lending  interest  rates  in  conjunction  with  the
ongoing  strengthening  of  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area.  More  favourable  access  to  financing,
linked with increased competition in the banking industry since the start of Monetary Union, may also
have played a role. Finally, in some countries an interplay of credit growth and rising house and land
prices has been observed, as well as the need to finance intense merger and acquisition activity.
Overall, therefore, current monetary developments seem to indicate that the liquidity situation in the
euro area is at present rather generous.
The  outlook  for  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  will  also  very  much  depend  on  forthcoming  wage
rounds. In recent years, wage growth has been relatively moderate in Europe, thereby facilitating the
attainment of price stability. In an environment in which the unemployment rate stands at around 10%
for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  wage  moderation  is,  however,  not  only  crucial  for  maintaining  price
stability  but  also  for  helping  to  improve  the  labour  market  situation.  In  this  light,  the  forthcoming
wage negotiations will very much influence the future course of the European economy.
It is my firm belief that the present situation in Europe provides a golden opportunity to set the stage
for a virtuous scenario of continued higher growth and stable prices. However, the task of exploiting
the  potential  for  growth  created  by  the  environment  of  stable  prices  and  of  achieving  the  highest
possible pace of economic development, while preserving price stability, calls for appropriate action
on the part of all policymakers and economic actors.
In the euro area, a prolonged period of sustained growth and lower unemployment requires decisive
measures for tackling existing market imperfections, in particular inflexible market structures, and the
resolute  continuation  of the process  of  consolidating  public finances, including  the  reform  of  social
security systems. We do not get tired of repeating the message over and over again, as it is our firm
conviction,  that  the  future  of  Europe  will  to  a  large  extent  depend  on  structural  and  fiscal  policies
within  the  Member  States,  which  must  commit  themselves  to  improving  the  conditions  for  further
economic development and, in particular, employment developments.
The high rate of structural unemployment remains the main challenge for economic policy in Europe.
Although  a  faster  pace  of  expansion  of  economic  activity  should  foster  net  job  creation,  without
structural reforms this will not be sufficient to bring about a significant reduction of unemployment.
BIS Review 105/1999
2
The structural nature of the problem in Europe is evident from a comparison of the euro area labour
market with that of the United States, and also from a comparison of the respective performances of
the different countries within Europe. Structural reforms with a view to increasing flexibility in labour,
product and services markets are the key to solving Europe’s single most pressing economic problem.
If undertaken promptly, such reforms would be the best way for the euro area to make the most of its
potential for growth and employment.
Another main challenge for Europe at the present juncture remains that of consolidating fiscal policy.
Several Member States are not yet meeting the medium-term budgetary objectives of being in surplus
or  close  to  balance.  This  is  the  objective  to  which  all  governments  in  the  European  Union  have
committed themselves through a Stability and Growth Pact. The fiscal measures which are currently
planned are often not ambitious enough, and only relatively modest reductions in structural deficits are
envisaged.  The  improving  economic  environment  will  provide  an  opportunity  to  achieve  sounder
budgetary  positions.  This,  in  turn,  will  create  the  conditions  for  a  more  efficient  conduct  of  fiscal
policies and allow governments to face important challenges ahead, such as the ageing of populations.
Undoubtedly, this will in turn help to support non-inflationary growth and enhance the prospects for
maintaining a stable social environment.
The achievement of a scenario of higher growth and continued price stability is, in my opinion, the
best contribution that the euro area can  make  to  an  orderly  and  balanced  development  of the  world
economy and of global financial markets. The ECB, as the single monetary authority in the euro area,
hereby  plays  its  part  by  focusing  on  its  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability  over  the
medium term.
Let me now give a brief overview of how we perceive developments in Latin America. The overall
outlook continues to improve,  although  uncertainties  as  to  the  strength  and resilience  of  the  growth
recovery remain. The region’s output is bottoming out as South America’s recession is being partially
offset by a better situation in Mexico and Central America. The region’s recovery has been helped by
higher  than  expected  growth  in  Brazil  in  the  first  two  quarters  of  1999,  while  inflation  remained
subdued.  Most  observers  expect  inflation  to  be  some  10%  in  1999,  the  lowest  level  in  50  years.
Factors which may affect the region’s growth over the next year are external financing conditions, the
extent  of  the  expected  slowdown  in  the  US  economy,  and  uncertainties  about  the  pace  of  Brazil’s
recovery. Moreover, a number of countries have fragile banking systems, which may affect economic
growth in the medium term.
Recovery in Latin America may, however, benefit from stronger growth in Europe given the size of
bilateral trade and financial relations. The EU in particular accounts for about 20% of Latin American
exports (2% of the region’s GDP), and about 25% of Mercosur exports. Moreover, Europe has been a
traditional  exporter  of  capital  to  Latin  America.  Europe  accounts  for  some  40%  of  the  net  foreign
direct  investment  in  the  region,  some  EUR20.8 billion  or  USD20  billion.  Numerous  European
corporations and banks now have a significant share of investments in Latin America.
Over the last decade Latin America has made a great deal of progress toward sound economic policies,
and the region’s growth potential is vast in terms of human and natural resources. Latin America is
still  carrying  out  the  challenging  work  of  building  up  its  economic  institutions  in  order  to  foster
financial stability and sustained non-inflationary economic growth.
The policy developments to date are encouraging. Several countries in the region have adopted sound
budgetary  policies,  redirected  public  investment  towards  health  and  education,  privatised  a  large
number of public sector companies, changed their laws to give foreign investors the same treatment as
national  ones,  opened  up  their  economies,  and  adopted  more  disciplined  monetary  polices,  thereby
curbing  inflation.  Moreover, a  number  of countries  have  granted  a  more  independent  status to  their
central banks and have strengthened their banking systems. All these factors lead us to believe that we
are  witnessing  an  enduring  and  genuine  structural  change  in  the  region.  The  containment  of  the
Brazilian financial crisis early this year offers evidence that economic reforms have been beneficial to
the  region.  It  is  also  worth  pointing  out  that  the  countries  in  the  region  have  come  a  long  way  in
enhancing relations with international institutions, which undoubtedly helped to contain the impact of
the crisis.
3
BIS Review 105/1999
If  Europe’s recent history  is  any  guide,  possible  setbacks  along  the  path  of  economic  and  financial
development should not discourage the governments and peoples of the region from persevering in the
pursuit  of  sound  economic  policies  and  economic  reform.  Latin  America  has  made  extraordinary
progress in the last decade, which it should try to further pursue in order to build a firmer and more
equitable base for non-inflationary economic growth.
BIS Review 105/1999
4
