Mr Welteke examines the extent to which markets need guidance
and in which specific areas
Statement  given  by  Mr  Ernst  Welteke,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Frankfurt
European Banking Congress, held in Frankfurt on 19 November 1999.
 I
To address the main question of this panel: yes, financial markets do need guidance. But this is not a
sufficient answer in itself. In a market economy the real question is the extent to which markets need
guidance and in which specific areas? The differences which may exist in the three areas (accounting
standards, electronic money and the New Basel Accord) are mainly a consequence of differences in
underlying  financial  systems,  but  they  are  also  the  result  of  different  traditions.  The  US  financial
system  relies  much  more  on  capital  market  instruments  than  the  European  financial  sectors.  The
issuance of bonds and stocks listed on the stock exchange is a more widely used instrument in raising
capital for enterprises. Market capitalisation of outstanding shares as a percentage of GDP amounts to
about 180% in the US, compared with 53% in Germany.
Most European financial markets are based on bank/customer relationships focusing on the traditional
loan business. In Germany, for example, capital market financing (including shares) amounts to only
about 38% of total funds raised by enterprises (in the US this ratio is about 70%). As a consequence,
securitisation is not as widespread in Europe as in the US, and both the depth of the European capital
markets  and  the  volume  of  financial  transactions  cannot  yet  fully  compete  with  the  Anglo-Saxon
markets.  However,  I  expect  that  the  euro  will  gain  increasing  importance  and  live  up  to  its  full
potential as  a transaction, reserve  and  investment  currency.  This  should  also  contribute  to  a  further
narrowing of national financial markets’ roles and structures, and, on the whole, strengthen European
capital markets.
II
What does this all mean for the issue of guidance for financial markets ?
Let  me  start  with  a  general  principle  which  is  widely  accepted:  regulations  should  provide  a
framework that best suits the specific market conditions. This means that regulations are a reflection of
market  developments  and  structures  and  not  a  driving  force  for  changing  markets.  Constraints  on
markets  and  developments  are  only  justified  where  financial  stability  or  issues  of  competition,
protection of depositors and investors, or the functioning of the markets in a more general sense are at
stake. As long as differences in financial market structures exist a detailed “one size fits all” approach
will not be fully compatible with the goal of creating or even improving the level playing field.
However, it is also clear that the globalisation of financial markets and increased merger activity exert
pressure on those markets to adapt, to become more and more integrated, and similar. Firstly, in terms
of the kind of financial transactions which are considered “state of the art” and, secondly - this will
take  more  time  -  also  in  terms  of  market  structures.  Therefore,  harmonisation  as  well  as  close
cooperation between supervisors around the world are highly desirable. This is well understood and
already common practice, as is demonstrated by the multilateral cooperation in international forums.
1
BIS Review 128/1999
III
Let me now turn to the three specific areas, addressed in the question.
In the area of accounting, the G7 assigned the International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC)
the task of establishing a worldwide harmonised set of core accounting principles. I strongly support
this  initiative  and  very  much  hope  that  we  move  towards  a  true  world  standard  on  this  basis.  IAS
(International  Accounting  Standards)  should  in  my  opinion  be  the  requirement  for  a  listing  on  all
major  stock  exchanges  of  the  globe.  German  legislation  already  allows  banks  to  set  up  their
consolidated accounts on the basis of the IAS.
The IAS are currently reviewed by the Basel Committee, the IOSCO (regulators for securities firms)
and the IAIS (regulators for insurance firms). Some differences of opinion still exist, especially on the
issue  of  “fair  value”  accounting.  The  IASC  obviously  prefers  “fair  values”  (which  means  market
values) for all financial instruments including the loan portfolio. The majority of regulators (including
Germany)  favour  such  accounting  only  for  instruments  traded  on  financial  markets.  For  traded
instruments we can easily calculate “fair values” whereas this  is  much  more  difficult  for  assets  and
liabilities  of  the  banking  book.  The  European  Commission  has  taken  up  this  issue  with  the  aim  of
arriving at a common standard for IAS and the European accounting legislation.
IV
With regard to the regulatory framework for e-money the US and Europe take a different approach. In
Europe, the issuance of e-money will probably be regulated (although the relevant EU directive has
not yet passed the European legislative process). Most European countries perceive a need for such
regulation in order to ensure sound market practices, to protect those who use e-money, and to take
adequate account of both systemic and monetary policy concerns. The envisaged rules will allow for
enough freedom for the e-money business to evolve, and technological progress will not be hindered.
The  United  States  is  taking  more  of  a  “wait  and  see”  approach  before  they  issue  regulations  for
e-money. Nevertheless, I would not be concerned about possible competitive disadvantages for Europe
resulting from the different speed of regulatory initiatives in this field. The reason is quite obvious:
e-money should remain a national or European business for quite some time and transatlantic e-money
services may not evolve easily. In addition, the regulatory demands for e-money business should not
pose a real constraint for well run e-money systems. Moreover, we must not miss the optimal point of
time  for  regulating  e-money.  Waiting  for  too  long  could  mean  that  we  end  up  with  very  divergent
systems in Europe. This in turn would make it extremely difficult to  have  a  European  passport  and
single market in this area. Against that background the envisaged European directive on e-money is
expected to improve market development.
V
The third area you mentioned is the current review of the capital adequacy framework by the Basel
Committee.  Naturally,  differences  of  opinion  exist.  One  prominent  example,  which  has  been  cited
various times in the press, is the use of external versus internal ratings for assessing the banks’ credit
quality.  With  regard  to  the  Basel  Accord  as  such,  aspects  of  competition  may  arise  for  both  the
banking sector and non-banks, especially small and medium-sized companies. It is important that the
Basel rules do not cause competitive disadvantages for countries or specific sectors of the economy.
For  this  purpose,  common  European  positions  should  be  formulated  wherever  possible.  Without
prejudging  the  negotiations  in  Basel,  there  are  good  prospects  that  competitive  distortions  will  be
avoided by, for example, allowing the use of banks’ internal ratings.
Considering the revision of the Basel Accord as a whole, there are still many details which have to be
worked  out  and  require  our  full  attention.  But,  in  essence,  there  seem  to  be  fewer  differences  of
opinion  than  press  reports  sometimes  suggest.  Americans  and  Europeans  alike  favour  a  more
risk-based assessment of credit portfolios, the introduction of a supervisory review process to better
highlight qualitative aspects of financial oversight, and the strengthening of transparency and market
BIS Review 128/1999
2
discipline.  The  recent  financial  crises  in  Asia  should  have  revealed  to  all  regulators  (and,  in  my
opinion, to the public at large) the need to promote financial stability worldwide.
I  am  optimistic  that  the  Basel  Committee  will  resolve  all  outstanding  issues  by  autumn  2000  and
propose a harmonised regulatory framework which will be appropriate for capital market-oriented as
well as bank-based financial systems. To close, let me underline that the new guidance we are giving
to  banks  in  the  form  of  the  revised  Basel  Accord  should,  to  a  large  extent,  reflect  “sound  market
practises”.  To  obtain  an  optimum  result,  it  is  essential  that  banks  contribute  to  this  regulation  by
providing technical input.
3
BIS Review 128/1999
