Mr Stark elucidates the future of official international organizations
Remarks by Mr Jürgen Stark, Vice President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Conference “Lessons
from Recent Global Financial Crises”, held in Chicago on 30 September – 2 October 1999.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
My  following  remarks  about  the  future  of  official  international  organizations  are  divided  into  two
parts.
Firstly, I want to say something about the rationale and, secondly, I want to deal with the past and
future role of official international organizations.
But let me start with a summary:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
There  is  a  need  and  a  future  for  well  designed  official  international  organizations.  In  the
political  setting  of  sovereign  nation  states  and  the  increasing  economic  and  financial
integration and globalization, they perform important tasks. Many of these tasks can hardly
be  taken  over  by  other  organizations,  national  or  private.  Furthermore,  due  to  their
establishment by agreement between governments  of  many  countries,  official  international
organizations have a high degree of legitimacy.
Effective 
international  organizations  must  have  a  clear  mandate  and  clear-cut
responsibilities  for  their  work,  reflecting  the  benefits  of  specialization  and  the  division  of
labor. Overlapping mandates and activities tend to waste resources due to double work and
– which is even more important – blur responsibilities.
Within  these  clear  and  non-overlapping  mandates  the  different  international  organizations
should  develop  appropriate  cooperation  procedures  to  make  their  work  consistent  and  to
arrive at highly efficient results.
Existing  official  international  organizations  in  general  have  so  far  shown  a  broadly
satisfactory performance. They have acquired a strong expertise and valuable experience in
their respective fields which provide a special capital for future work. However, they must
also  be  prepared  to  adapt  to  significant  and  systemic  changes  in  the  international
environment but  should refrain from  adapting  their strategies to  volatile topics of the  day.
There is a need for leaner agendas for international organizations.
Official  international  organizations  are  public  institutions  and  consume  and  manage
taxpayers’ money – or central bank money in the case of the IMF. Thus, they are responsible
to  their  official  “shareholders”  and  their  work  must  be  transparent,  accountable  and
efficient.
Rationale for official international organizations
Given the general superiority of the market mechanism for coordination of individual action, public
intervention requires justification. Economists usually refer to welfare factors, in the form of market
failures such as externalities or a shortage in the supply of public goods, or to transaction costs. Such
factors, however large or small, can play a role in an integrated world economy. Many economic and
financial linkages  between  countries  –  such  as  international trade, capital flows  or transportation  as
well  as  spill-over  effects  from  national  policy  decisions  –  may  call  for  some  official  regulation  to
prevent or limit adverse effects or to allow for scale effects. However, the question whether official
intervention would be beneficial, and if so, what kind of intervention would be most adequate, has to
be decided for the single case.
1
BIS Review 105/1999
There  are  also  political  considerations  that  support  official  international  treaties  and  organizations.
Such considerations include benefits from the international exchange of information and consultations
on  a  regular  basis  or  from  cooperation  and  dispute  settlements  within  an  existing  and  accepted
framework. The existence of official international organizations, especially with a broad international
membership, also facilitates and promotes the  search  for  multilateral solutions  to  problems  in  areas
such as trade policy, and limits the scope for bilateral or unilateral policies. Such multilateral solutions
which are developed and implemented within a rule-based framework might be more acceptable to the
parties involved than other solutions, e.g. unilateral sanctions.
„International economic and financial stability” is often referred to as an international public good,
as a means to broadly shared global prosperity.
Evidence seems to support the view that adding rules for international transactions such as through
the WTO to ensure fair international trade or the BIS to develop capital adequacy ratios for financial
institutions have the potential effect of reducing the likelihood of severe international economic and
financial  instability.  In  this  regard  such  rules  and  organizations  limit  the  non-sanctioned  room  for
manoeuvre  of  the  single  nation  states  to  such  measures  which  are  supposed  to  be  in  line  with
international  stability.  This  applies  also  to  international  organizations  which  have  a  mandate  to
promote  sound  domestic  economic  policies  –  such  as  the  IMF  with  its  surveillance  mandate.
Promoting  sound  policies  aiming  at  internal  and  external  stability  in  a  country  helps  to  avoid
externalities  or  negative  spillover  effects  to  other  countries,  such  as  through  beggar-thy-neighbor
policies or inappropriate exchange rate policies.
International economic and financial stability is dependent on economic stability at the national level
and to the stability of international transactions. Both factors can be and are being addressed through
specific codes, rules and procedures, which are set by official international organizations, such as the
IMF, the WTO or the BIS.
Crucial is the implementation  of  all these  codes, rules  and  procedures  by  individual  countries.  The
implementation  then  has  to  be  monitored  very  closely  by  the  respective  official  international
organizations.
I would like to mention here especially the IMF surveillance procedure in the context of its Article IV
consultations. This exercise should disclose macro-economic as well as micro-economic weaknesses
and imbalances – in the latter case I am thinking specifically about national banking systems – and
recommend appropriate policies to achieve internal stability and external viability. Thus, it could serve
as a prominent tool for preventing externalities and international crises.
Of course national authorities have to be prepared to adopt corrective policies in a timely manner – if
called for.
The future of official international organizations
To what extent the efforts of international organizations to produce stability have been successful in
the  past  is  open  to  debate.  Unfortunately,  financial  crises  have  occurred  in  recent  years  in  several
countries.  All  elements  –  the  setting  of  codes,  rules  and  procedures,  their  implementation  and
monitoring – have to be respected to safeguard international economic and financial stability. Some
initiatives  are  already  under  way  in  this  respect.  In  general,  it  seems  crucial  that  the  international
organizations concentrate – not least under conditions of scarce resources – on their core mandates.
As concerns the IMF, the surveillance function must play a dominant role on the basis of professional
diagnosis  and  frank  and  open  discussion  of  therapy.  Not  completely  new  though  is  the  problem  of
non-complying  countries  that  refuse  corrective  policies  suggested  by  the  IMF  and  supported  by  its
membership. At some point in time, when non-compliance heightens the risk of a crisis, the IMF must
go beyond confidential channels of communication with the respective country. While we do not want
the IMF to become a kind of rating agency, the IMF should under appropriate circumstances issue data
information to encourage the respective authorities to correct some “dangerous policies”.
BIS Review 105/1999
2
Another  element  of  the  Fund’s  preventive  role  is  the  design  and  monitoring  of  data  publication
standards like the SDDS to enhance transparency of the national economic situation and policies as a
means to facilitate solid judgements by markets participants that allocate financial flows.
I  mention  the  financing  role  of  the  IMF  at  this  late  stage,  since  it  generally  comes  into  play  when
preventive efforts of all players have not succeeded. It is certainly a more visible and glamorous role,
especially in crises situations, than the day to day business of surveillance, but it is a sign of failure of
the preventive role.
A rising need for IMF financing reflects a poor grade for the Fund’s surveillance efforts. Generally
speaking,  the  more  successful  the  surveillance,  the  less  IMF  financing  is  required.  Of  course,
conditionality under Fund supported programs should be subject  to  the  same  test to  demonstrate  its
effectiveness. This implies that successful work of the IMF should be reflected in a declining trend of
the overall number of Fund supported programs over time, i.e. fewer new and follow-up arrangements.
To  be  clear,  we  do  not  object  that  there  are  legitimate  cases  which  require  access  to  the  Fund’s
resources. However, the Fund’s financing role should and can only be catalytic. In that respect we also
have  to  enhance  our  efforts  to  involve  the  private  sector  in  crises  prevention  and  solution.  The
prolonged use of Fund resources is hardly in line with the Fund’s mandate, that speaks of “making the
general  resources  of  the  Fund  temporarily  available”  (IMF  Articles  of  Agreement,  Article  I  (v)).
Countries  that  run  IMF  supported  programs  over  many  years  or  even  decades  are  probably  not  a
demonstration of success. Thus, the major role of the IMF should be to  prevent that  IMF  financing
becomes necessary and to make it redundant over time for countries.
When performing the financing role, however, negative feedbacks on the intended international public
good  in  the  future  must  be  avoided. There has  been a  controversial  discussion  to  what  extent  large
IMF financing packages have caused moral hazard and thus undermined the functioning of the market
mechanisms, i.e. whether the crisis solution in one case has actually prepared the ground for the next
crises.
To conclude:
1.
Official international organizations may play a well founded and systematically meaningful
role,  supplying  public  services,  that  are  not  profit-oriented  and  therefore  would  not  be
attractive to, or performed by, the Private Sector. Thus, the IMF and the World Bank are also
justified and have to be streamlined on this basis.
2.
3.
This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  international  institutions  should  not  be  viewed  very
critically. They work with public money, and thus have to operate very efficiently – in the
short-run as well as in the long-run. International organizations are responsible to the public,
and thus are always part of an open and changing world.
International organizations – particularly the IMF and the World Bank – should refocus their
respective  mandates.  Otherwise  we  run  the  risk  that  while  there  is  double  work  on  some
tasks, other crucial tasks for safeguarding international economic and financial stability are
neglected.  Responsibilities  would  be  blurred  with  yet  unknown  consequences  for  long-run
international stability.
I fully agree with the findings of an Independent Task Force – sponsored by the Council on Foreign
Relations – on the future international architecture: the IMF and the World Bank have tried to do too
much in recent years or were driven by their shareholders to do more.
1.
2.
3.
The IMF should lend less and concentrate more on crisis prevention.
It  should  focus  on  a leaner  agenda  of  monetary,  fiscal  and  exchange  rate  policies,  and  on
banking and financial sector surveillance and reform.
The  World  Bank  should  focus  on  longer  term  structural  and  social  aspects  of  economic
development and help to reduce poverty.
3
BIS Review 105/1999
4.
5.
It  should  not  be  involved  in  crisis  lending  or  crisis  management  and  should  refrain  from
publicly second-guessing the Fund’s macro-economic policy advice.
Finally, the World Bank should do more in the design of social safety nets.
To refocus the IMF and the World Bank does not mean that other areas of economic policy should be
ignored.  Those  areas  fall  to  other  institutions  or  agencies  within  their  respective  mandates  and
expertise.
BIS Review 105/1999
4
