Mr Erçel reports on developments in the
Turkish economy in the light of the recent disinflation efforts
Speech  by  Mr  Gazi  Erçel,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey,  at  the
American-Turkish Council, held in Washington on 28 September 1999.
 Two  years  ago,  in  the  summer  of  1997,  the  crisis  in  Asia  began  to  accelerate.  One  year  ago,  on
17 August  1998  a  crisis  erupted  in  Russia  that  threatened  serious  consequences  not  only  for  the
Russian  economy  but  also  for  the  entire  international  financial  system.  By  comparison,  this  year’s
summer has been uneventful, except my country, which was struck by an earthquake on 17  August
1999.
The  earthquake  has  been  devastating  both  in  terms  of  human  life  and  physical  infrastructure.  The
death toll has risen to over 15,000 with over 25,000 injured. More than 200,000 houses were damaged
or destroyed and over half a million people were left homeless.
The  spontaneous  and  prompt  support  from  the  international  community  together  with  domestic
resources will cover reconstruction costs and we will recover.
I  have  to  emphasize  that this  tragic event  will  not  derail  our  macroeconomic  strategy,  nor  shall  we
allow it to jeopardize the hand-won disinflation achievements realized so far.
Since Turkey has a long history of inflation, which is the main cause of macroeconomic imbalances,
we have directed our efforts to reducing the inflation for quite some time.
A disinflation program was launched at the beginning of 1998. This program is gradual in nature and
aims to reduce inflation, which had reached 91% by the end of 1997, to single digits over the medium
term.
All we know is that the  disinflation  program  has three  components: counter  cyclical  fiscal  policies,
structural reforms, and nominal policies.
Let me make some comments firstly on fiscal and nominal policies.
Turkey’s inflation has a long history. It originated mainly from budget deficits and the way they have
been financed, and for this reason fiscal policies should be the backbone of any Turkish anti-inflation
program.  Calculations  indicate  that  a  primary  surplus  of  4–5%  during  the  first  two  years  of  the
program  should  be  enough  both  to  relieve  the  pressure  on  domestic  demand  and  on  domestic
borrowing  and  demonstrate  that  the  fiscal  authorities  are  serious  about  reducing  inflation.  A  tight
fiscal  policy  will  also  lighten  the  burden  of  stabilization  efforts,  making  a  more  flexible  monetary
policy possible.
The  monetary  program  is  also  consistent  with  these  fiscal  policies.  At  the  Central  Bank  we  have
focused on net domestic assets since the second half of 1998. Bringing these aggregates under control
conveyed two basic messages: first, that public sector deficits would no longer be monetized with the
Central Bank resources, and second, that henceforward the Central Bank will increase its Turkish lira
liabilities only to finance an increase in its net foreign assets. The substantial decreases in “credit to
the Treasury” item and overall net domestic assets, and the large increase in the Central Bank’s net
foreign assets, are the result of these policies. Here, of course, we should take account of the damage
done by the Russian crises. The capital outflows connected with these crises caused net foreign assets
to decrease, which in turn produced an increase in domestic assets. Even so, the source of the latter
increase was not the increase in public sector credits but mainly the increase in Central Bank funding
to the banks.
Another  aspect  of  the  Central  Bank’s  monetary  program  is  related  to  exchange  rate  policy.  The
proposal  to  conduct  exchange  rate  policy  in  accordance  with  the  inflation  target  has  important
1
BIS Review 109/1999
implications for expectations. First of all, it signalled to the market that the Central Bank endorsed the
government’s inflation target.  Since the  public  can  monitor  the  exchange  rates  daily,  exchange  rate
policy  becomes  an  important  tool  for  moving  the  public’s  inflation  expectations  towards  the
government’s inflation target. Of course the continued success of this policy requires the authorities to
set  a  realistic  inflation  target,  which  is  to  say  an  inflation  target  consistent  with  the  public  sector’s
proposed budget balance.
Besides  influencing  inflation  and  inflationary  expectations,  exchange rate  policy  directly  affects  the
external sector. A stable real exchange rate policy puts the Central Bank in a neutral position in this
respect. That is, the Central Bank neither intends to use exchange rates to support exports, nor does it
intend to harm Turkey’s long-term trade competitiveness.
The implication of the Central Bank’s stable real exchange rate policy is that the economy’s current
account balance is determined by real sector developments. Here the decline in domestic demand in
recent  months  has  made  its  mark.  As  imports  decreased,  the  foreign  trade  balances  improved
significantly.  As  a  result  of  this,  Turkey  ended  1998  with  a  current  account  surplus  of
US$1,871 million. In 1999, a small current account deficit is expected, mainly due to an expected rise
in domestic demand in the second half of the year.
The  coordination  of  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  has  succeeded  in  reducing  the  inflation  rate  from
91% in 1997 to 54% in 1998. As of August 1999, the WPI-based inflation rate stood at 54% despite an
unexpected change in the price of oil and a relative loosening of the fiscal stance in the first half of the
year.
Since  Turkey  has  a  long  history  of  inflation,  inertia  has  played  an  important  role  in  determining
inflation.  Breaking  down  this  “inflation  resistance”  of  the  economy  requires  a  high  level  of
commitment  on  the  part  of  the  political  authorities.  One  sign  of  this  commitment  may  be  their
performance  in  the  area  of  structural  reforms.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  more  successful  the
realization of the reforms, the stronger will be the credibility of the program. Now let me turn to these
reform issues.
Turkey has a good record for structural issues. We have liberalized the trade and capital accounts of
the  balance  of  payments  for  about  two  decades.  We  have  a  flexible  labor  market.  High  domestic
savings is one of the main characteristics of the economy. Market oriented economy is another aspect
of the structural component of Turkey.
Right  now,  Turkey  has  four  important  structural  reforms  on  its  agenda,  not  only  as  a  part  of  the
disinflation  effort  but  also  because  they  are  essential  for  changing  the  environment.  Thus,  these
structural reforms are vital for adapting to the changing global environment. They consist of reforming
the banking sector, the social security system, agricultural subsidies, and privatization. Some of these
reforms have already been approved by parliament, and the others are in the pipeline.
to close the legal loopholes;
to implement the international supervisory regulations;
The  new  Banking  Act  which  was  approved  by  parliament  in  June  has  the  following  four  general
objectives:
• 
• 
• 
• 
In particular, the twenty-five Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision drawn up by the Bank
for International Settlements in 1997 have been endorsed in the amendments to the Banking Act.
to make some adjustments regarding the process of founding and operating banks.
to assign the supervision of banking organizations to an independent agency; and
As a result, the amendments are consistent with modern principles of effective banking supervision. I
believe this new law will rapidly improve the soundness of Turkey’s banking system, which is crucial
for the conduct of monetary policy. Just as the monetary authorities cannot achieve medium-term price
stability without appropriate fiscal policies, they cannot pursue a price stability target without a sound
banking system.
BIS Review 109/1999
2
The banking law  approved  by  parliament  was  a big  step  forward,  but  further action  is also  needed.
One important additional issue is to restructure the  state  banks  and reduce  their role  in  the banking
system. These banks not only operate in a competitive banking market, but also undertake operations
on  behalf  of  the  government,  such  as  providing  preferential  loans  to  the  agricultural  sector  and  to
small  and  medium-sized  businesses.  Since  it  is  intended  to  eliminate  preferential  credits  in  the
medium-term, these banks can be commercialized by privatizing them.
Another reform that the Turkish government has recently undertaken is social security reform. Let me
give  you  a  brief  summary  of  Turkey’s  social  security  system,  which  has  caused  major  budgetary
problems in recent years. The Turkish social security system includes three pension institutions. The
first and largest, the SSE, is for corporate employees, the second is for civil servants, and the third is
for the self-employed. All three operate on a “pay-as-you-go” basis, which  means  that  pensions  are
paid out of the current contributions of the working population and not of the past contributions of the
retirees.
The main reason for the growing deficits of recent years is not the ageing of the population, but early
retirement.  The  pension  system  deficit  has  been  growing  rapidly  since  1992,  when  the  minimum
retirement  age  requirement  was  abolished.  A  new  bill  to  correct  this  situation  has  already  been
approved by parliament.
As  regards  privatization,  public  enterprises  still  play  a  central  role  in  Turkey.  We  all  know  that  a
stronger  privatization  program  would  reduce  the  state’s  involvement  in  commercial  and  industrial
activities, and that this in turn would reduce the budgetary burden of subsidies and deepen the capital
markets by encouraging wider ownership of shares. Since privatization has come to be seen as a key
element of policies aimed at improving resource allocation, it will be essential to modernize Turkey’s
legal and institutional framework for privatization and to bring it more in line with EU norms and the
norms now prevailing in some of the region’s more successful transition economies.
An adequate legal foundation will be the key element of such reforms. Important steps have recently
been  taken  in  this  direction,  and  the  constitution  has  been  amended  to  reduce  the  legal  obstacles
obstructing the privatization process. And in order to attract foreign investors who could be interested
in privatization, long awaited amendments to the constitution concerning international arbitration have
also been approved by parliament.
The agricultural sector is especially important in Turkey. It still contributes around 15% of GDP and
accounts  for  about  42%  of  all  employment.  In  Turkey,  total  support  to  agriculture  has  more  than
doubled in the last 10 years, while in other western countries it has been reduced.
Turkey has a complex system of agricultural supports, which are delivered to the producers through
two  main  channels:  output-based  market  support  schemes,  and  the  state-owned  Exert  Benches
(Agricultural Bank) which delivers payments based on the use of inputs. Additional measures cover
the cost of general services provided to agriculture, which are financed through the budget.
The  present  agricultural  support  arrangements  cannot  be  replaced  overnight,  and  the  authorities  are
working  with  the  World  Bank  on  projects  aimed  at  making  it  possible  to  shift  to  a  direct  income
payments  system  in  the  future.  The  move  from  the  present  subsidy  system  to  a  direct  subsidy  is
supported by everyone in Turkey, but the change will be gradual and will take some time.
The  new  government  that  was  formed  after  the  April  election  seems  serious  about  completing  the
above reforms, as shown by their quick action in passing the Banking Act, international arbitration,
and the social security reform.
With the strengthening of credibility that will come with the completion of these  reforms,  I  believe
Turkey’s  disinflation  program  will  shift  into  a  new  stage  starting  in  2000.  While  there  has  been
considerable progress since last year’s Staff Monitored Program, a new and comprehensive effort is
now needed to eradicate inflation. A comprehensive program of macroeconomic and fiscal adjustment,
aimed at lowering inflation to 10% by the end of 2001. This time the likelihood that the disinflation
program  will  succeed  is  high  for  three  main  reasons.  First,  there  is  now  political  stability  and
consensus on implementing this inflation-reduction policy. Second, all parts of society are aware that
there  is  no  alternative  to  solving,  now,  our  budget  and  debt  burden  problems.  Third,  the  technical
3
BIS Review 109/1999
foundation  has  already  been  prepared.  These  three  factors  underline  the  importance  of  the  new
program.
Accordingly,  the  inflation  targets  have  been  set  at  25%  for  the  year  2000  and  10%  for  2001.
Consistent with these inflation targets for the next two years, fiscal policy will be conducted according
to a broad-based approach aimed at improving all aspects of public sector revenues and expenditures.
With this effort, monetary policy will continue to be supportive of fiscal policies. Although we should
not  expect  a  radical  change  in  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  its  efficiency  will  definitely
improve in step with the improvement of the fiscal stance.
I  would  also  like  to  underline  once  more  the  importance  of  Turkey’s  recent  efforts  towards
disinflation. As you know, in the 1980s the Turkish economy succeeded in making the transition from
a closed economy to a market-oriented one. Turkey aims, through this more recent effort, to build a
macroeconomic infrastructure suitable for membership in the global economy, where low inflation and
a sustainable growth rate, combined with sound and well functioning financial and real sectors, are the
minimum standards.
The last but by no means the least point I would like to make is that we now have an occasion for
showing,  once  more,  the  ability  of  the  Turkish  economy  to  overcome  adversity  by  meeting  the
challenge to our resilience following a major earthquake. During the last two years, we have survived
the South Asian, Russian and Latin American crises, and also an economic slowdown in the EU region
that  is  an  extremely  vital  trading,  financial  and  economic  partner  for  Turkey.  We  also  had  the
uncertainties preceding the early election held in April 1999, which tested the resistance of the Turkish
economy.  I  truly  believe  that  we  have  already  passed  these  exams,  and  also  that  we  have  gained
enormous experience. I have always said that we are extremely good in bad times, although we don’t
like  them.  This  time  the  situation  and  prospects  are  different,  and  we  will  show  the  abilities  of  the
Turkish  economy  in  good  times  as  well  as  bad.  If  the  program  we  have  begun  implementing  is
successful, that success will affect at least the next 50 years of Turkey’s economic and social life.
I believe these messages are clear and will be well understood by our international partners.
BIS Review 109/1999
4
