Mr Alweendo discusses Namibia’s current exchange rate
arrangement and its implications for the country’s monetary policy
Annual  Speech  1999  given  by  Mr  Tom  K  Alweendo,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Namibia,  on
17 November 1999.
 Introduction
I would like to welcome you all to this first Annual Speech by the Governor of the Bank of Namibia.
It is common in many countries that the Central Bank takes the opportunity once a year to inform the
most  important  stakeholders  of  economic  issues  the  Bank  considers  to  be  of  particular  importance.
The intention is to also make this an annual event in Namibia.
The Annual Speech shall not be a review of economic developments in Namibia and abroad; that you
will  find  in  our  Annual  Reports.  I  will  rather  try  to  give  the  Central  Bank’s  views  and  outlook  on
selected topics. Today, I will mostly deal with Namibia’s exchange rate arrangement. From the outset,
I  would  like  to  stress  that  there  are  no  other  reasons  for  this  choice,  other  than  the  fact  that  it  is
important for many of our stakeholders to fully understand the current exchange rate arrangement. The
issues involved are many and complicated, and it is my intention to give a comprehensive overview of
the current arrangement and its implications for monetary policy in Namibia.
The CMA arrangement
As you all know, Namibia is a member of the Common Monetary Area (CMA). Within a monetary
area,  exchange  rates  between  the  participating  countries  are  fixed  and  there  are  no  payment
restrictions.  The  CMA  has  many  of  the  characteristics  of  a  monetary  union,  as  the  exchange  rates
vis-à-vis other member states are fixed and capital flows are free. As a consequence, interest rates and
the money supply cannot be directly influenced by the individual country. Monetary policy in such a
system is at best subordinated to exchange rate policy, as domestic credit creation must be kept within
limits in order to ensure a sufficient volume of net foreign assets of the banking system. In monetary
unions  there  is  usually  also  a  high  degree  of  policy  coordination,  which  in  my  opinion  could  be
improved in the current CMA arrangement. This is an issue I will return to later.
The formal agreement
Namibia’s  membership  of  the  CMA  was  formalised  by  the  accession  to  both  the  multilateral
agreement with Lesotho, Swaziland and the Republic of South Africa in 1990 and a separate bilateral
agreement with the Republic of South Africa in 1992. Two dominant features of this arrangement are:
(1)
(b)
a commitment by the  Bank  of  Namibia to  exchange the domestic currency  for  a specified
amount of the reserve currency - the rand - “without restriction subject to a normal handling
charge” at a fixed exchange rate; and
an explicit requirement that at least a major proportion of its monetary liabilities be backed
by the reserve currency or other foreign assets. More specifically, Article 4, Section 1, of the
bilateral monetary agreement  states that, and I quote:
“Against the aggregate amount of Namibia dollar currency issued by the Bank of Namibia,
the Bank of Namibia shall maintain a reserve equivalent thereto in the form of rand assets
and freely usable foreign currencies in such proportion as the Bank  of  Namibia  considers
appropriate…”.
1
BIS Review 127/1999
In addition, the bilateral agreement also provides that either contracting party has the right to issue its
own national currency. It is also a part of the agreement that either party may introduce measures for
domestic resource mobilisation in the interest of the development of their respective countries.
I will in particular draw your attention to two issues in the provisions cited above. First, there is under
no circumstances room for changing the exchange rate, and second, the backing rules of the currency
must be observed at all times. These two characteristics remain both the source of strength as well as
the  most  limiting  aspects  of  the  present  monetary  arrangement.  The  fixed  exchange  rate  and  the
backing  rule  confer  a  degree  of  credibility  that  is  usually  not  found  in  the  conventional  pegged
exchange rate arrangements. However, we must also clearly state that this credibility is obtained at a
cost. In monetary policy decisions, as in most other aspects of life, there is “no free lunch”!
The decision to join the CMA was influenced by the long economic relationship with South Africa,
and was perceived as the most appropriate arrangement under the prevailing circumstances. The extent
to which the country has benefited from this arrangement will depend on a careful assessment of its
merits and constraints.
Benefits of the CMA arrangement
Let me start by first analysing the benefits.
Price stability
By  far  one  of  the  greatest  benefits  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate  arrangement  is  that  it  provides  price
stability in the domestic economy. It is now widely accepted that the main objective of the monetary
authorities  in  most  countries  is  to  achieve  price  stability.  By  pegging  the  domestic  currency  to  the
currency of a low-inflation country, its ability to maintain price stability is enhanced, provided there is
a  strong  commitment  on  the part  of  the  authorities  to  maintain  the  exchange  rate.  The  arrangement
constrains  monetary  expansion,  restrains  excessive  government  spending,  and  sends  out  credible
signals to private agents about prospects for inflation. This is normally achieved when money growth
in the peg currency country approximates that in the anchor currency country. The measured inflation
rate may diverge because of the price of non-tradable goods, but in most cases they are cointegrated.
In Namibia, the available evidence seems to support this conclusion. Since 1993 the domestic inflation
rate has closely mirrored the prevailing rate in South Africa.
Credibility
Many governments in developing and developed countries have for a number of reasons experienced
difficulties in making their policies generally credible. The credibility problem arises from the fact that
when the authorities announce a monetary policy objective in one period, they may have an incentive
to deviate from the policy in subsequent periods. This is so because private agents have formed their
expectations and entered into wage and other contracts. There may be possibilities for government to
engage  in  surprise  monetary  expansion,  even  if  that  was  considered  not  to  be  the  best  long-term
solution.  Another  credibility  problem  arises  from  the  fact  that  even  if  the  current  government  is
pursuing  prudent  macroeconomic  policies,  investors  may  fear  future  governments  will  not  have  the
same  preferences.  Changes  in  government  can  bring  forward  interest  groups,  whose  demands  for
subsidies could lead to a relaxation of fiscal policy.
Acquiring a reputation for fiscal prudence in a longer-term perspective is a lengthy process. Therefore,
tying  governments  hands  by  either  creating  a  policy  rule  or  delegating  control  of  certain  policy
instruments to an independent agent is a welcome arrangement, especially during the period when the
country  is  passing  through  the  learning  curve  and  institutions  are  being  put  in  place.  Under  these
circumstances, membership of the CMA and the rule-based policies, such as the restrictions placed on
government  borrowing  from  the  Bank  of  Namibia,  are  instrumental  in  raising  the  government’s
credibility and therefore making its policies time consistent. A time consistent policy is a policy that
will  be  sustained  as  circumstances  change  over  time.  Time  consistency  bears  the  advantage  of
BIS Review 127/1999
2
credibility because of the predictability of the future. It therefore reduces monetary disturbances and
eliminates the doubts of the financial and  real  sector  markets,  thus  creating  a  healthy  and attractive
environment for investment and economic growth.
Exchange rate fluctuations
Another major advantage of the current arrangement is that it helps to avoid exchange rate fluctuations
and reduces the unfavourable effects of exchange rate uncertainty on trade and investment. As South
Africa  is  Namibia’s  main  trading  partner,  a  major  benefit  of  CMA  membership  for  Namibia  is  the
elimination of uncertainty associated with exchange rate variability. Since Namibia is a net importer of
goods and services from South Africa, the benefits derived from CMA membership may in this respect
be large.
The emphasis here is on exchange rate volatility, which is of a short-term nature and is not due to the
flexibility of exchange rates by itself. Market determined exchange rates are prone to excess volatility
that can be damaging to the real economy. Overshooting of the exchange rate could have some real
negative economic effects. The elimination of such fluctuations promotes economic stability. This is
particularly  important  given  the  volume  of  Namibian  trade  with  South  Africa.  Overshooting  of  the
exchange  rate  between  countries  doing  little  trade  may  not  matter  much,  but  between  countries
engaged in substantial trade, it does. A stable exchange rate will ensure the stability of the prices of
traded goods and hence  eliminate  volatility  -  not  only  in  the  exchange  rate  -  but  also in  wages  and
prices and hence enhance economic performance.
The  advantage  here  is  derived  from  the  benefits  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate  arrangement  and  the
suitability of the exchange rate as a nominal anchor.  But this goes beyond that. At independence in
1990, the nation gained from this linkage to the rand as it ensured confidence in the fledging domestic
financial system and the economy given its historical and trade association with South Africa.
Reduction of transaction costs
A related benefit is the reduction of transaction costs associated with the fixed exchange rate between
the Namibia dollar and the South African rand. Transactions costs include the spread between the buy
and sell price, computed as the difference between the rate at which banks buy foreign currency and
the rates they  charge  for sales  of  foreign  currency.  Other costs  involve  the  commission  charges  for
engaging in foreign exchange transactions. The commission varies with the size of transactions, and
there are usually different rates for various forms of foreign currency transfers.
The gains from the elimination of transaction costs are a function of trade flows between members of a
monetary union. With high volumes of trade, the gains are substantial. Furthermore, if the country’s
direction of trade was highly diversified, fixing the exchange rate against the currency of only one of
the trading partners would not eliminate all the transactions costs. Elimination of exchange rate risks
removes the hedging of exchange rates as an argument in a firm’s decisions regarding the geographical
concentration  of  activities.  It  is  difficult  to  arrive  at  precise  estimates  of  the  magnitude  of  savings
involved. For small economies that are highly dependent on international trade and investments, these
savings could be substantial.
This is the case for Namibia. Due to its membership of the CMA, Namibia saves on the transaction
costs involved in exchanging the Namibia dollar into the South African rand and the spread between
rates charged for sales and purchases of foreign currency. This benefit is increased due to the fact that
the rand is legal tender in Namibia and there are no costs involved in converting the Namibia dollar
into the South African rand. An estimated saving of 3.8% of GDP has been suggested in a previous
study. Compared to an estimated saving of 0.5% of GNP from the common currency in the EU, the
magnitude of this advantage for Namibia appears to be quite sizeable. This is to be understood given
the fact that close to 90% of Namibian imports come from South Africa.
3
BIS Review 127/1999
Access to financial markets
Though not the least important, a major benefit from the CMA arrangement is the free flow of capital
between  the  member  countries.  This  provides  wider  access  to  financial  markets  and  thus  helps  in
satisfying  extraordinary  financial  requirements  for  the  infrastructural  projects  in  the  country.  It  is  a
challenge for the private sector in Namibia to make full use of this advantage.
Costs
Against  these  benefits  of  the  CMA  arrangement,  we  shall  now  consider  the  costs  which  can  be
associated with the present system.
Loss of autonomy in monetary policy
By far the most often discussed setback of the arrangement is the loss of autonomy in monetary policy.
A  major  cost  of  CMA  membership  to  Namibia  is  foregoing  the  use  of  a  nominal  exchange  rate  or
interest rate policy as an instrument of macroeconomic adjustment. The Central Bank cannot control
the  supply  of  money  because  the  money  supply  is  determined  wholly  by  the  balance  of  payments.
With increased capital mobility, there exists limited scope for influencing the interest rate. These two
conditions also apply to any fixed but adjustable peg arrangement.
The exchange rate is a key determinant of the balance of payments, and can serve as a nominal anchor
for the price level. Therefore, movements of exchange rates in response to balance of payments shocks
affects output and price stability. For instance, a country may experience faster growth in productivity,
say in agriculture due to more abundant rainfall compared to other countries, or the discovery of new
mines that bring in additional export revenues or save on imports. In such cases, a real appreciation of
the exchange rate is called for. Under the present arrangement, the country cannot use the exchange
rate as a policy tool to control the increase or decrease in the supply of money. This has often been a
source of resentment against this exchange rate arrangement as economic management is taken out of
the hands of the domestic monetary authorities.
Related to this is the whole issue of the ability of the Namibian economy to absorb external shocks.
Namibia  is  a  highly  open  economy  and  -  given  its  membership  of  the  CMA  -  it  can  hardly  use
exchange rates or interest rates to mitigate the impact of external shocks. Namibia has had a number of
unfavourable shocks in the past 20 years. The cumulative net loss in income due to the terms of trade
shocks  is  estimated  to  have  amounted  to  an  average  of  2.1%  of  GDP.  The  export  earnings  and
investment were also negatively affected.
From time to time a country could also suffer shocks that are specific to it. The inability of the country
to embark on appropriate and timely policies, through for instance the use of exchange rate policy, to
escape such shocks creates a feeling of frustration. But there can also be a trade-off between monetary
policy credibility and smooth economic adjustments promoted by the exchange rate. The question is
whether this trade-off exists in the case of Namibia and South Africa. Flexible exchange rates hasten a
country’s adjustment to country specific economic shocks by facilitating rapid changes in the terms of
trade. However, when two countries experience broadly similar economic shocks, changes - if any - in
the bilateral terms of trade may not significantly aid adjustments of specific economic shocks in any
one country.
Moreover, if factors of production, particularly capital, are highly mobile, the use of the terms of trade
as an adjustment mechanism may prove to be inadequate. Finally, where the reserve currency country
is also the peg currency country’s major trading partner, as in the case of South Africa and Namibia,
exchange rate flexibility as a policy tool becomes less effective.
Stability of the rand as a reserve currency
The  issue  of  a choice  of  reserve  currency  is  very  crucial  in  deciding  to  peg  the  domestic  currency.
Among factors that may have determined the choice of the rand as a reserve currency are the direction
BIS Review 127/1999
4
of trade flows, the denomination of imports and exports, the deep financial market offered by South
Africa  and  the  correlation  among  cyclical  movements  between  the  economy  of  Namibia  and  South
Africa.  One  other  important  consideration,  which  in  recent  times  has  become  a  source  of  deep
concern, is the stability in the value of the rand. South Africa has in recent years experienced rapid
deterioration  of  the  rand:  the  Namibia  dollar  has  depreciated  in  tandem  with  the  rand,  particularly
during the financial crisis that engulfed South Africa in the early part of 1998. The exit by investors
from  the  emerging  markets,  South  Africa  included,  led  to  a  speculative  attack  on  the  rand.  The
subsequent depreciation affected the Namibia dollar. The response to the crisis by the South African
monetary  authorities  translated  into  high  interest  rates,  which  led  to  an  increase  in  the  cost  of
borrowing.
Generally, we would expect a depreciating rand to translate into increased exports for the Namibian
economy  as  domestic  goods  become  more  competitive  in  the  international  markets.  These  benefits
have been limited as Namibian exports consist mainly of commodities whose prices are determined in
the international commodity markets.
The answer to the question about the stability of the rand is not obvious. First, events since the crisis
that shook the rand in 1998 have proved the resilience of that currency as witnessed by the rapid rate
of  recovery  of  the  South  African  economy  and  the  present  stability  of  the  rand.  International
experiences tell us that most currencies undergo periods of strength and weaknesses. It is their ability
to  survive  such  tremors  that  determine  their  relevance.  Secondly,  even  if  the  Namibia  dollar  is  not
pegged  to  the  rand,  it  would  still  have  to  occasionally  undergo  shocks  that  could  lead  to  its
depreciation like any other national currency. The fact that such depreciation cannot be translated to
windfall gains for the economy has more to do with the export structure than the pegging to the rand.
Persistence of capital outflows
One other disadvantage of the present arrangement is the persistence of capital outflows in favour of
South  Africa.  Inter-country  movement  of  labour  is  minimal,  but  market  related  net  movements  of
capital tend to be one-sided in favour of South Africa. Among the CMA countries, South Africa has
by  far  the  most  sophisticated  financial  markets,  suggesting  that  capital  flows  are  likely  to  be
concentrated in that market to the detriment of the countries at the periphery, where financial markets
are still at the early stages of development.
This, in turn, could hamper the development of financial markets in Namibia. For example, Namibian
pension  and  portfolio  funds  are  channelled  to  South  Africa,  which  deprives  the  local  economy  of
investible  funds  and  makes  the  regional  disparities  even  worse.  This,  however,  has  to  be  balanced
against the advantage of the pooling of risk and the availability of investment opportunities created by
the free flow of funds within the CMA, which eventually could also give depth to financial markets in
Namibia.  Moreover,  a  significant  portion  of  Namibia’s  foreign  direct  investment  inflow  has  been
coming  from  South  Africa,  thus  partly  offsetting  the  outflows  in  the  long-term  funds.  Further,
Namibia’s savings continue to be in excess of the country’s present investment demand, implying that
efforts must be made to create investment opportunities in order to increase the level of investment.
Here, the government and the private sector have a joint responsibility.
Loss of seignorage
Joining the CMA has also involved costs such as the loss of seignorage. The issue could be viewed
from  two  perspectives.    In  a  growing  economy,  there  is  a  need  for  individuals  and  businesses  that
participate  in  economic  activities  to  increase  their  holdings  of  financial  balances  for  economic
transactions. A part of these balances will be in the form of currencies issued by the Central Bank, for
which the Central Bank pays no interest. Secondly, the government may “tax” existing real balances
by creating additional money and causing inflation. Inflation tax - as it is often called - is a kind of
forced savings, which enables the government to acquire goods and services. In a number of countries,
inflation tax revenue is an important part of government income.
5
BIS Review 127/1999
As a member of the CMA, the scope for inflationary financing is limited. Based on our discussions
earlier,  the  ability  to  increase  real  balances  in  line  with  growing  productivity,  and  hence  generate
seignorage, could be constrained by strict backing rules. The second aspect of seignorage payment has
to do with the payment to Namibia for the circulation of the rand in her territory. With the decline in
the circulation of the rand after the introduction of the Namibian national currency, the compensation
derived  by  Namibia  for  the  use  of  the  rand  has  also  contracted  significantly.  However,  this  second
factor  may  not  have  contributed  to  the  overall  contraction  in  the  earnings  from  seignorage.
Nevertheless, the crucial question to ask here is whether inflation tax - or the benefits from earning
seignorage - are significant enough to warrant foregoing the advantages of a stable financial system.
Inflation tax has been a major source of financial instability in many countries since it constitutes a tax
on the financial system.
Lender of last resort
One  principal  criticism  against  the  present  arrangement,  is  that  it  limits  the  ability  of  the  Bank  of
Namibia to perform the role of “lender of last resort”. Though the system guarantees the convertibility
of domestic currency at a fixed exchange rate, and thus enhances monetary credibility, a guarantee of
the convertibility of bank deposits is not explicitly dealt with in the formal agreement. As we all know,
no country can fully protect itself from a banking crisis that could lead to substantial macroeconomic
shocks. I do not intend to spend too much time on this argument for a number of reasons. There is
nothing in the CMA arrangement that precludes the Bank of Namibia from undertaking an appropriate
lender of last resort function should the need arise. All that is needed is an adjustment in its foreign
reserve coverage beyond the current 100% minimum. Secondly, the Bank of Namibia Act specifically
empowers the Bank to undertake a lender of last resort function if there is a need for it. Third, a major
antidote for bank failures is an adequate prudential and supervisory arrangement. In the past few years,
the Bank Supervision Department together with commercial banks have been engaged in standardising
prudential requirements. Commercial banks have also complied with these requirements. To us, this is
a more relevant factor in the prevention of bank failures.
Issues emerging from the present arrangement
Let me now turn to a discussion of some broader economic issues that emerge in relation to the present
arrangement.
Stability at the expense of development
An  important  question  to  be  asked  is  whether  the  relative  stability  achieved  through  the  current
exchange rate regime has been obtained at the expense of development.
(a)
Slower economic growth?
It has been argued that this arrangement in ensuring price stability tends to constrain domestic growth.
The arrangement can impose a contractionary bias to domestic money supply, as this may not expand
in  step  with  growing  domestic  production.  The  question  we  must  ask  is  whether  price  stability
necessarily constrains long  term  economic  growth.  Strong  empirical  evidence abounds  to  show that
the long-run trade-off between price stability and growth does not exist. On the contrary, increasing
empirical evidence is emerging which suggests that a reduction in the rate of inflation is beneficial to
economic growth. If it is the case that stable prices can help to generate a faster trend rate of economic
growth,  whatever  short  run  costs  a  country  may  initially  incur  in  attaining  the  objectives  of  price
stability, would have to be balanced against the long run benefits of economic growth.
In a recent study, comparisons made on macroeconomic performance between countries with this kind
of monetary arrangement and less extreme forms of exchange rate arrangements show that inflation is
about 4 percentage points lower in the former. On average, data from countries with this arrangement
over a ten-year period show that these countries are growing faster than countries with either pegged
or  floating  arrangements.  It  is  true  that  an  exchange  rate  arrangement  alone  could  not  have  been
BIS Review 127/1999
6
responsible for the observed differential, but at the same time, the evidence does not lend credence to
the assertion that this exchange rate arrangement leads to sluggish growth.
(b)
Impediments to trade diversification
There are, however, other aspects of this potential conflict between stability and development. In this
regard,  I  would  like  to  draw  on  experiences  from  the  Irish  currency  arrangement,  which  has  strong
similarities  with  our  CMA  arrangement.  The  Irish  pound  was  introduced  in  1927  at  a  one-for-one
parity  with  sterling  and  the  arrangement  lasted  until  Ireland  decided  to  participate  in  the  European
Monetary Arrangement in 1979. Full convertibility with sterling was ensured and all notes issued were
to be backed 100% by a reserve consisting of gold and sterling balances.
One consequence of the sterling link was that trade to a large extent was directed towards the sterling
area. It has been argued that for this reason Ireland did not benefit from the “post-war dynamism” in
Europe following the Second World War. Having the alternative to avoid the costs of currency risk
and foreign exchange transaction, the Irish exporting enterprises were reluctant to establishing trading
relationships with other markets in continental Europe and elsewhere. Because of the one-for-one link,
trade with the sterling area involved no greater financial complexity than internal trade.
The analogue to the Namibian situation is striking. As mentioned, Namibia is still importing close to
90%  from  the  CMA  countries.  The  arrangement  therefore  requires  vigilance  and  determination  to
diversify our pattern of trade and commerce.
(c)
Capacity building
A  similar  argument  can  be  made  with  regard  to  the  financial  system.  The  limited  use  of  monetary
policy instruments under the currency board arrangement and the use by the local banks of the London
money market for their liquidity needs, were not conducive to the development of risk management
and trading skills in Ireland. The acquisition of such skills was largely delayed until the emergence of
a domestic money market in the early-1970s and of a foreign exchange market even later.
Again,  these  are  relevant  points  when  analyzing  the  Namibian  situation.  One  point  that  is  often
overlooked  by  those  arguing  for  an  adoption  of  an  independent  monetary  policy,  is  the  issue  of
preparedness. The development of an active interbank market and secondary markets as well as local
capacity in liquidity forecasting and management is a pre-requisite for the successful implementation
of monetary and exchange rate policy. This process requires active promotion and assistance by the
Central  Bank.  While  some  progress  has  been  made  in  this  direction  by  the  consolidation  of
government  bonds,  the  fine-tuning  of  reserve  requirements  and  the  introduction  of  a  call  account
facility at the Bank of Namibia, more needs to be done to equip the bank to intervene in the domestic
money market. The capacity of the Bank to formulate and implement appropriate and timely monetary
policy measures also needs to be built up. The appropriate channel for the transmission of monetary
policy  has  to  be  investigated.  There  is  a  need  to  examine  carefully  the  choice  of  intermediate  and
ultimate targets of monetary policy, and other operational  variables that  are  appropriate  to  the  local
economy.  Building  adequate  capacity  to  undertake  the  aforementioned  functions  in  the  bank  takes
time and effort. Thus, there is a need for caution in this regard until appropriate institutional capacity
is put in place.
(d)
Regional cooperation
The experience of the 14 sub-Saharan African countries belonging to the CFA franc zone can provide
some interesting lessons with regard to the benefits and shortcomings of regional cooperation in the
area of exchange rate management. Since 1948, these countries have made up a monetary union with a
fixed exchange rate against the French franc. The French Treasury guarantees the convertibility of the
CFA franc into French franc, which is effectuated through the establishment by regional central banks
of an operational account with the French Treasury with market related yields and charges.
Initially, this arrangement appeared to work well. Following some 30 years of strong growth and low
inflation  compared  with  other  sub-Saharan  African  countries,  the  growth  performance  of  the  CFA
franc zone countries began to weaken from mid-1980, mainly due to a sharp deterioration of the terms
7
BIS Review 127/1999
of  trade.  Moreover,  fiscal  imbalances  and  external  public  debt  increased  substantially  in  relation  to
GDP. These countries also experienced a major weakening of the soundness and financial position of
the banking system.
Against this background, a decision was made in January 1994 to devalue the CFA franc by 50% and
to implement restrictive incomes and credit policies and a range of structural and institutional reforms.
This  policy  package  has  contributed  to  a  resumption  of  growth  in  real  per  capita  incomes  and  a
reduction in inflation and fiscal imbalances. Despite the progress made since 1994, the CFA countries
are still struggling with heavy external debt burdens and their economies are suffering under structural
rigidities.
A relevant question for us here is why these countries have not managed to take more advantage of the
stability provided through the fixed exchange rate regime. One important limitation has been that until
1994, the degree of economic and financial interaction and regional cooperation among the countries
of the CFA franc zone was relatively limited. There are surely many reasons for this, partly related to
various administrative  restrictions,  different  tax  treatments  and  protectionist  trade  policies.  But  also
political  considerations,  influenced  by  a  perceived  need  to  maintain  special  economic  and  political
links to France, appear to have dominated at the expense of regional economic considerations. After
1994, efforts have been made to strengthen regional economic and monetary integration. The objective
is to establish a common market based on a customs union and the harmonization of the tax system.
Economic policy coordination through regional surveillance has also been put on the agenda.
One overriding lesson I will draw from these experiences is that the current exchange rate regime can
be  a  basis  for  stability  and  economic  growth.  However,  economic  development  does  not  follow
automatically from this monetary policy arrangement.
Consequences of inflation targeting in South Africa
As monetary conditions in Namibia are so closely linked with those in South Africa, the conduct of
monetary policy in that country is naturally of special interest to us. The adoption of a formal inflation
targeting  framework  for  monetary  policy  is  a  move  which  the  monetary  authority  and  the  financial
community in Namibia has to follow closely.
First, it is important  for  us  to  understand  what inflation  targeting  is  all  about.  Under  this  system,  a
specific target for inflation in the medium term is publicly announced. Inflation targeting is therefore a
monetary policy framework that explicitly recognizes price stability as a medium-term objective. With
inflation targeting, monetary policy decisions  are  guided  by  expected future inflation  relative  to  the
announced inflation target.  This  system  has  been  adopted  in  a  number  of  countries  in  recent  years,
replacing either a formal intermediate monetary target or an exchange rate target.
Second, we have to ask ourselves whether the adoption of an inflation targeting system will have any
consequences  for  monetary  conditions  in  the  CMA  countries.  One  important  reason  given  by  the
South African authorities for the change is that an explicit inflation targeting framework will be more
transparent than the previous framework. To the extent the inflation targeting system and the monetary
policy decision-making process is perceived by market participants to be more transparent, this will be
a positive development for the other CMA countries and for Namibia. This should reduce unwarranted
market reactions, which at times result in disruptive movements in exchange rates and interest rates,
with negative consequences for trade and other economic activities.
It is also important for us to note that the adoption of inflation targeting will not in any significant way
change  the  practical  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  The  main  operational  instrument  will
continue to  be  the  repo  mechanism  and  the  Reserve  Bank  does  not  foresee  any  need  to  change  the
instruments  used  today  for  the  fine-tuning  of  the  liquidity  and  interest  rates  in  the  South  African
market.
There is, however, one possible consequence which we should be aware of and prepared for. In the
economic literature on inflation targeting, a concern has been expressed that direct inflation targeting
could easily lead to excessive short-term  - and even medium-term  - fluctuation in the nominal (and
BIS Review 127/1999
8
real)  exchange  rate.  This  has  been  a  common  experience  in  inflation  targeting  countries.  There  are
many causes for the observed fluctuations in the exchange rates. In some countries strong fiscal and
structural policy adjustments have given a support to such changes, as well as portfolio shifts. In the
case  of  South  Africa,  the  exchange  rate  is  included  as  an  important  element  in  the  macroeconomic
monetary policy model used by the Reserve Bank. Exchange rate changes come out as a result of the
policy process and not as an independent objective.
Greater  nominal  exchange  rate  changes,  if  these  should  materialize,  is  a  concern  for  Namibia  for
reasons  I  already  have  touched  upon.  However,  these  consequences  are  not  likely  to  be  severe.
Exchange rate fluctuations are nothing new to the financial and commercial community in Namibia. It
should also be emphasized that an inflation target could in itself promote considerable stabilization of
the nominal exchange rate. So far, experiences with inflation targeting regimes indicate that the largest
fluctuations are prompted by a lack of credibility of the regime. As credibility improves, the exchange
rate variability should generally be limited to normal fluctuations in the real exchange rate.
International trends in exchange rate arrangements
As  we  are  entering  a  new  decade,  fixed  exchange  rate  systems  seem  generally  to  be  replaced  with
floating exchange rates. The international foreign exchange market is now dominated by three major
currencies - the US dollar, the Yen and the euro - which are floating against each other. None of these
three  will  have  explicit  inflation  targets  as  the  objective  for  monetary  policy,  but  in  practice  their
orientation  of  monetary  policy  is  one  of  implicit  inflation  targeting.  In  the  US,  for  example,  the
Federal  Reserve  has  made  it  very  clear  that  it  is  its  assessment  of  inflationary  pressures  and  the
outlook for inflation that is the major determinant of any monetary policy adjustments. Although the
European Central Bank has adopted a system of monetary targeting, in practice the monetary policy
regime resembles inflation targeting quite closely. It is more difficult to classify monetary policy in
Japan,  but  the  fact  is  that  inflation  has  been  brought  down  to  very  low  levels.  The  trend  among
industrial countries and emerging economies appears to be the adoption of formal inflation targeting.
Although  it  can  hardly  be  characterised  as  a  trend,  some  countries  still  adopt  a  pegging  of  their
exchange rate and groups of countries are opting for cooperation in a currency area or monetary union.
Alternatives for Namibia
Namibia is indirectly linked to what appears to be the present norm in exchange rate arrangements.
This is because the Namibia dollar is linked to the rand, which is floating and its fluctuations will in
the  future  be  influenced  by  a  monetary  policy  based  on  inflation  targeting.  If  for  some  unknown
reasons  the  present  arrangement  should  be  terminated  some  time  in  the  future,  the  most  relevant
alternative  would  be  that  Namibia  adopts  a  floating  exchange  rate  of  its  own.  It  is  the  Bank  of
Namibia’s view that the benefits of the present membership of the CMA outweigh the costs. A peg
arrangement will also continue to remain the optimum as the country battles with an attempt to reduce
fiscal deficit. For the foreseeable future, therefore, Namibia should not take any initiatives to terminate
its membership.
But there is another alternative. The present arrangement should - to the extent possible - be managed
in such a way that the stability is utilised in promoting the development of the national economy. In
my opinion, Namibia would benefit from evolution of the CMA arrangement toward a full monetary
union.  As  mentioned  earlier,  this  would  require  a  closer  coordination  of  economic  policy  in  the
currency area.  Political structures would have to be established and made operational. The group of
countries that comprise the CMA  could be  extended to  include countries in  our  region  with  similar
economic structures and development priorities.
I am fully aware that the realisation of this objective can only be achieved in a long-term perspective.
In  the  meanwhile,  Namibia’s  benefits  from  the  CMA  arrangement  could  be  increased  by  extended
consultations  between  the  member  countries.  For  example,  the  adoption  of  the  inflation  targeting
framework in South Africa would be a good occasion for extending the discussion on the framework
9
BIS Review 127/1999
itself  and,  later,  on the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  in  response  to  the  monetary  authorities’
expectation of future inflation. Such extended consultations should not be limited to monetary matters,
but apply to other areas of economic policies as well.
In  the  end,  the  achievement  of  monetary  union  will  require  that  countries  in  the  region  commit
themselves  to  confront the  process  of  solving  conflicting  national  interests  in  a  fair  and  democratic
manner.  In  order  to  reach  a  common  objective  of  monetary  stability  and  economic  prosperity,  a
regional solution may also be the route to take for us here in Southern Africa.
Conclusion
In  conclusion,  I  hope  that  my  explanation  of  this  complex  issue  has  raised  your  awareness  of  the
problems  involved  and  given  you  a  basis  for  further  discussions.  It  is  also  my  hope  that  this
explanation will create a better understanding of the actions of the Bank of  Namibia  with  regard  to
monetary policy related matters.
BIS Review 127/1999
10
