Mr Thiessen clarifies some points regarding the economy,
productivity and standard of living in Canada
Remarks by Gordon Thiessen, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to The Fraser Institute in Vancouver,
British Columbia, on 6 December 1999
 Over the past couple of years, there has been considerable debate about productivity and our standard
of living in Canada. For the most part, the discussion of these issues has been useful, but at times it has
been somewhat confusing.
There are so many different facets to productivity and the standard of living that they cannot all be
covered in one speech. My objective today is relatively modest - to try and clarify some of the basic
ideas and measures and to explain where monetary policy fits in this debate.
I will start by focusing on the relationship between the standard of living and productivity. Next, I will
talk  about  some  of  the  different  measures  of  productivity.  I  will  finish  with  a  few  words  on  how
monetary policy can contribute to rising productivity and rising standards of living.
The connection between the standard of living and productivity
A country’s standard of living and its productivity are not the same thing, although over the long run
they are closely linked. This distinction has not always been made clear in some of the commentary I
have seen.
When we speak of a society’s standard of living, we are typically referring to the individual well-being
of  its  citizens.  In  principle,  our  standard  of  living  should  reflect  both  economic  welfare  and  social
(“quality of life”) elements, such as a clean environment, a low crime rate, freedom of expression, etc.
But because the social elements are difficult to assess and to weigh properly, the focus is usually on
measures of our economic well-being.
There are a number of different indicators of our economic welfare. The most common one measures
how much output is produced in our economy, on average, for every man, woman and child in Canada
(real gross domestic product per capita). There are also various measures of real income per person,
before and after taxes (such as gross national income per capita and personal disposable income per
capita).
If we look closely at any one of these measures, it is clear that productivity is a critical factor in the
determination of our standard of living. But it is not the only factor. And when there are changes in
any of the other elements that influence our economic welfare, our standard of living can, for periods
of time, change in ways that appear to be disconnected from trends in the growth of productivity.
As an example, let us look at the simplest yardstick of living standards - output per capita. Clearly, this
is  closely  related  to  the  output  produced  per  worker  -  which  is  the  most  common  measure  of
productivity. But it also depends on the number of people employed relative to the total population.
Through  the  1960s,  1970s  and  1980s,  output  per  capita  in  Canada  increased  more  rapidly  than
productivity. But over the past 10 years, it has fallen behind the growth in productivity.
Canada’s lacklustre standard-of-living performance in the 1990s, which we have heard so much about,
has less to do with slower productivity growth than with the fact that the proportion of the population
that is actually employed has not been increasing. This is in contrast to the rising trend of the previous
three  decades,  when  an  increasing  number  of  women  and  baby  boomers  were  entering  the  labour
market.
1
BIS Review 135/1999
During the 1990s, trends in employment rates in Canada also diverged significantly from those in the
United  States,  contributing  to  an  increased  gap  in  living  standards  between  the  two  countries.  This
weak employment growth in Canada partly reflects the extensive and difficult restructuring that our
private and public sectors had to undergo in a relatively short time compared with the United States,
where the process started earlier and was spread over a longer time period.
If we measure our standard of living in terms of how much of the national income goes to each and
every Canadian, then we are not just talking about the volume of goods and services we produce. We
are also talking about the world prices we receive for what we sell abroad relative to the prices we pay
for imports - that is, our terms of trade.
During  the 1970s,  world  prices  for the  primary  commodities  that  Canada  exports  soared  relative  to
prices  in  general.  And  they  remained  high  through  to  the  early  1980s.  Since  then,  however,
commodity prices have typically been on a downward trend. And, of course, they fell sharply in the
wake  of  the  Asian  crisis  in  1997-98,  before  partly  recovering  in  1999.  We  have  to  take  this  into
account when we examine what happened to our standard of living in the 1990s compared with earlier
decades.
We also need to look at what has happened to personal income after taxes. From the mid-1970s to the
early 1990s, tax revenues did not cover government spending and we were getting deeper and deeper
into  debt.  In  other  words,  we  were  living  beyond  our  means.  During  the  1990s,  taxes  rose  and
government  transfers  and  other  expenditures  were  cut  back  relative  to  the  size  of  our  economy  to
reduce the burden of those large public debts that had accumulated during the previous two decades.
Measures of after-tax income in the 1990s reflect that sobering reality.
So these are some of the factors that have weakened the link between productivity and living standards
in  recent  years.  In  the  long  run,  however,  productivity  is,  without  a  doubt,  the  key  element
contributing to our prosperity. Productivity growth is the foundation for real income growth - it allows
businesses to pay higher real wages and still keep costs down and remain profitable.
There is one important difference between productivity and the other factors that influence our living
standards. The difference is that there are no constraints on productivity and its ability to contribute to
improvements  in  our  welfare  on  a  sustained  basis.  The  other  factors  are  constrained  by  physical,
institutional, and legal limitations. For example, there is a limit to the proportion of the population that
can, and will, engage in economic activity. Similarly, there are limits on the length of the work week.
On the other hand, there does not seem to be an upper bound on capital accumulation over time or on
the growth of human knowledge or on the degree to which both can result in higher productivity.
Productivity: the Canadian record
But I have been talking about productivity without defining it properly or describing how we measure
it.
Measures of productivity tell us how much output we can produce from the effective use of various
inputs  -  skilled  workers,  capital  equipment,  technological  innovation,  and  managerial  and
entrepreneurial  know-how.  Increases  in  productivity  trace  improvements  over  time  in  our  ability  to
boost output by finding new and more efficient ways to use these inputs.
The most commonly used, and best-understood, measure of productivity is labour productivity. It tells
us  how  much  output  is  produced  per  worker  or  per  hour  worked.  Of  course,  labour  productivity  is
affected  by  experience  and  education  as  well  as  by  the  amount  of  capital  equipment  (notably
machinery  and  equipment)  that  is  available  to  workers.  So,  ideally,  we  would  prefer  to  use  the
measure  that  combines  labour  with  all  these  other  inputs  -  what  we  economists  call  total  factor
productivity.
In  practice,  however, it  is  very  difficult to  measure  the  amount  of  physical  capital  in  the  economy.
Also, it is not clear how best to take account of improvements over time in the quality of the various
inputs. And, of course, measurement problems are worse in the services sector, where output is also
notoriously  difficult  to  estimate.  Because  of  these  difficulties,  analysts  usually  focus  on  the  more
BIS Review 135/1999
2
straightforward  measures  of  labour  productivity.  This  has  the  added  advantage  of  being  closer  to
measures of standards of living and more directly comparable across countries.
With  that as  background,  let  me  now  turn  to the  “facts”  on  productivity  in  Canada,  as  best  we  can
measure them, and see how they compare with those for the United States. We should, of course, keep
in mind that the relevant statistics for the two countries, while similar, are not always comparable. For
example,  there  are  differences  in  the  way  some  prices  are  measured,  particularly  for  high-tech
equipment,  as  well  as  differences  in  adjusting  for  changes  in  the  quality  of  inputs.  Moreover,  last
month, the Americans revised their productivity figures upwards, following revisions to their national
accounts going back to 1959. To a significant extent, these revisions reflect a definitional change that
now treats computer software as an investment (instead of a business expense as before), and therefore
as part of the country’s gross domestic product.
These  definitional  changes  probably  make  the  U.S.  productivity  figures  less  comparable  with  ours
than before. So one should be careful not to draw strong conclusions from comparisons that focus too
narrowly on these data. Nevertheless, we can still comment on the broad trends.
Through  the  1950s  and  1960s  and  into  the  early  1970s,  labour  productivity  in  the  overall  business
sector in Canada grew rapidly. It averaged close to 4 per cent per year - somewhat higher than in the
United  States.  From  the  early  1970s  to  the  mid-1990s,  productivity  growth  slowed  sharply  in  both
countries - to less than half that rate. It has picked up in the latter half of the 1990s, especially in the
United  States,  where  an  investment  boom  has  given  U.S.  workers  substantially  greater  amounts  of
capital equipment to work with.
Some commentators have paid particular attention to productivity growth in the manufacturing sector,
even  though  manufacturing  accounts  for  less  than  20  per  cent  of  total  economic  activity  in  both
countries. They believe that the measures for this particular sector are more reliable and more relevant
for international competitiveness.
Since the 1980s, labour productivity in the Canadian manufacturing sector has risen at a significantly
slower  pace  than  in  the  United  States.  To  a  large  extent,  this  stronger  showing  by  the  U.S.
manufacturing sector reflects the remarkable performance of two industries - electrical and electronic
products  and  commercial  and  industrial  machinery.  These  industries  have  benefited  the  most  from
dramatic advances in computer technology, and they have a much larger weight in the U.S. economy
than here in Canada.
As a last comment on the facts about our productivity performance, I would like to stress the need to
distinguish clearly between the rate of growth and the level of productivity. While this may seem self-
evident, there has been a certain confusion on this score in some of the recent public commentary.
The rate of growth in our productivity has certainly slowed since the early 1970s, as it has in  most
industrial countries, for reasons that are still not fully understood. But the level of our productivity has
been  rising,  not  falling.  And  it  cannot  be  blamed  for  the  decline  in  some  measures  of  our  living
standards during the 1990s.
However, there is a significant gap in levels of productivity between Canada and the United States -
ours is below theirs. Since access to ideas and technology is international, we would have expected
that gap to narrow, as it did during the 1950s and 1960s. But it hasn’t. For this to happen, productivity
in Canada has to grow at a faster pace than in the United States. This is the challenge we Canadians
face if we are to bring our standard of living closer to that of our southern neighbours.
How can monetary policy support productivity growth?
Economists  have  not  been  particularly  successful  in  explaining  differences  in  rates  of  productivity
growth over time or across countries. As a result, there is no widespread agreement on what can be
done to bring about faster productivity growth on a sustained basis.
3
BIS Review 135/1999
Nonetheless,  I  would  like  to  make  some  comments  on  what  would  be  helpful in this  regard.  And  I
would certainly emphasize that we should always scrutinize our economic policies for any potential
impact on productivity.
When it comes to monetary policy, there is an increasing international consensus that the contribution
central banks can make to encourage growing productivity and higher standards of living is to provide
a low-inflation environment.
Low and stable inflation reduces uncertainty about future price movements, lowers the incidence of
boom-and-bust cycles in the economy, and helps to keep interest rates down. All of this encourages
investments in equipment and new technology that should lead to productivity gains. When I look at
the impressive productivity record of the United States over the past couple of years, I am struck by
the  exceptionally  large  investments  in  machinery,  equipment,  and  technology  that  have  taken  place
there.
I  know  that  the  depreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar  through  late  1997  and  1998  has  kindled  some
concerns that a weak currency blunts the incentives for export industries to improve productivity. And
that has led to some suggestions that Canadian monetary policy, rather  than targeting  low inflation,
should set targets for the Canadian dollar. Or that perhaps our currency should be pegged to the U.S.
dollar.
It is true that in a period of high, and potentially rising, inflation, a depreciating currency adds to the
confusion  about  what  is  happening  to  relative  prices  and  contributes  to  an  attitude  that  any  cost
increases can be passed on. Thus, businesses may not be as concerned about improving productivity as
a cost-cutting measure. But that is not the case in Canada today - inflation is low and stable, and the
Bank is committed to keeping it that way. Businesses know that they will generally not be able to pass
on cost increases, and so they focus on cost control.
The argument that a depreciated currency tends to discourage productivity improvements also ignores
today’s powerful global competitive forces and the strong drive of businesses to increase their market
share and their profits as well as raise the prices of their stock.
In my judgment, our floating exchange rate works well. It absorbs the impact of, and facilitates the
adjustment to, extraordinary shocks that hit our economy from time to time, such as the sharp drop in
primary  commodity  prices  in  1997-98.  As  part  of  that  adjustment,  the  low  Canadian  dollar  has
encouraged businesses outside the primary industries to expand their presence in foreign markets. But
they can maintain those gains only if they continue to work hard to increase productivity and to ensure
that they stay competitive as our currency regains strength.
Concluding thoughts
To  conclude,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  overemphasize  the  importance  of  rising  productivity  as  the
fundamental  long-term  factor  contributing  to  healthy  economic  performance  and  prosperity.  Over
time, gains in productivity are the basis for growing incomes and rising standards of living.
Compared with the strong performance of the 1950s and 1960s, Canada’s productivity record since the
early 1970s has been rather disappointing. Even though the level of our productivity has been rising,
we have not made any headway in bringing it closer to that of the United States.
Recent developments in Canada, however, offer some promise of improvement. Productivity growth
has  picked  up  in  the  past  couple  of  years  in  response  to  the  cyclical  recovery  and  the  structural
changes  in  our  economy.  And  investment  in  machinery,  equipment,  and  technology  has  increased
sharply in the past three years, much the same way as it did in the United States some years earlier.
But there is no room for complacency. Increases in productivity do not just happen. These days, good
productivity performance seems to be related to changing technology - an openness to adopting it and
a flexibility in adapting to it. That is what we must strive for in Canada.
We will also need to maintain a stable macroeconomic environment that combines low inflation and a
prudent fiscal policy. This will help foster a climate conducive to initiatives in innovation, risk-taking,
BIS Review 135/1999
4
and investment that can contribute to sustained productivity gains. I can assure you that the Bank of
Canada will continue to do its part, by keeping inflation low and stable.
5
BIS Review 135/1999
