Mr Hartmann reflects on recent developments
in international payment systems
Speech delivered by Mr Wendelin Hartmann, Member of the Directorate of the Deutsche Bundesbank
and Chairman of the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems of the G10 central banks, at the
Conference of the Belgian Financial Forum celebrating 25 years of the Belgian Automated Clearing
House  -  CEC  (Concluding  session),  held  at  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  Brussels,  on
23 November 1999.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
The  Belgium  Clearing  House  CEC  (Centre  for  Exchange  and  Clearing)  is  celebrating  its
25th anniversary this year, and today’s speeches have shown that it can justifiably be called a success
story.  The  early  standardisation  and  centralisation  of  retail  payments  in  Belgium  offers  many
advantages from the point of view of cost and efficiency and might well act as a model for solving the
many different problems in cross-border payments in Europe. As the representative of a central bank
of  a  country  with  a  much  less  centralised  payment  settlement,  albeit  with  a  high  degree  of
standardisation, I am, of course, able to envisage other solutions as well.
It is probably no exaggeration to say that today’s conference has fully met its objective. It has given all
those involved in European retail payments - the financial industry as the service provider as well as
the  users  and  regulators  -  the  opportunity  of  presenting  their  different  standpoints,  thus  offering  a
platform for a very interesting and constructive exchange of views.
Considering the current developments in international payments highlighted by preceding speakers I
would  like  to  conclude  that  cross-border  retail  payments  -  including  those  in  the  euro  area,  in
particular - are still in  need  of  considerable improvement  in  terms  of  quality,  efficiency  and  prices.
The  aim  must  be  a  dramatic  reduction  of  the  existing  marked  differences  between  domestic  and
cross-border payment services and their complete elimination in the longer term, so that the motto of
this conference, “one eurozone for retail payments”, can become a reality.
EU directive on cross-border payments
The fact that the European Parliament and Council directive on cross-border payments has now been
implemented in almost all the EU member states means that a major step towards greater transparency
and a better service level has already been taken. However, this measure alone will not be sufficient to
meet  the  requirements  of  an  efficient  single  market  and  the  expectations  of  European  consumers.
Given a single currency and the use of electronic transmission media, the general public naturally does
not  understand  why  a  credit  transfer  from  Brussels  to  Frankfurt  should  be  several  times  more
expensive and take longer than a transfer from Brussels to Antwerp. It was not without reason that the
EU Commission and the European Central Bank (ECB), independently of each other, have once again
stressed the need for improvements. As far as I can see, there has already been distinct progress in the
time it takes for a transfer between euro countries. But little has happened in terms of pricing. What
are affected members of the public to think if - as in a recent case - they have to pay a fee of EUR25
for a transfer of EUR75 from Germany to Austria? However, I personally obtained some weeks ago
the  double  amount  of cash  in  Austria  by  drawing  on  my  domestic account  -  which,  of  course,  also
involved  a  non-cash  transaction  -  and  this  “only”  cost  EUR4  owing  to  the  high  degree  of
standardisation. The free negotiation of prices between the customer and the bank certainly represents
one of the key areas of free competition, but if the result is out of proportion to the service provided,
then - as past experience has shown - new operators or procedures tend to emerge - in Europe possibly
in the form of cross-border cash transports or the increasing use of credit cards - which is unlikely to
1
BIS Review 129/1999
be  in  the  interest  of  either  the  banking  industry  or  of  consumers.  There  are  important  reasons  for
adjusting the prices of cross-border transfers very rapidly to those of the efficient domestic procedures.
What is required in this connection is to work towards further improvements on the technical side.
Standardisation
The major importance of standardisation in Europe has therefore, in my view, been rightly highlighted
in the report published by the ECB in September of this year. A Europe-wide linking of the national
payment  systems  has  not  yet  been  reached.  So  far,  national  standards  are  only  compatible  for  the
provision  of  cash  through  automatic  teller  machines  using  the  ec-card,  but  not  for  credit  transfers.
Owing to the differing standards, foreign payments are mostly still transferred in systems which are
separate from domestic payment systems and are levied with special charges, in some cases without
the consent of the originator. A complete conversion towards unseparated processing in each domestic
payment  system  is  not  always  possible  and  also  quite  expensive  owing  to  the  many  possible
combinations.  A  harmonisation  in  terms  of  cost,  however,  requires  a  very  close  Europe-wide
cooperation.  Here,  the  solution  is  to  be  found  not  so  much  in  the  development  of  new  (additional)
standards  as  in  the  general  implementation  and  application  of  standards  such  as  those  already
developed  by  the  “European  Committee  for  Banking  Standards  (ECBS)”  (the  International  Bank
Account Number (IBAN) and the International Payment Instruction (IPI), for example).
The  shortcomings  of  cross-border  payments  in  terms  of  efficiency  and  costs  become  particularly
evident, of course, in the processing of credit transfers within the euro area. After all, the use of the
single currency means that national boundaries in payment systems  should  no  longer play  any  role.
From  2002,  when  the  national  banknotes  and  coins  will  be  replaced  by  the  new  currency,  this
discrepancy will become even more obvious. Even so, the problem also has a dimension which goes
beyond  Europe,  since  cross-border  payments  are  on  a  rising  tendency  worldwide  in  the  wake  of
globalisation. Therefore, at the end of this conference, allow me in my capacity as the chairman of the
“Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS)” of the G10 central banks to cast a glance
beyond Europe’s frontiers.
Activities of the CPSS
The CPSS is a platform of the G10 central banks for the monitoring and analysis of trends in domestic
and cross-border payment and settlement systems and for coordinating their oversight function. The
focus of the committee’s activities has always been on large-value payment systems. As a result of the
major transactions executed through these systems, the credit and liquidity risks associated with the
payments  and  the  settlement  can  potentially  lead  to  cross-system  problems  which  jeopardize  the
stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  Moreover,  efficient  and  secure  large-value  payment
systems are indispensable for a functioning money market and hence ultimately also for an efficient
implementation of monetary policy measures. The CPSS has therefore been advocating the reduction
of risks in payment and settlement systems for years. Examples of this are the minimum standards for
the  design  and  operation  of  cross-border  and  multi-currency  netting  and  settlement  schemes,  often
called  the  Lamfalussy  criteria,  and  studies  on  the  settlement  risk  of  foreign  exchange  transactions.
Moreover, the committee is currently working on the formulation of “Core principles for systemically
important payment systems” which are intended to contribute to a reduction of risk, not only at the
G10 level but also worldwide.
Why now does the CPSS also concern itself with questions of retail payment systems where, owing to
the  lower  transactions,  considerations  of  risk  are  of  minor  importance?  Well,  the  central  banks
perceive  their  responsibility  in  this  area  too  and  they  do  so  within  their  general  role  as  overseer  in
payments.  For  that  reason,  the  CPSS  has  intensified  its  activities  in  the  area  of  retail  payments  in
recent  years  -  and,  not  least  in  view  of  the  rapid  developments,  particularly  in  the  area  of  new
electronic payment instruments, what is known as “electronic money”.
BIS Review 129/1999
2
Electronic money
“Electronic money” can normally be divided into card money and network money. In the case of card
money,  electronic  value  units  are  being  stored  on  chip  cards,  which  are  known  as  prepaid-cards  or
electronic  purses.  It  is  a  new  electronic  payment  instrument  which  is  mainly  designed  for  retail
payments  and  is  intended  to  replace  cash  transactions  when  purchasing  lower-priced  goods  and
services, for example, from vending machines. Besides this, another form, which is known as network
money,  has  developed.  Here,  the  value  units  stored  on  chip  cards  or  hard  disks  are  used  to  make
electronic payments via computer networks such as the Internet. Although the development of network
money  is  currently  still  at  an  early  stage,  the  increasing  importance  of  the  Internet  and  thus  of
electronic commerce will undoubtedly contribute to a rapid spread of those products in the future.
The central banks are affected in two ways by the development of electronic money. First, this new
instrument has the potential to replace cash and may have an impact on the demand for money and its
velocity of circulation. Implications for monetary policy and seignorage cannot therefore be ruled out.
Second, the central banks have the task of maintaining the integrity of payments. They therefore have
to examine the question of the technical security of these new instruments as critically as the reliability
and financial integrity of the issuers of electronic units of value. The extensive analyses conducted by
the  G10  central  banks  were  incorporated  into  two  reports  published  in  August  and  October  1996,
respectively: “Security of electronic money” and “Implications for central banks of the development of
electronic money”. In contrast to the EMU, where the central banks issued the recommendation that
the right of issuing electronic money should be restricted to credit institutions, the G10 central banks
did not propose a binding regulatory framework for the time being. But they will - as at the EU level -
continue to monitor developments in this area very closely in the future in order to be able to initiate
any appropriate measures that are necessary.
In the EU, the directive on the taking-up, the pursuit and the prudential supervision of the business of
electronic money institutions, which was drawn up some time ago, under which e-money institutions
in  principle  become  credit  institutions,  has  unfortunately  still  not  been  adopted  by  the  ECOFIN
Council.  At  the  urgent  request  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  the  draft  forwarded  by  the
Commission to the Council has not been approved, since it would mean that in line with the waiver in
Article 7 issuers of e-money would not fall within the definition of “credit institution” under certain
conditions  and  would  therefore  be  exempted  from  banking  supervision.  This  would  result,  for
example,  in  these  issuers  of  e-money  not  being  subject  to  minimum  reserve  requirements  or  the
redeemability requirement, which would, in turn, impede a level playing field among the issuers - in
this instance at the expense of the credit institutions. Moreover, the draft directive does not contain a
clear indication that the issuer of e-money has to guarantee the redemption of electronic money in all
cases at par value. Owing to the enormous potential of this new form of money, the ECB has to ensure
from the outset that its monetary policy responsibility will not be jeopardized by developments outside
its  sphere  of  influence.  These  factors  have  to  be  given  at  least  equal  weight  in  considering  the
promotion  of  e-commerce  as  intended  by  the  EU  Commission.  In  my  view,  this  is  also  necessary,
since correspondingly stricter  regulations have  already  been  legislated  in a  number  of  EU countries
(such as Germany).
Comparative study on retail payments
To gain a better understanding of the most recent general developments and trends beyond issues of
electronic money, the CPSS commissioned a working group to study retail payments. The first step
was a comparative study on retail payments in the G10 countries and Australia, which was published
in September 1999.1 The report contains a description and analysis of various payment instruments,
especially from the point of view of the end-users. Furthermore, a cross-country comparison was made
1 Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems: “Retail payments in selected countries: a comparative study”; Bank for
International Settlements, Basel, September 1999.
3
BIS Review 129/1999
on  the  use  of  the  individual  instruments  and  the  relevant  expected  trends.  Finally,  it  included  a
description of technical innovations in electronic retail payments. The outcome of the study shows that
cash  transactions  continue  to  play  a  significant  role  in  all  countries  studied,  but  that  the  use  of  the
individual payment instruments in non-cash payments varies greatly from one country to another. In
many European countries and in Japan, the credit transfer is still the most frequently used instrument,
whereas  Australia,  the  United  States,  Canada  and  a  few  European  countries  tend  to  be  “cheque
countries”.
A survey on the clearing and settlement systems for retail payments is planned as a follow-up. Both
analyses are ultimately to form the basis for a debate on possible policy objectives of the G10 central
banks in retail payment systems.
Potential forms of participation by the central banks
As  already  mentioned,  the  described  activities  concern  the  central  banks’  role  in  their  oversight  of
private systems in which they exert an influence on an efficient and secure design of retail payments.
This function is normally exercised either in cooperation with the banking industry or as a sovereign
function based on a legal mandate.
The fundamental issues which are examined by the G10 central banks include, first and foremost, the
degree of the central banks’ participation in retail payment systems. This currently varies very widely
among the central banks of the individual countries. All central banks perform the oversight function,
but, beyond this, a number of other, more active forms of participation, are theoretically feasible.
For  example,  central  banks  can  influence  the  standardisation  of  retail  payments  processing  at  the
national  or  international  level  by  actively  participating  in  the  banking  industry’s  standardisation
committees, without setting unilateral standards on their part. The analysis of the situation in Europe
shows  that  in  the  long  run,  competition  with  differing  standards  is  detrimental  to  all  the  parties
involved,  since the interoperability  and  straight-through  processing  are  impeded,  thus  giving  rise  to
high  and  avoidable  costs.  Here,  central  banks  regard  themselves  as  mediators  promoting  and
accelerating  the  process  of  standardisation.  The  Eurosystem’s  central  banks  have  positioned
themselves precisely in this way. They wish to be seen, above all, as a catalyst for improvements in
cross-border retail payments; it is only if the market participants were not to perform their role that
they would have to think about a broader operational involvement.
A major contribution which the central banks are already making is that of taking on settlement for
private  clearing  facilities  of  the  banking  industry.  At  the  G10  level,  all  central  banks  provide  such
settlement  facilities;  in  other  words,  the  balances  derived  from  the  interbank  settlement  of  retail
payments  are  offset  via  the  respective  RTGS  systems  and/or  accounts  with  the  central  banks.  This
helps to minimise risks, since private settlement agents always bear a default risk. Nevertheless, this
only  requires  a  low  degree  of  operational  commitment  on  the  part  of  the  central  banks,  since  the
settlement of files containing retail payments may be executed as a sum total in large-value payment
transactions.
Necessity of private initiatives
I  hope  that  I  have  been  able  to  give  you  an  insight  into  the  intentions  and  various  activities  of  the
European and G10 central banks in the field of national and cross-border retail payments. However,
we  should  keep  in  mind  that  it  is  primarily  the  task  of  the  private  sector  to  eliminate  the  current
shortcomings  in  cross-border  retail  payments,  which  are  rightly  criticised  in  my  view.  Essentially,
what the central banks can do is to draw attention to undesirable developments, urge improvements
and offer their assistance for this. Torn between the consumers’ expectations of convenient and low-
cost  payment  facilities  and  the  banking  industry’s  interests,  the  central  banks  should,  in  my  view,
continue  to  assume  mainly  a  role  as  mediator  and  catalyst.  Why  should  the  central  banks  and  the
banking industry not be able to master this agenda 2000 together to the benefit of all those involved?
At all events, initial successful efforts, such as those in standardisation, are under way. However, they
BIS Review 129/1999
4
must be implemented at the national level as soon as possible and be reflected very soon and lastingly
in adequate prices for cross-border transfers.
5
BIS Review 129/1999
