Mr Meyer gives a central banker’s view from Switzerland
Speech given by Mr Hans Meyer, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at
the Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce, in New York on 1 October 1999.
 Environment
The Swiss will remember the last few years  as  a  time  of  important economic  and  social  challenges
with mixed feelings.
If  one  attempts  to  put  events  into  a  larger  context,  the  first  thing  that  comes  to  mind  is  that  in  the
course of time, there have always been periods of intense change which were followed by calmer ones.
Such  fluctuations  can  occur  because  different  events,  with  their  positive  or  negative  consequences,
may have a more or less coincidental cumulative effect. As a rule, however, there is a remarkable logic
behind the way events unfold.
All things considered, it appears to be entirely logical that at the close of this century, we should have
reached an economic and social turning point. An era is coming to an end, which – in a broad sense –
we still associate with the post-war period.
During this period, our economic development was characterised by remarkably steady real growth.
Especially  during  the  first  decades  following  the  Second  World  War,  pent-up  demand  created
extraordinary dynamism. Economic output improved continuously not only  in  terms  of  quantity  but
also of quality, leading to unprecedented growth as well as more widespread prosperity.
In the course of this development, the public sector witnessed a remarkable expansion. Here too, an
apparent backlog in demand had to be satisfied. Subsequently, developments became more complex.
In  the  face  of  increasingly  scarce  resources,  the  question  arose  as  to  what  the  optimal  role  of
government should be in terms of type, scope and implementation of its activities.
There  is  obviously  also  a  dark  side  to  this  briefly  outlined  development.  The  pace  of  activities
increasingly overwhelmed many contemporaries and thus led to new tensions. The social fabric has
become less cohesive. Relations between individuals are more difficult. Environmental pollution is a
problem  which  we  tend  to  repress.  Finally,  we  have  come  to  realise  that  an  increasing  economic
interdependence between individual countries entails opportunities as well as risks.
In short, we are today confronted with problems of a mature society. It is perhaps a small comfort, but
nevertheless important, to point out that we find ourselves in a similar position as our neighbours and
other comparable industrial states. Satisfaction with what has been achieved makes one forget all too
easily what was needed to advance so far and what will be needed to maintain – if not increase – this
level of prosperity. In the interests of innovation, flexibility and productivity, further adjustments are
imperative.  They  must,  however,  take  place  in  a  manner  that  will  not  put  at  risk  social  cohesion.
Demands should be made on the individual, but they should not be excessive.
The goal of our common effort is a development which assures security, freedom and general welfare
in a balanced way. In the economic area, we must create the human and material conditions to promote
appropriate growth, while keeping unemployment and inflation low. With regard to the human factor,
the  necessary  qualification  must  be  coupled  with  an  adequate  motivation.  This  motivation  can  be
enhanced by an appropriate macroeconomic environment.
A gradual development of economic and social activities seems appropriate, since this is the only way
to ensure the necessary identification of individuals with the community.
1
BIS Review 106/1999
Economic situation
In  the  course  of  this  year,  prospects  for  economic  recovery  in  Switzerland  have  been  improving,
bringing  to  an  end  an  unusually  long  period  of  stagnation.  The  human  and  material  costs  of  this
stagnation are of course regrettable.
The causes for this period of stagnation are manifold. First, one has to bear in mind that it followed
years  of  marked  expansion.  Other,  more  general  reasons  are  the  consequences  of  our  past  labour
market policy, which helped to maintain existing structures, as well as of insufficient competition in
the domestic economy. Last but not least, an already high level of achievement made it increasingly
difficult to provide the necessary punch for change.
The need for structural changes as well as the necessity to tackle remaining problems from the past –
notably in the construction sector, in agriculture and tourism – along with the repercussions of a weak
global economy, have led to a temporary decline in growth.
A  sustained  process  of  adjustment,  but  also  favourable  monetary  conditions  have  subsequently
contributed  to  improve  prospects.  However,  the  impetus  for  take-off  inevitably  had  to  come  from
outside.
Our  economic  problems  were,  and  still  are,  neither  confined  to  a  sector  nor  a  region.  The  line
separating  positive  and  negative  developments  runs  right  across  the  economic  landscape.  It  is  still
quality  of  performance,  characterised  by  innovation,  flexibility  and  productivity,  which  determines
success.
Consolidating  public  finances  remains  important.  Furthermore,  efforts  to  promote  competition  must
continue even though considerable progress has already been made. In this context, we have to realize
that in many quarters, people are obviously sceptical about the concept of competition. The argument
has  not  yet  sunk  in  sufficiently  that  when  it  comes  to  allocating  resources,  the  free  play  of  market
forces  is  well  suited  to  achieve  prosperity  and  economic  welfare.  This,  however,  is  only  possible
within a framework of general economic stability.
One  of  the  most  gratifying  recent  developments  is  a  steady  decline  of  unemployment.  Since
imbalances  in  the  labour  market  continue  to  exist,  we  must  foster  both  know-how  and  motivation.
Sufficiently flexible working conditions and greater mobility are also essential.
Finally,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  securing  the  right  macroeconomic  environment  and  its
exploitation by people participating in the economy is an ongoing challenge. Consequently, there are
no quick, simple or cheap solutions for the problems confronting us.
Monetary policy
The Swiss National Bank has the task of conducting a monetary policy in the interests of the country
as  a  whole.  It  must  contribute  to  creating  a  framework  which  promotes  a  balanced  economic
development, meaning adequate real growth, low unemployment and modest inflation.
Ensuring price stability is the primary goal of monetary policy. Our definition of price stability is a
consumer  price  index  below  2%. This is  obviously  not  an  end  in itself,  but  a  means  to  an  end.  An
economic system which relies on the forces of the free market must be able to count on price stability
for its smooth functioning. In particular, price stability prevents undesirable distortions in the social
area.
Economic teaching and experience leave no doubt as to the connection between the money supply and
price stability. As economists tend to say: money matters. Whether the supply of money is adequate
depends on its relation to real economic development. Monetary policy is therefore able to make its
best possible  contribution  if it succeeds in  bringing  the  supply  of  money  basically  in  line  with  real
growth in the long term.
Three main problems have to be contended with in the conduct of monetary policy: the difficulty of
assessing  the  economic  situation,  the  limited  knowledge  of  the  way  a  modern  economy  works  and
BIS Review 106/1999
2
foreign  influences,  over  which  we  have  little  control.  While  knowing  that  these  uncertainties  exist
should not paralyse our ability to make decisions, it should nevertheless lead us to exercise appropriate
restraint.  Both  the  basic  interdependencies  previously  mentioned  and  current  events,  which  are
reflected in the relevant economic indicators, must be factors influencing the decision-making process.
As a small and open economy, Switzerland is highly integrated in international economic relations. By
participating in international cooperation, the Swiss National Bank contributes to creating favourable
conditions for an international division of labour. In this context, stable currency relations are crucial.
Such  relations  are  ultimately  a  result  of  sustained  convergence  of  sound  economic  policies
implemented by individual countries.
With  an  increasing  international  integration  of  individual  economies,  the  awareness  of  mutual
dependence has also grown. Accordingly, efforts to coordinate the behaviour of individual countries in
the field of economic policy have been reinforced. In this context, it is important to realise that  the
stability  of  international  economic  and  monetary  relations  is  not  primarily  a  matter  of  institutional
regulations. What is of the essence is the conduct of individual countries.
These considerations are also relevant for an assessment of the European Monetary Union. Creating
the  Union  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  meant  a  big  step  forward  for  the  process  of  European
integration.  With  the  European  Monetary  Union,  the  participating  Western  European  countries  are
trying to put their currency relations on a new footing in line with the changed environment.
If the European Monetary Union can be implemented according to plan, this will vastly improve the
preconditions for a balanced economic development in Europe. Freedom of movement for persons will
be facilitated along with the free flow of goods, services and capital. After what has been said, all will
depend  on  whether  the  participating  countries  can  muster  the  discipline  indispensable  for  sustained
and convergent stability-oriented policies.
In  the  context  of  the  run-up  to  monetary  union,  significant  progress  has  been  made  in  individual
countries.  Inflation  has been  brought  under  control.  Budgets  have  been  brought  in  line  with  lasting
effect. Both achievements did not fail to have a positive impact on the development of interest rates.
In view of the challenges that lie ahead, one must bear in mind that with the fixing of exchange rates,
individual  countries  have  forfeited  an  element  of  flexibility.  In  the  past,  imbalances  in  economic
development  were  compensated  with  flexible  exchange  rates.  Losing  this  possibility  is  significant,
because many countries already lack the capacity to adjust.
We  note  with  satisfaction  that  the  monetary  concepts  of  the  European  Central  Bank  are  largely  in
conformity with our own. The chances are thus good that this will result in a sustained convergence of
stability-oriented  policies  and,  as  a  consequence,  basically  stable  exchange  relations  between
Switzerland and the new European currency area. Should, however, difficulties arise when the present
goals are implemented, we would have to expect some turbulence. This would be likely to result in an
upward  pressure  on  the  Swiss  franc.  The  National  Bank  would,  of  course,  have  the  possibility  of
relaxing monetary policy to counteract such a trend. This might, however, conflict with our policy’s
orientation towards stability.
The basic considerations on monetary policy outlined here also apply if we look beyond the European
environment.
The  crisis-like  developments  in  East  Asia,  Russia  and  Latin  America  may  have  their  characteristic
features in individual cases. However, they also give rise to a number of comments of a more general
nature.
Imbalances in economic development, weak financial systems and insufficient supervision of financial
markets  are  merely  symptoms  of  deeper-lying  causes.  In  any  case,  most  recent  experiences  tend  to
confirm  the  opinion  that  a  sustained  economic  development  is  only  possible  on  the  basis  of  social
coherence.  Individual  countries  themselves  bear  the  responsibility  for  creating  this  stability.  In  the
long run, outside help can only be meaningful if it is granted as help towards self-help.
These remarks are equally relevant for assessing the activity of the International Monetary Fund. The
chief  task  of  this  important  institution  in  the  area  of  international  monetary  policy  is  advising  its
3
BIS Review 106/1999
members in the conduct of economic policy. This is designed to create favourable preconditions for a
positive development of international monetary relations and, of course, also the world economy. The
second task  is  to  provide  credit facilities  in  order to  support  the  necessary  processes of  adjustment.
Since its inception, the International Monetary Fund has thus held an intermediate position between
emphasising the self-responsibility of a country and granting adjustment aid. Its task is not made any
easier by the fact that it has no possibility of enforcing recommendations.
Whenever difficulties arise in shaping international monetary relations, a call is made for introducing
fundamental reforms. Experience has taught us, however, that bold visions hardly ever have a chance
of being realised. It seems to make more sense to implement what has been recognised as appropriate
in small, purposeful steps.
Reform of the monetary constitution
A  monetary  constitution  comprises  all  regulations  concerning  the  currency  on  a  constitutional  and
statutory level. Our present monetary constitution still dates largely from the time of the establishment
of the Swiss National Bank almost a hundred years ago. We are currently in the process of adapting it
to modern requirements. These endeavours bear a direct relation to the reform of our fundamental law,
the Federal Constitution, which was recently brought to an end.
A  central  issue  of  these  reform  efforts,  to  which  I  shall  restrict  myself  in  the  following  remarks,
concerns the severance of the Swiss franc’s link to gold. In actual practice, this link has been outdated
for  decades.  It  is,  moreover,  in  direct  contradiction  to  our  commitments  as  a  member  of  the
International Monetary Fund. With the severance of the gold link, we will be free to act according to
our own discretion with respect to the evaluation and utilisation of our  gold  holdings. The  question
therefore arises how to use this freedom of action.
In  attempting  to  answer  this  question,  one  must  bear  in  mind  that  monetary  reserves  are  of  course
indispensable for a central bank in fulfilling its tasks. This is particularly true in the case of a small,
open  economy  with  a  significant  financial  sector.  Currency  reserves  consist  primarily  of  freely
disposable foreign exchange reserves and of gold holdings.
In  retrospect,  we  have  to  remember  that  our  freely  disposable  foreign  exchange  reserves  have
undergone  a  substantial  increase,  particularly  after  the  transition  to  freely  floating  exchange  rates  a
quarter  of  a  century  ago.  At  the  beginning  of  the  nineties,  we  therefore  decided  to  limit  future
expansion  to  the  extent  of  nominal  economic  growth.  By  international  standards,  we  thus  have  a
comfortable level of reserves.
As regards gold holdings, it must be decided what proportion will still be required for monetary policy
purposes in future or, conversely, what proportion should become available for other public uses. This
is  basically  a  question  of  how  an important  part  of  our  national  wealth  is  to  be  usefully  employed.
Both fundamental considerations and a comparison with other countries may be helpful. However, in
the  final  analysis  there  is  a  discretionary  decision  to  take.  We  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it
would be appropriate to maintain around half of today’s gold holdings of approximately 2,600 tons as
currency reserves.
In principle, we are in favour of removing the other half of this gold from our balance sheet. However,
we are willing to accept that, in a broader perspective, it may not be appropriate to outsource. In such a
case, the gold holdings would have to be managed according to special criteria by external specialists
under the responsibility of the National Bank.
We have of course always been fully aware that any discussion of these problems is a sensitive issue.
In consideration of the necessary legal adjustments on a constitutional and statutory level, we had no
other choice but to lay bare the situation in detail.
I  should  like  to  underline  once  more  that  we  do  not  underestimate  the  significance  of  abundant
currency reserves. The sky, however, cannot be the limit. It will be in our own interest to exercise the
necessary  diligence  when  converting  part  of  our  gold  holdings  into  interest-bearing  assets.  This
includes close contacts with institutions with which we entertain friendly relations.
BIS Review 106/1999
4
Financial centre
Let me conclude with a few reflections on Switzerland as a financial centre.
A financial centre is by definition the location in which the various financial market players combine
their  efforts.  Conforming  to  more  recent  developments,  we  no longer  talk  about  regional  centres  in
Switzerland. We rather refer to the Swiss financial centre. In the forefront are of course activities of
banks  and  insurance  companies. To these  must  be  added  a  growing  number  of  further  providers  of
financial  services.  In  keeping  with  international  developments,  the  dividing  lines  are  gradually
becoming blurred.
The decisive criteria for assessing the substance of a financial centre are integrity, stability and quality.
These depend on various factors of a human and material nature.
On  a  human  level,  these  factors  are  know-how  and  mentality.  Integrity,  loyalty,  reliability  and  a
willingness to serve must go hand in hand with specialist knowledge as well as urbanity and a gift for
languages. Our social environment and our educational system basically provide a good starting point.
Nevertheless, gaps in specialised training and international experience are still cause for complaint.
On a material level, the primary factors are political and economic stability. Both are guaranteed to a
high degree. It cannot be overlooked, however, that other countries have made considerable progress
in this respect.
In the context of the legal order, banking secrecy is currently at the centre of attention. Applying it is,
and remains, a tightrope walk. What is basically undisputed is an adequate protection of the private
sphere. This should not, however, lead to such protection being exploited for dubious business deals.
In  an  international  context,  valid  law  takes  account  of  this  problem  in  the  form  of  regulations  on
mutual  judicial  assistance  in  criminal  matters,  which  include  insider  transactions  and  money
laundering. One way or another, it cannot be overlooked that legal regulations must be supported by
an  appropriate  business  mentality.  Problems  in  the  grey  area  between  business  as  usual  and
unlawfulness can also affect the integrity of a financial centre.
The  relevant  environment  is,  of  course,  also  influenced  by  fiscal  regulations.  Here,  too,  one  might
refer to a tightrope walk. The implications of subjecting financial transactions to fiscal charges and of
spreading  the  tax  burden  evenly  must  be  weighed  against  each  other.  Aside  from  economic  and
operational efficiency, exercising political discretion is indispensable. At the same time, it is clear that
growing international involvement restricts the room for manoeuvre.
More recently, endeavours by the European Union to close loopholes by taxing interest earnings on
capital invested in countries other than the tax domicile have gained attention. Under discussion is a
choice between a withholding tax and a reporting obligation. At this juncture, a consensus within the
EU is not yet foreseeable. Clearly, a convincing solution would have to include all major financial as
well as off-shore centres. If that becomes possible, we would hardly be able to refuse to cooperate in
the field  of  withholding  tax.  In  the  event of  a  comprehensive  solution, the effects  should  be  within
acceptable limits from a general economic perspective.
Finally, attention must be drawn to the organisational and technical infrastructure as an element of the
general  environment.  In  this  respect,  conditions  in  Switzerland  are  favourable.  Technologically
advanced  and  in  some  areas  pioneering  solutions  guarantee  quick,  safe  and  cost-effective  business
transactions. This is of great value for the integrity, stability and quality of the financial centre even if
the respective activities are largely hidden from the public eye.
Apart from the relevant factors already mentioned, the development of financial transactions will be
influenced to a considerable degree by changing customer needs and technological innovations.
As  regards  customer  needs,  changes  in  savings  and  investment  habits  of  private  and  institutional
customers  must  be  pointed  out.  To  this  must  be  added  the  changing  financing  requirements  and
practices of enterprises. Such changes depend on economic developments, but also on trends of which
it is difficult to say if they will prove to be of lasting influence.
5
BIS Review 106/1999
In  the  technological  field,  the  primary  concern  is  continued  development  in  data  processing  and
communications.  These  have  implications  for  the  design  of  products,  the  conduct  of  business,
international  integration  and  the  development  of  costs  and  prices.  The  resulting  consequences,  for
example for the ideal size of an enterprise, are a matter of controversy.
As  has  already  been  pointed  out,  the  dividing  lines  between  individual  suppliers  are  becoming
increasingly  blurred.  Moreover,  new  suppliers,  notably  among  wholesale  distributors  and  in  the
consumer goods industry, are pressing into the financial area.
As  regards  retail  banking,  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  population  of  a  highly  developed  industrial
country  will  still  require  financial  services  in  the  future.  Straightforward  transactions  tied  to  a
particular  location  will  be  of  primary  importance.  These  should  be  carried  out  rapidly,  reliably  and
cost-effectively. For economic and technological reasons, there will be an increase in providers, and
this, in turn, will strengthen competition.
Trading  and  advisory  services  with  their  strong  international  orientation  have  shown  an  impressive
development in recent years. Experience has been that this is a line of business which not only offers
opportunities, but also involves considerable risks and is very much centred on people. It seems quite
remarkable that all major banks in industrial countries are currently concerned with their strategy in
this field.
The future development in portfolio management is of particular significance to us. This is the core
business of the Swiss financial industry. Further progress will depend in large measure on what the
outlined background conditions will look like in future. In this context, it is the overall situation that
counts rather than conditions in a certain area.
Outlook
At  the  turn  of  the  century,  Switzerland  is  economically  and  socially  in  good  condition.  Following
years  of  frequently  painful  adjustments  to  a  changing  environment,  preconditions  for  a  balanced
development are favourable. The quality and scope of these adjustments bear witness to the flexibility
of our economy and society. The years ahead will continue to be characterised by constant change. It
is therefore important to remain vigilant. On the basis of overall economic as well as social stability,
innovative  power  and  flexibility  must  be  preserved.  In  a  mature society,  this represents  a  particular
challenge.
By  keeping  our  own  house  in  order,  we  also  make  the  best  possible  contribution  to  international
solidarity. In the narrower European context, our bilateral agreements with the European Union will
form  a  good  basis  for  cooperation  in  the  coming  years.  In  Europe  and  beyond,  Switzerland
traditionally has an extensive network of international relations which we shall continue to cultivate in
the  future.  As  far  as  these  relations  are  of  a  political  nature,  an  appropriate  social  consensus  is
necessary for doing so.
The further development of our financial centre will depend on whether we succeed in continuing to
guarantee the attributes mentioned earlier on: integrity, stability and quality. This requires efforts both
on  an  individual  and  on  an  overall  economic  level.  A  sustained  commitment  in  both  spheres  will
permit existing opportunities to be used.
BIS Review 106/1999
6
