Mr George looks at past, present and future challenges
 for the City of London
Speech given by Mr Eddie George, Governor of the Bank of England, at a City University Conference
at the International Maritime Organisation in London 7 December 1999.
 Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
As we approach the end of every year we naturally tend to look back at the past, to take stock, and to
look  forward  to  the  challenges  ahead.  The  temptation  to  do  that  this  year  on  the  brink  of  the  new
Millennium, is almost irresistible.
But take courage - I will at least try not to dwell upon the historical origins of the City this morning.
Instead, I will start from where we are now - which is a good place to start because by and large the
City is in pretty good shape.
It is, of course, the hub of the financial and business services industry of this country, which, broadly
defined  to  include  shipping  and  real  estate  as  well  as  other  forms  of  intermediation,  and  the
accountancy  and  legal  professions,  contributes  directly  something  like  a  quarter  of  total  national
output - with some 7-8% coming from the financial services sector alone.
And, whatever the periodic outcry whenever something goes wrong - as it will from time to time - the
demand for these services does not of course exist in a vacuum; it exists because of the very positive
contribution  that  the  business  services  sectors,  including  financial  services,  make  to  growth  and
employment and rising living standards in the wider economy. That is true nationally, but it is equally
true  in  a  global  context.  Indeed  the  unique  characteristic  of  the  City  is  its  role  as  the  predominant
international  financial  centre.  It  accounts  for  a  fifth  of  all  international  cross-border  lending,  for
example;  for  a  third  of  global  turnover  in  foreign  exchange  and  OTC  derivatives,  and  as  much  as
two-thirds  of  issuance  and  secondary  trading  in  eurobonds,  or  of  global  turnover  in  international
equities, with more foreign firms listed on the LSE than on any other exchange. And London has a
near-monopoly in exchange-traded short-term euro interest rate derivatives.
I will not labour the point further, Mr Chairman. Despite - or perhaps driven by - a continuous stream
of  shocks  and  competitive  challenges,  the  City  has  in  fact  gone  from  strength  to  strength,  most
recently  coming  through  the  global  financial  turbulence  of  the  last  couple  of  years  as  well  as  the
advent of the euro at least as strong as before.
It is perhaps worth asking why the City is as strong as it is.
Certainly  it  does  have  to  do  partly  with  history.  The  emergence  of  the  City  owed  a  good  deal  to
Britain’s earlier position as the world’s leading industrial and trading nation and international power.
But that does not explain its continuing strength. To explain that there are lots of factors one might
point to - the English language, the European time zone, the sheer momentum  of  the  City’s critical
mass,  supported  by  the  availability  of  a  professionally-qualified  and  technically-skilled  work  force
which  gives  the  City  remarkable  resilience  and  flexibility,  aspects  of  our  commercial  and  physical
infrastructure, and so on. All of these factors are certainly relevant factors.
But if I had to identify one factor above all that helped to explain the continuing phenomenon of the
City,  it  would  be  what  I  can  only  rather  vaguely  describe  as  the  surrounding  ethos  of  a  free,
competitive, market place.
I do not at all mean by that that the City is a lawless jungle where anything goes! In fact  quite the
reverse. You cannot have an effective competitive market without reasonably clear rules of the game,
both to protect society as a whole from disruption and to retain the confidence of both the providers
and  users  of  the  market  by  ensuring  that  they  know  what  is  expected  of  them  and  what  they  can
1
BIS Review 134/1999
reasonably  expect  of  others.  The  evolving  legal  and  regulatory  framework  in  this  country,  together
with  the  self-regulatory  disciplines  applied  by  the  relevant  market  organisations  and  professional
bodies have been - and remain - a vitally important asset for the City in this context.
It is not just the structure of these arrangements but their substance and the manner of application of
the rules of the game that matters.
It is all too easy to err on either side. The rules may be so loosely drawn that market participants and
market users lose confidence and go elsewhere; or they may be so tightly drawn that they discourage
competition and inhibit innovation. Equally, the actual, as distinct from the intended, balance between
social protection and fairness on the one hand, and competition on the other, may be affected by the
approach adopted by the various arbitrators. Theirs is  a  difficult job  at the  best  of times.  We’ve  all
seen matches ruined by either unduly lax or unduly officious refereeing. But ultimately the character
of the game depends upon the self-discipline, as well as the skills, of the players.
In general I believe that we in this country have been well served in these respects. There has been
relatively little systemic disturbance in recent years, and what there has been has required relatively
modest  commitment  of  public  funds.  There  have,  it  is  true,  been  periodic  concerns  about  business
behaviour. Where these have been general concerns - often reflecting the rapid evolution of the market
place or rising public expectations - they have mostly been addressed by reinforcing the rules of the
game. Or where they have reflected the behaviour of individual firms  or  their  employees they  have
been pursued - not least to encourage others. Of course we need to remain constantly vigilant in all
these areas to retain confidence in our market place. But all the evidence suggests that such confidence
remains strong by any international standards.
There are three characteristics of the City’s market ethos that I would point to in particular.
Quite early on in my career at the Bank - more years ago than I care to remember - I was profoundly
influenced by the man then responsible for administering Exchange Control - Brian Bennett. He had,
framed on his desk, a wartime poster which read “Freedom is in peril - defend it with all your might.”
And  he  explained  to  me  that  this  was  to  remind  him  that  his  job  was  not  simply  to  apply  the  4
Exchange Control regulations - though that certainly was his job; it was also to help people to do what
they were seeking to do consistently with both the spirit and the letter of the law. I like to think that
that  philosophy  has  informed  -  and  continues  to  inform  -  the  approach  to  applying  the  rules  of  the
game more generally in the City.
A related characteristic is that apart from defining, and applying, constructively, the rules of the game,
the various authorities do then leave the market to get on with it - they do not by and large seek to tell
the various markets, or firms operating within them, what they should or should not do. In the Bank,
for example, we always stand ready to help when market participants collectively seek our help - say,
in relation to market infrastructure projects where, working with market participants, we took on the
development  and  introduction  of  new  settlements  systems  for  the  Gilt-Edged,  Money  and  Equity
markets and new wholesale payments systems - but we try to avoid either dirigisme or unnecessary
conservative  resistance  to  market  initiatives,  whether  collective  initiatives,  such  as  the  creation  of
LIFFE, or initiatives at the level of the individual firm. We may act as a catalyst, encouraging different
sectors of the market to address emerging problems, either on their own or by coming together, but
essentially  we  take  the  view  that the  markets  and  firms  themselves  are  best  placed  to  find  the  way
ahead.
The third characteristic of what I’ve called the free market ethos - and one which is absolutely crucial
to the City’s success - is impartiality and even-handedness, both in the application of the rules of the
game and in terms of business opportunities - applying the same standards to all market participants or
would-be participants, regardless in particular of nationality.
Some people still find this difficult to understand. A few years ago Japanese bankers used to tease me
by asking what I thought of the “Wimbledonisation” of the City - meaning that this country organised
the best competition in the world but the visitors carried off the prizes. I used to explain to them that it
was activity - rather than nationality of ownership or even control - that mattered in terms of the City’s
contribution to the wider economy, and in terms of its direct contribution to growth or employment, or
BIS Review 134/1999
2
of income or tax base in this country; I even suggested that Tokyo would benefit as a financial centre
if it became more open to overseas players. I don’t think that they were convinced at the time. But
now that has begun to happen, and some of my Japanese banker friends tell me they finally see the
point.  It  is  in  fact  of  course  more  generally  a  lot  harder  to  see  the  benefits  of  increasing  global
competition  if  you  are  an  existing  producer,  whether  an  individual  business  or  the  national
representatives  of  businesses  directly  in  the  firing  line  than  if  you  are  looking  at  it  in  terms  of  the
health  of  the  macro-economy.  But  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  is  this  characteristic  of  openness  to
competition perhaps above all that explains the uniquely international nature of the City (with more
foreign  banks  represented  here  than  in  any  other  centre)  and  accounts  for  much  of  the  City’s
continuing success.
So  much  then,  Mr  Chairman,  for  the  past,  let  me  turn  now  to  the  challenges  and  prospects  for  the
future.
The most immediate challenge is to get through to the next millennium without significant mishap - to
demonstrate that we have indeed succeeded in overcoming the Y2K bug. In fact I have no misgivings
on that score as far as the City is concerned. The preparation has been immensely thorough. The Bank,
with  our  colleagues  in  the  FSA,  and  with  our  counterparts  abroad,  has  worked  with  the  financial
markets, both on that technical preparation and to ensure that the necessary liquidity will be in place.
That in turn has provided a degree of reassurance - to financial intermediaries and to the public more
broadly  -  that  should  help  to  avoid  undue  precautionary  behaviour  which  might  otherwise  prove
disruptive.
A second challenge is the advent of the euro - and on this score, too, I have very few misgivings. Even
before  the  introduction  of  the  new  currency  the  City  played  a  very  positive  role  in  its  technical
preparation - and one which has been widely acknowledged. And since that introduction the City has
continued to play a very active part in the development of the broader, more liquid, financial markets
which the  euro  has  made  possible, and  which are  vital  to its  success  as  a  widely-used  international
trading and investment currency. This activity is in fact the greatest contribution that the UK can make
to  that  success  from  the  outside.  Of  course  the  City  is  in  competition  with  other  financial  centres
elsewhere  in  Europe.  But  as  I  have  often  pointed  out  before,  at  the  macro-economic  level  such
competition is a positive-, not a  zero-sum  game  from  which  we  collectively,  borrowers  and  lenders
and market intermediaries, all stand to gain. I have every confidence in the ability of the City to thrive
in  this  competitive  environment  -  but  it  will  thrive  not  at  the  expense  of  the  rest  of  Europe  but
alongside  other  European  financial  centres.  And  in  that  context  suggestions  that  we  should  be
somehow artificially disadvantaged are irrational.
The  third  challenge  confronting  the  City  -  and  a  much  more  fundamental  one  -  is  the  accelerating
advance of information and communications technology which is currently sweeping across the whole
of the global economy. In the financial services sector in particular it is the major driver of change and
innovation. It makes possible the introduction of a whole raft of essentially new financial services and
products, and it is radically  changing  the  way  in  which  they  and  existing  services  and  products  are
delivered,  whether  in  wholesale  or  retail  financial  markets,  at  a  fraction  of  the  existing  cost.  In
wholesale markets it will affect the whole spectrum of activity - from trading through payments and
settlements, across the whole range of financial instruments, across national boundaries - not simply
within  Europe  although  that  is  an  immediate  focus  of  attention  -  and  it  has  the  potential  to  alter
fundamentally the relationships between end-users of the markets, intermediaries and exchanges. And,
at the retail level, too, we will all eventually need to learn to live with totally new, and more efficient,
ways of doing things - though that will no doubt come harder to people of my generation!
I don’t think anyone at this stage can see at all clearly the end-point of all this or even necessarily the
appropriate next steps. And that is why we are seeing a continuous, and often bewildering, stream of
new individual and collective initiatives, many of them involving the same participants, both in this
country and abroad. Some of these initiatives will inevitably fall by the wayside - that’s part of the
process  by  which  the  market  as  a  whole  discovers  the  way  ahead.  But  those  that  do  succeed  will
succeed  because  they  add  value  by  meeting  more  effectively  the  needs  of  the  consumers  of  the
products and services they provide. As an intensely interested - but non-commercial - observer of it
3
BIS Review 134/1999
all,  I  find  the  whole  process  hugely  stimulating  and  encouraging.  I  recognise  that  I  might  feel
differently if I were a commercial rather than a central banker, but I’m impressed by the fact that most
of the commercial bankers I talk to see it in terms of opportunities rather than threats.
The  other  challenge  to  the  City  that  I  would  draw  attention  to  is  the  quite  different  challenge
associated with growing social concerns and rising public expectations, which are probably heightened
by the rapid pace of financial change associated with advancing technology.
In part these concerns relate to perceptions of increased risk of financial instability. There has been,
and I suspect will continue to be, increasing public emphasis - both domestically and internationally -
within the IMF, the new Financial Stability Forum and the BIS, for example, notably in the wake of
the recent global financial turmoil - on reducing systemic financial risk and on how to handle systemic
disturbances when they occur.
But  the  social  concerns  go  well  beyond this  sort  of  systemic issue.  They  include  growing  concerns
about  organised  criminal  abuse  of  the  financial  system,  for  example;  they  include  an  increasing
emphasis  on consumer  protection  -  particularly  protection  of  the  less financially-sophisticated  in  an
increasingly  complex  environment;  and they  include  questions  relating  to  the  financial  exclusion  of
disadvantaged sectors of the community. In all these respects, too, the concerns are not just domestic
concerns but have close parallels internationally.
It seems to me that in many instances the new technologies, appropriately deployed, actually improve
the capacity of the financial system to address these concerns. But if they are not adequately addressed
- whether within the system as a whole or at the level of the individual market or individual firm - they
could  -  like  purely  financial  failures  -  weaken  public  confidence  or  attract  public  responses,  which
would have a damaging effect on overall activity.
Mr Chairman, I can’t imagine that anyone working in the City will become bored as we move into the
new millennium in the face of these challenges.
How  successful  we are  in confronting  them  will  depend,  as  in  the  past,  upon  the  interaction  of  the
technical  and  professional  skills  and  self-discipline  of  the  market  and  the  structure,  substance  and
application of the rules of the game as they are reflected in public policy.
We have unique experience within the City on which to build.
The market has  repeatedly  demonstrated  its  capacity  to  respond successfully  to  new  challenges  and
currently  attracts  representatives  of  the  strongest  participants  from  all  parts  of  the  world.  It  is
supported by very highly qualified professionals and professional bodies which play an important role
in  setting  and  maintaining  standards.  It  is  supported,  too,  by  an  extraordinary  range  of  specialist
professional and technical organisations, which help to ensure that the rules of the game are sensibly
formulated and clearly understood. And it is supported by a very strong tradition of technical training
and education through the various financial institutes, a tradition which I hope may soon be bolstered
by  the  development  of  a  coherent  set  of  professional  qualifications  across  the  different  financial
market sectors.
But how far we remain successful will depend importantly, too, on how far we are able to maintain
what I have described as the ethos of the competitive market place in a rapidly changing environment
and that will represent a considerable challenge to public policy. Given market self-discipline, I have
every confidence, Mr Chairman, that the various competent authorities will remain constructive and
impartial in their approach to defining and applying the rules of the game, and open to innovation and
wide  participation,  so  that  the  City  retains  its  position  as  an  attractive  location  for  the  provision  of
financial and business services.
So, Mr Chairman, I look to the future of the City with very considerable confidence. On recent form it
has little to fear and great opportunities to look forward to. But I don’t say that it will be easy.
BIS Review 134/1999
4
