Mr Hartmann reports on central bank involvement
in the design, operation and oversight of payment systems
Speech by Mr Wendelin Hartmann, Member of the Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman
of  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  of  the  G10  Central  Banks,  at  a
conference organised by the Organisation of Central and Eastern European Clearing Houses in Sofia,
held on 6–8 October 1999.
 Central Bank involvement in payment systems
As I am sure all bankers are now  aware, payment  systems  are  going  through  a  period  of  enormous
change – and this is true in every region of the world. In my remarks this morning, I would like to look
at the role central banks are playing in this process of change. Payment systems are a key component
of a modern market economy, and therefore the way they function can have an important bearing on
how efficient that economy is. In particular, they can have an important bearing on how well financial
markets  function.  In  Europe  –  and  not  least  in  East  and  Central  Europe  –  this  efficiency  aspect  of
payment  systems  hardly  needs  spelling  out.  And  alone  this  is  sufficient  reason  why  central  banks
should take an interest in payment systems.
But  what  I  want  to  do  in  the  next  few  minutes  is  focus  on  the  importance  of  payment  systems  for
achieving  financial  stability,  rather  than  efficiency.  This  aspect  of  payment  systems  is  perhaps  less
widely understood. Yet it is fundamental to  understanding  why  central banks  increasingly  attach  so
much  importance  to  the  introduction  of  payment  systems  that  are  safe  as  well  as  efficient.  In  this
context  reliable  real-time  gross  settlement  (RTGS)  systems  are  of  particular  interest.  This  type  of
payment system is an optimal basis for a well-functioning money market and therefore most suitable
for the implementation of monetary policy. Thus, interest rates are finding an effective channel for the
whole currency area.
Why financial stability is important ...
Let  me  start  by  briefly  reviewing  why  financial  stability  is  so  important.  Achieving  stability  in
financial  markets  is  part  of  the  wider  goal  of  achieving  macroeconomic  stability.  What  happens  if
financial stability is missing – what can be done if there is a financial crisis? Broadly speaking, one
has  two  options.  One  is  to  provide  unconditioned  financial  support  for  the  market.  But  doing  this
involves  the  risk  of  undermining  macroeconomic  policy:  looser  monetary  policy  will  finally  cause
inflation and ongoing asset price bubbles. Moreover, the provision of inadequate liquidity support can
bring about moral hazard problems that make future instability more likely. The other option is to let
the  crisis  run  its  course  by  doing  nothing.  This  is,  however,  likely  to  lead  to  institutional  failures,
giving rise both to heavy costs for national treasuries and to a danger of systemic collapse with wider
economic consequences. Recent developments in several South East Asian countries show that neither
option is acceptable. So it is far better to try to prevent the financial instability emerging in the first
place by performing a monetary policy which aims at stability and orderly market conditions.
... and why it is becoming harder to achieve
Financial stability has therefore always been important. But achieving financial stability  is arguably
harder now in open financial markets than it ever has been.
The proximate causes of this are well understood. First, financial markets have developed to be really
international. Moreover, the fact that information, both substantiated and unsubstantiated, now flows
almost  costlessly  and  instantaneously  around  the  world  significantly  increases  the  likelihood  that
shocks  of  whatever  sort  could  be  propagated  elsewhere.  Both  insufficient  and  exaggerated  market
1
BIS Review 118/1999
concerns about counterparty risk, or technical shortcomings in the payments infrastructure, could pose
further threats to international financial stability if they lead to a sudden loss of liquidity in important
markets or an inability to settle transactions. Achieving financial stability is thus increasingly difficult
at the national level without international cooperation.
Second, the pace of change is increasing. The assessment of existing shortcomings in the system and
possible  solutions  is  made  more  difficult  by  the  extraordinary  pace  of  change  in  modern  markets.
Driven  in  part  by  dramatic  advances  in  technology,  the  target  at  which  policymakers  must  aim  is
constantly moving. As a consequence of recent technical developments the EU Commission issued a
Directive which the German legislator also implemented in the Banking Act by declaring the issuance
of e-money as being a banking activity. At present, discussion is going on about how to react to the
increasing use of internet facilities for e-commerce.
Third, the volume of transactions, as well as their complexity and opacity has increased sharply as the
cost  of  carrying  out  transactions  has  been  drastically  reduced.  Investment  banking  has  meanwhile
developed  to  be  the  main  field  of  activity  of  internationally  operating  financial  institutions.  Huge
Highly Leveraged Institutions (HLI) are explicitly designed to profit from extremely high turnovers by
very narrow margins.
The  world  is  therefore  a  busier,  more  complex  and  more  interdependent  place.  Underlying  these
proximate causes are perhaps two more fundamental causes. An obvious one is change in technology –
both in processing power and in communications. But another fundamental cause is deregulation – the
decision  to  put  more  emphasis  on  market  mechanisms,  whether  in  the  move  away  from  planned
economies or in the liberalisation of existing market economies. In the financial sector regulators have
to  find  a  balance  between  direct  control  and  allowing  the  market  to  find  its  own  equilibrium.  The
increased  emphasis  on  market  mechanisms  is  in  my  opinion  desirable  because  of  the  gains  in
economic  efficiency  it  can  bring.  Furthermore,  it  is  to  some  extent  inevitable,  since  the  changes  in
technology  have  been  making  regulations  increasingly  easy  to  avoid  and  thus  direct  control  over
markets and their participants – albeit still necessary – increasingly hard to maintain.
The need for a strategy to make payment systems safer
The result of the developments I have just described is a world where markets are more volatile – and
where there is more chance that extreme movements in one market will spill over into others. From a
regulator’s point of view this volatility can be unnerving – so how can we cope? A crucial element is
ensuring that the infrastructure is sound. In  the financial  system  the infrastructure is based  on three
main  pillars:  the  financial  institutions,  the  markets  they  trade  in  and,  of  most  interest  to  this
conference,  the  mechanisms  to  settle  financial  transactions  in  those  markets,  in  other  words  the
payment  systems.  For  the  latter  pillar  adequate  procedures  of  oversight  are  necessary  in  order  to
ensure a well-functioning technical basis.
So how do we go about strengthening the payments systems infrastructure to make it more stable? In
the light of what I said earlier, I suggest we need a strategy that recognises that the pace of change is
extraordinary,  ongoing  and  irreversible.  The  strategy  also  needs  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that
transactions are becoming increasingly complex and interdependent and involve an ever-widening and
changing range of participants.
This reality has three strategic implications. First, the strategy must be comprehensive across sectors to
cope with interdependencies. This means that we should not tackle payment systems in isolation. To
be fully effective, the changes to payment systems must be part of a broader plan of reform that also
includes not just other settlement mechanisms but also the other two pillars of the financial system,
namely financial institutions and financial markets.
Second,  the  strategy  must  be  international.  It  has  to  recognise  that  we  can  no  longer  safely  see
payment  and  settlement  system  reform  as  a  purely  domestic  matter.  You  only  have  to  look  at
Euroclear,  Cedel,  TARGET,  S.W.I.F.T.,  the  planned  CLS  Bank,  VISA  and  Mastercard  to  see  truly
international  systems  that  are  growing  in  importance and  whose  smooth  and  efficient  operation  has
implications for an ever-increasing number of countries. And even systems that seem still to be purely
BIS Review 118/1999
2
domestic  –  those  we  use  to  make  payments  in  our  own  currencies  –  are  in  reality  increasingly
interconnected.  This  is  partly  through  overlapping  memberships:  many  banks  with  extensive
international operations are now direct participants in the payment systems of a number of different
countries. Some leading European and American banks are simultaneously participating in all larger
payment systems like CHIPS, Euro 1, EAF, CHAPS, etc. Highly sophisticated liquidity management
systems are necessary to optimise the money flows around the globe. The estimated daily turnover in
cross-border payments is as high as about USD 2,000 billion.
The  interconnection of financial  markets  also  arises  because an  important source  of  traffic  in  many
“domestic” systems is the settlement of the domestic element of cross-border transactions; and as we
continue to reduce the risks that arise when settling these international  trades,  we  will  find that  our
actions  inevitably  have  the  effect  of  making  settlement  in  different  countries  more  inextricably
interdependent.  The  evidence  of  this  interdependence  is  clearly  visible  when  bank  holidays  are
celebrated  in  the  United  States.  Turnover  in  European  Systems  drops  then  by  more  than  50%  and
increases far above average the day after.
And third, the strategy must increasingly rely on market-led processes, albeit ones that complement,
rather than replace traditional regulatory activity. Regulators are finding it difficult to keep up with a
complex  and  rapidly  changing  financial  system.  Increasingly,  therefore,  they  have  felt  it  useful  –
perhaps  necessary  –  to  get  the  market  itself  involved  in  the  regulatory  process.  So  there  is  more
emphasis now on consultation with  the  market  by  risk  analysis  and  adequate  means  of  oversight  to
determine  the  appropriate  form  of  regulatory  activity.  And  there  is  also  more  emphasis  on
self-regulation and on market transparency to complement traditional regulatory or oversight activity.
The role of central banks and the market
My colleague, Gregor Heinrich, will be saying more about the nature of international cooperation in
achieving  optimal  payment  systems.  Before  concluding,  I  would  like  to  focus  briefly  on  the
relationship between central banks and the market in the reform process.
When it comes to the regulation of payment systems, the situation varies from country to country.
In  general  we  can  say  that  at  one  extreme  are  central  banks  that  do  not  operate  payment  systems
themselves and also do not have explicit regulatory powers over private sector payment systems. In
these  circumstances  central  banks  have  little  choice  but  to  work  with  the  market  by  means  of  a
permanent  dialogue  with  its  participants.  At  the  other  extreme  are  central  banks  that  both  own  and
operate the payment systems, and who may therefore be tempted to impose a solution on the market.
But experience has shown that, even where it is possible to impose a solution, it is not necessarily the
most effective approach. Accompanying consultation with the market often pays additional dividends.
Of  course,  cooperation  is  a  two-way  street.  The  market  in  turn  must  realise  that  commercial
considerations,  while  important,  cannot  by  themselves  dictate  the  nature  of  necessary  reforms.  The
central  bank  will  usually  have  certain  overriding  interests  (such  as  avoiding  systemic  risk)  that  are
likely  to  be  a lower priority  for  the  market  itself.  So the central  bank  will  typically  have  to  set  the
objectives  of  the  reform.  And  ultimately  the  central  bank  may  have  to  override  the  wishes  of  the
market in some areas.
But if the experience of the private sector is drawn on wherever possible, the objectives are likely to be
met more effectively. This is partly because the market can exert a positive influence on the design of
the reforms. A good example of this approach put into action is the strategy adopted by G10 central
banks to tackle the issue of foreign exchange settlement risk: after the thorough analysis of the overall
situation by the CPSS the market has been set the objective of developing appropriate multicurrency
services, but how it reaches that objective is largely up to it to determine. And market involvement can
do more than help to shape the form of the solution. Implementation of the reform is also likely to be
much easier if it is on the basis of an agreed solution rather than one that is imposed. Such a solution
necessarily includes a full agreement of the regulators of the internationally most used currencies.
3
BIS Review 118/1999
Conclusion
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  the  overriding  importance  of  reliable,  efficient  and  risk-free
large-value transfer systems has been acknowledged worldwide. As a consequence of this situation, in
my  capacity  as  Chairman  of  the  CPSS  I  have  been  appointed  a  member  of  the  Financial  Stability
Forum. This new institution has been created by the heads of state of the G7 countries. It associates
representatives of twenty countries – including financial regulators and central banks – as well as of
international  organisations  like  IMF,  World  Bank,  OECD.  Also  seen  from  this  angle  I  want  to
encourage  all  payment  system  experts  and  central  bankers  in  this  region  to  cooperate  closely  when
designing  or  implementing  new  payment  systems  in  their  countries.  Be  assured  that  you  will  be
supported  by  international  bodies  like  the  CPSS  and  the  participating  central  banks  to  the  extent
needed and wherever possible.
BIS Review 118/1999
4
