Mr Yam looks towards a stronger financial system in Hong Kong
Speech given by Mr Joseph Yam JP, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the
Annual Dinner 1999 of the Hong Kong Society of Accountants on 29 October 1999.
 Introduction
I feel greatly honoured to have been invited to speak at this year’s Annual Dinner of the Hong Kong
Society of Accountants. I must confess that I became a little worried when I checked up on the list of
speakers  at  your  Annual  Dinners  in  the  past  10  years.  I  realise  that,  in  accepting  this  speaking
engagement, I have taken on the almost impossible task of performing to a standard that may well be
beyond me. I shall nevertheless try my best not to make you feel that you have gone down market.
You are of course well aware of the close working relationship between the accounting profession and
the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. Your involvement in all our many advisory committees and in
regulatory compliance of the financial institutions we supervise is crucial to our work, and I take this
opportunity  to  thank  you  all  for  your  help  and  forbearance  in  our  ever-increasing  supervisory
demands.  As  a  gesture  of  gratitude  I  shall  this  evening  steer  well  clear  of  the  irksome  domestic
supervisory issues. Instead I shall focus on the broader subjects of economy and finance as we recover
from the financial turmoil of the last two years.
Economic performance
The economic numbers that came out in the past few months seem to convey a clear message, and this
is that the economy has, since the second quarter of this year, been slowly but steadily recovering from
the  painful recession,  which  had lasted  for  about  eighteen  months. The  growth  rate  of  GDP  moved
back to positive territory in the second quarter of this year, having been in negative territory, year on
year, for six quarters. The unemployment rate has peaked. Asset prices have recovered. Retail sales
have picked up. Tourist arrivals have increased. Exports have started to grow again, with the external
trade  account  at  the  same  time  moving  into  surplus.  The  fall  in  consumer  prices,  adjusting  for  the
effects  of  the  generally  welcome  rebate  of  rates  and  lowering  of  rentals,  has  stabilised.  Monetary
conditions have remained stable, although we could do with lower interest rates. The overall quality of
bank assets, and the mortgage portfolio in particular, has improved. On the fiscal side, although I am
not privy to any information that has not been made public, I have the fullest confidence in the skills
of  the  Financial  Secretary  in his  management  of the  public  finances.  As  the  economy  recovers,  the
fiscal position should quickly move back into overall balance.
An 18-month period of sharp recession and painful adjustments is, of course, very tough for everyone.
But  this  does  not seem  to  be  an  excessively  long  period,  given  that  we  were  affected  by  the  worst
financial turmoil in the recent history of the region. I am aware, however, that there has been some
controversy  over  the  performance  of  the  Hong  Kong  economy,  compared  with  that  of  other  Asian
economies,  in  coping  with  the  Asian  financial  crisis.  There  seems  to  be  the  impression  that  Hong
Kong has been the slowest to recover. This may be true according to one measure or another, and we
should obviously look critically into the reasons, if indeed there are structural defects that may have
inhibited  our recovery.  Economic  cycles  come  and  go,  and  there  is  no  way  that  Hong  Kong,  as  an
open and externally oriented economy, can be immunised from external shocks of the dimension that
we have seen. But we need to make sure that we come out of the crisis stronger rather than weaker.
Structural defects, if any, need to be corrected decisively, to the extent that this is within the powers of
Government to do so.
But  we  also  need  to  keep  our  heads  cool  and  be  objective  in  this  self-assessment.  The  loud  and
heartfelt complaints of a community in pain, legitimate though they may be, can sometimes drown out
the arguments in support of policies that are in the long-term interests of Hong Kong. It may therefore
1
BIS Review 120/1999
be worth making a few observations on how the policies we pursue have helped Hong Kong through
the crises that have hit this region over the past couple of years.
First, while Hong Kong may be one of the last economies in the region to move back  into  positive
economic growth, it was in fact also one of the last economies to go into recession as a result of the
financial crisis.
Second, currency stability has protected our real incomes. Indeed, we emerged from the recession with
one of the smallest falls in average incomes for our community, measured in US dollar terms.
Third,  Hong  Kong’s  monetary  and  financial  systems  also  experienced  the  least  structural  damage.
And, at the height of the crisis, we were also able to introduce various effective measures to strengthen
them.
Fourth,  our  currency  has  remained  the  most  stable  in  the  region.  Operating  under  robust  currency
board arrangements, our exchange rate link to the US dollar has remained intact, and its credibility has
increased.
Fifth, the necessary structural adjustments in the economy have been taking place efficiently, more so
than in many of the other crisis-hit economies in the region. The fixed exchange rate has the effect of
forcing the inevitable structural adjustments to take place quickly throughout the economy, rather than
taking the easy way out through currency depreciation. The experience of Asia has clearly shown that
adjustments  through  currency  depreciation  can  easily  get  out  of  hand  by  setting  off  a  financial
meltdown,  unless  the  process  of  currency  depreciation  is  guided  by  exchange  controls  or  credit
restrictions. And, even then, the structural adjustments can probably only be postponed, not obviated.
I hope that in pointing out these aspects of Hong Kong’s performance in the Asian financial crisis I
have not given you the impression of being complacent or defensive. I am aware of the need to address
such  important  issues  as  Hong  Kong’s  competitiveness  and  the  provision  of  credit  to  small  and
medium-sized enterprises. But what I have mentioned are aspects which have, I fear, been very much
neglected in the domestic discussions about Hong Kong’s performance in the financial crisis. But the
fact of the matter is that, notwithstanding all the doom and gloom descriptions and predictions, and the
death sentences that have been pronounced on our city, Hong Kong has performed reasonably well.
The impact on Hong Kong of the Asian financial crisis has been severe. But we have stuck it out and,
by and large, we have managed without catastrophes.
Controversy
It is true that we have had to take unconventional and controversial actions in the financial markets.
But  regulators  do  have  a  responsibility  to  deal  with  market  failures,  which  in  our  case  arose  from
market concentration and manipulation. The few of us involved received a lot of criticisms as a result,
and some of these were not pleasant, particularly the accusations that we betrayed the free market. But
I  hope  the  way  the  matter  has  played  out,  and the  handsome  book  profits  that  we  are  making,  will
serve as a vindication of our decisions. And, in case it has crossed your mind, luck has had very little,
if  any,  to  do  with  it,  although  I  do  not  mind  luck  being  on  my  side.  The  whole  explosion  of
international finance has simply gone too far. If it were not the default by Russia, some other event
would have caused yield spreads to widen sharply. If it were not LTCM, then some other hedge fund
would  have  needed  the  massive  de-leveraging  that,  had  it  been  allowed  to  take  place,  threatened
dislocation even in the largest market in the world. Some event, large or small, would have triggered
all that. As some of you may remember, the sharp  correction in  the  stock  market  in  Hong  Kong  in
1973 was triggered by the Fire Brigade being sent in to inspect overcrowding on the then rather small
trading floor of one of the stock exchanges before unification. Incidentally, the widening of the yield
spreads  that  caused  problems  for  LTCM  last  year  actually  started  when  we  entered  the  market  in
August, according to a chart prepared by Stanley Fischer of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). It
gathered momentum as Russia defaulted. So perhaps we played a part in turning around the sentiment
of international finance last year.
BIS Review 120/1999
2
And let me say this also: knowing well my close colleagues who fought this battle together with me, it
would, I think, be difficult to find stronger believers in the free market than those of us in the Hong
Kong Administration. A few names will, of course, spring to your mind immediately, but my response
is that we work in the real world and not in ivory towers. The fact of the matter is that free markets can
sometimes  fail.  Free  markets  can  sometimes  behave  in  a  manner  very  much  against  the  long-term
interests of society. When this occurs, if those of us in the Administration hide conveniently behind
the banner of free markets and do nothing, we are failing in our duties. And to those who accuse us of
betraying the philosophy of positive non-interventionism, let me ask this question: why do you think
Sir Philip Haddon-Cave used the word “positive” when he coined the phrase?
International finance
But  perhaps  enough  has  already  been  said  on  that  subject.  Let  me  now  move  to  the  longer-term
structural issues of concern to our monetary and financial systems. As I said earlier, we need to ensure
that we come out of the crisis stronger rather than weaker. We need to identify structural defects, if
any, and address ways of correcting them, not necessarily limiting ourselves to our own systems, given
the globalisation of financial markets.
You may be surprised to hear that we started a form of this exercise immediately after the tequila crisis
in  early  1995,  well  before  the  continuation  of  that  crisis,  now  best  described  as  the  crisis  of
international  finance,  hit  this  region.  While  we  were  able  to  put  together  domestic  contingency
measures, some of which in the event had to be invoked, consideration of issues, involving as it did
cooperation at the international and regional levels, took time. In any case, I must confess that none of
us involved in this work, in Hong Kong and in the regional forums, were able to appreciate, let alone
predict, when and how the crisis would hit us and how severe it would be. There was a lack of urgency
and  an abundance of  scepticism  about  regional  monetary  cooperation.  We  have  since  pushed  much
harder in the international and regional forums, to the extent, I fear, that we might have become a little
too noisy for the comfort of those who are, for one reason  or  another, in  favour  of  maintaining  the
status quo in the international financial architecture.
Indeed, of great concern to us is the inadequacy of the international financial architecture to cope with
and harness the explosion of international finance. The size and volatility of global capital flows have
grown tremendously relative to the global economy. Global output has grown by 26% between 1990
and 1997, before the financial crisis hit us. Global trade in goods has grown faster by 64%. But global
finance, however measured, has grown much, much faster. Stock market capitalisation and turnover
surged  by  153%  and  282%  respectively.  Foreign  exchange  turnover  more  than  doubled  during  this
period, and has now grown to roughly 70 times of merchandise trade.
You have seen the consequences of this disproportionate growth of international finance in many parts
of the world, in Latin America, in Asia, in Russia, in Central Europe, and in South Africa, where the
associated  volatility  of  capital  flows  posed  serious  problems.  Even  in  the  US,  where  the  largest
markets  in  the  world  operate  in  what  must  be  the  most  favourable  economic  environment  seen  for
many decades, the destabilising potential of international finance was brought home by LTCM.
Let me hasten to point out here that the rapid development of international finance is not necessarily a
bad  thing.  Indeed,  the  phenomenon  has  been  one  important  factor  contributing  to  increasing  global
prosperity. Much of the Asian miracle as we know it, during the long period of prosperity before the
financial turmoil broke out in July 1997, was brought about by financial liberalisation. The crucially
important  process  of  financial  intermediation,  in  which  savings  are  channelled  into  productive
investment, has been made a lot more efficient. Money is no longer stored under mattresses, but is,
through  placements  with  banks,  and  investments  in  debt  and  equity  and  their  ever-proliferating
derivatives, put to productive use farming land, building homes, manufacturing goods and providing
services.  Financial  liberalisation  has  further  taken  this  process  of  financial  intermediation  to  the
international  level,  in  which,  for  example,  UK  pension  funds  are  invested  in  Thai  equity  and  US
depositors are funding infrastructure investments in the Philippines. And this is not a one-way process
either. A large part of Asian savings - to the extent that they are increasingly allowed, by the relaxation
of  exchange  controls - to  be  invested  overseas,  have  been  funding  the  budget  deficits  of  developed
3
BIS Review 120/1999
economies and providing capital, for example, for Microsoft, Citibank or British Telecom. Indeed, the
Asian miracle would not have been possible without the advent of international finance. But, alas, it
was also international finance that was responsible, at least in part, for turning the Asian miracle into
Asian misery.
International financial architecture
In the history of this world, it has not been unusual to see the riches of a family surpassing the wealth
of a poor nation. However, with a free and open global trading system, economic differences generate
opportunities for business interactions of mutual benefit. The sharing of that benefit has nevertheless
been  the  subject  of  controversy,  where  the  distinction  between  doing  business  and  exploitation  is
blurred. But then this is a fact of life, with different perspectives when viewed from different angles.
And  so  arguments  arising  from  such  issues  as  protectionism  and  dumping  remain,  and  there  are
established  institutions  and  mechanisms,  as  part  of  the  global  trading  system,  to  tackle  them  at  the
international  level.  And  despite  all  these  imperfections,  history  has  shown  that,  with  the  increasing
freedom of international trade, the world is in many ways a better place to live in.
I believe that the same sentiment can generally be applied to international finance. Indeed, in much the
same spirit as in the promotion of free trade, a great deal of effort and commitment has been put into
the promotion of the free flow of capital in recent decades. Financial liberalisation became very much
the  fashion,  leading  to  domestic  financial  markets  rapidly  attaining  a  global  dimension,  welcoming
and  absorbing 
international  financial
intermediation,  channelling  savings  into  productive  investments  across  countries  and  across
currencies, enhancing the efficiency in the use of global capital and contributing to promoting global
economic growth and development.
international  capital.  This  created  opportunities  for 
But, as in the case of international trade, there is also a need for institutions and mechanisms to deal
with  the  undesirable  aspects  of  international  finance.  We  now  have  a  situation  in  which  individual
financial institutions are in a position to mobilise financial resources larger than the Gross Domestic
Product  of  an  economy.  They  can  take  dominating  positions  in  particular  markets  and  dictate
short-term  market  movements  in  their  own  interests.  Small  open  markets  have  become  increasingly
vulnerable to international capital. Whilst many of them have benefited greatly from an abundance of
international capital, both in the form of foreign direct investment and foreign portfolio investment,
they have also become easily overwhelmed by such flows. Yet there is no equivalent of a World Trade
Organisation to deal effectively with the problems that inevitably would spring up, even though the
degree of complexity and time criticality of international finance far exceed that of international trade.
There is, of course, the IMF, and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). They perform useful
roles  respectively  in  providing  assistance  to  individual  economies  in  difficulty,  and  in  setting
international regulatory and supervisory standards, and they have done a good job in these areas. But,
as  very  much  part  of  the  international  financial  architecture,  they  need  to  evolve  to  cope  with  the
rapidly  changing  nature of international  finance. They  need to  ensure  that  they  are  able  to  play  the
roles required of them in prudently managing the risks, and limiting the destabilising impact, of the
increasing freedom of international finance.
There  is  much  catching  up  to  do,  and  much  international  effort  has  been  devoted  to  this  task.  But,
presumably because of the difference of opinion on what exactly needs to be  done,  we  now  have  a
rather  confusing  picture  of  where  all  this  effort  might  lead  us  to.  There  have  been  many  new
international  forums  created  to  look  at  the  relevant  issues  and,  together  with  the  existing  forums,
everybody  seem  to  be  involved  in  this  work - G3,  G7,  G10,  G22,  G26,  APEC,  EMEAP,  etc.,  with
multiples  of  working  groups  formed  under  each.  More  recently,  there  is  the  more  authoritative
Financial Stability Forum formed, in which the HKMA participates. Yet another ‘G’ - the G20 - is in
the process of being established. Hong Kong’s significant voice on the subject means that some of us
have to be travelling and attending international meetings all the time. Yet our extensive involvement
is necessary if the plight of the small open markets, particularly those that are international financial
centres, is to be adequately heard and taken into account in the reform of the international financial
architecture.
BIS Review 120/1999
4
International reform
Our stance in these discussions is that we support the free flow of international capital but that there is
a  need  to  limit  its  destabilising  influence  on  financial  markets,  particularly  those  in  small  open
economies.  And  specifically  we  point  to  the  two  interrelated  aspects  of  excessive  volatility  and
inadequate transparency that need to be addressed. Volatility is largely the result of herding behaviour,
which is in turn the result of the lack of information on which market participants can make rational
decisions. All this is made a lot worse when, because of the lack of market information, particularly in
the  case  of  the  over-the-counter  markets,  market  concentration  develops,  whether  consciously  or
unconsciously. And market concentration has a tendency to lead to market failure and possibly market
manipulation. The international solutions we put forward, therefore, are greater disclosure and, where
applicable and practicable, enhanced regulation.
It is in our reference to market manipulation that I think we touched a  few  raw  nerves,  particularly
against the background of the controversial action we took last summer. While there is wide sympathy
for our decisive action against market manipulation, we have been cautioned by some on the need not
to be confused by herding behaviour. Others have challenged us to come up with hard evidence that
manipulation existed,  reminding  us  of the established academic  theory  of  market  manipulation,  and
urging  us  to  examine  carefully  the  history  of  the  events  leading  to  last  August,  collect  data  and
conduct econometric research into them.
While I agree that all these need to be done where possible, I must tell you that such advice reminded
me of what Andrew Crockett, the General Manager of the BIS and Chairman of the Financial Stability
Forum, once told me. He said that the economic theorists are those that attempt to look in a dark room
to find a black cat. The economic historians are those that attempt to look in a dark room to find a
black cat that is not there. And the econometricians, who conduct all those regression analyses from
the data collected, are those that attempt to look in a dark room to find a black cat that is not there and
say that they have found it. I certainly do not wish to be involved in that sort of thing. But there is
surely one thing that ought to be done, if we are serious about the matter. Using the same analogy of
the dark room and the black cat, why don’t we just light up the room and look? But then, some may
fear that instead of finding a black cat we shall find a fat tiger taking up much of the room, playing
havoc, tearing up things, creating chaos and not wanting anybody to know about it.
I firmly believe that the disclosure of relevant information by market participants will make markets
work better. This could be done directly or indirectly through regulators and special purpose agencies
such  as  credit  registrars  or  custodians.  The  information  should  include  data  that  will  enable  the
financial position of significant market participants to be assessed objectively, such as their degree of
leverage  and  their  exposure  to  specific  markets.  This  would  help  counterparties,  such  as  the  banks
extending credit to them and the investors using their services and entrusting their savings to them, to
take  decisions  based  more  on  rational  analyses  rather  than  on  herding  behaviour.  The  information
should  also  include  data  that  will  enable  overall  market  positions  and  their  concentration  to  be
established. This would help the regulator in effectively ensuring systemic stability, taking regulatory
action  where  necessary  to  manage  or  limit  the  systemic  risks  or  simply  to  disclose  publicly  the
relevant aggregate information for the benefit of all market participants.
This is  of  course  easier  said  than  done.  When  you  are  dealing  with  international  markets  operating
over the counter, with participants possibly registered in cyberspace, how and  on  what  authority  do
you obtain that information, or impose regulatory measures, desirable as they may be? And even when
such  information  disclosure  requirements  are  successfully  imposed  in  a  particular  market  in  a
particular  jurisdiction,  and  regulatory  measures  put  in  place,  would  there  not  be  the  danger  of  the
market migrating offshore? Market participants are quite willing to take advantage of opportunities for
disclosure or regulatory arbitrage that individual offshore centres may be keen in introducing so as to
attract business.
These are among  the  questions  now  being  asked  in  international  discussions. The task  of achieving
greater  transparency  in  international  finance  is  no  doubt  a  difficult  one,  but  it  is  in  the  interests  of
all  developed and emerging markets - to support this initiative, to light up the dark room. And without
going into the technical details, let me say this: with adequate international cooperation, involving all
5
BIS Review 120/1999
the significant financial centres, this is achievable. Regulatory authorities from these centres may just
have to be a little more forceful. They could collectively say that these are the disclosure rules we have
laid down on the basis of international consensus, under the auspices of an authoritative institution on
international finance.* They could further emphasise that the disclosure rules are essential safeguards
for systemic stability in international finance that is in the interests of all. If you wish to operate in our
markets,  or  make  use  of  our  market  infrastructures,  including  effecting  any  payment  or  settlement
arising  from  relevant  transactions,  as  participants  or  as  intermediaries,  you  have  to  follow  these
disclosure rules and ensure that you deal only with those who follow these rules.
The regulation of international finance is even more difficult, but I think the same cooperative spirit
can be applied, if indeed regulation in whatever form is considered necessary. But then, looking at the
situation facing the key players in a position to influence the direction of this important reform, I doubt
whether the political will is there to make changes of this nature. Views of strong domestic lobbies
may  prevail  and  urgent  domestic  issues  may  divert  attention.  As  you  may  know,  it  is  not  the
desirability of reform, nor the technical feasibility of the details, that dictates action or inaction, it is,
regrettably,  more  often  than  not,  the  political  reality.  Meanwhile,  international  discussions  on  this
subject  are  moving  into  a  critical  stage  when  we  will  either  see  results  or  see  much  recent  effort
jettisoned as momentum is lost.
Regional initiatives
What  recourses,  then,  are  left  to  small  open  markets  such  as  our  own  to  enable  us  to  pursue  the
legitimate goal of ensuring monetary and financial stability? Not a lot, I am afraid. We can certainly
tackle the smallness, in terms of building bigger markets and effective shock absorbers, but I would be
really loath to see openness tackled, for this would imply restrictions and controls that undermine the
efficiency of international financial intermediation and hamper the potential for economic growth and
development.
Elsewhere,  I  have  addressed  a  few  times  the  question  of how  we  can  build  bigger  markets  through
regional cooperative efforts. The idea of an Asian Monetary Union is far-fetched. I would be the first
to admit that, even though I also claim to be the first to draw attention to the idea publicly. So I will
not  go  into  that  now,  or  the  subject  of  regional  monetary  cooperation,  except  to  say  that  we  shall
continue,  for  the  time  being,  to  urge  the  building  of  a  more  robust  financial  infrastructure  for  the
region, and the improvement and harmonisation of regulatory and supervisory standards. These need
not be pursued or be seen as preludes to further steps in a particular direction in the context of any
wider regional initiative, but purely as things desirable in their own right, managing risks and reducing
the probability of systemic problems occurring.
We have a number of regional initiatives in this area, and have made some, but slow, progress. There
are  the  liquidity  assistance  arrangements  in  the  form  of  the  bilateral  repurchase  agreements  we
initiated  and  put  in  place  in  1995.  Then  there  are  the  standing  invitations  from  us  to  other  central
banks  in  the  region  to  have  their  real-time  gross  settlement  (RTGS)  payment  systems,  when
constructed, linked up with our own. And if such linkages are also established among themselves then
we will have a robust network of RTGS payment systems to facilitate the safe transfer of money in
this region. We also have another standing invitation to others to have debt clearing systems similarly
linked  up  to  form  what  we  would  like  to  call  the  Asiaclear,  to  facilitate  investment  flows  across
markets  in  this  region.  This  will  also  help  the  development  of  a  regional  debt  market.  We  shall
persevere with these efforts.
* This could be a reformed IMF or a BIS with enhanced roles. Or it could be a new World Finance Organisation (WFO),
mirroring the WTO.
BIS Review 120/1999
6
Domestic responses
On the domestic front, we all, in the first place, have to put our own house in order, if indeed there are
shortcomings in economic policies generally, or monetary and financial policies in particular. But one
lesson from the financial crisis is that, even if you are white as snow, you are still vulnerable to the
vagaries  of international finance,  and  will  continue to  be  so, if they  are  not  satisfactorily  addressed
soon at the international or regional levels. This vulnerability makes the authorities, particularly those
of small open markets, uneasy, as the task of maintaining monetary and financial stability has become
a very onerous one.
For the purpose of self-fortification, the small open markets need to make greater efforts to strengthen
domestic monetary and financial systems. They may need to do so to such an extent as to go beyond
established practices and standards of the large developed markets, simply because there is greater risk
for them than for the larger markets of being overwhelmed by international capital. This approach will
involve costs, and this should be recognised and accepted.
First,  it  may  require  substantial  resources - witness  the  enlargement  of  the  monetary  base  in  Hong
Kong to build a big cushion to absorb the impact of volatile short-term capital flows and to reduce the
sensitivity of interest rates to those flows. This involved committing over US$10 billion of our foreign
reserves as a shock absorber. We can afford this, but this may not be the case for other small open
markets.
Second,  it  may  also  involve  the  regulators  playing  a  more  proactive  role  in  market  development,
anticipating  and  pre-empting  systemic  problems.  This  is  very  much  the  background  to  the  banking
reforms now in train, to the public discussions about consolidation of the banking sector, and also to
the merger of the exchanges.
Third,  it  certainly  requires  a  much  higher  degree  of  cooperation  and  coordination  among  different
domestic  regulators,  and  for  each  to  take  into  account  the  wider  cross-market  issues  that  have  a
bearing on systemic stability. This means a greater regulatory burden for all and greater inconvenience
to  market  participants,  and  possibly  implications  for  the  legal  and  institutional  arrangements  for
regulation.
Fourth, this approach may involve tighter rules for the markets. The critics may again say that this will
further erode market freedom. But should we be so dogmatic? In any case, it is all a matter of degree.
In the end, it is the public interest that counts. Is  there, for example,  anything  wrong  in  restrictions
against  the  holding  of  large  dominating  positions  in  any  particular  market,  or  against  the  taking  of
market moving activities? The purpose of a market is price discovery. There is no objection for buying
low and selling high, and I would wish anybody who is attempting that the best of luck. But there is no
legitimate reason for anybody to be operating in a market in a manner that has the sole aim of moving
the price in order to make a profit. Tighter rules aside, it is interesting, and indeed slightly worrying, to
note that stronger forms of restrictions and controls have been gaining currency among some monetary
authorities  or  regulators  in  the  past  two  years.  These  range  from  restrictions  on  domestic  credit  to
some forms of exchange controls. This response is quite understandable and may be a reflection of the
failure of the international financial architecture to accommodate the needs of small markets. But it is
also regrettable, given the enormous benefit that international capital has brought to the region.
For  the  immediate  future,  self-fortification,  in  one  form  or  another,  will  probably  continue  to  be  a
prominent  policy  feature  in  the  management  of  the  monetary  and  financial  systems  of  small  open
markets.  This  is  one  reason  why  we  in  Hong  Kong  have  been  pressing  ahead  with  many  domestic
reform initiatives to strengthen our monetary and financial systems. There are many proposals still on
the table. We need to make quick progress, for the current reprieve as the highly leveraged institutions
lick their wounds may not last for long. In my opinion they have not met their Nemesis yet. We should
not assume that they have, nor should we necessarily wish that they should, remembering that free and
open  financial  markets  have  been  generally  beneficial  to  economic  growth  and  development.  Our
objective  is  to  harness  this  process  while  limiting  the  destabilising  influences.  And  so  let  us  also
continue to push hard for the reform of the international financial architecture. We need to persevere
on all the IRD fronts, and by this I mean the international, regional and domestic fronts, and not the
Inland Revenue Department that is loved and hated by accountants.
7
BIS Review 120/1999
