  Graeme Wheeler: The global economy, New Zealand’s economic outlook 
and the Policy Targets Agreement 
Speech  by  Mr  Graeme  Wheeler,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the 
Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce, Christchurch, 3 February 2016. 
 Good morning and thank you for the opportunity to meet with you again, it’s a great pleasure 
to be here. I believe this is the 23rd year in which the Reserve Bank has been invited to meet 
with the Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce and offer some thoughts on the state 
of the economy. 
If  it  is  helpful  I’ll  start  with  a  few  comments  on  the  global  economy,  before  turning  to  the 
domestic economy, the Policy Targets Agreement and the outlook for monetary policy. 
The global economy 
1. 
Last year the global economy hit a soft patch and financial markets have had a rocky start to 
the  current  year.  Global  growth,  at  3.1  percent,  was  the  slowest  since  2009  despite 
unprecedented monetary stimulus and falling oil prices. This wasn’t the first slowdown since 
the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), although previous episodes have largely occurred in the 
advanced economies, such as in the EU area in 2012. Indeed, the emerging and developing 
countries,  led  by  China,  have  delivered  a  strong  growth  performance  in  recent  years, 
accounting for about 80 percent of global growth since 2010 (measured in purchasing power 
parity terms)1. 
This pattern began to change in mid-2014 with weaker trade volumes and slower growth in 
emerging markets – and especially in China, Russia, Brazil and South Africa. During 2015, 
foreign net capital outflows from emerging markets totalled USD 735 billion, the majority of 
which was out of China – the largest amount since 20082. Growth picked up in the advanced 
economies – particularly in the US and European Union. 
The slowdown in global growth hasn’t been for lack of monetary stimulus by central banks. In 
the history of the world as we know it, monetary conditions in recent years have never been 
easier.3  
A  particular  concern  during  2015  was  the  slow  growth  (2  percent)  in  the  volume  of 
merchandise  trade.  Since  the  mid-1960s  there  have  only  been  five  occasions  of  weaker 
trade growth – each was associated with a major slowdown in global GDP growth (OPEC1, 
OPEC2, Asia Crisis and US high tech bubble, and the GFC)4. The current weakness in trade 
volumes reflects the sluggish recovery in investment in advanced economies, slower growth 
in emerging markets, high inventories of commodities, and reduced import intensity in China. 
The Baltic Dry Index, which measures the cost of shipping raw materials such as minerals 
                                                
1  M Obstfeld, “The Global Economy in 2016”, IMF Survey Magazine, January 2016. 
2  Financial Times, “Capital Flight from China worse than thought”, January 20, 2016. 
3  Several developments illustrate this: policy rates are close to zero in most advanced economies, and negative 
in some; quantitative easing by the ECB and BoJ last year was the highest since 2011; sovereign bond yields 
in several countries – mainly in Europe – are currently negative for 2 year maturities and in some cases 5 year 
maturities; the policy rate at the Bank of England is the lowest since its inception in 1694; prices of financial 
assets and real estate surged to record levels in many countries; Switzerland sold 10 year bonds at a negative 
yield, and Mexico twice issued 100 year foreign-currency bonds that were heavily oversubscribed. 
4  OECD Economic Outlook; November 2015, page 19. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  and grains, has fallen nearly 70 percent since the end of July 2015 and is at its lowest level 
since the index was established 30 years ago. 
Figure 1: World trade volumes and GDP growth 
Source OECD. 
 Forecasts of global GDP growth in 2016 look a bit more promising with the IMF, World Bank, 
BIS, and OECD forecasting growth of between 2.9 and 3.4 percent. However, if world trade 
remains depressed and market volatility continues, we are likely to see downward revisions 
to these forecasts. 
These  institutional  projections  show  improving  growth  in  most  advanced  and  emerging 
market  countries  (although  with  slower  growth  in  China)  and  a  pickup  in  world  trade.  All 
institutions see the balance of risks lying on the downside, with the main risks being: 
• 
Monetary  policy  in  the  three  largest  central  banks  is  on  a  divergent  path  with  the 
Federal Reserve having begun to raise the Fed Funds rate, while further monetary 
easing is possible in the euro-area and Japan. This policy divergence could lead to 
greater financial market volatility and uncertainty. 
The  weakness  in  commodity  prices  could  be  greater  than  projected  and  further 
reduce growth in commodity producers such as Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Russia, Saudi-
Arabia and South Africa. 
A further slowdown in China could feed through into lower demand and production 
in China’s many trading partners. For example, 10 percent of the European Union’s 
exports and 18 percent of Japan’s exports go to China. 
The rapid build-up in non-financial corporate debt and falling corporate profitability in 
emerging markets pose risks to banking systems and to broader stability  in these 
economies.  Non-financial  corporate  debt  in  emerging  market  countries  has 
increased from 60 percent of GDP to 90 percent of GDP since early 2009. At the 
same  time,  average  emerging market  profitability  fell  sharply  in  2015  and  is  at  its 
lowest level in a decade.5  
                                                   
5  P  Turner,  The  Financing  of  Emerging  Markets  Non-Financial  Companies,  BIS  note  to  G20  Finance  and 
Central Bank Deputies Meeting, 14 December 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Figure 2: Non-Financial Corporate Debt 
  Note:  The  advanced  economies  group  contains  Australia,  Canada,  the  euro  area,  Japan,  Sweden, 
Switzerland,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States.  The  emerging  economies  group  contains 
Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Korea, Mexico, Poland, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa and 
Turkey. 
Sources: IMF, Bank for International Settlements. 
At the country level, China represents the greatest risk to global growth given its impact on 
global  trade  volumes  and  commodity  prices,  the  rapid  build-up  in  corporate  indebtedness 
and  the  difficult  switching  strategy  (away  from  investment  and  manufacturing  towards 
stronger private consumption and services) that is underway. China accounted for 40 percent 
of  global  growth  in  2014.  Although  its  output  is  60  percent  of  that  of  the  US  (at  market 
exchange  rates),  imports  of  non-oil  commodities  are  around  2½  times  those  of  the  US. 
Market  forecasts  suggest  that  China’s  economic  growth  is  currently  in  the  5  to  7  percent 
range and supported by strong services sector production, whereas growth in activity in the 
manufacturing and construction sectors has slowed substantially. 
An  area  to  watch  closely  is  the  rapid  rise  in  China’s  corporate  indebtedness.  At  around 
220 percent of GDP, China’s debt burden is not the highest among the largest economies, 
but the extent of its debt accumulation (over 70 percent of GDP in 6 years) is unprecedented. 
Most of the increase represents SOE debt, mainly in the areas of real estate, construction, 
mining and utilities. Many of China’s 155,000 SOEs are losing money, leverage has soared, 
and the average return on assets is low and falling. A key challenge will be how to begin the 
necessary de-leveraging process without causing a major slowdown in growth. 
Simulations  by  the  OECD  suggest  that  a  reduction  of  2  percentage  points  in  Chinese 
domestic demand growth over the next two years, if accompanied by the types of financial 
market impacts on equity prices and uncertainly and risk premia that we observed in August 
last year and again more recently, would lower global growth by ¾ – 1 percentage point on 
average in 2016–20176. Its impact would be greater if this were accompanied by a sizeable 
and prolonged depreciation in the RMB that exports deflation to the rest of the world. 
                                                
6 
“OECD Economic Outlook”, November 2015, pages 27–28. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Outlook for the New Zealand economy 
2. 
Our economy has faced a wide range of shocks since the GFC, some positive for growth, 
some  negative.  A  partial  list  includes:  the  tightening  in  global  liquidity  in  the  immediate 
aftermath  of  the  GFC;  the  Canterbury  earthquakes;  2012/13  drought;  terms  of  trade  that 
reached  a  40  year  high;  the  70  percent  peak  to  trough  movement  in  dairy  prices;  the 
75 percent  fall  in  oil  prices;  record  net  migration  and  labour  force  participation;  sizeable 
movements  in  the  real  exchange  rate  and  annual  house  price  inflation  in  Auckland  that 
reached 27 percent. Overall, the economy appears to have done reasonably well despite the 
headwinds created by some of these developments. 
The  economy  is  in  its  7th  year  of  expansion.  Annual  GDP  growth  slowed  to  around 
2½ percent in the first half of 2015, primarily due to the sharp decline in dairy prices, but the 
economy is projected to grow at around 3 percent over the next couple of years. At this stage 
there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the  expansion  will  stop.  However,  more  so  than  in  recent 
years, there are greater uncertainties around the outlook, and, as with the global economy, 
the balance of risks lies on the downside. Foremost among these are the possibility of slower 
growth in China, weaker than projected dairy prices, and the implications of a serious El Nino 
event (although it appears that this threat has eased due to higher rainfall in recent weeks). 
The main upside risk is around the possibility of continuing strong migration inflows. 
i) 
 
ii) 
 
 Slower growth in China 
A marked slowdown in the Chinese economy would have important implications for 
New  Zealand,  especially  if  accompanied  by  a  sharp  decline  in  China’s  household 
consumption. This would reduce the volume and price of our commodity exports to 
China, and likely affect our services trade, including exports of education services 
and tourism. Its overall impact on our economy would be magnified through other 
trade  channels  as  China  is  the  largest  trading  partner  for  over  100  countries  – 
including our main trading partners. 
El Nino 
New Zealand is experiencing El Nino weather conditions. Its impact on the economy 
will depend on whether it leads to drought conditions and, if so, where the drought 
hits and how long it lasts. A prolonged drought would lower agricultural production 
and reduce farm incomes. New Zealand’s last major El Nino occurred in 1997, and 
like the 2013 drought, reduced GDP by around ¾ percent. 
Farming  patterns  however,  have  changed  considerably  since  the  1997  El  Nino 
event.  Since  1996,  the  dairy  herd  has  increased  by  61  percent,  while  sheep  and 
beef numbers have fallen by 37 percent and 24 percent respectively. Dairy numbers 
have  expanded  in  Canterbury,  Southland,  Waikato  and  Otago  with  much  of  the 
growth in Canterbury facilitated by extensive investment in irrigation. The severity of 
the 2012/13 drought reflected its impact in Northland, Waikato and the Manawatu – 
areas with heavy concentrations of dairying, but limited irrigation.7  
                                                
7  D Ford, A Wood, ‘El Niño and its impact on the New Zealand Economy’, RBNZ Analytical notes AN2015/07, 
December 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Figure 3: Irrigation by region (share of total hectares farmed) 
 Source: Statistics New Zealand Agricultural Census. 
iii) 
 
iv) 
 
Dairy prices 
Most dairy farmers have experienced two consecutive years of negative cash flows 
and cut back their spending. Our December 2015 MPS projections assumed that the 
price  of  wholesale  milk  power  would  rise  gradually  and  reach  USD  3300/metric 
tonne  by  mid-2018.  The  current  auction  price  of  USD  2188/metric  tonne  remains 
well below this level. Farm gate prices are falling in the US and Europe causing milk 
production to slow, while Fonterra expects production in New Zealand to decline by 
around  6  percent  in  the  current  season.  Last  week,  Fonterra  reduced  its  pay-out 
estimate for this season by 10 percent. 
Net migration 
Over the past 3 years net permanent long-term migration has totaled 133,000. The 
December MPS projections assumed that we are about half way through the current 
migration cycle, which would make it the strongest net migration surge for several 
decades. However, there is considerable uncertainty around the magnitude of future 
flows  given  the  difficulty  in  forecasting  arrivals.  A  stronger  or  more  persistent  net 
migration  inflow  would  create  demand  pressures,  but  also  raise  the  economy’s 
supply  potential.  The  impact  on  consumer  price  inflation  would  depend  on  how 
quickly  the  supply  response  (eg  from  the  growth  in  labour  force)  offsets  the 
additional demand generated by the net migration. However, property prices in the 
Auckland market and elsewhere would be pushed further upwards. 
Policy Targets Agreement 
3. 
While  the  Policy  Targets  Agreement  (PTA)  for  monetary  policy  is  a  relatively  simple 
document, we continue to be surprised at the wide range of interpretations that we see in the 
media and in commentaries. I would like to take this opportunity to discuss: what the PTA 
says;  the  thinking  behind  the  changes  introduced  in  2012;  and  how  the  Reserve  Bank 
interprets  the  PTA  –  particularly  in  relation  to  recent  data  on  inflation  outcomes,  and  in 
relation to monetary policy going forward. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  What the 2012 PTA says 
i) 
The PTA has several important features, including: 
• 
A well-defined policy target to keep future CPI inflation outcomes between 1 percent 
and  3  percent  on  average  over  the  medium  term,  with  a  focus  on  keeping  future 
average inflation near the 2 percent target mid-point. 
Recognition that inflation might deviate from its trend for several reasons such as 
international  commodity  price  movements,  natural  disasters  and  government  tax 
and other policy measures that affect prices. 
A requirement that the Bank monitor asset prices, have regard to the efficiency and 
soundness  of  the  financial  system  and  seek  to  avoid  unnecessary  instability  in 
output, interest rates and the exchange rate. 
Considerations underpinning the 2012 PTA 
ii) 
The 2012 PTA, which was signed by the Minister of Finance and myself in September 2012, 
recognises  the  flexible  approach  needed  in  making  monetary  policy  decisions.  Several 
considerations were important in this regard. 
• 
The  1  to  3  percent  target  range  remains  the  central  focus  of  the  Bank’s  flexible 
inflation  targeting  framework,  as  has  been  the  case  since  2002.  The  range  was 
deliberately framed in a medium term context, with an “on average” connotation and 
recognized that inflation might move outside this band due to global developments 
in  commodity  markets,  natural  disasters,  and/or  government  fiscal  and  regulatory 
decisions. 
The concept of a mid-point objective was introduced with the objective of helping to 
lower  and  stabilise  inflation  expectations  close  to  2  percent.  This  was  important 
because  CPI  inflation  had  averaged  2.3  percent  since  2000  and  measures  of 
inflation  expectations  were  averaging  2.5  percent  or  higher.  The  language 
deliberately  emphasised  the  medium-term  context  of  the  mid-point  objective.  This 
was  because  attempting  to  move  rapidly  to  a  mid-point  target  could  create 
damaging  volatility  in  output  and  key  relative  prices,  including  asset  prices,  that 
could,  in  turn,  threaten  financial  stability  and  undermine  longer-term  growth 
prospects. 
The  requirement  that  the  Bank  monitor  asset  prices  was  inserted  for  two  related 
reasons. First, because of concerns at the rapid house price inflation and spillover 
into  spending  that  New  Zealand  experienced  in  the  mid-2000s  (which  was  a  key 
consideration  behind  the  steady  increase  in  the  OCR  during  the  mid-2000s  that 
peaked at 8.25 percent in July 2007). Second, was the desire to avoid the serious 
economic  and  social  damage  caused  by  sharp  falls  in  house  prices  that  many 
economies experienced during the GFC. 
In a similar vein, the addition of the phrase requiring the Bank to “have regard to the 
efficiency  and  soundness  of  the  financial  system”,  recognised  that  interest  rates 
affect the demand for credit, and therefore the balance sheets of households and 
financial  intermediaries.  The  language  requires  the  Bank  to  consider  whether  its 
monetary policy choices could undermine the efficiency and stability of the domestic 
financial system. 
Recent Inflation data 
Annual  headline  CPI  inflation  is  currently  0.1  percent.  Headline  inflation  is  falling 
nearly everywhere across the globe, and is below the target range in nearly all of the 
30 or so economies whose central banks pursue flexible inflation targeting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     iii) 
• 
6 
       Headline  inflation  in  New  Zealand  is  below  the  1  to  3  percent  band  primarily 
because  of  negative  tradables  inflation  caused  by  the  slow  global  economic 
recovery and the 75 percent decline in oil prices that has taken them to a 13 year 
low. Domestic petrol prices at the end of 2015 were 8 percent lower than a year ago, 
reducing  CPI  inflation  by  0.4  percentage  points.  In  addition,  the  Government’s 
decision to reduce motor vehicle levies has taken 0.3 percentage points off the CPI. 
Annual core inflation, at 1.6 percent, is consistent with the target range.8 This is a 
useful measure of underlying inflation because it excludes one-off or highly volatile 
price  movements  that  do  not  reflect  fundamental  sources  of  underlying  inflation 
pressures. 
Survey measures of inflation expectations have fallen and are now consistent with 
inflation settling at 2 percent in the medium term. 
Figure 4: Inflation expectations surveys and fitted curve 
Source: ANZ Bank, Aon Consulting, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates. 
 Non-tradables inflation is running at an annual rate of around 1.8 percent, but has 
been a little lower than forecast in recent years. This has also been the case in other 
advanced economies. Part of the reason is because the Phillip’s curve, which shows 
the relationship between unemployment gaps and annual CPI inflation, has flattened 
since the 1990s. 
                                                
8  G Price “Some Revisions to the sectorial factor model of Core Inflation”, RBNZ Analytical Notes, AN 2013/06, 
October 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Figure 5: Annual CPI inflation and unemployment gap 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
 The  flatness  of  the  relationship,  in  contrast  with  the  clear  negative  relationship  during  the 
1970s and 1980s, means that the economic recovery has translated into less inflation than 
historically might have been the case. 
There are several possible explanations for the flatness of the relationship. These include: 
inflation expectations embodied in wage and price setting behavior have fallen and become 
more  stable;  globalisation  and  increased  competition  from  offshore  is  limiting  the  ability  of 
businesses to raise prices; and greater labour mobility, high levels of net immigration, and 
concerns about job security may mean that workers do not press as much for higher wages 
when  domestic  demand  increases.  Over  the  past  three  years,  higher  than  expected 
immigration appears to have been an important factor in moderating labour market pressures 
and wage outcomes. 
Monetary policy going forward 
4. 
In balancing risks and making judgements about monetary policy we view the PTA flexibly, 
rather than taking a mechanistic approach. This is necessary in view of the numerous factors 
the  Bank  is  required  to  consider  –  such  as  asset  prices,  financial  stability  and  efficiency, 
volatility in output, interest rates and the exchange rate. All of these factors have bands of 
uncertainty  attached  to  them.  There  are  also  considerable  uncertainties  associated  with 
economic forecasting, and uncertainties as to which transmission channels monetary policy 
will operate through and the lags involved in achieving desired outcomes. 
The Bank’s main influence over inflation comes through its scope to influence the economy’s 
output gap and the degree of non-tradable inflation (which accounts for around half of the 
regimen that makes up the consumers price index). Monetary policy can also at times have a 
significant effect on inflation through its influence on the exchange rate and tradables prices. 
There  are  major  structural  forces  acting  to  reduce  inflation  that  domestic  monetary  policy 
cannot  influence.  These  forces,  arising  typically  from  trends  in  globalisation,  information 
technology and demography, have exerted substantial downward pressure on global inflation 
in recent years. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Monetary policy also needs to work alongside other policies that can affect output growth and 
activity in markets, such as the housing market. For example, the Government’s fiscal policy 
has  been  contractionary  in  recent  years  and the  regulatory framework  around  the  housing 
market affects the supply and demand dynamics within that sector. 
Annual headline inflation is currently 0.1 percent. This is primarily because of the negative 
inflation in the tradables sector, and the decline in oil prices in particular. Low oil prices are 
recognised in the PTA as a factor that can legitimately cause inflation to be outside the target 
band. It would be inappropriate to attempt to offset the low oil price effect through the OCR, 
which tends to influence inflation outcomes over an 18 month to 2 year horizon. 
Our goal is to anchor inflation expectations close to the mid-point of the price stability target 
range,  while  retaining  discretion  to  respond  to  inflation  and  output  shocks  in  a  flexible 
manner.  In  this  regard,  some  recent  inflation  indicators  are  encouraging.  Annual  core  CPI 
inflation, at 1.6 percent is well within the target range, and the Bank’s combined measures of 
annual  inflation  expectations  are  averaging  2  percent.  We  would  not  wish  to  see  inflation 
expectations become unstable and decline significantly. 
Monetary  policy  is  highly  accommodative  and  the  OCR  is  back  to  historic  lows.  Since  the 
beginning of 2016, the New Zealand dollar has depreciated by around 4 percent on a trade-
weighted  basis  and  market  interest  rates  have  declined.  Some  further  exchange  rate 
depreciation is desirable given the ongoing weakness in export prices. 
We believe that imbalances in the Auckland property market pose a financial stability risk. 
Record  low  interest  rates,  along  with  record  net  migration  inflows,  strong  bank  lending, 
heightened investor activity, and insufficient housing supply have led to strong house price 
inflation in Auckland and an average house price to income ratio over 9.5 that is 70 percent 
higher than in the rest of the country. In addition, house price inflation has been accelerating 
in Waikato/Bay of Plenty, Northland and in Central Otago. 
Recent indicators suggest that housing activity in Auckland may be beginning to slow as a 
result  of  the  Government’s  measures  introduced  on  1  October  2015  and  the  macro-
prudential policy measures applying to investor-related lending. We will have a better feel for 
this  when  we  see  the  February  and  March  2016  housing  data.  Nevertheless,  the  Bank’s 
macro-prudential policies have played an important role in reducing the risks associated with 
the growth in bank lending. Across the banking sector the share of high LVR lending (LVRs 
of  80  percent  or  higher)  has  fallen  from  21  percent  of  overall  housing  lending  before  the 
introduction of LVRs, to 13 percent currently. 
Looking  ahead,  monetary  policy  will  continue  to  be  accommodative.  With  the  ongoing 
weakness in commodity prices, and particularly oil, it will take longer for headline inflation to 
reach  the  target  range.  On  the  other  hand,  the  data  on  core  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations are more encouraging in terms of consistency with the PTA. 
However, most of the risks facing the economy are downside ones. Important amongst them 
is a rising concern about the strength of the global economy and increased financial market 
volatility. This reflects several factors, including the importance of growth in China and other 
emerging  markets,  tensions  in  oil  and  other  commodity  markets,  and  the  prospect  of 
increasing divergence between monetary policies in the major economies. 
In addition to the powerful structural forces that are reducing global inflation, our economy 
has  been  hit  by  several  important  supply-side  shocks.  These  include  falling  oil  and  dairy 
prices,  strong  net  migration  flows  and  rising  labour  force  participation.  Some,  such  as  the 
changes in oil prices, net migration and participation, are positive for growth, but all of the 
supply shocks are exerting downward pressure on inflation in New Zealand. 
These issues and the requirements in the PTA in respect of asset prices, financial stability 
and efficiency and volatility in output, interest rates and the exchange rate, mean that there is 
much to consider in determining monetary policy that extends well beyond the current level 
of headline inflation. If concerns deepen around the prospects for the global economy and its 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  impact on New Zealand, some further policy easing may be needed over the coming year to 
ensure future average inflation settles near the middle of the target range. We will continue to 
monitor closely the emerging economic and financial data. 
Concluding comment 
The outlook for the New Zealand economy looks positive, with growth forecast to increase to 
an  annual  rate  of  3  percent  and  inflation  projected  to  move  back  within  the  target  band. 
However, there are greater uncertainties around the economic outlook than normal, and the 
balance of risks lies on the downside. Foremost among these risks are the difficult external 
environment, weak commodity prices, and unusually strong net migration flows. 
In managing economic risks and assessing monetary policy we will continue to draw on the 
flexibility contained in the PTA and avoid taking a mechanistic approach to interpreting the 
PTA. A mechanistic approach could lead to an inappropriate fixation on headline inflation. It 
would  cut  across  the  flexibility  deliberately  built  into  the  PTA  framework  and  risk  creating 
serious distortions in the financial system, housing market and broader economy. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
