  
 
John Iannis Mourmouras: Global risks in an era of negative interest rates 
Speech by Professor John Iannis Mourmouras, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at 
the “Asset and Risk Management Seminar for Public Sector Investors”, organized by the Lee 
Kuan Yew School of Public Policy of the National University of Singapore in association with 
OMFIF, Singapore, 29 March 2016. 
 Views expressed in this speech are personal views and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Greece. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Singapore and I would like to thank the Lee Kuan 
Yew School of Public Policy of the National University of Singapore and OMFIF for inviting 
me to speak to you today. 
My  speech  will  be  structured  in  two  sections.  The  first  section  looks  into  today’s  negative 
interest rate world, dissecting the factors that have brought us here and also exploring the 
theory  behind,  and  the  limits  of,  a  negative  interest  rate  policy  and  its  potential  hazards. 
Section 2 analyses other downside risks for global markets, placing particular emphasis on 
China and its huge private debt, on the sharp fall in oil prices, and on Brexit. 
1. 
On negative rates 
Living in a negative interest rate environment 
1.1 
After nine years of low interest rates and large-scale market interventions, the consensus is 
that  this  unconventional  monetary  policy  is  not  temporary,  while  in  most  advanced 
economies the prospect for normalisation seems rather remote. Indeed, most of continental 
Europe  (the  euro  area,  Denmark,  Sweden  and  Switzerland)  and,  as  of  last  January,  also 
Japan  have  moved  towards  a  much  more  accommodative  monetary  policy  by  introducing 
negative  policy  interest  rates,  and/or  negative  central  bank  deposit  rates.  Together  with 
forward guidance and quantitative easing, such measures have created an unprecedented 
situation,  in  which  nominal  interest  rates  are  negative  in  a  number  of  European  countries 
across a range of maturities in the benchmark yield curve, from overnight to even five- or ten-
year maturities! Indeed, 88 of the 346 securities in the Bloomberg Eurozone Sovereign Bond 
Index have negative yields, thus nearly $2 trillion of debt issued by European governments is 
currently  trading  at  negative  yields.  Illustrative  examples  are  those  of  Switzerland  and 
Germany, in which 18 out of 19 bond issues and 14 out of 18 bond issues respectively are 
priced with negative yields. As a result, almost one quarter of the world’s GDP is produced in 
countries with negative interest rates. 
A chronicle 
Sweden’s Riksbank was the first central bank to experiment with negative interest rate policy, 
or NIRP as it has been commonly known, briefly moving the rate it pays on commercial bank 
deposits to –0.25% in 2009. In February 2016, it brought its benchmark interest rate even 
further into negative territory, to a record low of –0.5% from –0.35%, not having met its 2% 
inflation  target  for  four  years.  The  second  central  bank  to  have  taken  similar  actions  by 
setting  its  deposit  rate  below  zero  was  the  Danmarks  Nationalbank  (DNB),  which  in  early 
July  2012,  cut  its  certificate  of  deposit  rate  from  zero  to  –0.20%,  while  in  early  2015,  it 
pushed this rate to as low as –0.75%. 
The  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  announced  the  introduction  of  negative  interest  rates  
(–0.25%) on sight deposit account balances in December 2014 (effective 22 January 2015). 
In  mid-January,  with  pressure  on  the  Swiss  franc  unabated,  the  SNB  discontinued  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
minimum exchange rate and lowered the interest rate on sight deposit accounts further to –
0.75%. 
Last but not least, in January 2016, the Bank of Japan (BoJ), which has seen the effects of 
its  last  stimulus  package  dissipate  as  a  result  of  tax  increases  and  slowing  demand  from 
China,  cut  the  rate  it  offers  on  new  deposits  to  –0.1%,  from  0.1%,  adopting  a  three-tier 
system  for  interest  rates  on  excess  reserves.  Under  the  planned  three-tier  scheme,  the 
average outstanding balances of excess reserves that each financial institution held in 2015 
will  still  have  the  current  interest  rate  of  0.1%.  This  could  be  deemed  the  BoJ’s  way  of 
showing  its  consideration  for  financial  institutions’  cooperation  towards  monetary  base 
expansion via Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE). A zero interest rate will 
be applied to the statutory required reserves plus the reserve balance corresponding to the 
credit provided through the BoJ’s various loan support programs. In addition, as the excess 
reserves increase alongside the BoJ’s continued buying operations of Japanese Government 
Bonds (JGB), a certain ratio of these new reserves (“macro add-on”) will be subject to the 
zero  rate. Thus, the  penalty  rate  of  –0.1%  will  only  be  applied  to  a fraction  of the  excess 
reserves, as the BoJ is concerned about minimising the damage to banks’ earnings. 
The following figures (Figure 1, Figure 2) clearly show the current key negative rates for the 
central banks I just mentioned and the very low levels of the 10-year government bond yields 
of  Germany,  Denmark,  Switzerland,  Sweden  and  Japan.  Moreover,  Japan  is  the  second 
country to sell 10-year bonds at a negative yield, after Switzerland last April. Tables 1–3 also 
provide detailed information about the impact of negative rate regimes on liquidity and retail 
rates. 
The ECB’s recent policy stance 
1.2 
Turning  to  the  euro  area’s  case,  let  me  quickly  remind  you  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy 
stance over the last nine years as a response to the worst financial crisis since the Great 
Depression, leading to negative interest rates and entering practically unchartered territory 
(Table 4). 
Some theory behind negative policy interest rates 
1.3 
In theory, the transmission of negative policy interest rates to economic activity should be 
close, but not similar, to a standard rate cut that leaves policy rates positive. Let me explain. 
One thing is a drop in interest rates from 2% to 1%, from 1% to zero, but another thing is a 
drop from zero to –0.5% to –1% and so on. 
Economists  used  to  think  that  policy  interest  rates  could  not  fall  below  zero.  They  talked 
about nominal interest rates having a “zero lower bound” (ZLB), but we know now that the 
lower  bound  to  interest  rates  is  not  exactly  zero,  but  below  zero!  I  focus  here  on  the 
transmission mechanism and on cash hoarding. 
A. Targeting interest rates to negative territory will reduce the costs to borrow for companies 
and  households,  driving  demand  for  loans  and  incentivizing  investment  and  consumer 
spending affecting the outlook for the economy, influencing confidence. These changes will 
in  turn  affect  the  investment  and  saving  decisions  of  businesses  and  households,  which 
should raise demand for domestically produced goods and services. By discouraging capital 
inflows,  there  will  be  downward  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate,  which  should  support 
external demand. Here are the transmission channels related to negative interest rates. 
B.  Holding  cash  is  costly  for  people  as  it  involves  storage,  insurance,  handling  and 
transportation  fees  (what  macroeconomists  call  “shoe-leather”  costs).  In  fact,  the  cost  of 
holding cash is what defines the effective lower bound on policy interest rates (i.e. the real 
constraint on the ability of central banks to set negative interest rates). Central banks can, in 
effect, safely reduce their policy rates in the amount of storage and insurance costs of money 
holdings  without  triggering  widespread  switching  to  cash  in  the  economy.  But  once  policy 
rates fall too far into the negative zone, i.e. below the costs of holding cash, people will start 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
to hoard money instead of holding the negative yielding deposits. At this point, cash will be 
held by people merely as a store of value, indistinguishable from bonds, banks will be left 
with less deposits and the economy with fewer loans. 
Potential risks from negative rates policy 
1.4 
There are, however, a number of concerns associated with the use of negative interest rates, 
each of which is considered in turn. 
I.  Erosion  of  bank  profitability:  As  negative  deposit  rates  impose  a  cost  on  banks  with 
excess reserves, there is a higher probability that the banks’ net interest margins (the gap 
between  commercial  banks’  lending  and  deposit  rates)  will  shrink,  since  banks  may  be 
unwilling  to  pass  negative  deposit  rates  onto  their  customers  to  avoid  an  erosion  of  their 
customer base and subsequent reduced profitability. The extent of the decline in profitability 
will  depend  on  the  degree  to  which  banks’ funding  costs  also fall. The central  bank  could 
reduce  concerns  about  bank  profitability  by  raising  the  threshold  at  which  the  negative 
central  bank  deposit  rate  applies,  as  the  Bank  of  Japan  recently  introduced  a  three-tier 
system, a different way from the ECB’s negative interest rate policy. Doing so, however, it 
could reduce the transmission of negative deposit rates to market rates, namely the power of 
negative  interest  rate  policy  transmission  through  the  credit  and  portfolio  rebalancing 
channel. Moreover, compressed long-term interest rates also reduce profit margins on the 
standard banking maturity transformation of short-term borrowing and lending at a somewhat 
longer term. So far, lenders have been reluctant to pass on the costs of negative rates to 
customers  and  have  taken  almost  all  of  the  burden.  But,  as  recent  research  by  the  BIS 
shows,  the  impact  on  profitability  becomes  more  drastic  over  time,  as  short-term  benefits 
such as lower rates of loan defaults diminish. 
II.  Negative  effects  on  financial  markets:  Money  market  funds  make  conservative 
investments  in  cash-equivalent  assets,  such  as  highly-rated  short-term  corporate  or 
government debt, to provide liquidity to investors and help them preserve capital by paying a 
modest positive return. While these funds aim to avoid reductions in net asset values, this 
objective may not be attainable if rates in the market are negative for a considerable period 
of time, prompting large outflows and closures and reducing liquidity in a key segment of the 
financial system. For insurance and pension funds, a low-for-long interest rate environment 
poses challenges, which may even be exacerbated if rates enter into negative territory. They 
may find themselves unable to meet fixed long-term obligations. Life insurance companies 
will also be less able to meet guaranteed returns. 
III. Excessive risk-taking: Increased financial stability risks, stemming from search for yield 
and  higher  leverage.  Keeping  interest  rates  at  negative  levels  for  a  long  time  increases 
borrowing attractiveness in key sectors of the economy and the risk of bubbles. This can not 
only lead to an inefficient allocation of capital, but leave certain investors with more risk than 
they appreciate, as investors in search of higher yields necessarily  turn to excessive risky 
assets. 
IV.  Disincentive  for  government  debt  reduction:  With  interest  rates  at  negative  levels, 
governments are under no pressure to reduce their debt. Negative rates actually encourage 
them to borrow more. And if government borrowing becomes a sort of free lunch, there is a 
clear  disincentive  for  fiscal  discipline.  Ultra-low  interest  rates  flatter  the  debt  service  ratio, 
painting  a  misleading  picture  of  debt  sustainability.  For  instance,  persistent  negative  rates 
may potentially act as an “anaesthetic” to governments of eurozone countries, especially in 
the  europeriphery,  meaning  that  they  will  proceed  only  slowly  with  fiscal  and  structural 
reforms, given the fiscal space that they gain from lower debt servicing costs.. 
V. Operational risks: The issuance of interest-bearing securities at negative yields may face 
design challenges. Areas that are commonly mentioned as sources of concern are interest-
bearing  securities,  particularly  floating-rate  notes  (renegotiating,  collecting  interest,  use  as 
collateral) in the context of negative interest rates. More generally, if negative rates were to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
prevail for long, they may entail the need to redesign debt securities, certain operations of 
financial  institutions,  the  recalculation  of  payment  of  interest  among  financial  agents,  and 
other  operational  innovations,  the  costs  of  which  may  offset  negative  rate  benefits.  For 
instance, most  option-pricing  models  either  do  not  work  or  do  not  work well  with  negative 
interest  rates,  particularly  entailing  risks  for  the  compatibility  of  trading  systems  and  other 
market infrastructure. 
In  brief,  persistent  negative  rates  may  change  expectations  and  create  distortions  (for 
instance, in terms of saving habits and, in that sense, they may be a topic for behavioural 
economists  to  look  at).  It  is  still  unknown  what  their  long-term  effects  will  be  (e.g.  on  the 
erosion of bank profitability). In contrast, QE has been tested successfully in the US and the 
UK and I would also like to remind you that monetary policy– conventional or unconventional 
– entails considerable time lags. It takes time to see the results at full length. However, there 
is definitely something positive about negative interest rates: it is a strong reminder that the 
time has come for other policy tools, including fiscal and structural ones. 
2. 
Other global risks 
China 
2.1 
Let  me  now  turn  to  other  global  risks,  starting  with  a  country  in  this  region  of  the  world: 
China.  Three  are  the  major  risks  concerning  China,  stemming  from:  a)  its  lower  growth 
prospects,  b)  significant  capital  outflows,  and  c)  rising  private  debt.  China  is  beginning  to 
rebalance  and  consolidate  its  economy.  Services  now  account  for  51%  of  GDP  and 
consumption’s GDP share is rising, while the current account surplus dropped to 2.7% from 
10%  in  2007.  Even  if  you  accept  the  lower  expected  growth  rate  for  China  around  6%  in 
2016,  trade  flows  to  the  rest  of  the  world  are  not  significant  and  this  is  in  contrast  with 
financial flows. 
Only recently I had been invited to give a personal verdict at an event in London and rank the 
above three downside risks facing China, namely  lower growth prospects, capital outflows 
(almost  US$160  billion  exited  the  economy  in  December  2015,  reaching  an  aggregate 
amount  of  almost  US$1  trillion  in  2015,  see  above  Figure  6)  and  private  debt  (which 
accounts for about 210% of China’s GDP). I gave the following ranking from bottom to top. At 
the bottom, I would place capital outflows, since the instrument of capital controls is always 
available and these days indeed with the blessing of the IMF. I would then place in second 
position the rise in private debt, since only less than 1% of it is held by foreigners, and it can 
be easily turned into public debt, if it comes to the worst, and I mean by that, all these state-
owned zombie companies which may lose their state guarantees, but whose debt may well 
be acquired by the government, thus increasing China’s public debt ratio, which is now low at 
60%  of  its  GDP.  Leaving  at  the  top,  as  the  biggest  risk,  the  rebalancing  of  the  economy 
which, however, will take years and, in my view, markets will have to learn to live with this. 
Oil prices 
2.2 
Since June 2014, oil prices have declined by more than 70%, after having stabilised above 
US$100 per barrel for four years and, more generally, after rising almost continuously since 
early 2000. By January 2016, oil prices traded around US$30 per barrel, a level not seen in 
the past 12 years (see Figure 7 below). 
In the context of weak global growth and zero or negative rate monetary policies, lower oil 
prices  are  both  a  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  challenge  for  major  economies.  While  the 
positive impact on oil importer countries, and especially households and corporates, should 
materialize in the medium term, the negative impact on oil exporter countries, particularly on 
fiscal balances and the exchange rates, is more immediate and could be amplified by the 
energy export dependence for respective countries. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
In  a  monetary  policy  context,  the  lower  inflation  observed  in  the  euro  area,  for  example, 
driven in part by the oil price decline, could de-anchor inflation expectations from the ECB’s 
target. Furthermore, in the US, the pressure on oil prices and subsequent pass-through to 
lower  inflation  levels  could  impact  the  economy  in  such  a  way  as  to  delay  the  pace  of 
normalisation of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy. It should also be noted that (like in 
1985) today’s low oil price is due to a combination of weak global demand and oversupply 
from oil-producer countries and hence, it is suggested, prices could stay stubbornly low for 
quite some time. 
Referendum on Brexit 
The UK has entered the final pre-election period for the referendum on Britain’s possible exit 
from the EU (Brexit), which will take place on 23 June 2016, the outcome of which is very 
uncertain  at  this  stage.  I  will  say  a  few  more  things  on  the  importance  of  the  British 
referendum  for  the  rest  of  the  EU  tomorrow  morning  in  my  lecture  on  Europe’s  political 
economy  at  the  event  hosted  by  the  Singaporean-German  Chamber  of  Industry  and 
Commerce. Today, I will limit myself to only one comment. It seems that the weak pound is 
the  only  “certainty”  across  the  spectrum  of  financial  markets!  Since  the  beginning  of 
December, the British pound has lost over 7% and 5% of its value against the euro and the 
US dollar respectively (see Figure 8), with a portion of this decline in spot price being cited as 
a “Brexit” premium by market participants. 
However, in implying any direct causality between Brexit and the pound’s depreciation, we 
should remind ourselves that the recent pound depreciation has occurred in parallel with a 
reassessment of the likely rate path of the Bank of England, with expectations for the Bank of 
England to follow the Fed in raising  interest rates, having decreased significantly over the 
same  period  with  the  market re-evaluating  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  potential  interest  rate 
path. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     7 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9 
      10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
