   Andrew Hauser: Between feast and famine – transparency, accountability and the 
Lender of Last Resort 
Speech by Mr Andrew Hauser, Executive Director for Banking, Payments and Financial 
Resilience  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  "The  Lender  of  Last  Resort:  An  International 
Perspective",  a  conference  sponsored  by  the  Committee  on  Capital  Markets  Regulation, 
Washington DC, 10 February 2016. 
 I am grateful to Nicholas Butt, Ronnie Driver, Tarkus Frost, Nicholas Govier, Rachel Greener, Andrew Lavender, 
Tim Taylor and Caspar Worthington for their help in preparing these remarks.  
Introduction 
Of  all  the  actions  taken  by  central  banks  during  the  financial  crisis,  some  of  the  most 
contentious involved the extension of huge sums in liquidity assistance to banks and other 
financial institutions. Those actions helped prevent global economic and financial meltdown. 
But they also triggered intense public debates around the globe about the appropriate scope 
and nature of central bank powers.  
One strand of this debate is led by those who feel that central banks lent “too much”, too often 
or  too  freely  during  the  crisis,  using  public  money  –  so  the  allegations  go  –  to  support 
institutions  of  dubious  solvency,  sometimes  in  secret,  protecting  bankers  from  their  own 
mistakes, and thereby stoking moral hazard for the future. The main policy conclusion from 
such  thoughts  is  that  central  banks’  Lender  of  Last  Resort  (LOLR)  activities  should  be 
constrained. 
But another strand in the debate draws the opposite conclusion from the crisis – focusing on 
the risk that central banks might lend “too little”, too rarely or too late, amplifying what might 
begin as short-term liquidity shortages into deeper or more persistent solvency concerns, and 
subsequently causing financial institutions to over-insure, reducing their capacity to lend. The 
main policy conclusion from this way of thinking is that central banks need stronger toolkits for 
detecting and responding to liquidity crises. 
These (deliberately stylised) perspectives seem diametrically opposed. National debates have 
tended to lean one way or the other, depending on each country’s specific crisis experiences. 
But, in truth, it is vital we pay heed to both. 
Without an effective LOLR framework, economies cannot hope to foster strong and sustainable 
growth over the long run. History shows that, sooner or later that growth, and the employment 
it supports, will be threatened by an unexpected withdrawal of liquidity from key parts of the 
financial  system,  unconnected  to  the  underlying  quality  of  real  assets  in  the  economy. 
Historically that liquidity risk resided primarily in the banking sector. But as economies migrate 
towards more market-based forms of finance, liquidity risk is increasingly likely to originate (or 
be concentrated) elsewhere: including broker-dealers, central counterparties (CCPs), or traded 
instruments themselves. The herd mentality that can develop during crises can sometimes 
only be tamed by well-designed intervention – be it covert or overt – using a credible backstop. 
Countries lacking such backstops are likely to sustain large-scale, and preventable, economic 
damage. So the risk of central banks having “too little” scope to carry out LOLR is real. 
At the same time, the public has a legitimate interest in avoiding “too much” LOLR. We cannot 
afford  for  financial  institutions  to  view  liquidity  support  as  a  substitute  for  prudent  financial 
management: central banks must not be “lenders of first resort”. And lending to institutions that 
are  in  need  of  capital  rather  than  liquidity  is  the  wrong  solution.  Given  the  uncertainties 
involved,  neither  outcome  can  be  avoided  with  certainty.  But  it  is  right  to  seek  robust 
safeguards against them. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   A well-designed LOLR framework must therefore get the balance right between lending “too 
little” and “too much”:  
– 
To help avoid “too little” LOLR, central banks must be given clear responsibilities and 
the  tools  and  powers  needed  to  carry  them  out,  including  the  ability  to  lend  to 
individual institutions, covertly if necessary to maintain financial stability. 
To help avoid “too much” LOLR, central banks must have strong risk management, 
be ring-fenced from special interests (in public or private sectors), have a clear public 
mandate specifying their scope for action, and be subject to strong transparency and 
accountability requirements. 
 There are powerful parallels between these design challenges, and those for monetary policy. 
Like monetary policy, LOLR is vitally important to an economy’s health, but involves intrinsically 
complex, technical judgments – including the solvency or otherwise of potential borrowers, the 
pricing, scale and maturity of loans, and the appropriate collateral. It is important that these 
judgments are made by experts. But, also like monetary policy, the consequences of these 
expert judgments have potentially wide-ranging effects on society. So they should only take 
place  within  a  clear  public  framework  of  delegated  authority.  This  combination  of  expert 
discretion within public parameters is sometimes termed “constrained discretion”. 
The large scale LOLR interventions undertaken by the UK authorities during the financial crisis 
played a significant role in preventing a much deeper economic and financial collapse. But 
they also exposed a number of shortcomings in the Bank’s pre-crisis frameworks. Through the 
course  of  the  crisis,  and  subsequently,  that  framework  has  been  transformed  through  an 
extensive series of public reforms1. In the rest of my remarks today I want to draw out from 
that work four particular lessons from the crisis that have helped the UK in its quest to plot a 
more effective course between “too little” and “too much”. 
Four lessons from the crisis in the United Kingdom 
The first  lesson  drawn  by  the  UK  authorities  was that a key part of reducing the risk of 
conducting “too much” LOLR is having effective and coordinated macro- and micro-
prudential supervisory and resolution regimes. 
Pre-crisis, the UK lacked a comprehensive micro-prudential liquidity regulation framework, and 
banking  supervision  did not focus  enough  on  liquidity  management. This  meant  that many 
banks took too much liquidity risk. There was no system for conducting system-wide stress 
tests  for  determining  the  appropriate  level  of  bank  capital,  and  micro-prudential  capital 
requirements were inadequate, so banks tended to be undercapitalised. And there was no 
regime for resolving insolvent firms in an orderly way.  
This placed the Bank of England in a difficult position. In particular, there was a heightened 
risk that LOLR for a particular bank would turn out to be solvency support, with no credible exit 
strategy.  In  response,  the  Bank  adopted  a  conservative  approach  to  providing  liquidity 
collateral 
                                                
1   See  for  instance  “The  Development  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  Market  Operations”,  October  2008 
“Extending 
(http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/money/publications/condococt08.pdf); 
2010 
eligible 
(http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/money/publications/condocmar10.pdf);  the  “Review  of 
the  Bank  of  England’s 
the  banking  system”  by  Bill  Winters 
(http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2012/cr2winters.pdf)  and  the  “Review  of  the 
Bank  of  England’s  provision  of  Emergency  Liquidity  Assistance 
Ian  Plenderleith, 
(http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2012/cr1plenderleith.pdf), both October 2012; 
(http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2013/ 
and 
Bank’s 
nr051_courtreviews.pdf 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/money/publications/ 
liquidityinsurance.pdf). 
response 
and 
in  2008-09”  by 
for  providing 
framework 
Discount 
Facility”, 
Window 
liquidity 
March 
the 
the 
to 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   assistance in the early stages of the financial crisis. Ironically, therefore, concerns about the 
risks of lending “too much” led to perceptions the Bank would lend “too little”. 
Post-crisis  reforms  have  changed  this  situation  significantly.  Banks  are  now  subject  to 
heightened  liquidity  and  capital  regulation,  and  annual  stress  testing.  And  the  UK  has  a 
statutory resolution regime. Taken together, these steps mean that LOLR no longer has to 
shoulder as much of the burden of preventing insolvency ex ante, or dealing with it ex post. As 
such, the Bank is now able to state, as a presumption, that all banks and building societies 
meeting the supervisory threshold conditions for authorisation may sign up for, and access, 
the Bank’s published liquidity facilities2. So changes designed to reduce the risks of lending 
“too much” have actually allowed the UK to offer a more effective LOLR scheme. 
The second lesson drawn in the UK was that, to avoid the twin pitfalls of “too little” and “too 
much”, the central bank should have access to the best possible information to judge 
solvency;  and  wherever  possible  be  ready  and  willing to  lend  on pre-defined  terms, 
against pre-defined collateral.  
Prior to the crisis, the Bank said very little about the terms on which it would be willing to provide 
LOLR, or the collateral against which it would lend. Indeed the provision of liquidity insurance 
wasn’t explicitly acknowledged in its public framework, in large part with a view to minimising 
moral hazard. In addition, the Bank had limited access to information on the financial position 
of firms to whom it might have to provide LOLR, because banking supervision was carried out 
in the Financial Services Authority, a separate organisation.  
In practice, efforts to tackle moral hazard had little effect: in the absence of formal regulatory 
requirements, banks took minimal steps to self-insure against liquidity risk. Yet at the same 
time, the Bank was poorly placed in the early stages of the crisis to launch well-structured 
liquidity assistance rapidly, either to the market as a whole or to individual firms. It lacked the 
information to evaluate firms’ solvency. And, where LOLR was required, it lacked well-defined 
pricing or maturity schedules, pre-arranged legal documentation or – most importantly of all – 
a clear ex ante understanding of the amount and quality of suitable collateral on banks’ balance 
sheets against which it could lend. 
Prudential supervision has now returned to the Bank, facilitating a more coordinated approach 
to  financial  crisis  management,  horizon  scanning  and  proactive  contingency  planning,  and 
improving the  Bank’s  ability  to  evaluate  solvency  ahead  of  any  LOLR. And  the  bulk  of the 
Bank’s liquidity insurance toolkit has progressively been made public since the height of the 
crisis.  The  Sterling  Monetary  Framework  (SMF)  now  contains  a  range  of  facilities  with 
documented price, maturity and quantity schedules, including a regular auction-based market-
wide Indexed Long-Term Repo facility, a bilateral on-demand Discount Window Facility and a 
discretionary Contingent Term Repo Facility. All of these facilities can be used against a wide 
range of eligible collateral, including securities and raw loans. But this collateral must normally 
be “pre-positioned” with the Bank so that it can be credit assessed, priced and haircut well 
before any need to use it arises, rather than in the heat of a crisis. The most recent published 
data show that nearly half a trillion pounds of collateral have been delivered to the Bank in this 
way.  
The existence of a wide range of facilities, coupled with the presumption of access, has helped 
reduce  concerns  about  the  Bank  lending  “too  little”.  But  at  the  same  time,  it  has  also 
strengthened safeguards against lending “too much”. Counterparties can see clearly that the 
Bank’s facilities are priced to incentivise the use of private markets in normal trading conditions. 
And the detailed pre-positioning process, underpinned by published collateral eligibility criteria, 
                                                
2   See  the  Sterling  Monetary  Framework  “Red  Book”,  at:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Pages/ 
sterlingoperations/redbook.aspx. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   provides assurance against the possibility that the Bank is taking sub-standard or overpriced 
collateral. 
The third lesson from the UK is that richer tools for LOLR require strong governance and 
accountability mechanisms, to reassure society that the central bank will operate according 
to clearly established procedures, and will report on its activities ex post. 
Assurance that the Bank will not lend “too much” under its published facilities (backed by its 
own  resources)  is  provided  through  a  combination  of  ex  ante  safeguards  and  ex  post 
transparency.  The  ex  ante  safeguards  include:  the  new  liquidity,  capital  and  resolution 
regimes;  the  link  between  access  to  facilities  and  the  threshold  conditions  for  supervisory 
authorisation;  the  requirement  to  pre-position  collateral;  and  the  pricing  schedule.  Ex  post 
transparency  of  aggregate  amounts  lent  is  provided  immediately  for  market-wide  liquidity 
provision,  and  with  a  lag  for  any  usage  of  the  bilateral  Discount  Window.  The  Bank  also 
publishes an annual report on the operation of its published facilities3. 
The Bank’s published facilities now provide a rich toolkit for responding to a wide range of 
sterling  liquidity  needs.  But  not  every  eventuality  can  be  predicted  in  advance  –  and  UK 
institutions might on occasion require assistance in larger size, against alternative collateral, 
or in currencies other than sterling. The terms and conditions for any bilateral lending done 
outside of the Bank’s published facilities – so-called “Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA)” – 
would use as a starting point those in the SMF, including pricing and collateral eligibility and 
haircuts. But, recognising the potential for discretionary deviation from these terms, and the 
large  sums  of  money  that  such  lending  can  involve,  ELA  is  also  subject  to  enhanced 
governance and accountability arrangements, published in a Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU)4 between the Bank and HM Treasury. 
These  arrangements  are  somewhat  shaped  by  history.  In  his  autobiography5,  the  then 
Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson records his deep annoyance at being given only 
half an hour’s notice by the Bank in October 1984 to decide whether to provide a government 
guarantee to back a large loan to Johnson Matthey Bankers, “a bank of no great consequence”, 
which the Bank had been working for some time to save.  
The 2012 MoU sets out a panoply of safeguards against the repetition of such an incident, 
including a requirement for timely notification from the Bank to HM Treasury of any risk to 
public funds, and analysis of the systemic impact of alternative policy options. The MoU makes 
it clear that the Chancellor has sole responsibility for the use of public funds, approves all ELA 
(including the terms on which it is provided), and may if necessary direct the Bank to extend 
ELA – though this is a backstop power, whose use is not expected to be considered in the 
majority of crisis situations. 
Where it is judged necessary to keep ELA covert for a period in order to minimise the risks to 
financial  stability,  key  Parliamentary  Chairs  will  be  briefed  orally  by  senior  officials  on  any 
government indemnity attached to such lending – and full disclosure to Parliament would be 
made at the earliest subsequent opportunity once the risk of damage to the public interest had 
passed.6  
Covert operations, particularly those involving a fiscal component, are often cited as the most 
troubling forms of LOLR by those concerned that central banks have a bias to lend “too much”. 
In the United Kingdom, the disclosure of large covert loans to HBOS and RBS in late 2009 
(more  than  a  year  after  the  loans  were  advanced)  triggered  a  public  debate  about  the 
                                                
3   http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/smf/annualreport15.pdf. 
4   http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/Documents/mous/statutory/moufincrisis.pdf.  
5  
6   See page 22 of http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200910/cmselect/cmtreasy/181/181.pdf.  
“The view from No.11” by Nigel Lawson, pages 402-6. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   appropriate boundaries for covert action. At the same time, the consequences of premature 
disclosure were vividly illustrated by the case of Northern Rock in September 2007, when a 
press leak led to long queues at branches, and required the government to issue a blanket 
guarantee to ease public concern. Where liquidity shortages are widespread, or central bank 
support  would  otherwise  be  seen  as  clearly  confidence-enhancing,  there  are  strong 
advantages in central banks conducting overt operations. But the capacity to operate covertly, 
subject to accountability safeguards, remains an essential part of the central bank toolkit.  
The  final  UK  lesson  is  that  LOLR  frameworks  must  be  flexible  enough  to  respond  to 
changes in the structure of financial markets if societies are to guard against the twin perils 
of lending “too little” or “too much”. 
At the start of the crisis, the UK’s LOLR toolkit was poorly equipped to deal with the needs that 
emerged,  and  had  to  be  innovated  rapidly.  The  changes  introduced  in  recent  years  have 
reduced the risk that the Bank would lend “too little” if the same risks re-occurred. 
In all probability, however, the next crisis will not be like the last one. It is important that policy 
steps taken to prevent central banks lending “too much” to today’s financial institutions do not 
also impair their ability to maintain financial stability as the structure of financial markets adjust 
and policy needs change.  
One  important  change  is  the  shift  from  bank  to  market-based  finance.  Historically,  central 
banks have relied on the assumption that, even if liquidity shortages emerge in the non-banking 
sector, banks are likely to remain an effective conduit for LOLR. The efficacy of that channel 
may be less reliable in the future, however. For that reason, the Bank of England has extended 
access to its published facilities to broker dealers and CCPs overseen by its supervisory arm 
the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority,  and  has  ensured  it  faces  no  technical  obstacles  to 
providing ELA if required. The Bank has also set out principles under which it might operate 
as market maker of last resort – consistent with the role it played in sterling corporate bond 
and commercial paper markets during the crisis. 
Conclusions 
Ensuring central banks lend neither “too little” nor “too much” in pursuit of financial stability is 
vital  if  countries  are  to  retain  LOLR  toolkits  that  can  both  protect  their  economies  against 
genuine liquidity risks whilst maintaining broad-based public support and legitimacy. 
In recent years, reforms to the Bank of England have focused on minimising the risk that it 
might  lend  “too  little”,  significantly  increasing the  Bank’s  ability  to  provide  structured  LOLR 
assistance,  to  a  wider  range  of  counterparties,  against  a  wider  set  of  collateral,  at  longer 
maturities  and  somewhat  lower  prices.  But  at  the  same  time,  safeguards  have  also  been 
strengthened  against  the  Bank  lending  “too  much”:  better  supervisory  and  resolution 
frameworks; transparent terms for access, pricing and collateral; and stronger accountability 
and governance. 
The UK’s arrangements are no panacea. The decision to lend or not to lend will always be a 
difficult  one,  conducted  with  imperfect  information  and  in  the  midst  of  a  crisis.  Ex  post 
judgments on whether the central bank lent too much or too little must recognise this constraint. 
But the UK’s experience can I hope show one way to address the risks of lending “too much” 
through  enhanced  accountability  whilst  also  still  allowing  central  banks  the  “constrained 
discretion” to exercise expert judgment in the pursuit of financial stability.  
I look forward to our discussion of these issues today. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
