  Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before 
the  Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 21 June 2016. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am grateful to be back speaking to your committee for the second hearing of this year. 
Let  me  first  say  that  the  ECB  takes  note  of  today’s  judgement  of  the  Federal  German 
Constitutional  Court.  This  judgement  confirms  the  ruling  of  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the 
European Union which concluded that the OMT programme is compatible with EU law and 
falls within our mandate. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  review  the  state  of  the  euro  area  recovery  and  the  recent 
monetary policy measures adopted by the ECB. Then, at the request of this committee, I will 
discuss  the  investment  outlook,  outlining  in  particular  why  more  action  is  needed  to  boost 
investment demand in the euro area. 
Economic outlook and the ECB’s monetary policy 
As  regards  economic  developments,  the  recovery  of  the  euro  area  economy  gained 
momentum at the start of the year. It is expected to proceed at a moderate but steady pace, 
supported by solid domestic demand and the effective pass-through of our monetary policy 
measures to the real economy. Consumers are benefiting from still relatively low oil prices 
and  improved  employment  prospects.  Likewise,  investment  is  edging  up,  supported  by 
higher corporate profits and favourable financing conditions. Looking forwards, according to 
the June 2016 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, annual real 
GDP is expected to increase by 1.6% this year and by 1.7% in the next two years. 
At  the  same  time,  inflation  dynamics  in  the  euro  area  remain  rather  subdued.  The  rate  of 
headline inflation was slightly negative in May and is expected to hover at low levels over the 
coming  months.  While  lower  oil  prices  continue  to  act  as  a  drag  on  the  annual  headline 
inflation, domestic price pressures, notably from wage growth, also remain muted, reflecting 
persistent  economic  slack.  According  to  the  Eurosystem  staff  projections,  inflation  should 
pick up towards the end of 2016. Thereafter, inflation is expected to increase further to 1.3% 
in  2017  and  to  1.6%  in  2018,  as  a  strengthening  economic  recovery  mobilises  unused 
resources. 
Since the start of our credit easing measures in June 2014, bank lending rates for firms and 
households have fallen by about 90 and 80 basis points respectively, reaching historical lows 
in  April  2016.  The  growth  rate  of  bank  credit  to  euro  area  corporations  turned  positive  in 
2015.  At  the  same  time,  other  sources  of  external  finance  –  the  net  issuance  of  debt 
securities and shares by non-financial corporations – have benefited from more favourable 
capital market conditions, improving corporate profits and increasing retained earnings. 
The  easing  is  especially  felt  by  small  and  medium-sized  companies  (SMEs),  which  are 
heavily reliant on bank credit. In our recent Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises 
in the euro area, SMEs continued to report a further improvement in their access to credit 
and  an  increased  willingness  of  banks  to  provide  credit  at  lower  interest  rates. New  bank 
credit to companies is increasingly being used to finance investment projects. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Further monetary policy stimulus is in the pipeline. We started our corporate bond purchases 
earlier  this  month  as  part  of  our  asset  purchase  programme.  The  programme  has  started 
smoothly, with ample purchase volumes. Since the start of 2016, and even more evidently 
since  the  corporate  bond  purchase  programme  was  announced  in  March,  borrowing 
conditions  for  companies  with  direct  access  to  the  bond  market  have  improved  materially. 
For  example,  over  the  first  half  of  2016  the  cost  of  market-based  debt  for  euro  area  non-
financial  corporations  has  declined  by  around  75  basis  points.  We  expect  more  firms, 
including mid-sized companies, to be able to access this source of external finance over the 
near future as the market for companies’ debt expands and deepens. Tomorrow we will start 
conducting  the  first  operation  of  our  new  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing 
operations  (TLTRO  II).  TLTRO  II  will  allow  banks  to  secure  long-term  funding  at  very 
attractive conditions that can be as low as the deposit facility rate. This should further ease 
the borrowing costs of the private sector and provide an additional impulse to credit creation. 
Overall, our measures have been instrumental in putting the recovery on a more solid footing 
and thereby securing the conditions for inflation to rise towards levels closer to 2% over a 
not-too-distant  horizon.  They  have  underpinned  the  revival  in  the  consumption  of  durable 
goods which we have observed since 2014, and are finally showing through in a more robust 
pick-up in non-construction investment. 
Without our policy stimulus, both growth and inflation would be significantly lower. 
Our  March  package,  in  particular,  has  mitigated  the  downside  risks  to  the  euro  area 
economic outlook. Additional impetus will come from the measures that are still at an early 
stage of implementation. 
At the same time, uncertainty remains high and downside risks are still significant due to the 
continued fragile state of the global economy and geopolitical developments. 
We will closely monitor the evolution of the outlook for price stability. We stand ready to act 
by  using  all  the  instruments  available  within  our  mandate,  if  necessary,  to  achieve  our 
objective.  In  particular,  the  ECB  is  ready  for  all  contingencies  following  the  UK’s  EU 
referendum. 
Investment in the euro area 
After  the  sharp  downturn  observed  during  the  financial  crisis  in  2008  and  the  renewed 
decline during the European sovereign debt crisis, real investment in the euro area has now 
begun  to  recover.  In  particular,  business  investment  has  undergone  a  welcome  recovery 
since 2013 and public and housing investment have recently broadly stabilised. 
Despite these positive trends, the current level of investment is still unsatisfactory. The level 
of total real investment in the euro area remains more than 10% below pre-crisis levels. 
Therefore, further action is needed, including at EU level. 
The Investment Plan for Europe is a welcome example. While we would support extending it 
beyond  2018,  the  success  of  the  current  plan  also  rests  on  its  capacity  to  improve  the 
investment environment, at both European and national level. Only reforms in this area can 
guarantee its long-term effects. 
At  EU  level  –  and  here  the  European  Parliament  has  an  important  role  to  play  as  co-
legislator  –  we  should  further  deepen  the  Single  Market,  notably  in  the  areas  of  energy, 
transport and the digital economy. We should also make full use of the potential of existing 
Single  Market 
its  complete  and  consistent  enforcement. 
Strengthening  the  European  dimension  of  regulatory  enforcement  would  help  to  lessen 
complexity, enhance the level playing field and reduce the fragmentation of product markets. 
In  addition,  we  should  act  decisively  to  make  the  channelling  of  savings  into  productive 
investment  more  efficient.  The  banking  union,  including  the  ECB  in  its  micro-  and 
legislation  by  ensuring 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  macroprudential  role,  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  ensuring  that  banking  markets 
efficiently allocate resources to the most productive investment opportunities across the euro 
area. 
Progress on the capital markets union is also essential to develop a favourable environment 
for productive investment in the EU. It will help  diversify the sources of funding needed to 
spur  investment  –  notably  for  SMEs  and  long-term  projects  –  by  complementing  bank 
financing with deeper, more developed capital markets. The legislative acts regarding simple, 
transparent and standardised securitisation you are discussing are tangible examples of how 
EU  legislation  can  broaden  financing  opportunities  for  EU  companies,  foster  cross-border 
investment and ultimately have a positive impact on the EU investment outlook. 
At national level, reforms to improve business framework conditions and reduce regulatory 
and administrative bottlenecks also need to be further pursued. It is the whole institutional 
framework that helps to transform financial resources into productive investments, which, in 
turn,  increase  productivity  and,  ultimately,  create  jobs.  Inefficient  public  procurement, 
taxation systems, judicial systems and insolvency frameworks, identified in some countries, 
need  to  be  fully  addressed.  Country-specific  recommendations  can  be  a  powerful  tool  to 
identify and address barriers to investment in individual countries. 
Moreover, those countries where public finances allow, should undertake public investment 
in  areas  conducive  to  growth.  Regarding  other  countries,  let  me  mention  that  long-term 
investment benefits from stability-oriented macroeconomic policies. 
Finally,  investors  need  certainty  regarding  the  economic  and  institutional  environment  in 
which they will operate. This is also one of the reasons why, almost one year ago, the Five 
Presidents’ Report set out a plan for strengthening Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union 
(EMU). 
Conclusions 
Allow me to conclude. 
Looking ahead, we expect the economic recovery to proceed at a moderate but steady pace. 
Nevertheless,  for  this  recovery  to  be  consolidated,  our  efforts  should  now  concentrate  on 
strong  policy  action  to  improve  the  business  environment,  favour  investment  and  raise 
productivity. Delivering on these objectives will not only create the conditions for inflation to 
accelerate its return to levels below, but close to, 2%. It will also make a major contribution to 
improving the standard of living of the people of Europe. 
Citizens and markets need to be sure about our capacity to take on the common challenges 
we face. Our focus should be on making our common home, Europe, stronger. 
Thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
