  Sukhdave Singh: The rise of the South at a crossroad – a view from East 
Asia and Latin America 
Opening address by Dr Sukhdave Singh, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia 
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the World Bank Knowledge and Research Hub Conference “The 
Rise of the South at a Crossroad: A View from East Asia and Latin America”, Sasana Kijang, 
Kuala Lumpur, 16 May 2016. 
 I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  today’s  Conference  on  “The  Rise  of  the  South  at  a 
Crossroad:  A  View  from  East  Asia  and  Latin  America”  organised  by  the  World  Bank 
Knowledge and Research Hub in Kuala Lumpur. For those of you who have not been here 
before, I would also like to welcome you to Sasana Kijang. I congratulate the World Bank 
Knowledge and Research Hub for organising this conference on economic integration. 
Economic integration within the current global context 
It is indeed an opportune time for us to look at economic and financial integration and what it 
can offer to emerging economies in Asia and Latin America. 
It  is  an  opportune  time  because  the  world  seems  to  have  been  unable  to  bounce  back 
towards a healthy growth path after the financial crisis in the developed world. 
It is an opportune time because policymakers have not been successful in generating strong 
sustainable growth. The traditional tools for nursing the economy back to health don’t seem 
to be working as well – possibly because of overuse or misuse. 
A pedantic approach to monetary policy in much of the developed world has led to near zero 
and negative interest rates in many of these economies. Yet growth has remained stubbornly 
weak. Such policies also risk merely creating the transfer of growth across time rather than 
promoting sustainable growth over time. It is perhaps time to start asking whether the best 
way to recover from the blow-out of one debt bubble is to create the conditions for another. 
Central  bankers  and  financial  markets  seem  to  be  caught  in  a  cycle  of  brinkmanship  and 
central  banks  are  caught  in  a  trap  of  their  own  making.  The  outcome  has  been  almost  a 
decade  of  worsening  financial  repression,  the  progressive  build-up  of  risks  in  the  global 
financial  markets,  accompanied  by  weak  investment  and  weak  growth.  It  is  clear  that  the 
lessons  of  the  financial  crisis  have  not  been  fully  learnt  in  these  economies  –  not  by  the 
financial markets and not by the policymakers. 
Similarly, fiscal policy is supposed to be a tool that should be useful in supporting demand. 
But that is only if it is used prudently and has been used prudently. If the use of fiscal policy 
in the past has not been optimised – and that is often the case, with fiscal policy often being 
used for political ends rather than as an economic tool – then it is likely that fiscal policy has 
not  only  been  ineffective  in  creating  the  conditions  for  sustainable  growth,  but  that  the 
opportunity to use it to support growth has also become significantly narrower. This is indeed 
the place where many emerging and developed nations now find themselves. 
Today, we are seeing the limits of debt-fuelled growth. The world seems to need more and 
more debt to create less and less growth. That cannot go on. Debt has a role in supporting 
growth but over-dependence on it, and its misuse, has repeatedly resulted in bad outcomes. 
Therefore, we have to look at alternative means of creating more sustainable growth. One of 
those alternatives may be greater economic integration, regionally and globally. 
In fact, economic and financial integration, whether regional or global, has been occurring. 
As  a  result,  it  has  become  increasingly  difficult  for  individual  countries  to  determine  their 
independent path to prosperity. While not downplaying the importance of keeping our house 
in order and the need to promote competitive and transparent economies, it is nevertheless 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
obvious that the fates of economies are increasingly linked to those of others. Integration has 
its benefits and it has its costs. In a world of low growth, the political rhetoric in some major 
economies  has  tended  to  focus  more  on  the  costs  and  less  on  the  benefits.  That  is 
unfortunate, because given the current circumstances of the global economy, it is likely that 
we need deeper and fairer integration. 
For emerging economies in Asia and Latin America, the question for us is whether deeper 
economic  and  financial  integration  offers  a  feasible  path  towards  unlocking  sustainable 
growth  of  our  economies?  How  do  we  mitigate the  costs  and maximise  the  benefits? The 
World  Bank  theme  paper  for  this  conference  provides  a  useful  starting  point  for  thinking 
about these issues. I will leave it to the learned speakers today to ponder on that. I will just 
briefly share my perspective on this issue with respect to ASEAN and Malaysia. 
Asian regional economic and financial integration 
The  ASEAN  Economic  Community  Blueprint  2025  contains  ASEAN’s  vision  of  regional 
economic and financial integration over the next 10 years. 
When it came to formulating the 2025 Blueprint, the issue of the nature of integration has 
always been central. The fundamental challenge remains on how to use regional integration 
to  leverage  on  ASEAN’s  diversity  in  terms  of  economic  size  and  structure,  income  levels, 
resource  endowments  and  stage  of  financial  sector  development.  Here,  in  the  interest  of 
time, l will just focus on ASEAN financial integration. 
I remember that soon after the Asian Financial Crisis, there was a lot of interest in looking at 
the European model of a single currency. So much so, that we actually formed a taskforce to 
look  into  that  possibility  for  ASEAN.  However,  that  seminal  work  reached  a  very  firm 
conclusion, which was accepted by regional policymakers. The conclusion was that ASEAN 
was  not  ready  for  a  currency  union,  and  will  not  ready  for  a  long  time  to  come.  It  was 
therefore not a goal that ASEAN should pursue as other forms of integration provided much 
more opportunity for increasing regional economic welfare. 
What should the role of financial integration be within ASEAN? Essentially, it is as a catalyst 
for  economic  growth.  Finance  is  the  bridge  that  will  facilitate  the  movement  of  trade  and 
investment flows across the borders of regional economies. This is recognised and accepted 
by all ASEAN economies. 
However,  given  the  reality  of  the  differing  stages  of  financial  development,  and  the  risks 
associated  with  premature  financial  openness,  the  outcome  has  been  the  adoption  of  a 
flexible approach that enables its members to pace their integration based on their state of 
readiness.  For  example,  in  March  2015,  the  ASEAN  Banking  Integration  Framework  was 
launched.  It  adopts  a  bilateral  approach  to  banking  integration.  Countries  can  negotiate 
reciprocative agreements that would allow Qualified ASEAN Banks to operate in each other’s 
territory. 
The Financial Integration Blueprint also recognises the risks of financial integration as well as 
the  need  to  ensure  that  all  sectors  of  society  benefit  from  financial  integration.  Therefore, 
besides greater financial integration, the other two key pillars of the financial Blueprint relate 
to collaboration to promote financial inclusion and financial stability within ASEAN. ASEAN 
financial integration also promotes a gradual and prudent liberalisation of the capital account 
and it recognises the right of countries to take temporary capital flow management measures 
should these flows threaten to undermine stability. There is also ongoing work to strengthen 
regional  surveillance  arrangements,  regional  financial  safety  nets,  and  the  regional  crisis 
management and resolution framework. Therefore, while recognising the benefits of financial 
integration,  there  is  also  awareness  of  the  risks,  and  this  has  led  to  a  cautious  but 
progressive approach that we hope would ensure that financial integration indeed contributes 
to sustainable growth of the ASEAN economies. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion 
I will conclude with my view of the role of integration for Malaysia. 
Since  the  financial  crisis,  Malaysia’s  growth  has  become  more  dependent  on  domestic 
demand and less dependent on external demand. While the resilience of domestic demand 
in the challenging environment is a noteworthy achievement, the reduced contribution of the 
external sector has clearly pushed Malaysia on to a lower growth trajectory. Since 2007, the 
contribution of net exports to real GDP growth has been negative with the sole exception of 
2014.  Over  the  longer  term,  the  contribution  of  the  external  sector  will  need  to  expand  to 
support a healthy and sustainable economy. 
Therefore, for Malaysia, economic integration and strengthening our economic ties with other 
countries  is  a  necessity.  Preferential  arrangements  such  as  Trans-Pacific  Partnership 
Agreement,  the  Regional  Comprehensive  Economic  Partnership  and  ASEAN  Free  Trade 
Agreements  have  a  critical  role  in  spurring  productivity  growth,  accelerating  structural 
reforms and creating a diversified, competitive and resilient Malaysian economy. 
Once again, welcome to this Conference, and thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
