  Jorgovanka Tabaković: Continuous improvement of the business 
environment 
Speech  by  Dr  Jorgovanka  Tabaković,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  at  the 
meeting with the  representatives of the French-Serbian Chamber of Commerce, Belgrade, 
15 March 2016. 
 Your Excellency Ms. Moro, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to speak here today. First of all, I wish to thank you for organizing this event. 
As the Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, I am here with my associates to share with 
you  the  experience  of  our  past  cooperation  with  entities  founded  by  investors  from  the 
French Republic, and to ensure this cooperation grows further in the period ahead. As the 
central bank of this country, we have had the opportunity to influence not only financial and 
banking  cooperation,  but  also,  indirectly,  economic  cooperation  with  the  French  Republic, 
and we will be glad to do so in the future as well. 
France  has  traditionally  been  a  friend  of  Serbia,  and  that  is  something  our  people,  with  a 
history riddled with tremendous challenges, will never forget. Not far away from here stands 
the impressive monument of our gratitude to France. Our future cooperation, in the spirit of 
modern  times,  will  definitely  focus  on  the  economy,  especially  as  France  is  a  respectable 
member of the European Union, to which we also aspire. For that reason in particular, we are 
happy  to  see  every  French  investment  in  Serbia  and  each  type  of  economic  association, 
such as this joint chamber of commerce. 
Data collected and published by the French-Serbian Chamber of Commerce reveal a very 
positive trend in the field of economic cooperation, especially during the last couple of years. 
There is, however, room for further growth, and that is, among other things, why we are here 
today.  As  you  well  know,  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  is  an  institution  with  broad  powers, 
each  of  which  we  seek  to  exercise  with  a  maximum  degree  of  professionalism  and 
coordination, in order to achieve the best results. 
Speaking of French investment in the services sector, I must definitely single out financial 
services  which  are  the  subject  of  direct  supervision  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  and 
include,  in  particular,  commercial  banking,  insurance,  financial  leasing,  and  voluntary 
pension funds. I am happy to say that Serbia saw direct investments in each of the above 
areas through the establishment of companies with majority French capital. 
French investors were among the first to enter Serbia’s commercial banking sector and have 
so far achieved stable performances and an excellent reputation. With us here today are the 
representatives  of  “Credit  Agricole”,  “Societe  Generale  Srbija”  and  “Findomestic  BNP 
Paribas” and I would like to use this opportunity to greet them. French entities are relatively 
new  to  the  Serbian  insurance  sector.  We  expect  much  of  them,  especially  as  the  local 
insurance market has great potential and needs drivers to kick off development. To bring this 
industry  closer  to  contemporary  international  standards,  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  has 
drafted  and  adopted  new,  modern  regulations.  I  would  also  like  to  welcome  the 
representatives of “Societe Generale Osiguranje” and “AXA Osiguranje”, while recalling that 
the first greenfield license issued by the National Bank of Serbia in the insurance sector was 
granted to a French investor – “Credit Agricole”. Today, French capital is present in the agent 
and broker network of the insurance industry as well, through “Gras Savoye”. In the field of 
financial leasing, we have “Sogelease” and “CA Leasing”. As a result of market consolidation 
in our voluntary pension funds sector, “Societe Generale” is no longer engaged directly in the 
provision of these services, but remains present in this segment, providing custody services 
to all voluntary pension fund management companies through its commercial bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
I  believe  that  each  of  the  above  names  is  in  itself  a  guarantee  that  the  National  Bank  of 
Serbia has created a good investment environment in all financial services coming under its 
remit,  by  generating  legal  certainty  for  setting  up  and  doing  business  and  by  contributing, 
through  its  supervisory  activities,  to  the  strengthening  of  the  market  and  ensuring  better 
protection of all participants, consumers and investors alike. As most of the representatives 
of  these  financial  institutions  are  also  active  in  the  Foreign  Investors  Council,  they  can 
confirm  that  we  were  most  cooperative  in  drafting  current  regulations  to  our  mutual 
satisfaction. This is the standard of work I set out to achieve when I became Governor of the 
National Bank of Serbia, and it is the standard to which I will adhere in the future. I believe 
the best results can only be achieved through coordinated efforts, which will be continuously 
adjusted and enriched by our mutual practical experience. 
On  the  other  hand,  I  feel  quite  certain  that,  when  in  the  role  of  consumers  of  banking, 
insurance,  leasing  or  voluntary  pension  funds  services,  members  of  the  French-Serbian 
Chamber of Commerce who are active in the area of industry and agriculture fully appreciate 
the  work  and  the  results  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  with  regard  to  regulating  and 
ensuring the stability of that part of our financial system. 
In addition, the National Bank of Serbia keeps making efforts to influence the business and 
investment environment in Serbia in order for it to remain stimulative for maintaining current 
and attracting new foreign investment. According to the law that regulates the activities of the 
National  Bank  of  Serbia,  it  is  responsible  for  achieving  and  maintaining  price  stability, 
contributes to maintaining and strengthening the stability of the financial system and supports 
the pursuance of economic policy of the Serbian Government. 
The National Bank of Serbia has achieved the objective of price stability. Inflation averaged 
at 1.9% in 2015 and we expect it to stay low in 2016. Low and stable inflation, enjoyed by 
Serbia today and for close to three years already, is imperative for preserving the real value 
of wages and pensions but also for creating a predictable business environment. Because 
Serbia is a small, open end euroised economy, the exchange rate represents an important 
factor  of  financial  stability  and  certainty  of  doing  business.  Larger  oscillations  of  the 
exchange rate substantially hinder the maintenance of price and financial stability. All of us 
living and working in Serbia, corporates and households with loans to repay, are well aware 
of this fact. Hence, maintaining relative stability of the exchange rate is one of the important 
factors  for  strengthening  the  business  and  investment  environment,  contributing  to  higher 
investment  and  lower  country  risk  premium.  We  have  no  dilemma  over  this  and  remain 
unwavering in our commitment to achieving stability in all respects – price stability, financial 
stability,  and  relative  stability  of  the  exchange  rate. With  regard  to  the  exchange  rate,  we 
achieve  stability  by  preventing  excessive  short-term  oscillations  in  the  foreign  exchange 
market.  Foreign  investors  in  particular  have  been  highly  appreciative  of  our  results  in  this 
respect, pointing out that this parameter is of great significance for their business. And that is 
why I am proudly emphasizing this particular aspect today. 
Also, by continuously trimming the key policy rate from May 2013 onwards, we have created 
room for a recovery in lending and further economic growth. The fall in interest rates was 
indeed one of the factors behind acceleration of economic growth. Today, interest rates on 
dinar loans of corporates, households and the government are at their all-time lows since the 
adoption  of  the  inflation  targeting  regime.  Interest  rates  declined  by  as  much  as  up  to 
5 percentage points in 2015 relative to the previous year. The numbers speak for themselves 
–  we  have  achieved  a  huge  reduction  in  costs  for  corporates,  households  and  the 
government. Economic growth in Serbia is also supported by net foreign direct investments 
which  came  at  EUR  1.8  billion,  rising  by  45.6%  from  a  year  earlier.  The  fact  that,  today, 
investments in Serbia are channeled into a large number of projects, and that they originate 
from a larger number of countries, indicates that companies which decided to invest in Serbia 
are  sure  that  they  have  made  a  good  business  move.  And  here,  we  must  not  forget  to 
mention domestic investors which we consider equally important and valuable. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
By achieving successful coordination of monetary and fiscal policies, while ensuring a clear 
division of powers among different institutions, we have strengthened our credibility with all 
relevant entities considering the prospect of investing in Serbia. If I were to summarize the 
results achieved by our institution with regard to the overall investment climate in just one 
sentence,  I  would  point  out:  low  inflation rate, record  low  interest rates,  anchored  inflation 
expectations,  relatively  stable  exchange  rate,  stable  and  resilient  financial  system,  higher 
investment loans, increased confidence in the dinar coupled with higher household borrowing 
and savings in the local currency. That we are not the only ones who say this is confirmed by 
data and the assessment of credit agencies and relevant international institutions. We have 
also enjoyed excellent cooperation with the International Monetary Fund, providing maximum 
contribution to positive signals coming from that important institution, the arrangements with 
which lend major support to our economic stability. 
In particular, the National Bank of Serbia strongly supports the commitment of the Serbian 
Government  to  European  integrations  and  has  taken  direct  part  in  this  process,  not  only 
through  negotiations,  but  also  through  a  series  of  other  activities  aimed  at  harmonizing 
regulations  and  creating  a  better  and  safer  investment  environment,  following  the  lead  of 
countries such as France. We are proud to say that all of the above has been achieved by 
relying  on  our  own  resources,  bravely  facing  all  challenges  coming  from  the  international 
environment  and  global  financial  flows.  I  therefore  hope  we  will  continue  to  enjoy  your 
understanding and support, and will fully reciprocate it, to our mutual satisfaction. 
Finally,  allow  me  to  add  a  few  facts  regarding  French-Serbian  economic  and  cultural 
cooperation.  The  National  Bank  of  Serbia  has  had  intense  cooperation  with  the  Bank  of 
France, but also with the French agency for prudential supervision of financial institutions. 
The  Bank  of  France  took  part  in  the  technical  assistance  project  for  strengthening  the 
institutional capacities of the National Bank of Serbia, thereby continuing, in the best possible 
way, the cooperation begun in late 19th and early 20th century when the French central bank 
was  printing  Serbian  banknotes.  In  honour  of  this  fact,  an  exhibition  dedicated  to  the 
cooperation of the two central banks was organized in the Banque de France a few years 
ago, while the International Day of Francophonie is celebrated in the National Bank of Serbia 
each year. With regard to financial indicators, the Republic of Serbia regularly services its 
debt  obligations  to  the  French  Republic,  while  the  French  Republic  has  donated  over 
EUR 16 million to the public sector of the Republic of Serbia over the past eight years. The 
value of French direct investment in Serbia has so far exceeded EUR 800 million. This is an 
honour for us, but also an obligation, and the National Bank of Serbia will continue to be one 
of the pillars of French-Serbian cooperation. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
