   Philip R Lane: The Central Bank of Ireland in 2016 
Address  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  Institute  of 
Directors, Dublin, 22 January 2016. 
 Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to speak at the Institute of Directors. The Central Bank of 
Ireland and the Institute of Directors share a common agenda in promoting best practice in 
corporate  governance;  the  co-hosted  Risk  Appetite  Forum  in  October  2015  provided  an 
excellent example of effective collaboration between the two institutions. 
It is natural that the transition to a new Governor should prompt discussion and reflection about 
the role of the Central Bank of Ireland in 2016 and over the next number of years. In recent 
years, there have been considerable changes to the mandate and structure of the Central 
Bank, in response to the many lessons from the domestic and international financial crises. 
With the passing of the most intensive phase of crisis management, it is important to establish 
new priorities for the Central Bank. Our recently-published Strategic Plan 2016–2018 provides 
a detailed guide to our plans for the next three years. Our mission statement “safeguarding 
stability,  protecting  consumers”  encapsulates  the  dual  priorities  for  the  Central  Bank:  the 
preservation of financial stability, while also working to ensure that the financial sector operates 
in the best interests of its customers. 
Today, I wish to provide a high-level overview of some of the key priorities for the Central Bank, 
while also reporting on some new initiatives in how the Central Bank operates. I will also outline 
our efforts to enhance transparency about the Central Bank, including our decision to publish 
the minutes of meetings of the Central Bank Commission. 
The  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  is  organised  into the  two  policy  pillars  of central  banking  and 
financial  regulation,  which  are  coordinated  through  a  unified  governance  structure  and 
supported by shared corporate services1. At a global level, the experience of recent years has 
vividly  demonstrated  that  the  stability  of  financial  systems  depends  both  on  the  effective 
regulation of financial institutions and markets and the capacity of central banks to detect and 
mitigate systemic financial risks through preventive macroprudential policies and pro-active 
liquidity support during stressed periods. This requires that financial regulators and central 
bankers  work  closely  together.  Accordingly,  the  preservation  of  financial  stability  is  an 
overriding strategic priority that unites both pillars of the Central Bank. 
Furthermore, given the very high levels of financial integration in Europe, there are advantages 
in adopting a common international approach to both central banking and financial regulation. 
The Central Bank is part of the eurosystem (consisting of the ECB and the national central 
banks) that designs and implements the common monetary policy for the euro area. In similar 
fashion,  financial  regulation  is  highly  coordinated  at  both  euro  area  and  EU  levels2. 
Accordingly,  across  the  Central  Bank,  much  of  our  work  programme  is  directed  at  the 
formulation and implementation of policies that are jointly determined at a European level. 
In relation to the central banking pillar we play our part in the setting of monetary policy for the 
euro area through a range of eurosystem committees and the Governing Council of the ECB. 
The  actual  implementation  of  ECB  monetary  policy  is  largely  decentralised  to  the  national 
central banks (in proportion to each country’s share in the capital key of the eurosystem), so 
                                                
1   The Central Bank of Ireland was among the first in the central banking community to appoint a Chief Operating 
Officer (COO) to lead operational functions. In recent years, the Bank of England and the European Central 
Bank have created similar positions. 
In turn, there is also global coordination of financial regulation through international institutions (such as the 
Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board). 
2  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
that a core activity for the Central Bank is the provision of liquidity to banks against suitable 
collateral. Such liquidity operations build on our fundamental role as part of the eurosystem in 
operating the TARGET 2 payments system that links banks and central banks across the euro 
area.3, 4 
In  common  with  similar  initiatives  by  the  other  major  central  banks,  the  ECB  has  recently 
adopted  a  number  of  unconventional  measures  in  pursuit  of  its  inflation  target.  These 
measures include the expanded asset purchase programme (EAPP) that will run until at least 
March 2017. In implementing the EAPP, the Central Bank of Ireland has been actively engaged 
in asset purchases. To illustrate the scale of the eurosystem’s intervention in asset markets, 
total cumulative purchases of euro area public debt securities amounted to close to €500 billion 
by the end of 2015. This aggregate includes purchases of €7.6 billion of Irish sovereign debt. 
The  ECB’s  accommodative  monetary  policy  has  contributed  to  Ireland’s  excellent  recent 
economic performance. For instance, the low interest rate environment has been a boon to 
many indebted households, while the government has been able to issue debt at low yields. 
More  generally,  as  indicated  in  the  introductory  statement  to  the  press  conference  after 
yesterday’s monetary policy meeting, the assessment of the Governing Council is that the 
monetary policy measures that have been adopted since mid-2014 are working; noting the 
increase in downside risks in recent weeks, the Governing Council will review and possibly 
reconsider the monetary policy stance in early March. 
In relation to the longer-term agenda for the euro area, the financial crisis also made clear that 
the original institutional design of the euro area suffered from a lack of risk-sharing and crisis 
management  mechanisms.  While  there  has  been  significant  progress  in  reforming  the 
institutional setup of the euro area, the recent Five Presidents’ Report highlighted that further 
reforms  could  help  in  improving  the  resilience  of  the  monetary  union.  This  reform  agenda 
should be a high priority for European policymakers. 
Another favourable recent development has been the twenty per cent depreciation of the euro 
against the dollar in the last eighteen months, which has been especially helpful for Ireland 
through both trade and financial mechanisms. That said, the recent depreciations of many 
emerging market currencies is a countervailing force in terms of the overall trade-weighted 
exchange rate for the euro area. 
It  is  important  to  recognise  that  Ireland’s  recent  economic  performance  has  been  broadly 
based,  with  domestic  sectors  now  making  a  significant  contribution  to  overall  growth 
performance.  While  we  do  not  have  final  data  yet,  the  likelihood  is  that  GDP  grew  by  
6.5–7.0 per cent in 2015. Looking ahead, the latest forecasts suggest that the economy will 
continue to grow rapidly this year, with GDP growth expected to moderate slightly to around 
5 per cent. 
It is always necessary to point out that measured GDP is only a limited guide to economic 
performance, especially in relation to highly-globalised economies such as Ireland. Financial 
transactions within multinational firms or lumpy investments such as in new aircraft can have 
a sizeable effect on measured Irish GDP. Still, faster growth in consumption and employment 
confirm that the domestic economy is growing at a robust pace. This reflects the confluence of 
several  positive  factors,  including  the  employment-rich  nature  of  the  recovery,  a  less 
constrained policy environment, the boost to purchasing power from lower energy prices, the 
                                                
3   Of course, in addition to this electronic payments system, the Central Bank is responsible for the issuance of 
notes and coins through the banking system, which entails a considerable logistical and security operation. The 
ending of production of one and two cent coins will deliver cost savings; the recent rounding campaign has 
proceeded quite smoothly. 
4   The Central Bank also operates the deposit guarantee system (DGS), which protects deposits up to €100,000 
the  new  DGS  website:  http://www.deposit-
further  details,  see 
institution.  For 
per  person  per 
guarantee.ie/en/home. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
on-going easing of the balance sheet legacies of the crisis and broadly favourable conditions 
in Ireland’s main export markets. It is the positive alignment of all these factors that has helped 
growth to strengthen and supports a continued favourable outlook. 
However, while much has improved, vulnerabilities remain. The strong growth outlook provides 
an opportunity to address the legacies stemming from still-high levels of public and private 
sector indebtedness. Externally, the main current global risk factor relates to economic and 
financial conditions in some emerging economies. Closer to home, the Central Bank is also 
keeping a watchful eye on Brexit-related risks to the economy and the financial system5. 
More generally, small, highly-globalised countries such as Ireland are inherently more volatile 
than  larger  economies: we  can  grow  strongly for  extended  periods  but are  also  especially 
vulnerable to negative shocks. For this reason, it is essential that the Central Bank is pro-active 
in the deployment of macroprudential policies that can improve resilience and mitigate the 
procyclical dynamics associated with excessive leverage. The new rules that impose loan-to-
value and loan-to-income limits on most mortgages were introduced to protect borrowers and 
contribute to a safer financial system, which in turn also contributes to a more stable economy 
over the longer term. 
In  addition,  the  new  EU  system  of  financial  regulation  also  allows  for  the  imposition  of  a 
counter-cyclical capital buffer (CCB), so that banks must build up extra capital during phases 
in which credit conditions are assessed to be unusually strong6. Tools such as mortgage rules 
and the CCB would have mitigated the costs of the boom-bust credit cycle in Ireland in the 
mid-2000s. The Central Bank is firmly committed to deploying such tools on an ongoing basis, 
with periodic reviews to ensure that the measures are appropriately calibrated. I expect the 
first review of the mortgage rules to be published by November this year. This review will be 
based on an analysis of the evidence provided by data on the first year of the operation of the 
rules, while taking into account other factors that may have influenced the mortgage market 
during this period. The rules-based framework is intended to promote the resilience of both 
banks and households and, as such, should be viewed as a permanent feature of the system. 
The Central Bank is open to tightening or loosening the calibration of these rules in response 
to the evidence; still, the value of stability in a rules-based framework means that the evidence 
threshold to justify adjustments to these rules is significant. 
The monitoring and analysis of the domestic and international economies and the interactions 
between the overall economy and the financial system are ongoing challenges for our team of 
economists  and  statisticians7.  This  is  especially  important  in  Ireland  in  view  of  the  wide 
variations  within  traditional  macroeconomic  aggregates.  For  instance,  the  corporate  sector 
encompasses very large multinationals and the spectrum of small and medium enterprises. 
Similarly, the financial system includes both externally-focused international financial firms and 
investment funds and the domestically-orientated retail banks. This diversity means that the 
analysis  of  macroeconomic  performance  and 
financial  stability  necessitate  a  deep 
understanding of behaviourial patterns at the microeconomic level. To this end, the Central 
Bank is committed to the analysis of a wide array of micro-level economic and financial data. 
Our  role  in  the  collection  of  financial  data  will  also  be  further  expanded  through  the 
establishment of the Central Credit Register (CCR). The credit reporting obligations will apply 
                                                
5   See  the  Central  Bank’s  analysis  of  Brexit  risks  that  was  published  in  the  December  2015  Macro-Financial 
Review. 
6   The CCB is currently set at zero, given the limited current rate of credit growth in Ireland. 
7   The  complexity  of  the  Irish  economic  and  financial  systems  poses  significant  challenges  in  relation  to  the 
monetary and financial data collected by the Central Bank. In recent years, there has been a major expansion 
in the depth and quality of the statistics published by the Central Bank, which is necessary in order to conduct 
effective surveillance of macro-financial performance. The Central Bank also draws heavily on loan-level data 
supplied by the banks in its analysis of financial stability conditions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
to over 500 lenders, including banks, credit unions, asset finance houses, local authorities and 
money lenders and will be fully operational from 2017. 
Since  the  crisis,  the  provision  of  liquidity  to  Irish  banks  and  various  asset  purchase 
programmes have resulted in a sizeable increase in the balance sheet of the Central Bank 
compared to the pre-crisis period. The restructuring of the banking sector in conjunction with 
Ireland’s strong economic recovery has allowed the banking system to substantially reduce its 
dependence  on  central  bank  funding,  such  that  the  Central  Bank’s  balance  sheet  has 
contracted from its peak size of about €208 billion in early 2011 to €76 billion at the end of 
2015. 
An important component in the balance sheet is the special portfolio of assets the Central Bank 
acquired as a result of the liquidation of IBRC in February 20138. The portfolio consisted of a 
fixed-coupon Irish Government Bond, NAMA bonds and a portfolio of Floating Rate Notes9. At 
the time of the liquidation, the Bank stated that it would dispose of the government bonds as 
soon  as  possible,  provided  conditions  of  financial  stability  permitted,  but  also  specified  a 
minimum schedule of disposals. The disposal schedule of these bonds has been faster than 
the minimum schedule, due to improved financial conditions. The pace of future disposals will 
continue to depend on conditions of financial stability. 
Still, the normalisation of monetary conditions over time will lead to further reductions in the 
size of the balance sheet. In parallel, once normalisation has been attained, this implies that 
the  surplus  income  generated  by  the  Central  Bank  will  make  a  smaller  contribution to  the 
government’s finances than has been the case in recent years. 
Let me now say a few words about financial regulation and supervision and what you can 
expect to see during 2016. 
The banking sector is in the middle of a multi-year transition to higher capital requirements, 
reduced leverage and increased balance sheet liquidity. The Single Supervisory Mechanism 
(SSM) has been in place for just over a year, with the Central Bank having made a material 
contribution to the design and implementation of unified supervision for the larger banks in the 
euro  area.  It  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  speech  to  provide  a  detailed  account  of  the 
engagement  of the  Central  Bank  and  SSM  with  the  domestic  banking  sector.  However,  in 
relation to distressed mortgage loans, the ongoing focus remains on delivering sustainable 
solutions for distressed mortgage loans and the effective implementation of protections for 
borrowers in the revised Code of Conduct for Mortgage Arrears (CCMA). 
The SSM represents the first pillar of Banking Union. The second pillar consists of the Single 
Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM),  which  came  into  effect  on  January  1st.  By  ensuring  that 
financial institutions can be resolved in an orderly manner, the SRM should significantly reduce 
the adverse impact of an institution’s failure on the wider financial system and the taxpayer. 
In its capacity as the national resolution authority (NRA), the Central Bank cooperates closely 
with the new Brussels-based Single Resolution Board (SRB), which acts as decision maker in 
                                                
8   The Central Bank had extended considerable liquidity assistance to IBRC. Upon liquidation, the collateral that 
secured the liquidity assistance was transferred to the Central Bank. The Central Bank’s balance sheet also 
includes investment assets of approximately €19 billion. This comprises an actively managed marked-to-market 
portfolio and a hold-to-maturity portfolio. Investment earnings on these portfolios amounted to about €455 million 
in 2014; financial results for 2015 will be disclosed in the Annual Report, due in March. The Central Bank also 
manages a US dollar bond portfolio (of about $1 billion) as an agent for the ECB, as part of the ECB’s foreign 
reserve holdings. 
9   The FRNs were the largest share of the portfolio at €25.034 billion, the fixed-coupon Irish Government Bond 
had a value of €3.461 billion and NAMA bonds were valued at €13.724 billion. The IBRC resolution-related 
NAMA bonds have been fully redeemed, while the CBI has sold its entire holding of the 2025 fixed rate bond. 
In relation to the FRNs, the CBI has disposed of €2.5billion in total, in five equal transactions, with the NTMA as 
purchaser. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
the  resolution  of  significant  institutions  and  cross-border  banks10,  11.  The  Central  Bank  is 
currently developing resolution plans for in-scope institutions, which document the actions to 
be taken in the event of failure12. 
This is also a landmark year for the insurance sector, with the Solvency II framework going 
live. This represents a major change in the way that insurance firms are regulated. The “whole 
balance sheet” approach to capital calculation combined with the strong emphasis on a firm’s 
risk  management  and  supervisory  review  will  result  in  a  much  transformed  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework. This year, Central Bank supervisors and the supervised firms will be 
putting this framework into operation for the first time. 
During 2016, you can expect to hear plenty of discussion about the European Commission’s 
proposal for Capital Markets Union (CMU). The CMU Action Plan published in September 2015 
contains  33  initiatives  designed  to  enhance  the  performance  of  the  financial  sector  in 
supporting growth across European economies. These aim to improve the diversity of funding 
sources for businesses and project, enhance investment opportunities for savings and reduce 
barriers within the Single Market for cross-border investing. Work is already well-advanced on 
proposals for more straightforward securitisation activities to receive a proportionate regulatory 
treatment. The Prospectus Directive will be revised with a view to trying to improve access to 
finance for small and mid-size companies. A harmonised European approach to the regulation 
of lending by investment funds is also under consideration13. 
Ireland is an important location for non-bank financial entities, with the vast bulk engaged in 
externally-oriented  financial  trade.  Amongst  other  entities,  this  sector  includes  investment 
funds, money market funds and financial vehicle corporations. While many of the entities and 
financial  activities  are  subject  to  regulation  and  oversight,  our  understanding  of  this  broad 
sector  is  considerably  less  developed  relative  to  traditional  banking  activities.  In  line  with 
growing  international  interest  in  the financial  stability  implications  of  banking-type  activities 
carried  out  by  non-banks  (that  is,  “shadow  banking”),  the  Bank  for  the  first  time  was  a 
contributor to the 2015 Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report published by the Financial 
Stability Board. We are set to continue to monitor and deepen our understanding of any risks 
that may arise to the financial system from these activities – either in Ireland or more widely. 
In December, we released new regulations on SME lending. The regulations aim to strengthen 
protections for SMEs, while also facilitating access to credit. The regulations provide for greater 
transparency around the application process and the reasons for refusing credit applications, 
greater protections for guarantors and an expansion of the grounds for an internal appeal14. 
There is growing international recognition that financial regulators should be more pro-active 
in protecting consumers, in view of the complexity, risks and costs of financial products. Our 
work on consumer protection is primarily focused on increasing transparency to enable people 
make informed decisions with full clarity about the risks, costs and long-term impact of financial 
                                                
10   On 1 January 2016, the Single Resolution Board (SRB) assumed full responsibility for both resolution planning 
and  resolution  actions  in  respect  of  the  c.150  largest  banks  within  the  Banking  Union,  including  the  Irish 
Significant Institutions (AIB, Bank of Ireland, Permanent tsb and Ulster Bank). 
11   This mandate is in addition to our responsibilities under the domestic resolution regime, which primarily applies 
to credit unions. 
12   The new framework also provides for the establishment of a national resolution fund and a European Single 
Resolution  Fund, to  help  finance the cost  of  future failure.  In  2015,  both  banks  and investment firms  were 
required to contribute to the national fund. This changes from 2016 onwards, when banks will instead pay into 
the Single Resolution Fund, contributions to which will be mutualised over an eight year period. 
13   The Central Bank has been a leader at the European level in already providing a regulatory treatment for loan 
origination by investment funds. 
14   The regulations will apply to regulated entities from 1 July 2016. Credit unions will come under this legislation 
from 1 January 2017. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
products. This year, we will further enhance our engagement with boards of the larger retail 
firms  to  push  for  a  more  consumer-focused  culture  within  firms,  and  will  carry  out  on-site 
consumer risk assessments across a number of retail firms. 
We also plan to continue our product-focused supervisory work, including the tracker mortgage 
examination, and reviews of structured products and health insurance. We will also increase 
our  firm-specific  engagement  with  low-impact  firms,  including  intermediaries  and  debt 
management  firms.  Further  work  will  be  done  to  strengthen  consumer  protection  code 
requirements,  including  for  variable  rate  mortgage  holders,  as  well  as  carrying  out  an 
examination  of  the  impact  on  consumer  outcomes  of  commission  payments  to  insurance 
intermediaries. 
Over recent years, the approach of the Central Bank to financial supervision has completely 
changed not only in the area of banking where supervision is now carried out by the ECB 
through the SSM but across the organisation. Using our risk-based supervisory framework – 
or PRISM as it is commonly known – we have developed an approach to supervision which is 
assertive, rigorous, demanding, but also proportionate and fair. In terms of the supervision of 
firms, the Central Bank does not operate a “no failures” regime. Rather, we expect that, as with 
any other sector of the economy, some firms may fail. Where this occurs, our aim is to ensure 
that the failure is orderly and that disruption to consumers is minimised. 
Our supervisory approach continues to evolve and develop. During 2016, we will be carrying 
out a review of the PRISM framework. As part of this we will be taking a look at our risk appetite 
to see that it is clearly stated and well understood. We will be introducing changes suggested 
by peer reviews (for example in our approach to lower impact firms), and we will be further 
integrating emerging risks, including cyber risk. 
An independent assessment of recent external peer reviews of the Central Bank’s regulatory 
functions is published today and available on our website and recognises the success of the 
Central Bank’s actions in the last several years. 
On the subject of cyber risk, we are seeing a material increase in the frequency, sophistication 
and severity of cyber-attacks on financial sector firms. This will be an important area of focus 
for us over the coming period. As highlighted by Deputy Governor Cyril Roux in a speech in 
September,  we  expect  financial  firms  to  be  addressing  this  risk  clearly  and  effectively.  In 
particular, cyber risk is a matter for the board and senior management, not only for the IT 
division. You can expect to hear more from us on this topic during 2016. 
Finally,  on  the  topic  of  regulation,  I  will  mention  that  you  will  have  seen  a  good  deal  of 
enforcement  activity  reported  in  the  press  in  recent  months.  This  reflects  our  approach 
whereby high-quality supervision must be underpinned by a rigorous approach to enforcement. 
You can expect to see this approach continued. 
The expansion in the scope of monetary policy, the adoption of a more intrusive approach to 
financial regulation, the introduction of new EU regulatory mandates, the ongoing growth of 
the investment funds sector in Ireland and the professionalisation of corporate services in the 
Central  Bank  have  resulted  in  a  significant  expansion  in  staff  numbers.  As  our  mandate 
expands, we expect continued growth in our staff numbers; we anticipate recruitment of an 
additional 150 staff this year, bringing our staff numbers to about 1650. 
As we expand, we will begin the move to our new headquarters on North Wall Quay at the end 
of 2016. The layout of the new building has been designed to promote a collaborative working 
environment, which will facilitate the teamwork that is so critical to the delivery of the CBI’s 
multi-faceted mandate. 
In  parallel,  the  Bank  is  also  reviewing  its  organisational  and  management  structures.  We 
expect  to  complete  the  design  of  new  organisational  and  reward  models  in  the  next  few 
months. The implementation of the identified reforms will need to be achieved in consultation 
with our staff representative bodies and within the boundaries of the FEMPI legislation. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
We are also responding to the growth in the activities of the Central Bank by implementing a 
new data strategy, in order to capture, manage and analyse the extensive amount of data we 
process  in  support  of  our  regulatory  and  central  banking  functions.  We  will  also  invest  in 
enhanced cyber-security measures to combat the increasing risks in this area. 
As I said at the outset, I am conscious that more needs to be done to build the level of trust 
among the public that the Central Bank will take the correct  actions to safeguard financial 
stability and protect consumers. At a basic level, we believe that people will be more confident 
that  we  act  independently  and  in  the  public  interest  if  they  have  greater  insights  and 
understanding about into what is going on inside the Bank. As a progressive, independent 
central bank, our ultimate vision is to be trusted by the public, respected by our peers and 
provide a fulfilling workplace for our people. 
In this spirit, I am pleased today to announce some measures that are intended to increase 
transparency. First, the Central Bank Commission has decided to publish the minutes of its 
meetings.  While  information  on  the  supervision  of  regulated  firms  and  market-sensitive 
financial  operations  activities  cannot  be  disclosed, the  publication  of  these  minutes  should 
contribute to  greater understanding  of  our  corporate  governance,  internal  debates  and the 
initiatives we take to deliver on our mission. The minutes will be published about six weeks 
after  each  meeting,  with  the  minutes  of  the  first  meeting  I  chaired  as  Governor  in  mid-
December scheduled to be released by early February. 
Second, we have also committed to publishing data on our salary structures and pay scales 
on an annual basis and publish these for the first time today. Furthermore, by providing greater 
details on our human resources policies, we aim to enhance understanding about the Central 
Bank  as  a  public  organisation  and  prospective  employer.  We  will  continue  to  add  to  the 
transparency measures announced today, as we seek to present an open view of the Bank 
through our media and public engagements. This will be supported by a new website that is 
currently under development, which will go live at the end of this year. 
In summary, during my tenure as Governor, my aim is to build on the progress that has been 
achieved in recent years in recasting the Central Bank as an efficient and effective central bank 
and financial regulator. The staff of the Central Bank can be proud of these achievements, 
which were recently recognised by our international peers through the Central Bank of the 
Year award from centralbanking.com and the Central Banking journal. 
In particular, I am firmly committed to ensuring that the Central Bank fulfills its critical social 
responsibility towards consumers of financial services and the general public. To this end, the 
Central Bank will be vigilant and pro-active in its independent macroprudential and financial 
regulatory  policies  in  order  to  avoid  a  repetition  of  the costly  boom-bust  cycle  that Ireland 
endured in the last decade. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
