   Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Sustaining the momentum for inclusive growth 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Chamber of Thrift Banks Convention, Makati City, 18 
March 2016. 
 In preparing for my remarks, I considered your theme and two words leapt at me. The first 
word is “momentum”. As you may know, this takes its roots from physics. Some may remember 
its formula -- “Mass x Velocity”. In other words, “mass in motion”. The second really, is a phrase 
--  “inclusive  growth”.  Picture  this  then,  an  object,  say,  a  truck  called  “the  initiatives  and 
programs towards inclusive growth”, that is on the move and it will take some effort to stop it. 
That is what this conference is all about. First -- how can we ensure a critical mass of initiatives 
to keep us moving towards the goal of inclusive growth. And then, how can we make sure that 
we will continue in motion. 
Our current operating environment 
In gathering my thoughts for today’s event, I could not help but reflect on how the last seven 
months  or  so  have  affected  our  operating  environment.  Global  growth  has  slowed. 
Developments out of China have surprised markets. The US Federal Reserve finally raised its 
target funds rate (Although just yesterday the Fed turned dovish, retreating on their initially 
indicated four rate hikes in 2016 to just two). Risk aversion was causing a de-risking. And oil 
supply was significantly much larger than demand. 
The net result has been a volatile financial market. And while it felt good to see a full tank’s 
worth  of  fuel  cost  significantly  less,  we  remain  cognizant  of  what  this  was  doing  to  our 
countrymen working in oil-generating economies. 
Without overlooking these emerging developments, we should also not lose sight of the fact 
that our macroeconomic and financial market fundamentals remain solid and intact. We have 
now had 68 quarters of continuous growth, finishing 2015 at a full-year growth of 5.8 percent. 
Inflation was recorded at 1.4%, the lowest rate since the BSP adopted inflation targeting as 
our monetary policy framework in 2002. 
Our Balance of Payments position for 2015 was at a surplus of USD2.6 billion, a turnaround 
from  the  USD2.9  billion  deficit  in  2014.  And  with  our gross  international reserves  still  over 
USD80 billion, this is sufficient to service more than 10 months’ worth of imports of goods and 
payment for services. The exchange rate has sustained its relative competitiveness as it has 
moved in line with currencies in the region. 
Based  on  our  assessments,  therefore,  the  current  stance  of  monetary  policy  remains 
appropriate, but we have flexibility to address developments should there be reason to adjust 
our policy levers. 
Certainly, the banking industry remains a clear pillar of strength. According to S&P, and I quote, 
“Philippine banks are looking forward to another solid year in 2016, thanks to the economy’s 
good growth prospects and banks’ healthy capitalization and asset quality.” 
Our favorable economic prospects are also noted by Fitch Ratings, which, for its part, gave the 
Philippines the only positive outlook among Asia Pacific banking systems for 2016 . 
 I am happy to note that thrift banks continue to contribute to the strength of the overall banking 
industry. The collective assets of TBs reached Php961.13 billion as of November 2015 after 
growing  annually  by  10.71  percent  for  the  past  five  years.  Over  the  same  period,  deposit 
balances  have  been  expanding  at  nearly  11  percent  per  annum  [Php773.37  billion  as  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   November 2015] while loans have grown just below 15 percent annually [Php 681.41 billion in 
November 2015]. 
Quo vadis? 
Given all of these developments, where do these take the thrift banking industry? The textbook 
answer, is to follow your mandate under the Thrift Bank Act. Under this law, TBs are expected 
to: 
1. 
2. 
promote economic development and expand industrial and agricultural growth; 
place  within  easy  reach  of  the  people  the  medium  to  long-term  credit  facilities  to 
agriculture, services, industry and housing at reasonable cost and 
encourage industry, frugality and the accumulation of savings among the public. 
3. 
While all of you are well aware of these, we all also recognize that these are not trivial tasks 
and  targets.  These  speak  of  thrift  banks  as  an  enabler  of  economic  development  by 
encouraging retail savings and extending credit to targeted sectors. 
Your mandate makes no distinction of where you are based or the environment within which 
you operate. This, I feel, is important to highlight because your own business strategy appears 
to reflect the more “inclusive” track of the industry. By this I mean that your branching footprint 
has clearly extended beyond cities. 
Specifically, the number of thrift bank branches located in cities actually grew by 26.3 percent 
(from 991 to 1252) between 2010 and 2015 but your branches in 1st to 5th class municipalities 
grew by 37.5 percent (from 304 to 418). Certainly, the bulk of your branches are still in 1st and 
2nd class municipalities but I am encouraged by the expansion elsewhere. What were just 35 
branches in 3rd to 5th class municipalities in 2010 are now 73 branches as of end 2015. 
The numbers may be modest in absolute terms but the pace of growth is not trivial. Which 
brings  me  back  to  your  conference  theme:  “Thrift  Banks:  Sustaining  the  Momentum  for 
Inclusive Growth”. Now, a critical question comes to mind-- How can/do thrift banks contribute 
to inclusive growth? I think with some pragmatism and humility, we would be well-served to 
“scope” the response to this and say that thrift banks play a role in financial inclusion, which 
promotes inclusive growth. 
Inclusive growth and the role of the thrift banks 
There are several policy issues which are being considered in the space of financial inclusion. 
For thrift banks, I think two of these are most relevant. 
First, we would want to ensure that there is symbiotic relationship between financial inclusion 
and financial stability.  Certainly,  it  defeats  our  prudential  purposes  if  the  attainment  of  one 
comes at the expense of the other. 
Here, your expanding footprint strategy is a critical element. As banking services are offered 
outside of the traditional city-centers, the expectation is that the dynamics between inclusion 
and stability can very well change. 
The BSP and the BIS are currently writing a paper on the relationship between inclusion and 
stability  to  explore  the  empirical  linkages.  The  preliminary  results  suggest  that  information 
between a bank and its clients as well as the relationship between a bank and other banks in 
the vicinity do matter. This sounds rather straightforward but the implications on the operations 
of banks are not simple. 
In practice, this means each bank must maintain a continuing dialogue with its stakeholders. 
This kind of transparency is not just “another disclosure regime”. Rather, it is communication 
that  prevents  surprises  and  allows  stakeholders  to  make  informed  decisions,  avoiding  the 
sharp spikes that often create and/or exacerbate evolving issues. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Furthermore, banks must be cognizant that stakeholders do look at the localized community 
of financial service providers. In this day and age of electronic communication and affordable 
channels,  financial  consumers  demand  “banking  services”,  which  may  no  longer  be 
necessarily supplied by the traditional “brick-and-mortar banking institutions. 
This  leads  me  to my  second  policy  area  which  I  often  refer to  as the “totality  of the  client 
experience”. As far as financial consumers are concerned, we live in a digital age and financial 
services are expected to be delivered and are in the form defined by financial technology. 
The digitization of financial services, more popularly labeled as fintech, requires innovation and 
support. The BSP has put in place both its e-money and IT Risk framework to enable this 
environment. Financial consumers who need to transfer funds from one branch to another of 
the same bank (let’s say from Manila to relatives in the province OR between two branches 
here in Metro Manila) must be able to do so with as less friction as possible. 
In the event that something unexpected happens to such a transaction, this is where “support” 
comes into play. Here, the BSP issued its Consumer Protection Framework that focuses on 
pro-active  interventions  such  as  financial  literacy  initiatives  and  the  necessity  of  having 
remedial recourse by way of redress. 
The issues I just discussed are certainly relevant to thrift banks because you are the ones 
defining your target audience and by extension, you will have to provide for the “totality” of your 
clients’ experience, regardless of where they may be. 
Final thoughts 
Ladies and gentlemen, we spoke of the links between financial inclusion and financial stability; 
of  how,  as  an  industry,  you  would  need  to  harness  fintech  to  enrich  your  clients’  total 
experience. We also spoke of how your strategy of expanding branching footprint is helping to 
reach the underserved. These support our belief that we are (well) on our way towards creating 
a critical mass in our collective initiatives towards inclusive growth. Importantly, this mass is 
moving.  By  definition  therefore,  we  have  momentum.  But,  that  is  not  enough,  we  need  to 
sustain it. 
As  the  banking  regulator,  we  will  enable  the  environment  with  a  commensurate  regulatory 
framework and calibrate as may be necessary. But the form and substance of the banking 
products and services, including the means of delivery and distribution, are choices that only 
the banks can make. 
Thrift banks will have to define your market niche, as individual institutions that compete with 
others and as an industry that collaborates with the whole. Competition and collaboration may 
be flipsides of each other but the end goal will have to be the totality of the experience of the 
financial consumer. Absent such a positive experience, the financial consumer simply drifts to 
the shadows (i.e., shadow banking) or chooses to be financially excluded. I trust that no one 
in this room will find that to be an acceptable outcome. 
The National Strategy for Financial Inclusion (NSFI) has been launched, and we now have to 
focus on its execution. I therefore look forward to your active participation in this endeavor. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  work  of  financial  inclusion  is  enormous.  If  we  pursue  this 
individually, we are likely to only hardly make a dent. But collectively, and forming a critical 
mass, who knows where our efforts will take us? We could just very simply turn out to be 
unstoppable! 
 Thank you for your attention. Good morning. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
