   Jens Weidmann: The euro area in 2016 – crucial to set right course for 
enhancing growth and stability 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  International  Club  La 
Redoute e.V., Bonn, 28 January 2016. 
1. 
Introductory remarks 
 Gräfin Lambsdorff, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for your kind welcome and for inviting me to your club. I was pleased to accept your 
invitation. I am probably partial to requests to speak in Bonn – and I mean that positively – due 
to my old ties to the University of Bonn. After all, I studied here for a number of years and 
obtained a degree in economics and a PhD here, thus acquiring a large chunk of my economic 
“toolkit” in this city. However, a more important reason for accepting your invitation was the 
fact that you regularly address current European policy topics. I am sure that we will therefore 
have a lively debate at the end of my speech. 
Ladies and gentleman, as you know, 2016 is a leap year. There have been leap years since 
the time of Julius Caesar. They take account of the earth taking a little more than 365 days to 
orbit the sun. According to calculations by the Greek astronomer Hipparchus – which would 
have been known in Caesar’s time – it took 5 hours, 55 minutes and 12 seconds longer, though 
he was a few minutes off according to modern-day calculations. There ended up being one 
leap year too many every 128 years; as a result, by the mid-16th century spring had been 
brought forward 10 days. This needed to be corrected, and Pope Gregory XIII did this with his 
Gregorian calendar, which is still used today. 
The introduction of the Gregorian calendar set the course for a calendar that keeps track with 
the seasons. When we talk today about setting the right course for a more stable and growth-
promoting regulatory framework for monetary union, we get the impression that this requires a 
more complex process than the introduction of the Gregorian calendar. But we merely need to 
take a leaf out of Pope Gregory XIII’s book of long-term thinking. We don’t need to look forward 
centuries in one fell swoop. It would already be a big step forward if we were to address the 
challenges looming in the coming years and decades. 
However, we have already been discussing the right course to set in Europe for seven years 
now. Children born at the outbreak of the crisis have now already learnt to read and write, 
while in the euro area we are still going through the A to Z of the terms and conditions that will 
bring the euro area more stability as well as more growth. 
Against the backdrop of the rise to power of populist parties in many crisis countries, Italian 
Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, for instance, said in an interview with the Financial Times just 
before  Christmas:  “We  can  defeat  this  demagogy,  apathy  and  populism  by  betting  on  the 
growth and employment of a new social Europe.” And he added: “We have to be careful with 
our finances, but it has to be less about commas and decimal points.” 
Ladies and gentleman, are growth and fiscal solidarity really at odds with each other, as is 
implicitly assumed by Renzi with his reference to commas and decimal points? I do not think 
so. A looser fiscal policy can temporarily jump-start economic growth. However, in the longer 
run, lasting growth cannot flourish on an ever growing mountain of debt – this is precisely what 
the sovereign debt crisis in Europe has made clear. Furthermore, numerous empirical studies 
demonstrate that once debt goes beyond a certain level it impedes growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   And is Renzi right in alleging that the discussions in Europe are really just focused on commas 
and decimal points? I get the impression that the fundamental issue here is rather obeying 
rules. But rules don’t mean anything unless they are obeyed. In my opinion, confidence in the 
binding  power  of  the  joint  agreements  is  essential  for  the  functioning  and  acceptance  of 
monetary union. And this is all the more the case when Europe’s problem-solving skills are 
being put to the test and there is an evident tendency among some member states to go it 
alone. 
Moreover, monetary policy also benefits when fiscal policy rules are obeyed. The crisis has 
namely also shown how much pressure monetary policy can come under if confidence in the 
soundness of public finances is lost and risks for financial stability emerge. However, stable 
money is a key pillar of our economic system and a prerequisite for lasting growth. Before I 
turn  my  attention  to  how  to  enhance  growth  in  the  euro  area  and  make  the  regulatory 
framework of monetary union more stable, I would first like to say a few words about the current 
monetary policy. 
Monetary policy 
2. 
Ladies and gentleman, there is no doubt that the current monetary policy situation is not an 
easy  one,  with  downside  risks  to  inflation  in  the  euro  area  having  increased  recently. This 
concern is also evident in the introductory statement of the ECB Governing Council last week. 
There is no doubt that uncertainty is currently running high. Given the recent financial market 
turbulence  in  China,  the  continued  drop  in  oil  and  commodity  prices  and  the  heightened 
geopolitical risks, doubts are being raised in some quarters as to whether the international 
environment is still providing the stimuli for euro-area growth that were incorporated into the 
December Eurosystem staff projection, with economic growth for 2016 and 2017 expected to 
be 1.7% and 1.9%, respectively. 
However, we shouldn’t  paint the economic outlook blacker than it actually is. The financial 
market turbulence in China at the start of January and its partial transfer to the rest of the world 
demonstrate the nervousness of the financial markets. However, the price falls in China can 
primarily  be  viewed  as  further  corrections  to  earlier,  sharp  price  rises.  And  they  were 
undoubtedly  also  reinforced  by  an  ill-timed  regulatory  measure.  In  my  opinion,  there  are 
currently no signs of a severe economic slump in China. Instead, there are indications of a 
gradual slowdown in economic growth. This is consistent with China’s transition to a more 
service-oriented, domestic-driven economic model. 
Furthermore,  the  unusually  sharp  oil  price  drop  is  now  weighing  heavily  on  numerous  oil-
producing countries. Many of these countries are on the brink of, or have already tipped over 
into,  a  recession,  which  is  why  they  need  to tighten the reins  on  public  and  private  sector 
expenditure. As net importers of crude oil, Germany and the euro area are receiving a boost 
to their economies, as petrol and heating costs are falling further and many firms are able to 
manufacture and produce goods more cheaply. The fall in energy prices compared with the 
level  included  in  the  December  Eurosystem  staff  projection  will  probably  yield  estimated 
savings of just over half a percentage point for consumers and enterprises this year – both in 
Germany and in the euro area as a whole. 
The flip side of the oil price drop in monetary policy terms is, however, that downside risks to 
the inflation outlook have also increased. The inflation rate will not rise again until later than 
previously anticipated and there will probably need to be a substantial downward revision of 
the inflation forecast for this year. The fact that the Eurosystem will not achieve its price stability 
goal over an extended period of time will undoubtedly put the credibility of monetary policy to 
the  test.  We  must  therefore  pay  particularly  close  attention  to  longer-term  inflation 
expectations.  This  is  because  they  are  an  indicator  of  confidence  that  the  self-imposed 
monetary policy goal of an inflation rate below, but close to, 2% over the medium term will be 
achieved. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Moreover,  we  must  also  carefully  monitor  possible  signs  of  second-round  effects.  Some 
believe that the current wage growth rates in the euro area are already sounding warning bells. 
I  don’t  agree,  however.  As  some  crisis  countries  will  still  need  to  increase  their  price 
competitiveness  in  order  to  regain  lost  global  market  shares,  wages  there  can  only  rise 
moderately. This employment-oriented wage policy is thus putting pressure on wage growth. 
Yet, on the other hand, the improving labour market situation is boosting consumption. 
When assessing price risks, we shouldn’t be like a rabbit caught in the headlights, fixated on 
the current consumer price inflation rate. This rate could, in fact, temporarily slip back into 
negative territory during the spring quarter. Monetary policy should look beyond these short-
term oil-price-induced fluctuations in consumer prices. Domestic price pressures are better 
reflected by the core inflation rate, which factors out such effects. Although, at 1%, this rate is 
currently also below the price stability target, it is rising and is far removed from the dangerous 
territory of deflation, that is to say the territory in which we would have to fear a downward 
spiral of sinking prices, falling wages and an economic downswing. 
Paths leading to stronger growth  
3. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  purpose  of  the  Eurosystem’s  highly  accommodative  monetary 
policy  is  to  stimulate  economic  activity  in  order to  bringing  inflation  into alignment  with  the 
definition  of  price  stability.  Private  consumption  in  the  euro  area  has  been  picking  up 
perceptibly,  and  not  just  because  financing  conditions  are  favourable  –  low  oil  prices  and 
inflation  are  another  factor.  Investment,  meanwhile,  is  only  now  gradually  getting  off  the 
ground. 
Investment, of course, is more than just a component of aggregate demand in the economic 
process  –  it  also  has  a  bearing  on  the  size  and  quality  of  the  economy’s  capital  stock. 
Investment in machinery and equipment, especially, keeps production structures up to speed 
with  technological  advances,  making  it  a  useful  lever  for  lifting  an  economy’s  output  and 
ultimately its growth as well. Investment in machinery and equipment may have been back on 
the increase since early 2013, but across much of the euro area it has still not yet returned to 
pre-crisis levels. One glimmer of hope, of course, is that the impediments to investment will 
gradually peter out over time. The adjustment and reform processes in the crisis countries are 
making headway, and financing conditions are looser again than they were when the crisis 
was raging. This means that two major burdens on investment have been removed. 
However, one major impediment lingers on – the outlook for growth – a hugely important factor 
for investment – has been revised downwards in recent years. The European Commission 
projects that, in the absence of further growth-enhancing reforms, the medium-term growth 
outlook will be no better than 1% per annum. It is this malaise, and not deficit-financed stimulus 
programmes,  that  needs  to  be  addressed  by  economic  policy.  The  same  can  be  said  for 
Germany, where negative demographics look set to play a major role in depressing potential 
output growth. 
Incidentally, Gräfin Lambsdorff, the idea of making each country individually responsible for 
creating  growth-friendly  conditions  was  something  which  your  late  husband  already 
expounded in his famous “Lambsdorff paper”. That document back in 1982 spelled out his plan 
for  boosting  growth  in  Germany  and  probably  sounded  the  death  knell  for  the  SPD/FDP 
coalition. Pointing to the stubborn adjustment crisis that was stifling the global economy at that 
time, Graf Lambsdorff wrote: “It will only be possible to find a solution – at least a lasting one 
– to the worldwide problems if the individual countries themselves do away with what’s making 
it difficult for them to adjust.” 
The efforts needed to clear the debris after the financial and sovereign debt crisis sometimes 
addressed shortcomings of a very fundamental nature. Greece, for instance, urgently needs a 
reliable  and  functioning  administration  and  a  more  efficient  public  sector,  not  to  mention 
measures  to  sustainably  consolidate  its  public  finances  and  further  reform  steps  to  make 
Greece a more competitive economy. And Italy, too, could place its economy on a much more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   rewarding growth path by streamlining its public administration and making its legal system 
more efficient. It is gratifying to note that the constitutional reforms on which prime minister 
Matteo Renzi has staked his political future are moving in the right direction. This initiative will 
enable parliament to adopt legislation more quickly. Once the reform measures have been 
formally  and  fully  approved  by  parliament,  the  final  step  in  the  process  will  be  a  public 
referendum, most likely in the autumn. 
In  some  countries,  the  efforts  to  mop  up  the  post-crisis  carnage  have  centred  around  the 
question of debt. High levels of household and corporate debt in some euro-area countries are 
continuing to stifle overall economic activity, particularly investment. But private indebtedness 
is not the only topic on the agenda – public debt also needs to be addressed. A string of euro-
area countries have made huge progress in scaling back their fiscal deficits since the onset of 
the sovereign debt crisis – indeed, Greece, Ireland and others deserve plaudits for paring back 
their annual deficits by ten percentage points or more. But more often than not, countries are 
still  crashing  through  the  3%  deficit  ceiling.  And  if  we  factor  cyclical  gains  and  temporary 
measures out of the deficit numbers, then the structural deficits, as they are known, have been 
static at best or even going back up. Essentially, the opportunity opened up by the low interest 
rates to bring down structural deficits particularly quickly was squandered. 
In the key area of labour market reforms, countries like Italy, Spain and France have made 
tangible progress in the right direction since the crisis struck. But employment could be boosted 
further still if France and Spain, say, act even more decisively to address the divide splitting 
their labour markets into temporary and permanent employment contracts. 
The goods markets are another area where key decisions unleashing the forces of growth can 
be made. For instance, some European countries have rules which inhibit the growth of small 
enterprises.  But  when  highly  innovative  small  businesses  are  prevented  from  scaling  new 
heights, this stunts economic growth. Another case in point is the red tape involved in setting 
up a business, which is a major hurdle across much of Europe and, I might add, especially so 
in Germany. The World Bank’s Doing Business Report ranks our country 107th for red tape, 
alongside Antigua and Barbuda and behind Nepal and Ghana. So we’re not “best practitioners” 
in this respect, not by any stretch of the imagination. 
And there are other areas where Germany would be unwise to rest on its laurels. Potential 
growth  is  just  a  meagre  1.3%,  and  globalisation  and  the  “energy  U-turn”  are  exposing  the 
economy to mounting competitive and cost pressures. More importantly, German society is 
feeling the effects of radical demographic change, which will take its toll on the country’s growth 
prospects. Over time, the working-age population will diminish and the number of people in 
work will shrink, causing growth to falter further. The current influx of refugees will do little to 
alleviate this problem. 
We may be powerless to halt the wheels of demographic change, but we can at least soften 
its blow on the economy.  To achieve that goal, we would have to 
focus more strongly on education and training – that is, on labour productivity 
• 
boost the participation of women and the elderly in the labour force still further 
• 
improve the way the long-term unemployed are integrated into the labour market 
• 
• 
integrate into our labour market those refugees who are permitted to stay in Germany. 
Our success in integrating refugees into our society will hinge in large measure on how quickly 
and smoothly these immigrants can be absorbed into the labour market. But that’s a task that 
will take stamina and patience, because language difficulties won’t be the only problem for the 
vast majority of refugees; their qualifications will probably be found wanting, too. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The individual member states aren’t the only ones who can put their economies on track for 
stronger growth – the European Commission and Council can contribute as well. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   They could, for instance, work towards bringing together the 28 separate digital markets that 
still  exist  in  Europe  to  finally  create  a  pan-European  digital  market  that  extends  from 
Hammerfest to Heraklion. Studies suggest that, in Germany alone, a single European digital 
market could create more than 400,000 new jobs within the space of a few years. And the 
establishment of the capital markets union is another project where the European Commission 
is at the wheel. Broad, well-developed capital markets will offer fresh sources of funding for 
businesses, again paving the way towards stronger growth. 
Architecture of the monetary union and the path to greater fiscal soundness 
4. 
A full economic and monetary union should also include a capital markets union. As you know, 
last year, the President of the European Commission Jean-Claude Juncker and the presidents 
of four other EU institutions published a report entitled “Completing Europe’s Economic and 
Monetary Union”. In it, the five presidents wrote, “Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union 
today is like a house that was built over decades but only partially finished. When the storm 
hit, its walls and roof had to be stabilised quickly. It is now high time to reinforce its foundations 
[...].” 
The time has indeed come to strengthen the foundations of the monetary union, and a sound 
institutional architecture is undoubtedly also a key prerequisite for a prosperous euro area. I 
would therefore like to take a closer look at the architecture of the euro area and outline how 
we might improve its stability. 
If we were to try to compare the architecture of the euro area to that of a real building, I don’t 
think the La Redoute here in Bad Godesberg would immediately spring to anyone’s mind. This 
beautiful building is simply too symmetrical. Instead, you would probably think of structures 
such  as  the  Guggenheim  Museum  in  Bilbao  or  the  Gehry  buildings  in  Düsseldorf’s  Media 
Harbour, because one of main features of the euro area is its asymmetry. It brings together 
19 largely autonomous fiscal policies under a single monetary policy. Nobody would say that 
asymmetrical buildings such as those I have just mentioned cannot be structurally stable, but 
they are bound to require complicated calculations. 
To  a  certain  degree,  the  founding  fathers  of  the  monetary  union  also  performed  structural 
calculations  and  were  aware  that  their  asymmetrical  design  contained  flaws.  The  risk  of 
accumulating excessive debt is greater in a monetary union than in countries with their own 
currencies.  One reason is because the member states of a monetary union are not borrowing 
in their own currency. Another is that there are greater incentives to borrow in a monetary 
union  because  any  consequences  of  relying  too  heavily  on  capital  market  funding  can  be 
passed on to the other member states – at least in part. 
I usually like to compare this to the overfishing of our oceans. However, here in Bonn, the UN’s 
“climate  capital”,  I  would  prefer  to  compare  it  to  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  The  damage 
caused by CO2 emissions is global, whereas the benefits from, say, the burning of fossil fuels, 
are local. This simple logic explains why preventing climate change is so difficult in practice. 
The dilemma can only be solved through international cooperation. The Kyoto Protocol was 
intended to protect the atmosphere and reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and it remains to 
be seen whether this will finally be achieved thanks to the agreement recently signed in Paris. 
To protect the single currency and prevent excessive debt, the member states of the euro area 
have also agreed on a “Kyoto Protocol” of their own – the Maastricht Treaty, which includes 
the Stability and Growth Pact. Under the terms of the Treaty, the member states pledged to 
maintain sound public finances and prohibit central banks from printing money to fund cash-
strapped governments – also known as the ban on monetary financing of governments. They 
also agreed to a “no bail-out clause” that prevents one member state from assuming liability 
for  the  debts  of  another.  This  means  that  the  euro-area  member  states  are  individually 
responsible  for  the  consequences  of  their  own  excessive  borrowing.  It  is  also  intended  to 
encourage  the  capital  markets  to  factor  risk  into  the  interest  rates  at  which  they  lend  to 
governments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   This regulatory framework based on the principle of liability – the Maastricht framework – was 
the starting point for the creation of the monetary union in 1999. In its first decade, it proved to 
be a stable structure. However, with hindsight, this also turned out to be a period of fine weather 
in economic terms. But then, to quote the five presidents again, the “storm” arrived in the guise 
of the financial and debt crisis, which is why “the walls and roof had to be stabilised quickly”. 
The crisis revealed that enormous macroeconomic imbalances had built up in some countries 
over the initial period of calm. Alongside the huge increase in public and private-sector debt, 
international competitiveness had also been eroded. A number of these imbalances exposed 
the blind spots in the regulatory framework of the monetary union. 
In response to the crisis, a procedure for identifying macroeconomic imbalances at an early 
stage  was  therefore  established,  in  which  the  European  Commission  regularly  examines 
whether, for example, private sector debt or member states’ current account balances are a 
source of harmful imbalances. When trying to repair the damage, however, a great deal of 
energy was also devoted to strengthening fiscal soundness. For instance, a fiscal compact 
was adopted to make the fiscal rules of the Stability Pact more stringent and binding, thus 
boosting confidence in the sustainability of public finances. It was this very lack of confidence 
that was at the heart of the sovereign debt crisis. The binding effect of the fiscal rules had 
already been weakened before the crisis. First, the financial markets appeared not to take the 
no bail-out clause seriously, and second, Germany and France successfully avoided sanctions 
over their excessive deficits in 2005, leading other countries to believe that they, too, could 
bend the rules. 
While the crisis was being tackled, elements of communitised liability gained ground. Although 
the no bail-out clause still applies in theory, its foundations have been eroded to some extent 
in practice, most notably by the European rescue packages. At the time, this communitisation 
of liability helped to stabilise the situation. 
However, joint liability can only lead to lasting stability in combination with joint control. This is 
because liability and control must be aligned, either at the national or the European level, or 
the principle that each member state must “pay its own way” would be breached. 
The financial crisis also illustrates just how serious the consequences of circumventing the 
liability principle can be. For year, banks had taken excessive risks because, for example, they 
were too big and too interconnected to fail, and could expect taxpayer-funded bailouts. This is 
why many of the regulatory initiatives in the financial sector rightly aim to ensure that banks 
are once more subject to the same liability principle as any German Mittelstand company. 
Transferring liability and control to the European level is not a new idea. When the treaties 
were signed, some saw the monetary union as merely an interim step towards a political union. 
Addressing the Bundestag here in Bonn in November 1991, Helmut Kohl remarked that “the 
idea of sustaining economic and monetary union over time without political union is a fallacy”. 
There are a wealth of proposals as to how liability should be shared. By saying that “is now 
high time to reinforce [the] foundations”, the five presidents, too, are aiming to establish joint 
liability  and  risk-sharing.  However,  when  it  comes  to  the  necessary  transfer  of  fiscal 
sovereignty, practically no concrete proposals have been made. Although the five presidents 
wrote that “a genuine Fiscal Union will require more joint decision-making on fiscal policy,” they 
are relatively short on specifics – which is understandable. After all, there is next to no political 
support for the transfer of fiscal sovereignty to the European level. 
The  parliamentary  group  of  the  SPD  recently  adopted  a  paper  on  the  future  direction  of 
monetary union which calls for new executive powers at the euro-area level in the medium 
term in order to monitor the fiscal rules and national budgets. This recognises the need for a 
balance between liability and control. I do not, however, perceive any broad-based willingness 
to relinquish sovereignty, let alone the majorities for the constitutional and treaty amendments 
which that would require. On the contrary, national politicians get very touchy about warnings 
from Brussels and reject any interventions in their fiscal autonomy. For instance, Matteo Renzi, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   whom  I  have  already  quoted,  says  that  Italy  will  not  allow  a  “bureaucrat  from  Brussels”  to 
dictate its fiscal policy. 
In  any  event,  a  halfway  solution  –  along  the  lines  of  increased  joint  liability  while  leaving 
national sovereignty in financial matters as it is – would undermine incentives for sound fiscal 
action. That would harbour the risk of monetary policymakers again being called to the rescue 
– and far too much has already been demanded of monetary policy in the current crisis. 
As long as liability and control are not aligned at the European level, there is therefore only 
one way to stabilise the monetary union in the long run. That way consists in affirming the 
decentralised approach of the Maastricht framework and reinforcing the principle of national 
responsibility. At first, that may seem to be a case of looking backwards. But that impression 
is deceptive, because it is not about restoring the monetary union to its pre-crisis condition. 
Rather, the asymmetric Maastricht framework should be designed so as to make the structure 
stable without depending on a political union. 
To do that, the binding force of the debt rules should be strengthened. Admittedly, that was 
precisely the objective of the last reform of the Stability and Growth Pact. However, it ended 
up conceding considerable discretionary scope, mainly to the European Commission. Torn in 
two  directions  in  its  dual  role  as  a  political  institution  and  guardian  of  the  treaties,  the 
Commission is frequently inclined to compromise at the expense of budgetary discipline. This 
means that the binding power of the debt rules has ultimately tended to be weakened. A more 
consistent interpretation of the rules could have been achieved if responsibility had rested with 
an independent fiscal authority for budgetary surveillance instead of the Commission. Please 
note:  an  independent  authority  –  a  committee  which  only  advises  the  Commission,  as 
proposed by the Five Presidents, would fall short. 
Past  developments  have  made  it  abundantly  clear  that  political  agreements  alone  are  not 
enough to ensure sound public finances. That was evidently also how the founding fathers saw 
the situation. By introducing the no-bail-out clause, they sought to allow the disciplining forces 
of the financial markets to come to bear. But that can only work if the no-bail-out principle is 
made credible. “Whoever reaps the benefits must also bear the liability.” This liability principle, 
as once described by Walter Eucken, also needs to be applied to sovereign debt. 
Investors  have  to  perceive  a  credible  threat  of  losing  their  money  if  they  buy  bonds  from 
governments that have unsound public finances. The crisis has brutally exposed the fact that 
sovereigns, too, can reach the brink of insolvency. An orderly procedure for a sovereign default 
does  not  yet  exist,  however.  But  that  is  precisely  what  we  need.  This  is  not  only  about 
procedural rules, however. It is also about a sovereign default not being allowed to jeopardise 
the stability of the entire financial system. To a certain extent, the terror has to be taken out of 
sovereign debt restructuring. Doing this means, in particular, loosening the close links between 
banks and sovereigns. This is because, at present, a considerable part of sovereign debt is 
held by – mostly domestic – banks. Therefore, if a government no longer serviced its debt, the 
banks, too, would encounter massive economic difficulties. Financial stability would be under 
threat. 
One reason for the large holdings of sovereign debt on the banks’ balance sheets is that, unlike 
in the case of loans to enterprises and households, banks currently do not have to hold any 
capital against euro-area government bonds. The idea behind this is that euro-area bonds are 
believed to be risk-free. Upon the outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis, if not beforehand, it 
had become clear that this assumption was a fiction with no basis in reality. For that reason, 
there must be an end to the preferential regulatory treatment of government bonds. Giving 
banks an incentive to maximise their sovereign debt holdings instead of lending to the private 
sector is, after all, absurd. 
We have come a long way over the past few years towards making the financial system more 
robust.  In  particular,  banks  now  have  to  satisfy  higher  quantitative  and  qualitative  capital 
requirements, which has improved their ability to absorb losses. But, to date, no decisions have 
been taken with regard to cutting back the regulatory privileges of government bonds. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   Bundesbank has been calling for this for a number of years now; the fact that it is now being 
negotiated at the global and European levels can be regarded as a success. 
The inherent risks of the strong economic links between sovereigns and banks have to be 
limited  and,  until  the  key  decisions  have  been  taken  on  this  issue,  a  European  deposit 
protection scheme would be premature. What argues against an over-hasty communitisation 
of deposit protection – which the Commission and some member states are calling for – is, not 
least, the fact that the member states still hold considerable sway over the quality of bank 
balance sheets, say, by virtue of national insolvency law. Here, too, it holds true that liability 
and control have to be aligned with one another. It is inconsistent to claim national sovereignty 
while at the same time calling for more European solidarity. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Europe is therefore still facing major challenges. A large number of fundamental decisions 
aiming at more economic growth and a durably stable monetary union still have to be taken. 
The sooner they are taken, the better. Having said that, the description “durably stable” has 
two sides to it. What has to be “durably stable” is, first of all, the regulatory framework. This will 
only be possible once liability and control are in alignment and once solidarity and sovereignty 
are in balance. Public finances, too, have to be “durably stable”, however. This is because a 
monetary union is stable only if each country keeps its own house in order; this has been made 
abundantly clear by the repeated discussions on financial assistance for Greece. 
This was something that was pointed out in a speech delivered here at your club, La Redoute, 
more  than  25 years  ago.  The  former  Bundesbank  President  Hans  Tietmeyer  was  already 
aware of the pitfalls back then and said that “Without sufficient stability policy convergence 
and, above all, greater budgetary discipline in a number of European countries, economic and 
monetary union will be unable to gain a sustainable foundation. No matter what fine words and 
ambitious statements of intent are contained in the treaties, it will not be enough if there does 
not exist the will to actually change fiscal and budgetary policy itself.” 
Once we in the euro area have reached the point where balanced budgets are actually firmly 
anchored in policy, tenths of a decimal point will indeed probably no longer be important for 
confidence in the euro. 
Thank you for your attention, and I look forward to your questions. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
