  Yannis Stournaras: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Greece 
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  83th  Annual 
Meeting of Shareholders, Athens, 25 February 2016. 
 The completion of the review is essential for an exit from the crisis 
2016: a year of pragmatism and adjustment 
According to Bank of Greece estimates included in the present report, the conditions shaping 
the path of the Greek economy in 2016 appear to be more favourable than a year ago. It is 
therefore reasonable to anticipate that the recession will bottom out and that the economy 
will see a slight recovery during the second half of this year, provided that political stability is 
maintained and uncertainty, which harms investor confidence, is eliminated. 
This outlook is subject to strong uncertainties and high risks, associated, on the one hand, 
with global developments and, on the other, with the pace at which the Greek economy will 
return to normality and adjust to the new conditions. 
The  first  set  of  risks  relates  to  the  refugee  crisis  and  the  manner  in  which  the  European 
Union (EU) as a whole will address it; a surge in geopolitical risks in the broader region; a 
slowdown of global economic growth and an overreaction of financial markets in this respect; 
a new Asian crisis originating in China; and finally, the possibility of a British exit from the EU. 
These  risks  in  the  global  environment  could  reinforce  centrifugal  trends  in  the  EU  and 
undermine European cohesion, at a time when the stronger Member States of the euro area 
seem to have fundamentally different approaches to the architecture of the monetary union. 
On  the  domestic  front,  the  prospect  of  recovery  crucially  hinges  on  a  number  of 
prerequisites, including reaching an agreement on the first review of the programme and the 
adoption of the agreed measures by the Hellenic Parliament, commitment to implementing 
the programme, and action to restore political and economic stability and foster a return to 
normality. In order to respond and adjust to the fast changing global environment, the Greek 
economy,  integrated  into  a  globalised  economy  and  exposed  as  it  is  to  international 
competition,  must  first  of  all  consolidate  its  position  by  effectively  addressing  its  own 
problems. The country that fails to keep up with European developments and lags behind will 
be the one hardest hit, in case the global environment takes a turn for the worse. 
Recent macroeconomic developments 
Between 2008 and the end of 2013, the Greek economy lost a cumulative 26% of its Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP). After a short-lived rebound in 2014 that continued until mid-2015, it 
fell  back  into  recession  in  the  third  quarter  of  2015  (–1.9%).  The  rate  of  change  in  GDP 
remained  negative  (–1.9%)  in  the  fourth  quarter,  coming  to  –0.7%  for  2015  as  a  whole. 
Underlying  this  new  downturn  were  political  instability  from  the  end  of  2014  onwards,  the 
protracted negotiations with our creditors in the first half of 2015, the bank holiday and the 
imposition of capital controls, as well as the new fiscal adjustment measures under the new 
Financial Assistance Facility Agreement, considered necessary to achieve the revised fiscal 
targets.  The  strengths  of  the  Greek  economy  and  of  the  domestic  banking  system  were 
tested. However, the economy showed remarkable resilience, and the negative impact was 
more moderate than initially expected. 
This  resilience  is  associated  with  the  implementation  of  the  adjustment  programmes  since 
2010, which – in spite of several delays and missteps – have succeeded in sharply reducing 
the major macroeconomic and fiscal imbalances. More specifically: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
     The high fiscal deficit has been reduced, covering three quarters of the adjustment 
path  towards  the  ultimate  fiscal  target  (for  a  primary  surplus  of  3.5%  of  GDP  by 
2018, compared with a primary deficit of 10.1% of GDP in 2009). 
The current account deficit and the loss of competitiveness have been addressed, 
while  labour  market  rigidities  and  constraints  have  been  reduced,  leading  to  an 
increase in exports. 
There  have  also  been  signs  of  sectoral  reallocation  towards  tradable  goods  and 
services  and,  more  generally,  towards  the  more  productive  businesses  across  all 
economic sectors. 
As  opposed to the  substantial  progress  made  in  recent  years  with fiscal  adjustment,  there 
have been delays  with privatisations and the implementation of growth-enhancing reforms. 
These  delays  held  back  the  beneficial  effects  on  growth  and  employment,  which  only 
emerged in the course of 2014, with GDP growth returning to positive territory for the year as 
a  whole  (+0.7%)  and  in  the  first  two  quarters  of  2015.  The  recovery  would  have  gained 
traction and the overall outcome for 2015 and 2016 would have undoubtedly been positive 
and  stronger,  in  line  with  the  projections,  if  it  had  not  been  undercut  by  heightened 
uncertainty  from  the  last  months  of  2014  until  a  new  agreement  was  reached  with  our 
partners at the Euro Summit of 12 July 2015. 
After a primary surplus of 1.2% of GDP in 2013, well above the target for a balanced primary 
budget, Greece’s fiscal position deteriorated in 2014, on the back of political and economic 
uncertainty in the late part of the year. Nevertheless, the primary balance remained positive, 
albeit  small  and  falling  considerably  short  of  the  targeted  1.5%  of  GDP.  In  the  course  of 
2015, fiscal aggregates showed strong fluctuations, reflecting developments in tax revenue, 
public investment expenditure and government arrears. Following a downward revision of the 
primary balance target to a deficit of 0.25% of GDP (from an earlier target for a 3.0% surplus) 
and  the  adoption  of  additional  fiscal  measures,  the  primary  budget  in  2015  is  expected  to 
have been balanced or slightly in surplus. 
The major challenge of 2015: safeguarding financial stability 
Against  the  background  of  uncertainty  that  prevailed  in  the  first  half  of  2015,  it  became 
crucially  important  to  safeguard  financial  stability  under  threat  from  a  pick-up  in  deposit 
outflows, a spike in non-performing loans (reversing the picture that had begun to emerge in 
the  course  of  2014),  the  non-eligibility  of  Greek  securities  as  collateral  in  Eurosystem 
monetary policy operations and, above all, the heated debate over a possible Greek exit from 
the euro area. 
At these most difficult of times, the Bank of Greece fulfilled its primary duty arising from its 
participation in the Eurosystem and from its Statute, namely to safeguard monetary stability 
and support liquidity in the domestic banking system, while at the same time safeguarding its 
independence and credibility helping to restore normality. In this respect: 
• 
it  provided  timely  and  reliable  information  to  the  government  and  political  parties, 
while raising public awareness through its reports and public interventions; 
it ensured the uninterrupted funding of the banking system through the Emergency 
Liquidity Assistance (ELA) mechanism; 
it  supplied  credit  institutions  with  banknotes,  averting  any  cash  shortages  even  in 
the remotest parts of the country; 
it  developed,  in  collaboration  with  the  government  and  the  Hellenic  Financial 
Stability Fund (HFSF), a strategy on non-performing loans (NPLs); 
it carried out the Asset Quality Review of banks; 
    2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      it completed the successful recapitalisation of significant and less significant banks, 
without shocks to the credit system; 
it  engaged  in  close  cooperation  with  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM) 
through the participation of members of its staff in Joint Supervisory Teams; 
it helped to minimise the impact of capital controls, with the result that the recession 
was much more moderate than expected; 
it supported the work of the Committee for the Approval of Bank Transactions; 
it provided support to government operations, always in compliance with the Treaty 
on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union,  which,  among  other things, delineates 
the relations between national central banks and Member States’ governments. 
The bank holiday and the capital controls managed to contain the deposit outflows and the 
capital  flight.  The  ensuing  distortions  in  the  capital  market,  as  well  as  in  the  goods  and 
services markets, have had indirect repercussions that cannot be precisely assessed as yet. 
On a positive note, however, capital controls have encouraged the use of electronic money. 
There is already strong evidence that the widespread use of e-money has supported private 
consumption  and  tax  revenue,  by  reducing  the  informal  economy.  Thus,  one  first  policy 
implication is that the use of e-money needs to be strengthened further, through appropriate, 
mainly tax-related, incentives. 
A stronger banking system in the wake of recapitalisation 
The recapitalisation of Greek banks was successfully completed in December 2015, with a 
substantial  participation  of  private  investors.  This  new  recapitalisation  became  necessary 
against  the  background  of  a  deteriorating  economic  climate,  heightened  uncertainty  and 
increased  outflows  of  deposits  during  the  first  half  of  2015,  as  well  as  amid  rising  non-
performing  loans.  The  four  significant  Greek  banks  managed  to  cover  the  capital  needs 
identified by the ECB’s stress tests. The necessary funds came from (a) foreign investors, 
who placed around €5.3 billion; (b) capital mitigating actions amounting to €0.6 billion; and 
(c)  liability  management  exercises  (voluntary  bond  swap  offers  to  bank  bondholders)  that 
yielded about €2.7 billion. 
For the two banks that did not fully cover their capital needs, based on the adverse scenario, 
from private sources (totalling about €5.4 billion), the necessary additional funds were drawn 
from the HFSF. Thus, the public resources used proved to be far lower than the amount of 
€25 billion foreseen by the Eurogroup in August 2015. 
Moreover,  banks’  reliance  on  ELA  has  decreased,  and  the  ceiling  has  been  reduced  by 
about  €19.0  billion  since  end-August.  The  lower  ceiling  reflects  the  improved  liquidity 
situation of Greek banks amid easing uncertainty and a stabilisation of private sector deposit 
flows, as well as, to a large extent, the progress with the recapitalisation of Greek banks. 
In  2015,  the  stock  of  non-performing  loans  increased.  Non-performing  exposures  as  a 
percentage of total exposures (NPE ratio) rose to 43.6% at end-September 2015 (up from 
39.9%  in  December  2014).  This  deterioration  was  visible  and  similar  in  size  (roughly 
4 percentage points) across all loan categories. In particular, the NPE ratio reached 55.4% 
for consumer exposures, 43.3% for business exposures and 39.8% for housing exposures. 
This  can  in  part  be  attributed  to  the  postponement  of  the  implementation  of  the  Code  of 
Conduct on the management of NPLs and to the less active loan portfolio management on 
the part of banks, which seemed to focus mostly on short-term solutions. However, from the 
third quarter onwards, especially after the recapitalisation, banks appeared to step up their 
efforts towards more active NPL management. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The completion of the first review will enhance the prospect of recovery 
Contrary to what was the case in 2015, 2016 could mark a new beginning leading Greece 
out of the crisis and onto a path of sustainable growth. As mentioned previously, however, 
there are a number of major challenges, arising not only from unpredictable developments in 
the international environment but also, more importantly, from potential risks to the domestic 
macroeconomy, such as delays in the completion of the first review of the new stabilisation 
programme or failure to implement the programme’s actions. 
Real  GDP  growth  is  expected  to  be  negative, at  least  during  the first half  of  2016,  largely 
reflecting  a  carry-over  effect  from  2015.  However,  as  already  mentioned,  the  objective 
conditions are in place for Greece to exit recession and come closer to positive growth from 
the second half of this year. This is also conditional on a number of steps that will help to 
avert risks and strengthen the prospect of recovery, which is feasible. 
The  first  step,  and  the  one  with  the  most  crucial  bearing  on  future  developments,  is  the 
successful completion  of  the first review  of the  programme,  currently  in  progress. This  will 
require, among other things, the completion of the social security reform and the alignment of 
farmer  income  taxation.  These  are  not  just  prior  actions  for  the  review  of  the  programme. 
They are necessary to ensure the sustainability of the social security system and of public 
debt  and  to  restore  social  and  tax  equity  both  across  generations  and  across  taxpayer 
groups. 
  A positive review would boost the real economy and open the way for discussions on 
debt relief 
A positive completion of the review would benefit the real economy in a number of ways: 
• 
by  bringing  about  a  major  improvement  in  confidence,  thereby  contributing  to  a 
faster return of deposits to the Greek banking system; 
by  enabling  a  decision  to  reinstate  Greek  securities  as  eligible  collateral  in 
Eurosystem  monetary  policy  operations,  providing  Greek  banks  with  access  to 
lower-cost funding from the ECB; 
by  allowing  Greek  government  bonds  to  be  included  in  the  ECB’s  quantitative 
easing programme; 
• 
by bringing forward the further relaxation – and ultimately lifting – of capital controls. 
All of the above, coupled with the successful recapitalisation of banks and the more efficient 
management of non-performing loans, will restore normality to the banking system: banks’ 
higher  funding  capacity  will  in  turn  boost  their  capacity  to  lend  to  the  real  economy, 
translating  into  lower  borrowing  costs  for  businesses  and  households.  These  more 
favourable financing conditions will bolster growth. 
Over the medium term, the successful completion of the first review will prove to be decisive, 
in that it will open the way for discussions with our partners on further debt relief measures. 
Such measures would ensure the sustainability of public debt in a manner that contains the 
government’s annual financing needs at manageable levels. Among other beneficial effects, 
this would directly ensue in a further relaxation of the ultimate fiscal target and free up funds 
that could be channelled into investment, supporting output and employment. 
Preconditions for an exit from the crisis towards sustainable growth 
As already mentioned, an end to the recession and recovery from the second half of 2016 
are  within  reach,  provided  that  the  problems  and  risks  outlined  above  are  effectively 
addressed. However, moving further along from recovery to sustainable growth will require 
strong commitment to implementing the new financial assistance agreement and long-term 
policies  towards  a  new  extrovert  and  competitive  growth  model.  The  factors  that  will 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  ultimately  determine  success  are:  acceptance  and  ownership  of 
the  programme; 
perseverance  and  consistency  in  implementing  the  necessary  actions;  open  dialogue;  and 
political and social consensus. 
Over the past years, the Greek economy has been following an arduous road of adjustment, 
at great social cost, but also with tangible results. Little remains to be done, compared to the 
bulk of the effort already made. Indicatively, ten steps are recommended in this direction: 
Further strengthening of the banking system 
1. 
The strengthening of the banking system entails addressing the high stock of non-performing 
loans. The effort towards long-term solutions to this major problem should benefit from the 
high-level  operational  targets  for  NPL  resolution  to  be  set  by  the  Bank  of  Greece,  in 
consultation  with  banks and  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  applicable  as  from 
June  2016  and  subject  to  monitoring  on  a  quarterly  basis.  The  requirement  on  banks  to 
achieve  these  targets,  coupled  with  the  newly  enacted  legal  and  institutional  framework, 
concerning,  among  other  things,  the  establishment  of  a  secondary  market  for  NPLs,  the 
speeding-up  of  judicial  proceedings  and  the  streamlining  of  the  real  estate  collateral 
liquidation process, is expected to contribute to a gradual decline in the NPL ratio. 
The strengthening of the banking system would be supported by: 
First,  bold  and  innovative  initiatives  for  a  substantial  reduction  of  non-performing  loans  on 
bank  balance  sheets  within  the  next  two  years.  This  cannot  be  ensured  by  the  current 
“business as usual” approach, despite any refinements. 
Second,  a  shift  towards  long-term  workout  solutions.  The  current  practice  of  short-term 
arrangements only serves to perpetuate the problem. 
Third, promoting multi-creditor workouts. Progress in this respect has been limited. In most 
cases,  definitive  solutions  cannot  be  reached  without  coordinated  action  by  all  creditors. 
Almost all large non-performing business loans involve more than one creditor. 
Fourth,  an  intervention  to  restructure  viable  businesses.  Alongside  loan  restructuring,  it  is 
crucial  to  enable  active  initiatives  to  change  uncooperative  managements,  structures  and 
business plans of corporate debtors. 
Fifth, enhanced internal controls to ensure equal and transparent treatment of borrowers. 
Acceleration of reforms 
2. 
The programmes implemented over the past years were focused on fiscal adjustment and 
succeeded in eliminating the twin deficits. However, there were delays in the implementation 
of reforms, which, if made from the very start, would have reduced the extent and severity of 
the  recession.  This  is  the  area  on  which  we  now  need  to  focus.  Specifically,  the  reforms 
needed in the services sector and network industries (transport, energy, telecommunications, 
trade)  involve  lifting  restrictive  regulations  that  stifle  competition.  In  the  labour  market, 
emphasis must be placed on establishing a new framework for encouraging apprenticeship 
and  vocational  education  and  training,  tackling  undeclared  work  and  streamlining  existing 
labour  laws  and  consolidating  them  into  a  Labour  Law  Code.  Finally,  in  the  field  of  public 
administration,  a 
towards 
modernisation  and  de-politicisation.  Concrete  steps  need  to  be  taken  towards  simplifying 
administrative  processes,  overhauling  structures,  expanding  modern  technology  usage, 
optimising human resources, and strengthening transparency and accountability. 
reform  programme  needs 
implemented,  geared 
to  be 
Privatisations and utilisation of public real estate 
3. 
The  scaling-up  and  successful  implementation  of  the  privatisations  and  public  real  estate 
utilisation programme are decisive to economic growth, as they will have a multiplier effect, 
with  long-lasting  gains  for  the  domestic  economy.  Privatisation  proceeds  can  be  used  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  gradually pay off public debt, supporting fiscal adjustment. Furthermore, when accompanied 
by a strong commitment to future investment, privatisations enhance the inflow of funds for 
productive  investments  that  stimulate  employment  and  aggregate  active  demand.  As 
estimated by the Bank of Greece, privatisations hold a huge potential, which could yield far 
more than the quantitative revenue targets. The public real estate, if properly utilised through 
an upgraded land use and spatial planning framework that will fully respect the environment, 
can attract substantial foreign direct investment. 
4. 
Continued consolidation of public finances and of the social security system, 
through a redefined economic policy mix 
The downward revision of the primary balance target for a surplus of 3.5% of GDP by 2018 
frees up resources that can be channelled into the real economy. However, the current policy 
mix, focused on closing the remaining fiscal gap and ensuring the sustainability of the social 
security system, must become more growth-friendly. In other words, the emphasis should be 
on reducing non-investment government expenditure and raising productivity. The focus, so 
far,  on  increasing  labour  and  business  income  tax  rates,  as  well  as  social  security 
contributions,  provides  incentives  for  tax  and  contribution  evasion  and  encourages 
undeclared  work,  undermines  the  competiveness  of  Greek  firms  and  discourages  job 
creation.  As a  result,  any  improvement  in  the fiscal  balance  is  self-defeating,  preventing  a 
lasting reduction of the debt-to-GDP ratio. Instead, the remaining fiscal gap can be covered 
more  effectively  and  more  permanently  by  rationalising  public  administration  structures, 
introducing  a modern  performance  assessment  system, merging  and reducing the  number 
(currently about 1,800) of public sector entities, abolishing various exemptions from general 
tax and social security provisions for specific groups of taxpayers or workers, redesigning the 
regime of own resources of local government with a view to removing disincentives for cost-
saving,  reducing  tax  expenditure,  cutting  back  on  non-investment  expenditure,  better 
targeting  social  spending  to  remove  the  bias  against  the  new  generation  and  improving 
labour mobility from overstaffed to understaffed parts of the public sector. 
Encouraging business investment and protecting private investors 
5. 
Greece  has  been  plagued  by  serious  investment  inertia.  Between  2007  and  2014,  total 
investment expenditure as a percentage of GDP fell by half. Underlying this disinvestment 
are  anaemic  demand,  political  and  economic  uncertainty,  as  well  as  financing  constraints. 
The prompt rebound of business investment expenditure is key to sustainable growth. The 
restoration of economic and political stability that would strengthen investor confidence and 
encourage business investment plans, the rapid shift of the domestic production model from 
non-tradable  to  tradable  goods  and  services  and  the  easing  of  financing  constraints  are 
instrumental in stimulating business investment expenditure. A decisive contribution should 
also come from actions such as the enactment of a new development law with clear growth 
incentives,  but  especially  initiatives  from  the  financial  system  to  address  non-performing 
loans  in  the  context  of  the  new  institutional  framework,  which  also  enables  creditors  to 
cooperate  in  restructuring  productive  businesses.  Furthermore,  the  Greek  State  must  help 
restore  investor  confidence  and  protect  private  investors  by  ensuring  a  stable,  business-
friendly economic environment. This can be achieved through the establishment of a clear-
cut, simple and stable tax and legal regime fostering healthy entrepreneurship, and through 
initiatives to settle long-pending, and harmful for the country’s investment appeal, disputes 
with major international investors. 
Increasing exports 
6. 
The competitiveness gains achieved by the Greek economy at considerable social cost do 
not seem to have been  fully exploited. These gains, together with improved labour market 
flexibility, are strong incentives for investment initiatives. Despite the recouping of losses in 
international competitiveness, mainly in unit labour cost terms, exports have not yet recorded 
the anticipated upward dynamics. This can in part be explained by the lack of financing, the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  comparatively higher cost of long-term borrowing and the increased tax burden which weighs 
on  the  economy’s  overall  competitiveness.  In  part,  however,  it  is  also  due  to  a  number  of 
inherent  structural  weaknesses 
in 
international  markets  and  relate  to  non-cost  aspects  such  as  product  quality,  protected 
designation of origin and branding, red tape, etc. 
the  penetration  of  Greek  products 
that  hamper 
Combatting high unemployment 
7. 
The  observed  gradual  decline  in  unemployment  and  the  continued  recovery  of  the 
employment  rate  have  been  supported  by  the  active  employment  policies  implemented 
through  programmes  and  actions  using  resources  from  the  National  Strategic  Reference 
Framework (2014–2020). 
In  order  to  fight  high  unemployment,  in  particular  long-term  and  youth  unemployment,  the 
active  employment  policies  and  the  vocational  training  programmes  in  place  need  to  be 
constantly  improved  and  expanded,  while  their  effectiveness  also  needs  to  be  increased, 
which  requires  results-based  review  and  monitoring.  Moreover,  the  enhancement  of 
employment support schemes should go hand in hand  with action against undeclared and 
uninsured work. 
Education reform 
8. 
The road to growth entails knowledge, research, innovation and lifelong learning. The exit of 
Greek society from the crisis can only be achieved through its transformation into a society of 
creative  citizens,  capable  of  preserving  and  expanding  its  human  capital  stock.  In  this 
context,  the  education  reform  currently  being  debated,  which  forms  an  integral  part  of  the 
national growth strategy, must be based on five pillars: (a) evaluation of the Greek education 
system  at  all 
innovation  and  entrepreneurship; 
(b) rationalisation of curricula across all educational levels, as well as of the functioning and 
governance of higher education institutions, while enhancing the efficiency and autonomy of 
public  educational  units;  (c)  breaking  the  hold  of  corporatist  interests  on  the  education 
system; (d) increasing funding, which still remains low; and (e) transparency at all levels. 
levels  with  a  view 
to  enhancing 
Halting the brain drain 
to  migrate  abroad,  with  alarming 
9. 
Soaring  unemployment  and  the  deep  economic  recession  have  caused  part  of  Greece’s 
human  resources 
the  country’s 
demographics, public finances, pension system and, to the extent that it involves high-skilled 
people,  the  quality  of  the  remaining  labour  force.  In  order  to  reverse  this  brain  drain,  the 
Greek State must take measures aimed at: (a) redefining the types and forms of academic 
and  vocational  specialisation  needed  to  improve  skill  matching  for  young  generations;  (b) 
supporting  business  start-ups;  (c)  combatting  mediocracy,  the  lack  of  transparency  and 
nepotism; (d) promoting excellence; (e) expanding apprenticeship and internship schemes; 
and (vi) fostering a business-friendly environment. 
implications 
for 
Supporting social cohesion and tackling poverty 
10. 
Sustainable growth hinges upon social cohesion, under threat at present from rising poverty, 
income inequality and social exclusion. Although based on the results of the latest EU-SILC 
survey (2014), both indices, namely the poverty gap and the relative risk of poverty in Greece 
decreased  somewhat,  the  relative  risk  of  poverty  is  still  the  third  highest  in  the  EU-28. 
Moreover,  the  number  of  households  living  below  the  poverty  line  has  increased.  Public 
debate should therefore focus on the need to redesign both the policy of social transfers, in 
order to increase their effectiveness in tackling poverty, and the education system, to ensure 
that it provides equal learning opportunities at all levels of education to those facing social 
exclusion. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  The Greek economy has already come a long way, and it is only a short distance from here 
to an exit from the crisis. In order to avert any setbacks and obstacles on the path towards 
growth, all existing potential must be fully exploited, avoiding past mistakes that only led to 
vicious circles and impasses. 
Today, an exit from the crisis is within sight, but remains subject to prerequisites. In order to 
reach it, we must remain committed to honouring the terms of the agreement, which must not 
be seen as imposed upon us by our creditors, but as fundamental and necessary reforms 
that should have been implemented years ago. The Greek side must take ownership of the 
programme as a necessary means towards adjustment and reform. In addition, however, the 
ten steps mentioned above, which should ideally be incorporated into a national growth plan, 
are  geared  towards  supporting  (a)  output  and  investment;  (b)  the  “knowledge  triangle” 
(education,  research,  innovation);  and  (c)  the  new  generation.  This  national  plan  must  be 
both a new growth and a social pact for the creation and mobilization of resources to support 
productivity, new businesses and jobs. These are the orientations that will enable the Greek 
economy  to  exit  the  crisis  once  and  for  all  and  return  to  a  virtuous  circle  of  growth  and 
employment. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
