  Yves Mersch: Shaping the future of Europe’s financial market 
infrastructure 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Information  session  on  the  consultative  report  on  RTGS  services, 
Frankfurt am Main, 22 March 2016. 
 Introduction 
In my opening remarks I want to address three issues. First, I will set out the main drivers of 
change that have been shaping Europe’s financial market infrastructure in general and the 
RTGS  system  in  particular.  Second,  I  will  address  the  consequences  of  these  drivers  for 
change that the Eurosystem will have to tackle in its roles as operator, overseer and catalyst. 
And  third,  I  will  present  the  Eurosystem’s  concept  for  evolving  its  market  infrastructure 
beyond 2020. 
Key drivers of change in Europe’s financial market infrastructure 
1. 
Change  in  Europe’s  financial  market  infrastructure  landscape  has  been  driven  by  two  big 
objectives: integration and increasing efficiency. With the advent of the euro as a common 
currency,  integration  was  at  the  heart  of  the  Eurosystem’s  strategy  for  building  its  RTGS 
system and the Correspondent Central Banking Model (CCBM) in the 1990s. The elimination 
of differences between national and cross-border retail payments in euro was a key ambition 
behind the creation of the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). Last but not least, T2S, the 
single  pan-European  platform  for  securities  settlement  in  central  bank  money,  has 
consolidated the most fundamental part of the securities value chain: settlement. We are now 
seeing market consolidation in trading and clearing as well. 
In parallel to the efforts to move towards an integrated market infrastructure, the Eurosystem 
has  taken  steps  to  increase  the  efficiency  of  its  market  infrastructure.  This  has  been 
facilitated by technological progress and innovation. At the same time, we have to take into 
account that digitalisation and the social diffusion of real-time information and communication 
has fundamentally changed end user expectations. Access to and use of financial services 
anytime, anywhere, via multiple devices/access channels is taken for granted now. This not 
only  has  consequences  for  the  service  layer,  but  also  for  the  underlying  clearing  and 
settlement layers. A further impact on certain functionalities within the market infrastructure 
may  be  expected  from  distributed  ledger  technologies  (DLTs).  We  are  committed  to 
analysing whether these technologies could lead to lower costs and a more resilient market 
infrastructure. But we also have to consider how they may affect financial intermediation in 
general, the role of banks and other market participants, as well as our rules and procedures 
as regulators. 
Consequences for the central bank in its three roles as operator, overseer and 
2. 
catalyst 
The Eurosystem fulfils its statutory task of promoting the smooth operation of payment and 
settlement systems in three distinct roles: as operator, overseer and catalyst. These three 
roles are not going to change. What does change is what we need to do in each role. 
As  an  operator, the  Eurosystem  is  committed  to  assessing the  opportunities  presented  by 
new  technologies  to  enhance  the  different  services  it  provides  to  the  financial  services 
community. The current exercise of consolidating the two infrastructures operated by us is an 
excellent starting point for this. With this exercise, we aim to bring benefits to TARGET2 end 
users by offering them the state-of-the-art features available in T2S. We are convinced that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 for 
that 
the  security  requirements 
 
 
increasing the efficiency of our market infrastructure will ultimately support the efficiency of 
the financial services community. 
As  an  overseer,  the  Eurosystem  needs  to  arrive  at  a  common  understanding  of  which 
developments could potentially affect the overseen entities. The digitalisation of the financial 
industry  means 
instruments  and 
infrastructures need to be adapted and enhanced accordingly. Furthermore, the emergence 
of new service providers requires reflection on issues such as how to ensure a level playing 
field  for  newcomers  and  long-established  players,  as  well  as  an  appropriate  level  of 
protection  for  the  users.  Service  providers  from  outside  Europe  offering  global  solutions 
present  a  further  challenge  that  has  to  be  tackled.  Last  but  not  least,  the  effects  of 
digitalisation and new technologies also need to be studied in the context of cyber resilience, 
in both our operator and overseer functions. The objective continues to be to have resilient 
infrastructures  and  smoothly  functioning  payment  systems  which  guarantee  the  proper 
transmission of monetary policy. 
As a catalyst, the overarching goal is still to fulfil our tasks as laid down in the Treaty and to 
support  the  creation  of  truly  single  European  market  for  payments  and  securities.  We 
strongly believe that the Single Market brings improvements in efficiency and contributes to 
economic growth. Hence, our main focus here is to ensure that technological innovation does 
not lead to disruption or re-fragmentation in the market. 
the  overseen 
3. 
The Eurosystem’s vision for evolving its financial market infrastructure services 
To address the need for Europe’s financial market infrastructure to continuously evolve and 
keep  pace  with  market  developments  and  technological  progress,  the  Eurosystem  has 
developed three key action points it will work on in the run up to 2020 and beyond. 
The first, which we are here to discuss today, is to explore synergies between TARGET2 and 
T2S, with the goal of achieving a consolidated market infrastructure for large-value payments 
and securities settlement. 
The second action point is to prepare for the enhancement of TARGET2 services with instant 
retail  payments,  at  least  in  the  settlement  layer.  Currently,  business  requirements  for  the 
settlement  of  instant  payments  and  credit  risk  management  across  payment  systems  are 
being  gathered  from  market  participants. We  also  need  to  assess  whether  interoperability 
arrangements  between  automated  clearing  houses  can  ensure 
full  pan-European 
reachability for instant payment scheme participants in the EU and if and to what extent risk 
mitigation measures have to be harmonised across automated clearing houses to facilitate 
interoperability. 
Third,  there  are  plans  to  review  the  harmonisation  of  Eurosystem  arrangements  and 
procedures for collateralisation. Further progress is needed in this area before the business 
case for a common Eurosystem collateral management system can be reconsidered. 
Conclusion 
Europe’s financial market infrastructure has been built on the basis of a collective approach, 
driven  jointly  by  the  public  and  the  private  sector. In  all  three  action  points for the market 
infrastructure beyond 2020, the Eurosystem will continue to work closely with the market in 
order to benefit from its knowledge and experience as well as to ensure that Europe’s future 
financial market infrastructure fully meets the needs of its users. 
Please have your say – whether today in this information session, in the existing users’ fora 
or by written procedure. Your input is needed. Let us jointly write the script for the future of 
the Euroystem’s RTGS services. 
With this, I hand over to the Chair of the meeting.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
