   Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Building a sound global Islamic financial system 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  –  Meet  the  Members  & 
Industry Engagement Session, Kuala Lumpur, 28 January 2016. 
 It is my pleasure to welcome you to this Industry Engagement Session organised by the IFSB. 
Since  its  introduction  in  2012,  these  sessions  have  drawn  encouraging  response  from  the 
members and the industry. Such an interface between the regulators, industry and the IFSB 
has become even more important in the current environment in which greater global attention 
is  being  accorded  to  the  reform  of  prudential  regulations.   The  strengthening  of  such  an 
interface  provides  an  important  platform  for  building  greater  understanding  on  the 
expectations, issues and areas of concern amongst the regulators, the industry and the IFSB. 
With more than a decade since the inauguration of the IFSB in November 2002, the IFSB has 
built  a  solid  global  reputation  as  a  prudential  standard-setting  body  for  Islamic  finance.  Its 
achievements  also  include  initiatives  to  increase  international  regulatory  cooperation,  to 
encourage uniformity of regulatory frameworks and the efforts to enhance the monitoring of 
financial  risks  in  the  Islamic  financial  system.  The  enhanced  stability  and  resilience  of  the 
current global Islamic financial system is reinforced by its vibrant growth and its increasing 
internationalisation and integration into the international financial system. This is a realisation 
of the aspirations and vision of the IFSB Founding Members. 
The IFSB has also made significant advancements in taking forward the recommendations 
made  in  the Islamic  Finance  and  Global  Financial  Stability  Report  2010  towards  achieving 
financial stability in the national and the international Islamic financial system. The prudential 
standards including that for liquidity management issued by the IFSB takes into account the 
unique characteristics of Islamic finance and are also designed to not impose any regulatory 
burden while upholding the financial stability agenda. 
The effective implementation of the standards issued by the IFSB is key towards promoting 
the soundness and stability of Islamic financial institution. To enhance this prospect, the IFSB 
has strengthened its role in facilitating greater jurisdictional preparedness in the adoption of 
these standards through the provision of technical assistance to its members. Malaysia is one 
of  the  jurisdictions  that  has  adopted  and  operationalised  the  prudential  standards  and  the 
guiding  principles  that  have  been  issued  for  the  industry.  The  implementation  of  these 
standards and guiding principles support the regulatory framework that we now have in place 
in our Islamic financial system. As the industry is aware, it places emphasis on the enforcement 
of standards for capital adequacy, effective risk management practices, liquidity management, 
greater  financial  disclosure  and  governance,  reinforced  by  a  strong  Shariah  and  legal 
framework. 
Among the important initiatives of the IFSB is also the establishment of the International Islamic 
Liquidity  Management  Corporation  (IILM)  in  2010  which  has  changed  the  landscape  for 
liquidity management in the international Islamic financial system, particularly in strengthening 
the  cross-border  liquidity  arrangements  among  the  Islamic  financial  institutions.  A  further 
initiative during the same year was the introduction of the Islamic Financial Stability Forum 
(IFSF), set up in 2010 to further solidify the global efforts in areas that will contribute towards 
safeguarding financial stability. Deliberations on wide ranging issues that pertain to risks to 
financial  stability  in  the  Islamic  financial  system  have  taken  place  at  this  forum.  Greater 
awareness on issues relating to regulation and supervision of Islamic finance have also been 
raised at international meetings, conferences, seminars, workshops and other dialogues that 
have been organised by the IFSB in many countries across several continents. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The  initiatives  and  milestones  achieved  by  the  IFSB  have  indeed  paved  the  way  for 
jurisdictions across the globe to build a solid foundation for the progressive growth of Islamic 
finance that is underpinned with stability. 
Additionally, the early recognition by the IFSB of the increasing interconnectivity in a financial 
system, the IFSB, unlike other prudential standard setting bodies, has advanced its mission 
through  the  development  of  prudential  standards  for  a  broader  coverage  that  includes  the 
banking, capital market and insurance or takaful sectors. The prudential standards issued by 
the IFSB takes into account the specificities of Islamic finance and the dynamics of the various 
Shariah contracts used in the wide ranging products offered by Islamic financial institutions. It 
is  within  this  context  that  Islamic  financial  institutions  are  able  to  perform  its  role  more 
effectively as financial intermediaries that are differentiated from its conventional counterparts. 
With greater readiness, Islamic financial institutions can strategically position themselves to 
further realise the true value proposition of Islamic finance, particularly as a financial regime 
that places emphasis on risk-sharing and that further strengthens the link of finance to the real 
economy.  Of  importance,  industry  players  will  be  better  positioned  to  ride  the  evolutionary 
waves of financial innovation that is prevalent in Islamic finance in order to enable greater 
offerings of risk-sharing products to customers and businesses. 
In Malaysia, Islamic banks now have the potential to be better able to pursue their role as 
investment  intermediaries  through  the  offering  of  investment  accounts  in  addition  to  the 
entrenched deposit products, in which various modes of risk-sharing contracts can be applied. 
This  is  supported  by  the  legal  recognition  of  investment  accounts  in  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services Act 2013 (IFSA). It provides a differentiation between the deposit account and the 
investment account which offers a new investment avenue that caters for a wider range of 
investor risk-return preferences. 
In  contrast  to  the  deposit  account,  these  funds  are  being  channelled  directly  to  finance 
entrepreneurship  in  productive  activities.  In  promoting  entrepreneurship  and  value-creating 
activities, it also contributes towards generating growth and enhances the prospects for job 
creation. Additionally, the Investment Account Platform (IAP) that is currently being developed 
will provide a centralised multi-bank platform as a new financing option for entrepreneurs with 
viable projects as well as an opportunity for the investing public to finance these projects. 
It is encouraging that to date, eight Islamic banks are offering investment accounts to their 
customers.  More  are  expected  to  follow  when  the  value  proposition  of  such  investment 
accounts, with its unique features and the different target market become better understood. 
The industry-led communication by the Association of Islamic Banking Institutions Malaysia 
will contribute towards increasing the awareness of customers on the concept and on the key 
features of investment account. The latest establishment of a consortium developed by four 
Islamic  banks to  develop  and  operate  the  IAP which  is  to  be  launched  next  month  is  also 
another initiative to advance this new offering. 
In the development of the investment account, it will be essential for Islamic banks, investors 
and entrepreneurs to embrace the different approaches in the management of the risk and 
return relationships that are embedded in the variations of the Shariah contracts used in such 
investment accounts. These relationships need to be well understood by the parties involved 
and which are aligned with clear contractual and operational requirements. The IFSB has an 
important  role  in  not  only  providing  guidance  but  also  in  initiating  the  convergence  of  the 
different  practices  between  IFSB  members  with  regard  to  the  treatment  of  the  investment 
account – also referred to as profit sharing investment account (PSIA) – in the IFSB standards. 
More in-depth work can also be explored by the IFSB on the prudential requirements for the 
investment account to further ensure a conducive environment for such risk-sharing offerings. 
The global Islamic financial system is now operating at a time when the international economic 
and financial environment has become immensely more challenging. New risks that are more 
complex, with more profound systemic implications are emanating with the increasing forces 
of  financial  liberalisation,  globalisation,  technological  advancement,  intensified  competition, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   financial  innovation  and  the  internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance.  Cumulatively,  these 
developments necessitate greater prudential regulation and supervisory oversight to ensure a 
resilient and sustainable financial system. 
The role of the IFSB remains instrumental and paramount as we face a time of increasing 
uncertainties.  Continuous  and  stronger support for the IFSB,  particularly from  its  members 
including in actively providing feedback on its Consultative Papers and in the participation in 
IFSB  related  events,  supported  by  the  existing  collaboration  and  cooperation  among  the 
regulators would collectively strengthen the potential for the IFSB to manage its journey ahead. 
Greater  concerted  efforts  by  members  to  consistently  adopt  and  implement  the  prudential 
standards issued by the IFSB will not only contribute towards preserving financial stability but 
it will also enhance regulatory harmonisation across jurisdictions. 
These efforts will indeed place us on a path to realising our quest and shared aspirations for a 
more resilient and sound global Islamic financial system. It is also timely for the IFSB to elevate 
its level of engagement and connectivity with other international standard setting bodies. This 
would enable the framework for financial stability in the context of Islamic finance to interface 
with the arrangements that exists for the conventional financial system, therefore avoiding any 
fragmentation  in  the  global  regulatory  framework.  Malaysia,  as  the  host  of  the  IFSB  will 
continue to be committed to support its development and its potential as a prudential standard-
setting body in the international financial system. 
On  that  note,  I  wish  you  a  productive  session  today  and  look  forward  to  the  constructive 
outcomes of this engagement. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
