  
 
Sabine Lautenschläger: European banking supervision – much achieved, 
but still much to do 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, 
at the Bundesbanksymposium “Dialogue on banking supervision”, Frankfurt am Main, 1 June 
2016. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 In  1863  the  Freemasons’  Tavern  in  London  was  the  scene  of  a  lively  discussion.  It 
concerned the adoption of a set of rules which was initially only valid in England and a good 
20 years later was to become very important for the whole world. The rules I’m referring to 
govern  the  world’s  nicest  trivial  pursuit  –  and  for  once  I’m  not  talking  about  banking  –  I’m 
talking about football. Football is played the world over according to the same set of rules. 
Whether in South America or Europe, whether it’s the World Cup or at regional league level, 
the rules are the same worldwide. 
Incidentally, at the outset it was the players themselves who policed the game. Referees, as 
we  know  them  today,  didn’t  appear  until  the  end  of  the  19th  century  –  the  players’  self-
regulation didn’t work out particularly well. 
Banking is perhaps not the world’s nicest trivial pursuit, but in some respects it is not unlike 
football. Banks also compete with each other and have to stick to certain rules. And these 
rules,  too,  are  now  largely  harmonised.  The  Basel  framework  takes  care  of  that  at  global 
level and the single rulebook at European level. 
And, of course, also in the banking sector there has to be someone who makes sure that 
everyone follows the rules – banks need a supervisor just as footballers need a referee, for 
self-regulation  is  a  sub-optimal  solution  here  too.  We  have  had  single  European  banking 
supervision  in  the  euro  area  for  over  one-and-a-half  years  –  here  too  there’s  been  a 
harmonisation. 
This  process  aims  to  regulate  and  supervise  banks  across  the  euro  area  according  to 
uniformly high standards – and to prevent regulatory and supervisory arbitrage. That, in turn, 
is an essential basis for a stable banking sector that promotes growth and prosperity in the 
monetary union. 
Much achieved... 
It was in this context that European banking supervision was established. Since November 
2014  the  ECB  has  supervised  the  now  129  biggest  banking  groups  in  the  euro  area. 
However, this does not mean that there is only one referee. 
European banking supervision consists not only of the ECB, but also of a total of 26 national 
central banks and supervisory authorities. And the national supervisors play an essential role 
in  day-to-day  supervision.  They  make  up  the  majority  of  the  members  of  the  teams 
supervising  the  large  banks.  Decisions  are  then  taken  by  the  Supervisory  Board  and  the 
ECB’s Governing Council, in which the national supervisors are also represented. 
European banking supervision thus means cooperation – a stable European banking system 
is  a  joint  endeavour.  It’s  about  supervising  banks  from  a  European  perspective;  it’s  about 
combining experience and knowledge to spot risks at an earlier stage and to respond to them 
more  rapidly.  It’s  about  preventing  regulatory  and  supervisory  arbitrage,  and  it’s  about 
supervising  in  the  same  way,  throughout  the  euro  area, the  same  business  and  the  same 
risks. By focusing on all these goals we have already achieved quite a lot. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  We have, for example, harmonised  large  parts of  the  supervisory  cycle.  Together  with  the 
national  supervisors  we  identify  the  main  risks  to  the  banking  sector.  Building  on  this,  we 
specify our supervisory priorities and transfer them to the supervisory programme for each 
bank, taking a uniform approach that is forward-looking, risk-oriented and proportionate. 
Above all, we have harmonised the annual SREP – the Supervisory Review and Evaluation 
Process, the centrepiece of any form of banking supervision. In the SREP we analyse the 
business model, governance, the capital and liquidity risks for each institution, as well as the 
respective risk management. Using this as a basis, we then specify the capital and liquidity 
requirements for each institution. Our advantage is not only that we can assess banks across 
the  euro  area  on  the  basis  of  uniform  criteria,  but  also  that  we  are  now  in  a  position  to 
compare banks with similar business models and to draw conclusions not only for individual 
banks, but also for whole banking systems. 
Another  example  of  harmonisation  concerns  the  “options  and  discretions”.  The  European 
regulatory framework contains a series of provisions which allow the respective supervisor to 
decide on their practical implementation. Together with the national supervisory authorities 
we have agreed to exercise these options and discretions in a uniform way throughout the 
euro area. 
internally  review 
... but still much to do 
So, in the last one-and-a-half years, we have notched up some achievements. But there’s 
still a lot to do. 
One of our roles is to further develop the SREP. We are working on improving our analysis of 
liquidity risks, risk management and liquidity adequacy. We will harmonise our idea of how 
banks 
their  capital  adequacy  –ICAAP  (internal  capital  adequacy 
assessment process) is the key word. 
This year, however, we still need to decide on other components of the SREP concept. 
One question is whether, with regard to a bank’s capital position, we as supervisor should 
restrict ourselves solely to the formal and binding supervisory capital surcharge. 
Or would it make sense to express the supervisor’s expectation for a bank’s capital level as 
requirements on the one hand and as guidance on the other? 
The  requirement  could  then  represent  the  formal,  binding  part  of  the  supervisory 
expectations  for  capital.  The  supervisor  could  use  the  instrument  of  the  requirement  if 
immediate risks were not, or not adequately, covered or if there were serious shortcomings in 
a  bank’s  internal  risk  management.  These  capital  requirements  would  then  serve  as  the 
variable  for  the  distribution  of  dividends,  and  so  for  the  calculation  of  the  maximum 
distributable amount. 
By  contrast,  the  supervisor  could  mainly  use  the  instrument  of  guidance  when  processing 
insights from hypothetical scenarios. 
To  this  end,  we  would  need,  among  other  things,  to  transfer  to  the  calculation  of  the 
supervisory  guidance  on  capital  those  scenarios  that  we,  in  the  last  year  SREP  exercise, 
took  into  account  in  the  binding  capital  surcharge.  This  adjustment  to  the  SREP  concept 
would  not  change  the  total  capital  level;  it  would  just  be  divided  differently  between 
requirements and guidance. 
If  a  bank  observed  the  binding  capital  requirements,  but  not the  guidance,  this  should  not 
automatically lead to a formal supervisory measure. 
But  that  is  enough  about  potential  changes  to  the  concept  –  as  I  said,  the  work  is  still 
ongoing. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Let’s consider the small and medium-sized institutions: for them, the system of institutional 
protection schemes, for instance, plays an important role. In Germany, for instance, four out 
of five institutions belong to such a protection scheme – measured by balance sheet size, 
that’s around 40% of the German banking system. 
Under  European  law,  banks  gain  privileges  if  they  belong  to  a  protection  scheme.  For 
example, institutions do not necessarily have to hold capital against exposures to members 
of the same protection scheme. The decision on whether to grant such a privilege is taken by 
the competent supervisor – in the case of small and medium-sized institutions, the national 
supervisors; in the case of large banks, the ECB. 
So  there  is  much  to  be  said  for  harmonising  supervisory  expectations  here  too  and  for 
granting  the  privileges  according  to  uniform  criteria  –  both  across  countries  and  across 
institutions. I’d like to be clear about one thing, however: the aim is not to call into question 
the protection schemes in general. The objective is to harmonise the supervisory treatment 
of the systems. 
Ultimately, European banking supervision can only apply the principle of equal treatment as 
far as national banking regulation permits. As for national banking regulation, there are still a 
number of differences, some of them major, among the countries of the euro area. 
Let’s compare it with football for a moment. For the referee it would be difficult if he were in 
charge  of  a  game  in  which  each  player  played  by  different  rules  and  in  which  there  were 
some parts of the pitch, scattered around, where the rules were different. 
But  this  is  exactly  the  situation  European  banking  supervision  is  contending  with  at  the 
moment.  One  source  of  the  regulatory  differences  is  the  CRD  IV  Directive  which,  as  a 
European directive, has to be transposed into national law in the individual countries. And it 
wasn’t and won’t be as uniformly implemented as would be sensible for single supervision. 
Let me mention just one example to give you an idea of these differences, which are often 
hard to understand. The supervisor assesses whether candidates for the governing bodies of 
banks  are  professionally  competent  and  reliable.  However,  the  corresponding  rules  are 
implemented in very different ways at national level. In some countries, for instance, it’s not 
only  the  candidates  for  the  governing  bodies  who  are  evaluated  but  also  those  for  key 
positions at the levels below. Some countries use questionnaires for the assessment and a 
range of detailed evaluation criteria, others don’t. Some countries interview the candidates, in 
part with the support of psychologists, others don’t. Some countries don’t allow candidates to 
occupy their new post until the supervisory body has given its approval. In other countries 
candidates can take up their new post even if the documents required for the assessment 
are not yet available. 
These differences create serious complications for European banking supervision and are an 
obstacle  on  the  way  to  a  single  financial  market.  How  can  it  be  that  the  executive  board 
members  of  a  globally  active  bank  in  one  particular  country  have  to  have  different  skills, 
knowledge  and  experience  from  their  counterparts  in  another  country?  Here  too,  further 
harmonisation of the relevant rules would be useful. 
National  rules  which  are  not  expressly  mentioned  in  the  CRD  IV  are  a  further  cause  of 
regulatory  fragmentation.  They  include  rules  governing  the  acquisition  of  shareholdings. 
Some  countries  require  major  transactions  to  be  supervised  in  advance  by  the  national 
authorities,  other  countries  don’t.  Here  too,  it  would  make  sense  to  further  harmonise  the 
regulation. 
We can thus  conclude European  banking  supervision  has  helped  to further  harmonise the 
supervisory  framework  in  the  past  18  months.  Much  has  been  achieved,  but  there  is  still 
much to do. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Limits of harmonisation 
Ladies and gentlemen, harmonisation is not an end in itself but important for financial stability 
and sustainable economic growth. But how far must harmonisation go? 
Let’s consider football again. Yes, the rules are largely harmonised, but that doesn’t mean 
the referee punishes every misdemeanour straightaway. In the penalty  area a serious foul 
results in a penalty kick, and outside that area a free kick. The reason: a foul in the penalty 
area, i.e. near the goal, has a greater effect on the game than a foul in midfield. At the same 
time, the rules in professional leagues and in major competitions are stricter – consider the 
fourth official or goal-line technology. 
The rules and the refereeing of football thus follow the principle of proportionality. And in the 
banking sector the proportionality of regulation and supervision may be even more relevant 
than in football. 
First  and  foremost,  the  rules  of  football  should  allow  fair  and  orderly  play;  in  the  banking 
sector,  it  is  also  and  above  all  about  stability  –  the  stability  of  the  banking  system  and 
ultimately of the whole economy. 
And here the fact that multiple and diverse players are on the pitch is important: large banks, 
small banks, regional institutions and cross-border ones, banks with risky business models 
and banks with low-risk models. As all these banks are relevant to the stability of the system 
in different ways, the benefits of strict regulation and supervision also differ widely. 
The costs incurred by individual banks as a result of regulation and supervision also  vary, 
particularly  the  operational  costs.  For  smaller  banks,  these  costs,  relatively  speaking,  are 
higher – unlike larger banks they cannot benefit from economies of scale. At the same time, 
disproportionately  high  regulatory  and  supervisory  costs  represent  a  barrier  for  new 
competitors entering the market. 
So  there  is  something  to  be  said  for  regulating  and  supervising  banks  according  to  the 
proportionality  principle.  Here,  harmonisation  comes  up  against  a  boundary  which  is  both 
reasonable and necessary. 
In public discussions proportionality is often tied to the size of the institutions. This makes the 
discussion easier, but it can also lead in the wrong direction. The decisive factor should be 
the bank’s systemic importance. And at the latest since the savings and loans crisis in the 
United States in the 1980s, we know that even small banks may still be systemically relevant 
– “too many to fail” is as big a problem as “too big to fail”. 
The wording of the legal basis of European banking supervision with regard to proportionality 
is correspondingly broad. It reads as follows: “When carrying out the tasks conferred on it, 
and  without  prejudice  to  the  objective  to  ensure  the  safety  and  soundness  of  credit 
institutions, the ECB should have full regard to the diversity of credit institutions and their size 
and business models”. 
In European banking supervision, proportionality is clear to see: while the 129 biggest banks 
in the euro area are directly supervised by the ECB, the smaller institutions, some 3,200 of 
them, are overseen by the national supervisors. 
Only in specific cases and under certain conditions does the ECB directly supervise smaller 
institutions – and in such cases the question may be asked whether that is appropriate at all. 
Normally, the ECB only plays a secondary role in the supervision of smaller institutions – its 
task  is  to  be  in  the  background  supporting  national  supervisors.  So  we  are  developing, 
together  with  national  supervisors,  high-quality  standards  which  take  account  of  regional 
factors,  size,  business  and  risk  of  the  individual  institutions,  and  are  correspondingly 
adaptable. 
This  kind  of  harmonisation  does  not  aim  to  be  a  levelling-down.  It  is  not  a  question  of 
replacing national supervisory approaches by a European one. On the contrary, we ensure 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  that  the  key  elements  of  the  supervision  attain  certain  minimum  standards.  Then  national 
specificities can be taken into account, but only if they are justified from a risk perspective. 
The  principle  of  proportionality  also  takes  us  into  areas  which  go  beyond  the  general 
supervisory  standards.  And  I  would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  clear  up  a  widespread 
misunderstanding. Again and again, people tell me that the ECB is imposing who knows how 
many  reporting  obligations  on  small  and  medium-sized  institutions.  Let  me  give  just  two 
examples  that  show  that  when  it  comes  to  reporting  we  certainly  work  in  line  with  the 
principle of proportionality. 
Under the European regulation, supervisors may require the banks to use the International 
Financial Reporting Standards for supervisory reporting. We have chosen not to exercise this 
option. It would have imposed a disproportionate burden on those banks that draw up their 
balance  sheets  according  to  national  standards.  Banks  may  therefore  continue  to  use 
national standards for their supervisory reporting. 
Accordingly, the reporting requirements are quite precisely tailored to, among other things, 
the  size  of  the  institutions.  In  anticipation  of  future  reporting  requirements,  we  asked  the 
national supervisors last year, for the first time ever, to provide us with supervisory data on 
all  small  and  medium-sized  banks.  They  were  asked  to  submit  37  separate  data  points, 
including the balance sheet total, the level of customer deposits or the trading book portfolio 
– so nothing complex at all. By contrast, the banks that are directly supervised by the ECB 
are asked to give more than 8,000 data points – and these have to be submitted not annually 
but quarterly. 
And one last example: the supervisory fees are also based on the principle of proportionality, 
rightly taking into account the significance, the size and riskiness of the respective institution. 
Of this year’s fees, around 88% are allotted to the 129 institutions directly supervised by the 
ECB, 12% to 3,200 smaller banks. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  harmonising  banking  regulation  and  supervision  in  Europe  plays  a 
key  role  in  ensuring  the  stability  of  the  banking  sector  and  in  providing  the  basis  for 
prosperity and growth in the euro area. With regard to the banking sector, we have in the last 
year-and-a-half come a long way, but there is still much to do. 
In view of the increasing harmonisation of regulation and supervision their proportionality is a 
recurring  issue,  not  least  because  the  complexity  of  regulation  has  increased.  Again,  it’s 
always being said that smaller banks above all are bearing a disproportionate burden; and 
again, a reduction of these burdens is always being called for. 
This discussion is important, but it must be conducted in a discerning way. First, regulation 
and supervision already follow the principle of proportionality – I have given some examples. 
Second,  the  complexity  of  regulation  and  supervision  is  not  least  due  to  the  increasing 
complexity  of  the  banking  business.  And  third,  the  principle  of  proportionality  must  not  be 
used  as  a  pretext  for  generally  weakening  regulation  and  supervision.  The  basis  of  the 
discussion  must  always  be  the  cost-effectiveness  of  regulation  and  supervision  – 
proportionality must not come at the expense of stability. 
As  I  said  earlier,  there  was  a  heated  discussion  in  the  Freemasons’  Tavern  too  about  an 
important set of rules. What started in 1863 in London will again be in the spotlight as of 10 
June,  for  that’s  when  the  Euro  2016  championship  starts.  As  a  professional  European  I 
naturally have no favourites. I look forward to a fair competition, and may the best team win. 
But if it happens to be Germany, I wouldn’t complain. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
