  Janet L Yellen: Supervision and regulation 
Testimony by  Ms Janet L Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives, 
Washington DC, 28 September 2016. 
 Chairman  Hensarling,  Ranking  Member  Waters,  and  other  members  of  the  committee,  I 
appreciate the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve’s regulation and supervision of 
financial institutions. 
One  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  fundamental  goals  is  to  make  sure  that  our  regulatory  and 
supervisory  program  is  tailored  to  the  risk  that  different  financial  institutions  pose  to  the 
system  as  a  whole.  As  we  saw  in  2007–08,  the  failure  of  systemically  important  financial 
institutions  can  destabilize  the  financial  system  and  undermine  the  real  economy.  The 
largest,  most  complicated  firms  must  therefore  be  subject  to  prudential  standards  that  are 
more stringent than the standards that apply to other firms. Small and medium-sized banking 
organizations – whose failure would generally pose much less risk to the system – should be 
subject to standards that are materially less stringent. 
The Federal Reserve has made substantial progress in building a regulatory and supervisory 
program  that  is  consistent  with  these  principles.  We  have  implemented  key  standards 
designed  to  limit  the  financial  stability  risks  posed  by  the  largest,  most  complex  banking 
firms. We continue to work on some remaining standards and to assess the adequacy of this 
package of measures. With respect to small and medium-sized banks, we must build on the 
steps  we  have  already  taken  to  ensure  that  they  do  not  face  undue  regulatory  burdens. 
Looking forward, we must continue to monitor for the emergence of new risks, since another 
key lesson from the crisis is that financial stability threats change over time. 
Strengthening the regulation and supervision of the largest financial institutions 
The Federal Reserve’s post-crisis efforts to strengthen its regulation and supervision of large 
banks have focused on promoting the safety and soundness of these firms and on limiting 
the adverse effects that their distress or failure could have on the financial system and the 
broader  economy.  This  orientation  is  consistent  with  section  165  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Wall 
Street  Reform  and  Consumer  Protection  Act  (Dodd-Frank  Act),  which  directs  the  Board  to 
impose enhanced prudential standards on large banking organizations “in order to prevent or 
mitigate  risks  to  financial  stability.”  Our  efforts  to  mitigate  financial  stability  risks  posed  by 
large  financial  institutions  generally  fall  into  one  of  two  categories.  First,  we  aim  to  make 
large  financial  institutions  more  resilient  in  order  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of  their  failure  or 
distress. And second, we aim to make large financial institutions more resolvable to limit the 
damage that their failure would have on the rest of the financial system and on the broader 
economy. 
Resiliency 
To  increase  the  resiliency  of  the  largest  banking  organizations,  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
established  a  broad  set  of  enhanced  prudential  standards  for  large  domestic  and  foreign 
banking organizations. Together with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and 
the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, we have implemented capital rules that require 
large banking organizations to hold substantially larger amounts of high-quality capital than 
they  were  required  to  hold  before  the  2007–08  crisis,  and  we  have  adopted  a  liquidity 
coverage ratio (LCR) that requires these organizations to hold a buffer of high-quality, liquid 
assets sufficient to meet liquidity outflows during a 30-day period of severe funding stress. 
We have also proposed single-counterparty credit limits that are designed to guard against 
the  build-up  of  excessive  concentrations  of  credit  risk  and,  along  with  the  other  federal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  banking agencies, proposed a Net Stable Funding Ratio that would require banks to maintain 
a  minimum  level  of  stable  funding  relative  to  the  liquidity  of  their  assets  over  a  one-year 
horizon. 
In addition to strengthening the regulation of the largest, most complex financial institutions, 
we have also transformed our supervision of firms that pose elevated risk to U.S. financial 
stability  through  the  creation  of  the  Large  Institution  Supervision  Coordinating  Committee 
(LISCC).1  The  LISCC  is  distinguished  by  several  characteristics.  First,  the  LISCC  has 
implemented  a  centralized,  multidisciplinary  approach  to  supervision  by  bringing  together 
experts from around the Federal Reserve System in the areas of supervision, research, legal 
counsel,  financial  markets,  and  payments  systems.  Second,  major  areas  of  focus  for  the 
supervision  of firms  in the  LISCC  portfolio  are  capital  and  liquidity  resiliency  under  normal 
and  potentially  adverse  conditions  in  the  future,  as  well  as  recovery  and  resolution 
preparedness. And third, the LISCC complements traditional, firm-specific supervisory work 
with  annual  “horizontal”  programs  that  examine  these  firms  at  the  same  time  and  on  the 
same  set  of  issues  in  order  to  promote  better  monitoring  of  trends  and  consistency  of 
assessments across all of the LISCC firms. 
With regard to capital adequacy, the introduction of capital stress testing for large banking 
organizations has been one of our signature innovations since the financial crisis. As events 
during  the  financial  crisis  demonstrated,  capital  buffers  that  seem  adequate  in  a  benign 
environment  may  turn  out  to  be  far  less  than  adequate  during  periods  of  stress.  For  this 
reason,  consistent  with  the  stress-testing  mandate  in  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  the  Federal 
Reserve  conducts  supervisory  stress  tests  each  year  on  banking  organizations  with  $50 
billion or more in total assets to determine whether they have sufficient capital to continue 
operations  through  periods  of  economic  stress  and  market  turbulence,  and  whether  their 
capital planning frameworks are adequate to their risk profiles. The expectation embodied in 
our stress testing program that large banking organizations should maintain sufficient capital 
buffers to withstand a period of significant stress promotes the resilience of those firms and 
of the financial system more generally. 
While our stress testing program has been successful since it was first introduced in 2009, 
the  crisis  reinforced  the  need  for  regulators  and  supervisors  to  continually  revisit  the 
effectiveness of their tools and adjust as needed over time. We therefore launched a review 
of the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) program last year with the aim 
of  re-assessing  our  stress  testing  practices  on  a  comprehensive  basis.  As  part  of  this 
process, we met with a wide range of stakeholders, including academics, analysts, bankers, 
public interest groups, and others. We are now considering making several changes to our 
stress testing methodology and process. 
The  leading  idea  that  has  emerged  from  our  comprehensive  CCAR  review  is  to  integrate 
CCAR  with  our  regulatory  capital  framework.  More  specifically,  the  regulatory  capital  rules 
now  include  a  firm-specific,  risk-based  capital  surcharge  for  each  global  systemically 
important  bank  (GSIB)  and  a  uniform  capital  conservation  buffer  requirement  above  the 
regulatory capital minimum for all firms. Under the approach we are considering, the existing 
capital conservation buffer would be replaced with a risk-sensitive, firm-specific buffer that is 
sized based on stress test results. Each firm’s buffer requirement would be set equal to the 
decline  in  its  common  equity  tier  1  capital  ratio  in  the  supervisory  stress  test.  The  buffer 
requirement would be floored at 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets, the current level of the 
                                                
1  The  firms  currently  in  the  LISCC  portfolio  are  American  International  Group,  Inc.;  Bank  of  America 
Corporation; The Bank of New  York  Mellon Corporation; Barclays PLC; Citigroup Inc.; Credit Suisse Group 
AG;  Deutsche  Bank  AG;  The  Goldman  Sachs  Group,  Inc.;  JPMorgan  Chase  &  Co.;  Morgan  Stanley; 
Prudential  Financial,  Inc.;  State  Street  Corporation;  UBS  AG;  and  Wells  Fargo  &  Company.  Further 
information  on  the  LISCC  is available  on  the  Board’s  website  at  www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/large-
institution-supervision.htm. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  capital conservation buffer, to avoid any reduction in the stringency of the regulatory capital 
rules. We call this idea the “stress capital buffer,” and it would effectively move the stress test 
to the center of our regulatory capital framework. 
For the eight U.S. GSIBs, the move to the stress loss buffer – which would be similar in effect 
to including the GSIB capital surcharge in the CCAR post-stress minimum – would result in a 
significant  aggregate  increase  in  capital  requirements.  Thus,  in  addition  to  simplifying  the 
capital framework by integrating CCAR with our regulatory capital rules, the stress loss buffer 
would  advance  our  macroprudential  goal  of  making  GSIBs  more  resilient.  In  contrast,  the 
move  to  the  stress  loss  buffer  approach  generally  would  not  entail  a  toughening  of  our 
requirements for the 25 large banking firms that are subject to CCAR but are not GSIBs. Nor 
would  the  move  have  any  impact  on  community  banks  or  other  firms  with  less  than  $50 
billion in assets. 
We  are  also  considering  making  certain  changes  to  the  stress  test  assumptions  used  in 
CCAR.  For  example,  under  the  current  CCAR  program,  a  firm’s  capital  adequacy  is 
assessed by assuming that the firm continues to make its baseline capital distributions over 
the stress test’s two-year planning horizon. We are considering changing this conservative 
assumption, in significant part because of the advent of the capital conservation buffer in the 
regulatory capital rules, which limits the ability of a firm to make capital distributions when its 
capital  ratios  are  lower  than  the  buffer  requirement.  Instead,  we  are  proposing  that  firms 
simply  add  one  year  of  planned  dividends  to  their  stress  capital  buffer  requirement  in 
recognition of the fact that firms generally are more reluctant to reduce dividends than share 
buybacks.  On  this  and other changes to  CCAR  that  we  are  considering,  we  will  of  course 
seek public input before moving to adopt them. 
Resolvability 
During  the  crisis,  fears  about  the  systemic  consequences  that  would  result  from  the 
bankruptcies  of  systemically  important  firms  motivated  extraordinary  government  actions. 
The 
fears  proved  well-founded:  The  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers  significantly 
exacerbated  the  crisis.  To  reduce  the  potential  that  resolution  of  a  large  financial  firm  in 
bankruptcy will be disorderly, section 165(d) of the Dodd-Frank Act requires large banking 
organizations to produce living wills that help these firms prepare to be resolved in an orderly 
way under the Bankruptcy Code. Although the Bankruptcy Code provides the default legal 
framework for resolving a failed bank holding company, the Dodd-Frank Act also creates a 
backup resolution authority that can be used if the resolution of a failed financial company 
under  the  Bankruptcy  Code  would  have  serious  adverse  effects  on  U.S.  financial  stability. 
The  orderly  liquidation  authority  in  Title  II  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  has  several  features  that 
could reduce the systemic impact of a firm’s resolution, including an orderly liquidation fund 
and provisions to prevent the chaotic unwinding of a firm’s derivatives, securities financing 
transactions,  and  other  qualified  financial  contracts.  In  the  unlikely  event  that  the  orderly 
liquidation fund does incur losses, these losses would be covered by assessments on major 
financial firms and would not be passed on to taxpayers. 
The Federal Reserve has recently proposed important new rules to increase the prospects 
for the orderly resolution of a GSIB. Last October, the Board proposed to require the eight 
U.S. GSIBs to meet total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) and long-term debt requirements. 
The  proposal  would  require  these  systemically  important  firms  to  maintain  outstanding  a 
large quantity of long-term debt that could be used to absorb losses and recapitalize the firm 
in resolution. Because, by definition, the actual equity of a bank will have been substantially 
depleted  –  if  not  totally  eliminated  –  by  the  time  it  fails,  a  separate  long-term  debt 
requirement  is  essential  to  ensure  that  the  resolution  authority  has  the  raw  material  from 
which to manufacture new equity in resolution to recapitalize and stabilize the failed firm. For 
this  reason,  the  proposed  long-term  debt  requirement  would  more  assuredly  enhance  the 
prospects  for  successful  resolution  –  and  thereby  contribute  to  solving  the  too-big-to-fail 
problem – than would a TLAC requirement on its own. The proposal would also restrict the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  operations  of  GSIB  holding  companies,  so  that  those  legal  entities  could  go  through 
resolution  without  setting  off  short-term  wholesale  funding  runs  or  otherwise  jeopardizing 
financial stability. 
In May this year, the Board issued another proposal to make GSIBs more resolvable. This 
second  proposed  rule  would  impose  restrictions  on  GSIBs’  qualified  financial  contracts  –  
including derivatives and repurchase agreements (repos) – to guard against the rapid, mass 
unwinding of those contracts during the resolution of a GSIB. The proposed restrictions are a 
key  step  toward  GSIB  resolvability  because  rapidly  unwinding  these  contracts  could 
destabilize the financial system by causing asset fire sales and toppling other firms. 
Acting in conjunction with the FDIC, the Board has also sought to increase GSIB resolvability 
through the living wills process. In April this year, the Board and the FDIC announced the 
results of their review of the eight U.S. GSIBs’ 2015 resolution plans. During this review, the 
agencies evaluated the plans based on the firms’ capital, liquidity, governance mechanisms, 
operational  capabilities,  legal  entity  rationalization,  derivatives  and  trading  activities,  and 
responsiveness to prior agency feedback. The agencies found that five of the GSIBs’ plans 
fell short of the resolvability standard set by the Dodd-Frank Act and required those firms to 
fix  deficiencies  in  their  plans  by  October  of  this  year  or  potentially  face  more  stringent 
prudential requirements. If the agencies jointly determine that a firm has failed to adequately 
remedy the noted deficiencies, the agencies may jointly determine that the company or its 
subsidiaries will be subject to more stringent capital, leverage, or liquidity requirements or to 
restrictions on the growth, activities, or operations of the firm. The agencies also identified 
less-severe  shortcomings  in  the  plans  of  all  eight  U.S.  GSIBs,  which  are  expected  to  be 
addressed in the next round of resolution plan submissions, due in July 2017. 
The  resolution  planning  process  requires  firms  to  demonstrate  that  they  have  adequately 
assessed  the  challenges  that  their  structure  and  business  activities  would  pose  during 
resolution and that they have taken action to address those issues. Firms must also confront 
the resolution consequences of their day-to-day management decisions on a continual basis, 
particularly those related to structure, business activities, capital and liquidity allocation, and 
governance.  Firms  are  also  expected  to  create  a  meaningful  set  of  options  for  selling 
operations  and  business  lines  to  generate  resources  and  to  allow  for  restructuring  under 
stress,  including  through  the  sale  or  wind-down  of  discrete  businesses  that  could  further 
minimize  the  direct  impact  of  the firm’s  distress  or failure  on  the  broader financial  system. 
The  deficiencies  and  shortcomings  issued  in  the  most  recent  plan  review  focus  on  steps 
necessary to ensure these objectives are met at each GSIB on an ongoing basis. 
In addition to providing the firms with our feedback on their resolution plans, the agencies 
took several steps in April to improve the transparency of the resolution planning exercise. 
These  steps  included  publicly  releasing  the  firm  feedback  letters,  a  paper  outlining  the 
resolution plan assessment framework and firm determinations, and a document detailing the 
expectations  of  the  agencies  regarding  the  firms’  2017  resolution  plan  submissions.  The 
expectations  articulated  for  the  2017  plan  contents  build  on  detailed  guidance  previously 
provided to the GSIBs in 2014 and 2015. 
While the five firms that received joint deficiencies are required to fix those deficiencies by 
October 2016, all of the firms that received agency feedback in April are required to submit a 
full  resolution  plan  by  July  1,  2017.  In  these  plans,  firms  will  be  required  to  address  all 
identified shortcomings, follow all guidance provided by the agencies, and meet all statutory 
and  regulatory  requirements  for  their  resolution  plans.  In  meeting  these  expectations,  the 
actions that firms need to take should be substantially complete by July 2017, as previously 
communicated by the agencies. 
Regulation and supervision of large and regional banking organizations 
In  supervising  banking  organizations  with  more  than  $50  billion  in  assets  but  outside  the 
LISCC  program,  the  Board  focuses  on  ensuring  that  companies  are  well  managed, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  appropriately capitalized, and prepared to withstand potential adverse developments in the 
business  environment.  However,  because  the  distress  or  failure  of  a  non-LISCC  firm  is 
unlikely to have the same effect on the financial system and broader economy as that of a 
LISCC  firm,  we  do  not  apply  the  full  range  of  rules  that  we  apply  to  those  in  the  LISCC 
portfolio.  For  example,  the  Board’s  risk-based  and  leverage  capital  surcharges,  as  well  as 
the recently proposed long-term debt and TLAC requirements, only apply to GSIBs. Similarly, 
the  advanced  approaches  capital  rules,  countercyclical  capital  buffer,  supplementary 
leverage ratio, and full LCR only apply to the largest and most internationally active banking 
organizations.  We  also  scale  our  examination  procedures  to  reflect  the  lower  level  of 
systemic  risk  presented by  banks  with  more  than  $50  billion  in  assets  that  are  not  LISCC 
companies. 
As a result of the comprehensive CCAR review I described earlier, we are also considering 
exempting from the qualitative portions of CCAR any bank that has less than $250 billion in 
total  assets  and  that  does  not  have  significant  international  or  nonbank  activity.  While  we 
strongly  believe  the  CCAR  qualitative  review  produces  significant  safety  and  soundness 
benefits for the largest firms, we can achieve our supervisory goals at most medium-sized 
banking  firms  using  our  normal  supervisory  program  combined  with  targeted  horizontal 
assessments  of  particular  aspects  of  capital  planning,  as  many  of  these  firms  are  now 
meeting or close to meeting our supervisory expectations for capital planning processes. As 
required by statute, these firms would still be subject to the quantitative portion of our stress 
testing  program.  But  even  with  respect  to  the  quantitative  portions  of  CCAR,  we  are 
considering reducing  the  amount  of  data that these firms  are  required to  submit for  stress 
testing purposes. 
Regulatory  and  supervisory  requirements  are 
for  regional  banking 
organizations,  defined  as  those  with  total  assets  between  $10  billion  and  $50  billion.  For 
example, while regional banking organizations must comply with capital rules, they are not 
subject  to  a  supervisory  stress test  or  CCAR.  Rather,  as  required  by  the  Dodd-Frank  Act, 
regional banking organizations perform their own stress tests. Similarly, these companies are 
not  subject  to  enhanced  prudential  standards  established  under  section  165  of  the  Dodd-
Frank Act, the LCR, or other related requirements. Instead, we conduct regular inspections of 
regional  banking  organizations  and  evaluate  their  safety  and  soundness  based  on  each 
company’s individual circumstances, in addition to horizontal exams we conduct of regional 
banking  organizations.  Because  many  regional  banking  organizations  concentrate  their 
assets  and  activities  in  banking  subsidiaries  that  are  supervised  by  other  federal  banking 
agencies, we coordinate supervisory activities closely with the other U.S. banking agencies 
and rely significantly on the results of their examinations, focusing our own  inspections on 
the parent company and its ability to serve as a source of strength to the subsidiary banks. 
tailored 
further 
Community bank supervision 
I know that community banks play a vital role in many of your districts. Let me say that the 
experiences  and  challenges  of  community  banking  are  not  new  to  me.  Before  I  became 
Chair of the Board of Governors and Vice Chair before that, I spent six years as president of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. In that role, I was involved in the supervision of 
a  substantial  number  of  community  banking  organizations  in  the  nine  states  of  the  San 
Francisco  District.  Among  the  lessons  that  experience  reinforced  is  that  when  it  comes  to 
bank regulation and supervision, one size does not fit all. To effectively promote safety and 
soundness and to ensure that institutions comply with applicable consumer protection laws 
without  creating  undue  regulatory  burden,  rules  and  supervisory  approaches  should  be 
tailored to different types of institutions such as community banks. 
The  Federal  Reserve  supervises  more  than  800  community  banks  and  more  than  4,000 
holding companies that control small depository institutions. These are banking organizations 
with  total  assets  of  $10  billion  or  less.  In  supervising  community  banks,  we  follow  a  risk-
focused  approach  that  aims  to  target  examination  resources  to  higher-risk  areas  of  each 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  bank’s  operations  and  to  ensure  that  banks  maintain  risk-management  capabilities 
appropriate to their size and complexity. In the wake of the crisis, we have taken steps to 
refine  this  process  by  using  the  financial  data  we  collect  from  banks  to  calibrate  our 
examination procedures based on risk. We believe this will help us to identify and address 
emerging risks and to ensure that community bank examiners with specialized expertise are 
allocated to the institutions exhibiting the highest risks. We also implemented a risk-focused 
consumer compliance examination framework for community banks in 2014 that is intended 
to  allow  examiners  to  spend  less  time  on  low-risk  compliance  issues  so  that  issues  more 
likely to result in harm to consumers get more attention. 
The  Federal  Reserve  and  the  other  banking  agencies  are  currently  in  the  process  of 
completing  the  Economic  Growth  and  Regulatory  Paperwork  Reduction  Act  (EGRPRA) 
review. Under EGRPRA, the federal banking agencies are required to conduct a joint review 
of their regulations every 10 years to identify provisions that are outdated, unnecessary, or 
unduly burdensome. The Federal Reserve views this review as a timely opportunity to step 
back and identify ways to reduce regulatory burden, particularly for smaller or less complex 
banks  that  pose  less  risk  to  the  U.S.  financial  system.  In  carrying  out  this  review,  the 
agencies  sought  public  comment  on  their  regulations  and  held  several  roundtable 
discussions with bankers and interested parties to gather additional feedback on sources of 
burden.  Themes  emerging  from  these  comments  include  streamlining  the  Call  Report, 
reducing examination frequency, raising long-standing dollar-based thresholds for appraisals, 
and reducing the complexity of capital requirements for smaller banks. In response to public 
comments on examination frequency, the agencies have already approved interim rules to 
implement a provision of the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation Act (FAST Act), which 
raises the asset threshold for insured depository institutions that are eligible for an 18-month 
examination cycle from $500 million to $1 billion. As a result of raising the threshold, eligible 
institutions will be subject to fewer safety and soundness and Bank Secrecy Act exams. The 
agencies  are  also  exploring  potential  options  for  alleviating  some  burdens  of  appraisal 
requirements  and  are  actively  considering  proposals 
to  simplify  regulatory  capital 
requirements for community banks. 
In  addition,  the  banking  agencies,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions 
Examination Council, recently issued a proposal for a new and streamlined Call Report for 
community banks. The proposal would eliminate certain data items and reduce the reporting 
frequency of many other data items. As a result, banks with less than $1 billion in total assets 
would  submit  a  Call  Report  with  about  40  percent  fewer  data  items  than  the  existing  Call 
Report.  The  proposal 
from 
community  banks  during  several  outreach  events  used  to  gather  information  on  the 
challenges faced by community banks in preparing Call Reports. 
Congress may also wish to consider carving out community banks from two sets of Dodd-
Frank  Act  requirements:  the  Volcker  rule  and  the  incentive  compensation  limits  in  section 
956.  The  risks  addressed  by  these  statutory  provisions  are  far  more  significant  at  larger 
institutions than they are at community banks. In the event that a community bank engages 
in  practices  in  either  of  these  areas  that  raise  heightened  concerns,  we  would  be  able  to 
address  these  concerns  as  part  of  the  normal  safety-and-soundness  supervisory  process. 
While  the  banking  agencies  have  tailored  the  Volcker  rule  and  have  proposed  significant 
tailoring  of  incentive  compensation  rules,  community  banks  and  supervisors  would  benefit 
from  not  having  to  focus  on  regulatory  compliance  for  matters  that  are  unlikely  to  pose 
problems at smaller banks. 
the  banking  agencies  received 
incorporates  comments 
Current conditions 
Having reviewed some of the major elements of our regulatory and supervisory programs, let 
me offer a few brief remarks about the current state of the firms we regulate. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  response  to  regulatory  and  supervisory  pressures,  the  financial  condition  of  the  U.S. 
GSIBs  has  strengthened  considerably  since  the  crisis.  Common  equity  capital  at  the  eight 
U.S.  GSIBs  alone  has  more  than  doubled  since  2008,  representing  an  increase  to  almost 
$800  billion.  Moreover,  these  firms  generally  have  developed  much  more  stable  funding 
positions.  The  largest  banking  organizations  have  increased  their  holdings  of  high-quality 
liquid  assets  by  over  $1  trillion  over  the  past  five  years,  at  the  same  time  as  they  have 
substantially reduced their reliance on run-prone sources of funding. Reducing run-risk is a 
central goal of post-crisis regulation and supervision. 
Our examinations have found large and regional banks to be well capitalized. Both large and 
regional  banking  organizations  have  shown  improved  profitability  since  the  depths  of  the 
financial crisis, although these banks have also faced challenges in recent years because of 
weak  growth  in  interest  and  noninterest  income.  Both  large  and  regional  institutions  have 
seen  robust  growth  in  commercial  and  industrial  lending,  which  supports  sustainable  job 
creation. 
Finally, community banks are significantly healthier. More than 95 percent are now profitable, 
and capital lost during the crisis has been largely replenished. Loan growth is picking up, and 
problem loans are now at levels last seen early in the financial crisis. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, our post-crisis approach to regulation and supervision is both forward-looking 
and tailored to the level of risk that firms pose to financial stability and the broader economy. 
Standards  for  the  largest,  most  complex  banking  organizations  are  now  significantly  more 
stringent than standards for small and medium-sized banks, which is appropriate given the 
impact  that  the  failure  or  distress  of  those  firms  could  have  on  the  economy.  As  I  have 
discussed,  we  anticipate  taking  additional  actions  in  the  near  term  to  further  tailor  our 
regulatory and supervisory framework. 
Yet even as we finalize the major elements of post-crisis reform, our work is not complete. 
We must carefully monitor the impact of the regulatory changes we have made and remain 
vigilant regarding the potential emergence of new risks to financial stability. We must stand 
ready to adjust our regulatory approach where changes are warranted. The work we do to 
ensure the financial system remains strong and stable is designed to protect and support the 
real economy that sustains the businesses and jobs on which American households rely. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
