R Gandhi: Green finance – early initiatives 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
launch  of  the  Final  UNEP  India  Inquiry  Report  titled  “Delivering  a  Sustainable  Financial 
System in India”, Mumbai, 29 April 2016. 
 Recognition 
is  growing  of 
the  pressing  challenge  of 
Assistance provided by Ms Latha Vishwanath is greatly appreciated. 
Friends, 
2.
financing  sustainable
development,  and  the  opportunity  it  offers  for  channeling  financial  capital  to  productive, 
profitable and more broadly beneficial uses. The year 2016 is set to be the year of green 
finance.  Across  the  world,  we  are  seeing  a  growing  number  of  countries  aligning  their 
financial  systems  with  the  sustainability  imperative.  We  welcome  this  new  green  finance 
initiative. 
3.
In this context, it gives me great pleasure to be here this morning to release the final
UNEP India Inquiry Report titled “Delivering a  Sustainable Financial System in India”. The 
interim report on designing a sustainable financial system for India issued in February 2015 
had  flagged  certain  key  issues  in  making  the  Indian  financial  system  ready  to  respond  to 
climate  change  and  other  sustainable  development  priorities.  I  understand  that  the  UNEP 
India  Inquiry  led  by  FICCI  has  had  continuous  dialogue  and  deliberations  with  various 
stakeholders. I would like to compliment the India Advisory Council, of UNEP India Inquiry, 
chaired by Ms Naina Lal Kidwai, FICCI and the UNEP India Inquiry for this initiative. I am 
sure  that  the  final  India  Inquiry  Report  gives  a  clear  overview  of  the  stakeholders’ 
expectations. I suppose it brings out specific recommendations to urge the financial sector 
towards  the  sustainable  development  agenda.  We  will  look  forward  to  be  examining  any 
recommendation  on  policy  changes  that  will  help  the  financial  sector  to  channel  finance 
towards sustainable development. 
4.
definition of Sustainable Development: 
5.
Sustainable development has been defined in many ways, but the most frequently
quoted definition is from the Brundtland Report which says that “Sustainable development is 
development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their own needs. It contains within it two key concepts: 
•
In  order  to  have  a  meaningful  conversation  on  this  topic,  let  me  start  with  the
The concept of needs, in particular the essential needs of the world’s poor, to which
overriding priority should be given; and
The idea of limitations imposed by the state of technology and social organization on
the environment’s ability to meet present and future needs.”
 So how does sustainable development work? 
6.
important foundations or pillars: 
Sustainable  Development  is  often  described  as  being  built  on  three,  equally
Pillar 1: Social development 
To have a sustainable future, the needs of people must be met equally. Needs are things like 
access to food, suitable housing, medical care, and sanitation i.e. basically what is popularly 
known  in  India  as  “roti”,  “kapda”  aur  “makan”.  Additionally,  people  will  want  as  high  a 
standard  of  living  as  possible  and  this  must  be  achieved  in  a  way  that  does  not  harm  or 
exploit others. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
Pillar 2: Environmental protection 
Planet Earth has a limited amount of resources. We all need clean air, clean water, and land 
to  live  on  that  also  is  productive  enough  to  provide  good  quality  food  for  all.  Sustainable 
human activities look to protect the Earth’s environment to make sure it is not damaged for 
future generations. 
Pillar 3: Economic development 
People  throughout  the  world  deserve  the  best  standard  of  living  that  is  sustainable. 
Improving  medical  care,  sanitation,  education,  and  enabling  people  to  support  themselves 
with  a  good  standard  of  living  requires  the  generation  of  wealth  by  economic  activity. 
Sustainable economies also need to be competitive in a world market. Products that are too 
expensive to buy cannot be sustainable, even if they are environmentally friendly. 
What are the challenges to sustainable development? 
The  High-level  Panel  of  the  UN  Secretary-General  on  Global  Sustainability  had
7.
observed that by 2030, the world will need at least 50% more food, 45% more energy and 
30% more water. Only 13% of global energy comes, at present, from renewable sources, but 
the imperatives of climate changes requires that the contribution of renewable energy must 
increase.  As  highlighted  by  the  High–level  panel,  the  challenge  is  “to  eradicate  poverty, 
reduce  inequality  and  make  growth  inclusive,  and  production  and  consumption  more 
sustainable, while combating climate change and respecting other planetary boundaries”. 
8.
One  of  the  important  medium  of  attaining  sustainable  development  is  through
cleaner production. It enables the manufacturer or service provider to adopt green, energy 
efficient technologies which helps in lesser waste, positive impact on environment and thus, 
leading to greater sustainability. 
9.
However,  developing  and  adopting  environment-friendly  technology  measures
require  a  tremendous  amount  of  capital.  UNCTAD  estimates  that  realizing  the  sustainable 
development goals (SDGs) will require US $5-7 trillion annually over the next 15 years. Over 
the  coming  15  years,  the  world  will  need  to  invest  around  US  $90  trillion  in  sustainable 
infrastructure assets in key areas such as buildings, energy, transport, water and  waste  – 
more than twice the current stock of global public capital. Estimates from the International 
Energy Agency (IEA), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 
World Bank and World Economic Forum confirm these orders of magnitude. Green financing 
is a potent instrument to accelerate the process of sustainable development. 
So what is the position in India? 
10.
Historically,  India  has  always  incorporated  sustainable  development  as  a  way  of
doing business. In Vedanta, business is viewed as legitimate and an integral part of society, 
but  essentially  it  should  create  wealth  for  the  society  through  the  right  means  of  action. 
“Sarva loka hitam” in the Vedic literature refers to “wellbeing of stakeholders”. This means an 
ethical and socially responsible system must be fundamental to all business undertakings. 
11.
More  recently,  as  was  the  case  with  other  developing  economies,  the  era  of
globalisation  and  privatisation  of  the  1990s  witnessed  increased  capital  investment  with 
asset  creation  through  new  economically  viable  projects,  production  of  more  goods  and 
services, widening market outreach from local to regional to national and even global levels. 
The  attendant  adverse  impact  of  wider  industrialisation  on  environment  was  also  a  focus. 
However,  climate  change  concerns  received  wider  recognition  and  acceptance  with  the 
signing  of  the  Kyoto  Protocol.  India  demonstrated  its  commitment  to  combating  global 
warming by ratifying the protocol in August 2002. 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 c. 
b. 
 
 
12. 
Since Sustainable development goals demand immense capital contribution which 
cannot be provided by  Governments and public sector institutions alone, a framework has 
been put in place to involve a number of stakeholders. As part of the Legislative framework, 
The Companies Act, 2013 mandates that larger companies should contribute atleast 2% of 
their  average  net  profits  annually  towards  Corporate  Social  Responsibility  (CSR)  activities 
which includes, inter-alia, the following: 
a. 
promoting preventive health care and sanitation and making available safe drinking 
water; 
ensuring  environmental  sustainability,  ecological  balance,  protection  of  flora  and 
fauna,  animal  welfare,  agroforestry,  conservation  of  natural  resources  and 
maintaining quality of soil, air and water; 
contributions  or  funds  provided  to  technology  incubators  located  within  academic 
institutions; and 
d. 
rural development projects 
13. 
The Government of India has, in turn, launched a number of niche specialised funds 
/ schemes such as Textile Upgradation Fund, Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme, and 
Tannery  Modernisation  Scheme  with  a  desire  to  move  Indian  enterprises  towards  cleaner 
production. 
14. 
India is among the few countries in the world to have introduced a carbon tax. The 
clean energy cess imposed on coal mined in India or imported into India is collected into the 
“National Clean Energy Fund” set up for funding research and innovative projects in clean 
energy technologies. 
15. 
The Government of India has also kept a plan outlay of Rs. 10,192.83 crore in the 
annual  budget  plan  for  the  year  2016–17  towards  utilizing  new  and  renewable  energy 
resources of energy for supplementing energy requirements of the country in an eco-friendly 
and sustainable manner. Government is proposing to set up new missions on Wind Energy, 
Health,  Waste  to  Energy,  Coastal  Areas  and  redesigning  the  National  Water  Mission  & 
National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture. These steps indicate the Government of India’s 
commitment towards energy efficiency and will help to meet our national mission to reduce 
emission intensity by about 30%–35% between 2005 and 2030. India is looking forward to 
enhance its renewable energy capacity in line with our vision of providing 24×7 electricity to 
all households. Accordingly, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) is looking 
forward to install 1,00,000 MW of renewable capacity in the country in the next five years. In 
order  to  fulfil  the  ambitious  renewable  energy  targets,  the  country  would  require  huge 
investments. 
Role of financial entities in sustainable development 
16. 
Since no development is possible without a sound financial system supporting it, the 
spotlight is now on aligning the financial system with sustainable development. We, in the 
RBI,  have  been  conscious  of  the  role  of  banks  in  providing  finance  for  sustainable 
development. As early as in December 2007, banks in India were sensitized to the various 
international initiatives including the Equator principles and were asked to keep abreast of 
the developments in the field of sustainable development and corporate social responsibility 
and dovetail / modify their lending strategies / plans in the light of such developments. 
17. 
India’s  focus  on  harnessing  the  financial  system  to  provide  to  socially  important 
segments actually dates back to even pre-nationalisation days and got great impetus after 
bank  nationalisation.  A  core  of  the  financial  policy  in  India  is  the  Priority  Sector  Lending 
requirement for banks to allocate 40% of lending to key socially important sectors such as 
agriculture  and  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises.  In  2015,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India 
(RBI) included lending to social infrastructure and small renewable energy projects within the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
targets, thereby, giving a further fillip to green financing. In the renewable energy segment, 
bank  loans  of  up  to  Rs.15  crore  for  solar-based  power  generators,  biomass-based  power 
generators, wind mills, micro-hydel plants, etc. will be considered part of PSL. For individual 
households,  the  loan  limit  will  be  Rs  10,00,000  a  borrower.  The  RBI  has  also  recently 
introduced  market  for  trading  priority  sector  lending  obligations,  incentivizing  lower  cost 
delivery. 
18. 
The External Commercial Borrowing (ECB) norms have been further liberalized so 
that  green  projects  can  tap  this  window  for  raising  finance  across  the  borders.  Extant 
guidelines permit use of ECB proceeds to retire outstanding Rupee loans provided minimum 
average maturity of ECB is 10 years or ECB is denominated in Rupees. ECB can also be 
raised to refinance existing ECB provided all-in-cost is lower than that of existing one and 
residual maturity is not reduced. 
19. 
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has, in January this year, put in 
place  the  framework  for  issuance  of  green  bonds  and  the  listing  requirements  for  such 
bonds. 2015 was the year India entered the green bond market, with a total of US $1.1 bn of 
green  bonds  issued  from  a  handful  of  pioneer  issuers  (Yes  Bank,  Export-Import  Bank  of 
India, CLP Wind Farms and IDBI). 
Sustainability reporting 
20. 
In 2012, the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), mandated the Annual 
Business  Responsibility  Reporting  (ABRR),  a  reporting  framework  based  on  the  National 
Voluntary  guidelines  on  Social,  Environmental  and  Economic  Responsibilities  of  Business 
(NVGs) released by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. These guidelines serve as a driver to 
pursue sustainable management practices as a means to reaching sustainable development 
goals. 
c. 
b. 
Way forward 
21. 
The challenge, before developing economies like us is to mainstream green finance 
so  as  to  incorporate  the  environmental  impact  into  commercial  lending  decisions  while 
simultaneously balancing the needs of economic growth and social development. This will 
necessarily mean setting out on the journey of integrating financial system and sustainable 
development which has numerous goal-posts. These goal-posts could include: 
a. 
Developing  awareness  about  environmental  vulnerabilities  and  risks  among  the 
stakeholders especially market intermediaries. 
Develop a commonly accepted set of green finance definitions and indicators that 
can be used to make cross-country or cross-market comparisons. 
Identify and develop green financial products and services which can be introduced 
in the market. 
Develop a framework of metrics for measuring progress. 
Develop  innovative  financial  solutions  for  supporting  the  needs  of  long  gestation 
environment-friendly projects. 
Enhance capabilities for assessing the risks including environment risks in order to 
dovetail them into lending decisions. 
22. 
While the time taken to achieve these milestones could vary in view of the balanced 
emphasis on economic development and environment, it would go a long way in aligning the 
Indian financial system with sustainable agenda. 
23. 
I wish FICCI and UNEP the very best for all the future endeavors in this area. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
