  François Villeroy de Galhau: Central bank role to support a strong and 
sustainable growth in the medium and long term 
Speech by  Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the global 
economic  symposium  “Reigniting  Global  Growth:  Headwinds  and  Tailwinds”,  co-hosted  by 
The  National  Association  for  Business  Economics  (NABE)  and  the  Organisation  for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), Paris, 23 May 2016. 
 Introduction 
Good evening ladies and gentlemen. It is a pleasure for me to be here this evening. A well-
known joke asks “how many central bank economists does it take to screw in a light bulb?” 
and answers “Just one  –  he holds the light bulb and the whole earth revolves around him”. 
By addressing the role of central banks in supporting growth, you may think I am taking a 
step too far my role as a central banker. But as you will see, my views are more modest. 
As  we  all  know,  growth  in  the  long  run  is  determined  by  real  forces:  the  accumulation  of 
physical capital, the development of new products and production techniques, the provision 
of  public  infrastructure,  investment  in  education  and  skills  and  the  efficient  allocation  of 
resources between alternative uses. Long run growth is not determined by anything nominal 
and thus it may seem odd to think that central banks play any role in supporting strong and 
sustainable  growth  in  the  medium  and  long  term.  Monetary  policy  is  usually  seen  as  the 
demand and supply side. 
However, I would like to argue that there are at least three important ways how central banks 
may increase the sustainable rate of growth. 
The first contribution central banks can make is well-known and is to provide price stability. 
This helps narrow the range of future paths of the aggregate price level and thereby provides 
some  assurance  about  the  real  economic  value  of  nominal  contracts.  Reducing  the 
inflationary  risk  premium  reduces  the  uncertainty  of  longer  term  contracts  which,  in  turn, 
facilitates investment in projects with high potential returns but long gestation periods. 
Price  stability  also  helps  consumers  and  businesses  to  identify  changes  in  relative  prices 
more  easily.  In  turn,  a  clearer  view  about  relative  prices  allows  an  economy  to  move  its 
resources more rapidly to more profitable uses, to improve its competitiveness and thereby 
aggregate productivity. 
However, I would like to elaborate on two other less well-known ways how central bank can 
help to increase the potential growth rate of an economy: 
• 
monetary  policy  can  contribute  to  alleviate  the  medium  term  negative  effects  of  a 
deep recession on potential growth in particular in the aftermath of a financial crisis; 
and 
monetary policy can foster long-term growth by supporting structural reforms and in 
particular the ones favoring a more resilient and efficient financial system. 
Monetary policy can contribute to alleviate the medium term negative effects 
of a deep recession on potential growth 
First,  “border  line”  between  appropriate  counter-cyclical  monetary  policy  and 
1.1. 
medium-term sustainable growth is an open one. 
A  deep  recession,  such  as  the Great recession,  can  have  long  lasting effects  on  potential 
growth,  which  are  different  in  nature  from  the  usual  consequences  of  a  cyclical  downturn. 
Because  of  its  duration  and  amplitude,  it  may  damage  the  available  human  and  physical 
 1. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  capital  stock  as  well  as  medium-term  productivity  growth.  Monetary  policy  may  alleviate 
these effects through an appropriate accommodative stance. 
First,  a  deep  recession  may  lead  to  a  depreciation  of  the  available  human  capital  stock1. 
Long  term  unemployment  reached  historical  heights  during  the  Great  Recession  in  the 
United States, Spain, Italy or France, as you can see on this graph. The skills of long-term 
unemployed’ may then be eroded by lack of practice. 
Long-term  unemployment  may  also  discourage  part  of  the  labour  force,  which  may  leave 
definitively  the  labour  market.  The  structural  decline  in  the  labour  force  participation  rate 
accelerated with the crisis in the United States. This evolution is however not shared by all 
countries,  such  as  Spain.  Indeed,  the  reverse  behaviour  may  be  observed  as  the 
unemployment of one member of a household may lead other members of the household to 
enter  the  labour  market.  The  two  effects  can  offset  or  dominate  one  another,  leading  to 
different country paths, as shown on the graph. 
Finally,  a  deep  recession  may  lead  to  sectoral  reallocation,  with  part  of  the  labour  force 
lacking  appropriate  skills.  As  can  be  seen  in  this  graph,  the  Spanish  construction  workers 
had to face a sharp contraction of the share of employment in that sector, from 13% of total 
employment  to  5%  and  find  a  job  in  other  sectors.  The  decline  is  less  significant  but  still 
relevant in countries which experienced a construction boom. More generally, according to a 
Banque de France research paper2, the Beveridge curve has shifted in the euro area and the 
United States, with more vacancies associated with a similar level of unemployment, pointing 
at an increase in structural unemployment. 
These effects of the crisis on human capital would fade away only slowly, with the arrival of 
new cohorts on the labour market. However, they could be mitigated by active labour market 
policies,  such  as  an  appropriate  training  policy,  which  have  a  very  effective  and  targeted 
impact on human capital depreciation. 
1.2. Second, in Europe, the ECB has significantly loosened monetary policy in recent years 
even after the limits of conventional monetary policy have been reached. 
But this has been no ordinary recession. It has also been associated with an acute financial 
crisis  and  history  has  shown  that  recessions  associated  with  financial  crises  can  have  an 
even  longer  lasting  impact  on  economic  performance.  During  financial  crises,  credit 
constraints  can  tighten  drastically  for  banks  and  for  firms  and  households  which  in  turn 
harms physical capital and labour productivity growth. 
Financing  constraints  may  lead  to  increased  firm  defaults.  This  may  not  be  detrimental  to 
long-term  growth  if  it  has  a  “cleansing  effect”,  if  non  performing  firms  and  equipment 
disappear and free resources for innovative  young firms3. However, it may also hit  young, 
innovative and risky firms, which are more fragile and financially dependent4. According to 
Foster, Grim and Haltiwanger5, reallocation in the United States during the Great recession 
                                                
1  R. Jackman and R. Layard, 1991. “Does Long-term Unemployment Reduce a Person’s Chance of a Job? 
A Time-Series Test,” Economica, London School of Economics and Political Science, vol. 58(229), pages 
93–106, February. 
2  A.  Maravalle,  M.-E.  de  la  Serve.  and  G.  Verdugo,  2014.  “The  euro  area  Beveridge  curve  in  the  post-crisis 
period:  increase  in  structural  unemployment  since  2010,”  Quarterly  selection  of  articles  –  Bulletin  de  la 
Banque de France, Banque de France, issue 36, pages 95–109, winter. 
3  R.  J.  Caballero  and  M.  L.  Hammour,  1996.  “On  the  Timing  and  Efficiency  of  Creative  Destruction,”  The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Oxford University Press, vol. 111(3), pages 805–852. 
4  M. Ouyang, 2009. “The scarring effect of recessions,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol. 56(2), 
pages 184–199, March. 
5  L.  Foster,  C.  Grim  and  J.  Haltiwanger,  2016.  “Reallocation  in  the  Great  Recession:  Cleansing  or  Not?,” 
Journal of Labor Economics, University of Chicago Press, vol. 34(S1), pages S293–S331. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  was  less  intense  and  productivity-enhancing  than  in  normal  times,  contrary  to  previous 
recessions. Similar decrease in reallocation was found in the United Kingdom by the Bank of 
England6. 
Financing  constraints  also  hit  more  particularly  R&D  financing:  according  to  a  Banque  de 
France study7, R&D investment share becomes procyclical when credit constraints bites and 
does  not  increase  proportionally  in  upturns.  As  the  Great  Recession  was  global,  years  of 
R&D  efforts  lost  cannot  be  recovered  by  the  purchase  of  technology  from  abroad,  as  all 
countries have been hit. In the medium term, this will weigh on productivity growth, which is 
partly fed by technical innovation. 
Financing constraints may contribute to a depressed investment, especially in industries with 
heavier reliance on external finance or lower asset tangibility8, which can slowdown capital 
stock  and  hence  potential  growth,  but  also  lead  to  its  aging  and  weigh  on  its  productivity 
through the use of older equipment vintages. As we can see on this graph from a Banque de 
France study9, both the great Depression and the great Recession led to a significant ageing 
of the equipment stock. 
The Governing Council of the ECB has been particularly conscious of the acute strains in the 
financial system over recent years and the impairment of the credit channel. In particular, it 
has been concerned that bank deleveraging could reduce the supply of credit and undermine 
the supportive effects of lower interest rates on firms’ balance sheets. This could have been 
a significant “headwind” for monetary policy and has reinforced the case for decisive action. 
To  counteract  this  impairment  of  the  credit  channel,  the Governing  Council  has,  alongside 
other  non-conventional  measures  which  don’t  need  repeating,  also  launched  two  targeted 
lending programmes. These so-called TLTROs I and II allow banks to borrow up to a fixed 
fraction of their loan portfolio at an interest rate linked to the ECB official rates. Banks that 
make new loans in excess of their benchmarks receive a lower average cost of funding. This 
provides  a  powerful  incentive  to  expand  lending  and  goes  some  way  towards  alleviating 
funding risks when nominal interest rates are negative. 
In  a  further  step  to  alleviate  the  credit  channel,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  include 
corporate bonds in its asset purchase programme in March 2016. This should directly reduce 
the cost of corporate borrowing in capital markets. 
Overall,  these measures  have  been  quite  effective  in  easing  credit  conditions  in  the  Euro-
area. The volume of bank lending to non-financial corporations has begun to grow again and 
bank lending rates have fallen across the Euro-area but most noticeably in those countries 
where that had tightened the most. 
2. 
Monetary policy can foster long-term growth by supporting structural reforms 
The financial crisis in some ways revealed some structural weaknesses in many economies. 
In  some  cases  there  were  excessive  levels  of  public  debt.10  In  others  it  were  structural 
                                                
6  R. Riley, C. Rosazza-Bondibene and G. Young, 2015. “The UK productivity puzzle 2008–13: evidence from 
British businesses,” Bank of England working papers 531, Bank of England. 
7  P. Aghion, P. Askenazy, N. Berman, G. Cette and L. Eymard, 2012. “Credit Constraints And The Cyclicality Of 
R&D  Investment:  Evidence  From  France,”  Journal  of  the  European  Economic  Association,  European 
Economic Association, vol. 10(5), pages 1001–1024, October. 
8  P. Aghion, D. Hémous and E. Kharroubi, 2014. “Cyclical fiscal policy, credit constraints, and industry growth,” 
Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol. 62(C), pages 41–58. 
9  A. Bergeaud and G. Cette and R. Lecat, 2016. “The role of production factor quality and technology diffusion 
in 20th century productivity growth,” Working papers 588, Banque de France. 
10  C. Reinhart and K.S. Rogoff. 2010. “Growth in a Time of Debt.” American Economic Review, 100(2): 573–78; 
Lane, Philip R. 2012. “The European Sovereign Debt Crisis.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(3): 49–68. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  impediments to the flow of resources, in particular in the labour market and in the way credit 
was allocated between sectors, hence revealing that a malfunctioning of the financial sector 
can reinforce structural weaknesses.11 In some cases both were present at the same time. 
Of  the  uttermost  importance  were  the  structural  changes  targeting  an  improvement  in  the 
monitoring  and  the  resilience  of  our  financial  system.  Arguably  the  financial  crisis  partly 
resulted  from  excess  risk  taking  and  overinvestment  in  low  productivity  sectors.12  The 
Basel 3  framework  worldwide  and  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  in  the  euro-zone 
provide new supervisory and prudential tools to mitigate these risks in the future. 
That said, many countries within the zone also have had to make sharp fiscal adjustments 
and implement significant structural reforms. 
Unfortunately,  many  of  these  structural  reforms  may  have  a  transitory  deflationary  impact. 
This  is  the  case  of  product  market  reforms,  which  directly  target  lower  prices,  but  also  of 
reforms fostering supply if demand is depressed. Enhanced competition in telecom led to an 
impressive decrease in prices: in France, the entrance of a fourth mobile phone operator led 
to  a  decrease  in  mobile  costs  by  a  quarter  and  a  negative  impact  on  the  average  CPI  of 
0.3 point  in  2012.  There  have  been  similar  disinflationary  effects  in  many  of  the  so-called 
stressed jurisdictions of the euro-zone. 
However, at the current juncture, structural reforms are badly needed due to the productivity 
slowdown  and  larger  product  and  labour  market  reforms  should  be  envisaged  in  highly 
regulated  countries.13  In  that  case,  it  is  crucial  for  the  central  bank  to  anchor  inflation 
expectations,  through  a clear  commitment  to  its  inflation  objective.  The Governing  Council 
has been clear that it is willing to do everything within its mandate to deliver on this objective 
which is headline inflation close to, but below, 2% over the medium term. 
Structural reforms can also have a short-term negative impact on employment and growth, 
especially  in  a  depressed  environment14.  In  that  respect,  monetary  policy  can  provide  an 
offsetting support to growth, along with fiscal policy. 
The various packages of monetary accommodation implemented by the Governing Council 
since mid-2014 have already had considerable success in supporting nominal growth. Even 
though  headline  inflation  is  currently  negative,  it  would  have  been  significantly  weaker 
(around  80  basis  points  in  2016  according  to  the  Euro-system’s  estimates)  without  these 
interventions. Real economic growth is slightly stronger and unemployment lower. 
However, it is important to stress that monetary policy is a companion to structural reforms 
rather  than  a  substitute.  Stimulatory  monetary  policy  cannot  be  an  excuse  to  postpone 
structural reforms. 
Indeed it sometimes feels as if central banks had sole responsibility for supporting growth in 
the  short-run.  This  is  not  a  comfortable  position  for  us  and  should  not  be  an  acceptable 
position  for  any  of  you.  Our  monetary  policy  accommodation  has  made  the  cost  of 
investment considerably cheaper but its effectiveness is blunted somewhat if entrepreneurs 
feel constrained by structural impediments and a lack of economic reform. The OECD has 
                                                
11  S.Gilchrist and B.Mojon, Forthcomning “Credit Risk in the Euro Area.” The Economic Journal. 
12  V. V. Acharya and S.Sascha, 2015. “The ‘Greatest’ Carry Trade Ever? Understanding Eurozone Bank Risks.” 
Journal of Financial Economics, 115 (2): 215–236. 
13  C. Teulings and R.Baldwin, 2014. “Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes, and Cures” VoxEU.org eBook, CEPR 
Press. 
14  M. Cacciatore, R. Duval, G. Fiori and F. Ghironi, 2016. “Market Reforms in the Time of Imbalance,” NBER 
Working  Papers  22128,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  Inc.;  in  ‘t  Veld,  Jan.  2013.  “Fiscal 
consolidations  and  spillovers  in  the  Euro  area  periphery  and  core.”  Economic  Papers  506,  European 
Commission. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  been  urging  a  faster  pace  of  structural  reforms  for  many  years  now  and  I  wish  more 
governments would listen. 
But monetary policy and domestic structural reforms should not be the only game in town. 
We  need  a  better  overall  policy  mix.  Against  a  background  of  accommodative  monetary 
policy  and  faster  economic  reform,  we  need  looser  and  better  targeted  fiscal  policy  at  a 
European  level.  For  example,  more  could  be  done  to  increase  investment  in  public 
infrastructure, education and apprenticeship in Southern Europe. Fiscal expenditure could be 
shifted  towards  retraining  programmes  or  other  measures  to  help  shift  resources  between 
sectors. 
One way of thinking about our current predicament is that the natural short-term real rate of 
interest is too low, due to insufficient ex ante investment relative to savings. The ECB has 
been  providing  substantial  monetary  accommodation  using  unconventional  tools  to  try  to 
push  down  the  effective  nominal  rate.  A  better way  in  the  long-term  would  be  to  raise the 
natural real rate of interest through stronger economic growth and investment. 
Conclusion 
As for many other economic policies and concepts, the Great Recession led us to reconsider 
the role of central banks with regard to medium and long-term growth. Beyond their normal-
time  contribution  to  long-term  growth  as  price  stability  guardians,  central  banks  in  deep 
depression  have  to  act  against  the  hysteresis  effects  of  the  crisis  and  the  damages  from 
financial sector disruptions. All indicators, from the matching process on the labour market to 
the  reallocation  of  resources  among  firms,  have  shown  how  serious  the  shocks  from  the 
great recession have been, vindicating a large-scale and determined reaction of economic 
policy across the world. 
In this global economic policy reaction, it would be hard to argue that central banks have not 
done their share of the job. 
At the current juncture, however, all need to do their share. Focusing on the euro area, I am 
convinced  that  we  would  do  much  better  with  more  growth-enhancing  fiscal  policies, 
especially  in  the  member  states  that  have  fiscal  space,  and,  at  the  same  time,  more 
ambitious structural reforms, especially in the member states that don’t have fiscal space. 
Indeed,  this  is  probably  the  most  subtle  criticism  of  the  active  monetary  policy  currently 
undertaken by central banks: has it been an excuse for inaction by other public authorities, in 
particular structural reforms? Our answer cannot be to stop doing our own job but, drawing 
on  the  legitimacy  given  by  our  own  actions,  to  strongly  invite  governments  to  do  more.  In 
particular in my own country, here in Paris, reforms are necessary, as I stressed in my recent 
Letter to the French President some days ago. But reforms are also possible. Yes, France 
too, like many of its successful European neighbours, is “reformable”. 
I thank you for your attention and wish you an excellent dinner. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
