  S S Mundra: Empowering MSMEs – issues & challenges 
Inaugural address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
2nd Bankers Borrowers Business Meet 2016, New Delhi, 6 April 2016. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Jose Kattoor and Ms. Chaithanya Devi is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Shri Rajkumar Dhoot, Member of Parliament; Shri K.K. Jalan, Secretary, Ministry of 
MSME,  Govt.  of  India; Shri  Ashwani  Kumar  Chairman, Indian  Banks’  Association  &  CMD, 
Dena  Bank;  Dr.  Kshatrapati  Shivaji,  Chairman  &  Managing  Director,  SIDBI;  Shri  Sunil 
Kanoria,  President,  Assocham;  dignitaries  on  the  dais;  distinguished  colleagues  from  the 
banking fraternity; members of Assocham; representatives of the print and electronic media; 
ladies  and  gentlemen!  Bringing  the  bankers  and  the  borrowers  together  on  a  common 
platform to deliberate on issues and challenges that afflict businesses is a very novel idea 
and hence, I could not refuse an invite to address this gathering for the second year in a row. 
So,  I  begin  by  complimenting  ASSOCHAM  for  conceptualizing  this  “Bankers-Borrowers-
Business”  meet  and  more  so,  for  choosing  “Empowering  MSMEs”  as  the  theme  for  the 
second  edition  of  the  Meet.  The  theme  is  extremely  significant  for  a  number  of  reasons: 
continued moderation in economic growth; rising pile of stressed assets in the corporate loan 
book of banks; need for employment generation; fulfilling entrepreneurial ambitions and so 
on. 
2. 
I  understand  that  three  fundamental  issues  pertaining  to  the  MSME  sector  are 
getting  covered  during  the  deliberations  here:  firstly,  enabling  better  understanding  of  the 
sector by the banking community; secondly, ensuring timely financial support to distressed 
Micro and Small enterprises; thirdly empowering MSMEs, an objective that is closely linked 
to the first two. 
3. 
Let me set the ball rolling by briefly speaking on each of these three issues which 
can then be deliberated upon in greater detail in the technical sessions that follow. To put 
things in context, I would like to recall that the MSME Sector has emerged as a vibrant and 
dynamic sector of the Indian economy, contributing 37.5 per cent of India’s GDP, with its vast 
network of 48 million enterprises providing employment to 111.4 million persons.1 It may not 
be out of place to mention here that in the face of adverse economic conditions prevalent in 
the country today, the MSME sector stands as a beacon of hope. Realizing the potential that 
the  sector  holds,  both  Government  of  India  and  Reserve  Bank  of  India  have  been  laying 
substantial emphasis on means to energize the sector. Among the GOI initiatives that have a 
bearing  on  the  sector  are  provision  for  Udyog  Aadhaar,  Start-up  India,  Make  in  India  and 
steps for improving “Ease of Doing Business” in the country. Likewise, Reserve Bank of India 
has also been very conscious of the needs of the MSMEs and has hence, initiated a plethora 
of steps to support them through their lifecycle. I will delve upon some of these measures in 
the course of my address today. 
Strengthening the Banking System for lending to MSMEs 
4. 
With  a  view  to  strengthen  the  reach  and  scope  of  credit  delivery  mechanism  for 
small  entrepreneurs  and  businesses,  RBI  has  recently  issued  in-principle  approvals  for 
setting up of 10 Small Finance Banks (SFBs). The SFBs are mandated to extend 75 per cent 
of their Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC) to the sectors eligible for classification as priority 
sector lending (PSL) by RBI. Further, these banks are also mandated to ensure that at least 
50  per  cent  of  their  loan  portfolio  should  constitute  of  loans  and  advances  of  up  to 
                                                
1   Annual Report Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 2014–15. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Rs.25 lakh.  This  is  intended  to  ensure  that  these  SFBs  have  a  diversified  loan  book  with 
exposures to small entrepreneurs. We believe that together with the existing players, these 
banks would be able to meet the credit needs of small businesses in a holistic and timely 
manner, which is so central to the financing needs of the MSMEs. 
5. 
The  recent  revision  to  the  priority  sector  lending  guidelines  has  also  sought  to 
facilitate flow of credit to the sector. While on the one hand, the target for banks’ lending to 
micro  enterprises  has  been  progressively  increased  to  7  percent  by  March  2016  and 
7.5 percent  by  March  2017,  medium  enterprises  have  been  brought  within  the  ambit  of 
priority  sector,  whereby  all  loans  to  medium  enterprises  in  the  manufacturing  sector  and 
those up to Rs. 10 crore in the service sector now qualify for priority sector classification. 
6. 
An  extremely  important,  but  relatively  much  less  appreciated  aspect  of  credit 
delivery system is the availability of trained human capital within the banks. Bankers ought to 
have a sound understanding of the businesses that they finance. In respect of established 
businesses with predictable cash flows, conducting a credit appraisal, developing a proper 
understanding of the business cycle and analyzing problems is a lot easier when compared 
to small businesses, which often do not follow a set business cycle, are too dependent on 
idiosyncratic  events  and  where  promoters  are  not  in  a  position  to  bring  additional  equity 
quickly.  In  this  decade  of  retirements  for  the  PSBs,  the  number  of  trained  personnel  has 
been  dwindling  very  fast  while  the  relatively  inexperienced  bottom  rung  does  not  possess 
appropriate skill-sets to lend to the MSME sector, which is perceived to be risky and costlier 
to service. 
7. 
To overcome this human resource deficit in the banking sector, we at the Reserve 
Bank of India have embarked upon a fairly ambitious national level skill building programme 
for the bankers titled National Mission for Capacity Building of Bankers for Financing MSME 
Sector (NAMCABS) in July 2015. A major facet of the NAMCABS initiative is “Training the 
trainer”, which is intended to serve as a force- multiplier. I am happy to state that close to 
1800  bankers  have  undergone  an  intensive  entrepreneurial  sensitivity  and  skill  building 
programme in the last 8 months. I would like to re-emphasize the “Entrepreneurial sensitivity” 
content of the capacity building efforts, as this is the key to responding to the lifecycle needs 
of the small and medium enterprises. 
8. 
Of  course,  the  banking  system  needs  to  walk  a  fair  bit  to  create  an  environment 
where  an  aspiring  entrepreneur  is  more  worried  about  embracing  technology,  improving 
productivity  and  efficiency  at  his/her  unit  rather  than  worrying  about  the  availability, 
timeliness  and  adequacy  of  finance.  This  would  require  more  enablers  in  the  nature  of  a 
more robust and responsive financial infrastructure. There are several initiatives on the anvil 
towards this objective. Let me give a peek into some of them: 
9. 
Timely  availability  of  credit  from  the  formal  financial  sector  is  a  very  critical  issue 
which the small entrepreneur faces. I receive a fair bit of complaints about the cumbersome 
processes 
that  are 
associated with getting finance from the banks. We have issued guidelines on maintaining 
electronic  records  of  the  loan  applications  from  MSME  borrowers  and  some  of  the  banks 
have  implemented  a  Credit  Proposal  and  Tracking  System.  However,  that  has  not  been 
universally implemented. Under the circumstances, the potential borrowers continue to face 
uncertainty over quantum and timelines after making a loan application. To ease the process, 
bridge  information  gaps,  enable  monitoring  of  processing  time  and  reducing  transaction 
costs, RBI is in active discussions with GOI, IBA, SIDBI and e-governance experts to set up 
a universal “Udyami” Portal for access by small entrepreneur. 
10. 
The  Committee  on  Medium  Term  Path  on  Financial  Inclusion  (Chairman:  Shri 
Deepak Mohanty) has recommended exploring a system of professional credit advisors for 
MSMEs, which could help bridge the information gap between bank and the borrower that is 
a  major  constraint  in  the  flow  of  credit  to  the  MSME  sector  today.  As  announced  by  the 
Governor  in  yesterday’s  Monetary  Policy  statement,  there  is  a  proposal  to  accord 
involved,  documentation  requirements  and  concomitant  delays 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
accreditation to few credit counsellors who would act as facilitators for the micro and small 
entrepreneurs  for  accessing  the  formal  financial  system  with  greater  ease  and  flexibility. 
Since MSMEs are typically enterprises with weak credit histories and inadequate expertise in 
preparing financial  statements,  credit  counsellors  can  help  bridge  the  information  gap  and 
thereby help banks make better credit decisions. The Reserve Bank will hold consultations 
with all the stakeholders and come out with guidelines for this by September 2016. 
11. 
Another  financial  infrastructure,  which  could  have  a  multiplier  effect  on  lending  to 
small  businesses,  is  a  Movable  Asset  Registry.  Today  CERSAI  provides  a  facility  for 
registering  charge  on 
the  small  business 
entrepreneurs do not possess immovable property to offer as collateral and instead they own 
machinery, stocks, receivables or livestock, which can be leveraged to obtain finance from 
banking channels if a “Movable Asset” Registry is available. We are working towards this as 
well. 
immovable  property.  However,  most  of 
Tiding over the life cycle issues – MSME way 
12. 
Predicting  the  lifecycle  of  MSMEs,  particularly  the  Micro  units,  is  a  difficult 
proposition.  The  micro  entrepreneurs  neither  have  keen  business  acumen  nor  sizeable 
resources. As opposed to larger businesses, the inability to respond in time to the vagaries of 
these  business  cycles  can  often  prove  fatal  to  the  Micro  enterprise.  With  timeliness  of 
resource support being such a critical element at different stages during the life cycle of small 
businesses, let me flag a few initiatives which RBI has taken to address the issue. 
13. 
RBI has recently issued licenses to three entities for operating the Trade Receivable 
Discounting System (TReDS), which when operational, would address a major issue faced 
by the sector, i.e. timely realization of receivables. This is a path-breaking initiative with very 
few  parallels  in  other  countries.  However,  the  implementation  would  need  wholehearted 
support from all the major stakeholders, i.e. the large corporates, the PSUs and eventually, 
the Government enterprises. 
14. 
RBI has also recently issued guidelines to streamline the credit flow to the MSME 
sector. The  banks  have  been  advised  to  review  their  existing  lending  policies  to  the  MSE 
sector  and  fine-tune  these  policies  by  incorporating  provisions  for  sanctioning  of  Standby 
Credit Facility in case of term loans, Additional Working Capital Limits, Mid Term Review of 
Regular Working Capital Limits, setting timelines for making credit decisions, etc. I take this 
opportunity to urge the banks to be sensitive to the requirements of the small entrepreneurs 
and offer a helping hand in times of crisis. 
15. 
Thirdly,  it  is  seen  that  the  life  cycle  issues  of  micro  entrepreneurs  like  weavers, 
artisans, etc. in far flung areas, in agglomerations and unrecognized clusters are much more 
acute. More often than not they are compelled to borrow towards their working capital needs 
from  local  money  lenders  and  informal  sources.  RBI  has  carried  out  a  dip  stick  survey  of 
agglomerations/clusters  recently  and  observed  a  huge  scope  for  deepening  of  banking 
services  in  such  areas.  I  urge  the  banks  to  proactively  open  their  banking  outlets  in  and 
around clusters/agglomerations as it makes prudent business sense. 
Empowering the entrepreneur 
16. 
Having  delved  into  the  supply  side  issues  and  focusing  mainly  on  institutional 
infrastructure, let me now talk about the demand side of things. While it is not difficult to find 
people with entrepreneurial ambitions, there is a need to imbue the budding entrepreneurs 
with a keen business sense and awareness about the intricacies of the markets and banking, 
the demand-supply conundrum, understanding of technology, etc. 
17. 
Preparing an individual for an entrepreneurial venture is as important to the resource 
provider as it is to the entrepreneur himself. One of the major initiatives in this direction has 
been the institution of Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (R-SETI) which trains the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
rural  youth  to  take  up  micro  entrepreneurial  ventures.  Close  to  three  lakh  youngsters  are 
trained  through  around  600  RSETIs  every  year.  While  conceptually,  it  is  an  excellent 
mechanism,  I  observe  that  certain  infirmities  have  come  to  grip  the  institution  of  R-SETIs 
over time. In my opinion, such institutions require well-defined objectives, a robust process 
for  selection  of  trainees,  constant  up-gradation  of  training  methodologies,  hand-holding, 
ensuring credit linkage etc. I feel that there is a need for a fundamental shift in our approach 
towards  operations  and  management  of  R-SETIs.  It  may,  perhaps,  be  ideal  to  pool  the 
R-SETIs into a single National Trust with a separate Governance framework for achieving 
better synergy. This would ensure an arms’ length distance with the banks in terms of their 
operations  even  while  they  continue  to  receive  funding  support  from  the  banks.  We  have 
done some internal studies and see a clear possibility for achieving this. I would request the 
banks and the IBA to work together to make this institution truly meaningful. 
18. 
The second issue that I want to highlight in this regard is the recently announced 
Framework for Revival and Rehabilitation of MSMEs. GOI, in consultation with RBI and other 
stakeholders,  has  provided  an  institutionalized  framework  for  rehabilitation  of  enterprises 
which  are  potentially  viable,  but  under  temporary  duress.  From  a  bank’s  perspective,  the 
most critical period in the lifecycle of small enterprises is the little time window between the 
unit  operating  smoothly  and  turning  sick.  The  Framework  provides  for  a  structured 
mechanism, which could be triggered either by the banker or by the entrepreneur when first 
signs of stress appear. The problem resolution is scaled up to a committee with a time bound 
schedule.  I  am  sure,  if  implemented  effectively,  it  would  greatly  help  in  saving  productive 
enterprises rather than letting them slip into morass. I trust, the entrepreneurs would find this 
mechanism truly empowering. 
19. 
Thirdly,  it  is  time  we  took  a  relook  at  whether  we  need  to  change  our  approach 
towards  the  sector  from  a  “one  size  fits  all”  approach  to  a  more  differentiated  approach 
towards the Micro sector. The Micro sector itself consists of a diverse set of enterprises. The 
banking  fraternity  needs  to  look  at  how  they  can  differentiate  in  their  procedures  and 
products by making them more attuned to the unique needs of the Micro sector. 
20. 
While on the institutional mechanism, just as a reassuring thought, I would like to 
mention that we at RBI are extremely mindful of the trials and tribulations of small enterprises 
and we have put in place institutional mechanism for deliberating and generating solutions 
for issues concerning the MSME sector. First, there is the Standing Advisory Committee at 
the national level which I chair and in which some of the industry bodies participate. Then 
there is an Empowered Committee at the Regional Offices of RBI and then there are town 
hall meetings held at periodic intervals to serve as a forum for feedback. Each of these fora 
have  evolved  into  vibrant  platforms  for  deliberating  and  sorting  out  policy  and  operational 
issues  with  specific  focus  on  this  sector.  I  would  urge  the  industry  bodies,  including 
ASSOCHAM,  to  use  these  platforms  extensively  to  deliberate  on  critical  issues  (and  not 
merely  raising  rhetoric  for  reducing  interest  rates)  and  put  forward  suggestions  for  policy 
interventions. 
Conclusion 
21. 
Before I conclude, let me reemphasize that an entrepreneur would feel empowered 
when he/she is able to bridge the asymmetry of knowledge. There is no better way to do this 
than peer help. Be it in skilling, assisting or hand holding, the industry bodies have a major 
role to play in empowering the MSMEs. International experience, you might know, is towards 
industry bodies serving as peer counsellors for small businesses. I visualize a significant role 
for industry associations like ASSOCHAM in empowering the entrepreneurs. I am happy that 
ASSOCHAM  has  been  actively  working  in  this  area  and  the  report  released  today  is  a 
testimony to their efforts. 
22. 
I stated this at the close of my address last year and at the cost of repetition, would 
like to re-emphasize the importance of borrower education (especially for small businesses). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The banks and borrowers share a symbiotic relationship and hence, both the lenders as well 
as the borrowers have to understand their basic responsibilities, co-operate with each other 
and adhere to a general code of conduct and discipline. We have to realize that only if the 
business survives would both, the borrowers and the bankers flourish. 
23. 
As  I  said  at  the  beginning  of  my  address,  the  MSMEs  are  key  to  a  sustainable 
economic growth and hence, it is in our collective interest that these enterprises thrive. To 
paraphrase Mao-Tse-Tung, “Let a billion MSMEs bloom!” To paraphrase Mao-Tse-Tung, “Let 
a billion MSMEs bloom!” 
I  thank  ASSOCHAM  for  inviting  me  to  share  my  thoughts  and  wish  the  conference  great 
success. 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
