  Ewald Nowotny: “Central bank policies – past challenges and future 
perspectives” – Session 1 
Speech by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Austria, 
at  the  ceremony  to  mark  the  200th  anniversary  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Austria, Vienna, 2 June 2016. 
 Mr. President of the Republic Heinz Fischer, 
Prime Minister Christian Kern, 
Dear President Mario Draghi, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It’s  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  today  to  the  commemoration  of  the 
200th anniversary of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank and we are very grateful and proud 
that such an eminent audience has followed our invitation to this celebratory event. 
In  the  two  hundred  years  of  its  existence,  the  fate  of  the  Nationalbank  has  always  been 
closely entwined with the fate of Austria, for better and for worse. It is not by accident, that it 
was  Schumpeter,  the  great  economist  and  short-term  finance  minister  of  the  Republic  of 
Austria, who said that the condition of the monetary system of a nation is a symptom of all its 
conditions, or in German, “Der Zustand des Geldwesens eines Volkes ist ein Symptom aller 
seiner Zustände.” 
If there is one lesson to be drawn from the eventful monetary history of Austria, then it is that 
the greatest threat to financial and monetary stability has been, and continues to be, war. In 
fact, it was also war, which triggered the foundation of the Nationalbank in 1816. When on 
June  1,  1816,  Emperor  Francis  I  signed  the  decrees  establishing 
the  privilegirte 
oesterreichische National-Bank, he did so almost exactly one year after the conclusion of the 
Congress  of  Vienna,  which  marked  the  end  of  more  than  twenty  years  of  war  in  Europe. 
Ultimately,  the  Austrian Empire  emerged  as  one  of  the  victorious  powers,  but the  price  of 
victory  had  been  steep.  A  significant  part  of  the  war  effort  had  been  financed  by  issuing 
paper money, which resulted in high inflation. In addition, the Austrian state had to declare 
default  on  its  debt  in  1811.  As  is  always  the  case  in  periods  of  high  inflation,  the 
consequences for the population were disastrous. 
The agenda for the new bank can thus be summarized quite briefly: get the monetary system 
back  in  order. The  most  important  ingredient for  stability  was  the  reestablishment  of  trust. 
The Austrian people had lost their faith in the Austrian currency because of inflation and state 
bankruptcy;  now  a  way  had  to  be  found  to  regain  public  confidence.  The  solution  was  to 
create the new issuing bank as an institution held by private shareholders. This arrangement 
was not uncommon at the time. The Bank of England, which dates back to 1694, as well as 
the Banque de France and De Nederlandsche Bank, which had both been founded only a 
couple of years before the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, had been set up as privately held 
joint stock corporations. The advantage of this arrangement was two-fold. On the one hand, 
the shareholders contributed capital, which was the foundation of the financial strength of the 
new institution and which the Austrian government itself would have found difficult to raise. 
On the other hand, private shareholders’ participation in the management of the bank was 
thought to pose limits on the government and prevent government from intervening in a way 
that might prove harmful to monetary stability. Thus, the new institution would find it easier to 
obtain confidence and trust. The shares of the bank were subscribed by a rather broad group 
of  people.  Indeed,  we  find  many  entries  with  just  one  or  two  shares  in  the  list  of 
shareholders.  One  of  many  medium-sized  investors  was  the  composer  Ludwig  van 
Beethoven. In our museum you can have a look at a share made out to his name. By the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
way, this was quite a good investment: Between 1818 and 1827, when Beethoven died, he 
earned something between 15% and 20% per year on his investment. 
The Nationalbank was not only financially successful for its shareholders; it also succeeded 
in stabilizing the value of the Austrian florin in terms of silver. The period of calm lasted until 
1848,  when  the  people  of  the  Empire  toppled  Metternich’s  repressive  regime.  The  bank, 
which was perceived as quite close to the state, faced a run – everybody tried to convert his 
banknotes into silver coins. In response, the Nationalbank resorted to a measure that was a 
small  revolution  in  itself.  To  restore  confidence,  the  governing  board  decided  to  start 
publishing end-of-month financial statements. Before 1848 nobody apart from a handful of 
bank officials and civil servants at the ministry of finance had known about the true state of 
the bank, notably the amount of banknotes in circulation and silver reserves held. Now this 
information was made public. In the following  years, the bank never returned to its former 
secrecy, but recognized the importance of transparency for the confidence in the quality of 
the money. Transparency and accountability are also key elements in how  we think about 
policy in the Eurosystem today. 
In  the  19th  century,  the  privileged  Austrian  central  bank  evolved  from  a  bank  that  mainly 
financed the government to a central bank of the banking system of the monarchy. In 1847, 
the bank had opened its first branch office in Prague. By 1913, the network comprised some 
100 offices all over the monarchy. These branch offices were not only useful when it came to 
stemming  local  banking  crises,  they  also  helped  facilitate  the  flow  of  capital  within  the 
monarchy, thus forging together this vast, yet highly heterogeneous economy. This way, the 
bank  –  which  had  for  its  first  forty  years  been  mainly  active  in  Vienna  –  became  a  truly 
“national” bank, in the original sense of encompassing all the people of the Empire. 
By  that  time,  however,  “national”  already  referred  to  a  rather  exclusive  concept,  which 
opposed rather than united different groups of the population. The bank could not escape the 
national  struggles  that  marked  the  Habsburg  monarchy  during  the  last  decades  of  its 
existence.  In  1867,  Hungary  obtained  a  significant  degree  of  independence  within  the 
Empire,  now  renamed  Austria-Hungary.  As  a  consequence  of  this  “compromise,”  most 
competences of the central government were devolved to the levels of the Austrian and the 
Hungarian parliaments and governments, respectively, notably fiscal policy. Only few areas 
of policy continued to be run jointly: including foreign policy, the army, the navy, foreign trade 
and – last but not least – the common currency. The bank faced an environment that had 
fundamentally  changed.  Before  1867,  the  bank had  negotiated  with  just  one  counterparty, 
the  Imperial  government,  about  its  statutes,  which  had  to  be  renewed  at  regular  intervals, 
and all other laws pertaining to the monetary system. Now, the bank faced two interlocutors, 
which more often than not found it difficult to agree. The Austrian central bank was renamed 
the  Austro-Hungarian  bank,  Budapest  was  promoted  to  become  the  second  head  office 
equal to Vienna and a common, but independent decision-making process was installed. In 
the  following  years,  the  relationship  between  Austria  and  Hungary  was  not  always 
harmonious, to put it mildly. More often than not, important decisions were blocked. Within 
this difficult setting, the bank operated quite successfully. In the 1890s, after almost 50 years 
of floating exchange rates, Austria-Hungary succeeded in pegging its currency to gold, then 
seen  as  the  seal  of  prudent  policy.  As  it  turned  out,  being  an  independently  run, 
supranational institution, the bank was well placed to take decisions swiftly, when the political 
process was fraught with difficulties. Here, all of you probably see some similarity to the role 
of the Eurosystem during the recent crisis. Quite often the Eurosystem had to take the lead, 
e.g.  with  the  SMP  or  OMT,  until  the  governments  managed  to  agree  on  long-run 
arrangements like the ESM or banking union. 
That  war  is  the  greatest  threat  to  financial  and  monetary  stability  became  again  painfully 
clear when the First World War broke out in 1914. The four years of war proved catastrophic, 
for the population, which suffered death and hunger, for the monarchy, which fell apart after 
centuries of existence, and for the currency, which by November 1918 had lost 95% of its 
pre-war  value.  But  worse  was  to  come.  The  new  Republic  of  Austria,  found  itself  in  a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
horrendously difficult position. In the post-war chaos, Austria was cut off from the supply of 
food  and  coal  and  its  traditional  markets.  The  only  way  to  finance  the  burgeoning 
government expenses was to print money. It is therefore not surprising that those parts of the 
monarchy,  like  Czechoslovakia,  that  found  themselves  in  a  better  economic  and  political 
condition created their own currencies. Czechoslovakia, i.e. today’s Czech Republic, by the 
way,  is  the  only  part  of  the  former  Empire  that  to  this  day  uses  the  name  “Crown”  for  its 
currency, the name introduced by the Austro-Hungarian central bank in 1892. By 1919, the 
monetary area governed by the Austro-Hungarian bank for more than hundred years did no 
longer exist. 
In the meantime, Austria faced the worst inflation in its history that could only be stopped 
when the newly founded League of Nations arranged a loan for Austria in 1922. The League 
loan,  which  was  the  first  international  support  scheme  of  its  kind,  came  with  severe 
conditions attached. For several years, Austrian fiscal policy was under direct supervision of 
League  commissioners.  In  1923,  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  was  resurrected  from 
the ashes of the defunct Austro-Hungarian bank. Here again, a representative of the League 
sat  on  the  board.  The  stabilization  succeeded  and  the  republican  Schilling  replaced  the 
crown of the old monarchy. The new bank, however, soon had to face a banking system that 
was weakened by hyperinflation and the need to shrink after the old markets of the monarchy 
were lost. A number of banks failed in the 1920s. The long-drawn-out crisis culminated in the 
failure of Creditanstalt in 1931. The Creditanstalt crisis marked the beginning of a series of 
banking and currency crises  worldwide, first in  Germany, which then led to the exit of the 
United  Kingdom  from  the  gold  standard.  For  Austria  the  failure  of  its  largest  bank  proved 
dramatic. If an example of a systemically important, too big to fail institution were needed, the 
Creditanstalt  would  fit  perfectly.  Ultimately,  the  bank  was  reconstructed  by  using  taxpayer 
money  and  significant  resources  provided  by  the  Nationalbank.  In  the  face  of  a  deep 
economic slump, record unemployment and increasing political conflicts ultimately leading to 
a brief episode of civil war, however, the Nationalbank like many other central banks at this 
time followed a  very conservative line of monetary policy,  which aggravated the economic 
and social problems of Austria. 
Thus, political unrest and unemployment made Austria an easy target for populist-nationalist 
Nazi propaganda. Austria was attractive for the German rulers. By 1936, due to massive re-
armament, Germany’s economy was running at full capacity, and foreign exchange reserves, 
which  were  needed  for  imports,  were  low.  When  German  troops  marched  into  Austria  on 
March  12,  1938,  one  of  the  first  targets  were  the  substantial  gold  reserves  of  the 
Nationalbank,  which  were  quickly  shipped  to  Berlin.  The  bank  itself  became  part  of  the 
Reichsbank. 
After seven long years, Austria was liberated in 1945. Even before the war officially ended on 
May 8, the Nationalbank started to operate again on April 14 on the basis of the pre-1938 
law. The argument was made that the Nationalbank had in fact never ceased to exist but had 
only been prevented from operating because of German occupation. The challenges in 1945 
were quite similar to those in 1918. Austria needed to be carved out of a larger, disintegrating 
monetary area, then the crown, now the Reichsmark. In a second step, money supply had to 
be brought into a reasonable relationship to the amount of goods available. While the setting 
was similar, this time – unlike after 1918 – the government and the Nationalbank together 
succeeded  in  managing  the  transition  without  hyperinflation.  A  monetary  reform  in  1947 
reduced  the  money  supply  dramatically,  while  negotiations  between  employer  and  worker 
representatives  allowed  for  a  gradually  engineered  increase  in  the  price  level.  Finally,  the 
Marshall plan proved crucial, first, to receive food aid, and later, to receive necessary raw 
products and machinery. The following years saw a fantastic economic recovery, a veritable 
“Wirtschaftswunder.” 
In 1955, the Nationalbank received new statutes. The objective set in the law was no longer 
a gold standard but to keep both the internal and external value of the schilling stable. When 
President  Nixon  closed  the  gold  window  in  1971  and  the  system  of  Bretton  Woods 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
disintegrated, Austria rather quickly opted for a peg to the German mark. After 1945 and until 
the early 1970s, foreign exchange policy had mainly served to encourage exports and keep 
the  current  account  balanced.  Now,  foreign  exchange  policy  became  the  tool  of  choice  to 
control domestic inflation. The peg was successful and could be kept until Austria adopted 
the euro in 1999. It thus became one of the longest stable pegs on record internationally. 
Sustaining the peg required careful policies. Austria’s policy was built on a broad consensus 
between the two main political parties, the social partners and the Nationalbank. The social 
partners  also  sat  in  the  General  Council  of  the  Nationalbank,  which  allowed  coordinating 
general economic policies and monetary policy to achieve the overarching objective of low 
inflation and a stable exchange rate. 
In  1995, the  Austrian  people  voted  with  an  overwhelming  majority  of two-thirds  to  join  the 
European Community, soon to become the European Union. Membership of the European 
Union meant that Austria was also to be among the first round of countries to introduce the 
common currency, the euro, in 1999, followed by the introduction of banknotes and coins in 
2002.  Austria  was  now  part  of  a  large  economic  area  dedicated  to  maintaining  monetary 
stability.  In  this  sense,  joining  the  euro  area  was  the  logical  final  step  and  the  crowning 
moment of the policies Austria had pursued over the previous quarter century. 
At  the  same  time,  joining  the  Eurosystem  brought  significant  changes  to  the  role  of  the 
Nationalbank.  Monetary  policy 
the 
presidents/governors of all member central banks. We are glad to bring in our expertise, both 
in general – and specifically also for the region of central Europe – to the work of the ECB. 
Furthermore, in Austria the Nationalbank is responsible for monetary policy operations, we 
manage the foreign reserve assets of our country, ensure the smooth operation of cashless 
payments, provide businesses and the general population with high-quality secure banknotes 
and collect and provide crucial financial statistics. A relatively new task, which is also jointly 
operated  with  European  institutions,  is  the  supervision  of  banks.  Last  but  not  least,  the 
Nationalbank serves as a link between the European level and the Austrian public, ensuring 
the legitimacy of the Eurosystem and our common monetary policy. 
Looking back at two hundred years of central banking in Austria, it seems that few countries 
– and their central banks – have lived through as many exceptional and difficult experiences. 
But  then  Austria  and  the  Nationalbank  have  also  lived  through  some  happy  and  peaceful 
years:  in  particular  the  past  seventy  years,  which  brought  economic  growth,  high 
employment and stable prices. Yet, irrespective of the challenges the Nationalbank faced at 
different moments of its 200-year history, the overarching principles of its policy were always 
the  same:  the  quest  for  stability,  built  on  trust  in  the  Nationalbank,  which  in  turn  is 
fundamentally linked to its independence. 
It is these same principles of stability and independence which still guide our policy today as 
well as the policy of the European Central Bank and the other national central banks united 
in the Eurosystem. I am therefore extremely glad that the OeNB has had the privilege to host 
the June meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB in Vienna this morning and that I can 
welcome  so  many  dear  colleagues  and  friends  to  the  commemoration  of  our  bank’s 
bicentennial today. 
In particular I am very happy to be able to now welcome the President of the ECB, Mario 
Draghi. 
jointly  decided  by 
the  Eurosystem 
in 
is 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
