  Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: Distribution in a liberalised environment 
Keynote address by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank 
of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  General  Insurance  Agents  Convention 
“Distribution in a Liberalised Environment”, Kuala Lumpur, 5 August 2016. 
 The profound impact of financial technology on the provision of financial services – including 
insurance – is set to gain more traction in Malaysia. Just last week, Bank Negara Malaysia 
issued  a  discussion  paper  which  outlines  the  conditions  for  companies  to  test  financial 
technology (also known as “fintech”) innovations in a safe environment. This responds to the 
innovations  that  we  have  seen  emerge  in  the  financial  services  industry;  many  of  them 
tapping  into  opportunities  now  made  possible  by  technology  to  enhance  the  customer 
experience, improve risk management and lower the costs of providing financial services. 
The insurance industry itself has just entered the first phase in the progressive liberalization 
of the motor and fire insurance tariffs which began on 1 July this year. After over 30 years 
during  which  more  than  60%  of  the  general  insurance  market  has  been  regulated  under 
tariffs,  this  is  arguably  the  most  significant  reform  of  the  general  insurance  market  in 
decades. The implications of the reform are much wider than just an adjustment to premium 
levels.  It  will  pave  the  way  for  a  new  wave  of  product  innovation,  significantly  expanding 
choices for consumers. It will improve incentives for safe driving behaviours and better risk 
management  practices  by  both  risk  owners  and  insurers.  And  it  will  address  market 
distortions which have threatened access to motor insurance, particularly for higher risks. 
This  is  also  a  time  when  businesses  and  households  are  facing  rising  costs  and  more 
uncertain conditions which can adversely affect discretionary spending on insurance. At the 
same  time,  the  exposures  of  households  and  businesses  which  insurance  is  designed  to 
protect,  have  actually  increased  as  evidenced  by  more  frequent  and  severe  incidents  of 
natural and man-made disasters. 
All  of  these  developments  raise  critical  questions  for  insurance  agents.  One  question  that 
comes up time and again is: Will insurance agents continue to be relevant? If you are in this 
room  today,  then  I  assume  you  will  agree  with  me  that  the  answer  is  clearly  ‘yes’.  But  I 
believe  you  are  also  here  because  there  is  a  recognition  that  agents  will  have  to  evolve. 
Even if some of you were not completely convinced of this before, that reality surely can no 
longer be ignored or dismissed. So the more important question then is how agents can be a 
meaningful part of this change in order to advance the important benefits of insurance for the 
economy and the wider society? 
Today in Malaysia, the general insurance penetration level measured in terms of premiums 
as a share of GDP stands at less than 2% (1.68% as at end 2015). In comparison, premiums 
as a share of GDP are about 3 to 4% in more developed markets. There is reason to believe 
that  the  extent  of  underinsurance  is  widening  given  the  growth  in  economic  activity  and 
higher risk exposures. As an example, during the December 2014 flooding in the east coast 
of Malaysia, total economic losses were RM2.6 billion while insured losses paid nationwide 
as at end-2015 was close to RM100 million, which is only a fraction of total economic losses. 
Some of the more important reasons for underinsurance include a lack of risk awareness and 
the lack of affordable products particularly for low income groups. Another important reason, 
and one that the Bank has also observed more widely in our work on market conduct issues, 
is a lack of trust in insurance providers and intermediaries. For most people, any insurance 
that they buy, with the exception of required insurance coverage for regulatory or financing 
purposes, would have been on the recommendation of an agent, broker or financial adviser. 
Yet, the same people who have purchased insurance products on the advice of their agents 
or advisers rarely express confidence that they really understand what they have purchased, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  if it was suitable for their circumstances, or even if it was the right amount of insurance. If 
their  experience  with  insurance  providers  or  intermediaries  later  disappoints,  particularly 
when they are trying to make a claim, their trust in the industry at large quickly erodes. 
Ultimately, the most important measure of success for the reforms that we are now pursuing 
in  the  general  insurance  industry  will  be  how  far  they  contribute  towards  addressing  the 
protection  gap  that  exists,  in  turn  strengthening  our  foundations  for  growth  and  stability. 
Today, I would like to talk about how agents have a key role in this process. 
In a more liberalised environment, insurers will have much greater flexibility in the design and 
pricing  of  products  based  on  their  respective  business  and  risk  strategies.  This  should 
encourage  pricing that  is  more  aligned  to  risks (let’s  call  this  point  “A”),  and  place  greater 
power  in  the  hands  of  consumers  to  manage  the  cost  of  insurance  by  controlling  the  risk 
factors that influence pricing (let’s call this point “B”). This in turn can make insurance more 
affordable for more people and businesses, especially small businesses. 
However,  interventions  by  an  agent  are  what  effectively  connects  points  “A”  and  “B”.  In  a 
detariffed environment, the number and range of risk factors that determine insurance prices 
are expected to expand. Consumers will also have more choice on the scope and level of 
protection that they purchase. Agents, having both direct access to consumers, and intimate 
knowledge  of  an  insurance  provider’s  underwriting  considerations  and  products,  are  best 
placed  to  explain  the  insurance  options  that  are  available  to  the  consumer  and  make 
recommendations on how to maximize the value of a purchase. 
A number of things will need to happen for agents to deliver on this expectation. First, agents 
will need to build their capacity to analyse consumer needs and risk profiles, and be able to 
match them efficiently to suitable products or combinations of products that are appropriate 
to  the  consumer.  In  practical  terms,  this  has  significant  implications  for  the  information 
systems  that  agencies  need  to  develop  and  maintain,  the  training,  development  and 
recruitment programs that they have in place, and the kind of information and support that 
they need to secure from insurers to enable them to properly advise consumers. 
The  role  of  agents  is  especially  important  for  an  orderly  transition  to  a  more  liberalized 
environment.  A  deeper  understanding  of  risks  developed  by  agents  can  help  address 
information gaps in the earlier stages of transition and prevent premiums from over or under-
shooting their technical levels. This in turn will reduce future volatility in premiums which is 
important to build confidence in the ability of insurers to meet their promises as expected. 
Consumers should also be informed that in the first year of transition, they can continue to 
maintain the same motor insurance coverage at prevailing tariff-rates. This is to provide an 
opportunity for the public to familiarize themselves with new product options that will become 
available – a process that agents will play a key role in helping with. 
Second, agents need to be able to provide higher and more unique value in their services, 
and  they  need  to  be  able  to  do  this  in  a  highly  flexible  way.  Going  forward,  insurers  are 
expected  to  leverage  more  extensively  on  direct  channels  to  distribute  their  products  and 
communicate  with  customers.  With  digitisation  and  other  new  technologies,  not  just  in 
insurance  but  across  all  other financial  and  non-financial  services, the  costs  of  distribution 
and  managing  customer  relationships  can  be  greatly  reduced  with  expanded  reach. 
Digitisation is also expected to give rise to new entrants into the insurance value-chain such 
as  product  aggregators,  which  will  allow  consumers  to  easily  compare  product  features, 
providers,  coverage  and  price.  These  developments  will  drive  the  increasing  adoption  of 
multi-channel distribution strategies. 
The implications for agents will be a greater need to specialise and to be able to do so while 
seamlessly integrating with different and more diverse contact points with consumers. This 
will  require  innovative  business  models  as  parts  of  the  distribution  chain  become 
commoditised.  For  example,  agents  may  specialise  in  more  complex  product  offerings, 
provide  more  tailored  advice,  improve  the  customer  experience  by  deploying  new 
technologies and reaching out to untapped consumer segments. As greater efficiencies drive 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  down  costs,  fees  and  commissions  will  increasingly  be  tied  to  the  breadth  and  depth  of 
services provided by agents. This in turn will contribute towards lifting productivity and the 
value of jobs in the industry, including that of the agency force. 
Third, insurance agents will need to embrace a broader role in the education of consumers. 
Over the years, Bank Negara Malaysia working together with the insurance associations has 
invested  significantly  in  informing  the  public  about  insurance  through  our  financial  literacy 
initiatives.  We  have  come  a  long  way  in  this  process.  Today,  schoolchildren  as  young  as 
10 years of age will already be introduced to insurance through subjects taught in the formal 
school  curriculum.  By  2021,  we  expect  to  complete  the  process  of  integrating  financial 
education  content  in  the  formal  school  curriculum  at  all  levels  of  primary  and  secondary 
education. 
We have also continued to expand the ways in which we reach consumers, through different 
mediums  and  leveraging  in  particular  on  social  media.  We  have  adopted  a  life  cycle 
approach  to  guide  education  initiatives,  so  that  education  content  is  more  targeted  and 
delivered when consumers are most responsive to receiving information. And we continue to 
adapt  our  education  content  so  that  it  remains  relevant  and  current  to  the  issues  and 
experiences that consumers face. 
In  parallel  with  these  efforts,  agents  will  have  a  more  important  role  going  forward.  With 
greater proliferation of online avenues for consumers to obtain information, contacts between 
agents  and  consumers  are  likely  to  be  more  targeted  and  specific  in  nature.  Consumer 
needs and appetite for advice  will also be greater in a more diverse insurance landscape. 
This  opens  up  an  enormous  opportunity  to  tap  into  the  potential  for  the  more  than 
100,000-strong life and general insurance agency force to play a much more active role in 
educating  consumers  on  the  importance  of  insurance  protection,  on  how  to  evaluate  their 
insurance needs, and on making informed choices about the insurance options available. 
It is often joked that an insurance agent can persuade you to buy almost anything. Imagine 
what  we  could  achieve  by  more  effectively  mobilizing  such  a  powerful  persuasive  force  to 
communicate  essential  and  life-changing  messages  on  the  importance  of  insurance.  The 
ability of agents to distinguish this role from the sales process is also important. This should 
be  further  developed  by  the  representative  bodies  of  agents  as  part  of  a  professional 
commitment of all agents to promote sound financial and risk management. 
Finally, agents need to engender the type of trust that is built on a solid track record of quality 
professional service that places the long term interests of consumers front and centre. With 
more than 39,000 general insurance agents registered with PIAM, agents continue to have 
the  widest  outreach  of  any  distribution  channel,  accounting  for  over  63%  of  general 
insurance  revenues.  With  such  reach,  agents  wield  significant  influence  over  how  people 
perceive  and  experience  insurance.  This  in  turn  affects  not  only  decisions  to  purchase 
insurance; it can also affect the value that is derived from insurance coverage. 
For 
the 
responsibilities  that  insurers  and  agents  have  to  treat  customers  fairly.  Our  supervisory 
reviews  show  that  while  most  agents  are  honest  and  professional,  there  continue  to  be 
agents who have knowingly mis-sold products. We have and will continue to take firm actions 
against such agents and the insurers which failed to implement adequate controls to prevent 
these incidents. The Bank is also developing standards on the fair treatment of consumers to 
set out our expectations on fair dealings. This includes an expectation that consumers are 
provided  with  products  that  perform  as  insurers  and  agents  have  led  them  to  expect,  and 
services  associated  with  the  product  meet  acceptable  standards  and  are  consistent  with 
specific representations made when the product was sold. We will hold insurers accountable 
for ensuring that agents comply with these standards, and we will expect agents to align the 
way  that  they  engage  with  consumers  to  meet  these  expectations.  For  many  agents  who 
have placed the consumer at the heart of their business, this will not have a material effect 
on their conduct or business. But for agents that have largely thrived on just closing sales, 
these  reasons,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  places  significant 
importance  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  this  will  provide  an  important  catalyst  for  transforming  agents  into  trusted  and  dependable 
advisers. 
Conclusion 
Over  the  next  5  to  10  years,  the  insurance  industry  will  undergo  its  most  significant 
transformation,  possibly  since  the  early  1990s  when  the  insurance  regulatory  system  in 
Malaysia was overhauled. During this period, the insurance landscape is expected to change 
in ways that will have a direct and profound impact on the experience that consumers and 
businesses have with insurance. As major intermediaries between insurance providers and 
consumers  of  insurance  products  and  services,  how  insurance  agents  think  about  their 
business  and  interact  with  their  customers  can  make  an  important  difference  in  helping 
millions of individuals, families and businesses across the country who remain ill-prepared for 
losses arising from unforeseen events. Addressing this protection gap is ultimately the goal 
that we must all aspire to, to promote a resilient economy and the well-being of our society. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
