   Luigi Federico Signorini: Policy and regulatory issues confronting the 
current global economic and financial environment 
Keynote address by Mr Luigi Federico Signorini, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the 
International  Finance  Corporation,  7th  Annual  Global  Trade  Partners  Meeting,  Milan, 
17 February 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to this important conference. Trade is key to prosperity and finance 
is key to the development of trade. The role that monetary policy and financial regulation play 
in ensuring a stable and efficient financial environment is therefore, I believe, of interest to this 
audience. Without any pretence of generality, in my speech I shall take up a selection of policy 
and  regulatory  issues  confronting  the  global  economic  and  financial  environment  at  the 
moment and discuss briefly the policy response and agenda. 
Inflation 
Low inflation remains a challenge, in the euro area and beyond. We in the Eurosystem take 
this risk very seriously. 
 The adverse effects of a long period of low inflation are well known. When the economy is at 
the lower bound of nominal interest rates, the room for conventional monetary policy shrinks. 
Since debt contracts are fixed in nominal terms, a fall in inflation increases the ex-post real 
debt burden for borrowers; with long-dated debt this effect may persist for years. With very low 
inflation even otherwise favourable supply shocks, like the effects of increased supply on fuel 
prices, may not be an unmixed blessing. Research at the Bank of Italy has shown that, when 
the zero lower bound is binding, even a negative cost-push shock may generate a negative 
and protracted decline in output.1 
A protracted period of low inflation and a string of negative inflation surprises increase the risk 
of de-anchoring of long-run inflation expectations. A symptom of this risk is the tendency of 
long-term inflation expectations to move together with short-term expectations. Some of the 
studies we have conducted at the Bank of Italy show that this risk is material, but also that it 
can be countered:2 the correlation of long- and short-term expectations in the euro area has 
increased, but the announcements of monetary policy measures have had a perceptible impact 
in weakening this correlation. 
The aim of the decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB is to counter the risk of 
persistent  downward  pressures  in  prices.  Our  assessment  is  that  the  effects  of  the  Asset 
Purchase Programme (APP) on financial markets and on the real economy, in the euro area 
and in Italy, have been significant and largely consistent with our initial estimates. 
Between  November  2014  and  the  beginning  of  January  2016,  the  yields  on  ten-year 
government securities  decreased  by  about  40  basis  points  in  the  euro area,  and  by  about 
90 basis points in Italy; the adjustment of portfolios towards assets in other currencies led to a 
depreciation of the euro of 13 per cent against the dollar and 6 per cent in nominal effective 
terms. Credit supply conditions also improved: the cost of new loans to firms has declined by 
                                                
1  Neri and Notarpietro, 2014. 
2  Cecchetti, Natoli and Sigalotti, 2015. Natoli and Sigalotti, 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   70 basis points since mid-2014 in the euro area (120 basis points in this country). This is pretty 
much in line with what we initially expected.3 
Estimates made at the beginning of last year indicated that the APP would have a significant 
effect on GDP and on inflation in the euro area; for Italy, we estimated a cumulative effect on 
GDP of 1.4 percentage points over two years and an increase in inflation of 0.5 percentage 
points per year. In the past 12 months, the expansion of world trade has fallen short of what 
was expected; the negative contribution of commodity prices to inflation is now much greater 
than  initially  assumed.  Nonetheless,  GDP  has  so  far  grown  in  line  with  expectations  and 
projections for 2016 have remained virtually unchanged, thanks to the on-going shift towards 
a more domestic driven recovery; headline inflation was in line with the projections until the 
autumn, although it decreased significantly in December and January. The more favourable 
financing conditions and the depreciation of the euro associated with the ECB’s unconventional 
measures have largely offset the effects of a less benign external environment on economic 
activity. But the risk that they may again start to affect long-term inflation expectations must be 
countered. 
Despite the positive effects of the programme, the current inflation outlook is not yet in line with 
the objective of monetary policy. This reflects global headwinds, which have been – and still 
are – much stronger than was expected when the programme was launched. 
The  persistent  weakness  in  inflation  suggests  that  continued  action  is  still  needed  on  the 
monetary  side.  The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  will  review  and  possibly  reconsider  its 
monetary policy stance at the next meeting in early March.4 As President Draghi re-affirmed, 
we do not give up pursuing our mandate. 
Banks 
Banks’ stocks have had a rough start to 2016. As of yesterday, in the US, the euro area and 
Italy, banks’ stock prices have fallen by about 19, 24 and 29 per cent, respectively, year-to-
date, and by 20, 30 and 28 per cent year-on-year. 
Increased  uncertainty  in  the  global  economy  has  surely  contributed  to  a  revision  in 
expectations of banking profits. Furthermore, a factor in the eyes of the markets may be the 
effect of regulation and especially of capital requirements as the closing round of the Basel III 
standards approaches. 
Basel III has indeed increased capital requirements in quantity and quality. This was necessary 
in the wake of the financial crisis, which exposed weaknesses in the previous international 
framework, especially a treatment of trading-book risks that was too lenient and a definition of 
capital  that  was  too  lax.  Regulators  have  succeeded  in  strengthening  the  capital  basis  of 
banks. Capital ratios, besides being a multiple of what they used to be years ago, are also 
defined in a much more robust way. While this may have had a negative impact on return on 
equity in the short-to-medium run, it has increased the resilience of the banking system and 
should ensure a more sustainable level of profitability, net of risks, in the longer term. 
Many changes, however, have already been implemented and, one assumes, have also been 
amply digested by the markets. The concern today is that a number of final pieces still missing 
to complete the Basel III standards (such as finalising the leverage ratio, constraining internal 
models and completing the review of the OpRisk and Trading Book frameworks) will end by 
significantly increasing banks’ capital requirement again. 
On this I need to be clear: I do not think that a further significant increase is justified; neither is 
it envisaged. While individual increases may be appropriate for outliers, the overall result of 
                                                
3  Cova and Ferrero, 2015. 
4  Draghi, 2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   this final round of rule-making should be broadly neutral. This is not just my personal view: the 
Basel group of Governors and Heads of Supervision said as much in their January statement. 
As a member of the Basel Committee and of various Financial Stability Board structures, I am 
committed to work towards ensuring that this aim is duly pursued at the technical level. 
In Europe certain further factors need to be considered. 
With 2016 the European Banking Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) has come into 
full force. Investors know that they may be called upon to take losses in the event of a bank’s 
distress, with public support a more remote possibility. The shift of the burden of bank crises 
from public to private capital was a conscious political decision at the European level; that this 
would reflect on the market valuation of banks’ capital and debt was to be expected. However, 
there are elements that have increased market uncertainty and sensitivity and that need to be 
taken into account when, as already foreseen, the BRRD is revised in the light of experience, 
as Governor Visco recently said. It is especially important that the European concept of ‘bail-
in-able’  instruments  is  brought  as  fully  as  possible  into  line  with  international  standards 
(reference here is to the TLAC concept), ensuring legal certainty, awareness of investors and 
a clear procedure in the event of resolution. 
Furthermore,  there  seem  to  be  lingering  market  concerns  in  Europe  about  legacy  assets. 
Opaque financial assets are one issue that needs to be tackled. In this speech I intend to 
concentrate on non-performing loans (NPL). 
The global financial  crisis  and the  ensuing recession  caused  a  deterioration  in  bank  credit 
portfolios. According to a recent analysis by the IMF5), NPLs in the European Union countries 
more than doubled between 2009 and 2014. The increase in NPLs is therefore by no means 
unique to Italy: however, as their level as a proportion of loans is especially high in this country, 
let me confront the issue head on. 
There are two reasons for the high NPL/loans ratio in Italy. The first is structural: procedures 
for recovering a credit in the case of default or distress of a borrower are typically lengthy in 
this country, which means that, all else being equal, NPLs stay on a bank’s balance sheet for 
longer and therefore their ratio to outstanding loans at any given moment is higher6. 
The second reason is that in Italy the length and severity of the recession was unique among 
major European countries, with a fall in GDP of almost 10 per cent, and in industrial production 
of almost a quarter, from peak to trough (2008 to 2014). This took a toll on banks. Banks in 
Italy  mostly  have  a  traditional  business  model  and  tend  to  stick  to  the  core  business  of 
commercial banking. The Italian banking system therefore shouldered the first phase of the 
financial crisis fairly well, owing to its negligible exposure to toxic assets. But this also meant 
that it was affected by the deterioration in the economic situation: provisions for credit losses 
absorbed on average more than 95 per cent of operating profits over 2012–2014. 
That said, let me say clearly that concerns are vastly overrated. While they depressed bank 
profitability for a few years, hefty provisions (spurred by supervisory action, first by the Bank 
of Italy alone, then by the Single Supervisory Mechanism) meant that the coverage ratio of 
NPLs in Italian banks grew from 39 to 45 per cent between 2012 and 2015. Within the broader 
category of NPLs, provisions for “sofferenze” (loans to debtors in full distress) reach 60 per 
cent of gross amounts. Moreover, around two thirds of NPLs are collateralised. Increases in 
capital ratios have also been substantial. Provisioning levels for NPLs are currently in line with 
IMF, 2015b. 
                                                
5 
6  Our estimates suggest that a reduction of two years in credit recovery times could substantially decrease, by up 
to one half in steady state, the ratio of bad debt to total loans. This suggests that government action to reduce 
the length of judicial procedures is a key ingredient for a reduction of the stock. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   the European average and no new requests for higher provision levels or capital are foreseen, 
as President Draghi recently clarified. 
As the economic landscape gradually improves, the flow of new NPLs has trended down over 
the past two years. The rate of new non-performing loans stood at 3.6 per cent in the third 
quarter of 2015, more than two percentage points below the peak reached at the end of 2013. 
Our models forecast a further steady reduction in 2016. 
Running down the existing stock of NPLs will, of course, take time. Let me mention, however, 
a series of developments in this respect. Last year the Italian bankruptcy law was amended, 
with several provisions intended to facilitate out-of-court restructuring agreements and shorten 
court  proceedings  for  forced  sales  of  collateral.  Additional  measures  have  recently  been 
announced by the Government. As a result, the length of bankruptcy procedures is expected 
to diminish appreciably. This will reduce the time NPLs stay on banks’ balance sheets and at 
the same time is expected to improve the secondary market for bad loans. The tax treatment 
of  loan  losses,  which  used  to  be  extremely  unfavourable  for  Italian  banks,  has  also  been 
brought broadly into line with practices elsewhere. Finally, a recent agreement between the 
Ministry of Economy and Finance and the European Commission will introduce a government 
guarantee  scheme  for  senior  tranches  of  securitised  bad  loans,  which  is  also  expected  to 
support the secondary market. 
Macro-prudential policy 
I shall now move away from Italy, back to more general issues, and talk briefly about macro-
prudential policies, a set of tools which in the past few years has started to complement two 
long-established ones (monetary policy and prudential supervision) in the overall pursuit of 
financial stability. The macro-prudential policy set sits on the intersection of the other two sets. 
Europe, as you will know, now has a rather developed set of rules and institutions to apply 
macro-prudential measures; other jurisdictions have been experimenting with them to various 
degrees. 
Much has been written about macro-prudential policy, but as it is still, comparatively speaking, 
in its infancy, much is yet to be learned about its working and potential. This is not the occasion 
for a comprehensive treatment of such a large subject. I would like to offer just two points for 
reflection. 
First, the relation between macro-prudential and monetary policies should be well understood. 
Macro-prudential policy is not meant to undo what monetary policy does; in this respect, it is 
useful  that  monetary  authorities  have  a  significant  responsibility  in  the  decision-making 
process for macro-prudential measures in many jurisdictions. More specifically, if monetary 
policy is enacted with a view to fostering bank lending generally, it would make little sense to 
use  macro-prudential  tools  to  restrict  bank  lending  generally  as  well.  On  the  other  hand, 
carefully targeted macro-prudential measures do have a role to play in tackling any undesired 
side-effects  of  monetary  policy  in  specific  sectors  or  markets:  think,  for  example,  of  a  real 
estate market bubble in any particular country of the euro area. We have had many examples 
of measures enacted to that effect in Europe recently. They should be seen as complementary 
to monetary policy, not undermining it. 
Second, macro-prudential measures should not be seen in isolation and it is important to think 
jointly about micro- and macro-prudential regulation. The line between the two regimes is thin: 
on the one hand, because they rely on a largely overlapping set of policy tools; on the other, 
because when micro-prudential policies are implemented simultaneously on the entire banking 
system (as with the introduction of new prudential standards), this has macro implications that 
should not be overlooked. Consequently, I think that we should develop an ability to understand 
and measure what I term the ‘overall prudential stance’, that is to say, the combined effect of 
all prudential measures, and to do so in a way that is comparable to the way we understand 
and measure the monetary or fiscal stance. Today, we have no such measure, either in the 
euro area or globally. Understanding the way prudential action works at the macro level is 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   more challenging than in the case of monetary or fiscal action because (i) the micro and macro 
policy frameworks are different, with separate governance structures; (ii) each comprises a 
large set of policy tools; (iii) these tools can vary across countries; and (iv) we still know too 
little, as I said, about transmission mechanisms. But constructing a holistic measure of the 
prudential stance, difficult as it may be, is an important research and policy programme. 
Non-banks 
Stricter regulation of banks is one factor behind the increase in non-bank financing, especially 
market-based  funding,  that  we  have  seen  in  the  past  few  years.  A  more  diversified  set  of 
financial channels is welcome, especially in Europe where the composition of firm financing 
appears to be too heavily tilted towards bank financing. The increase in non-bank financing, 
however, poses a whole range of regulatory questions that I cannot cover extensively here. 
Let  me  point to  a couple  of  issues,  specifically  concerning  asset management companies, 
which I think deserve attention at the present juncture. 
Market-based funding sits at a crossroads between market and prudential regulation, often 
done by separate regulators with different mandates, and I think that the importance of the 
latter has increased. Asset managers now operate with larger portfolios, but in a context of 
thinner market liquidity. The main concern is the potential interaction between reach for yield, 
possible undervaluation of credit and liquidity risks and a decline in secondary market liquidity. 
Under stressed conditions, this may result in rapid asset re-pricing in certain markets such as 
corporate  bond  markets.  These  potential  liquidity  strains  may  be  increased  by  the  recent 
growth  in  assets  under  management  in  open-ended  mutual  funds  that  invest  in  less  liquid 
assets while offering on-demand liquidity to their unit-holders. 
The risk of fire sales triggered by massive redemption requests to open-ended funds which 
invest in illiquid, long-term securities, while remote, should not, therefore, be overlooked. This 
would call for policies to limit the funds’ structural liquidity and maturity transformation, such as 
some alignment of redemption rules with the asset classes the fund is allowed to invest in (Italy 
has some such regulations in place). Authorities should also consider whether and how to 
incorporate investment funds into system-wide stress testing exercises, to form a view on how 
funds’  selling  impacts  the  market  and  how  this  in  turn  feeds  back  into  funds’  asset  price 
declines  and  further  redemptions.  Finally,  data  gaps  (concerning  e.g.  investment  funds’ 
leverage, liquidity and maturity transformation) should be addressed; in awareness of this, the 
Bank of Italy is contributing to the Data Gap Initiative launched by the G20 Finance Ministers 
and Central Bank Governors in October 2009 and expanded in 2015. 
Capital flows in emerging market economies 
The final point I would like to touch on concerns the risk of capital flow reversals in Emerging 
Market Economies (EMEs), a risk that is frequently mentioned in the flagship reports of the 
international financial institutions and deserves attention. Two main developments have, in my 
view, contributed to the evolution of this risk in the last decade. 
First, global factors have assumed an increasing role as driver of capital flows towards EMEs. 
It  is  now  largely  accepted  that  major  capital  flow  episodes  (surges,  sudden  stops,  flights, 
retrenchments) can be associated with the evolution of global factors (i.e. global risk aversion, 
global interest rates, global growth).7 Recently, the IMF8 has provided a thorough analysis of 
the mechanisms driving the strong increase in the corporate debt of non-financial firms across 
major EMEs. One of the points emphasised by the IMF’s analysis – based on micro data – is 
                                                
7  Forbes and Warnock, 2012. Rey (2013) highlights the co-movements of different classes of capital flows with 
global factors. 
IMF, 2015a. 
8 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   that firm and country specific characteristics appear to have become less and less relevant, 
compared with global factors, in explaining leverage growth, issuance and spreads in emerging 
markets. 
Second, the composition of capital flows towards EMEs has changed. While, up to a few years 
ago, cross-border banking flows were the main driver of the increase in capital flows towards 
EMEs,  more  recently  portfolio  flows  have  grown  in  importance.  Low  yields  in  advanced 
economies (AEs) have spurred an extensive search for yield. An increasing fraction of global 
capital has been allocated to governments and corporations in EMEs, with large inflows into 
cyclical sectors like mining and energy. At the same time banks have been retrenching from 
some activities and risks, not least because of the new post-crisis regulation. Although bank 
loans still account for the largest share of EME debt, the share of bonds has nearly doubled 
over the last decade, and increased issuance has been largely absorbed by investment funds 
held by individuals and institutions domiciled in the AEs. 
These two developments have increased the potential exposure of EMEs to extreme capital 
flow episodes and altered the effectiveness of the policy tools which can be used to limit the 
inherent risks. 
One issue is extending some elements of the prudential framework to the non-banking sector, 
something I have just mentioned. 
Another  issue  concerns  the  effectiveness  of  the  global  financial  safety  net  (GFSN).  Key 
components  of  the  GFSN  are  each  country’s  own  FX  reserves,  Regional  Financing 
Arrangements resources and IMF resources. Regional Financing Arrangements have grown 
in  importance  in  recent  years  (the  European  ESM  and  the  BRICS’  Contingent  Reserve 
Arrangement are two examples). Also, the financial crisis has highlighted the importance of 
central  bank  swap  arrangements  –  including  the  conversion  of  temporary  bilateral  liquidity 
swap arrangements into standing arrangements. 
Achieving consensus on the required size and the most useful role for each component is a 
clear priority at the G20 level and one of the main aims of the Chinese presidency. 
Regarding the size, i.e. the amount of resources needed to confront a sudden stop crisis, the 
evidence  seems  to  show  that  overall  existing  effective  resources  in  the  GFSN  would  be 
sufficient in most plausible scenarios, provided all components can be effectively put to use; 
in the case of a systemic sudden stop scenario, the IMF’s resources would be called upon to 
play a key role.9 The last point has implications for the discussion of the Fund’s resources that 
is  to take  place  in  the  coming months,  specifically  concerning  extending  the  2012  bilateral 
loans and raising the overall IMF quotas in the context of the XV General Review of Quotas. 
Of course, the existence of a carefully designed and properly sized GFSN does not reduce the 
role that macro-prudential policy needs to play in limiting the risk and the consequences of 
extreme capital flow episodes in EMEs. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Trade is one of the hallmarks of civilisation. In the semi-brutish state of bellum omnium contra 
omnes, the war of all against all that certain old philosophers assumed to have existed before 
the emergence of civilised polities, trade would have been next to impossible. Trade flourishes 
on physical security, legal certainty, honesty, and peace. 
It also needs technology, another feature of human civilisation, and not just for the physical 
delivery of goods and services, as this audience knows perfectly. From barter to specie, to fiat 
money and letters of credit, to the more complex arrangements of today’s trade finance, the 
                                                
9  Denbee, Jung and Paternò (2016). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   progress in credit and payments technology has multiplied the potential prosperity gains from 
trade. 
Financial technology, however, like all technology, carries risks as well as the ability to increase 
productivity. Global financial regulation has to adapt to the evolution of finance. 
I have taken this opportunity to review some current issues in financial policy and regulation. 
Much progress has been made in making the international financial system more resilient. The 
effort  will  not  stop.  Risks  evolve  and  alertness  to  new  risks  is  essential.  The  international 
regulatory and monetary policy community is, and must remain, fully aware of this need. 
References 
Cecchetti,  S.,  F.  Natoli,  L.  Sigalotti  (2015),  ‘Tail  comovement  in  option-implied  inflation 
expectations  as  an  indicator  of  anchoring’,  Banca  d’Italia,  Temi  di  Discussione  (Working 
Papers), No. 1025 
Cova  P.,  G.  Ferrero  (2015),  ‘The  eurosystem’s  asset  purchase  programmes  for  monetary 
policy purposes’, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 
270 
Denbee, E., C. Jung, F. Paternò (2016), ‘Stitching together the global financial safety net’, 
Bank of England Financial Stability Paper, No. 36 
Draghi  M.  (2016),  Introductory  statement  to  the  press  conference,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  21 
January 2016 
Forbes K. J., F. E. Warnock (2012), ‘Capital flow waves: surge, stop, flight and retrenchment’, 
Journal of International Economics, No. 88: 235–251 
IMF  (2015a),  ‘Corporate  leverage  in  emerging  markets  –  a  concern?’,  chapter  3,  Global 
Financial Stability Report, October 2015 
IMF (2015b) ‘A Strategy for Resolving Europe’s Problem Loans’, September 2015, IMF Staff 
Discussion Note, No. 19 
Natoli F., L. Sigalotti (2016), ‘An indicator of inflation expectations anchoring’, Banca d’Italia, 
mimeo 
Neri  S.,  A.  Notarpietro  (2014),  ‘Inflation,  debt  and  the  zero  lower  bound’,  Banca  d’Italia 
Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 242 
Rey  H.  (2013),  ‘Dilemma  not  trilemma.  The  global  financial  cycle  and  monetary  policy 
independence’, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
