   François Villeroy de Galhau: Developments in Europe against the 
background of global uncertainties 
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Paris 
Europlace International Financial Forum, New York City, 18 April 2016. 
 In 2016, the world in general, and Europe in particular, is experiencing a period of uncertainty: 
uncertainties relating to our security, with the threat of terrorist attacks; political uncertainties, 
with the risk of a “Brexit” and the refugee crisis; as well as economic uncertainties, with lower 
economic growth in emerging economies, including China, and high market volatility at the 
beginning of the year. Nevertheless, recovery is underway in Europe.  
As you may know, a meeting of the ECB Governing Council will be held in two days, so I have 
to respect a silent period on monetary policy matters. But I can emphasize that, in response to 
weak inflation and heightened uncertainties, the Eurosystem, of which the Banque de France 
is a member, has been acting decisively. And European countries have been implementing 
structural reforms since the onset of the crisis.  
Those  national  efforts  are  crucial,  but  we  need  to  go  further  with  more  coordination: 
coordination to direct savings towards projects and countries that need them; coordination of 
the reforms themselves at the European level.  
1/ Changes in economic conditions  
[Slide 2] Economic growth in Europe recovered markedly in 2015 and is expected to get firmer 
in 2016 and 2017, notably thanks to the dynamism of the German and Spanish economies 
and, to a lesser extent, to France and Italy.  
Labour market conditions are improving and unemployment is receding. In the euro area, the 
unemployment rate is at its lowest level for four years. However, it is still too high.  
In France, growth remains moderate. It reached 1.2% in 2015, up from 0.2% in 2014, and 
should stay at least at this level in 2016 and 2017. Nonetheless, the business climate indicator1 
improved throughout the year, and in January 2016 reached its highest level for four years.  
2/ Inflation developments  
[Slide 3] In 2015, inflation was nil in the euro area, well below the Eurosystem objective of an 
inflation  rate  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  Inflation  has  even  dipped 
temporarily into negative territory, with prices falling 0.1% year-on-year in March. However, 
this decline is mostly related to energy prices: core inflation was 1% in the same month. Oil 
prices seem to have bottomed out and this should help inflation return to positive territory over 
the  course  of  2016,  thereby  lowering  real  interest  rates  and making  monetary  policy  more 
effective.  
[Slide 4] The new comprehensive package of measures adopted on 10 March 2016 made euro 
area monetary policy more accommodative. One of its distinctive features is that it targets the 
financing  of  the  real  economy.  The  new  series  of  targeted  refinancing  operations  (dubbed 
“TLTRO 2”) should improve medium-term funding conditions for banks and foster bank lending 
to companies and households.  
                                                
1  
INSEE: Indicateur de climat des affaires et de retournement conjoncturel. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   3/ Structural policies  
Moreover, monetary policy is not the only game in town. It is supported by structural reforms 
that increase potential growth, particularly in countries with a high unemployment rate.  
History has shown that ambitious reforms can contribute durably to growth. Sweden in the 
1990s  and  Germany  a  decade  later  have  demonstrated  that  structural  reforms  enhance 
employment rates, potential growth and resilience. They also reduce labour market duality, 
and provide more opportunities to new entrants in the labour market, particularly young people. 
In the wake of a severe crisis, Sweden and Germany rebuilt their economic models and, as a 
result, have been better able to weather the latest downturn.  
Indeed,  a  number  of  European  countries  are  conducting  major  reforms  to  bring  high  and 
sustainable  growth  back.  Those  reforms  are  particularly  challenging  when  it  comes  to  the 
labour  market,  but  they  are  needed.  We  need  to  improve  labour  flexibility  and  reduce  the 
duality in the labour market between permanent and temporary contracts, which generates 
both high structural unemployment and inequality.  
The most emblematic example is Spanish reforms. Their results are impressive, especially 
when  we  consider  the  very  difficult  economic  situation  in  the  country  during  their 
implementation.  Since  the  beginning  of  2013,  Spain  has  experienced  a  decrease  in  its 
unemployment rate of some 6 percentage points and Spanish growth is nowadays one of the 
main drivers of the European recovery.  
Contrary to preconceptions, France has also demonstrated in the past its capacity to meet the 
challenge of economic and social reform. In the 1990s, to prepare for the introduction of the 
euro, France pursued a competitive disinflation policy that proved highly effective. Remember 
that in the late 1990s, France experienced the highest GDP growth and the weakest inflation 
rate among European countries, along with a significant fall in its unemployment rate.  
Today, French reforms are heading in the right direction, [Slide 5] in particular the tax credit 
for competitiveness and investment (CICE) and the Responsibility and Solidarity Pact (RSP) 
that  enhance  the  competitive  strength  of  the  French  economy.  A  policy  of  administrative 
simplification, the so-called ‘simplification shock’, and a new law to sustain economic growth 
and  entrepreneurship  (‘loi  Macron’),  are  also  being  conducted  in  order  to  rebuild  business 
confidence. However, we are not there yet and a number of reforms need to be complemented. 
In particular, in the labour market: hopefully renewed progress will be made with the draft law 
under discussion in Parliament.  
Finally, in the euro area, fiscal policy is now more balanced since significant adjustment has 
already been achieved. Structural efforts and a growth recovery have led to a reduction in 
deficits and to a stabilisation in the ratio of debt to GDP.  
This more balanced policy mix is an opportunity to engage in new ways of thinking and to 
strengthen  the  recovery  via  stronger  economic  coordination  in  Europe.  The  room  for 
manoeuvre in economic policy is highly heterogeneous across European countries, and each 
country should use its capacity to improve the overall situation [Slide 6]. European countries 
have done quite a lot on their own, but now we can and must do more to coordinate demand-
side policies and structural reforms at the European level. To do so, I would like to make two 
proposals.  
4/ Strengthen Investment  
First, we need to improve investment financing [Slide 7]. Our efforts should be put towards 
financing growth and innovation and towards finding the right mix between debt and equity 
financing solutions, while still preserving financial stability and consumer protection. In the EU, 
the  European  Commission  has  launched  several  initiatives  to  serve  these  objectives, 
particularly the Investment Plan and the Capital Markets Union.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Second,  we  need  to  focus  on  removing  obstacles  to  investment,  providing  visibility  and 
technical  assistance  to  investment  projects  and  making  smarter  use  of  new  and  existing 
financial  resources.  The  European  Fund  for  Strategic  Investments  (EFSI)  drives  the 
Investment  Plan  for  Europe.  It  supports  strategic  investments  in  key  areas  such  as 
infrastructure, education, research, innovation, as well as risk finance for small businesses. 
Through the use of limited public guarantees, it aims to foster private investments totalling 
EUR  315  billion  in  three  years.  For  the  first  year,  the  Plan  managed  to  trigger  around 
EUR 76 billion of investment in Europe.  
The action plan on the “Capital Markets Union project”, launched in September 2015, aims at 
diversifying the way the European Union economy is financed. The objective is to achieve a 
better  balance  between  bank  credit  and  market-based  financing.  France  is  a  euro  area 
frontrunner in this field, with markets providing 40% of the financing for its economy. Various 
initiatives  are  already  well  underway,  like  the  framework  for  simple,  transparent  and 
comparable securitisation instruments, or the revision of capital requirements for investment 
in infrastructure by insurance companies.  
The  Juncker  Plan  and  the  Capital  Markets  Union  should  complement  each  other  and  the 
Banking Union, which is already in place, to fully deliver their results in terms of growth and 
investment. Therefore, I prefer the concept of a “Financing and Investment Union” rather than 
a “Capital Markets Union”, as it better reflects the ultimate objective which is growth, thanks to 
a better mix of financing instruments including, but not limited to, capital markets [Slide 8].  
Significant amounts of savings are available in the euro area and these should be directed 
towards long-term assets, as well as to those projects and countries that need them. Innovative 
schemes need to be developed at European level, such as European venture capital funds, in 
order to support the creation and growth of new businesses. The composition of investments 
is equally important, as too little money is devoted to R&D and long-term investments. We also 
need to encourage equity financing rather than debt funding.  
5/ Improve European economic governance  
The second idea I would like to share with you relates to economic governance in Europe. I 
believe we need to make progress towards a more economically integrated euro area. This is 
essential, regardless of whether or not the United Kingdom remains in the European Union. 
Naturally, I would like it to stay in. My point is not purely institutional. It is not about “more 
Brussels”,  it  is  about  more  growth  and  employment.  Indeed,  economists  estimate  that  the 
current lack of coordination between national economic policies has cost Europeans between 
two and five percentage points of GDP growth since 2011. Contrary to the case of monetary 
policy, the aim is not to fully integrate all of our economic policies at the European level, but to 
achieve a “full coordination” of fiscal and structural policies. For this, we need to have shared 
economic goals, and a true “collective strategy” for the euro area, in which each country has a 
role to play to improve everyone’s situation.  
This requires trust based on a clear pact: national reforms and, not or, European coordination. 
This  full  coordination  also  rests  on  the  setting  up  of  a  strong  and  legitimate  European 
institution: a euro area Finance Minister backed by a European Treasury system and subject 
to greater democratic accountability. This Finance Minister would be in charge of defining the 
collective  strategy,  supervising  its  decentralised  implementation  by  Member  States  and 
handling crisis management tools. Going forward, he/she could also be in charge of a common 
budget.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
