  Lesetja Kganyago: Inflation, but no jobs or growth – policy responses to 
South Africa’s economic challenges 
Address  by  Mr  Lesetja  Kganyago,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the 
Labour Law Conference, Johannesburg, 24 August 2016. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me here today to address this forum. 
South Africa is suffering from a combination of stagnant economic growth and rising inflation. 
The  economy  contracted  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  year,  and  although  the  second  quarter 
looks  considerably  better,  we  expect  no  growth  in  2016  overall  –  which  compares 
unfavourably  to  the  1,3  per  cent  achieved  in  2015  or  the  3  per  cent  average  since  1994. 
Furthermore,  for  the  first  time  since  the  global  financial  crisis,  we  expect  to  lose  jobs  this 
year, on a net basis. Yet even as economic growth and job creation stall, prices – fuelled by 
food price and currency shocks – as well as wages and salaries continue to increase above 
the  targeted  inflation  rate.1  This  keeps  headline  inflation  higher  than  economic  conditions 
warrant.  Underlying  this  inflation  outcome  is  a  set  of  markets,  rules  and  systems  that 
generate  strong  price,  wage  and  salary  pressures  and  play  a  large  role  in  generating  this 
combination of high inflation, high unemployment, and low growth. 
Today,  I  will  discuss  policy  options  for  addressing  this  problem,  including  the  contribution 
from monetary policy. 
One of the things we need is for price and wage demands to abide by the inflation target, so 
that we achieve a lower inflation rate more consistently. Attaining these outcomes will require 
change, including institutional reforms. And reforms will create space for monetary policy. We 
would prefer not to tighten policy during a slowdown, but as long as our economy is geared 
to produce weak growth and high inflation, we have to do just that. Higher inflation begets 
higher  interest  rates.  Lower  inflation,  alternatively,  enhances  the  competitiveness  of  the 
economy  and  reduces  interest  rates,  supporting  investment,  job  creation,  and  poverty 
reduction. 
South Africa as a labour market outlier 
South Africa’s unemployment rates, narrowly defined, have exceeded 20 per cent since the 
early 1990s. From a comparative perspective, sustained unemployment rates at these levels 
are  very  rare.  At  the  moment,  according  to  data  published  by  the  International  Monetary 
Fund (IMF), they are shared by just four other countries. Two of these are Greece and Spain, 
which  have  suffered  intense  and  prolonged  economic  crises.2  But  both  expect  to  see 
unemployment  decline  in  the  next  few  years.  In  fact,  Spanish  data  in  May  showed 
unemployment  falling  to  just  under  20  per  cent  for  the  first  time  since  the  global  financial 
crisis. In South Africa, no such improvement is being forecast. In fact, the IMF numbers show 
our unemployment deteriorating, from about 25 per cent now to around 27 per cent in three 
years’ time. 
                                                
1  Over  the  past  five  years,  average  wages  and  salaries  have  consistently  outpaced  inflation.  From  2011  to 
2015, annual headline inflation stood at 5 per cent, 5,7 per cent, 5,8 per cent, 6,1 per cent and 4,6 per cent. 
Average wages and salaries, by contrast, grew by 7,6 per cent, 7,5 per cent, 9,3 per cent, 7,7 per cent and 
8,5 per cent over the same period. Employment growth has slowed every year from 2011 to 2015. 
2  The other two are Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. These are 
more complicated cases than Greece or Spain, but both were affected by the violent breakup of Yugoslavia 
and the loss of historical markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  It is quite extraordinary for unemployment to remain so high throughout an economic cycle. 
Compare South Africa with Brazil, a country similar in many ways. When Brazil’s economy 
boomed,  unemployment  fell  to  below  5  per  cent.  Since  then,  Brazil  has  fallen  into  a  deep 
recession,  with  growth  close  to  minus  4  per  cent  in  each  of  the  past two  years,  the  worst 
performance in a century, including the Great Depression. 
Unemployment has more than doubled; it is now over 10 per cent. This is a terrible economic 
experience. But if we could get unemployment in South Africa to 10 per cent, that would be 
viewed  as  a  tremendous  success. There  isn’t much to  envy  about  Brazil’s  economy  these 
days, but I would happily take their unemployment rates. 
Many observers look at South Africa’s levels of joblessness and reflexively describe them as 
unsustainable. But they have persisted for around two decades, so it is a bold prediction to 
say  that  they  cannot  continue.  A  better  interpretation  is  that  we  have  very  unusual,  even 
unnatural, labour market dynamics. This implies that we have vast scope for improvement. 
Almost every other country has a larger share of its people in work – and most have a larger 
share participating in the workforce. 
The National Development Plan sets unemployment goals of 14 per cent by 2020 and 6 per 
cent by 2030. For labour force participation rates, the plan envisions 60 per cent by 2020 and 
65 per cent by 2030, up from the estimated 56 per cent today.3 We don’t have to achieve a 
world-beating  performance  to  arrive  at  these  sorts  of  numbers.  Mexico  has  a  65  per  cent 
labour force participation rate right now. Brazil is at 70 per cent. Meanwhile, world average 
unemployment  rates  are  at  about  5,5  per  cent  currently,  and  a  little  lower  in  emerging 
markets.4 In other words, the goals of the National Development Plan are perfectly sensible. 
By world standards, they are normal, or even a little worse than normal. But if we’re going to 
get there, we’re going to need to create 11 million new jobs given the population growth. 
At  the  moment,  however,  we  are  going  in  the  wrong  direction.  Both  the  Quarterly 
Employment Statistics and the Quarterly Labour Force Survey have recently shown declines 
in the number of people working – the first negative numbers since the global financial crisis. 
Our  forecasts  suggest  that  this  trend  will  continue,  as  the  public  sector  achieves  financial 
sustainability and the private sector only slowly recovers from the current lows. 
The  private  sector  remains  the  major  employer  in  this  economy,  providing  around  three-
quarters of all jobs. And while we have seen higher employment in service sectors such as 
finance  and  trade,  catering,  and  accommodation  since  the  crisis,  private-sector job growth 
stalled a few years ago. The mining sector is grappling with lower commodity prices and a 
difficult investment environment; it now employs about 80 000 fewer people than it did at its 
peak  in  mid-2012.  The  manufacturing  sector  continues  to  shed  workers,  persisting  on  a 
multi-decade trend. We need to get private-sector employment going again. 
The public sector employs far fewer people than the private sector does, but it has been the 
prime source of new jobs in the post-crisis period. Since 2009, public-sector employment has 
grown by about 300 000 people. The share of the budget spent on compensation has also 
risen  markedly;  South  Africa’s  government  wage  bill  is  now  one  of  the  highest  among 
emerging markets – not so much because the state employs an unusual number of people, 
but because it pays them comparatively well.5 Our national finances can no longer bear this 
                                                
3  National Planning Commission, Our future – make it work: National Development Plan – 2030, p. 118. 
4  The  labour  force  participation  data  are  drawn  from  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and 
Development database; see https://data.oecd.org/emp/labour-force-participation-rate.htm. 
The unemployment numbers are from the Bank for International Settlements; see http://www.bis.org/statistics/ 
ar2016stats.htm, Figure I.1. 
 5  The average wage in the public sector is about 1,8 times the South African gross domestic product (GDP) per 
capita,  well  above  the  emerging  market  average  (which  is  about  1,4  times  the  GDP  per  capita).  See  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  sort  of  wage  growth  and  government  has  had  to  implement  a  personnel  freeze,  removing 
one source of job growth in recent years. 
The overall result is a bleak outlook for labour markets. The question is what to do about it. 
The inclusive reform agenda 
The answer is fundamentally about growing again, reforming product markets, and making 
labour markets more inclusive. We’ve built an economy that produces much more inflation 
than growth and spits out unemployment as a by-product. As long as we can use commodity 
prices or debt to grow – the path taken between 2004 and 2014 – we look like we’re making 
progress. The economy expands (albeit modestly) and jobs are sustained, but real income 
per capita doesn’t move much.6 When the debt burdens get too heavy and commodity prices 
fall,  however,  inflation  stays  sticky  while  growth  falls  below  the  population  growth  rate, 
entrenching inequality and worsening poverty. At its core, the formal sector of the economy 
protects  itself  from  the  growth  slowdown  by  raising  prices,  aggravating  the  downturn,  and 
imposing the cost on those losing their jobs and those without the market power to set prices 
and wages. 
There  is  an  alternative  path,  in  which  strong  investment  and  increasing  labour  force 
absorption  allow  the  economy  to  expand  without  accelerating  inflation.7  That’s  where  we 
need to go. There are a series of product and labour market reforms that can help us get 
there. 
Start with product markets, which offer us our most attractive reform opportunities. OECD8 
studies  of  product  market  regulation  show  that South  Africa  has  unusually  high  barriers  to 
entry  for  new  businesses.9  Targeting  and  reducing  these  barriers  would  encourage  new 
business  creation  and  investment,  and  would  raise  productivity.  In  particular,  lowering  the 
costs  in  network  industries  –  such  as  telecommunications,  energy,  and  transport  –  would 
benefit many other parts of the economy. The cost of utilities feeds into the underlying cost 
structure of the economy; it makes South African goods expensive for the export market and 
raises  that  cost  of  living  for  the  average  South  African.  Research  suggests  that  we  could 
raise our potential growth rate by 1,5 percentage points by reducing the markups in product 
markets to world benchmarks – which would roughly double the economy’s current “speed 
limit”.10 
Of course, structural reforms of this type are difficult. Their benefits, in the form of stronger 
growth  and  more  employment,  tend  to  be  widely  distributed  across  the  population.  The 
diffusion  of  benefits  is  important  in  the  policy  debate,  because  the  costs,  by  contrast, 
generally appear quickly and affect a smaller number of people. For example, bringing down 
                                                                                                                                                   
IV  consultation:  South  Africa,  pp.  18–20,  July  2016 
International  Monetary  Fund,  2016  Article 
(https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2016/cr16217.pdf). 
6  From 1991 to 2000, the gross domestic product (GDP) per capita contracted slightly by, on average, –0,2 per 
cent per year. From 2001 to 2010, it grew by 2,2 per cent per year (on average). From 2011 to 2015, GDP 
growth per capita slowed to 0,5 per cent on average; the numbers for 2014 and 2015 are –0,04 per cent and 
–0,48 per cent respectively. 
7  This is discussed, for instance, by Ruchir Sharma in The rise and fall of nations: forces of change in the post-
crisis world, published by W.W. Norton & Company, New York, in 2016. See especially chapter 7. 
8  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 
9  This  is  available  from  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development,  Indicators  of  product 
market regulation (http://www.oecd.org/eco/growth/indicatorsofproductmarketregulationhomepage.htm). 
10  See  David  Faulkner,  Chris  Loewald  and  Konstantin  Makrelov,  ‘Achieving  higher  growth  and  employment: 
for  South  Africa’,  Working  Paper  13/03,  July  2013  (http://www.resbank.co.za/Lists/ 
policy  options 
News%20and%20Publications/Attachments/5806/WP1303.pdf). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  the  price  of  a  product  like  electricity  is  good  for  all  the  millions  of  users  of  electricity  but 
painful for the producer, the latter having to become more efficient. For this reason, reform 
opponents usually mobilise more effectively than the prospective beneficiaries. 
Nonetheless, there are extra, easy benefits that make reform yet more attractive right now. 
South Africa has acquired a reputation for devising sound development strategies and then 
failing  to  implement  them.  Following  through  on  reform  could  reframe  the  whole  South 
African narrative and boost business confidence. Global conditions would also help. Interest 
rates are now exceptionally low internationally, and investors are desperately searching for 
yield.  That’s  an  opportunity;  a  lot  of  money  would  move  this  way  if  we  became  a  better 
growth and investment story. 
Then there are reforms which affect the labour market directly. South Africa, arguably, has a 
three-tier  labour  market.  One  is  mostly  informal  and  pays  low  wages.  The  second  is 
formalised  and  pays  intermediate-range  salaries,  typically  negotiated  on  an  industry-wide 
basis. The third tier pays the highest salaries and features mostly highly skilled employees. 
Each of these poses different challenges. 
On average, participants in the third market earn the highest salaries and benefit from skills 
shortages in South Africa. These shortages mean that employer competition for workers is 
quite intense, and unemployment in this category is therefore relatively low. But this doesn’t 
mean that the labour market for the highly skilled is a healthy one. The elevated wages in 
this market feed our high levels of inequality and contribute to inflation. Furthermore, skills 
shortages are a problem for economic growth and employment creation. Workers of different 
skill  levels  are  complementary  “goods”;  with  more  engineers  you  can  employ  more 
construction workers to build more bridges. What this segment of the labour market needs, in 
the longer run, is more and better education to open the highly skilled job market to more 
South Africans and better match what students study with the skills required by the private 
sector. We could also temporarily welcome more skilled immigrants to increase competition 
and help firms find the people they need to grow  while  we invest in growing our domestic 
knowledge base. The possibility of pro-growth, pro-equality reform in this area should make it 
a policy priority. 
South  Africa’s  other  two  labour  markets  don’t  absorb  nearly  enough  people,  which  leaves 
many  South  Africans  unemployed  or  out  of  the  labour  force  entirely.  As  the  National 
Development Plan recognises, this problem has a lot to do with spatial legacies and access 
to  information  about  work.  As  a  result,  the  plan  pays  special  attention  to  the  distances 
between people and jobs. It also points out that if we are going to create 11 million new jobs 
by  2030,  many  of  them cannot  be  highly  paid.  This  ties  in  with  the  product  market  reform 
agenda: if the wages in new jobs can’t be that high, we need to achieve downward pressure 
on prices so that the possible wages command decent buying power. It also speaks to the 
links  between  wages  and  employment.  As  Bheki  Ntshalintshali  of  COSATU11  recently 
reminded  us,  there  is  the  real  risk  of  excessive  wage  demands  producing  higher 
unemployment.12 
We  know  that  the  agricultural  sector  shed  hundreds  of  thousands  of  workers  after  the 
imposition  of  a  minimum  wage  at  an  excessive  level.13 We know  that  this  economy  lost  a 
disproportionate  number  of  jobs  during  the  global  financial  crisis  relative  to  the  decline  in 
                                                
11  Congress of South African Trade Unions. 
12  ‘COSATU  urges  members  to  balance  pay  with  job  security  in  wage  talks,  Business  Day,  4  July  2016 
(http://www.bdlive.co.za/national/labour/2016/07/04/cosatu-urges-members-to-balance-pay-with-job-security-
in-wage-talks). 
13  See  Haroon  Bhorat,  Ravi  Kanbur  and  Benjamin  Stanwix,  ‘Estimating  the  impact  of  minimum  wages  on 
employment,  wages,  and  non-wage  benefits:  the  case  of  agriculture  in  South  Africa’,  American  Journal  of 
Agricultural Economics, first published online on 27 June 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  economic output, in large part because of high wages and rigidities during periods of normal 
business  operations.14  Based  on  historical  trends,  we  forecast  persistent  wage  growth 
despite rising unemployment and minimal growth. If we try to play a game in which fewer and 
fewer  people  get  higher  and  higher  wages  while  more  and  more  people  wind  up 
unemployed, we can only lose. We have to get more people into work. 
To tackle this problem, one of the things we should do is reconsider the institutions we use to 
negotiate wage pricing. There is an important argument in academic literature, specifically by 
Lars  Calmfors  and  John  Driffill,  connecting  unemployment  to  the  kinds  of  collective 
bargaining  rules  used  in  a  country.15  The  basic  idea  is  that  a  country  can  achieve  better 
employment outcomes when collective bargaining is done either at a low level, such as one 
union  per  firm  or  plant,  or  at  a  very  high  level,  such  as  the  whole  economy.  The  worst 
outcome is to be in the middle, between the two options. This is because company or plant-
specific unions have a special interest in the health of the firm that employs their members 
and  will  not  want  agreements  that  make  the  firm  unsustainable.  By  contrast,  very  large 
unions have the power to shape macroeconomic outcomes. They will therefore avoid making 
deals which will push up inflation, drive up interest rates, reduce investment and growth, and 
ultimately destroy jobs. 
By contrast, medium-sized institutions, such as those that cover industries, are big enough to 
inflict costs on the economy but not big enough to experience those costs themselves – the 
costs are pushed onto others. In these systems, it is easy to reach a deal that keeps out new 
and  smaller firms,  so  you  get  a  lower  level  of  employment  at  higher  wages  and  a  smaller 
number of businesses with larger profits. This is a reasonable description of South Africa’s 
collective  bargaining  arrangements. We  should not  be  surprised that this  is  contributing  to 
bad  employment  outcomes,  an  effect  probably  only  partially  mitigated  by  exemptions.16 
Indeed, there are reliable estimates suggesting that these arrangements reduce employment 
in affected industries by 8–13 per cent, in large part because they hurt small, labour-intensive 
firms.17  South  Africa  has  surprisingly  few  of  these  firms,  relative  to  its  peers.  This  helps 
explain our unusually high levels of unemployment. 
The reform conversation and the problem of good faith 
Ladies and gentlemen, labour market discussions in South Africa are difficult. In particular, 
they are difficult because they are convened against a backdrop of historical oppression and 
deep race and class divides. 
As in some other countries with large economic and social problems, the discussion quickly 
moves  beyond  economics.  It  stops  being  about  appropriate  trade-offs  and  the  sorts  of 
experiments which might get us to a better place. Rather, it becomes a discussion about fear 
of  the future  and  about a  shortage  of  trust; the exchange  stops  too  soon  and  often  at the 
point where insults fly. If the conversation ends there, nothing gets solved. We are, together, 
responsible for the choices we make now – and we have the power to make better choices. 
The  people  who  have  the  most  to  gain  from  reform  are  the  people  locked  out  of  the 
economy.  They  don’t  have  much  power.  Government  therefore  has  a  special  duty  to 
                                                
14  See  Nir  Klein,  ‘Real  wage,  labor  productivity,  and  employment  trends  in  South  Africa:  a  closer  look’, 
International Monetary Fund Working Paper 12/92, April 2012. 
15  See  Lars  Calmfors  and  John  Driffill,  ‘Bargaining  structure,  corporatism  and  macroeconomic  performance’, 
Economic Policy, No. 88, 1988. 
16  Bargaining  council  agreements  typically  disallow  exemptions  for  “economic  reasons”.  This  presumably 
includes low productivity or unaffordability. 
17  See Jeremy R. Magruder, ‘High unemployment yet few small firms: the role of centralised bargaining in South 
Africa’, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Volume 4, No. 3, July 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  prioritise  their  interests.  For  many  South  Africans  in  jobs,  the  struggle  is  to  hold  on  to 
employment and keep wages growing enough to support large numbers of dependents. We 
need to turn this around, increasing employment and lowering dependency ratios. The best 
way to raise household incomes is to increase employment. A growing economy and rising 
productivity will push up real incomes for workers; this need not be done at the expense of 
jobs. For this reason, there will be long-run benefits for both the unemployed and the workers 
in the reform agenda. 
By  contrast,  opening  up  product  markets  will  deprive  some  people  of  lucrative,  over-
protected niches in the economy. That’s a good thing. Capitalists often preach the benefits of 
free markets; we think they should try some competition themselves. We can also see that 
the  labour  market  reforms  needed  to  temper  bad  economic  outcomes  should  go  hand  in 
hand with other reforms to boost economic growth. By achieving both sets of reforms, we will 
create  permanent gains  from  greater  inclusion  and  higher  productivity  –  gains  sufficient  to 
offset any temporary economic sacrifices imposed on our economy’s “insiders”. 
In addition to managing labour laws, government also has a role to play in managing labour 
market  dynamics.  Firstly,  by  writing  the  rules  and  regulations  which  ensure  that  product 
markets remain competitive. Secondly, by providing basic services that are accessible and 
lower  the  cost  of  living.  Planning  for  affordable  housing  that  is  closer  to  centres  of 
employment and the provision of adequate public transport systems would be examples of 
these. One of the things that have become clear from the experience in the mining sector is 
that  we  do  not  have  adequate  rental  housing  stock  for  entry-level  workers.  Thirdly, 
government will support long-term labour market productivity by providing quality education 
and  health  care.  Finally,  government  can  ensure  that  policy  conversations  balance  the 
interests of “insiders” and “outsiders”. 
The role of monetary policy 
I’d like to end on the subject of the contribution from monetary policy. 
The South African Reserve Bank has been tasked with maintaining inflation within the target 
range of 3–6 per cent, to be implemented flexibly. Being flexible means that inflation may, 
from time to time, find itself temporarily outside the target range. There are several reasons 
for this. Sometimes, there are inflation surprises and it is impossible to change policy in time 
to have any impact. Sometimes, it would be costly to return inflation to target very rapidly, so 
we  may  prefer  to  disinflate  more  gradually.  And  sometimes,  we  choose  to  look  through 
departures from the target range because they are expected to be temporary. 
But there are limits to how flexible we can be. We acknowledge that inflation has been rising 
recently  in  response  to  supply  shocks.  South  Africa  has  been  suffering  from  a  severe 
drought, which has so far pushed food prices 11 per cent higher than they were in the middle 
of last year. We are also seeing the effects of sustained currency depreciation, with the rand 
losing about half its value against the US dollar over the period May 2013 to July 2016. 
Our forecasts, and our experience, suggest that shocks of this scale pass through into prices 
and wages more generally and over time, accelerating both inflation and unemployment. This 
would have been an unacceptable outcome. Accordingly, we have been raising interest rates 
in a gradual way, taking the repo rate from 5,0 per cent in January 2014 to 7,0 per cent in 
March this year. By defending the target range, even in difficult conditions, we have helped to 
control  the  expectations  of  future  inflation.  Together  with  some  currency  strength,  and  the 
prospect of softening food prices, we expect underlying inflation to remain reasonably  well 
contained. And yet, with inflation hovering at around 6,5 per cent, the real interest rate level 
of about 0,5 per cent remains exceptionally supportive of economic activity. 
We are sometimes asked how we could have raised interest rates when the economy was 
slowing, but when inflation is sticky and even rising despite slowing growth, more and more 
monetary  accommodation  has  adverse  longer-run  consequences.  If  above-target  inflation 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  becomes the “new normal”, longer-term interest rates will quickly rise in response. Lenders 
expect to be compensated for inflation and inflation risk. In turn, the share of current income 
that we need to spend on servicing debt increases, draining resources from other priorities, 
like investment. 
So it is clear that we need to focus on doing things that reduce the general level of lending 
rates instead of permanently raising them. As I have discussed today, the markets for goods 
and services in South Africa are commonly dominated by a few big firms. And labour markets 
are  uncompetitive  because  of  skills  shortages,  restricted  entry,  and  extended  industry  or 
sectoral determinations. The result is that prices and wages are only flexible in an upward 
direction, and are otherwise rigid. 
This  rigidity  problem  constrains  our  efforts  to  improve  outcomes  and  permanently  lower 
interest rates. Our inflation outcomes appear to have settled at around the top of the target 
range, close to 6 per cent. This implies that nominal market interest rates will never fall much 
below 9 per cent. This cannot be an acceptable end point of macroeconomic policy, but it 
also  cannot  be  changed  easily  with  shifts  in  the  monetary  policy  stance.  If  we  want  lower 
interest rates and we want them without going through a recession, then we have to lower 
inflation outcomes arising from administered price processes and, above all else, the way in 
which prices and wages are determined in our collective bargaining system. Simply reducing 
the inflationary impulse from price and wage setting, to something around the middle of the 
inflation  target  range,  would  help  to  create  jobs  economy-wide  and  ease  constraints  on 
policy. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  I  have  spoken  today  about  some  key  challenges  facing  the  South  African 
economy. The solution probably isn’t going to emerge from rising commodity prices or a big 
rebound  in  world  growth  which  helps  exports.  It also  cannot  come from yet  more fiscal  or 
monetary  stimulus.  Macroeconomic  policy  is  already  doing  what  it  can, but  the  constraints 
are tightening; we are running out of room to borrow and we have too much inflation to lower 
interest rates. 
This leaves us with the option of reforms. South African product markets are ripe for change; 
opening up network industries would in particular have widespread growth benefits. Labour 
markets  for  skilled  people  could  be  made  more  competitive,  helping  growth  and  reducing 
inequality  at  the  same  time.  Our  wage  bargaining  institutions  could  be  more  supportive  of 
better  economic  outcomes.  Less  nominal  wage pressure  on  prices  would  help  us to  lower 
inflation and the overall level of interest rates. Our institutions could also be less hostile to 
small firms, the kinds of companies which create lots of jobs – and which are also scarcer 
here than they are in other countries. Getting more people into jobs would lower dependency 
ratios, reducing the urgency of high real wages which themselves price many people out of 
work entirely.  
Finally,  we  need  to  think  about  the  kind  of  conversation  we  are  having.  The  reform 
discussion  can  be  difficult,  partly  because  of  vested  interests  and  partly  because  of  a 
shortage of trust between parties. Given our difficult situation, we need to find ways of talking 
to each other that ultimately solve problems instead of merely emphasising our differences. 
We are all partners in this country and its future. We have a shared responsibility to make 
that future better. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
