   S Mundra: Customer service in banks – caveat venditor1 
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Conference of the Principal Code Compliance Officers, organized by the Banking Codes and 
Standards Board of India (BCSBI), Mumbai, 23 May 2016. 
The assistance provided by Shri R.Sathish and Shri P.J.Mathkar is gratefully acknowledged. 
 Code of Bank’s Commitment to Customers and 
Code of Bank’s Commitment to Micro and Small Enterprises 
Introduction 
1. Shri C. Krishnan, Member, Governing Council, Banking Codes and Standards Board of India 
(BCSBI);  Shri  Anand  Aras,  CEO,  BCSBI;  colleagues  from  the  banking  community, 
representatives from the  media;  ladies  and gentlemen!  At the  outset,  I would  like  to thank 
BCSBI for inviting me to inaugurate this annual conference of the Principal Code Compliance 
Officers  (PCCOs)  in  the  banks.  Over  the  years,  BCSBI  has  been  instrumental  in  driving 
improvement in level of service extended by the banks to their customers. All of you are pretty 
familiar with role of BCSBI so I am not going to elaborate on that. You must also be aware 
about the two sets of Codes that BCSBI has developed for its member banks, namely: 
• 
• 
These Codes are reviewed periodically with a view to incorporate all the relevant regulatory 
guidelines,  contemporary  developments  in  the  banking  sector  and  evolving  customer 
expectations. The BCSBI, in a way, helps the banks by providing an independent review and 
feedback on their adherence to the standards. RBI attaches great importance to the work and 
assessments  of  the  BCSBI,  which  places  an  onerous  responsibility  on  the  BCSBI  in  this 
relatively unexplored territory. 
2. I am sure that today’s deliberations will be a good opportunity for the participants: 
• 
• 
 
• 
 
3. A major challenge for all of us in the banking industry is to develop the right attitude for 
rendering service to customers. A broader question is whether we can define the standards of 
behaviour? Perhaps, it may be easier to identify the elements of unacceptable behaviour and 
try to redress grievances and improve the situation. The attitude and behavioural standards 
especially of the front-line executives of banks are very important aspects. We in RBI keep 
harping on a need for informed and courteous frontline executives/staff and even serve as 
torch bearers by conducting exclusive training programmes for the frontline executives of the 
banks.  But  the  fact  remains  that  customer  service  and  enhancing  customer  experience  is 
primary responsibility of the banks and hence, the onus of empowering the frontline staff and 
ensuring  the  presence  of  a  bevy  of  well  informed  and  courteous  frontline  executives  lies 
squarely with the banks. 
to deliberate upon the issues in implementation of the Codes 
to appreciate the importance of imbibing the Codes as a basic norm in day to day 
dealing with customers and 
to understand the linkage of the codes with the overarching principles of Charter of 
Customer Rights which is being implemented in your respective banks 
                                                
1   Note: Caveat Venditor: A Latin term meaning “let the seller beware”, in contrast to the more widely known saying 
caveat emptor (let the buyer beware). The principle of caveat venditor cautions that the seller is responsible for 
any problem that the buyer might encounter with a service or product 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Recent steps by RBI 
4. Having dwelt upon generic issues, let me now focus on some specifics that I wish to raise 
this morning. Very often, we found that the fair practices code adopted by banks / financial 
institutions is observed more in breach than in practice. In view of the growing complexities of 
the financial transactions and financial markets, RBI , therefore, felt a need to clearly define 
the role and responsibility of financial services providers, especially in relation to consumer 
protection  and  the  framing  of  the  Charter  of  Customer  Rights  was  a  logical  step  in  that 
direction. 
5. Formulation of the Charter was done after extensive consultations with all stakeholders, 
studying global best practices and drawing upon the domestic experience. As you know, the 
Charter comprises five critical rights: a) Right to Fair Treatment, b) Right to Transparency, Fair 
and  Honest  Dealing,  c)  Right  to  Suitability,  d)  Right  to  Privacy  and  e)  Right  to  Grievance 
Redress and Compensation. 
6. As a follow up, a model Customer Rights Policy formulated jointly by the BCSBI and IBA 
was provided to all the member banks and the banks were advised to formulate their own 
board approved Customer Rights Policy based on the Charter and the model policy by July 
31, 2015. RBI would be undertaking a close monitoring of the implementation of the policy and 
if needed, would issue necessary regulatory instructions. It is heartening that all the banks 
have drawn up a Customer Rights Policy. 
7. Let me now come to the disheartening part. Even a decade after having come into existence, 
the status of implementation of BCSBI Codes at the ground level remains far from satisfactory. 
I  understand  that  BCSBI’s  assessment  of  the  compliance  by  banks  with  the  Codes  and 
Standards, has brought out several instances of flagrant violations of the code. This is evident 
not only from the numerous complaints received by our Banking Ombudsman Offices across 
the country but also in our interactions with customers in Outreach programmes and Town Hall 
meetings. This aspect merits serious attention by PCCOs. I am told that in the rating exercise 
undertaken by BCSBI on adherence to the Codes by the banks in 2014-15, only 14% of the 
member banks were rated with high rating, 49% got Above Average and 21% banks received 
Average rating. These clearly evidence the fact that a number of banks need to enhance the 
present  level  of  code  implementation  and  appropriately  fulfill  their  commitments  to  their 
customers laid out in the codes. 
8.  As  you  know,  the  Banking  Ombudsman  Scheme  is  envisaged  as  an  inexpensive, 
expeditious customer grievance redress mechanism in the banking sector. The BO scheme 
works through a process of conciliation, mediation and adjudication. The nodal officers at the 
banks have a very important role in making the process seamless by ensuring expeditious 
response from the banks’ side after proper examination and due attempt at resolution. It is 
incumbent  on  the  nodal  officers  to  furnish  a  quick  revert  on  the  complaint  to  the  Banking 
Ombudsman.  The  nodal  officer  must  also  undertake  a  root  cause  analysis  to  ensure  that 
similar complaints do not arise again. In the context of BO scheme, I would like to inform that 
RBI is planning to augment the number of its BO offices in the near future and also to come 
out with certain amendments to the Scheme. 
9. You would also be aware that in our quest for an early resolution of customer complaints, in 
May 2015 RBI mandated all the public sector banks and select private sector and foreign banks 
to appoint Internal Ombudsman (Chief Customer Service Officers). The Internal Ombudsman 
are entrusted with the responsibility of examining those grievances which were either rejected 
by the bank’s internal grievance redressal system or where only a partial relief was granted. I 
am happy to note that all banks have since appointed Internal Ombudsman. We intend to meet 
them shortly and if needed, fine tune the instructions. A note of caution that I would like to 
sound here is about the role of the Internal Ombudsman, the Principal Nodal Officer and that 
of  the  PCCOs.  Banks  must  ensure  that  these  officials  have  clearly  demarcated  roles  and 
responsibilities and a clear chain of command so as to avoid overlaps or vacuums. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10. Upon analysis of the grievances received under the BO Scheme, we observe that a vast 
majority (about 33%) pertain to non-observance of the Fair Practices Code and non-adherence 
with commitments made under the BCSBI code, followed by complaints relating to credit/ debit 
cards, deposits accounts and pensions. The large number of complaints on account of non-
adherence to Codes/standards is difficult to accept as the banks have voluntarily accepted 
these Codes formulated by the BCSBI. 
Let me now raise a few major concerns in the area of customer service and also narrate some 
real life instances. 
Cyber frauds and grievance redressal 
11.  As  the  online  transactions  have  increased  so  have  the  rise  in  complaints  related  to 
electronic banking transactions. Complaints related to unauthorized fund transfers, fraudulent 
withdrawals from ATMs using duplicate cards, phishing E-mails aimed at extracting personal 
information etc. have witnessed manifold increase in recent times. It is imperative to have a 
robust mechanism to prevent incidents of fraud in areas of mobile/net banking and electronic 
fund  transfer  so  as  to  retain  customers’  confidence  in  these  delivery  channels.  Raising 
customer awareness on safe usage of such channels should also be an important item on the 
agenda of the banks. Let me mention here that RBI is already examining whether to issue 
regulatory directions with regard to limiting the liability of customers on fraudulent transactions 
arising out of cards and electronic banking transactions. 
12. Incidentally our teams have recently undertaken a survey of almost 4000 ATMs across the 
country with sample size fairly representing geographies and bank categories. Survey results 
are not comforting in any way. Almost 1/3rd of the ATMs were found to be not working at that 
point. Violation of regulatory instructions on display material, facilities for differently abled etc. 
were also observed. We will be taking necessary supervisory action in this regard. 
Mis-selling 
13. Next comes a very critical issue that I want to raise today. There has been increasingly 
large number of cases of mis-selling of third party products, particularly insurance products to 
the customers by the banks by bundling them with loans. 
a. 
In a recent incident, a senior citizen, a retired General Manager of a private sector 
company who had invested his retirement benefits in Fixed Deposits with one Private Sector 
bank was convinced by the bank’s representative to invest Rs. 2 lakh in an investment scheme 
assuring his funds would earn a minimum 11% interest and there would be no deduction of 
income tax  upon  withdrawal  after three  years. Another  representative from  the  same  bank 
visited the depositor after a period of one year from the initial investment and convinced him 
to prematurely close three FDs aggregating Rs. 7 lakh and invest the proceeds in the same 
scheme. After completion of three years the customer found that he had earned only about 
3.5% returns. The representative is no longer in the service of the bank and the customer is in 
a hapless position. This is a clear case of selling of a product which was not suitable to the 
needs of the customer. A retired person needs a secure and steady return on investments and 
any financial product, where returns are not assured, is not suitable for such customer. 
b. 
Another  unnerving  episode  of  mis-selling  of  insurance  products  by  the  DSAs  got 
reported in the media recently. The agent promised loans from an NFBC at a very cheap rate 
provided the customer bought a particular insurance policy. Detailed inquiry later revealed that 
the named NBFC no more existed under that name, he was not an employee of any NBFC & 
this was just a ploy to mislead the customer in buying a policy. Such proposals were then 
tendered to the bank from DSA and were accepted by them without any verification. Needless 
to say it amounts to a fraudulent transaction. Bank would surely face an aggrieved customer 
later on. Such cases of mis-selling are rampant and as sellers of third party products using 
their own staff/ DSAs, the banks are equally vulnerable. Often, higher sales targets coupled 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   with front ended high commissions are the main motives for such mis-sales. There is no real 
oversight on unethical selling of third party products. 
c. 
Let me give another recent example of failure of a bank to render proper customer 
service. A customer was sanctioned a home loan and he had agreed to take a life insurance 
as a cover for the loan and signed relevant documents. However, the loan sanctioned and 
disbursed  was  for  a  lower  quantum  than  original  applied.  On  the  unfortunate  death  of  the 
borrower, the bank contested the claim stating that at the time of availing lower quantum of 
loan the borrower had not submitted an insurance proposal form and hence, the bank had not 
taken  insurance.  Our  analysis  revealed  that  the  loan  installments  paid  by  the  customer 
included the insurance premium as well but the bank had failed to complete the process of 
insurance. The appellate authority adjudicated that the bank was at fault and it didn’t have 
appropriate procedure to secure insurance after the sanction of the loan and hence, an award 
was given in favour of the customer. 
14. Several field level studies have been undertaken by various consumer organizations in this 
area. RBI has also undertaken study on mis-selling of Third Party Products (TPPs) in semi-
urban and rural areas which has revealed startling facts. The Right to Suitability enshrined in 
our Charter of Customer Rights has been totally ignored or rather knowingly violated for the 
reasons best known to the banks. RBI is seized of this issue and may be constrained to take 
strict actions including imposition of heavy penalties, if the banking industry continues to follow 
such unethical and unacceptable practices of mis-selling of third party products. It would be 
appropriate for the banks to put in place a system of periodic inspection of the sale of third 
party products by involving their internal inspection teams and plug the loopholes, wherever 
identified. The PCCOs need to play a central role in administering this. 
Money muling 
15. Another area that the banks need to guard against is misuse of accounts for money muling. 
In  a  recent  episode,  it  was  observed  that  an  idle  account  was  used  for  receiving  and 
transferring large fund without the knowledge of the account holder. The fact came to light only 
when the income tax authorities served a notice on the account holder. This episode highlights 
the failure of bank’s systems and processes for monitoring of accounts. The newly opened 
accounts under the PMJDY could be very vulnerable to such sharp practices and hence, banks 
need to clearly guard against them. Kite flyers and the Ponzi scheme operators also sometimes 
use mule accounts to swindle public money. I sincerely urge the PCCOs gathered here to 
seriously introspect on this aspect as this is not one-bank’s headache or a bank-specific issue. 
It is an industry-wide issue with wider ramifications. Banks should have a robust system to 
monitor the transactions being undertaken in those accounts for taking proactive action, which 
entails  a  better  customer  protection.  Though  the  banks  have  some  alert  and  exception 
transaction reporting  mechanism  at  present,  it  is  mostly  primitive  and generally  ineffective. 
Failure  to  guard  against  misuse  of  customers’  accounts  might  result  in  banks  incurring 
supervisory sanctions and enforcement actions. 
High service charges and negative balance in savings accounts 
16. Another area of concern that we have is around levying of excessive charges for various 
services.  While  RBI  does  not  wish  to  micromanage  the  banks’  affairs,  the  imposition  of 
usurious and uncalled for charges certainly invokes our attention. Despite our guidelines on 
non-imposition  of  charges  for  non-maintenance  of  minimum  balance  in  a  savings  bank 
account, we have been receiving certain complaints of such practices. It is in this context that 
we  had  to  reiterate  our  instructions  on  stopping  imposition  of  such  charges  leading  to  a 
negative balance in savings accounts. I insist that all banks must stop these practices forthwith 
if not already done so. 
17. Before I conclude let me list out few good practices that I would like the industry to adopt 
for enhanced customer service: 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   a. 
Non-insistence on local address for account opening - I believe the banks continue to 
insist on providing a proof of local address also to the migrants for opening a bank account. 
As long as the individual is able to provide a proof of address (whether local or a permanent 
place elsewhere) and a proof of identity for KYC purposes, I don’t think there should be any 
reservation in opening an account. A self-declaration of the address, then should be sufficient 
for the purpose of the correspondence etc. RBI, in consultation with IBA is already working on 
a standardized form for account opening across banks. We also intend to highlight the list of 
documents that may be offered as a proof of identity and address (KYC) by the customers, in 
the same form so as to prevent harassment by the uninformed officials. 
b. 
There is growing need for the banks to invest in a technology enabled, centralized 
grievance  redressal  system.  This  would  not  only  empower  the  executive  management  to 
identify the geographical locations from where maximum complaints emanate but would also 
enable them to undertake a systemic root cause analysis and remove the pain points, be it the 
product, service or the individual. 
Conclusion 
18. As the competition intensifies with the licensing of more new banks, only those entities 
which provide better customer service and experience would survive. Various research studies 
have shown that customers are willing to pay for quality service and would transact with the 
institutions which provide better services. Some of you might have heard me speak at another 
forum about customers choosing to move to another bank in case if he/she was dissatisfied 
with the services received at the present. I had then said that with the implementation of a 
unified KYC, this phenomena, what I termed as account number portability, would come into 
the realms of possibility. With the introduction of unified payments interface, a customer can 
be identified with his unique “virtual address” mapped to his mobile phone linked to the bank 
account number. With this information available centrally at the NPCI, the portability of the 
account would merely need a change in linkage to an account in another bank at the backend. 
Banks must, therefore, build structure and processes that aim at providing quality and efficient 
services or else face the prospects of a customer silently walking away without causing any 
inconvenience to her and loss of business to the bank. 
19. I hope that the deliberations later in the day would cover issues that I have raised in my 
address. I once again thank BCSBI for inviting me today and thank you all for a patient hearing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
