  Malcolm Edey: The evolving risk environment 
Speech by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia,  at  the  Australian  Shareholders  Association  (ASA)  Investor  Forum,  Sydney, 
18 February 2016. 
 This is an expanded and updated version of a speech presented in November 2015. Malcom E (2015), “The Risk 
Environment  and  the  Property  Sector”,  speech  at  the  Australian  Property  Institute’s  Queensland  Property 
Conference, Gold Coast, 6 November. 
Thanks for the opportunity to speak to you today. I have taken as my subject “the evolving 
risk environment”. 
As you know, the Reserve Bank has a longstanding mandate to promote financial stability. 
The way we interpret that mandate, its place in the wider central banking framework, and its 
interaction  with  the  mandates  of  the  other  financial  regulators,  are  large  topics  in 
themselves.1  For  today,  I  simply  note  that  one  of  the  ways  we  seek  to  promote  financial 
stability is by providing regular analysis of system risks, particularly through our half-yearly 
Financial Stability Review. We do that partly to inform the policy debate, but also because it 
is important that lenders and investors are well informed about the risk environment, so that 
they can make prudent decisions about the risks they choose to accept. 
As investors in the share market, you will be well aware that investment is a risky activity. In 
the  early  part  of  this  year  we  have  seen  some  significant  falls  in  equity  prices  and  higher 
volatility  in  equity  markets  around  the  world.  There  has  been  significant  volatility  in  other 
markets too, notably including large falls in oil prices. There is no shortage of commentators 
offering interpretations of these events and predictions of what might follow. 
I am not going to be offering those sorts of predictions today. Instead, I think the way I can 
best contribute to your thinking about these things is to place them in the wider context of the 
evolving financial risk environment over the past few years. 
The post crisis environment 
In  many  ways  the  current  situation  continues  to  be  shaped  by  the  aftermath  of  the  global 
financial crisis (GFC). The epicentre of the crisis is usually dated to the collapse of Lehman 
Brothers in September 2008, and the general recovery that we have had since then began 
about six months later. On that basis, we have been in a period of global economic recovery 
now coming up to about seven years. 
In broad outline, this has been a period marked by: 
• 
A return to reasonably solid growth in world GDP, at rates either around trend or not 
much less than that. 
Widespread, though somewhat varied, progress in balance sheet repair in banking 
institutions; and 
Generally improved conditions in financial markets. 
• 
These  have  all  been  positive  developments:  they  represent  a  substantial  cumulative 
improvement since the height of the crisis, and it is important to keep that perspective when 
interpreting shorter-term fluctuations in market sentiment. 
                                                 
1 
I  discussed  some  of  these  issues  in  an  earlier  speech.  Malcolm  E  (2013),  “The  Financial  Stability  Role  of 
Central Banks”, speech at the Thomson Reuters’ Australian Regulatory Summit, Sydney, 1 May. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  That said, there are a number of qualifications that should be made to the summary picture I 
have just given: 
• 
Growth around the world during this period has been uneven geographically. China 
and other emerging market economies initially led the recovery while Europe tended 
to  lag.  More  recently  this  configuration  has  been  changing,  with  Asian  growth 
softening  and  Europe  looking  firmer.  The  US  has  achieved  fairly  steady  growth 
throughout the period. 
Labour  market  slack  remains  in  some  areas  of  the  global  economy,  especially  in 
parts of Europe. 
Global debt levels remain high. 
And  the  recovery  has  been  marked  by  periodic  bouts  of  nervousness  in  financial 
markets, including the one we are seeing just now. I will have more to say about that 
later. 
  One general indicator that things are still some way short of normality is the level of global 
interest rates, which are still at exceptionally low levels to support growth. This remains the 
case notwithstanding the much-heralded rise in the US Federal funds rate at the end of last 
year. 
An  obvious  question  that  arises  from  all  of  this  is  why  has  the  recovery  from  the  deep 
recession  of  2008  and  2009  been  so  protracted?  I  suggest  that  there  are  two  important 
factors at work here. 
The  first  factor  is  that  the  GFC  period  involved  more  than  one  crisis.  It  began  in  the  US 
mortgage market in 2007 and spread through various channels of contagion to banks and 
financial  institutions  in  other  parts  of  the  world, especially  the  euro  area  and  the  UK. That 
was the initial crisis, triggered by poor asset quality and excessive leverage. 
But even as the US was recovering from that, a second crisis was developing in Europe. This 
was  a  crisis  of  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of  the  euro  as  a  single  currency  area.  At 
different times a number of the weaker economies in the area have come under scrutiny as 
to whether they would be able to meet their obligations, with concerns particularly focused on 
Greece in key periods. These episodes led to strains in financial markets and increases in 
risk pricing, and they weighed heavily on confidence and on the pace of recovery. With the 
euro area accounting for just under one sixth of the global economy, this in turn acted as a 
significant drag on global growth. 
The second factor is that, other things equal, history suggests that recoveries from financial 
crises typically take longer than those from other types of business cycle events. It takes time 
to  repair  balance  sheets,  to  reduce  excessive  leverage  and  to  unwind  the  asset  market 
imbalances that might be left behind by a crisis; and it takes time to reverse the damage to 
trust and confidence. One important recent study2 found that the average duration of impact 
from financial crises across a range of countries over the past two centuries has been around 
five years. Since this current episode has been more severe than most, it is not surprising 
that its after-effects have lasted even longer. 
An  exacerbating  factor,  too,  has  been  the  international  dimension.  When  a  financial  or  a 
banking  crisis  occurs  in  a  single  economy,  or  in  a  relatively  small  number  of  countries, 
exchange  rate  depreciation  is  often  part  of  the  market  response  and  part  of  the  recovery 
mechanism.  But  there  is  obviously  much  less  scope  for  that  mechanism  to  work  when  a 
crisis affects large parts of the global economy simultaneously. 
                                                
2  Reinhart  CM  and  K  Rogoff  (2009),  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly,  Princeton 
University Press, Princeton. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Taken together I think these factors go a long way towards explaining the drawn-out nature 
of the global recovery to date – even though, as I said, economic conditions in recent times 
have been much better than they were a few years ago. 
Policymakers around the world have been responding to this situation on a number of fronts. 
Interest  rates  were  reduced  to  near  zero  (or  even  slightly  below  zero)  in  many  advanced 
economies to support recovery and assist in balance sheet repair, and they remain very low. 
In Europe, significant institutional reforms are being made to strengthen the stability of the 
euro area; these are aimed at getting banking and crisis-management arrangements across 
the  area  to  function  in  a  more  unified  way  that  makes  them  more  robust  to  shocks  in  the 
future.  And  globally,  there  is  an  extensive  program  of  reform  underway,  for  example  in 
banking and securities regulation, to build resilience in our financial systems. Australia has 
been very much a part of that process. 
A  related  development  in  this  period  is  that  there  has  been  a  renewed  interest  in  more 
proactive  approaches  to  the  management  of  systemic  risk.  Partly  this  reflected  the  lesson 
from the GFC itself that financial crises are costly, and hence that there is a strong need for 
better  risk  management.  In  keeping  with  that,  institutional  arrangements  have  been 
strengthened  in  some  jurisdictions  to  support  more  proactive  risk  management  by 
supervisors, where that was found to be lacking. A related point is that, in a low interest rate 
environment, supervisors have seen a need to be particularly vigilant against a build-up of 
risk  in  interest-sensitive  sectors.  A  number  of  them  have  been  taking  measures  in  recent 
times to respond to developing risks, often focused on property lending. I will have more to 
say about that later. 
To summarise (and oversimplify) this picture somewhat, the after-effects of the GFC on the 
global economy have included: 
• 
• 
• 
an extended period of low interest rates 
“search for yield” behaviour by investors in some interest-sensitive sectors, and 
a strengthened focus on risk management by prudential supervisors. 
Recent developments 
With all of that as background, I want to turn now to more recent developments. 
It  is  useful  to  take  that  in  three  parts,  namely  the  global  risk  environment,  possible 
implications of that environment for Australia, and domestically generated sources of risk. 
The global risk environment 
Prior  to  the  current  bout  of  market  volatility,  our  most  recent  Financial  Stability  Review, 
published late last year, noted an improvement in conditions in Europe and a general shift in 
the focus of risk towards emerging economies. 
In  Europe  this  trend  seemed  to  reflect,  at  least  in  part,  a  greater  degree  of  confidence  in 
Europe-wide  institutions.  The  European  authorities  have  taken  a  number  of  actions  over 
recent  years  to  alleviate  financial  system  risks,  including  increased  support  from  the  ECB 
and ongoing progress in unifying the system of banking regulation. 
More generally, the condition of the European financial sector has been gradually improving 
in  a  number  of  respects.  Non-performing  loans  of  European  banks  are  still  high,  but  they 
have been falling for two years mainly  in some of the periphery countries (Graph 1). Bank 
profitability has picked up a bit and banks are now better capitalised. And stronger balance 
sheets have enabled banks in the euro area to make some gradual increases in their lending 
to businesses and households. All of that said, there remain significant uncertainties in the 
euro area and some of the earlier concerns have resurfaced in the recent market turmoil. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Graph 1 
  At the same time, our Review noted that financial stability risks in China have been building. 
The Chinese economic expansion over recent years has been associated with increasing debt, 
strong asset price growth and apparent overinvestment in some sectors and regions (Graph 2). 
If growth were to fall further from its high recent rates, past excesses might be exposed, and 
leverage is always harder to manage in a slower growth environment. These risks of course 
are hard to assess. The Chinese authorities have many levers to support growth and financial 
stability,  given  the  ongoing  large  role  of  the  state  in  the  economy,  the  heavily  regulated 
financial  system  and  the  presence  of  capital  account  controls.  The  measured  central 
government fiscal position is also strong, though the overall public sector  position  is less so 
given the build-up in debt among local governments and state-owned enterprises. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 2 
  Outside China, country-specific risks also seem to have been increasing in a number of other 
emerging  market  economies  –  for  example  Brazil,  Russia  and  Turkey.  Among  the  various 
factors  contributing  to  that  have  been  falling  commodity  prices,  political  instability  and 
concerns over excessive corporate leverage. In response, equity prices and exchange rates 
in these economies have generally fallen quite sharply. These trends were already evident 
through the course of last year. 
These factors form part of the background to the nervousness seen in a number of markets 
in the early part of 2016. As I said at the outset, the early part of this year has seen some 
significant volatility in global markets, especially in equities and in some commodity prices. 
There has also been some widening in risk spreads for lower rated corporates and emerging 
market sovereigns. The broad equity price indices have fallen by around 10 per cent in the 
United States, 15 per cent in Europe, and by around 20 per cent in China since the start of 
the year (Graph 3). These have been accompanied by further large falls in prices of some 
commodities,  most  notably  oil,  continuing  the  declines  that  they  had  recorded  over  the 
previous couple of years (Graph 4). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 Graph 3 
 Graph 4 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  From  a  financial  stability  perspective,  these  developments  raise  a  number  of  important 
questions: to what extent (if any) are these price movements inter-related, and in what way? 
And what, if anything, do they tell us about the evolving risk environment? 
It  is  in  the  nature  of  these  things  that  definitive  interpretations  are  rarely  possible,  and 
certainly  not  in  real  time.  At  this  stage  a  number  of  possible  hypotheses  might  be  put 
forward: 
• 
the combination of lower equity and commodity prices might be signaling a weaker 
global outlook; 
it might simply be an indication that equity markets had previously been overvalued 
and in need of a correction; or 
the equity price falls might in part be an irrational response to commodity price falls 
and other economic data, or at least contain an element of overreaction to genuine 
signals. 
  Most  likely  there  is  an  element  of  validity  in  more  than  one  of  these,  and  no  doubt  other 
hypotheses can be put forward as well. As I said, I don’t think it is possible to be definitive 
about these things, but it is relevant to note that market and media commentary often errs on 
the side of being unjustifiably gloomy. A few points can be made on that score: 
• 
First, as always, the recent equity price movements have to be put in perspective. 
This  is  not  the  first  bout  of  nervousness  in  these  markets:  in  the  advanced 
economies there was a similar one late last year, from which markets subsequently 
recovered, and the recent declines reverse only a small part of the cumulative gains 
during the post-crisis recovery period. 
Second, there seems to have been relatively little new economic data in the early 
part of this year to trigger a significant reassessment of the global outlook. And even 
though the Chinese economy has been slowing, it is still growing at a reasonable 
rate. 
Third,  the  hypothesis  that  falling  equity  and  falling  oil  prices  are  inter-related 
responses to a weakening in global demand is hard to sustain. The falls in oil prices 
seem to be mainly driven by strong supply, not weak demand, as indeed has been 
the case for a number of other commodities such as iron ore. Consistent with that, 
other  non-energy  commodity  prices  have  been  relatively  stable  during  this  recent 
period when oil prices have continued to fall. This has important implications for the 
general outlook. While an oil supply expansion could be expected to have a range of 
complicated effects on producers, consumers and holders of energy assets, it would 
normally be considered a net positive for the world as a whole. 
  I think these points argue against putting an excessive focus on recent market movements. 
But,  that  said,  there  has  clearly  been  an  increase  in  market  volatility  around  the  word  in 
recent times and a heightened focus on financial risks. 
Implications of the global risk environment for Australia 
At  this  point  it  is  useful  to  ask  how  these  international  sources  of  risk  might  affect  the 
Australian financial system. 
Direct exposures of Australian banking institutions to the risk factors I have been describing 
are quite limited (Table 1). Exposures to the euro area have been scaled back in the wake of 
the crisis and now represent only around 1 to 2 per cent of Australian banks’ consolidated 
global assets. Although exposures to the Asian region have been growing quite rapidly over 
recent  years,  they  are  still  a  relatively  small  share  of  consolidated  assets  –  around  4  per 
cent. Many of these exposures are shorter-term and trade-related, factors that should lessen 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  credit and funding risks. That said, operational and legal risks around these exposures could 
be relatively high, particularly given the rapid expansion of these activities in recent times.  
 Table 1 
Australian Banks’ International Exposures  
Ultimate risk basis, September 2015 
  Value 
Share of 
international 
exposures 
Share of global 
consolidated 
assets 
$ billion 
Per cent 
Per cent 
New Zealand 
Asia(a) 
– China 
United Kingdom 
United States 
Europe 
– Greece 
Other 
Total 
330 
177 
46 
177 
139 
66 
0 
67 
957 
34 
19 
5 
19 
15 
7 
0 
7 
100 
(a) Asia includes offshore centres Hong Kong and Singapore. 
Sources: APRA; RBA. 
8 
4 
1 
4 
3 
2 
0 
2 
24 
As a more general observation, Australian banks have increased their resilience over recent 
years in a number of respects, responding both to market expectations and to regulatory and 
supervisory  actions.  Notably  they  have  raised  capital  ratios  and  shifted  their  funding 
structures to make them more resilient to financial market disruptions. Of course, none of this 
guarantees that Australian banks will be immune to international shocks in the future. But it 
suggests that  the  main effects from the risks I’ve  been  describing  are  likely  to  be  indirect, 
working through the impact of factors like commodity prices, trade flows, and confidence, on 
the broader economy.  
Domestically generated sources of risk 
That  brings  me  to  the  third  part  of  our  risk  assessment,  namely  domestically  generated 
sources of risk. Here our analysis has for some time focused on the buoyancy seen in parts 
of the property market and the leverage associated with that. Much of the focus has been on 
residential property, and I will start with that before turning to the commercial sector, where 
risks have also been growing.  
While the housing market has not been universally strong around the country, we have seen 
a period of significant strength in the Sydney and Melbourne markets in recent times, with 
investors playing a large role. We are now seeing some easing in these pressures, as I will 
describe in a moment. But to summarise a few of the key facts:  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Housing prices in Sydney reached a peak annual rate of increase of 18 per cent in 
mid-2015.  
In Melbourne the peak rate of increase was 14 per cent around the same time.  
The value of loan approvals to investors in New South Wales approximately doubled 
over the two years to mid-2015.  
 Largely  as  a  result  of  these  developments,  the  household  debt  ratio  has  been  edging  up 
again from a level that was already high, at around 1½ times annual income (Graph 5).  
Graph 5 
 It is against this background that the Reserve Bank has highlighted the need for prudence, 
and has supported APRA and ASIC in the various measures that they have taken over the 
past few years to strengthen lending standards.  
As  a  general  proposition,  mortgage  lending  standards  in  the  post-crisis  period  have  been 
tighter, at least more so than before the crisis. Low-doc loans are rare, genuine savings are 
required  to  fund  at  least  part  of  the  deposit,  and  the  application  of  interest  rate  buffers  in 
serviceability  assessments  has  become  widespread.  Nonetheless,  investigations  by  APRA 
and ASIC during 2015 showed that there had been some slipping in lending standards and 
that  they  were  inadequate  in  some  important  respects  to  the  current  risk  environment. 
Specifically, APRA found that, in some instances, lenders’ serviceability assessments were 
based on over-optimistic judgments about the reliability of borrowers’ incomes, or inadequate 
estimates of borrowers’ living expenses, or that they failed to take into account the possible 
effect of future interest rate movements on a borrower’s existing debt commitments. ASIC’s 
review  of  interest-only  lending  practices  made  similar  findings,  and  also  noted  instances 
where the lender did not make reasonable inquiries as to whether the loan product provided 
was suitable to the borrowers’ circumstances.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Furthermore,  as  a  result  of  the  additional  scrutiny  over  the  past  year  and  substantial  data 
revisions made by the banks, we now know that the level of investor activity in the housing 
market was in fact higher than previously thought. As we have highlighted in recent Reviews, 
a  high  level  of  investor  activity  can  add  to  the  level  of  financial  risks  associated  with 
residential markets.  
As  you  know,  APRA  announced  a  number  of  supervisory  measures  in  December  2014  to 
strengthen mortgage lending standards. These measures included expectations that:  
• 
• 
• 
banks should not be increasing their share of higher risk lending  
growth in investor lending should not be materially above 10 per cent  
appropriate  interest  rate  floors  and  buffers  should  be  applied  in  serviceability 
assessments.  
In  response,  lending  standards  tightened  significantly  over  2015.  Interest  rate  buffers  and 
floors  were  increased  at  many  banks  and  they  are  now  much  more  uniform  across  the 
sector.  The  level  of  higher  risk  lending  has  declined,  notably  lending  with  an  LVR  greater 
than  90  per  cent.  And  the  pace  of  investor  lending  growth  has  slowed  significantly  in 
response to a wide range of price and non-price actions that have been taken by the banks 
(Graph 6). This has been a welcome development given the general maturing of the current 
housing cycle.  
Graph 6 
The  second  main  area  of  risk  focus  domestically  has  been  in  commercial  property. 
Historically  this  sector  has  been  a  common  source  of  financial  instability  both  here  and 
abroad.  During  the  height  of  the  GFC,  Australian  banks  remained  in  comparatively  good 
shape but they did suffer a noticeable deterioration in asset performance, with the aggregate 
non-performance  rate  rising  to  just  under  2  per  cent  of  loans.  A  significant  part  of  that 
deterioration  was  in  their  commercial  property  lending;  impaired  commercial  property 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  exposures accounted for around 30 per cent of Australian banks’ non-performing domestic 
assets at that time.  
After the post-crisis downturn, the commercial property sector is again experiencing strong 
investor demand, and bank lending to the sector is increasing. However, there are a number 
of emerging signs of increasing risk. Trends in commercial property prices and rents have 
been diverging over the past few years, with prices continuing to rise while rents have been 
flat to down (Graph 7). As a result, yields have declined. At the same time, vacancy rates 
have been increasing.  
Graph 7 
 As  in  the  housing  market,  conditions  have  not  been  uniform  across  the  country,  and  they 
have  been  noticeably  firmer  in  Sydney  and  Melbourne  than  in  other  cities.  But  the  major 
commercial property markets have all seen downward pressure on yields over recent years. 
Strong demand from foreign buyers has contributed to this, reflecting the global environment 
of low interest rates and “search for yield”. The risks appear manageable at this stage, but 
they  underscore  the  need  for  sound  lending  practices  and  for  appropriate  prudence  by 
investors.  
Concluding comments 
In  summing  up,  and  to return  to  my  original  theme,  the  Reserve  Bank has  a  longstanding 
mandate for financial stability, affirmed for example as part of the Wallis reforms in 1998. In 
the post-Wallis world, this has not been primarily a regulatory function. The Bank does have 
regulatory  powers  in  some  areas  relating  to  financial  stability,  notably  in  its  oversight  of 
payments  systems  and  financial  market  infrastructures.  But  the  financial  stability  function 
goes well beyond that to the Reserve Bank’s wider role in the financial system. It includes the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  Bank’s role as the liquidity manager for the system and as the provider and operator of core 
payments infrastructure. It also includes coordination with other regulators. At a formal level, 
this is done through the Bank’s role in chairing the Council of Financial Regulators, but there 
are numerous less formal channels of coordination and sharing of information and analysis. 
These arrangements were reviewed and supported most recently in the Murray Inquiry.  
One  important  component  of  this  financial  stability  work  is  the  provision  of  timely  risk 
analysis, to help inform the policy debate and also to help inform the decisions of lenders and 
investors. I have given a summary of our latest analysis today, and I hope you will find that 
helpful in informing your own investment decisions.  
With that, I thank you for your attention, and wish you every success.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
