  Benoît Cœuré: The European Central Bank’s operational framework in 
post-crisis times 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Economic  Symposium  “Designing  resilient 
monetary policy frameworks for the future”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 27 August 2016. 
 I  would  like  to  make  some  comments  this  morning  on  the  challenges  that  lie  ahead  for 
central  banks  and  how  our  monetary  policy  frameworks  should  adapt  to  them.  I  will 
admittedly  be  asking  more  questions  than  giving  answers.  I  won’t  be  giving  any  definitive 
guide to the future shape of the ECB’s monetary policy framework. What I will offer is my 
view  on  some  of  the  key  issues  on  this  topic  and  pose  some  questions  of  relevance  to 
policymakers. 
Monetary  policy  operational  frameworks  concern  the  intermediate  targets  of  central  banks 
and how they meet them. This is distinct from monetary policy strategies, which concern the 
quantitative definition of policy objectives, the horizon over which they should be delivered as 
well as the organisation and weighting of incoming information. 
Operational  frameworks  can  be  designed  along  two  main  dimensions:  (i)  the  operational 
target  for  monetary  policy;  and  (ii)  the  measures  used  for  implementing  that  target,  which 
include the mode of liquidity provision or absorption, the counterparties that are eligible to 
take part in those operations and facilities, and the choice of collateral which is accepted in 
reverse repo operations. Where central banks position themselves along these dimensions is 
clearly  path-dependent  but  it  depends,  among  other  things,  on  institutions  and  financial 
structures. A comparison between the pre-crisis frameworks of the Federal Reserve and the 
ECB illustrates the different possible constellations. 
While both central banks had similar operational targets – de facto one or more very short-
term interest rates – the asset side of the Fed’s balance sheet consisted mainly of outright 
holdings of US government bonds, considered as a safe asset. The Fed also steered liquidity 
conditions,  at  the  margin,  via  repos,  whereby  the  collateral  set  was  narrow  and  again 
dominated by that safe asset. By contrast, the ECB, lacking a single fiscal counterpart and 
operating across multiple jurisdictions, injected liquidity mainly through repos with banks and 
deployed  a  wider  collateral  and  counterparty  framework  (albeit  with  appropriate  credit 
safeguards). Credit was provided to around 1,800 counterparties, against a set of collateral 
that comprised many different asset classes. 
The  ECB’s  operational  framework  proved  flexible  when  the  crisis  hit,  helping  cushion  the 
initial financial turbulence. And as the crisis unfolded in successive “waves” and materially 
altered our market environment, we adopted further measures to meet the new challenges 
we  faced. We  are  thus  now  presented  with  an  important  question–  should  we  treat  these 
changes as temporary imperatives that should be withdrawn as soon as conditions permit, or 
should they form a permanent part of our operational framework? 
To answer this, we need to ask: of all the challenges we have faced during the crisis, which 
ones are likely to persist? And which measures should we retain to deal with them? In my 
view, there are two challenges that stand out. The first is how monetary policy should adapt 
to structural shifts in financial intermediation. The second is how to cope with the constraints 
imposed on central banks by the effective lower bound of interest rates. 
Shifts in financial intermediation 
Financial intermediation in recent years has been characterised by two structural shifts, one 
of which was specific to the euro area and one of which is global. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
In the euro area, financial markets underwent severe spatial fragmentation in the early phase 
of the crisis, with intermediation retreating behind national borders and impairing the bank 
lending  channel  of  monetary  policy.  Many  of  the  changes  to  our  operational  framework 
during  the  crisis  were  a  reaction  to  this.  For  example,  the  move  towards  fixed-rate  full 
allotment liquidity provision, the widening of our collateral framework and the extension of the 
maturity of our lending operations acted as crucial stabilisers and averted sudden stops in 
market funding for national banking systems. 
While  this  problem  has  now  largely  disappeared,  it  would  be  complacent  to  see  it  as 
completely resolved. Some key components of our banking union (such as the build-up of 
the  Single  Resolution  Fund  and  the  removal  of  national  options  and  discretions  in  bank 
supervision) are still being phased in, and some key drivers of fragmentation, such as the 
bank-sovereign  nexus,  remain  unsolved  –  not  to  mention  a  lingering  risk  of  political 
fragmentation. 
The second structural shift in patterns of intermediation, a global one, is linked to financial 
regulation.  Tighter  financial  regulation  is  both  increasingly  affecting  the  behaviour  of 
supervised entities, and encouraging a parallel shift towards unregulated forms of finance. 
This  dual  process  has  repercussions  for  monetary  policy  implementation.  It  increases 
demand for safe short-term instruments to meet new regulatory requirements, such as the 
liquidity  coverage  ratio  and  margin  requirements  for  derivatives.  And  it  fosters  the  use  of 
prime collateral for lenders in unregulated forms of finance as a form of self-protection. This 
is not necessarily undesirable: a higher share of non-bank financing is intended in the EU as 
part of the capital markets union project and will make our financial system more resilient to 
shocks originating in the banking system. 
But these shifts raise important questions for central banks’ operational frameworks. In my 
view the tail risk of spatial fragmentation is an argument for retaining certain elements of our 
crisis framework, in particular our “wider” collateral policy. 
The same could be said for the fixed-rate full allotment mode of liquidity provision. In the new 
regulatory environment there may be a need to accommodate a structural excess demand 
for liquid and safe financial claims. This may call for a framework where the central bank can 
separate the level of reserves from the level of policy rates on a permanent basis. Fixed-rate 
full allotment would support such a disentangling of interest rates from liquidity conditions. 
Another  question  is  how  to  adjust  our  framework  in  response  to  the  growth  of  non-bank 
finance  in  Europe.  A  more  market-based  financial  structure  may  make  it  easier  for  us  to 
provide  liquidity  via  outright  purchases,  which  may  in  turn  become  more  important  as  a 
regular  instrument  of  policy  if  we  operate  in  a  framework  of  excess  reserves.  In  that 
environment, the quantity of liquidity to be supplied could become a quasi-intermediate target 
almost on a par with the level of the policy rate. But then we could not rely solely on “passive” 
lending  operations  to  deliver  the  right  stance  of  policy:  we  would  need  a  more  active 
instrument to inject the “right” quantity of reserves. 
But  all  this  could  have  drawbacks  as  well.  First,  the monitoring  costs  and  complexity  of  a 
wide-collateral and counterparty framework are higher. Second, a framework based on fixed-
rate  full  allotment  would  to  some  extent  weaken  signals  of  liquidity  and  credit  risk  in  the 
money  market.  Third,  and  most  importantly,  the  responsibility  for  generating  safe  assets 
should not only fall on central banks, but on fiscal issuers – not necessarily by issuing more 
bonds,  which  may  make  them  less  safe,  but  by  improving  the  credibility  of  their  fiscal 
frameworks. In the euro area, common debt issuance could one day support this objective, if 
done in a way which does not undermine incentives for sound fiscal management. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The effective lower bound on interest rates 
Moving to the second challenge – the effective lower bound – recent evidence suggests that 
real neutral rates have fallen to very low levels, driven by both cyclical and structural forces.1 
This  challenge  is  common  to  advanced  economies  but  it  is  more  pronounced  in  the  euro 
area than in the US, given its markedly lower rate of potential output growth. In this context, 
all  major  central  banks  reduced  interest  rates  to  very  low  levels,  thereby  approaching  the 
effective  lower  bound  on  interest  rates.  They  responded  to  this  via  different  measures: 
providing  forward  guidance,  launching  large-scale  purchases  of  public  and  private  sector 
assets, and – in our case – by implementing a negative interest rate policy, which has in fact 
uncovered that the effective lower bound is lower than was previously thought. 
These measures have been very effective in supporting output and inflation and anchoring 
medium-term price stability. However, they were taken on the implicit assumption that they 
would be transient, both because monetary stimulus would help counter the cyclical forces 
depressing  the  real  equilibrium  rate  and  because  other  economic  policies  would  provide 
cyclical support and tackle the more structural drivers of low real rates. But if other economic 
policies do not in fact play this  role, then  we cannot exclude that the real equilibrium rate 
remains  low.  As  such,  we  may  see  short-term  rates  being  pushed  to  the  effective  lower 
bound more frequently in the event of macroeconomic shocks; and the stimulus provided by 
lowering interest rates to that level would be of course be much weaker. 
For  central  banks  to  retain  a  handle  on  output  and  inflation,  then,  unconventional  policies 
may  have  to  be  deployed  more  frequently.  But  this  would  come  with  at  least  three 
complications. 
First is the question of the operational target. A target focused on short-term interest rates 
makes sense  when  this  is  the  main  policy  variable,  but  if  short-term rates  are  persistently 
pushed towards the lower bound, monetary policy has to focus on a wider constellation of 
rates across different maturities and asset classes. What then is its target? Central bankers 
currently offer quantity targets in these cases – a volume of assets to be bought per month – 
but price targets are only given in general terms, for instance “flattening the yield curve”. This 
is  appropriate  so  long  as  balance  sheet  policies  are  temporary.  It  may  not  be  in  the  long 
term, but moving to price targets may come at the expense of price discovery. 
This links to the second complication: balance sheet policies can mitigate certain facets of 
the  safe  asset  shortage,  but  they  might  exacerbate  others.  In  particular,  balance  sheet 
policies have been stimulative by swapping central bank money for assets with duration and 
credit risk. But over time, if monetary policy continues to withdraw long-dated safe collateral 
from the market, there is a risk that it has a countervailing effect – i.e. that it exacerbates safe 
asset hoarding at the long end of the yield curve. As various academics have documented2, 
this could eventually put further downward pressure on real equilibrium rates. 
Central banks have responded to this by re-lending their portfolios of securities. But this is 
only  a  temporary fix.  The first  best  solution  would  clearly  be  for fiscal  issuers  to  generate 
more safe assets under the conditions outlined above. If this does not happen, central banks 
may  have  to  use  their  own  balance  sheets  to  satisfy  safe  asset  demand,  also  at  longer 
maturities. 
A third complication is that extended use of unconventional measures could come with rising 
side  effects,  for  instance  on  financial  stability,  financial  intermediation  and  international 
                                                
1   The real neutral rate points to the level of real interest rate where monetary policy is neither stimulating nor 
restraining economic growth. 
2   See Caballero, R.J., E. Farhi and P-O. Gourinchas , 2015, “Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB” 
NBER Working Paper No 21670, October 2015. And Caballero, R.J. and E. Farhi (2015), “The Safety Trap”, 
NBER Working Paper No 19927, February 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
spillovers. Thus far, the benefits of such measures have clearly outweighed their costs, but 
we  cannot  rule  out  a  situation  where  the  side  effects  are  such  that  the  negative 
consequences  prevail.  When  discussing  negative  interest  rates,  I  have  called  that  tipping 
point  the  “economic”  lower  bound,  in  contrast  to  the  “physical”  lower  bound,  where  large-
scale substitution with cash materialises, a point which has clearly not been reached.3 
This could mean a more frequent use of micro- and macroprudential measures to oppose the 
adverse financial stability effects of very low rates, also in countries affected by international 
spillovers. It could further accelerate shifts towards non-bank forms of intermediation with the 
consequences  I  described  above.  And  it  may  mean  moving  towards  a  regime  of  greater 
international cooperation and policy alignment to avoid a situation where the effective lower 
bound leads to competitive devaluations. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Today, we face an exceptional situation where the real equilibrium rate is very low. All the 
monetary policy measures we have taken were a necessary response to this. They stabilised 
the euro area economy and anchored medium-term price stability. But they were done on the 
assumption that low real rates would be temporary, because other policies would act in their 
fields of responsibility. 
The ECB’s operational framework and its monetary policy strategy are robust and sufficiently 
flexible to deal with the current challenges. We will fulfil the price stability mandate given to 
us  by  the  Treaty.  But  if  other  actors  do  not  take  the  necessary  measures  in  their  policy 
domains, we may need to dive deeper into our operational framework and strategy to do so. 
 
                                                
3   See Cœuré, B., 2016. “Assessing the implications of negative interest rates”, speech at the Yale Financial 
Crisis Forum, Yale School of Management, New Haven, 28 July 2016. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
