  Javier Guzmán Calafell: A growth reset for emerging markets 
Remarks  by  Mr  Javier  Guzmán  Calafell,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the 
“2016 Astana Economic Forum”, Flagship Session on “A growth reset for emerging markets”, 
hosted by the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Economic Research Institute 
(Kazakhstan),  the  Reinventing  Bretton-Woods  Committee  and  ISPG/International  Strategy 
Partners Group. Astana, Kazakhstan, 25 May 2016. 
 The views expressed in this document are strictly personal. 
First of all let me say I am very honored to participate in this session of the 2016 Astana 
Economic Forum. I would like at the outset to express my gratitude to the organizers for the 
invitation to speak at this event. 
During the years preceding the global financial crisis, Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) 
showed  a  remarkable  performance,  with  the  pace  of GDP  growth  increasing  in  the  period 
2000–2007  to  nearly  7  percent  per  year,  a  sharp  contrast  with  the  figures  of  3.3  and 
3.7 percent  observed  during  the  eighties  and  nineties,  respectively.  Naturally,  this  had 
important consequences for the composition of the world economy. Thus, the share of EMEs 
in global output (in PPP-adjusted terms) increased from 43 percent in 2000 to around one 
half by 2007. Moreover, this accelerated growth in EMEs had a significant impact on the well-
being  of  these  economies’  populations,  as  their  nominal  GDP  per  capita  (also  in  PPP-
adjusted terms) rose by nearly 70 percent during that period, thus narrowing the gap  with 
respect  to  the  advanced  economies  (AEs).1  Naturally,  this  performance  supported  the 
expectation of a much faster convergence between the two groups of economies. 
Following the economic difficulties deriving from the global financial crisis of 2008–2009, the 
risk of an abrupt end to this process arose. Nonetheless, EMEs displayed resilience to this 
shock, and even though their output growth decelerated in 2009, the outcome was far better 
than  the  outright  contraction  observed  in  the  AEs.  Moreover,  the  subsequent  rebound  in 
economic activity fed the expectation that EMEs could again perform as strongly as they had 
prior to the crisis, and hence resume the increase in income per capita towards AE levels. 
Unfortunately, the pace of economic activity in EMEs has been on a downward path since 
2011,  and  2016  could  well  mark  the  sixth  consecutive  year  of  declining  output  growth  in 
these economies. Even if the expectation of a slight increase in EMEs GDP growth for this 
year materializes, the differential vis-à-vis the AEs would still narrow to levels not seen since 
the  early  2000s.  It  is  important  to  emphasize  that  the  recent  performance  has  so  far  only 
slowed,  but  not  reversed  or  even  stopped, the global  convergence  process.  However,  the 
persistent  deceleration  of  EMEs  over  a  time  span  of  several  years,  and  its  generalization 
across countries and regions, certainly raise important concerns. 
Not  surprisingly,  these  developments  have  given  rise  to  a  lot  of  debate  on  the  possible 
factors  behind  them.  Many  observers  have  stressed  the  role  of  external  conditions.  In 
particular, the rate of expansion in the AEs has remained since 2011 significantly below its 
pre-crisis  long-run  average  (1.6  percent  in  2011–2015  vs  2.8  percent  in  1980–2007).  In 
addition, the volume of global trade of both goods and services has decelerated sharply in 
recent  years,  as  its  growth  rate  during  2011–2015  (3.9  percent  annual  average)  fell  well 
below its pre-crisis long-term average (6 percent in 1980–2007). Also, the terms of trade for 
the  EMEs  have  severely  deteriorated  since  mid-2014,  essentially  due  to  the  fall  that 
                                                
1  According to IMF data, per capita GDP in the EMEs (in PPP-adjusted terms), as a share of the corresponding 
figure in the AEs, increased from 14.5 percent in 2000 to 18 percent in 2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
commodity prices, especially oil, have displayed. Lastly, capital flows to EMEs have not only 
declined, but are significantly more volatile with respect to previous years. 
How important are external conditions for economic growth in EMEs? The IMF has recently 
attempted to  answer  this  question,  on  the  basis  of  a  study for  16  of the  largest  emerging 
market economies, accounting for a large share of the group’s output and spanning a broad 
spectrum of economic and structural characteristics.2 The conclusion is that external factors 
(including, but not limited to, growth in the AEs) contribute as much as or more than other 
factors in explaining deviations from estimated average growth during the period 1998–2013. 
Irrespective of the precise figures, it is unquestionable that external factors have played  a 
decisive role in EMEs growth performance in recent years. However, I am of the view that 
the main challenge for this group of countries in coming years is of a domestic, not of an 
external, nature. 
In this respect, it is worth to consider the following. 
First,  the  above-mentioned  IMF  study  finds  considerable  differences  across  time  and 
countries.  In  particular,  it  notes  that  internal  factors  contributed  more  to  deviations  from 
estimated  growth  during  the  slowdown  observed  after  the  global  financial  crisis.  Other 
studies reach a similar conclusion. For instance, according to research carried out by World 
Bank  staff,  although  the  recent  EMEs  slowdown  was  driven  initially  by  external  forces, 
domestic factors have increasingly weighed on growth.3 In fact, this study estimates that the 
growth  slowdown  in  EMEs  since  2011  has  predominantly  reflected  slowing  total  factor 
productivity (TFP) growth. The significant decline in TFP growth in EMEs in recent years has 
also been stressed by other analysts.4 
Furthermore, the evolution of economic growth in EMEs in coming years will be affected by 
demographic trends. Since 2010, working-age population growth has slowed from pre-crisis 
rates in all EME regions. In addition to the resulting slowdown of labor market inputs, this 
may adversely affect innovation, productivity growth and savings.5 
Second,  a  substantial  recovery  of  the  world  economy  in  coming  years  is  still  out  of  sight. 
Some  analysts  have  expressed  concern  about  the  possibility  of  chronic  low  growth  in  the 
advanced economies, be it as a result of factors on the demand (a long-lasting excess of 
saving  over  investment  pulling  down  growth,  inflation  and  real  interest  rates)  or  supply 
(ageing and low productivity growth among them) sides.6 Regardless of whether or not these 
fears prove valid, it will be, in all likelihood, a long time before we see again rates of growth in 
the AEs similar to those observed before the global financial crisis. 
It is also important to note that the transition to a new consumption-services based economic 
model in China, coupled with the nature of other challenges currently faced by its economy 
                                                
2  See International Monetary Fund (2014): “On the Receiving End? External Conditions and Emerging Market 
Growth Before, During, and After the Global Financial Crisis”, Chapter 4 of World Economic Outlook, April. 
3  See Didier, Tatiana et al. (2015): “Slowdown in Emerging Markets: Rough Patch or Prolonged Weakness?”, 
World Bank Group Policy Research Note, December. 
4  See  for  instance  International  Monetary  Fund  (2015):  “Where  Are  We  Headed?  Perspectives  on  Potential 
Output”, Chapter 3 of World Economic Outlook, April. 
5  See Didier, Tatiana et al. (2015): “Slowdown in Emerging Markets: Rough Patch or Prolonged Weakness?”, 
World Bank Group Policy Research Note, p. 29, December. 
6  See, for instance, Blanchard, Olivier et al. (2015): “Inflation and Activity – Two Explorations and their Monetary 
Policy  Implications”,  IMF  Working  Paper  No.  15/230,  November;  as  well  as  the  chapters  by  Lawrence 
Summers  (“Reflections  on  the  ‘New  Secular  Stagnation  Hypothesis’”)  and  Robert  Gordon  (“The  Turtle’s 
Progress: Secular Stagnation Meets the Headwinds”), among others, in Teulings, Coen and Richard Baldwin 
(2014): “Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures”, a VoxEU.org eBook. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
(high levels of debt, overcapacity and financial fragility, among others) are already affecting 
this country’s growth potential. 
In  this  context,  it  is  hardly  surprising  that,  after  recording  last  year  their  sharpest  decline 
since 2009, the terms of trade of goods and services for the EMEs as a group are projected 
to continue falling, although at gradually moderating rates, throughout 2021.7 Furthermore, 
the  perspective  of  a  normalization  of monetary  policy  in  the  United  States  and  the  overall 
situation  of  uncertainty  in  international  financial  markets  point  to  the  continuation  of 
challenging external financing conditions for several years to come. 
To sum up, both the nature of the recent deceleration of economic growth in EMEs, and the 
structural  transformation  of  the  external  environment  these  countries  are  facing,  underline 
the need to reinforce the internal sources of growth. In other words, without disregarding the 
importance  of  international  economic  cooperation,  the  fundamental  challenge  is  domestic, 
not external. 
What should EMEs do to meet this objective? 
The first requirement is of course to ensure macroeconomic stability. This is not an area of 
much  controversy.  The  empirical  evidence  shows  clearly  the  benefits  of  strong  public 
finances,  low  inflation  and  in  general  a  solid  macroeconomic  environment  for  the 
achievement of sustained and adequate rates of economic growth. However, implementation 
has proved to be a more challenging issue, as we continue to  see high fiscal and current 
account imbalances, as well as excessive debt levels, in a number of EMEs. The reasons 
are varied: inadequate diagnoses, external shocks, restrictions of a political nature, improper 
timing of policy implementation, poor coordination of different policy instruments, and so on. 
In  fact,  macroeconomic  policy  slippages  explain  partly  the  poor  economic  growth  results 
observed in several EMEs in the last years. A frequent recommendation for these countries 
is to use fiscal and monetary stimulus, whenever this is feasible, to support growth. But the 
fact  is  that  most  of  them  lack  the  room  to  implement  expansionary  demand  management 
policies under present circumstances. 
As  stressed  by  the  experience  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  financial  stability  is  a  second 
requirement to lay the basis for sustained growth. The standard recommendation here is the 
use  of  macroprudential  policies,  with  simultaneous  and  coordinated  efforts  at 
the 
macroeconomic and microprudential levels. To this, one must add the need to ensure the 
availability of more and better statistics, an appropriate analytical capacity and the creation of 
a suitable institutional framework. Although the international community has devoted a lot of 
energy  to  enhance  our  understanding  of  the  policy  framework  needed  to  ensure  financial 
stability,  we  still  have  many  theoretical  and  empirical  gaps  in  this  field.  Under  these 
circumstances, the safest approach seems to be to adhere as closely as possible to the state 
of  knowledge,  with  proper  consideration  of  domestic  conditions  and  an  emphasis  on 
prudence. 
The  third  crucial  requirement  to  foster  growth  in  EMEs  is  structural  reform.  Indeed,  the 
deceleration of TFP growth in recent years and the relevance of this factor in explaining the 
lower rates of economic activity in EMEs, clearly point to the need for action on the supply 
side. The crucial role of structural reform is underlined when taking into consideration that 
many  EMEs  face  the  risk  of  falling  into  a  “middle-income  trap”.8  At  lower  levels  of 
development,  the  availability  of  a  substantial  amount  of  underutilized  resources  and  easy 
productivity gains (stemming for instance from importing foreign technologies or mobilizing 
                                                
7  See International Monetary Fund (2016): World Economic Outlook, April. 
8  See  Eichengreen,  Barry  et  al.  (2012):  “When  Fast‐Growing  Economies  Slow  Down:  International  Evidence 
and  Implications  for  China”,  Asian  Economic  Papers  11  (1):  42‐87;  and  Eichengreen,  Barry  et  al.  (2013): 
“Growth Slowdowns Redux: New Evidence on the Middle‐Income Trap”, NBER Working Paper No. 18673. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
resources  from  agriculture  to  manufacturing)  allow  the  achievement  of  high  rates  of 
economic  growth.  As  the  opportunities  brought  about  by  starting  from  behind  dilute  with 
increased levels of income, potential growth declines. 
Unfortunately, the efforts of structural reform in EMEs stagnated in recent years. To some 
extent, this is a result of the high rates of economic growth observed in this period. In view of 
the  dynamism  displayed  by  their  economies,  the  authorities  of  many  emerging  market 
countries saw little need for economic reform. Thus, notwithstanding the opportunity provided 
by a favorable external environment, they did not carry out the structural measures needed 
to  increase  productivity  and  the  potential  for  growth.  The  global  financial  crisis  may  have 
even  worsened  the  situation,  as  one  of  its  side  effects  has  been  a  reversal  in  the  reform 
effort  in  a  number  of  areas,  with  only  a  few  countries  announcing  comprehensive  reform 
plans, China, India and Mexico among them.9 
Naturally,  this  situation  has  to  change  if  economic  growth  in  EMEs  is  to  continue  at  a 
reasonable pace. Reform priorities vary from one country to another, and therefore it is not 
possible  to  recommend specific  measures  that may  be  applicable  on  a  generalized  basis. 
However,  on  the  basis  of  the  international  experience,  a  few  general  principles  can  be 
underlined: 
• 
Economic  reforms  that  reduce  barriers to  the  efficient  functioning  of markets, fuel 
competition,  stimulate  innovation  and  the  adoption  of  new  technologies,  and 
encourage the accumulation of human and physical capital, including infrastructure, 
are associated with higher productivity growth. 
Policy  reforms  may  have  non-linear  effects  related  to  the  quality  of  political  and 
economic  institutions.  Therefore,  a  broad  range  of  institutional  factors  need  to  be 
taken into consideration in a process of reform. 
Reforms in different areas interact. These synergies must be taken into account to 
maximize the impact on productivity growth. 
A  proper  transition  to  a  greater  influence  of  market  forces,  and  therefore  an 
adequate sequencing of reforms, is critical for the success of these efforts. 
The  drivers  of  productivity  growth  may  vary  along  the  development  path.  The 
“middle-income trap” hypothesis points to different policy requirements at different 
levels of development. 
Approval  of  long-ranging  reforms  may  take  a  long  time,  among  other  reasons 
because of obstacles of a political nature. Also, the impact of reforms on productivity 
will normally be slow. As a result, the payoff of an early move in this direction will be 
usually very high. 
     To conclude, let me say a few words about the recent efforts of structural reform in Mexico, 
as  my  country’s  experience  can  provide  some  additional  insight  on  the  intricacies  of  this 
issue. During the period 1990–2011, Mexico’s economy recorded an average annual rate of 
growth  of  around  2.8  percent,  too  low  for  the  country’s  needs.  In  the  presence  of  a 
demographic  dividend,  the  main  factors  behind  this  performance  were  a  relatively  low 
investment rate and, particularly, a negative contribution to growth of total factor productivity. 
As a response to this situation, the Mexican authorities embarked since late 2012 on a far-
reaching  structural  reform  effort,  aimed  at  increasing  the  economy’s  growth  potential.  The 
                                                
9  See  World  Bank  (2015):  “Latin  America  Treads  a  Narrow  Path  to  Growth:  The  Slowdown  and  its 
Macroeconomic  Challenges”,  Semiannual  Report  of  the  Office  of  the  Regional  Chief  Economist,  April;  and 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2016): “Economic Policy Reforms 2016: Going for 
Growth Interim Report”, February.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
reform package encompassed a wide range of sectors, as well as a significant strengthening 
of the institutional setting. 
The structural reform measures are still under implementation, and the full gains from this 
transformation will take a long time to materialize. However, some results are readily visible. I 
would like to highlight in particular the evolution of inflation. As of the first half of May, the 
annual inflation rate in Mexico stood at 2.5 percent, below the 3 percent target. As a matter 
of fact, we have been observing figures consecutively under the target since May 2015, an 
unprecedented achievement. This is of course the result of many factors, the implementation 
of strong macroeconomic policies the most prominent among them. But structural reform has 
also played a major role in these developments. For instance, the competition brought about 
by reform in the telecommunications sector has resulted in significantly lower prices for these 
products, with beneficial effects on inflation.10 This has also been supported by a reduction in 
electricity prices, partly the result of reform in the energy sector. 
The recent performance of economic growth in Mexico is also worth noting. During the years 
before the eruption of the financial crisis (2000 to 2007), the Mexican economy showed an 
average annual rate of growth of around 2.7 percent. The figure for 2011 to 2015 is similar 
(2.8  percent),  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  rate  of  GDP  growth  of  our  main  trading 
partner, the United States, fell by 0.6 percentage points between these two periods,11 and 
that the economy was hit by a number of other external shocks, including a sharp decline in 
oil prices. It is also worth noting that Mexico is one of the few EMEs where a deceleration of 
growth is not observed during the two periods under consideration. Although it would be very 
difficult to isolate the different determinants of this performance, there is clearly a possibility 
that the structural reform process begun in 2012, is one of the factors behind the resilience of 
the Mexican economy’s rate of growth to the difficult external environment. 
All in all, on the basis of an adequate macroeconomic management and a comprehensive 
package  of  structural  reform,  in  a  context  of  financial  stability,  the  Mexican  economy  has 
been able to successfully weather the turbulent times of recent years. The task, however, is 
not complete yet. To start with, the role of the reforms in setting the economy’s pace over the 
long  term  is  heavily  dependent  on  their  adequate  implementation.  Furthermore,  structural 
reform is a dynamic process and therefore additional measures may be needed. Finally, it is 
also important to remember that, as in the case of other EMEs, the country’s macroeconomic 
position and financial stability are still subject to challenges, particularly in what is likely to 
remain an uncertain and volatile external environment. 
                                                
10  The  annual  rate  of  growth  of  the  prices  of  telephone  services  fell  from  13.7  percent  in  December  2013  to 
minus 14.5 percent in December 2015 and minus 12.8 percent in the first two weeks of May 2016. 
11  The US economy grew at an average annual rate of 2.6 percent during 2000–2007. After the crisis, its pace of 
expansion declined to 2.0 percent per year, on average, during 2011–2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
