   Barry Whiteside: Fiji’s financial inclusion goals 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
Stakeholder Engagement Workshop, Suva, 4 April 2016. 
 Excellency, Ms Litia Mawi, Roving Ambassador for Fiji 
Mr Mark Flaming, Manager , Pacific Financial Inclusion Program (PFIP) 
Mr Eliki Boletawa, Head of Policy, Programmes & Regional Initiatives, Alliance for Financial 
Inclusion (AFI) 
Permanent Secretaries and CEOs 
Senior Government Officials  
Colleagues  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Ni sa Bula Vinaka and a very good morning to you all! 
Welcome 
We are honoured to have so many Government officials here today and it is with great pleasure 
that I welcome you all to this workshop, which has been jointly organised by the Alliance for 
Financial Inclusion (AFI), the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme (PFIP) and the Reserve 
Bank of Fiji.  
On behalf of the Reserve Bank and the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce I wish to also 
express our sincere appreciation and gratitude to the Alliance for Financial Inclusion and the 
Pacific  Financial  Inclusion  Programme,  for  their  continuing  commitment  and  support  of 
financial inclusion in Fiji. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me begin by explaining why we have invited you here today. The 
key objective of this Workshop is to further engage Government and cultivate a truly broad 
based commitment to financial inclusion initiatives for Fiji.  
In  one  sentence,  financial  inclusion  is  all  about  providing  relevant  and  affordable  financial 
services and, importantly, the accompanying knowledge, to all our people, to enable them to 
improve their lives and wellbeing. 
Financial Inclusion is a key ingredient in Fiji’s current 5- and 20-year National Development 
Plans which promote “A Better Fiji for All”.  
As stated in the Plans, “A Better Fiji for All” means more employment opportunities, a decrease 
in  income  inequalities  and  significant  reduction  in  poverty,  empowerment  of  women,  and 
greater social and economic progress in the less-developed regions of our country - all leading 
to a better balance in our rural and urban livelihoods.  
All these issues are aligned to the strategic goals of our soon-to-be launched second National 
Financial Inclusion Strategic Plan (2016 – 2020), of which you will hopefully hear more during 
the course of today.  
To  put  things  in  perspective,  allow  me  to  briefly  share  some  key  outcomes  of  Fiji’s  recent 
financial  inclusion  journey.  Some  of  you  may  already  be  aware  of  the  developments  and 
achievements  which  have  already  been  implemented,  but  for  others,  this  may  help  you  to 
connect the dots. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Fiji – financial inclusion journey 
Prior to 2009, very little was known about financial inclusion in Fiji and it wasn’t something that 
was going anywhere in great leaps and bounds!  
For  the  Reserve  Bank,  our  financial  inclusion  journey  really  began  in  2009  with  the 
establishment  of  a  new  group  within  the  Bank  to  provide  more  focus  on  financial  systems 
development. In November of that year the Reserve Bank, together with the Pacific Financial 
Inclusion  Programme,  hosted  the  first  National  Microfinance  Workshop,  which  brought 
together many of the key stakeholders who were to play important roles in contributing to, and 
driving, financial inclusion.  
An important outcome of this initial workshop was the first 5-year National Financial Inclusion 
Strategy for Fiji (2010-2014), from which the current financial inclusion policy framework was 
adopted.  
Since  then  a  collaborative  approach  has  always  been  taken,  with  the  establishment  of the 
National Financial Inclusion Taskforce and its four working groups (covering financial products 
and services, financial literacy, data and inclusive insurance). This model provided a platform 
for effective collaboration between all stakeholders  who agreed to make financial  inclusion 
work in Fiji. Getting the buy-in of our stakeholders (including financial institutions, government 
agencies, mobile network operators, civil society and donors) was a critical first step in the 
process. This approach, I believe, has been instrumental to the success of most of our financial 
inclusion efforts. 
Some of the significant achievements which contributed to the meeting of our agreed targets 
from that first strategic plan, which ended last year, include: 
• 
the  integration  of  financial  education  (FinED)  into  the  school  curriculum  at  both 
primary  and  secondary  levels  (the  Education  Department,  together  with  PFIP, 
obviously played a major role, for which we are very grateful); 
the introduction of mobile money (through the mobile network operators); 
the  implementation  of  policies  for  commercial  banks:  which  included  the  setup  of 
microfinance units to extend financial services to the poor and low income households 
and to micro and small enterprises; and branchless banking guidelines for reliable 
and sustainable delivery of financial services to communities where there is no bank 
presence; 
the continuous public awareness, financial literacy and community outreach through 
the  national  microfinance  awards  and  financial  inclusion  expositions  around  the 
country; and  
the establishment of financial inclusion indicators and geo-spatial mapping of financial 
access points for monitoring of coverage and financial inclusion initiatives. 
   Notwithstanding the success of our journey so far, we recognise that there is still a lot to be 
done to ensure the ongoing effectiveness and sustainability of the initiatives that have been 
put in place. In this regard, we are now embarking on our second Financial Inclusion Strategy 
which will bring more of the underserved population into the formal sector by improving access 
and the actual usage of financial products and services. This will empower households and 
communities  to  effectively  contribute  to  poverty  reduction,  improved  quality  of  life  and  be 
agents for economic growth. 
Why financial inclusion is important to government? 
Ladies and Gentlemen, financial exclusion can impose significant costs on individuals, families 
and our society as a whole and tackling financial exclusion requires actions across a range of 
areas and of key stakeholders, especially Government departments.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    In 2015, the Reserve Bank together with AFI and the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme, 
carried out a demand side survey of financial access and usage. It is important to note from 
the results of this survey that more than a third of our adult population (approximately 221,000 
people) are excluded from any formal financial services.  
Building inclusive financial sectors improves people’s lives especially the vulnerable and poor 
in our communities. Improved financial access, such as a small loan, a savings account or an 
insurance policy, can make a difference to peoples’ lives. When individuals and families are 
able put some money away for the rainy day, save and invest in education for their children, 
housing and health, they are better able to deal with the unforeseen events and from falling 
deeper into poverty. Access will help people to better plan for the future.  
Government’s role 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  according  to  international  best  practices,  financial  inclusion  is  a 
collective responsibility that requires the buy in and support of the public and private sectors, 
civil society, donors and NGOs. We have a model that is built along these lines. I am also 
pleased to say that our hard working Prime Minister has agreed to be a special advocate or a 
champion of financial inclusion in Fiji. 
Government  has  a  very  important  role  in  driving  and  creating  an  enabling  environment for 
greater financial inclusion that can incentivise the private sector to invest in technology and 
offer affordable products and services to meet the needs of all consumers, particularly those 
that are underserved and excluded.  
What perhaps can be improved is the coordination and collaboration between the public and 
private sector in the alignment of programs and budgets from the National Development Plans 
to the National Financial Inclusion Strategies. 
It is pleasing to note areas where Government is already involved in driving and creating an 
enabling  environment  for  greater  financial  inclusion.  Some  examples  include  promoting 
savings and catalysing sustainable transaction volumes by moving social welfare payments, 
wages,  lease  payments  and  other  G2P  (Government  to  People)  payments  onto  electronic 
channels and ensuring that these channels are linked to easily accessible, basic transaction 
accounts. I am pleased to note the efforts by various departments in moving away from cash 
pay-outs to direct bank deposits. By doing this it has enabled many of the recipients to actually 
own a bank account for the very first time! 
Keeping the momentum 
Coming back to our second National Financial Inclusion Strategy (2016 – 2020) which is one 
of the key topics of today’s Workshop. This is a five year plan with measureable targets to 
guide the collaboration amongst multiple stakeholders and is part of the national agenda to 
contribute to a deep, competitive and stable financial system: an inclusive financial system that 
provides all Fijians irrespective of social and economic background, an equal opportunity to 
improve their livelihoods.  
The key, Ladies and Gentlemen, is partnership and coordination. This is the reason for the 
workshop today, to get your understanding and buy in and hopefully your partnership.   
Closing 
In closing, I thank you once again for taking time out of your busy schedules to attend this 
workshop. I urge you to openly discuss ways in which Government may better assist us in 
helping drive towards our financial inclusion goals. In the end it is all about helping our people 
and give them that hand up to a better life. 
I wish you all fruitful and productive day of sharing.  
Vinaka. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
