  Stefan Ingves: Norges Bank 200 years 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the celebrations to mark Norges Bank’s (Central Bank 
of Norway) 200th anniversary, Oslo, 16 June 2016. 
 Sweden and Norway have a lot in common. We understand one another’s languages. We 
have a common labour market, though it is nowadays mainly Swedes who travel to Norway 
to  work.  And  we  get  a  little  irritated  when  our  ski  champions  lose  to  our  neighbours.  But 
above all, we have in many respects a common history. 
Today  we  are  celebrating  the  200th  anniversary  of  Norges  Bank.  However,  the  monetary 
history  of  Norway  starts  even  further  back  in  time,  1000  years  earlier,  when  the  Vikings 
spread  fear  throughout  Europe.  Coins  first  arrived  in  Nor-way  with  Vikings  returning  from 
raids  in  England.  In  995  AD  the  first  Christian  king,  Olav  Trygvason,  came  to  power  in 
Norway. He is also important in numismatic history since the first known Norwegian coin is a 
penny  attributed  to  him.  Around  the  same  time,  the  first  Swedish  coin  was  minted  by 
Sweden’s first Christian king, Olof Skötkonung. 
There have been many links between Sweden and Norway throughout the centuries, from 
the  Kalmar  Union  of  Norway,  Denmark  and  Sweden  in  the  late  Middle  Ages  to  the  union 
between Sweden and Norway in the 19th century. 
During the Napoleonic war, Sweden lost Finland to Russia and in the Kiel peace treaty of 
January  1814  it  was  decided  that  Norway,  which  was  then  a  part  of the  Danish  kingdom, 
should  instead  join  Sweden.  The  treaty  was  of  course  op-posed  by  the  Norwegians,  and 
during  the  spring  of  1814,  when  Sweden  was  occupied  with  wars  on  other  fronts,  the 
Norwegians  took  action.  They  declared  their  independence,  drew  up  a  constitution  and 
appointed a committee to plan a new Norwegian central bank. But in July Swedish soldiers 
arrived. After a brief battle, Norway accepted the Swedish king as king of Norway. However, 
the union created was fairly loose. Except for the foreign service, Norway retained all state 
institutions that characterize an independent state. 
In June 1816, exactly 200 years ago, Norges Bank was established. The bank was located in 
Trondheim  far  from  the  politicians  in  Kristiania  (which  we  now  know  as  Oslo)  and  even 
further  away  from  Stockholm  and  the  Swedish  king.  Norges  Bank  was  founded  in  a 
challenging  environment  where  the  economy  was  in  a  state  of  chaos  following  the 
Napoleonic  wars,  and  confidence  in  the  monetary  system  was  low.  The  previous  joint 
currency with Denmark had col-lapsed, and attempts to restore it had failed. It took a long 
time  before  the  newly  established  Norges  Bank  managed  to  create  credibility  for  the 
Norwegian currency. 
In  the  first  years  of  its  existence,  the  bank’s  main  tasks  included  managing  silver  tax 
payments  and  handling  receipts,  printing  and  distributing  banknotes  and  bookkeeping.  In 
January 1817 it was the only bank in the country. It received deposits, but charged a fee for 
that service. Thus, today’s situation with depositors having to pay for keeping their money in 
the bank is not entirely a new phenomenon. 
In the 1870s Norway joined a currency union with Denmark and Sweden that lasted until the 
outbreak  of  the  First  World  War.  The  Scandinavian  countries  enjoyed  strong  economic 
growth during this period. Large cross-border capital flows supported the industrialization of 
the  Scandinavian  countries,  and  financial  integration  driven  by  the  gold  standard  and  the 
currency  union  was  probably  a  contributing  factor  to  the  favourable  development.  Both 
Sweden and Nor-way were relatively poor countries situated on the outskirts of Europe when 
Norges Bank was founded 200 years ago, but with the advent of industrialization in the late 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
19th century both countries began their journeys to become two of the richest nations in the 
world. 
Economic  and  political  developments  in  Norway  and  Sweden  have  also  showed  similar 
patterns in the period since the Second World War. The role of the central banks was very 
limited  in  both  Sweden  and  Norway.  The  monetary  policy  decisions  were  made  by  the 
government  and  Norges  Bank  became  more  of  a  technical  implementer  of  government 
policy.  For  much  of  the  1970s  and  1980s,  economic  policy  in  both  Norway  and  Sweden 
lacked  a  long  term  strategy  and  credibility.  Inflation  and  wages  soared,  and  lost 
competitiveness resulted in repeated devaluations. In 1982, after a large devaluation of the 
Swedish krona, it was declared that there would be no more devaluations. The same thing 
hap-pened in Norway in 1986, when the Norwegian krone was devalued for the tenth time in 
a  decade.  Interest-rate  setting  once  again  became  the  genuine  responsibility  of  Norges 
Bank. 
We  have  also  shared  similar  problems  regarding  the  lending  spree  that  started  in  the 
mid-1980s, and ended in a systematic banking crisis and in the worst re-cession since the 
1930s.  Both  countries experienced  solid  economic  growth  and  very  rapid  credit  and  asset 
price  growth,  followed  by  a  cyclical  downturn  and  heavy  loan  losses  that  exhausted  the 
capital  of  many  banks  that  had  over-ex-tended  themselves.  The  strong  credit  growth  was 
partly due to the earlier de-regulation. Borrowing was also encouraged by the generous tax 
deductions for interest payments. 
While the crisis was certainly aggravated by external shocks, such as the currency crisis in 
Europe in the early 1990s, it was mostly homemade through a bad policy mix and bad timing 
of reforms. However, prompt and broad-based government intervention helped the banking 
sector to recover relatively quickly. The fiscal costs of solving the banking crisis were also 
comparatively  low.  Nevertheless,  the  negative  impact  on  the  real  economy  was  severe, 
particularly in Sweden, and unemployment soared. 
Sweden had to pay a high price for its defence of the krona in the early 1990s, and a return 
to  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  was  not  a  realistic  option  at  the  time.  Instead,  a  new 
monetary framework took form. An inflation target was adopted and the krona was allowed to 
float free. In Norway, the situation was somewhat different. The Norwegian krone had not 
depreciated  as  much  when  Norway  left  the  exchange  rate  mechanism.  Norway  therefore 
returned  to  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  although  this  regime  gradually  changed  and  in 
2001 Norges Bank also formally adopted an inflation target and a new fiscal framework was 
introduced. 
So our two countries have had a similar strategy for monetary policy based on an inflation 
target and a floating exchange rate since 2001. During this period there have been frequent 
and deep contacts between our staff, and I am thankful for all that we at Sveriges Riksbank 
have learned from these exchanges of methodologies and other experiences. 
However, the emergence of Norway as an oil nation has made Norges Bank unique in many 
respects,  not  least  in managing  a  sovereign  wealth fund.  Norges  Bank is  one  of  very few 
central banks charged with such a task. In fact, this fund is one of the largest investors on the 
Swedish stock exchange. 
When Norway became an oil nation in the 1970s, the country started its journey to become 
one of the richest nations in the world. We Swedes have some-times been a little envious of 
this, and perhaps even thought it was a shame we no longer have the union! 
Huge oil revenues also create major challenges, and many countries have not managed so 
well.  But  Norway  has.  By  creating  the  petroleum  fund,  Norway  has  managed  to  save  the 
revenues  and  keep  them  separate  from  its  domestic  economy.  Furthermore,  the  fund 
managed  by  Norges  Bank  is  now  seen  as  a  model  showing  the  way  for  other  sovereign 
wealth funds. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Even  though  monetary  policy  in  Norway  –  and  Sweden  –  is  geared  towards  an  inflation 
target, the development of the exchange rate cannot be ignored. It is also worth noting that 
both the Riksbank and Norges Bank pursue their monetary policy in the shadow of the ECB. 
Both  central  banks  have  to  take  into  ac-count  the  effects  on  the  exchange  rate  of  its 
monetary policy, since the value of the krona greatly influences import prices and ultimately 
inflation. This may imply a monetary policy stance that is not optimal in terms of stabilizing 
the  domestic  economy  and  its  financial  system.  In  fact  this  is  one  of  the  main  issues  in 
economic policy in Sweden and Norway these days. 
Central  banking  is  not  limited  to  finding  and  optimal  strategy  for  monetary  pol-icy.  What 
central  banks  can  and  need  to  do  is  shaped  by  the  developments  in  the  whole  world 
economy,  and  largely  influenced  by  political  circumstances,  in-side  and  outside  our  own 
countries. Both formal cooperation and informal ex-changes of ideas is now intense between 
central banks in many countries, and in particular between Norges Bank and the Riksbank, 
who continue to face very similar challenges. 
So to round off: Norway and Sweden have followed one another through the centuries, in 
war and peace, through crises and growth. And we can be thankful that we have succeeded 
in moving from poverty to wealth and becoming two of the world’s wealthiest nations. Often 
the central banks have been able to contribute to higher welfare, but sometimes monetary 
policy has unfortunately been destabilizing. 
Our joint history is continuing, we have common challenges to face going for-ward. Higher 
capital and labour mobility throughout the world opens new possibilities to raise welfare even 
further, but globalisation also require that we try to find common strategies across countries. 
We can also enjoy our similarities and continue teasing one another when we meet on the 
sports field. As Sweden now follows its team in Euro 2016, we can’t help but ask, oh where’s 
Norway? But on the other hand we can expect a lot of teasing from you in the next world cup 
ski event! 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
