  Jens Weidmann: Hans Möller medal acceptance speech 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the 
Munich Volkswirte Alumni-Club, Munich, 1 July 2016. 
 Dear Mr Baader 
Ladies and gentlemen 
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  echo  the  words  of  welcome  offered  by  our  host  and  likewise 
welcome you to the Bundesbank’s Regional Office in Bavaria. 
The fact that you are holding your annual meeting here at the Bundesbank for the third time 
now after doing so in both 2012 and 2013 is a clear sign that you feel very much at home 
with us. But as you know, we do offer you a suitable venue and I can assure you, Mr Baader, 
that  you  didn’t  have  to  present  me  with  this  award  to  be  able  to  hold  your  meeting  here 
again. 
Nevertheless, I am of course delighted to receive the Hans Möller medal and I would like to 
express my sincere gratitude for this honour. 
You outlined the reasons for your choice just now, and I value them as support for my efforts 
to broaden my audience beyond narrow circles of relevant experts when discussing issues of 
European  integration  and  monetary  policy.  I  also feel  encouraged  to  continue  promoting  a 
stability-oriented monetary union. 
The  fact  that  a  club  of  economists  is  recognising  my  efforts  to  make  economic  issues 
accessible  to  a  wider  public  is  very  fitting  given  the  words  of  Hans-Werner  Sinn  in  his 
farewell lecture – namely that economists must, first and foremost, serve the people. 
Monetary policy and economic education 
But I’m not just an economist – I’m also a central banker. In this capacity, I have a special 
interest in communicating with audiences beyond industry professionals. 
This is because the successful functioning of any central bank hinges heavily on the support 
of the general public. Or, as Otmar Issing put it, “Ultimately, every society has the inflation 
rate that it wants and deserves.” 
It  is  without  a  doubt  easier  to  implement  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  when  the 
general public holds monetary stability in high regard. What’s more, the stronger the public’s 
support for a central bank’s stability-oriented stance and the greater the confidence it enjoys, 
the greater its level of independence becomes. 
Appreciation of monetary stability is, of course, not to be confused with detailed knowledge of 
the mechanisms of monetary policy, although there is evidence to suggest that a person’s 
appreciation increases in parallel with the knowledge he or she has about the way in which 
these two factors interact. 
A number of studies indicate that economic education has – to put it diplomatically – some 
room  for  improvement.  The  Bundesbank  has  therefore  expanded  its  economic  education 
programmes in recent years. 
By using educational materials and organising various types of events, we want to improve to 
the best of our ability the general public’s understanding of monetary and foreign exchange 
policy issues. For example, our Regional Offices provide teacher training, visit school groups 
and  organise  public  lectures  under  the  motto  “Forum  Bundesbank”.  The  feedback  that  we 
have received on these initiatives has been very positive. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  I myself meet once a year with teachers and once with pupils. Time and time again, I see 
when young people visit the Bundesbank that they are very interested in our work and ask 
intelligent questions. 
We should, of course, be aware that the impact that such measures can have is limited in 
terms  of  both  breadth  and  depth.  Such  was  the  account  recently  given  by  the  senior 
business editor of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung concerning her own offspring: “It is a 
positive thing that [the Bundesbank] goes into schools to raise awareness about monetary 
stability and to provide insights into the secrets of interest rate policy. It really is never too 
early  to  start tackling  such  topics  in  times  such as  these.  However,  it  should  be  under  no 
illusions as to the success of its efforts. My child took precisely one term away from the talk 
given by a Bundesbank representative to a year 12 class: marginal lending facility.” 
Incidentally, this technical term is even on the sixth form curriculum in Bavaria. That being 
said, it is also clear that the jargon that we have become accustomed to as central bankers 
should not detract from the essentials. 
The principle of liability as a guide 
But  it  is  not  just  vocabulary  that  detracts  from  the  essentials.  Nowadays,  economists’ 
reasoning is highly mathematical and model-oriented, which often makes it difficult for non-
economists to comprehend. However, institutional rules and regulations have also become 
so complex nowadays that often only a few experts are able to fully understand them. 
Consider  the  federal  financial  equalisation  system,  for  example.  Addressing  this  subject, 
Peer Steinbrück once said, “There are only three people that really understood this concept. 
The  first  is  dead.  The  second  is  in  a  mental  asylum.  The  third  is  me  –  and  I’ve  forgotten 
everything.” 
Another example is the Stability and Growth Pact. With respect to the annual budget deficit 
ceiling,  the  old  saying  was,  “3%  is  3%.”  In  the  meantime,  however,  there  are  now  federal 
states that have been flouting the deficit rule for seven years – and have been able to call 
upon the exceptional circumstances approved by the European Commission. 
These  days,  even  the  experts  are  hard-pressed  to  judge  whether  fiscal  rules  are  being 
observed or broken. The general public has long since bowed out of this discussion ... 
But  what  members  of  the  public  certainly  do  understand  are  the  basic  principles  of  the 
market economy as taught to them by their own life experience. 
Take  the  principle  of  individual  responsibility,  for  instance.  As  Walter  Eucken  once  put  it, 
“Those who reap the benefits must also bear the costs.” Conversely, however, the principle 
of liability also means that those who are liable for losses must also be those who, based on 
their decisions, are responsible for said losses. 
To illustrate what this means, I always like to draw the following comparison for my audience. 
Imagine that your neighbour were able to go shopping using your credit card and you had no 
control over what he or she was spending. You would quite rightly say that such a situation is 
unacceptable – “I can’t be liable for something that I have no control over.” 
However, the two propositions “Those who reap the benefits must also bear the costs” and “I 
can’t be liable for something that I have no control over” go beyond the personal level and 
apply in an institutional context as well. 
The principle of liability ensures that decisions are made more responsibly. This is also, and 
especially, true for the institutional architecture of monetary union. 
When  I  gave  my  speech  at  the  Volkswirte  Alumni-Club  three  years  ago,  I  quoted  today’s 
keynote  speaker  Harold  James,  who  wrote  in  his  book  “Making  the  European  Monetary 
Union”  that,  without  a  common  fiscal  regime  and  without  a  stable  financial  system,  the 
monetary union had a very high centre of gravity that made for vulnerability and instability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  To  stay  with  his  allegory,  the  aim  of  an  institutional  reform  in  the  monetary  union  must 
therefore be to lower its centre of gravity so that it cannot be blown off course so easily. But 
this will only work if the principle of liability is once again paid greater attention and a balance 
is struck between action and liability. 
The  essence  of  this  argument  was  taken  into  account  when  financial  regulation  was 
overhauled  and  the  banking  union  established.  By  tightening  capital  requirements  and 
introducing a bail-in regime, the principle of liability is being more rigorously enforced in the 
banking sector: the greater the volume of liable capital that shareholders and creditors have 
available, the greater the losses that a bank is able to shoulder and the less likely a taxpayer 
bail-out becomes. 
The  principle  of  liability  also  plays  an  important  role  in  the  discussion  surrounding  a 
European  deposit  insurance  scheme.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  a  single  deposit  insurance 
scheme could have a stabilising effect. 
However,  as  long  as  actions  at  the  national  level,  such  as  drafting  insolvency  law  or 
responding to very high stocks of government bonds on banks’ balance sheets, can have a 
substantial impact on the welfare of financial institutions, savers from other member states 
should not be held jointly liable. 
In this respect, I welcome the fact that the Economic and Financial Affairs Council will not 
decide on the European deposit insurance scheme until adequate de-risking measures have 
been taken. And it goes without saying that adequate measures also include regulatory steps 
leading to the end of preferential treatment of government bonds over loans to the private 
sector.  In  any  case,  risk-appropriate  capital  backing  and  limiting  government  bond 
investments  would  significantly  reduce  the  risk  of  recourse  being  made  to  the  deposit 
insurance scheme. 
Conclusions from the Brexit vote 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I agree with the President of the European Parliament, who has called for “a more unified 
and cohesive European Union”. 
But this should not come at the price of increased joint liability unless joint control rights at 
the European level are agreed at the same time. And, in this case, we would have to make 
sure that the decisions made at the European level are also conducive to stability. 
However,  many  of  the  proposals  put  forward  before  the  Brexit  referendum  and  aimed  at 
“completing monetary union” only focus on elements of joint liability and disregard the issue 
of joint decision-making. They obviously anticipate and accept member states’ reluctance to 
transfer national sovereignty to the community level. 
Although such proposals might lower the centre of gravity of the monetary union, to stay with 
Harold  James’  allegory,  they  would  also  shift  it  to  one  side,  which  would  not  enable  the 
monetary union to survive as a stability union in the long term. 
Opinions on the future shape of the monetary union therefore differ greatly. However, even 
where common rules have been agreed – in the area of fiscal policy, for instance, – they are 
not taken seriously, and the Commission lets the major euro-area countries, in particular, do 
largely as they please. Not only does this damage the reputation of the European institutions, 
it also impairs the soundness of public finances in the member states. 
Unsound public finances can make it more difficult for monetary policy makers to fulfil their 
mandate of ensuring price stability. It was precisely to protect the single currency that these 
fiscal  rules  were  agreed  in  order  to  prevent  monetary  policy  from  playing  second  fiddle  to 
fiscal policy and from coming under pressure to make high levels of debt sustainable through 
low interest rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Ladies and gentlemen 
It is not only in the United Kingdom that the EU is seen as a canvas on which to project the 
drawbacks of globalisation and migration. Euroscepticism exists in other EU member states, 
too, and is possibly even strengthened by the fact that Europe breaks its own rules. I can 
therefore only reiterate what the Federal Chancellor said on Tuesday: “A successful Europe 
is a Europe that respects its treaties and keeps its promises.” 
Euroscepticism in the United Kingdom was so strong that, despite numerous warnings about 
the economic consequences, the majority voted in favour of leaving the European Union. For 
the first time in the history of European integration, a country wishes to leave the EU. 
This decision is very regrettable and, in my eyes, a mistake. But it should be respected and 
we will have to deal with it. It would appear that it is becoming harder and harder to convince 
people of the benefits of the European Union and to encourage them to believe in Europe. 
The decision marks a turning point both for the United Kingdom and for the EU as a whole 
and we have no way of knowing exactly what the consequences will be. 
Although the result of the referendum appeared to take the financial markets by surprise – at 
least  judging  by  the  sharp  drop  of  11%  in  the  value  of  the  pound  sterling  on  Friday  –  all 
things considered, the reaction has not been disastrous so far. 
The  search  for  safe  investments  has  led  investors  towards  government  bonds,  which  has 
pushed long-term interest rates back down and caused the yield curve to flatten again. The 
stock markets also recorded price losses and the pound sterling remains under pressure. But 
overall, financial markets responded calmly and there were no signs of panic. 
This was probably because, among other things, the vast majority of banks and supervisory 
bodies  had  treated  the  Brexit  scenario  with  the  seriousness  it  deserved  and  had  been 
prepared for that outcome. Another reason for the lack of severe disruption is that banks are 
now  far  more resilient  than  they  were  in  the  autumn  of  2008.  Nowadays, thanks to tighter 
regulation, they hold more capital and are therefore more robust. 
Even so, it should be borne in mind that the fall in long-term interest rates and the further 
flattening of the yield curve will probably put more pressure on banks’ earnings, which are 
already squeezed. That alone is reason enough to doubt that we are already seeing the new 
equilibrium prices in the financial markets. This means that a prolonged period of uncertainty 
is a distinct possibility. 
The ECB, along with other major central banks, has therefore announced that it will supply 
additional liquidity if required. So far, this has not been necessary. 
It is not clear at present how serious the economic impact will actually be. 
In  the  run-up  to  the  Brexit  referendum,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  had  voiced 
concerns that established trade links would be disrupted, causing serious regional and global 
damage.  The  IMF  also  predicts  that,  until  the  terms  of  the  UK’s  withdrawal  have  been 
negotiated, the uncertainty will have negative implications for investment and will give rise to 
additional financial market volatility. 
Although the sharp depreciation of the pound sterling is likely to dampen the impact on the 
aggregate UK economy for a time, it is important to keep the spell of uncertainty as short as 
possible. 
It is in the interests of both parties for the EU and the United Kingdom to quickly enter into 
level-headed negotiations on their future relationship. Neither party will have anything to gain 
from erecting trade barriers. 
Negotiations should not revolve around treating the UK better than other countries such as 
Switzerland or Norway, nor, however, should the objective be to make a political example of 
the UK. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Ladies and gentlemen 
The  UK  economy  will  bear  the  brunt  of  the  Brexit  fallout,  although  the  pace  of  euro-area 
activity  might  decelerate  a  little  as  well.  And  there  is  no  way  of  telling  what  the  political 
implications will be. 
Brexit will probably also place a strain on Germany’s economy, particularly since the UK is 
Germany’s third most important export destination. 
The  Frankfurt  financial  centre  alone  might  see  new  opportunities  opening  up,  though  that 
would  also  call  for  political  backing.  We  should  welcome  any  businesses  that  shift  their 
activity from London to Frankfurt. 
I see no need for any further loosening of euro-area monetary policy in response to the Brexit 
vote.  Monetary  policy  is  already  in  highly  expansionary  mode,  and  it  is  doubtful  whether 
easing it further still would deliver any stimulus whatsoever. Monetary policy can be as easy 
as it likes, but that cannot prevent political uncertainty from dragging on the economy. 
The  crisis  that  has  now  engulfed  the  European  Union  is  a  political  one  that  needs  to  be 
resolved in the political sphere. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The  Brexit  referendum  on  23  June  marked  a  turning  point  in  the  history  of  European 
integration. 
The vote should be regarded as a warning shot in the debate on institutional reform in the 
euro area. 
It  was,  in  my  opinion,  a  grave  error  to  increase  mutual  liability  without  simultaneously 
communitising fiscal control rights. 
However,  if  willingness  to  transfer  sovereignty  to  Brussels  is  also  limited  in  the  euro-area 
countries, the monetary union can only be stabilised in the long term by reinforcing individual 
national responsibility in order to strike a balance between action and liability. 
Incidentally,  I  mentioned  this  three  years  ago  in  my  last  speech  here  at  the  Munich 
Volkswirte Alumni-Club. 
On that note, I would now like to conclude my remarks and hand over to Professor James, 
whose speech I very much look forward to hearing. 
But before I do that, I would like to warmly congratulate today’s award winners, and to pass 
on my own thanks. I am delighted to receive the Hans Möller medal and see it as a token of 
support and encouragement. 
Monetary policy and European integration are really not simple topics. Helping the general 
public to understand them is an important task. They are topics that do not just concern the 
experts, but all members of the general public. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
