   Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Enhancing the quality of Malaysia’s Islamic 
finance education 
Speech  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara Malaysia), at the launch of the Educator’s Manual on Shariah Standard Murabahah, 
Kuala Lumpur, 15 August 2016. 
 the 
from 
We  are  here  today  to  witness  the  launch  of  the  Educator's  Manual  on  Shariah  Standard 
Murabahah.  The  Manual  is  a  pioneering  effort.  Translating  the  Shariah  standard  and 
operational requirements into a user-friendly format for adoption in the academic syllabus of 
our  local  universities  will  go  a  long  way  in  enhancing  the  Islamic  finance  syllabus  by 
educational establishment.  
This is a great team effort. I would like to congratulate the panel of authors that have tirelessly 
contributed towards the production of this teaching guide. The Shariah Advisory Council (SAC) 
members,  researchers 
International  Shari'ah  Research  Academy  (ISRA), 
representatives from the Islamic Banking and Finance Institute Malaysia (IBFIM), the academic 
fraternity and the industry players. The dedication of the team has produced a manual that will 
make the overall learning experience more comprehensive, exciting and interactive. 
My  congratulations  and  appreciation  to  Universiti  Sains  Islam  Malaysia  (USIM)  and  the 
International Islamic University Malaysia (IIUM) for being visionary to participate in this pilot 
project. There is a wealth of benefits to be gained. It is our aspiration that other universities 
would be a part of this initiative that would contribute towards enhancing the quality of our 
Islamic finance education. 
For  the  past  three  decades,  Islamic  finance  in  Malaysia  has  undergone  a  journey  that  is 
marked with various significant milestones. I would like to highlight three major achievements 
of the industry in term of its development since inception. Firstly, Islamic finance in the country 
has  become  a  key  segment  in  the  financial  system.  What  was  once  a  novelty  is  now 
mainstream.  This  is  a  consequence  of  continuous  initiatives  to  build  a  solid  foundation, 
focusing  on  infrastructural,  institutional  and  capacity  building  measures,  as  well  as  robust 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  These  measures  are  the  cornerstones  of  Islamic 
finance industry’s growth. 
From  less  than  four  Islamic  banks  and  takaful  players  before  year  2000,  there  are  now 
27 players  that  offer  over  100  financial  products  beyond  the  basic  financial  offerings.  The 
industry is characterised by increasing competitiveness and innovation. The recently launched 
Investment Account Platform (IAP) is the latest initiative where the industry has cooperated to 
further enhance the offerings of Islamic banks. The IAP provides an online marketplace to 
match potential investors with viable ventures. Islamic banking assets have also grown beyond 
the  targeted  20%  as  originally  intended  in  Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s  Financial  Sector 
Masterplan. 
It now stands at more than a quarter (27%) of the total banking system. Islamic finance also 
provides financing to all segments of society irrespective of beliefs, race and gender. There is 
also  greater  acceptance  of  takaful  with  its  increased  penetration  rate  to  14.8%  of  the 
population. For over 3 decades, Islamic finance has grown and developed and contributed 
significantly to the development of the real economy. 
Secondly, enhanced integration with the global market has enabled greater trade and financial 
linkages.  Malaysia  is  now  positioned  at  the  forefront  of  international  developments  with 
increasing  connectivity  between  financial  centres,  and  more  cross-border  Islamic  financial 
transactions. Our sukuk market constitutes more than 50% of global sukuk outstanding for the 
past 16 years. Malaysia as an international Islamic finance marketplace offers an attractive 
and facilitative platform for foreign issuers to tap our domestic sukuk market. There have been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   various issuances of multicurrency sukuk in US Dollar, Singapore Dollar, Chinese Renminbi 
and Japanese Yen. There are also stronger bilateral ties with various countries such as the 
United Kingdom, Hong Kong, Turkey, Indonesia and Japan. 
These  interlinkages  open  up  greater  opportunities  to  introduce  and  strategically  position 
Islamic finance services globally while providing opportunities for meaningful participation of 
our local players as lead arrangers for some of the global sukuk issuances. The gains are also 
extended to our ancillary service providers that were able to establish greater connections with 
the international market. 
Thirdly, Malaysia's pioneering initiatives and thought leadership in Islamic finance has enabled 
the country to advance innovation in the Islamic finance industry. On the regulatory front, the 
modernisation of the regulatory framework through the Islamic Financial Services Act 2013 
(IFSA) provides an opportunity and space for Islamic financial institutions to offer new products 
and services. 
The launch that we are witnessing today is a major initiative, the development of a Shariah 
standard that is integrated with details on operational requirements. This approach ensures a 
transparent basis of Shariah rulings by the SAC, and provides a convergent in understanding 
between  Shariah  scholars  and  industry  practitioners.  In  judiciary  matters,  where  the  SAC 
serves as a reference point in analysing muamalat cases, the court can also draw on these 
comprehensive and transparent Shariah standards as basis in arriving at a court ruling. The 
adoption of the standards by learning institutions will pave the way for greater understanding 
and  acceptance  of  these  standards  as  a  global  starting  point  of  reference  for  the  Islamic 
finance community. 
As we launch the Educator’s Manual, which is the first of 14 series of manuals, I would like to 
share my thoughts on our approach in developing the Shariah standards, and would also like 
to  emphasise  the  importance  of  embracing  diversity  and  mutual  respect  in  Shariah 
interpretations. I shall deliberate on two additional areas that stakeholders need to consider to 
maximise the benefits of having the Manual; reconfiguration of academic programmes and 
strategising talent deployment.  
The future growth of Islamic finance, especially cross border, is very much dependent on the 
harmonisation  and  mutual  recognition  of  Shariah  views  and  rulings  across  the  globe.  It  is 
critical if cross border trades are to be strengthened. Numerous efforts are being pursued to 
narrow  the  opinion  gaps  between  scholars  through  symposiums,  roundtables  as  well  as 
bilateral dialogues. However, narrowing of Shariah opinions is preferable but not critical. The 
fact is, differences in views and opinions among scholars are a historical fact, and an accepted 
facet in the area of Shariah, particularly in matters relating to fiqh muamalat (jurisprudence). 
In fact, my own view is that great Islamic civilisation of yesteryears was possible and the envy 
of many because of our diversity, tolerance and mutual respect of each other's view. 
In the context of the Shariah Standards, the dynamic process of its development involves the 
act of harmonising the differences and embracing diversity. We respect views of others which 
are  different  from  ours  by  looking  into  the  wisdom  of  earlier  scholars  from  all  recognised 
schools  of  thought  (Mazhabs).  We  are  also  willing  to  arrive  at  new  rulings  where  it  is 
appropriate.  This  broadens  the  reference  scope  for  Shariah  scholars  to  have  an  enriching 
debate on the best application of Shariah in contemporary finance, based on the customs, 
legal and operational framework of each market. This is an important principle, as it increases 
the depth of fiqh research that leads to greater understanding of practices in Muamalat through 
the  times  while  recognising  the  influence  of  local  tradition,  as  well  as  domestic  business 
practices.  The  act  of  balancing  the  authenticity  and  practicality  of  the  different  Shariah 
interpretations is an important component in seeking a solution for the benefits and welfare of 
the ummah. 
In this respect, the guiding philosophy of the SAC has always been to formulate a collective 
ijtihad or Shariah rulings that are comprehensive, inclusive and pragmatic, without sacrificing 
the sacred objectives of Shariah. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   I very much believe in the importance of embracing diversity in Shariah interpretations within 
the academic community. Students who are exposed to the teachings of all schools of thought 
from  the  very  beginning  would  get  to  appreciate  the  intellectual  differences  and  value  the 
flexibility arising from differing opinions. This provides an opportunity to open and sharpen their 
minds  and  widen  their  thinking  by  exploring  issues  from  multidimensional  perspectives. 
Through this way, the talent that we nurture and produce would not only be equipped with 
Shariah  know-hows,  but  also  with  intellectual  courage  that  can  articulate  contemporary 
Shariah issues in the context of domestic customs and business environment.  
I would like to expand my thoughts on the two additional areas that, if pursued could further 
enhance stakeholder gains from the Educator’s Manual: 
• 
First, is the reconfiguration of academic programmes to nurture talent with enhanced 
employability; and 
Second, strategising talent deployment to reduce time to competency. 
 Reconfiguration of academic programmes 
Continuous  enhancements  of  curriculums  in  universities  are  critical  to  increase  the 
employability  factor  of  our  students.  These  include  reconfiguration  of  the  academic 
programmes at universities and enhancements to the learning tools and methods of teaching. 
This adds to the traditional pedagogy to ensure its dynamism through evolving times, while 
providing the right learning environment that can challenge the minds and sharpen the skills 
and experience of our students. One such addition is experiential learning. 
The  adoption  of  experiential  learning  opens  the  window  of  opportunity  for  students  to  go 
beyond theory-based teaching. Examples include industry-wide internship, real life problem 
solving  assignments  and  apprenticeship  programmes  for  students.  These  methods  create 
greater  connection  between  classroom  learning  with  the  real  world.  I  believe  this  form  of 
experiential learning is a strong stimulant to knowledge acquisition that encourages students 
to develop their skills while experiencing responsible decision making in real-time. Experience 
in  real  life  situations  differentiates  experiential  learning  from  cognitive  and  behavioural 
learning. This provides the students with a competitive edge and increases the probability of 
success for graduates at entry-level into the workforce. 
Islamic finance industry can contribute significantly towards experiential learning. Malaysia, 
with its long history that includes the development of Islamic finance over three decades is 
content rich and ideal for case study research. There are many matters and areas that require 
in-depth research and solutions. The case study method is another popular learning tool that 
has proven to be effective in enhancing and strengthening critical appraisal and understanding 
among  students.  The  case  study  method  also  provides  an  opportunity  to  discuss  multiple 
perspectives in dealing with issues. 
Within the Islamic finance realm, prospective cases studies can include amongst others the 
application of Shariah Standards by Islamic banks and its effects on product structuring and 
pricing strategy, legal aspects, risk management, oversight function and governance process 
of the banks. For the takaful sector, case studies on microtakaful for example can lead to the 
development  of  protection  schemes  that  can  be  offered  at  affordable  prices.  I  trust  the 
academia has enough resources to produce such case studies and generate new research 
findings and breakthroughs, given the knowledge and expertise of their academic faculties. 
In essence, we need to be more exploratory and brave to rigorously investigate or examine 
real life situations and complex scenarios and benefit from hindsight and learnt lessons that 
can give new solutions for future growth. 
The initiative to develop the Educator's Manual is in itself a good starting point to encourage 
universities to move towards experiential learning. Students will be exposed to Shariah and 
operational requirements covering areas such as product structuring, legal, accounting as well 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   as risk management. The transparent nature of the standards would enable students to critique 
and form their own views and conclusions. It is a leap forward to change the paradigm on the 
theoretical and operational aspects of Shariah applications. This initiative is certainly a game-
changer for our Islamic finance education programme. 
This  initiative  is  also  an  important  milestone  in  terms  of  academia-industry  cooperation  in 
equipping  our  students  with  industry  relevant  and  contemporary  application  of  Shariah 
contracts in Islamic financial products and services. 
Given the new content on the subject matter, a pre-condition to successfully implement the 
learning  guide  is  to  train  and  expose  lecturers  to  multiple  disciplines  of  subject  matters. 
Particularly,  as the  applications  of the  Shariah  and  operational  requirements  cover  various 
fields  that  include  legal,  accounting,  risk  management  and  information  technology. 
Developmental  training  is  a  critical  component  as  it  enables  the  imparting  of  knowledge 
effectively. 
Strategising talent deployment 
While it is acknowledged that the role of learning institutions is essential to develop talent with 
higher skill  sets, the  industry  also  has  an  important  role to  ensure  effective  deployment  of 
graduates as they enter the workforce. The number of graduates is indeed increasing at a 
rapid rate. The general feedback of Shariah graduates however is the lack of opportunities for 
employment. But the reality is that the industry still grapples with shortage of the right talent 
that can lead and energise innovation. A solution is to reconcile the expectation gaps of the 
industry and graduates. Talent enrichment program is one area where we can pursue to bring 
out  the  best  of  student  talent.  Enrichment  programmes  in  areas  beyond  Shariah,  such  as 
leadership training at the early stage of recruitment would strengthen the confidence of Shariah 
students  and  provide  the  required  exposure  for  them  to  understand  and  appreciate  the 
intricacies of business environment. 
Over the years, the Bank established specialised institutions to enrich the talent ecosystem. 
These institutions, namely INCEIF, ISRA, IBFIM, the Chartered Institute of Islamic Finance 
Professionals  (CIIF)  and  the  Association  of  Shariah  Advisors  in  Islamic  Finance  Malaysia 
(ASAS) have collectively contributed towards sustainable development of professionals and 
expertise in the industry. 
I am pleased to note that the industry has significantly benefitted from the contribution of these 
institutions. INCEIF is now widely recognised as a global university in Islamic finance and has 
enrolled more than 2,000 students from 80 countries and produced over 1,000 graduates to 
date.  ISRA  plays  an  instrumental  role  as  a  dedicated  Shariah  research  arm  as  well  as  a 
knowledge  repository  for  Islamic  finance.  It  is  known  as  one  of  the  key  players  in  Islamic 
finance research globally and has emerged as the top contributor in Islamic finance research 
between  2011–2013.  IBFIM,  which  is  the  industry  training  arm,  has  also  made  significant 
achievements with over 6,400 participants attending its training programmes in 2015. In raising 
the bar of professionalism, the Chartered Institute of Islamic Finance Professionals as the first 
professional body in Islamic finance seeks to promote the highest standards of professional 
practice amongst Islamic finance practitioners. Two standards on the admission of members 
and accreditation of institutions have been issued in November last year and two more are 
anticipated in 2016. ASAS, with prominent scholars as its members, has also embarked on 
various initiatives that have contributed towards its objective of inculcating the highest level of 
professionalism of Shariah advisors. 
Despite all these achievements, we must admit that there is no room for complacency. We 
must continue to establish new grounds and set new thresholds for our organisations towards 
greater success. In this context, I am pleased to inform that the Bank will be forming a Steering 
Committee made up of representatives from both industry and academia to undertake an in-
depth review of the strategic positioning of these important organisations. It is as part of our 
efforts to re-energise and reinvent the Islamic finance talent development landscape. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Conclusion 
The collective efforts of everyone here today will determine the path of Islamic finance moving 
forward.  A  simple  yet meaningful  event  to  witness  the  launching  of  the Educator’s  Manual 
today will be an important learning tool for many of our future students. I wish to record again 
our sincere thanks for the contribution and commitment of many people, particularly from the 
panel of authors and members of academia and wish everyone continuous success for the 
upcoming series of the future manuals. 
Dengan  lafaz  Bismillahirrahmanirrahim,  saya  melancarkan  Educator's  Manual  on  Shariah 
Standard Murabahah. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
