   William C Dudley: The US economic outlook and implications for 
monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Economic  Leadership  Forum,  Somerset,  New  Jersey, 
15 January 2016. 
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to join you again at the Economic Leadership Forum. I 
would  like  to  thank  John  McWeeney  of  the  New  Jersey  Bankers  Association  and  Rutgers 
University for the invitation to be here today. Northern New Jersey is a vital part of the New 
York Fed’s district, and I don’t just say that because I live here. My staff and I actively maintain 
ties  with  local  community,  business  and  banking  leaders,  and  we  always  benefit  from 
opportunities to hear about what is on your mind. 
I am particularly delighted to see that community banks are well represented here today. The 
Federal Reserve understands the importance of a vibrant community banking sector and the 
crucial  role  community  banks  play  in  supporting  the  activities  of  local  businesses  and 
households. While protecting the safety and soundness of the financial system is an important 
part of the Federal Reserve’s mandate, I believe that the regulation of community banks should 
be appropriately calibrated to reflect the lower degree of risk they pose to the financial system 
relative to larger banks. In other words, community banks should not be subject to the same 
set of regulations that are applied to the most systemically important banking organizations. 
In my remarks, I will discuss the U.S. economic outlook and the implications for U.S. monetary 
policy. I will focus primarily on last month’s Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) “lift-off” 
decision – the first increase in the federal funds rate target range in nearly 10 years. I’ll explain 
what motivated my vote to begin to normalize U.S. monetary policy. I’ll also offer a preliminary 
assessment of how things are going so far – both with respect to how the U.S. bond market 
reacted to lift-off and how well our new tools are working as we begin to push up short-term 
interest rates. Both issues are pertinent, as money market rates have spent a very long time 
close  to  zero  and  we  have  never  attempted  to  tighten  monetary  policy  with  such  a  large 
balance sheet and high level of excess reserves. To summarize my conclusions: Generally so 
far, so good on both fronts. 
Looking ahead, I’ll talk about what comes next. No surprises here – it depends on the data. As 
noted in the December FOMC statement, we expect that the normalization of monetary policy 
will be quite gradual. But, there is no commitment here. The flow of the data – broadly defined 
– will drive our actions as it influences our assessment of the economic outlook and our view 
of  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  best  suited  to  achieve  our  dual  mandate  objectives  of 
maximum sustainable employment and price stability. As always, what I have to say reflects 
my own views and not necessarily those of the FOMC or the Federal Reserve System.1  
In terms of the economic outlook, the situation does not appear to have changed much since 
the last FOMC meeting. Some recent activity indicators have been on the softer side, pointing 
to a relatively weak fourth quarter for real GDP growth. But this needs to be weighed against 
the strength evident in the U.S. labor market. I continue to expect that the economy will expand 
at  a  pace  slightly  above  its  long-term  trend  in  2016.  In  other  words,  I  anticipate  sufficient 
economic strength to push the unemployment rate down a bit further and to more fully utilize 
the nation’s labor resources. 
                                                
1   Antoine Martin, Jamie McAndrews, Jonathan McCarthy, Paolo Pesenti and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing 
these remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Turning  to  inflation,  we  continue  to  fall  short  of  our  2  percent  objective  for  the  personal 
consumption expenditure (PCE) deflator. But I take it as a positive sign that the core PCE 
inflation rate – that is, excluding food and energy – has been quite stable despite the downward 
pressure being exerted by lower energy prices on the prices of non-energy goods and services, 
as well as the drop in non-energy import prices from a firmer dollar. 
Going into more detail, U.S. economic activity has areas of both strength and weakness. On 
the  stronger  side  of  the  ledger,  domestic  demand  is  doing  reasonably  well.  In  particular, 
consumption and housing activity continue to expand at a moderate pace. Consumer spending 
has been supported by solid real disposable income growth, which has been underpinned, in 
turn, by sturdy job gains and falling energy prices. Residential investment has been slowly 
increasing for several years and that trend seems likely to continue in 2016. Housing starts are 
still  well  below  the  rate  consistent  with  the  nation’s  population  growth  rate,  and  the 
fundamentals of housing demand remain positive. Rising employment is likely to boost the 
household  formation  rate  and  low  mortgage  interest  rates  should  keep  housing  relatively 
affordable, despite the ongoing recovery in home prices. Last month’s passage of a fiscal 2016 
budget package should also provide support to economic activity. Not only does this budget 
package reduce uncertainty about the budgetary outlook, but its extension of a number of tax 
breaks and easing of the caps on domestic and military spending means that fiscal policy in 
2016 will likely turn somewhat stimulative. 
On the weaker side, the collapse in energy prices continues to pull down domestic investment 
in oil and gas drilling projects. Although this adjustment is now well-advanced, I suspect that 
there remains a further leg down given the sector’s diminished cash flows and the reduced 
access to credit. In addition, manufacturing remains very soft – hurt by the drop in energy-
related investment, an ongoing inventory adjustment and the loss of competitiveness caused 
by the persistent strength of the U.S. dollar. Even the one bright spot in manufacturing over 
the  past  year  –  the  auto  sector  –  seems  to  be  close  to  a  cyclical  peak.  Thus,  I  suspect 
manufacturing will continue to be soft in 2016. Overseas developments, especially with respect 
to the  emerging  market economies,  pose  a risk to the  U.S.  economic  outlook  –  potentially 
exerting greater restraint on the demand for U.S. exports and contributing to greater turbulence 
in  global  financial  markets.  Putting  these  positives  and  negatives  together,  the  most  likely 
outlook seems to be more of what we have experienced in this expansion – an economy that 
grows at slightly above a 2 percent annual rate this year. 
The  inflation  outlook  also  has  not  changed much. Inflation remains  well  below  the  Federal 
Reserve’s 2 percent objective. In my assessment, this is due mainly to weaker energy prices 
and the impact of a stronger dollar on non-energy import prices. However, the fact that core 
measures of inflation are considerably higher than the headline readings, and have been quite 
stable in recent months, suggests to me that we are likely to see inflation rise once energy 
prices  stop  falling  and  the  dollar  stops  appreciating  –  clearly  neither  trend  can  persist 
indefinitely. Of course, this assumes that the U.S. economy grows sufficiently rapidly so that 
pressure on available labor and capital resources continues to increase. 
With respect to the risks to the inflation outlook, the most concerning is the possibility that 
inflation expectations become unanchored to the downside. This would be problematic were it 
to occur because inflation expectations are an important driver of actual inflation. If inflation 
expectations become unanchored to the downside, it would become much more difficult to 
push inflation back up to the central bank’s objective. Japan’s difficult experience indicates the 
importance of avoiding such an outcome. 
For  this  reason,  we  closely  monitor  inflation  expectations.  Inflation  measured  by  the  PCE 
deflator has been running below the FOMC’s objective since May 2012. A concern is whether 
these persistent underruns in inflation may be beginning to weigh on inflation expectations. 
Some surveys of inflation expectations have softened recently. For example, the University of 
Michigan measure of median long-term household inflation expectations – that is, expected 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   inflation at a five-to ten-year horizon – is currently at 2.6 percent. This is near the very bottom 
end of its range over the past two decades. 
The New York Fed’s Survey of Consumer Expectations also shows softness. The median of 
3-year  inflation  expectations  has  declined  over  the  past  year,  falling  by  22  basis  points  to 
2.8 percent. While the magnitude of this decline is small, I think it is noteworthy because the 
current reading is below where we have been during the survey history. Up until July 2014, the 
median largely stayed in the range from 3.2 to 3.4 percent, and from July 2014 to July 2015 it 
remained near 3 percent. 
While  it  has  a  short  history,  I  put  more  weight  on  the  New  York  Fed’s  survey  because  its 
methodology should be more robust in accurately assessing consumer inflation expectations. 
Compared to the more widely followed University of Michigan survey, for example, the New 
York Fed survey has several advantages. The sample size is larger, most of the people that 
are interviewed are the same each month, and the inflation expectations question is posed 
differently to focus the respondent’s attention on inflation rather than on prices. We believe that 
all these factors lead to a more reliable estimate of inflation expectations. 
Obviously,  I  didn’t  think  the  degree  of  weakness  we  have  seen  in  our  survey  measure  of 
inflation  expectations  was  of  sufficient  concern  to  defer  the  start  of  monetary  policy 
normalization. And, as long as the economy continues to grow at an above-trend pace, I expect 
the  increase  in  resource  utilization  will  be  sufficient  to  push  both  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations higher over time. That said, should the economy unexpectedly weaken, then this 
fall in inflation expectations would become more concerning. 
Assuming, as I anticipate, that inflation does move back towards our 2 percent target, I am 
often asked how tolerant would I be of an overshoot? In other words, is the 2 percent inflation 
target a ceiling or not? I don’t think of the 2 percent objective as a ceiling. I would be equally 
intolerant of misses relative to 2 percent in both directions, above or below, with my intolerance 
growing the further we deviated from our 2 percent objective. We will almost certainly never 
be precisely at our 2 percent objective for any length of time given all the forces – many of 
which  are  not  under  our  control  –  that  influence  actual  inflation  outcomes  over  a  business 
cycle. Thus, with a neutral monetary policy, my goal would be to spend about the same amount 
of time slightly above as slightly below our 2 percent objective. 
Turning now to U.S. monetary policy, why did I favor raising the federal funds rate target last 
month? Basically, my assessment was that our conditions for lift-off had been met. Recall, 
these  two  conditions  were:  1)  further  improvement  in  the  labor  market  that  we  anticipated 
would be sustained in 2016, and 2) greater confidence that inflation would begin to move back 
towards our 2 percent inflation objective over the medium term. 
The timing of policy normalization involves a balancing of risks. I don’t disagree with our critics 
that  there  were  risks  from  lifting  off  in  December  versus  waiting  a  little  longer.  First,  the 
economy might turn out to be more fragile than we anticipate, or economic shocks could push 
the economy off-course relative to our expectations. In other words, our economic projections 
might be too optimistic. Second, the first tightening move might itself provoke another taper 
tantrum characterized by higher bond yields and tighter financial market conditions that could 
be sufficiently strong to impede the economic recovery. 
My  judgment  was  that  these  risks  were  manageable.  First,  downside  forecast  errors  are 
certainly  possible,  but  the  U.S.  economy  appears  to  be  on  sufficiently  sound  footing  to 
withstand downside shocks better than was the case a few years ago. Second, I felt that the 
likelihood of a substantial tightening in financial market conditions due to lift-off was relatively 
low, in part, because the rate hike was widely anticipated. Market conditions had adjusted quite 
smoothly  –  except  for  some  strains  observed  in  the  high-yield  debt  market  –  as  market 
participants placed higher odds of tightening in the weeks preceding the December FOMC 
meeting. This reinforced that conclusion. A large market reaction would have been a surprise 
given that this was one of the most anticipated monetary policy events in history. Also, the 
policy action needs to be viewed in context. While this decision was the first upward adjustment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   to short-term rates in nearly 10 years, the actual move was small – only 25 basis points – 
which, by itself, should have only a very mild impact on the overall trajectory of the economy. 
As we noted in the FOMC statement and as Chair Yellen pointed out in her December press 
conference, even after this rate hike, the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative. 
Moreover, it is important to recognize that there are also significant risks from waiting longer 
to lift off. Upside forecast errors are also certainly possible. For example, while the pace of 
growth has generally been weaker than expected in recent years, the pace of labor market 
improvement  has  generally  been  stronger.  By  waiting,  we  would  increase  the  risk  that  we 
would  need  to  raise  rates  more  aggressively  in  the  future.  This  could  unduly  threaten  the 
economic expansion. In balancing these risks, relatively “early and slow” seems like a better 
strategy  than  “late  and  fast”  –  especially  when  one  is  uncertain  both  about  the  degree  of 
accommodation being provided by monetary policy and the level of unemployment consistent 
with  our  price  stability  mandate.  Because  monetary  policy  works  with  a  lag,  policy 
normalization  needs  to  begin  before  the  economy  reaches  its  employment  and  inflation 
objectives. That is, if we are to get to a neutral monetary policy setting before inflation materially 
overshoots our 2 percent objective, then we need to get started. Once underway, the pace of 
policy tightening can be calibrated to how the economy and financial market conditions are 
responding. 
A particular risk of late and fast is that the unemployment rate could significantly undershoot 
the level consistent with price stability. If this occurred, then inflation would likely rise above 
our objective. At that point, history shows it is very difficult to push the unemployment rate back 
up  just  a  little  bit  in  order  to  contain  inflation  pressures.  Looking  at  the  post-war  period, 
whenever the unemployment rate has increased by more than 0.3 to 0.4 percentage points, 
the economy has always ended up in a full-blown recession with the unemployment rate rising 
by  at  least 1.9  percentage  points. This  is  an  outcome to  avoid,  especially  given  that  in  an 
economic downturn the last to be hired are often the first to be fired. The goal is the maximum 
sustainable  level  of  employment  –  in  other  words,  the  most  job  opportunities  for  the  most 
people over the long run. 
Some of you may be wondering whether the risk of a recession isn’t already quite high? And, 
if so,  doesn’t this imply a need for special care in adjusting monetary policy? After all, the 
current economic expansion is more than six years old – a bit long in the tooth by post-war 
standards. 
Even so, recession risk did not play a major factor in my thinking. Economic expansions don’t 
simply die of old age. They primarily end either because monetary policy is kept too loose for 
too long, thereby necessitating a subsequent sharp tightening in monetary policy to prevent a 
significant inflation overshoot, or because some large adverse shock hits the economy that the 
central  bank  cannot  easily  offset.  Mitigating  the  first  risk  of  being  forced  to  choke  off  the 
expansion argues for getting started with policy normalization now rather than holding off. With 
respect to the second risk of unanticipated shocks, this is obviously very difficult for the central 
bank to insulate the economy from. Making sure the financial system is robust and resilient is 
probably the most important thing the central bank can do in this respect. 
I would like to turn now to the issue of how the initial step in normalization is going. The U.S. 
bond market response to lift-off has been very mild. There has been no bond market “taper 
tantrum” such as what occurred in 2013 when Chairman Bernanke discussed the possibility of 
tapering Federal Reserve asset purchases. Normalization is also going very well in the sense 
that, even with an extraordinarily large balance sheet, the tools we have developed to raise 
the federal funds rate (and other money market rates) have so far worked well. The federal 
funds rate is trading close to the middle of the new target range of 25 to 50 basis points and 
other money market rates have moved up in tandem. 
Why is this noteworthy? To explain, I’ll first have to provide some background on how monetary 
policy used to work before the crisis and then compare that regime with how it works now. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Before the financial crisis, banks valued reserves – even though the Federal Reserve paid no 
interest on them – because the Federal Reserve kept their supply scarce. When the FOMC 
wanted to adjust its federal funds rate target – that is, the interest rate banks earn or pay when 
lending  or  borrowing  overnight  reserves  with  another  bank  –  it  directed  the  System  Open 
Market Account (the Desk) manager in New York to alter the supply of reserves within the 
banking system (up or down) as needed to match the estimated demand for reserves in order 
to keep the federal funds rate very close to the FOMC’s target.2 In this setup, the amount of 
banking reserves in the system – required and excess – was very small and the Desk typically 
conducted open market operations that added or drained no more than a few billion dollars of 
reserves  from  the  banking  system  to  ensure  that  the  federal  funds  rate  traded  around  the 
FOMC’s target. 
In October 2008, after passage of the TARP legislation, the Federal Reserve was authorized 
to implement a new tool, the ability to pay interest on required and excess reserves.3 This tool 
was significant because it meant that the FOMC would be able to control interest rate policy 
even with a much larger balance sheet and a much larger amount of excess reserves in the 
banking system. This was important because it gave us more scope to expand the Federal 
Reserve’s balance sheet to help address the financial crisis and to provide support for the 
economic recovery, knowing that later, when the recovery took hold, we could raise interest 
rates even with an enlarged balance sheet. The Fed wouldn’t necessarily be forced to return 
to the much smaller balance sheet we had prior to 2008 before we could begin the monetary 
policy normalization process. 
When interest is paid on reserves, these reserves retain value even when they are no longer 
scarce. Banks may be able to borrow funds at lower interest rates from financial entities such 
as money market funds that are not permitted to hold deposits at the Federal Reserve and 
place these borrowed funds with the Federal Reserve to earn the higher interest rate paid on 
reserve balances. 
How  well  the  ability  to  pay  interest  on  reserves  works  in  practice  in  raising  the  entire 
constellation  of  short-term  interest  rates  depends  critically  on  the  willingness  of  banks  to 
engage in such arbitrage activity. Prior to lift-off, we were uncertain how much friction there 
might  be  that  would  limit  the  willingness  of  banks  to  expand  their  balance  sheets.  These 
frictions include limits on bank leverage that can make the use of balance sheet capacity costly, 
competitive frictions given the relatively narrow range of banks that are viewed as sufficiently 
creditworthy to warrant being recipients of large uncollateralized loans and, for those banks 
that  accept  FDIC  insured  deposits,  insurance  premiums  that  increase  when  they  borrow 
reserves and their total liabilities increase. 
To help ensure that money market rates would track the federal funds rate regardless of these 
frictions, the FOMC developed a second tool – the overnight, fixed-rate, reverse repurchase 
facility (overnight RRP). In this facility, a number of financial entities, such as money market 
funds,  that  cannot  hold  reserves  at  the  Federal  Reserve  can  lend  funds  overnight  to  the 
Federal Reserve against the Fed’s Treasury collateral and receive the overnight RRP rate – 
currently 25 basis points. The overnight RRP provides these institutions with an alternative 
investment if the interest rate offered by banks is unattractive. Consequently, these financial 
                                                
2  
In  this  arrangement,  the  size  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  was  mainly  driven  by  the  amount  of 
currency in circulation. As the amount of currency in circulation increased, this drained reserves from the banking 
system. The Federal Reserve offset this by increasing its holdings of Treasury securities. 
3   The Federal Reserve gained the authority to pay interest on reserves earlier as part of the Financial Services 
Regulatory Relief Act of 2006; that legislation authorized the Federal Reserve Banks to begin payment of interest 
on reserves in 2011. As part of the TARP legislation, Congress moved up the date at which the Federal Reserve 
could exercise that authority to October 2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   entities should be unwilling to lend funds to banks and others at lower rates than the overnight 
RRP rate. The overnight RRP rate should act, therefore, as a floor on money market rates. 
As I noted earlier, the tools are working as anticipated. Not only is the federal funds rate trading 
close to the middle of the new 25 to 50 basis point target range, but the entire complex of 
money market rates, such as LIBOR deposits and GCF repo, has also risen as well. Moreover, 
apart from a temporary spike in usage around year end, which was expected, the usage of the 
overnight, fixed rate reverse repo facility has fallen back to levels similar to what we saw during 
the testing phase. In recent days, usage has averaged less than $100 billion per day. Thus, 
the facility has been absorbing only a small fraction of the $2.4 trillion of excess reserves in 
the banking system. This demonstrates that to firm interest rates, we don’t necessarily have to 
drain reserves or shrink the size of our balance sheet. 
We are very pleased by how well our tools are working, and this has reinforced our confidence 
that they will support the policy normalization process going forward. This is what we expected 
given our extensive testing, but there are always uncertainties that only can be resolved by 
actually  getting  underway.  For  example,  there  was  some  residual  uncertainty  about  how 
important a factor the zero lower bound of interest rates had been in supporting the federal 
funds rate  and  other money  market rates. This uncertainty  now  has  been  at  least  partially 
resolved.  Even  as  we  have  moved  away  from  the  zero  lower  bound,  the  relative  yield 
relationships we saw before December’s federal funds rate hike have persisted. 
So what’s on the docket for monetary policy in 2016? The answer is that it depends on how 
the incoming data weighs on the outlook, and how changes in the outlook influence our views 
on the appropriate setting for monetary policy. What I can say is that our expectation at the 
December FOMC meeting was for further interest rate hikes in 2016 and beyond. Participants 
anticipated that the federal funds rate would likely continue on a gradual upward path. Over 
the longer term, FOMC participants expected that the federal funds rate would eventually reach 
3 to 4 percent as inflation rose back to our 2 percent objective and the headwinds from the 
financial crisis that had been restraining economic activity fully dissipated. 
Even  though  this  path  is  shallow  relative  to  previous  tightening  cycles,  the  median federal 
funds  rate  path  of  FOMC  participants  in  the  December  Summary  of  Economic  Projections 
(SEP) is well above the path implied by the federal funds futures market. Should this be a 
concern? Does this imply that there is a significant risk of an abrupt future spike in short- and 
long-term  interest  rates  as  market  rates  realign  to  levels  more  consistent  with  the  median 
FOMC participants’ projections? 
I don’t think so for several reasons. First, the SEP projections are modal forecasts – that is, 
what the participants believe is most likely to happen – whereas those embodied in market 
prices are a mean – that is, an average across all possible outcomes. One might reasonably 
expect these modal forecasts to be above the mean when inflation is low and the economic 
outlook is uncertain. Second, the median federal funds rate forecasts for primary dealers and 
for  buyside  participants  surveyed  just  prior  to  the  December  FOMC  meeting  differed  only 
marginally from the December SEP median projections of FOMC participants. This reinforces 
my judgment that the difference between means and modes is the main factor for the gap 
between the federal funds futures market and the SEP paths. Third, the differences between 
the interest rates implied by futures markets and the SEP have been quite small at shorter-
term  time  horizons,  such  as  the  end  of  2016,  and  grow  much  larger  as  the  time  horizon 
lengthens. I think this is noteworthy because the confidence one has at longer horizons should 
be much lower than at shorter horizons. 
Because I do not know what the federal funds rate target range will be at the end of 2017 or 
2018 with any confidence, I am not very concerned if others have a different modal forecast. 
Projections will adjust as incoming information changes the economic outlook. I would expect 
convergence over time of the SEP and market expectations as new information informs the 
outlook. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Let me close with some observations about my current thinking concerning our reinvestment 
of maturing Treasury securities and paydowns in our agency MBS holdings. As we noted in 
the  December  FOMC  statement,  we  anticipate  that  we  will  continue  reinvestment  “until 
normalization of the federal funds rate is well underway.” I think this policy makes sense not 
only because the decision to end reinvestment will represent a further tightening of monetary 
policy, but also because it is difficult to assess ahead of time the impact of such a decision on 
financial market conditions given the lack of historical experience. 
I also believe that continuing reinvestment until the federal funds rate reaches a higher level 
makes sense. We want to ensure that we have the ability to respond to adverse shocks by 
easing monetary policy by lowering the policy rate. Having more “dry powder” in the form of 
higher  short-term  interest rates  seems more  desirable  than  less  dry  powder  and  a  smaller 
balance sheet. 
Now the words “well underway” in the FOMC statement are vague – what does that mean in 
terms of the level of the federal funds rate? Reiterating the disclaimer that I am speaking for 
myself, my view is that we should not set a numerical tripwire for ending reinvestment. If the 
economy were growing very quickly and the risks of an early return to the zero lower bound 
for the federal funds rate were deemed to be low, then I could see ending reinvestment at a 
relatively low federal funds rate. In contrast, if the economy lacked forward momentum and the 
risks of a return to the zero lower bound were judged to be considerably higher, I would want 
to continue reinvestment until the federal funds rate was higher. Consistent with the general 
principles I mentioned before, the evolution of the overall monetary policy stance – both interest 
rate decisions and balance sheet developments – should be data dependent. 
In my view, good monetary policy-making requires ongoing assessment and judgment, not the 
adherence to mechanical rules. I know market participants desire certainty, but in the uncertain 
world in which we live, that desire is not consistent with the policy that would best achieve our 
objectives. We will strive to communicate as clearly as we can so you can think along with us 
and alter your expectations just as we do in response to incoming information. 
Thank you for kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
