  Yves Mersch: Reaching for perfection – building the market 
infrastructure of tomorrow 
Opinion piece by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, published in Eurofi Magazine, 7 September 2016. 
 Last year the Eurosystem launched TARGET2-Securities, or T2S, a pan-European platform 
for  securities  settlement  in  central  bank  money.  This  is  a  major  advancement  in  Europe’s 
securities  infrastructure,  allowing  banks  to  carry  out  cross-border  securities  transactions  in 
the same way as they make domestic transactions, and at lower cost. It also enables banks 
to manage their collateral more effectively by creating a single, centralised pool of liquidity. 
With T2S, banks can move collateral quickly and easily to where it is needed, rather than it 
getting blocked in local markets where it is not being used. 
T2S  is  just  one  part  of  the  infrastructure  that  forms  the  backbone  of  Europe’s  financial 
market.  The  Eurosystem  has  been  working  hard  over  the  last  decade  to  ensure  this 
infrastructure  is  sound  and  efficient.  What’s  more,  it  forms  the  foundations  of  the  capital 
markets  union  (CMU)  by  providing  the  technical  network  through  which  capital  can  move 
freely around the EU. The free movement of capital means greater access to financing for 
Europe’s businesses and more diversified investment opportunities for investors. Continuing 
with the example of T2S, this platform makes it much easier for a bank based in Portugal, for 
example, to buy securities in Latvia and to use them as collateral for transactions in France. 
T2S therefore makes it technically and physically possible to achieve the objectives of CMU: 
mobilising capital wherever it is found in the EU. 
Moreover, the Eurosystem’s work to build a strong financial market infrastructure has been 
the  trigger for regulatory  change  in  Europe.  For example,  as T2S  was  being  developed,  it 
became  clear  that  greater  harmonisation  across  borders  would  amplify  the  benefits  of  the 
securities  settlement  platform.  T2S  has  thus  driven  an  extensive  harmonisation  agenda, 
bringing  together  the  market  to  align  rules  and  practices.  The  CSD  Regulation  laid  down 
harmonised  rules  and  requirements,  which  have  created  a  more  level  playing  field  in  the 
post-trade arena. 
Despite all the  work done so far, new challenges are constantly emerging that require the 
Eurosystem  to  adjust  and  enhance  the  financial  market  infrastructure  further.  Even  a  safe 
and  efficient  market  infrastructure  can  be  enhanced  and  complemented  with  additional 
functionalities  and  features.  For  example,  as  digitalisation  changes  the  way  the  financial 
industry operates, so too must the infrastructure which supports it adapt to the ever-changing 
environment. The Eurosystem is keen to embrace the opportunities that these changes bring 
to provide new and enhanced services and functionalities. 
One  innovation  currently  being  investigated  by  the  Eurosystem  is  distributed  ledger 
technology (DLT). DLT offers the possibility to share records of information across defined 
networks, which could potentially revolutionise the way asset ownership is recorded or how 
products  are  ordered  and  delivered.  It  is,  however,  still  a  very  new  technology  requiring 
further testing, which prevents, for example, large-scale use within the Eurosystem’s market 
infrastructure.  However,  the  Eurosystem  is  currently  assessing  and  reflecting  what  its 
potential impact on the financial market infrastructure could be and what possibilities it could 
present in terms of new services. 
The  Eurosystem  is  also  currently  looking  into  ways  in  which  the  three  cornerstones  of  the 
financial market infrastructure – money, collateral and securities – could be brought closer 
together to improve efficiency. For example, a market consultation has been held to ask the 
market  for  its  views  on  ways  in  which  TARGET2,  the  Eurosystem’s  real-time  gross 
settlement system, and T2S can be streamlined to increase overall effectiveness, potentially 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  by creating a single interface for both systems. The Eurosystem greatly values the input of 
the  market  itself  and  experience  has  proven  that  this  combination  of  public  and  private 
partnership produces the best possible results. 
Innovation  is  not  a  threat  to  the  existing  infrastructure,  but  an  opportunity  to  make  it  even 
better. That is why the Eurosystem welcomes innovation in all areas and why it will continue 
to stay abreast of changes in the market in order to ensure it is delivering the safest, most 
efficient infrastructure possible. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
