   Claudia Buch: Completing the Banking and Capital Markets Union – 
where do we stand? 
Statement  by  Prof  Claudia  Buch,  Deputy  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
SUERF-Deutsche  Bundesbank-IMFS  Conference  on  “SSM  at  1”,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
4 February 2016. 
 The financial crisis and the ensuing sovereign debt crisis have revealed weaknesses in the 
European financial architecture. Although capital market integration in Europe intensified prior 
to the crisis, it took place mostly via debt capital markets. This form of financial integration 
turned out to be vulnerable at the outbreak of the financial crisis. Many European countries 
experienced a reversal of capital flows and a “sudden stop” as investors moved their funds into 
safe havens. Fragmentation of European capital markets increased, and a mutually reinforcing 
feedback loop between risks of banks and sovereigns (the “sovereign-bank nexus”) emerged. 
After the crisis, several policy initiatives have been launched which strengthen the institutional 
framework in Europe (Deutsche Bundesbank 2015a). The enhanced Stability and Growth Pact 
strengthens incentives to follow prudent fiscal policy while retaining decentralised responsibility 
for  fiscal  policy.  The  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  introduces  a  crisis  resolution 
mechanism  with  elements  of  risk-sharing  under  well-defined  conditions.  Collective  Action 
Clauses in sovereign debt contracts complement these new rules. The Banking Union, which 
has  become  effective  in  November  2014,  has  been  a  key  step  in  terms  of  transferring 
supervisory power to the European level with the aim to improve both, the monitoring of risks 
and  mechanisms  of  dealing  with  distress  in  the  banking  sector  (Buch  2014).  This  note 
discusses  the  scope  of  reforms  in  the  financial  sector  with  a  focus  on  open  issues  to  be 
addressed in future reforms. 
Completing the Banking Union 
The Banking Union rests on two main pillars: The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) has 
given the ECB responsibility for supervising the significant banks in the euro zone and the 
ability  to  assume  direct  supervision  over  smaller  institutions.  In  cooperation  with  national 
supervisors,  the  ECB  is  now  able  to  apply  a  uniform  set  of  prudential  standards  and 
supervisory  culture  across  the  European  banking  sector. The  second  pillar  of the  Banking 
Union is the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), which started in January 2016, and builds 
on the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD). The implementation of resolution 
powers, in particular the bail-in-instrument, and the creation of the Single Resolution Fund 
(SRF), are at the core of the SRM. 
Taken together, these reforms reduce the probability of bank distress and improve the ability 
to deal with distress events through improved private sector risk sharing mechanisms. Public 
bail outs become less likely. In this sense, the Banking Union addresses the sovereign-bank-
nexus by reducing the probability that distressed banks negatively affect sovereign risk. At the 
same time, additional reforms can contribute to further increase the resilience of the European 
financial system and to enhance the consistency of the new institutional framework (Deutsche 
Bundesbank 2014a): 
Limiting banks’ exposures to sovereign risk: The Banking Union has no direct implications 
for the prudential regulations of banks. Most importantly, it does not address the regulatory 
treatment of banks’ exposure to sovereign risk. Under current prudential regulations, sovereign 
debt is treated as risk-free when calculating banks’ capital requirements, and large exposure 
limits do not apply. This creates incentives for banks to hold exposures vis-à-vis governments 
with potential negative implications for private sector lending and financial stability. Abolishing 
this preferential treatment of sovereign debt in prudential regulation would thus be an important 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
complement to the institutional reforms that are already under way (Deutsche Bundesbank 
2014b). 
Completing the macroprudential toolbox: The ECB has also been given macroprudential 
powers. The main responsibility for the implementation of macroprudential measures still lies 
with national authorities. In the German case, some key macroprudential instruments are still 
missing. In 2015, the German Financial Stability Council has thus issued a recommendation 
to create the legal basis for macroprudential instruments addressing potential systemic risks 
in the market for mortgage loans.1 Many other European countries have instruments available 
to set minimum standards for loan-to-value ratios, debt-service to income ratios, or minimum 
amortization requirements. In addition to the recommendation to create the necessary legal 
instruments  in  Germany,  the  recommendation  of  the  Council  also  refers  to  the  additional 
statistical  requirements.  Current  reporting  systems  for  banks  in  Germany  do  not  allow 
monitoring risks resulting from mortgage lending and in particular possible changes in lending 
standards. 
Ensure sufficient loss-absorbing capacity and limit exemptions from bail in: Improved 
regulations and supervision reduce the probability of bank distress, but they do not eliminate 
these risks. Banks thus need to have sufficient loss-absorbing capacity to successfully prevent 
the  use  of  public  funds  in  case  when  a  resolution  becomes  necessary.  Internationally, 
standards for Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity (TLAC) for global systemically important banks 
(G-SIBs)  have  been  agreed  upon  last  year.  In  Europe,  Minimum  Requirement  for  Eligible 
Liabilities  (MREL)  apply.  Some  discretionary  scope  in  the  use  of the  bail-in  instrument,  as 
granted  by  the  BRRD  and  the  rules  on  state  aid,  may  be  necessary  to  prevent  systemic 
contagion. But this flexibility opens a door to political influence and may threaten the credibility 
of the instrument. Discretionary exceptions should, therefore, be made only under rare and 
strictly  defined  circumstances.  A  statuory  “systemic  risk  exemption”  that  would  require,  for 
instance, a strong majority among relevant stakeholders such  as finance ministers for any 
deviation from a bail-in in could be an appropriate institutional hurdle. 
Reform complex decision-making in the SSM and SRM: The current institutional set up of 
the Banking Union has been shaped by limitations of what is currently permitted within the 
boundaries of European primary law. As a result, decision-making procedures within the SSM 
and the SRM are overly complex and can lead to possible conflicts of interest. The ECB’s 
Governing Council, for instance, is the ultimate decision making body for both, monetary policy 
and  supervisory  decisions.  A  clear  separation  of  the  ECB’s  responsibilities  for  banking 
supervision and monetary policy would be desirable. Also, rules governing the participation of 
the European Commission and the Council in the decision-making procedures of the SRM 
could be streamlined. Both changes, however, would require amendments to primary union 
law. 
A common deposit guarantee scheme as a third pillar? 
The  European  Commission  has  recently  presented  a  proposal  for  a  European  Deposit 
Insurance Scheme (EDIS) as a potential third pillar for the Banking Union. Presently, national 
deposit guarantee schemes (DGS) are being harmonised through the Depositor Guarantee 
Scheme  Directive  (DGSD)  which  was  decided  upon  in  2014,  but  which has  not fully  been 
implemented  by  all  member  states.  In  the  long-run,  a  common  deposit  insurance  system 
would,  in  principle,  be  consistent  with  centralized  supervision.  It  could  enhance  financial 
stability because risk would be spread more widely and the pool of available resources would 
be larger. However, integrating deposit insurance systems now would be premature because 
necessary preconditions are not met (Buch 2015). 
                                                
1   http://www.bafin.de/SharedDocs/Veroeffentlichungen/DE/Meldung/2015/meldung_150630_afs_immobilien-
markt.html. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
As with fiscal reforms, risk-sharing mechanisms should be established only if powers to control 
risk-taking have been delegated to the European level as well. Hence, a de-risking of banks is 
necessary  before  further  steps  towards  a  further  mutualisation  of  liability  in  the  form  of  a 
common DGS can be taken. As regards policies that contribute to mitigate risks in the banking 
sector, regulatory reforms that limit banks’ exposure to sovereign risk are crucial. Therefore, 
reforms  of  the  current  regulatory  treatment  of  sovereign  risk  should  be  a  pre-condition  for 
further  risk-sharing  mechanisms.  Because  sovereign  debt  is  not  per  se  a  risk-free  asset, 
regulation should address both, credit risk and concentration risk of sovereign exposures of 
banks.  Otherwise,  effects  of  sovereign  distress  would  be  mutualised  under  the  common 
deposit insurance system via the direct effects on its national banks. 
In addition, there are many national and economic policy measures which, directly or indirectly, 
affect the risk profiles and thus the solvency of banks. For instance, differences in national 
insolvency laws have direct consequences for the valuation of banks’ assets and the burden 
that creditors must bear in the event of insolvency. Hence, reforms need to strike a balance 
between  retaining  national  discretion  over  domestic  policies  while,  at  the  same  time, 
preventing national sovereignty from risk-shifting to the European level through (changes in) 
regulations affecting bank solvency. 
The preconditions for a common deposit insurance scheme will not be met before these issues 
have been resolved. 
The capital markets union: enhancing channels for private sector risk-sharing 
The focus of the Banking Union has been on markets for debt capital. The Capital Market 
Union can complement the Banking Union by supporting the development and integration of 
European capital markets beyond the banking sector, and by creating additional channels for 
private sector risk sharing. Developing and integrating markets for equity capital through the 
removal of impediments to efficient, non-distorted market outcomes can play an important role 
in this regard (Deutsche Bundesbank 2015b). 
Integrated  capital  markets  contribute  to  risk  sharing  among  investors,  which  can  generate 
welfare gains. In integrated markets, local risks are shared amongst investors from different 
regions.  Individual  investors  can  safeguard  themselves  against  local  income  risks  by 
diversifying  their  equity  and  debt-financed  investment  across  borders.  As  the  nominal 
exchange rate cannot adjust in a currency union, cross-border risk sharing plays an important 
role  in  balancing  asynchronous  business  cycles  and  thus  in  supporting  the  stability  of  the 
currency union. It is therefore all the more important that capital markets function as channels 
for risk sharing within the European monetary union. 
Yet, cross-border risk sharing is constrained if the integration of capital markets is concentrated 
on  financial  instruments  with  payout  streams  that  are  not  contingent  on  an  enterprise’s 
business situation such as debt instruments. Equity investors, in contrast, directly participate 
in gains and losses. This serves as a buffer against losses and as a private sector risk sharing 
mechanism. 
While stock markets in the EU are already well integrated, there are other market segments in 
which reforms could be beneficial. 
For  instance,  removing  institutional  barriers  to  mergers  and  acquisitions  could  spur  cross-
border equity investments. This may include limiting discretionary power in the implementation 
of the European Takeover Directive or legal options available to national governments to block 
M&A transactions. It may also include reviewing to what extent corporate governance rules 
affect incentives for M&As. 
As regards European venture capital markets, the review of the European Venture Capital 
Funds  regulation  can  be  a  step  towards  more  developed  and  integrated  European  equity 
markets.  Regulation of venture  capital  markets should  aim  at  creating a  level  playing  field 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
across Member States by limiting discretion at the national level, for instance in terms of own 
funds requirements and the methodology used to determine the sufficiency of own funds. 
Beyond equity markets, the revitalisation of European markets for securitisations via rules for 
simple, 
transparent  and  standardised  securitisations  can  strengthen  European  and 
international private sector risk-sharing. 
In addition to short-term projects, the implementation of long-term goals is decisive for the 
success of the Capital Markets Union. Tax systems affect the choice between debt capital and 
equity  capital,  often  creating  incentives  towards  using  debt  finance.  Assessing  ways  to 
establish an equal tax treatment of different sources of funding could thus be an important step 
forward. Moreover, distortions of investors’ decision making emerge from heterogeneous and 
in some countries inefficient national insolvency laws. 
Obviously,  any  such  reform  should  take  risks  to  financial  stability  and  the  potential  for 
regulatory arbitrage into account. 
Further reading 
Buch,  Claudia  M.  (2015).  Stellungnahme  anlässlich  der  öffentlichen  Anhörung  des 
Ausschusses für die Angelegenheiten der Europäischen Union des Deutschen Bundestags 
zum  Fünf-Präsidenten-Bericht  zur  Vollendung  der  Wirtschafts-  und  Währungsunion, 
2. November 2015. 
Buch, Claudia M. (2014). The banking union – setting the course for better integrated and more 
stable financial markets in Europe? Speech at the Handelsblatt Annual Conference, Frankfurt 
am Main, 4 September 2014. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2014a), Financial Stability Review 2014: Implications of the banking 
union for financial stability, pp- 69–88. 
Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2014b),  Annual  Report  2014,  Reducing  the  privileged  regulatory 
treatment of sovereign exposures, pp 23–40. 
Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2015a).  Bundesbank  Monthly  Report  March  2015:  Approaches  to 
strengthening the regulatory framework of European monetary union. Frankfurt a.M. 
Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2015b).  Financial  Stability  Report  2015:  Capital  markets  union  – 
financial stability and risk sharing, pp. 85–94, Frankfurt a.M. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
