  Thomas Jordan: The euro and Swiss monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the Europa Forum Lucerne, Lucerne, 2 May 2016. 
 The speaker would like to thank Tobias Cwik and Mathias Zurlinden for their valuable support in preparing this 
speech.  He  also  extends  his  thanks  to  Petra  Gerlach  and  Carlos  Lenz,  as  well  as  to  Communications  and 
Language Services at the SNB. 
When  the  euro  was  created  almost  two  decades  ago,  there  was  considerable  uncertainty 
about how the currency would impact Switzerland. My predecessors on the Governing Board 
of  the  Swiss  National  Bank  regularly  commented  on  subsequent  euro  developments  in 
speeches and frequently voiced their expectations and concerns. Things ran fairly smoothly 
in the first few years; but the financial and debt crisis rocked the currency union and put the 
euro under pressure. The SNB has responded with a flexible and pragmatic monetary policy. 
As the difficulties have not yet been overcome, it is too early to draw definite conclusions. 
One  thing  is clear,  however:  getting  to  grips  with  the  challenges  we  face  has  been  –  and 
remains – harder than the cartoon character in the picture suggests (cf. chart 1). From the 
SNB’s  point  of  view,  the  experiences  of  recent  years  have  once  again  highlighted  the 
importance and value of monetary sovereignty. Monetary sovereignty has its price, of course, 
but  it  remains  true  that  the  interests  of  our  country  are  best  served  by  retaining  this 
independence. 
Economic importance of the EU, the euro and the ECB 
Ladies and gentlemen, as you all know, the EU is Switzerland’s most important foreign trade 
partner. And within the EU, the euro area countries play a particularly important role for us. In 
2015,  exports  to  the  euro  area  accounted  for  around  44%  of  total  exports;  the  share  of 
imports from the euro area was larger still. Although the share of exports to the euro area 
has fallen by around 10 percentage points since 2000 – we are increasingly diversifying our 
foreign trade towards the emerging markets in particular – overall, the euro area countries 
remain by far the biggest consumers of Swiss products (cf. chart 2). 
The particular significance of the euro area for Swiss foreign trade means that the exchange 
rate to the euro is an important variable, both for our economy and for the SNB’s monetary 
policy.  The  exchange rate  influences  the  price  of foreign  goods  in  Switzerland  –  and  thus 
also inflation, as measured by the national consumer price index; but it also impacts the price 
of Swiss goods in the euro area, which in turn impacts domestic inflation via production and 
employment effects. 
Consequently,  the  monetary  policy  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  is  particularly 
relevant for Switzerland. This has become clear again in recent years. On the one hand, the 
ECB’s expansionary monetary policy has encouraged the economic recovery and helped to 
promote cohesion in the euro area – which in turn has bolstered demand for Swiss products. 
On  the  other,  the  weakening  of  the  euro  has  put  Swiss  producers  in  a  bind  versus  their 
European competitors and presented problems for Switzerland’s monetary policymakers. 
Stability and instability in relation to European currencies 
Over the course of several decades, the Swiss franc has appreciated against all European 
currencies. This applies not just to the nominal, but also to the real exchange rate (i.e. the 
exchange rate adjusted for the inflation differential between the Swiss franc and the relevant 
foreign  currency),  which 
international 
competitiveness. So, while the appreciation we have witnessed in recent years is certainly 
very pronounced, it is not entirely new. 
important  determinant  of  Switzerland’s 
is  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Our  currency  has frequently  experienced  upward  surges  –  often  in  conjunction  with  short-
term increases in exchange rate volatility. In the 1970s and 1980s, for instance, the Swiss 
franc appreciated substantially against all European currencies amid major fluctuations. The 
exchange rate to the German mark – which remained relatively stable – was an exception. 
This was due to structural similarities between the two countries’ economies and to the fact 
that both the German Bundesbank and the SNB operated according to comparable monetary 
policy  principles  at  the  time.  Both  institutions  were  focused  on  money  supply  targets  and 
pursued a policy geared towards maintaining price stability. 
In the 1990s, monetary policy in most of the EU countries was dominated by preparations for 
the  launch  of  the  European  single  currency.  As  a  result  of  the  Maastricht  convergence 
criteria, the central banks of these countries were increasingly aligning themselves with the 
Bundesbank. Exchange rates between the affected currencies, as well as exchange rates to 
the Swiss franc, consequently stabilised. This phase of low exchange rate volatility continued 
in the years immediately following the launch of the euro. 
The  most  recent  period  of  exchange  rate  volatility  against  the  euro  has  its  roots  in  the 
international financial and debt crisis, which rapidly evolved into a euro crisis. Doubts about 
the  viability  of  some  euro  area  member  states’  sovereign  debts  caused  markets  to  lose 
confidence  in  the  euro.  As  in  past  crises,  the  mounting  uncertainty  triggered  substantial 
upward pressure on the Swiss franc. 
Why Switzerland doesn’t have the euro 
Considering its close economic ties to the euro area, why didn’t Switzerland ever seriously 
contemplate  joining  the  single  currency?  Politically  and  legally  speaking,  the  answer  is 
simple: a country can only join the Eurosystem if it is already an EU member state. Swiss 
voters and cantons rejected accession to the European Economic Area in a referendum in 
1992, and in 2001 followed this up by voting against a popular initiative favouring a “Yes to 
Europe”. These decisions settled the question of whether Switzerland should join the EU for 
the foreseeable future. 
Quite apart from these political and legal factors, the economic case for joining the euro had 
always been weaker for Switzerland than for many other European countries. Switzerland’s 
inflation  had  always  been  relatively  low,  and  the  country  thus  saw  no  need  to  import 
monetary credibility by pegging the Swiss franc to a stable currency. Furthermore, it makes 
sense for  Switzerland  to  pursue  an  independent  monetary  policy  given  the  structure  of  its 
economy  –  particularly  in  view  of  its  status  as  an  international  financial  centre  and  the 
research-intensive nature of the industrial goods it produces. 
Monetary policy between fixed and floating exchange rates 
In 1973, when the system of fixed exchange rates established in Bretton Woods towards the 
end of the Second World War collapsed, Switzerland decided to adopt a system of floating 
exchange rates. Over the long term, this decision has proved its worth. However, there are 
pros and cons to both fixed and floating exchange rate policies. 
The disadvantage of fixed exchange rates is that they prevent a country from pursuing its 
own,  independent  monetary  policy;  monetary  policy  in  a  given  country  cannot  be  geared 
towards ensuring price stability. Equally, the central bank is virtually unable to take account 
of  economic  developments  or  respond  to  the  kind  of  special  circumstances  that  typically 
arise  during  crises.  Ultimately,  under  a  fixed  exchange  rate  system,  monetary  policy  is 
delegated to the central bank of the country to whose currency one’s own is pegged. In the 
long term, this leads to relatively high fluctuations in both production and inflation. 
Floating  exchange  rates  allow  a  country  to  pursue  its  own,  independent  monetary  policy; 
however, the disadvantage of such an approach is that it can result in major (nominal and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
real)  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  A  country’s  currency  may  thus  be  substantially  under  or 
overvalued – sometimes for considerable periods of time. 
The problems associated with both fixed and floating exchange rates mean that, time and 
again, central banks have been on the lookout for compromises. Since the end of the Bretton 
Woods system, the SNB has twice introduced a temporary exchange rate floor in order to 
cap Swiss franc appreciation: first in October 1978 against the German mark, and latterly in 
September 2011 as a minimum exchange rate against the euro. 
The minimum exchange rate as a monetary policy instrument 
When a central bank announces a minimum exchange rate, it commits to enforcing a floor, if 
necessary  by  means  of  foreign  currency  purchases.  Such  a  policy  is  designed  to  cap  a 
currency’s appreciation. The minimum exchange rate is not conceived as an instrument for 
fine-tuning  the  exchange  rate.  Rather,  it  is  intended  to  give  guidance  to  the  markets  in  a 
period of extreme uncertainty and to reduce excessive appreciation. 
However, a minimum exchange rate is not a long-term instrument. This is especially true in a 
country  like  Switzerland  which  has  lower  long-term  average  inflation  rates  than  most 
countries and a currency that has appreciated consistently over the decades – both in real 
and nominal terms. 
In normal times, if a country’s currency appreciates to the point where it begins to jeopardise 
price stability, that country’s central bank will react by lowering the reference interest rate. 
Lowering  rates  makes  portfolio  investments  denominated  in  the  relevant  currency  less 
attractive, thereby weakening it on the foreign exchange markets. However, when nominal 
interest  rates  reach  their  lower  bound  at  or  close  to  zero,  central  banks  must  take 
unconventional  measures  to  prevent  an  undesired  tightening  of  monetary  conditions.  A 
minimum exchange rate is one such measure. 
In summary, a minimum exchange rate is first and foremost a temporary instrument for use 
in situations where foreign exchange markets are extremely unsettled, a country’s currency 
is substantially overvalued against most other currencies, and nominal interest rates are at 
their lower bound, meaning that the exchange rate can no longer be influenced by cutting 
interest rates. 
The introduction of the minimum exchange rate against the euro in September 2011 
In summer 2011, the decision to introduce the minimum exchange rate undoubtedly made 
sense. We had already lowered the target range for the reference interest rate to between 
0.0%  and  0.25%,  with  the  aim  of  reducing  the  three-month  Libor  to  zero.  Moreover, 
uncertainty  on the financial  markets  was  exceptionally  high  and  the  debt  crisis  had  raised 
questions  about  the  future  of  the  euro.  The  acrimonious  budget  dispute  in  Congress  was 
taking  its  toll  and  the  US  dollar  was  showing  signs  of  weakening.  This  situation  was 
compounded by weak economic data in the first half of 2011, which pointed to the risk of 
another  global  recession.  Swiss  franc  appreciation  accelerated  in  response  to  these 
developments, with the currency reaching historic highs against the euro and the US dollar 
and threatening to plunge Switzerland into a deep recession (cf. chart 3). 
The discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate in January 2015 
The minimum exchange rate – which was to remain in place for almost three and a half years – 
halted the appreciation of the Swiss franc and helped to ease tensions. When we discontinued 
the  measure  in  January  2015,  the  decision  was  criticised  in  some  quarters.  This  is 
understandable, as the scale of the minimum exchange rate’s negative side effects was not 
yet  fully  apparent.  However,  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate  was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
unavoidable;  conditions  had  changed  and  an  analysis  of  the  risks  clearly  favoured  the 
decision to remove the floor. 
The  overall  situation  had  improved  significantly  since  the  introduction  of  the  minimum 
exchange  rate.  The  economy  had  regained  momentum,  confidence  in  the  US  dollar  had 
been restored and uncertainty had decreased considerably. 
Then there was the issue of divergence: the monetary policies of the US Federal Reserve 
and  the  ECB  were  moving  in  opposite  directions.  As  the  markets  were  expecting  the 
Americans to  tighten  and  the  Europeans to  substantially  loosen  monetary  policy,  the  euro 
had been weakening against the US dollar since mid-2014. Not just the euro, but the Swiss 
franc, too, had been losing ground against the US dollar. In contrast to summer 2011, when 
the Swiss franc had been significantly overvalued against all other currencies, by the time of 
the discontinuation, Swiss franc strength had given way to euro weakness. 
The increasingly divergent monetary policy stances of the Federal Reserve and ECB were 
also putting pressure on the minimum exchange rate against the euro. The SNB was forced 
to intervene in the foreign exchange market on an ever larger scale. This was reflected in the 
monetary base (the volume of liquidity created by the SNB), which had expanded in several 
surges since 2009 and was now rising sharply again (cf. chart 4). 
Given the changed international environment, the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per 
euro  was  no  longer  sustainable.  The  SNB  could  only  have  enforced  it  through  ongoing 
foreign currency purchases of rapidly increasing magnitude – in an environment where there 
was  no  prospect  of  a  long-term  stabilisation  on  the  exchange  rate  front.  Delaying  the 
decision to discontinue would not have mitigated the economic consequences, but the losses 
for the SNB would have been far greater. This would have compromised the SNB’s ability to 
fulfil its mandate in the long term and would have undermined its independence in matters of 
monetary policy. 
Monetary policy since the discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate 
Developments  since  the  minimum  exchange  rate  was  discontinued  have  confirmed  our 
assessment at the time. The euro continued to weaken against the US dollar. The ECB also 
announced additional easing at the end of 2015 and again at the beginning of 2016. 
Concurrently  with  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  the  SNB  shifted  the 
focus of its monetary policy. We moved the interest rate on sight deposits at the SNB deeper 
into negative territory. Money market interest rates have since settled at around −0.75%. We 
also underscored our willingness to intervene in the foreign exchange market as necessary. 
Both  the  negative  interest  rate  and  the  willingness  to  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange 
market were intended to cushion the effects of the discontinuation of the minimum exchange 
rate (cf. chart 5). 
Once the currency floor had been removed, the Swiss franc appreciated sharply in the initial 
period;  the  euro  fell  to  parity  against  the  Swiss  franc  and  the  US  dollar  depreciated  by  a 
similar amount. Both currencies have since regained ground, however. In recent weeks, the 
euro has been trading at around CHF 1.10; and for some time now, the US dollar has been 
trading above the level posted on average while the minimum exchange rate was in place. 
Overall, though, the Swiss franc remains significantly overvalued. 
At  the  last  monetary  policy  assessment,  which  took  place  about  six  weeks  ago,  the  SNB 
confirmed that the monetary policy it had been pursuing since January 2015 would remain 
unchanged. The target range for our reference interest rate, the three-month Libor for Swiss 
franc  investments,  thus  remained  unchanged  at  between  –1.25%  and  –0.25%,  and  we 
confirmed the interest rate on sight deposits at the SNB of –0.75%. We also reaffirmed our 
willingness to intervene in the foreign exchange market as necessary. The SNB’s policy of 
negative interest and foreign exchange market interventions – measures that are intended to 
relieve upward pressure on the Swiss franc – is helping to stabilise price developments and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
support  economic  activity  in  our  country.  The  SNB  thus  continues  to  take  account  of  the 
exchange rate situation in formulating its monetary policy. 
Conclusion 
The SNB – like the ECB and many other central banks – has been deploying unconventional 
monetary policy measures in recent years. These were prompted by the financial and debt 
crisis, which caused the central banks to reduce short-term interest rates to near zero and 
significantly expand the  monetary base. In Switzerland, the crisis led to a very substantial 
appreciation  in  the  Swiss franc,  particularly  against  the  euro. The  SNB  thus  took targeted 
unconventional measures to ease upward pressure on the Swiss franc. Between September 
2011 and January 2015, it maintained a minimum exchange rate against the euro. Since the 
discontinuation of this measure, monetary policy has been based on negative interest and 
the willingness to intervene in the foreign exchange market. 
Logically and quite rightly, the central banks were major economic protagonists during the 
financial and debt crisis. However, in the intervening period, they have continued to play this 
role.  This  state  of  affairs  is  not  without  risks.  Ultimately,  monetary  policy  alone  cannot 
remedy all economic ills, especially those of a structural nature. It is therefore important that 
all the powers involved play their part in solving the problems we face. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen, today’s  topic  focused  on  the  challenges for  Swiss  monetary  policy 
with regard to the euro. Anything that affects the EU or the euro also affects our country. 
Consequently, it is very much in our interest that solutions for the structural problems in the 
EU be found and that economic recovery continue. Having said this, Switzerland should not 
simply  stand  idly  by  and  rely  on  Europe.  As  a  small  open  economy,  we  must  ‘do  our 
homework’  and  adapt  to  a  changing  landscape.  It  is  important  for  companies  to  continue 
operating with a high degree of flexibility, and for economic policymakers in all fields – in this 
country, too – to ensure good business conditions. The SNB will continue to make the most 
of  the  latitude  afforded  by  its  monetary  sovereignty  to  respond  pragmatically  to  the 
challenges ahead. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Chart 1 
 © Globe Cartoon 
Chart 2 
Switzerland’s foreign trade, 2000−2015 
    Source: Swiss Customs Administration 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 3 
Interest and exchange rates, 2008−2011 
 Chart 4 
Monetary base from 2008 to the present day 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
  Interest and exchange rates from 2012 to the present day 
Chart 5 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
