   Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr 
Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 10 March 
2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press 
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council, 
which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we have conducted a thorough review 
of the monetary policy stance, in which we also took into account the new macroeconomic 
projections by our staff extending into the year 2018. As a result, the Governing Council has 
decided on a set of measures in the pursuit of its price stability objective. This comprehensive 
package will exploit the synergies between the different instruments and has been calibrated 
to further ease financing conditions, stimulate new credit provision and thereby reinforce the 
momentum of the euro area’s economic recovery and accelerate the return of inflation to levels 
below, but close to, 2%.  
First, as regards the key ECB interest rates, we decided to lower the interest rate on the main 
refinancing  operations  of  the  Eurosystem  by  5  basis  points  to  0.00%  and  the  rate  on  the 
marginal lending facility by 5 basis points to 0.25%. The rate on the deposit facility was lowered 
by 10 basis points to –0.40%.  
Second, we decided to expand the monthly purchases under our asset purchase programme 
from €60 billion at present to €80 billion. They are intended to run until the end of March 2017, 
or  beyond,  if  necessary,  and  in  any  case  until  the  Governing  Council  sees  a  sustained 
adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its aim of achieving inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term. To ensure the continued smooth implementation of our 
asset  purchases,  we  also  decided  to  increase  the  issuer  and  issue  share  limits  for  the 
purchases  of  securities  issued  by  eligible  international  organisations  and  multilateral 
development banks from 33% to 50%. 
Third, we decided to include investment-grade euro-denominated bonds issued by non-bank 
corporations  established  in  the  euro  area  in  the  list  of  assets  that  are  eligible  for  regular 
purchases under a new corporate sector purchase programme. This will further strengthen the 
pass-through  of  our  asset  purchases  to  the  financing  conditions  of  the  real  economy. 
Purchases under the new programme will start towards the end of the second quarter of this 
year. 
Fourth, we decided to launch a new series of four targeted longer-term refinancing operations 
(TLTRO II), starting in June 2016, each with a maturity of four years. These new operations 
will  reinforce  the  ECB’s  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  and  will  strengthen  the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  by  further  incentivising  bank  lending  to  the  real  economy. 
Counterparties  will  be  entitled  to  borrow  up  to  30%  of  the  stock  of  eligible  loans  as  at 
31 January 2016. The interest rate under TLTRO II will be fixed over the life of each operation, 
at the rate on the Eurosystem’s main refinancing operations prevailing at the time of take-up. 
For banks whose net lending exceeds a benchmark, the rate applied to the TLTRO II will be 
lower, and can be as low as the interest rate on the deposit facility prevailing at the time of 
take-up. There will be no requirement for mandatory early repayments under TLTRO II, and 
switches from TLTRO I will be allowed. 
Finally, looking ahead, taking into account the current outlook for price stability, the Governing 
Council expects the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an extended 
period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Separate press releases with further details of the measures taken by the Governing Council 
will be published this afternoon at 15:30 CET.  
Adding  to  the  measures  taken  since  June  2014,  with  today’s  comprehensive  package  of 
monetary  policy  decisions  we  are  providing  substantial  monetary  stimulus  to  counteract 
heightened risks to the ECB’s price stability objective. While very low or even negative inflation 
rates are unavoidable over the next few months, as a result of movements in oil prices, it is 
crucial to avoid second-round effects by securing the return of inflation to levels below, but 
close to, 2% without undue delay. The Governing Council will continue to monitor very closely 
the evolution of the outlook for price stability over the period ahead.  
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Euro area real GDP growth was confirmed at 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the fourth quarter of 
2015, supported by domestic demand, while being dampened by a negative contribution from 
net exports. The most recent survey data point to weaker than expected growth momentum at 
the beginning of this year. Looking ahead, we expect the economic recovery to proceed at a 
moderate  pace.  Domestic  demand  should  be  further  supported  by  our  monetary  policy 
measures  and  their  favourable  impact  on  financial  conditions,  as  well  as  by  continued 
employment gains benefiting from past structural reforms. Moreover, the low price of oil should 
provide additional support for households’ real disposable income and private consumption, 
as well as corporate profitability and investment. In addition, the fiscal stance in the euro area 
is  slightly  expansionary,  partly  reflecting  measures  in  support  of  refugees.  However,  the 
economic recovery in the euro area continues to be dampened by subdued growth prospects 
in emerging markets, volatile financial markets, the necessary balance sheet adjustments in a 
number of sectors and the sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms. 
This outlook is broadly reflected in the March 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for 
the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.4% in 2016, 1.7% in 2017 and 
1.8%  in  2018.  Compared  with  the  December  2015  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections, the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised slightly down, mainly reflecting 
the weakened growth prospects for the global economy. 
The risks to the euro area growth outlook remain tilted to the downside. They relate in particular 
to the heightened uncertainties regarding developments in the global economy, as well as to 
broader geopolitical risks. 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was –0.2% in February 
2016, compared with 0.3% in January. All main HICP components contributed to this decline. 
Looking ahead, on the basis of current futures prices for energy, inflation rates are expected 
to remain at negative levels in the coming months and to pick up later in 2016. Thereafter, 
supported by our monetary policy measures and the expected economic recovery, inflation 
rates  should  recover  further.  The  Governing  Council  will  closely  monitor  price-setting 
behaviour and wage developments in the euro area, paying particular attention to ensure that 
the current low inflation environment does not become entrenched in second-round effects on 
wage and price-setting. 
This broad pattern is also reflected in the March 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections 
for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 0.1% in 2016, 1.3% in 2017 and 1.6% 
in 2018. In comparison with the December 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, 
the outlook for HICP inflation has been revised down, mainly reflecting the fall in oil prices over 
recent months. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, recent data confirm solid growth in broad money (M3), with 
the annual rate of growth of M3 standing at 5.0% in January 2016, after 4.7% in December 
2015. Annual growth in M3 continues to be mainly supported by its most liquid components, 
with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at an annual rate of 10.5% in January, after 
10.8% in December. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Loan dynamics continued the path of gradual recovery observed since the beginning of 2014. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation)  increased  to  0.6%  in  January  2016,  up  from  0.1%  in  December  2015. 
Developments  in  loans  to  enterprises  continue  to  reflect  the  lagged  relationship  with  the 
business cycle, credit risk and the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-financial sector 
balance sheets. The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation)  remained  stable  at  1.4%  in  January  2016.  Overall,  the  monetary  policy 
measures in place since June 2014 have clearly improved borrowing conditions for firms and 
households, as well as credit flows across the euro area. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from the monetary analysis confirmed the need for further monetary stimulus in order to secure 
a return of inflation rates towards levels that are below, but close to, 2% without undue delay. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative stance supports economic activity. However, in order to reap the full benefits 
from  our  monetary  policy  measures,  other  policy  areas  must  contribute  decisively.  Given 
continued high structural unemployment and low potential output growth in the euro area, the 
ongoing cyclical recovery should be supported by effective structural policies. In particular, 
actions to raise productivity and improve the business environment, including the provision of 
an adequate public infrastructure, are vital to increase investment and boost job creation. The 
swift and effective implementation of structural reforms, in an environment of accommodative 
monetary policy, will not only lead to higher sustainable economic growth in the euro area but 
will also make the euro area more resilient to global shocks. As indicated by the European 
Commission, the implementation of country-specific recommendations continued to be fairly 
limited in 2015; reform efforts thus need to be stepped up in the majority of euro area countries. 
Fiscal policies should support the economic recovery, while remaining in compliance with the 
fiscal  rules  of the  European  Union.  Full  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact is crucial to maintain confidence in the fiscal framework. At the same time, all 
countries should strive for a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
