   Raghuram Rajan: Impact of Chinese slowdown on SAARC region and 
policy options 
Inaugural  talk  by  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at 
SAARCFINANCE Governors’ Symposium, Mumbai, 26 May 2016. 
 It is indeed a pleasure to be here this morning. Let me welcome our guests of honour from the 
seven other SAARC countries; especially Mr. Arjun Mahendran in his capacity as the present 
SAARCFINANCE  Chair  as  also  Mr.  Fazle  Kabir,  the  Bangladesh  Bank  Governor  and  Mr. 
Dasho  Penjore,  Governor  Royal  Monetary  Authority  of  Bhutan  who  will  be  attending  the 
SAARCFINANCE event for the first time. I welcome our distinguished guests, including our 
invitees from the IMF and the BIS. 
SAARC1, as a regional bloc was set up in 1985 with the aim of promoting the welfare of the 
people  of  South  Asia,  to  accelerate  regional  economic  growth,  strengthen  collective  self-
reliance  and  contribute  to  mutual  trust,  understanding  and  appreciation  of  one  another’s 
problems in the region. Since then, our nations have come a long way. They share a common 
goal  of  sustainable  economic  development,  and  face  several  similar  developmental 
challenges. In terms of GDP based on purchasing power parity (PPP), SAARC’s share in the 
globe  has  increased  rapidly  from  4.0  per  cent  in  1980  to  9.0  per  cent  currently.  However, 
SAARC nations also make up 24 per cent of total world population. We do need more growth, 
and do need to do more to support each other in this quest. Intra-regional trade accounts for 
a measly 5 per cent2 compared to 66 per cent within EU. 
However, today, I will not be talking of SAARC alone but the challenges SAARC faces in the 
context  of  globalization.  The  world  has  become  increasingly  interdependent,  with  the 
strengthening  of  economic  and  financial  linkages  within  geographic  regions  and  across 
regions. Globalization has brought several economic gains and improved consumer welfare, 
but at the same time exposed economies to spillovers from disturbances in one part of the 
geography to another. 
Amid such growing vulnerabilities and imbalances, SAARC region shows continued resilience 
in the face of turbulent international markets, maintaining its spot as the fastest-growing region 
in the world. Average growth in the region has outstripped the average growth of emerging 
market and developing economies (EMDEs) throughout the post-crisis period. The outlook for 
the region has also improved as a result of significant disinflation in the region during 2014–
16. However, within the region, growth trends have diverged temporally and spatially. 
Moreover, the region is now facing newer challenges arising from uncertainties in other parts 
of the world. Possible moves by the US Fed, a potential rebound of oil prices, possible Brexit, 
geopolitical risks in the Middle East and volatility in financial markets due to risk-on or risk-off 
sentiment are some of the possibilities we have to anticipate. However, when we decided the 
theme of this conference, a common uncertainty that confronted us was the possible sharp 
slowdown of the Chinese economy. To my mind, this still remains a significant risk for the 
global economy and our region, though Chinese policymakers have a record of over three 
decades of astute policy making, which suggests they may significantly mitigate the potential 
downsides. Therefore, in the rest of this discussion, I will focus on the impact of the Chinese 
slowdown on SAARC region. I will also address potential policy responses, drawing specifically 
on India’s policy actions. 
                                                
1   Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. 
2   UN Commodity Trade Statistics Database, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Over the past two decades, China has emerged as a powerhouse of global production. China 
eclipsed the United States in 2013 to become the world’s largest trading nation. As per WTO 
data, China was the world’s largest exporter and second largest importer in 2014 accounting 
for 12.4% and 10.3% share, respectively. The United States accounted for 8.6% of the world’s 
exports and 12.7% of the world’s imports. So it is clear that a slowdown in China will affect the 
global economy, including the SAARC region. The sharp contraction in China’s imports over 
the  past  year,  has  already  led  to  spillovers  through  the  trade,  confidence,  tourism  and 
remittance channels. SAARC nations have not been able to avert its impact. More negative 
externalities could follow as Chinese economy adjusts to a more sustainable path. 
Not only has China had to rein in production as a result of weak post-crisis industrial country 
demand, it has also suffered from weak aggregate demand of its own, as it shifts from an 
investment-  and  export-led  growth  model  to  a  consumption-led  model.  Combined  with  the 
previous bouts of leveraged expansion, China now has a number of sectors that suffer from 
the twin ailments of overcapacity and high leverage. Bad loans in the banking system are likely 
to grow over current levels – stressed loans are estimated to be around 5.5% of the bank loan 
book today. In addition, there may be serious weaknesses in the shadow banking system, 
which could feed back to banks. Clearly, cleaning up the financial system will be a challenging 
but necessary task. 
Work at the IMF suggests that a 1-percent permanent negative shock to China GDP caused 
by one-off 1-percentage decline in its real GDP growth will knock off 0.23 percentage points 
from global growth in the short-run3. A key question is whether we in SAARC region are at 
significantly more risk than others. The answer probably is no because none of us is primarily 
commodity exporter to China, but it cannot be an unqualified one. Trade could be impacted 
due to second round effects – we export to those who traditionally export to China and have 
thus slowed down – and due to similarity in trade patterns with China – we compete with those 
who now have excess production capacity. 
On the financial side, exposure to China is large for the Asia-Pacific banks, especially for banks 
from Hong Kong, Singapore and Australia and much less for banks from our region. However, 
some of our countries, though not India, have significant borrowing from Chinese banks, and 
these borrowings could become costlier if Chinese banks turn inwards. Moreover, financial 
market losses in China can heighten the risk premia that industrial country investors will charge 
for investing in our region, and the result could be capital outflows of the kind that were seen 
last August and early this year. 
Chinese growth will depend not just on its policies, but on growth elsewhere in the world. There 
appears to be a general consensus that global growth has been too slow for too long. The IMF 
downgraded its outlook for global growth in 2016 and 2017 by 0.2 and 0.1 percentage points, 
respectively. It is true that downside risks and uncertainties to the global outlook are large in 
the backdrop of event risks I have alluded to. However, a more careful look at the data suggests 
some care in jumping to the conclusion that growth has been slow. Global growth has averaged 
3.5 per cent since 1980 and, in fact, if we take out the credit boom supported average growth 
of  4.5  per  cent  during  the  period  2000–2007  that  led  to  global  financial  crisis,  the  global 
average falls to 3.2 per cent. The fact is that after the small contraction in 2009, global growth 
has averaged 3.8 per cent during 2010–15 and is still expected to be 3.2 per cent in 2016. 
What this means is that growth in period before the financial crisis was perhaps goosed up by 
borrowing, and the post financial crisis period is not so bad in comparison, especially if we 
account  for  the  deleveraging  that  has  taken  place  in  industrial  countries.  Of  course,  the 
question of why underlying industrial country growth has slowed in recent years is still being 
debated, and the answer probably lies in the hard-to-understand effects of population ageing 
                                                
3   Cashin, Paul, Kamiar Mohadess and Mehdi Raissi (2016), “China’s Slowdown and Global Financial Market 
Volatility: Is World Growth Losing Out?” IMF Working Paper, No. WP/16/63, March. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   and productivity slowdown. While stronger global growth may be just around the corner, as the 
IMF has anticipated every year in the last few years, it may yet be some time in coming. It 
might  therefore  be  optimistic  to  expect  that  China  will  be  lifted  by  global  tides,  and  it  will 
probably have to undertake the needed policy adjustment without the tailwind of global growth. 
What should SAARC countries be doing? While growth in India, Bangladesh and Bhutan is still 
quite good, overall we are confronted with a difficult combination of relatively slow domestic 
demand growth since 2013 and a difficult global environment. Portfolio flows have turned more 
volatile in this period. Let me explain what India has been doing in the face of these global 
uncertainties. 
First, there is no substitute for good policy. India has outlined and adhered to a path of fiscal 
consolidation  to  reduce  the  fiscal  deficit  that  had  widened  dramatically  following  the  post-
financial  crisis  stimulus.  It  has  contained  inflation  through  a  combination  of  better  food 
management, a new inflation framework and calibrated monetary policies, and of course the 
good luck of lower energy prices. The resulting demand management has resulted in a lower 
current account deficit, down from 4.8 percent in 2012–13 to about 1 percent in 2015–16. We 
have  also  embarked  on  a  cleanup  of  bad  debts  in  the  banking  system so  as  to free  bank 
balance sheets to support growth. 
In addition, the government has embarked on ambitious structural reforms to revive growth, 
including  significant efforts  in  the  agricultural  sector to  boost productivity  through  irrigation, 
insurance, and access to markets, a strong push to deregulate business, especially for start-
ups, important efforts to improve the governance of public sector banks and to resolve distress 
in power distribution companies, and an immense effort to expand financial services to the 
excluded through the provision of bank accounts and of direct benefit transfers. While the eyes 
of the world have been on the much anticipated Goods and Services Tax reform, a number of 
other significant reforms have taken place, including the recent passage of the new Bankruptcy 
bill,  which  is  likely  to  speed  the  resolution  of  distress  tremendously.  With  the  benefit  of 
hindsight, I am sure we will see the cleaning up of the process of allocating public resources 
like spectrum and mines, as well as the process of appointing critical personnel such as public 
sector bank chiefs, as one of the most effective reforms undertaken by the government. This 
is significantly increasing transparency in our system. 
A second element of our defense is being careful about foreign borrowing, especially at the 
very short term. So we have expanded limits for foreign portfolio investment into government 
debt  in  a  very  measured  way,  even  though  considerable  pressure  has  been  put  on  us  by 
foreign investors to create more room. We have required any new debt investment to be in 
debt over 3 years in residual maturity. We have also reformulated our rules on foreign bank 
borrowing to ensure that domestic entities without foreign earnings either borrow in rupees or 
really long term. We are trying to create an offshore rupee corporate “masala” bond market. 
Finally, a strong liberalization of FDI regulations, coupled with the government’s active efforts 
to attract foreign investors, have resulted in record FDI inflows last financial year. 
We  also  are  careful  in  moderating  periods  of  extreme  volatility  in  the  currency  through 
exchange intervention. This is more of an art than a science, and we are extremely careful not 
to try and target any particular rate. Instead, we let the market adjust as needed, intervening 
only when we are convinced the movement is excessive. As a result, despite running a current 
account deficit, the currency has been relatively stable even in extreme risk-off periods. Based 
on our macroeconomic situation, we also intend to expand or contract what can be taken out 
annually by households – this will be a macro-prudential instrument. 
The fourth element of our defense is foreign exchange reserves. We have about $ 360 billion, 
plus  forward  positions  to  offset  possible  forward  liabilities.  We  also  see  merit  in  pooling 
reserves, and have a Contingent Reserve Agreement with BRICS countries, and a currency 
swap arrangement with SAARC countries. I am glad to say that this SAARC facility has been 
of use to some of you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   We are very conscious of the role the Indian economy plays in influencing growth in other 
SAARC economies. To avoid any negative externalities, we have kept the objective of securing 
and preserving macro-stability at the top of our agenda. The ongoing disinflation, aided by our 
new monetary policy framework, and the resultant outcome of relative exchange rate stability 
compared with other emerging market peers, have hopefully served as a public good in this 
region. We have contributed to strengthening the safety nets in the region. We look forward to 
a strengthening Indian economy as recent structural reforms take hold, and hope that some of 
this growth will spillover to your economies. In turn, we hope to be benefited as your economies 
pick up. Together, we can hopefully be an island of relative stability and co-operation in this 
turbulent world. 
Thank you. I look forward to fruitful deliberations at the rest of the symposium. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
