   Loi M Bakani: The importance of financial consumer protection 
Keynote address by Mr Loi M Bakani, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the CEFI 
Equity  Workshop  “Smart  Campaign  Client  Protection  Principles  Training”,  Port Moresby, 
21 October 2015. 
 Mr. Marcelo Minc, Country Director, ADB 
Mr. Cristian Shoemaker, Executive Director, CEFI 
Mr. Amit Gupta, Manager, Smart Campaign 
Mr. Muhammad Awais Butt, Finance Lead, Good Return 
Other Workshop Facilitators and Organizers 
Managers and Participants from Participating Financial Institutions 
Representatives of Development partners 
Invited Guests 
Ladies and gentlemen.  
Acknowledgements 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen, 
Welcome to this 3 day CEFI Equity Workshop – Smart Campaign Client Protection Principles 
Training of Trainers Program, a collaborative effort of the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the 
Bank of Papua New Guinea (BPNG), the Centre for Excellence in Financial Inclusion (CEFI), 
and the Smart Campaign. 
Financial Consumer Protection & Equity 
Financial Consumer Protection and Equity (fairness) in the microfinance industry are on the 
global  finance  agenda.  People  operating  in  the  informal  sector,  and  microfinance  industry 
clients in general, are often found at the lower tier of society’s social-economic ladder. These 
segments of the population are vulnerable to economic shocks, and are least able to afford 
taking on new risks. Financial literacy…knowledge of financial options, products and services, 
and consumer power in general, are often lacking. For microfinance clients, there are often 
information gaps, and inadequate re-dress mechanisms available to them. 
Against this background, international commitments have been made at various levels to raise 
and address financial consumer protection. The 2012 G20 Leaders Meeting in Los Cabos, 
Mexico, underscored the importance of financial consumer protection. That call is also taken 
up by many other international organisations, including the ADB. 
As the financial inclusion agenda has risen to prominence in recent times, and microfinance 
institutions  are  one  of  the  vehicles  used  to  bring  financial  services  to  this  segment  of  the 
population,  the  importance  of  financial  consumer  protection  has  grown.  For  microfinance 
institutions striving to reach and maintain sustainability, it is fundamentally important to work 
with  this  customer  base  by  offering  client  centric  financial  services  and  financial  literacy 
training, delivered by staff that understand the importance of financial consumer protection. A 
financially literate customer, one that knows what financial services are available to them and 
how to use them, and also understands the process for re-dress mechanisms to pursue when 
questions of fairness arise, are more likely to continue as customers of microfinance institutions 
over time, as informed, protected and satisfied clients. In a competitive environment where this 
segment of the financial sector is competing with first tier financial institutions, the process and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
effort you put into protecting your customer rights and fairness is important to ensure you retain 
them. 
Papua New Guinea’s recent experience in developing the principles of client protection for 
microfinance  began  in  collaboration  with  the  ADB,  DFAT  and  Government  of  Papua  New 
Guinea  funded  Microfinance  and  Employment  Project,  and  the  Centre  for  Excellence  in 
Financial Inclusion (CEFI). CEFI, the industry apex body set up by the Bank of Papua New 
Guinea and Government of PNG, to coordinate financial inclusion initiatives in the country, is 
leading development of industry principles and standards for microfinance in PNG through a 
consultative process with microfinance industry stakeholders. Furthermore, CEFI’s roadmap 
for collaboratively developing PNG’s 2nd National Strategy for Financial Inclusion & Financial 
Literacy,  includes  client  protection  as  one  of  several  strategic  areas  of  focus  for  financial 
inclusion going forward in Papua New Guinea, for the benefit of financial consumers, and the 
overall health and stability of financial markets in the country. With this as context, and with 
reference to CEFI’s core values of Quality, Transparency and Equity, CEFI is educating and 
advocating the adoption of the Smart Campaign Principles (CPPs) in Papua New Guinea. 
For this purpose, the Bank of Papua New Guinea is actively supporting CEFI in its work as 
partners of the Smart Campaign, a global campaign to embed client protection principles in 
the DNA of the microfinance industry. The Smart Campaign works with industry associations 
such as CEFI, and microfinance leaders from around the world on a common goal: to keep 
clients as the driving force of the industry by providing microfinance institutions with the tools 
and resources they need to deliver transparent, respectful and prudent financial services to all 
clients. The Smart Campaign believes that protecting clients is not only the right thing to do, 
it is also the smart thing to do. 
The Smart Campaign came about from the strongly recognised need by microfinance industry 
leaders around the world to assure safe and responsible treatment of their clients. They came 
together in 2008 and agreed to a set of Client Protection Principles to guide the microfinance 
industry.  They  recognised  that  when  financial  services  are  delivered  in  accordance  with 
principles, clients are enabled to use financial services well and provides the foundation for 
future  business  and  expansion.  They  put  these  principles  into  action  through  the  Smart 
Campaign and launched it in October 2009. 
The Seven Client Protection Principles for Microfinance are: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Ladies and gentlemen, these are the principles that will be imparted to you in depth over the 
course  of  the  next  three  days.  They  are  sound  principles,  globally  accepted  and  locally 
relevant for the microfinance sector of PNG. 
I  hope  your  participation  will  lead  to  your  individual  institution’s  benefit,  to  the  benefit 
of the microfinance industry as whole, and most importantly, to the benefit of all  Papua  New 
Guineans  engaging  with  the  microfinance  sector,  now  and  going forward. 
On this note, I declare the training open. 
I wish you all well. 
Thank you.  
Appropriate product design and delivery 
Prevention of over-indebtedness 
Transparency 
Responsible pricing 
Fair and respectful treatment of clients 
Privacy of client data 
Mechanisms for complaint resolution 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
