  Patrick Njoroge: Affordable housing finance in Kenya – developing a 
strategic framework 
Remarks  by  Dr  Patrick  Njoroge,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the  workshop 
“Developing  a  Strategic  Framework  for  Affordable  Housing  Finance“,  co-hosted  by  the 
National Treasury and the World Bank, Nairobi, 27 April 2016. 
 Good morning! 
I  am  indeed  honoured  to  be  here  today  at  the  opening  of  this  workshop  on  Affordable 
Housing Finance, and I thank The National Treasury and the World Bank for co-hosting it. 
The theme of this workshop – developing a Strategic Framework for Affordable Housing 
Finance – is timely given the state of the real estate sector in Kenya. The country continues 
to experience acute problems of affordable housing and to deal with this, there is need for 
higher  investment,  both  private  and  public.  As  you  may  be  aware  the  country  needs 
approximately 240,000 new housing units per year to meet the ever growing need. This is a 
big  challenge  given  the  high  cost  of  construction  material  and  other  related  expenses.  In 
addition,  shelter  without  the  supporting  infrastructure  of  water,  sewerage,  electricity,  and 
social  services  fails  to  achieve  the  desired  benefit.  Affordable  housing  therefore  is  a 
herculean and multi-faceted objective for which practical solutions are needed. In the words 
of Nelson Mandela, “it always seems impossible until it is done”. 
Allow me to share with you some statistics on the real estate sector: 
• 
The  sector  continues  to  receive  a  small  but  rising  share  of  bank  credit.  This  now 
accounts for 13 percent of credit to the private sector, rising from 7 percent in 2010. 
The  real  estate  and  construction  sectors  contributed  approximately  13  percent  to 
GDP in 2015. 
The residential mortgage finance market has more than tripled in the last five years, 
from Ksh.61 billion in 2010 to Ksh.203 billion in 2015. 
The number of mortgages in the banking sector has grown from 13,800 to 24,500 
over the same period. 
Though the  data  is  weak,  we  understand  that  SACCOs  have  provided  substantial 
support to the sector. 
    A critical piece in the puzzle is the role of the financial sector in driving this objective. It is 
important that this be probed, also highlighting the opportunities but also the significant risks. 
In particular, the seemingly perennial issue of high interest rates, in addition to high property 
prices and transaction costs, are often cited as key drawbacks. 
Evidently, the mortgage industry does not seem to provide adequate solutions for affordable 
housing. However, Kenya’s outstanding mortgage debt to GDP ratio at about 4.2 percent in 
2014  is  still  low  compared  to  peers  such  as  South  Africa  and  Namibia  where  the  ratio  is 
above 20 percent, and developed countries such as the U.S. market where the ratio is over 
70  percent.  This  may  be  attributed  to  the  high  mortgage  rates  averaging  17.5  percent  in 
2015, collateral requirements, difficulties with property registration and high incidental costs 
of borrowing among other factors. 
Nevertheless,  there  is  reason  for  optimism.  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  players  in  the  real 
estate  sector  have  embraced  the  aspirations  engraved  in  Kenya’s  Economic  Development 
Blueprint Vision 2030 on attaining “adequately and decently-housed nation in a sustainable 
environment”. This will ensure that the real estate sector and other players remain vibrant in 
provision of affordable and adequate housing; enhancing access to finance for developers 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  and  buyers;  pursuing  targeted  reforms  to  unlock  the  potential  of  housing  and  initiating 
nationwide urban plans and development campaigns. 
A number of initiatives have been undertaken to enhance the uptake of mortgage in Kenya. 
Allow me to mention a few; 
• 
Amendment  of  the  Banking  Act  in  2010,  which  allowed  mortgage  finance 
companies  to  advance  up  to  40  percent  of  their  total  deposit  liabilities,  from  the 
previous limit of 25 percent for purchase, improvement or alterations of land. This 
unlocked funding to finance the real estate sector. 
Enabling  issuance  of  corporate/housing  bonds,  through  which  commercial 
banks can mobilize long term funding to strengthen the mortgage market. 
Implementing Credit Information Sharing mechanisms. Commercial banks and 
microfinance banks are now able to access the credit history of borrowers on a real 
time basis, helping address information asymmetry which often stifled lending. 
Greater  transparency  and  competitive  pricing  of  loans  and  mortgages.  The 
Central  Bank  of  Kenya  (CBK)  continues  to  urge  banks  to  reduce  their  operating 
costs and enhance transparency in the pricing of credit. In this respect, the CBK has 
commenced the quarterly publication of individual banks’ lending rates across loan 
categories and maturities. 
   The housing sector in Kenya has also attracted the attention of the diaspora who have been 
remitting funds to acquire or build assets for their retirement or their future housing. Along 
with this dynamism, is the major increase in demand associated with the expansion of the 
towns housing County capitals. 
Much more work needs to be done. I am sure your deliberations will offer many useful ideas 
and innovative solutions. 
On our part, the CBK will continue to support initiatives and innovations aimed at reducing 
cost of doing business for financial institutions with the main aim of bringing down the cost of 
financial  services.  Further,  the  CBK  will  pursue  better  regulation  as  opposed  to  more 
regulation  so  as  to  create  room  for  more  innovations  by  financial  institutions  and  also  be 
ready with effective tools to deal with any system vulnerabilities and emerging risks. 
It  is  my  hope  that  a  Strategic  Framework  for  Affordable  Housing  Finance  will  provide 
solutions on some of the pertinent problems in the housing market in Kenya, sensitive to the 
immediate demands and the need to have a sustainable vision. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  now  my  pleasure  to  welcome  Mr.  Henry  Rotich,  Cabinet 
Secretary to The National Treasury, to make his remarks and officially open the workshop. 
Welcome Bwana Waziri 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
