   
Salvatore Rossi: The economic progress of Italy – historical heritage and 
future prospects 
Speech by Mr Salvatore Rossi, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Economic 
Conference to commemorate the 150th Anniversary of Diplomatic Relations between Italy and 
Japan  “The  Economics  of  Italy  and  Japan:  Historical  Development  and  Future  Policies  for 
Stability and Growth”, co-hosted by Keio University and Bocconi University, Tokyo, 23 May 
2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I  would  like  to  warmly  thank  the  organisers  of  this  Conference  for inviting me to offer my 
view on the Italian economy before such a distinguished  audience,  and  on  such  a  solemn 
occasion.  I  am  particularly pleased  to  share  the  task  of  animating  this  second  Part  of  the 
Conference with my old friend Deputy Governor Nakaso, and I look forward to hearing from 
him about the Japanese economy with great interest. 
We are here to celebrate the 150th anniversary of the diplomatic relations between Japan and 
Italy:  one  century  and  a  half,  during  which  our  two  countries  have  undertaken  enormous 
transformations,  with  differences but  also  with  analogies.  And  because  this  occasion  is  a 
historical one, my approach will be historical as well. 
I  am  not  a  professional  historian,  so  I  beg  the  pardon  of  those  who are. Yet I was helped, 
in  preparing  this  speech,  by  experts  in  the  Historical  Studies  Division  and  also  in  the 
Structural  Economic  Studies  Division  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  whose  contribution  I  gratefully 
acknowledge. 
I will concentrate on the evolution of the Italian economy since the political unification of the 
country, which took place only five years before the  beginning  of  diplomatic  relations  with 
Japan.  But  let  me  start  with  a quick glance at a more remote past, because when looking 
at the evolution of societies, the ampler the view, the deeper the comprehension. 
A long historical cycle 
The Italian peninsula came out of the European Middle Ages, in the late  XIII  century,  as  a 
nascent  economic  power.  It's  interesting  to  notice that one of the main driving forces was 
monetary:  gold,  which  had  almost  disappeared  from  coinage  after  the  fall  of  the  Roman 
empire, reappeared in Florence  in  a  coin  named florin, minted in  1252. A  monetary system 
was actually  essential  to  replace  barter  and  develop  manufacture  and  trade, which were 
the engines of prosperity. 
Since then, for about three centuries, and well into the Renaissance period, Italy maintained 
the  lead  in  western  economic  growth.  The perfection of the arts, from Piero della Francesca 
to Michelangelo, is witness  of  the  wealth  and  sophistication  of  Italian  society in  those  times 
(slide 2). 
But  after  that  a  long  period  of  decline  set  in,  both  economic  and political.  The  guilds, 
which  had  been a  growth  factor  in  earlier  times, became  jealous  custodians  of  their 
privileges,  stifling  innovation.  The  ruling  classes,  satiated  with  consumption,  stopped 
searching  for  new horizons. 
Most  European  countries  achieved  national  unification  in  the  XVI century, not Italy, which 
became just their battlefield. In terms of GDP per capita, Italy fell far behind in the European 
ranking. 
The very same perception of Italy by foreigners changed. In the XVII and XVIII centuries our 
land was avidly trodden by young aristocrats and wealthy bourgeois from all over Europe, in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   search of Roman temples, and eager to buy antiques. Finally, Italy had become the scenario 
of  her majestic ruins (slide 3). Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, the famous German poet and 
thinker, being a genius, was among the few able to break this arid and  exploitative  scheme 
during his journey in Italy, the Italienische Reise he  made  in the  late  XVIII  century: to him, 
Italy  offered not  only  the Coliseum,  but  also  interesting  conversations  with  craftsmen, 
innkeepers, civil servants. 
In the first half of the XIX century Italy was plagued by underdevelopment and poverty, hitting 
the bottom of the European ranking in terms of per capita GDP.  
The evolution since the creation of a unified state 
Following  a  struggle  lasted  half  a  century,  political  unification  was achieved  in  1861, 
though  still  partial:  Rome  and  Venice  joined  the  new kingdom  only  in  the  following  ten 
years.  The  new  Italian  state  had  to embark  on  a  painstaking  effort  to  put  in  place  the 
physical  as well  as  the legal  infrastructure  of  a  modern  country.  The  first  two  decades  of 
unity were  far  from  brilliant  in  terms  of  growth.  One  of  the  major  bottlenecks was the 
inadequate transportation network, especially railways. 
Only in the 1880s the annual growth rate of the economy surpassed 1 per cent. Early in that 
decade  Italy  joined  the  Gold  Standard,  which  was proof – at that time – that it had a viable 
economic management. It seemed, for  a  moment,  that  the  country  had  reached  its  place 
among  the  European powers.  But  the  international  financial  crisis  of  the  Nineties  had  a 
devastating effect on the economy: foreign capital fled and a housing bubble  burst,  leaving 
many  bankruptcies  behind.  Currency  convertibility  was  soon  suspended.  Financial 
reconstruction  had  to  start  again,  but  this time under the guidance of a central bank: the 
Bank of Italy was founded in 1893. While not yet formally monopolist of the currency, the newly 
created institution  had  the  size  and  the  capability  to  lead  the  reorganization,  and  to avoid 
major financial crises until the Great Depression. 
In  the  XX  century  Italy  benefited  from  two  successive  "golden  ages" of  sustained  growth 
and  catching-up  with  respect  to  the  older  economic powers:  the  fifteen  years  period 
preceding  the  First  World  War,  and  the twenty years following the end of the Second World 
War. 
We  might  have  expected,  or  hoped,  a  third  episode  of  sustained growth  following  the  ICT 
revolution  and  the  spurt  of  globalization  taking place in the Nineties of the past century, as 
we could observe in a number of  countries, but that did not happen.  On the contrary,  years 
of  sluggish economic growth and slowing productivity followed. I shall come back to this. 
The  early  XX  century  were  a  true  belle  époque  for  the  Italian economy:  it became  almost 
self-sufficient  in  the  production  of  steam engines and locomotives, the equivalent of today's 
smartphones as icons of progress (slide 4); it entered new fields, such as chemical production. 
Overall,  average  annual  real  GDP  growth  over  the  whole  period  was  a hefty 2.6 per cent 
(slide 5). Substantial merit for this result must be given to millions  of  Italian  migrants:  their 
savings,  sent  home,  allowed  the  country to pay for the machinery needed to modernize the 
industry. 
After  Second  World  War, 
in  a  new  democratic  political  environment,  started 
reconstruction.  A  burst  of  hyper-inflation  was  successfully  extinguished  in  1947,  which 
allowed  entrepreneurs,  workers and  consumers  to  focus  on  re-building  the  real  economy. 
Italian politicians understood that the future of the country was laying in its ability to thrive in 
a  larger  community.  The  decision  to  join  the  European  Community  in 1957 allowed Italian 
exports to expand at a dramatic pace. Italian country lands, especially in the South, supplied 
enough workforce for fast-growing industrial  sectors:  construction,  motorcycles,  car  making, 
domestic  appliances.  While  untrained,  this  workforce  was  good  enough  for  the  mass 
production  of  those  days.  The  Italian  “miracle”  (parallel  to  the  Japanese  one)  set  in. 
Italy, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Between 1958 and 1963, real GDP grew at an average rate of 7 per cent, 6 per cent on a per 
capita basis. 
To  this  miracle  the  Bank  of  Italy  contributed  by  preserving  a  stable money,  but  also  by 
funneling  savings  towards  key  projects,  such  as  road and  telephone  networks.  In  those 
days,  central  bank  independence  was  not perceived  as  a  crucial  issue.  The  central  bank 
shared  with  the  Government  the  responsibility 
for  key  economic  policy  decisions,  and 
implemented those  decisions  using  the  powers  it  had  on  the  financial  market  and  on 
banks. 
Let me recall that in the Sixties Keynesian thinking became dominant in  economics,  and  the 
Phillips  curve  oriented  decision-making  in  most countries.  Stable  money  had  ceased  to 
represent  a  goal  per  se,  and  was often  sacrificed  in  order  to  achieve  a  higher  rate  of 
employment. Monetary stability was essentially being judged in terms of the exchange rate, 
rather than in terms of consumers' purchasing power. 
The  landscape  dramatically  changed  in  the  Seventies  and  Eighties, with  the  oil  shocks, 
double-digit inflation rates in several countries, and a renewed emphasis put on the need for 
central banks' independence. 
The hypothesis of a new long-term decline 
From  the end of the Nineties, the Italian economy slowed down markedly. Low GDP growth, 
falling total factor  productivity and  shrinking export  market  shares  suggested  the  idea  that 
Italy was entering a phase of long-term decline (slides 6 and 7). 
How  come?  There  is  a  wide  consensus  by  now,  to  which  research done at the Bank of 
Italy gave a significant contribution, that some features of  our  economic  and  social  structure 
had  become  unfit  to  the  new technological  paradigm  and  global  trade  environment.  I  am 
referring first of all to the insufficient dynamics in firm demographics: that is to say, we had – 
and still have – too many small firms, too few capable and willing to grow. That reduced the 
general ability of the economy to exploit the potential gains from new technologies and global 
export markets. 
The  reasons  for  such  a  chronic  dwarfism  of  the  Italian  corporate sector  were  rooted  in 
our  peculiar  "doing  business"  ecosystem,  characterized  by  a  cobweb  of 
laws  and 
regulations  affecting  economic activity, sometimes redundant and incoherent, often inspired 
by  an  anti-market ideology; suffocating red tape; inefficient judiciary. 
To  give  you  an  example,  suppose  that  a  successful  Italian  small  firm  saw  the  concrete 
opportunity  to  make  a  dimensional  jump,  either  through internal  investment  or  acquiring  a 
competitor:  more  often  than  not  it  just gave  up,  and  stayed  as  it  was.  Why?  Because  it 
feared  to  become  too visible  to  bureaucrats,  to  tax  officials,  to  unions,  to  local  politicians, 
to judges. But even when those fears were not justified, the family owners of the  firm  could 
decide  anyway  not  to  leave  the  small  dimensional  class  in order not to lose control of the 
firm. 
The prevalence of small and medium sized firms was a strength of the Italian economy during 
the Seventies, thanks to their flexibility, and helped Italy to navigate through the turbulent oil 
crisis and the subsequent years of stagflation.  This  same  strength  turned  instead  into  a 
weakness  when  the combined  two  economic  revolutions  of  the  late  XX  century  –  ICT 
and  globalization  –  shocked  the  world.  But  the  implication  drawn  by  some  that Italy  had 
entered  a  phase  of  historical  decline,  like  the  one  following  the Renaissance age, was too 
simplistic. Actually, it was wrong. 
During  the  first  years  of  the  new  century  the  Italian  economy  as  a whole  showed  clear 
signs  of  reaction  and  dynamism.  But  the  corporate sector started to split into two diverging 
buckets:  in  the  first  one  we  could  find  firms  –  mostly  manufacturers,  medium-large  size, 
exporters – that were able  to  catch  the  opportunities  of  the  new  global  environment  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   raised their productivity and competitiveness. In the second bucket we could find other  firms 
–  mostly in  the  services  sector,  small,  domestically  oriented  – which were not. 
According  to  revised  figures  recently  released  by  our  national statistical office (Istat), labor 
productivity in the manufacturing sector has increased by 23 per cent since 1995, that of the 
services sector has remained  almost  stagnant.  As  a  result,  total  economy's  productivity 
has increased by a meagre 6 per cent in twenty years, one of the worst performances in the 
advanced world. 
Clearly the future of our economy will depend on the relative weights of  the  two  buckets  and 
on  the  ability  of  the  regulatory  and  institutional framework to incentivize corporates to climb 
from the lower to the higher. 
Since  the  mid-Nineties,  and  more  decisively  after  the  global  crisis,  a series  of  important 
structural  reforms  started  to  be  enacted.  The  inspiring principles  were:  less  state  in  the 
economy,  a  more  market-friendly environment, a lighter regulatory burden. The markets of 
several  products and  services  were  progressively  liberalized:  the  banking  system  was  fully 
privatized,  several utilities and  publicly-owned firms were  transformed into  privately-owned 
companies.  Notably,  the  pension  system  became  a full “pay-as-you-go” system, making it 
one  of  the  most  sustainable  in  the  world,  notwithstanding  the  progressive  ageing  of  the 
population. 
The Great Recession damages 
In the most recent years the impact of the global financial crisis, first, and  of  the  European 
"sovereign  debt"  crisis,  right  after,  have  rocked  the Italian  economy,  just  while  it  was 
struggling  to  adjust  to  the  new technological and global market environment. 
To give you a sense of the blow inflicted to the real economy by these two shocks combined, 
the cumulate drop in GDP during the crisis reached 9 percent; industrial production fell by a 
quarter.  The  fall  in  global  demand  severely  hit  exporting  firms,  precisely  those  that  were 
fighting hard to “go global”. It was the Great Recession. 
There  is  a  big  difference  between  the  two  shocks,  and  that  regards the  effects  on  the 
banking  system.  In  the  couple  of  years  following  the default  of  Lehman  Brothers, Italian 
banks weathered the storm. Much like Japanese banks, they were not substantially involved 
in the "toxic" asset kind of problem affecting banks of other countries. Hence, they were able 
to absorb the turbulence coming from the recession with no support from taxpayers' money. 
But  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  kicked  in.  It  paralyzed  the  cross  border interbank market in 
Europe.  Credit  started  to  decrease,  especially  to  SMEs.  The  recession  deepened.  Italian 
banks,  facing  a  strong  rise  in  non- performing  loans  and  a  sharp  increase  in  the  cost  of 
funding,  saw  their profits and capital squeezed, further impairing their ability to support the 
real economy in a vicious spiral. When the sovereign debt crisis subsided the  conditions  of 
our  banks  improved,  but  the  issue  of  bad  loans  still figures prominently on the policy 
agenda in Italy these days. 
Risks and opportunities for the future 
The  macroeconomic  scenario  is  now  getting  better  in  Italy.  A recovery  started  one  year 
ago.  Yet  the  rates  of  growth  projected  for  this year and the next one look still insufficient to 
reabsorb unemployment. 
We  still  see  a  lack  of  aggregate  domestic  demand,  determining  an output  gap  that  we 
estimate at around 5 per cent. The common monetary policy  put  in  place  by  the  European 
Central  Bank  is  doing  its  best  to contrast  deflationary  risks  still  visible  in  the  euro  area. 
On the fiscal side, Italy  has  inherited  from  a  long  season  of  excessive  current  expenditure 
started in the Seventies a high level of public debt. Hence, fiscal policy has now a limited room 
for manoeuver, also given the constraints posed by the European rules. The Government is 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   fully  using  the  available  flexibility.  In terms  of  composition  of  the  budget,  it  is  aiming  at 
changing  it  in  a  more growth-friendly manner. 
Consumers'  and  investors'  confidence  has  to  be restored,  with  the  help of  macroeconomic 
policies, in order for the Italian economy to eventually close the output gap. But we have to 
solve  an  even  more  important  problem,  one  of  a  longer  term  nature:  productivity  and 
potential  growth still too slow. 
How  to  stimulate  them  is  what  structural  policies  should  be  concerned  with.  Some 
important steps forward have been recently taken in this direction: I would just like to mention 
the  labor  market  reform,  the "Jobs  Act",  which  injected  a  decisive  dose  of  flexibility  into 
the  Italian labor market. Other very relevant reforms are in the making, such as that of the 
judiciary and of the civil service. 
Much  remains  to  be  done  to  boost  potential  growth.  It's  a  long  and multifaceted endeavor. 
A key factor is innovation. 
Let  me  mention  an  example  of  a  successful  innovation  of  the  past which  combines  most 
of  the  strength  of  the  Italian  scientific  and  artistic culture:  the  “Vespa”  scooter  (slide  8). 
This  is  a  symbol  of  the  Italian design, but also of technological ability, which became a 
global phenomenon  so  much  that  it  has  been  exhibited  even  in  the  Museum  of Modern 
Art in New York. 
The  idea  of  the  Vespa  came  to  the  manager  of  an  aircraft manufacturer  seeking to 
diversify its products right after the end of WW2. He  wanted  a  totally  different  product  from 
the  existing  motorbikes  and therefore asked an aeronautical engineer who “hated motorbikes” 
to  design  the  new  scooter.  The  engineer  came  up  with  a  completely  different  design, 
resembling  a  wasp,  the  English  for  “Vespa”, and  with  several  distinctive characteristics that 
made it extremely comfortable to ride. 
It  took  a  few  years,  but  the  Vespa  turned  into  an  astonishing  success, also  promoted  by 
Hollywood movies, such as the ride of Gregory Peck and Audrey  Hepburn on a Vespa  through 
the  streets  of  Rome in  “Roman Holidays”. 
The  lesson  that  we  draw  from  the  Vespa  example  highlights  two ingredients  that,  still 
today,  are  crucial  for  successful  innovations:  human  capital  and  what  can  be  called 
“managerial  capital”, i.e. the  availability of managers with a risk taking attitude, able to use 
the latest technology, and capable to think out of the box. 
While  it  is  difficult  to maintain a  high  propensity  to innovate  in ageing societies, naturally 
tending to be averse to “the new”, this is a key challenge  for  policy,  and  it  requires  to  keep 
investing  to  strengthen  the education system at all levels and to promote an entrepreneurial 
culture in the population, especially among the youths. 
What Italy and Japan can do together 
Let  me  conclude  this  brief  overview  with  a  tiny  episode  of  the  past, back  in  the  years 
following  the  establishment  of  diplomatic  ties  between our two countries. 
A printmaker, engraver and artist born near Genoa, whose name was Edoardo  Chiossone, 
was  selected  in  1868  by  the  Banca  Nazionale  (the main issuing bank in Italy at that time, 
subsequently merging with other issuing banks to  give  birth to the Bank of Italy)  to  be sent 
to  Frankfurt, Germany, in order to learn updated techniques of banknote printing. 
Banca Nazionale slowed down its projects in renewing printing technologies. Chiossone was 
approached  by  officials  of  the  Japanese Finance Ministry, and invited to move to Japan, to 
reorganize the printing activity of the State Printing Bureau. 
Chiossone  moved  to  Tokyo  in  1875  and  became  Head  Printer  within  the  State  Printing 
Bureau. The Bank of Japan was still to be founded. He realized  there  the  first  modern  (i.e. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   horizontal)  Japanese  banknotes  (slide 9). He maintained this position until his retirement and 
lived the rest of his life in Japan, never setting foot in Italy again. 
This story symbolizes, to my view, some comparative advantages of our  two  countries  and 
the  potential  of  cooperation  between  us:  artistic inventiveness  combined  with  openness 
to  new  technologies,  adventurous spirit, individualistic curiosity on the Italian part; superior 
capacity in organizing productive factors, long-term vision, social cohesion addressed towards 
collective endeavors on the Japanese part. 
Italy  and  Japan  already  cooperate  in  many  fields,  from  trade  to  finance,  to  international 
institutions and policies. We must strengthen our cooperation, exploit our complementarities, 
in the interest of our peoples' prosperity. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     7 
  8 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9 
       10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
