  Nina Stoyanova: The history of Bulgaria’s money 
Welcome  address  by  Ms  Nina  Stoyanova,  Deputy  Governor  (Banking  Department)  of  the 
Bulgarian National Bank, at the opening of “The History of Money on the Bulgarian Lands” 
exhibition, jointly organised by Burgas Municipality and the Bulgarian National Bank, Burgas, 
10 June 2016. 
 Mayor Nickolov, 
Dear citizens and guests of Burgas, 
It  is  a  great  honour  for  me  to  welcome  you  at  the  opening  of  this  exhibition  entitled  ‘The 
History  of  Money  on  the  Bulgarian  Lands’.  Co-organisers  of  the  exhibition  are  Burgas 
Municipality and the Bulgarian National Bank. This exhibition comprises coins and coin-like 
items minted and circulated on today’s Bulgarian lands from antiquity to the present day, and 
the major part of these comes from the BNB’s museum collection. 
Before we go back in time, I would like to mention that the Bulgarian National Bank (BNB) is 
one  of  the  oldest  public  institutions  in  Bulgaria.  It  was  founded  immediately  after  the  re-
establishment of the Bulgarian state, on 25 January 1879, and on 6 June of that same year 
the first banking transaction was carried out with the BNB’s involvement. Our central bank is 
also one of the oldest central banks in the world – the 13th oldest one by date of foundation. 
Today  the  BNB  still  is  the  independent  issuing  authority  of  Bulgaria.  It  performs  its  main 
objective, as it is written down in the law – to keep the national currency stable – and also the 
functions relating to its exclusive right to release banknotes and coins into circulation and to 
maintain the currency circulation in Bulgaria. 
One  year  after  the  BNB  was  founded,  the  Law  on  the  Right  of  Minting  Coins  in  the 
Principality was adopted, whereby the national monetary unit was created and named ‘LEV’ 
and  the  coins  were  named  ‘stotinki’.  In  1881  the  first  Bulgarian  coins  –  copper  coins  in 
denominations of 2, 5 and 10 stotinki – were minted in England, and in 1882 silver 1 and 2 
leva coins were minted in Russia. 
Soon the Bulgarian lev became widely accepted, facilitating trade payments and fostering the 
country’s economic development. At the same time the new national currency began to play 
the  role  of  a  ‘national  unifier’,  a  symbol  of  the  independence  and  sovereignty  of  the  new 
Bulgaria. 
For many years the production of Bulgarian coins used to be assigned to specialised mints in 
Europe – Birmingham, St Petersburg, Brussels, London, Vienna, Paris, Belgrade, Kremnica, 
Budapest and Berlin. For over six decades now, since the Bulgarian Mint opened up in 1952, 
Bulgaria has been producing its own circulation coins, and since 1965 commemorative coins 
as well. In 1994 the BNB Printing Works was established as a structural unit of the central 
bank, and four years later the printing of Bulgarian banknotes began. In 2013 a joint venture 
for production of banknotes was set up by the BNB Printing Works and one of the world’s 
leading  banknote  printers  François-Charles  Oberthur  Group,  France,  and  thus  Bulgaria 
became  an  important  player  in  the  banknote  industry.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  over  its 
137-year history the BNB has organised the production, issue and circulation of more than 
500 types of coins, including commemorative coins and medals produced by the Bulgarian 
Mint in Sofia. You know that a few months ago, on 7 December, the new 2 leva coin came 
into circulation. The design of that coin enjoys enormous public approval. 
But let’s come back to our exhibition. Along with the coins struck after Bulgaria’s liberation 
until now, the visitors will be able to catch a glimpse of the history of money on the Bulgarian 
lands going back centuries. I am convinced that the displayed items can tell a lot about the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  long  history  and  background  of  the  economic  and  political  life  on  the  territory  of  today’s 
Bulgaria. 
I wish much success to this exhibition. I hope many citizens and guests of Burgas will come 
to see it, to learn more about the money used on the Bulgarian lands, and to feel, as we do 
today, deep respect for the history and accomplishments of our ancestors. 
 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
