  Yves Mersch: Grasping the new normal of the banking industry – a view 
from a European central banker 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the European Financial Congress, Sopot, Poland, 14 June 2016. 
 Europe’s banking sector faces many challenges: challenges to its business models and to its 
profitability; competition from the non-bank sector; disruptions provoked by new technologies 
in  the  payments  field;  and  challenges  related  to  implementing  the  requirements  of  new 
regulation. 
Some national banking sectors have further and more idiosyncratic challenges. For example 
in Poland, the banking sector faces risks related to Swiss franc-denominated mortgages, the 
introduction  of  a  new  tax  for  certain  financial  institutions  (on  which  the  European  Central 
Bank (ECB) has issued an opinion)1 and additional ex-post contributions to the recently used 
Polish Bank Guarantee Fund. 
The  central  message  of  my  remarks  today  is  that  we  need  both  change  and  stability  to 
secure  the  future  of  Europe’s  banking  sector.  On  the  one  hand,  we  should  support  the 
healthy forces of creative destruction resulting from competition and technological advances. 
On  the  other  hand,  we  need  certainty  and  stability  so  that  banks  can  make  long-term 
business  plans  and  do  their  job  of  financing  productive  investment.  Sustainable  economic 
growth requires a strong, profitable and resilient financial sector. 
Let  me  explain  in  a  little  more  detail  what  I  have  in  mind.  I  will  first  elaborate  on  the 
challenges facing banks under what has come to be known as the “new normal”. I will then 
focus  on  the  new  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  and  the  importance  of  it  being 
completed with a solid architecture for managing financial crises. I will conclude with some 
reflections  on  the  need  for  policy-makers  to  provide  certainty  and  stability  to  underpin  the 
process of change that banks are currently going through. 
From the “old normal” to the “new normal” – drivers of change 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  global  recession,  Europe’s  banks  face  an 
environment that previously would have been considered abnormal but which nowadays has 
become so commonplace as to be perceived as the “new normal”. Yet at the same time, the 
fundamental role of banks in the economy has not changed: the banking sector is there to 
channel savings towards productive investment and thus to serve the real economy. 
The  “old  normal”  was  characterised  by  a  long  period  of  low  macroeconomic  volatility, 
sustained  economic  growth,  historically  low  credit  and  liquidity  premia,  and  rising  asset 
prices. All this came against a background of light-touch regulation. The financial crisis has 
led to much-needed and far-reaching reform of the regulatory framework and a redesign of 
the supervisory architecture. 
But while we may have left the ‘old normal’ behind us, the “new normal” is still surrounded by 
substantial uncertainty. 
I see three challenges or drivers of change in the banking sector that will ultimately influence 
the shape of the “new normal”. 
                                                
1  Opinion  of  the  European  Central  Bank  of  12  January  2016  on  a  tax  for  certain  financial  institutions 
(CON/2016/1). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  First, the current economic environment poses a challenge to banks’ business models and 
their  profitability.  Abundant  savings  are  not  sufficiently  absorbed  due  to  timid  investment 
activities of cash rich corporates. At the same time households and governments still need to 
repair  their  debt-contaminated  balance  sheets.  Moreover,  although  very  low  to  negative 
interest rates aim at stimulating investment and consumption, a Ricardian reaction cannot be 
excluded, i.e. households are hoarding even more as they need higher saving ratios to build 
up the same amount of wealth over the same time span. 
For  some  banks,  a  particular  challenge  is  compounded  by  a  legacy  issue,  namely  non-
performing  loans  (NPLs),  which  remain  a  serious  obstacle for these  banks  to  provide  new 
credit to the real economy, and a more general impediment for some banking sectors. 
Second,  banks  face  increasing  competition  from  other  actors  in  the  market  for  financial 
intermediation.  These  actors  include  peer-to-peer  lenders  and  technology  firms  offering 
financial services, but also to some extent insurance companies or investment funds. 
While more competition is surely welcome, market funding should complement, not replace, 
the role of banks in financing the economy. But further consolidation in the banking sector 
could  improve  its  overall  profitability  by  increasing  cost  and  revenue  synergies, thus make 
banking more competitive again. 
Third, banks are confronted with potentially disruptive technologies such as distributed ledger 
technology (DLT) in the payments field. A distributed ledger is essentially a database that is 
shared across a network to record and validate transactions in different locations. 
As with all innovations, this new technology brings both challenges and opportunities. While 
it could increase pressure on some bank activities, DLT also has the potential to lower back-
office costs significantly and make market infrastructures more resilient and efficient. 
As I highlighted in a speech in Frankfurt in April2, I see three main roles for the Eurosystem in 
this  regard:  first,  as  an  operator,  to  ensure  that  we  provide  the  right  services  for  the 
settlement of payments and securities; second, as a catalyst, to facilitate standardisation and 
interoperability; and third, as an overseer and supervisor, to safeguard financial stability and 
ensure a level playing field. 
Some  of  you  may  say  that  there  is  another  challenge,  namely  the  need  to  cope  with  the 
many changes in the regulatory framework. While I fully agree that we should provide stable 
framing conditions in terms of regulatory certainty, we should not forget where we have come 
from:  the  transition  from  the  “old  normal”  to  the  “new  normal”  was  accompanied  by  the 
biggest bail-out in history, costing European taxpayers almost two trillion euros.3 
In  response,  the  European  Union  (EU)  has  strengthened  and  harmonised  the  regulatory 
framework  with  the  Single  Rulebook  and  by  introducing  a  paradigm  shift from  “bail-out”  to 
“bail-in”. In the euro area, we went even further with the establishment of the Banking Union. 
The  Banking  Union  was  a  game-changer  in  the  crisis  as  a  way  to  weaken  the  bank-
sovereign nexus. It was also an unprecedented step towards deeper integration of Europe’s 
banking  sector.  The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  is  the  basis  for  independent, 
tough but appropriate supervision across the Banking Union. It is also an open project where 
non-euro area Member States can join through close cooperation. 
                                                
2  Speech by Yves Mersch: Distributed ledger technology – panacea or flash in the pan?, 25 April 2016. 
3  Around 5 trillion euros of aid (including State guarantees) have been approved by the Commission between 
2007 and 2015 of which 1.7 trillion were used at the peak of the crisis. State Aid Scoreboard 2015 > Aid in the 
context of the financial and economic crisis. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Deposit insurance and effective resolution tools 
It is important in the “new normal” not only to strengthen regulation and supervision but also 
to  establish  a  framework  in  which  it  is  possible  for  banks  to  fail  without  challenging  the 
stability  of  the  whole  financial  sector.  Here  the  frameworks  for  resolution  and  deposit 
insurance are central. 
At the EU level, beyond the establishment of the Single Resolution Mechanism, the Directive 
on  Deposit  Guarantee  Schemes  has  already  harmonised  important  provisions  in  deposit 
insurance,  such  as  the  coverage  level  and  the  payout  period,  and  thus  strengthened 
depositor protection. 
But ultimately we have to go further in the Banking Union to ensure that depositors across 
the  euro  area  are  afforded  a  uniform  level  of  protection  wherever  they  are  located.  At  the 
same  time,  legacy  issues  will  need  to  be  addressed  to  ensure  a  level  playing field  and  to 
mitigate  moral  hazard.  Tackling  these  legacy  issues  should  proceed  in  parallel  with  the 
establishment of an European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS). 
Deposit  insurance  kicks  in  only  at  the  very  end  of  a  bank’s  lifetime,  once  it  is  already 
undergoing  insolvency  proceedings  or  is  in  the  process  of  being  resolved.  Recent  events, 
including  in  the  Polish  banking  sector,  have  reminded  us  of  the  importance  of  having  an 
effective toolkit to deal with failing banks, including at the early intervention stage.4 
The Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) – which has yet to be transposed into 
Polish  law  –  provides  just  such  a  toolkit,  giving  the  supervisor  the  necessary  tools,  for 
example, to require a bank in difficulty to take the necessary recovery action. 
If early intervention proves unsuccessful, a bank may need to be resolved, without disrupting 
financial stability and the real economy but also without taking recourse to taxpayers’ money. 
In this respect, the BRRD provides for the necessary resolution powers and tools, as well as 
for substantial loss-sharing procedures with the stakeholders of the failing bank. 
Going  forward,  it  will  be  essential  for  both  investors  and  banks  to  have  certainty  on  the 
overall level of capital requirements and the application of the new resolution framework. 
In  this  respect,  consistent  implementation  of  the  minimum  requirement  for  own  funds  and 
eligible liabilities (MREL) across the EU and implementation of total loss absorbing capacity 
(TLAC) in the common EU framework will both be of great importance. 
Regulatory certainty 
Strengthening the regulatory framework through the Single Rulebook and establishment of 
the Banking Union have made Europe’s banking sector and the financial system as a whole 
more  stable  and  resilient.  Banks’  capital  positions  have  been  strengthened;  leverage  has 
been reduced; and business models and funding models are continuing to be adjusted. We 
should not undo this achievement. 
Now  is  the  time  to  finalise  the  regulatory  reform  agenda  and  implement  the  remaining 
measures.  This  includes  TLAC  but  also  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio  and  the  Leverage 
Ratio. Banks need regulatory certainty. 
Let me remind you of the message from central bank governors and heads of supervision 
that  they  would  not  significantly  increase  overall  capital  requirements  across  the  banking 
sector  in  finalising  international  regulatory  reforms.  It  is  fully  recognised  by  all  public 
authorities that proper calibration of the regulatory burden needs to be ensured. 
                                                
4  See NBP FSR of February 2016 (Financial Stability Report): ‘The experience from attempts to rescue SK bank 
confirmed  the  necessity  of  prompt  introduction  into  the  Polish  legal  system  the  provisions  of  the  Bank 
Recovery and Resolution Directive – BRRD’ (p.52). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In  this  respect,  we  have  to  be  mindful  of  banks’  concerns  about  compliance  costs,  the 
complexity  of  the  new  framework  and  its  cumulative  impact.  Inconsistencies  between  the 
different  levels  of  legislation  should  be  avoided.  At  the  same  time,  more  clarity  about  the 
interaction between the various acts and measures would be welcome. 
We  agree  on  the  need  to  standardise  and  streamline  data  reporting  initiatives  to  reduce 
unnecessary burdens for banks. Proportionality must guide action in the reporting area if we 
want to be consistent with the objective of preserving diversity of business models within the 
EU.  And  if  there  are  concrete  cases  to  improve  the  overall  consistency  of  the  post-crisis 
framework  by  avoiding  overlaps  and  gaps  in  the  regulation,  these  should  certainly  be 
addressed. 
Conclusion 
Let me draw to a close. A stable financial system is an absolute prerequisite for sustainable 
economic  growth,  but  stability  alone  is  not  enough:  as  has  been  said  before,  we  all  want 
stability, but we should not want the stability of the graveyard. 
It also has to be profitable for banks to provide credit to the real economy. For that, we need 
a  more  favourable  business  environment  in  Europe  but  we  also  need  less  uncertainty, 
including in the realm of regulation. The cost of equity cannot stay above the return on equity 
forever. 
Put differently, regulatory reform is necessary but it should lead to regulatory reliability. We 
should aim for regulatory completion yet still strive for a new dynamic equilibrium to provide 
the solid foundation that banks need in order to operate effectively. 
I am convinced that the transformation of Europe’s banking landscape currently in progress 
can lead to a stronger, more competitive and more resilient banking system if we succeed in 
balancing change and stability. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
