   S S Mundra: Indian banking sector – gazing into the crystal ball 
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Mint  Annual  Banking  Conclave  on  the  theme  “Disruption,  Innovation  and  Competition”, 
Mumbai, 4 February 2016. 
 Assistance provided by Smt. Usha Janakiraman and Shri Sanjeev Prakash is gratefully acknowledged. 
Dr.  K.  C.  Chakrabarty,  Former  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India;  Smt.  Chanda 
Kochhar, MD and CEO, ICICI Bank Limited; Shri Aditya Puri, MD, HDFC Bank Limited; Shri B. 
Sriram, Managing Director, State Bank of India; Shri P.S. Jayakumar, MD and CEO, Bank of 
Baroda; Shri Uday Kotak, Ex- VC and MD, Kotak Mahindra Bank; other senior colleagues from 
the  banking  and  financial  sector;  members  of  the  print  and  electronic  media;  ladies  and 
gentlemen! 
At the  outset,  I thank the  Mint  Management for inviting  me  to  deliver  the keynote 
2. 
address at this Annual Banking Conclave. The galaxy of speakers that headline this event 
provides a testimony to the importance of this event. A lot in the Indian banking sector has 
changed since I first spoke at this conclave three years ago. Disruptive events have taken 
place; innovative practices introduced and competition as it stands today, is stiffer than ever 
before and is likely to intensify further in the coming months. 
3. 
Some of you who attended this event last year might recall that I had briefly raised 
certain issues at the end of my address stating that they could emerge as potential challenges 
for the banking sector in the days to come. Many such challenges which were looking abstract 
or distant then are appearing imminent now. I have, therefore, chosen to elaborate on few such 
issues in my address today. These issues essentially revolve around “Disruption, Innovation 
and Competition” in the banking sector, which is the theme of the Conclave. You may also 
recollect that in my address last year, I had referred to Brett King’s book “Bank 3.0” in the 
context of a single channel solution to multiple product offerings. I would once again invoke 
him. In the concluding chapter of the book, King has raised 15 questions as a checklist to 
assess  whether  a  bank  is  prepared  to  withstand  the  disruptive  process  that  is  currently 
underway. According to King, answer to these questions would determine whether you are in 
trouble or you are not making the shift. While some of these questions may not be relevant in 
the context of Indian banking today, they will become so, soon. Many, however, are already 
relevant for us. Let me mention a few: 
• 
• 
• 
Do you still require a signature card for account opening? 
Do you have a distinct Head of social media in an executive role? 
Do you have a Head of Mobile, and do you have apps already deployed for your 
customers? 
Can you approve a personal loan application for an existing customer with a salaried 
account in real time, instantly? 
4. 
I acknowledge that some of the banks present here can surely claim that they are 
making the necessary shift. They can move to other eleven questions while remaining ones 
can make a beginning to address these four questions. The predominant message from the 
foregoing is that digital innovation and disruption are progressing at a fast pace and are already 
a subject of huge debate. Hence, I would not dwell any further on them but move to few other 
areas which can have equal or even greater impact on the way banking is conducted going 
forward. 
5. 
So, let me now come to those issues that I want to highlight today. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
(i) 
Account Number Portability: Just consider the possibility of a dissatisfied or less 
than satisfied customer asking for shifting his banking relationship; lock, stock and barrel to 
another bank. He/she would ask “If I can switch my mobile service provider without changing 
my mobile number, why not banking service provider without changing my account number.” 
This possibility can no longer be dismissed as a wishful thinking. This would need a “shared” 
payment system, regulated independently, where all account number and payment instructions 
are warehoused (such as standing instructions/direct debit etc.),an unique customer ID and a 
central payment system. Credits/debits would be linked to the unique ID. Interesting bit is that 
some international banks are already supporting the idea. With Aadhaar as unique ID and 
NPCI as a central payment system, we are quite well placed to translate this into a reality. Our 
past record as a country of having swiftly embraced anonymous “screen based” bond trading 
or switching from “open cry” system on the bourses, should portend a much shorter timeline 
for  this  transition  than  a  period  of  few  years  many  in  international  arena  are  presently 
presuming for this to happen. Why can’t we be a global first in this? Imagine how this can 
empower a customer and give an entirely new dimension to the competition, ensuring best of 
the breed customer service and fair pricing. Let me give a call today to all the banker friends 
here to commence a serious discussion on making “account number portability” a reality. 
(ii) 
Competition  from  non-bank  players  in  payment  system:  All  along  we  have 
believed that banks would retain the privilege to serve as the sole payment service providers 
even  while  their  other  traditional  functions  like  dispensing  credit  might  have  competition. 
Ground realities have changed. Payment system is no longer the sole preserve of banks. There 
is competition and how? Large data companies like Google, Vodafone, Apple have been taking 
over transactional roles. A set of payment banks have been granted licenses and then, there 
are  non-bank  payment  system  providers.  A  massive  disruption  is  possible  based  on  the 
technology  using  Block  Chain  which  would  make  distributed  ledger  possible.  For  the 
uninitiated, “distributed ledger” allows a payment system to operate in an entirely decentralized 
way,  without  intermediaries  such  as  banks.  The  banks  would  need  to  either  develop  own 
capability or seek proper alliances. I say this, however, with a caveat that we or rather the 
global regulatory community elsewhere have not taken a final stance on the use of distributed 
ledger technology. It is important to highlight here that Financial Stability Board has already 
started consultations on developing better understanding of the intricacies involved. Some of 
the large institutions like Goldman Sachs or J P Morgan Chase have set up internal groups to 
work in this area. Is it not the time for the Indian banking system to wake up to this possibility? 
(iii) 
Impact on Lending Business: A key concern that I had briefly hinted at last year 
also is whether the large corporates would continue to borrow from the banks or whether the 
banks themselves would be keen to fawn over them after their on-going experience with such 
lendings? Many large corporate houses have lately been able to access funds on their own at 
cheaper rates without needing to reach out to banks. In mature markets, it is usual for the large 
corporates  to  access  financial  markets  directly  for  their  funding  requirements  rather  than 
through banks. As the Indian economy and our financial markets mature further, more and 
more large corporates are likely to bypass banks for their funding requirements. Even medium 
enterprises  may  find  alternate  avenues  of  finance.  Under  the  circumstances,  banks  would 
need to look at substitutes for deployment of funds. This void could most likely be filled by 
lending to small and micro enterprises and retail clients. As you are aware, the assessment of 
credit needs of small & micro enterprises and retail, is a different ball game altogether. A non-
disruptive shift would require the bank staff to acquire new capabilities for credit appraisal of 
self-employed  individuals  and  people  with  little or  no  credit  history. The  competition  in  the 
shape of small finance banks, with a mandate to focus exclusively on small business units, 
small and marginal farmers, micro and small industries and other unorganized sector entities, 
which would operate through technology-focused, low cost structure, is already on the anvil. 
As part of this strategic shift, banks would also need to improve their analytical abilities for big 
data. As I spoke earlier about lending to customers with little or no credit history, banks would 
need  to  employ  some  non-conventional  tools  for  assessing  credit  worthiness  of  such 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
customers, which can, among others, include credit card usage, travel patterns, bill payment 
history and so on. Lack of attention to these segments by the banks might allow P2P lenders 
to sneak in and compete for the piece of the pie. Here again, I would like to use the caveat that 
we are yet to finalise our regulatory stance on P2P lending. 
(iv) 
IFRS  Implementation:  With  the  MCA  announcing  the  much  awaited  Ind  AS 
implementation road map for the financial sector, scheduled commercial banks (other than 
RRBs) are required to comply with the standards for accounting periods beginning from April 
1,  2018.  In  this  endeavour,  the  banks  would  need  to  deal  with  challenges  resulting  from 
implementation of Expected Credit Loss (ECL) based provisioning framework, classification 
and measurement of financial assets and impact of alignment of the regulatory guidelines with 
Ind AS on regulatory capital computations under the Basel III framework, leverage and liquidity 
ratios,  etc.  As  a  supervisor,  our  off-site  reporting  formats  would  need  to  be  revisited.  In 
essence, huge capacity building initiatives at the level of both the regulator and the regulated 
are required. 
While it may not be possible to precisely quantify the impact of Ind AS implementation at this 
stage,  rough  estimates  globally  indicate  a  transitional  impact  of  25–50%  increase  in 
provisioning  levels  on  account  of  implementation  of  ECL  based  provisioning  framework.  A 
2014  international  survey1  of  select  banks  indicated  that  over  half  of  them  expected  an 
impairment provision increase of up to 50 per cent across all asset classes. Though our policy 
stance  on  ECL  impairment  provisions  including  possible  prudential  floors  remains  to  be 
finalized, it is important that our banks start work on strengthening their data capture and risk 
management systems to enable impairment assessment. 
In this context, I wish to raise an issue today for larger debate. The regulatory experience with 
the  internal  models  employed  by  the  global  banks  to  assess  the  risks  under  the  Basel 
framework has not been very pleasant. The assessments carried out since the Global Financial 
Crisis have pointed out the complex models used by the banks for risk computation under 
advanced  approaches  had  significantly  underestimated  risks  that  the  banks  had  on  their 
books.  Since,  the  ECL  framework  would  involve  principle  based  assessment  of  credit  risk 
(using  models),  the  concern  would  be  around  underestimation  of  risks  by  the  institutions. 
Hence, I wonder that as we prepare  towards IFRS, could we conceive of an independent, 
umbrella  entity  to  prescribe  or  validate  models,  within  the  framework  of  the  accounting 
standards or to at least examine the approach adopted by the banks in computing expected 
losses  so  as  to  ensure  consistency  in  assessment  across  the  sector,  besides  having 
supervisory comfort on the adequacy of accounting provisions. 
Finally, one last question is whether we could draw some lessons from how banks globally 
have transitioned to IFRS from local GAAP? While we could get some perspectives about the 
challenges involved in the transition, the fact is that the challenges would be much greater here 
in India as we do not have an IAS 39 equivalent framework unlike other jurisdictions which 
migrated to IFRS from local GAAP largely aligned with IAS 39 or US GAAP. In that sense, 
IFRS transition is a paradigm shift in the Indian context. 
(v) 
Consumer  Protection:  The  profile  of  the  customer  that  the  banks  deal  with  is 
undergoing  a  major  transformation.  This  also  calls  for  a  transformation  in  the  way  banks 
position their products and services for their customers. Customers as a group are no longer 
satisfied  with  off-  the-  shelf  products  and  would  rather  have  products  customised  to  their 
individual needs. Towards this end, the banks have to leverage Big Data and proactively offer 
products and services that suit the needs of individual customers. 
                                                
1   The Fourth Global IFRS Banking Survey by Deloitte: The survey includes the views of 54 banks from Europe, 
the Middle East & Africa, Asia Pacific and the Americas. Responses were received from 14 of the 29 global 
systemically important financial institutions (G-SIFIs) and 25 of the top 50 global banking groups measured by 
total assets listed in the Banker Top 1000 World Banks 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
A regulatory red flag I would raise here is around rampant mis-selling in sale of third party 
products, especially insurance. Another recurring consumer grievance is around compensation 
for failed transactions/frauds. Of course, as institutions, banks have more muscle as compared 
to “resource poor” individuals, but as guardian of customer rights in our role as regulators, we 
would  quite  closely  monitor  misuse  of  such  might  against  the  customers.  If  violations  are 
observed, the banks wound need to not only compensate the customers, but also be forced to 
pay penalties. 
(vi) 
Financial Inclusion: I don’t want to touch this topic in any detail but would just like to 
caution banks on some aspects in dealing with newly acquired accounts. A large number of 
new accounts have been added under RBI’s Financial Inclusion focus and under the PMJDY 
push. Periodic updation of the KYC records in these accounts and continuous monitoring is 
vital.  Just  to  give  one  example-  a  news  item  had  appeared  the  other  day  mentioning  that 
Rs.1 crore was parked and withdrawn in a labourer’s bank account which he was unaware of 
till he received an IT demand of a tax of 40 lakh rupees. Many similar instances are being 
reported. This means that the recently opened accounts are susceptible to misuse by money 
mules and hence, banks must remain vigilant. 
(vii) 
Other issues: Lot of debate has surrounded the future of brick and mortar branches 
and their obituaries been written several times. However, they have survived and are doing 
well. Of course, the functions they undertook earlier, extent of client interface they had, has 
undergone a sea change, but my sense is that the brick and mortar braches would continue to 
remain relevant in India in the foreseeable future. Management would, however, have to think 
through the future of these branches in terms of the role and functions they envisage for the 
branches going forward. 
Another issue is around the future of ATMs and the plastic money. If Mobile Banking continues 
to grow at the pace that we see today, would cards still be needed and what use would be 
there for the ATMs? There is a justifiable call for reducing “cash transactions” in the system 
and hence, if more and more people moved to mobile/ internet based payments, the plastic 
cards and the investments made thus far in ATM networks would be rendered useless, unless 
put to more imaginative uses. 
Last but not the least, I would also like to sound another note of caution for the bankers present 
here. With all talks surrounding changing profiles, social habits and requirements of the gen-
next customer (Gen Y or the millennials), the banks must not lose sight of aging population. 
The next 15 years would see approximately 70 mn more people crossing the age of 60 years. 
These old age people would have different banking needs and would need to be serviced 
through appropriate delivery channels. Similarly, the pace of urbanisation in the country is only 
going to get heightened in the coming years and hence, banks would need to be geared up to 
cater to the requirements of this migrant population also. 
Conclusion 
6. 
I think I have scared you enough by highlighting the impending challenges that the 
banking sector is likely to face going forward. As Clay Christensen, Harvard Professor puts it 
“Disruptive  Innovation  can  hurt,  if  you  are  not  the  one  doing  the  disruption.”  Most  of  the 
scenarios that are going to play out are external to our system and hence, you need to be 
prepared, lest you get hurt. 
I believe the elite panel gathered here today would deliberate and reflect on some of the issues 
I have raised today. I once again thank Mint and Tamal for inviting me and wish you all a fruitful 
deliberation. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
