  Carolyn Wilkins: Release of the Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Ms Carolyn Wilkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, 
at the press conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 
13 July 2016. 
 Good morning. Governor Poloz and I are pleased to be here to talk about today’s interest 
rate announcement and our Monetary Policy Report (MPR). Before turning to your questions, 
let me spend a few minutes highlighting the main points of discussion that took place within 
Governing Council. 
Our  bottom  line  is  that  the  underlying  forces  that  underpin  stronger  growth  in  Canada  are 
intact, and the adjustment of the economy to lower oil prices is well under way. That said, 
both  international  and  domestic  factors  have  led  us  to  revise  down  our  forecast  for  GDP 
growth. 
Most importantly for Canada, there is good underlying momentum in the US economy, even 
if the composition of US growth is somewhat less favourable for Canada than it was in April. 
We are seeing relatively strong labour market conditions in the United States, consumers are 
confident,  and  the  rate  of  new  firm  creation  is  back  near  pre-recession  levels.  All  of  this 
suggests that the weak start to 2016 was largely temporary. The US economy remains a key 
driver  for  global  growth,  which  we  forecast  will  strengthen  gradually  to  3 1/2  per  cent  by 
2018. However, the results of the referendum in the United Kingdom have clouded the global 
outlook. 
Governing Council carefully considered how best to incorporate the effects of the Brexit vote 
into  the  outlook.  It  is  early  days,  and  there  will  be  a  prolonged  period  of  uncertainty  as 
authorities work out how the United Kingdom will exit from the European Union. Governing 
Council  decided  to  incorporate  in  the  base  case  projection  a  0.2  per  cent  reduction  in  the 
level  of  global  GDP  by  the  end  of  2018.  This  reflects  direct  trade  effects  and  some 
confidence  effects  on  business  investment.  We  are  assuming  that  the  Brexit  process  will 
proceed in an orderly fashion. Financial markets were resilient despite sharp adjustments in 
a  wide  range  of  global  asset  prices  in  the  wake  of  the  vote,  and  financial  conditions  are 
generally more accommodative. 
Now let me turn to the Canadian economy. Our discussions focused on how we should look 
through the choppiness in recent data to see the underlying trends, and what these trends 
mean for the inflation outlook. Among other factors, the fires in Northern Alberta, which have 
been costly for many, represent a sharp, but temporary, hit to the economy. We expect to 
see GDP fall by 1 per cent at annual rates in the second quarter, and then grow by 3.5 per 
cent in the third quarter as oil production resumes, rebuilding around Fort McMurray begins 
and  the  new  Canada  Child  Benefit  lifts  consumption.  In  fact,  fiscal  measures,  including 
infrastructure spending, provide an important support to growth over the forecast horizon. 
We have always said that the adjustment to the oil price shock would be a complex process. 
And  we  see  evidence  that  these  adjustments  are  happening,  thanks  to  the  resiliency  and 
flexibility of the Canadian economy. On the energy side, firms have been quick to cut back 
investment plans and reduce costs. By the end of the year, we expect these reductions to be 
largely over. 
On the non-commodity side of the economy, we have also seen evidence of adjustment, but 
it has been more uneven. Export data have been particularly volatile, and it is very important 
for  us  as  policy  makers  to  assess  underlying  trends. What  we  see  is  that  non-commodity 
exports over the past couple of years have been responding largely as expected to growth in 
foreign  activity  and  the  Canadian  dollar.  Businesses  are  telling  us  that  they  are  benefiting 
from stronger demand and a lower dollar. We have a great chart in the MPR that shows that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  non-commodity exports have recovered almost to their pre-recession peak, which puts the 
recent  volatility  into  proper  perspective.  Exports  are  projected  to  grow  in  line  with  the  US 
economy  over  the  projection  period. We  are  being  conservative  by  assuming  that  exports 
only make up part of the ground lost over the past four months. The past depreciation of the 
exchange rate will continue to support the level of exports, but its effect on export growth is 
projected to taper off over the course of this year. 
Growing  demand  for  Canadian  exports  should  lead  to  increased  investment  and  new 
businesses  being  created.  The  question  for  monetary  policy  is  when  and  by  how  much. 
Governing Council still believes that investment will be needed to expand productive capacity 
as both foreign and domestic demand increase. You can see that this rebuilding process is 
well under way in the United States, and we are seeing early signs that new firms are also 
being  created  in  Canada.  That  said,  our  profile  for  investment,  while  still  positive,  is  lower 
than  in  April.  That  is  because  investment  data  have  continued  to  disappoint  and  some 
businesses are telling us that they remain cautious. 
Let me make a point about the lower investment profile. It does not just mean slower growth 
in GDP, it also means a reduction in the economy’s potential, although to a lesser extent. 
When  you  add  it  all  up,  we  project  the  output  gap  will  close  toward  the  end  of  2017, 
somewhat  later  than  we  forecast  in  April.  The  uncertainty  around  potential  output  remains 
high  because  it  is  not  clear  how  much  productive  capacity  will  ultimately  be  rebuilt  as  the 
economy strengthens. 
In terms of inflation, we project it will average 2 per cent in 2017, as the output gap gradually 
closes. Our judgment about the inflation process is supported by two staff papers published 
today.  The  first  finds  that  wage  pressures  are  subdued  relative  to  historical  experience, 
largely  consistent  with  the  existing  slack  in  the  labour  market.  The  second  focuses  on 
structural  factors  that  help  explain  recent  movements  in  the  prices  of  consumer  energy 
products, food and services. 
Finally, as usual, we see a number of risks to our inflation outlook. We judge these risks to 
be  roughly  balanced.  The  overall  climate,  however,  is  one  of  heightened  uncertainty.  In  a 
context of continued weak investment at the global level, any additional uncertainty has the 
potential to keep businesses on the sidelines longer. 
Not  surprisingly,  Governing  Council  also  spent  some  time  talking  about  housing.  We 
continue to have the same concerns that we expressed in our June Financial System Review 
about  household  indebtedness  and  housing,  particularly  in  the  Greater  Vancouver  and 
Toronto markets. 
The circumstances that the Canadian economy is facing make the Bank’s risk-management 
approach to monetary policy particularly valuable, because the types of uncertainties we see 
cannot  readily  be  incorporated  into  projections.  In  light  of  all  these  considerations,  the 
Governing Council maintained the target for the overnight rate at 0.5 per cent. 
With that, Governor Poloz and I would now be happy to answer your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
