   R Gandhi: Targeted attacks – protection of critical infrastructure of the 
country and capacity building 
Speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, in the Valedictory 
Session of the 9th Annual Summit “Cyber & Network Security”, organized by the Associated 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) along with the Council of Europe 
(Strasbourg, France), New Delhi, 29 July 2016. 
 Assistance provided by Shri S Ganesh Kumar, CGM is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. I am indeed glad to be present here today as we conclude the deliberations on an important 
topical area – pertaining to cyber security and protection of critical infrastructure from cyber 
threats, coupled with capacity building in this crucial area of importance. I must congratulate 
the organisers on having chosen the theme of this summit, given the concerns emanating from 
cyber security related incidents. 
2. We are at a critical juncture in the world of today which is characterised by rapid advances 
in the use of Information and Communication Technology and where misuse of the facilities 
results in erosion of public confidence apart from resulting in financial loss and disruption of 
normal activities. Today’s world is witnessing the embedded use of IT in almost all spheres of 
life; be it in business or financial sector; be it government or household sectors, use of ICT is 
pervasive; even as mundane as switching a light is today executed by use of ICT; in addition, 
networked devices are now the norm. New concepts such as centralised processing systems, 
the Internet of things and mobile computing have all made life very easy; but this also has the 
attendant risks, prime among which is cyber security. The Financial system which is at the 
nerve centre of economic activity is an easy target not only because it is one of the largest 
users of Information and Communications Technology but also because financial crime results 
in  easy  access  to  money;  this  also  makes  it  important  that  cyber  security  is  given  its  due 
importance. 
3. Recent developments in banking as also payment and settlement systems have resulted in 
enhanced customer comfort and flexibility in terms of timing, location and choice of channels. 
These, however, also expose the customers as well as banks to risk of cyber-attacks. While 
the banks have better resilience in terms of risk mitigation structures and ability to absorb the 
losses and expenses, the customers may not be so privileged. A relatively small value fraud 
of a few thousands of rupees may endanger the purchase of basic needs and most customer 
may be ill-equipped to effectively handle the security features provided with the service. We 
have also heard of instances, elsewhere in the world, of even as small a value of one penny 
being robbed off every transaction, misusing the ICT capabilities, which have also resulted in 
loss of enormous amount of money. While it is recognised that the customer has to protect 
himself against disclosure of sensitive passwords, PINs etc., they may only have limited ability 
to distinguish between the genuine customer service calls and fraudulent operators. 
Nature of cyber crime 
4. Cyber criminals and the attacks they launch on financial sector and its users come with 
different  faces.  There  are  organised  criminals  who  are  looking  to  attack  the  financial 
institutions,  with  a  view  to  siphon  away  funds,  illegally.  Then  there  are  those  who  steal 
confidential  data  from  financial  institutions  which  may  also  include  customer  related 
information.  The  latter  are  more  interested  in  ex-filtration  of  data,  though  no  loss  happens 
immediately. These  stolen  data then  land  in the  hands  of petty  criminals,  who  defraud the 
banks directly or by enticing the customers to share more information such as passwords and 
pins where after actual loss takes place. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   5. A variation of these attacks is to masquerade as bank officials and extract information from 
customers, based on random calls to phone numbers obtained from various sources, or even 
by blind trials which result in at least a few attempts resulting in success. 
6. There are other cyber criminals who steal money by putting through fraudulent transactions, 
or changing the particulars, so that they are able to take large sums away and vanish. In such 
cases, customer may not be directly contacted, but his particulars are taken through malware 
or other means. Recent incidents of this type have set the alarm bells ringing. I would like to 
draw your attention to the recent cyber incident reported by one of our banks, which I am sure 
all  of  you  would  have  seen,  particularly  when  similar  incident  at  a  central  bank  in  the 
neighbourhood is still fresh in our memory. 
7.  Yet  another  vicious  cyber-attack,  which  we  really  tread  is  what  is  categorised  as  cyber 
warfare; this is expected to be of organised attacks, sometimes by backing of large terrorist 
organisations  and  often  with  covert  state  sponsorship,  made  against  enemy  country 
information assets. 
8. The different nature of cyber-crimes naturally require responses which are designed to fight 
each type of threat, with specifically designed tools and practices. I am sure that during the 
deliberations of the day, these have all been discussed threadbare so I shall not dwell in details 
about these. I would, however, outline a set of five commandments which if followed in letter 
and spirit would mitigate the impact of cyber related risks. 
Defence strategies – protection is better than repenting later on 
9. The strategy to build preventive and detective defences depends on the specific link in the 
asset that one is trying to protect. The ecosystem for financial transaction not only includes 
banks  and  their  customers,  but  also  network  service  providers,  IT  infrastructure  providers, 
providers  of  managed  services  such  as  data  centres,  software  developers,  providers  of 
security  solutions  and  providers  of  the  end-point  device  which  is  used  for  accessing  the 
financial  service,  including  the  ATMs  which  may  or  may  not  be  bank-owned  /  managed 
devices. 
10. The devices which are used to provide the entire ecosystem produce huge quantity of 
information  and  activity  logs,  which  contain  crucial  information  which  can  throw  light  on 
potential attacks, even before the attack takes place. However, the humungous quantity of log 
data  renders  it  impossible  to  analyse  using  conventional  outlier  detections.  Conventional 
techniques  result  in  considerable  false  alarms  and  restrict  genuine  activity,  causing 
inconvenience and also creating mis-trust among the users about the security products and 
techniques. 
11. Therefore, the focus has now been shifting to techniques which are not rule based, but 
having ability to identify the normal activity patterns and detect the anomalous and potentially 
harmful  activity.  Needless  to  say,  these  involve  machine  learning  and  soft  computing 
techniques. Application of these techniques is expected to generate better hit-rate in terms of 
identifying  threats,  without  generating  high  level  of  false  alarms.  As  each  alarm  requires 
response and is resource intensive in terms of time, money and manpower, the ability of the 
expert systems to distinguish the malicious behaviour from and casual digressions from the 
normal activity pattern will determine the value of these tools in the security infrastructure. 
12. In addition to the tools, the most important component of the critical infrastructure protection 
is the skills, experience and alertness of the manpower deployed in this activity. The skill sets 
required for security are getting diversified from conventional IT skills to investigative skills of 
criminal investigator, data scientists having ability to deal with huge data requirements and 
with innovative minds to stay one step ahead of the cyber-criminal. 
13.  As  the  strength  of  overall  security  is  only  as  much  as  the  strength  of  its  individual 
components, it is necessary that all the stakeholders have to work hand in hand to address the 
threat to the information systems. The forums such as this provide great opportunity to interact 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   and understand the role that each one of us has to play and to also ensure that our actions 
and plans are complementary and not at cross purposes. 
Cyber Security Preparedness – five Commandments for safety in banking 
14. Let me start with a most common requirement. Thou shall know your customer – which 
is  my  first  commandment.  All  of  us  are  aware  of  the  requirements  relating  to  Know  Your 
Customer or KYC as commonly referred to. Much has been said, discussed and detailed about 
KYC  that  I  shall  not  repeat  all  of  them;  suffice  to  say  now  that  it  is  essential  to  know  our 
customer well or else we shall have to face the consequences which may be detrimental to 
our business objectives. 
15. The second commandment of mine states that Thou shall know your employee. Most of 
the cyber frauds have some direct or indirect role of an insider, who generally happens to be 
an employee of the organisation which has been the target of the cyber security attack. There 
is an urgent need for an organisation to not only perform the antecedent verification of an 
employee at the time of recruitment, but also continuously monitor employee behaviour, trends 
in  operational  usage  of  the  organisational  resources,  interaction  levels  with  peers  and 
subordinates and the like. Today, IT tools provide a lot of information on employee behaviour 
and patterns; it is essential that organisations ascribe adequate importance to these aspects. 
16. The third commandment reads as follows: Thou shall keep your IT systems up-to-date 
and free of all risky components such as viruses, spams, malware, spoofing software and 
so on. Today, there are centralised IT system facilities which can ensure that the updates are 
implemented centrally and also monitored centrally. 
17.  The  fourth  commandment  is  Thou  shall  provide  for  maximum  IT  Governance.  The 
broad  requirement  in  this  area  relates  to  the  need  for  ensuring  good  IT  practices  such  as 
‘maker and checker’ for financial transaction processing, a four-eyes principle for IT based 
operations, regular monitoring of system and operational logs, conduct of regular, periodical 
and well defined IT system audit followed by suitable corrective action wherever required, and 
a separate distinct CISO (Chief Information Security Officer) who would continuously monitor 
the quality and efficacy of IT and IS Security in the organisation. 
18.  My  final  commandment  is Thou shall ensure continued Cyber Security Awareness 
amongst all players in the chain. The world of cyber related threats is changing very fast and 
what is current on any day becomes obsolete the very next day. If continued cyber vigil is to 
be  ensured  then  a  continuous  process  of  awareness  building,  education,  re-enforcement, 
tests, trials and upgradation is a must. It is this area which we generally tend to be rather lax 
and which is exploited by cyber-baiters. 
19. Let me dwell a bit on what the central bank of this country is doing in this regard. In terms 
of  providing  a  comprehensive  framework for  IT  implementation,  we  at  Reserve  Bank  have 
been  proactive  and  follow  an  approach  of  consultation  and  congruence  in  the  security 
framework. Right from the early days when RBI provided guidance on computerisation, we 
have been conscious of the role that IT plays in meeting the emerging customer needs and 
the opportunities and challenges of using technology, including cyber related aspects. I will 
draw your attention to a few recent initiatives in this regard by the RBI. 
20. The Reserve Bank has recently issued on June 2, 2016 a comprehensive set of guidelines 
for Cyber Security framework in banks. These guidelines built over the earlier work emphasise 
the importance of having a focussed attention to cyber threats and framework for mitigating 
the threats and to protect the information assets. I would like to redraw your attention to the 
recent cyber incident at one of our banks. Apparently there has been no monetary loss in the 
recent incident. But it is too early to conclude what and how of the incident at this juncture; 
however, the need for vigil over the sensitive systems like remittances is once again brought 
to the fore, with particular focus on configuration of the systems and the human aspects in 
managing the systems. Banks need to put in place preventive measures such as appropriate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   controls framework around the systems, reconciliation of transactions in on real / near real time 
basis, controls over the message creation and transmission, applying timely security patches 
to  the  interfaces,  if  any,  close  monitoring  of  transactions  and  disabling  USB,  and  Internet 
access  on  the  connected  nodes.  Equally  important  is  the  timely  detective  measures.  It  is 
pertinent to prepare ourselves to face such incidents, by having a robust crisis management 
plan. I am sure the banks are taking earnest steps to comply with the provisions of the Circular 
as soon as possible. Time has come to scale up the cyber security preparedness to meet the 
emerging threats 
21. Information dissemination is a key facilitator in combating the menace of cyber related 
incidents. While the Reserve Bank obtains information from banks on cyber incidents, including 
those which did not fructify into loss of money or information, such information is also shared 
amongst  the  banks  along  with  suggestions  aimed  at  best  practises.  The  Institute  for 
Development and Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT) also has a system to collate such 
information and share the generic aspects amongst the CISOs of banks. All these, I am sure 
will help the banks in further enhancing their cyber security related capabilities. 
22. Let me end with a positive note. The banking sector – similar to other sectors of the Indian 
economy has always been very responsive to change and has adapted itself very well to meet 
the challenges which keep emerging frequently. It has also proved that it cannot only adapt 
well but also quickly so that response times are fast to prevent recurrence of negative incidents. 
The same fervour, I am sure, will be witnessed in the area of cyber security as well and will 
leave a mark of confidence in the minds of the customers of banks. This will ensure that banks 
provide for a safe and secure processing environment when the depositor’s money is safe and 
where all other customers can conduct their banking transactions safely and securely. 
23. I am sure that there are many take-aways from today’s summit. I am also confident that 
these would be put to operational use when you all return to your respective organisations. I 
am grateful to you all for inviting me and for listening to my thoughts and I wish you all safe 
and secure IT based operations. 
24. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
