  Yves Mersch: Interview in Wall Street Journal 
Interview  with  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, in Wall Street Journal, conducted by  Mr Brian Blackstone and Mr Tom Fairless and 
published on 1 February 2016. 
 Over  the  last  few  months  we’ve  seen  oil  and  commodity  prices  bringing  down 
inflation. How worried should the ECB be about this, or is it providing the economy 
with a stimulus? 
The  whole  issue  is  how  you  see  it  on  the  time  axis:  is  it  a  temporary,  exogenous 
phenomenon  where  you  can  look  through  it,  or  are  you  to  be  worried  that  over  a  longer 
period you have second-round effects and a dis-anchoring of inflationary expectations. 
There  are  obviously  some  positive  effects  from  low  oil  prices.  It  gives  many  companies 
additional leeway to invest or repair their balance sheets. All in all this is also a signal which 
is pointing to future resilience of the moderate pace of recovery. 
How  much  should  the  ECB  respond  to  deviations  from  its  target  of  just  below  2%, 
when it’s being driven by oil? Is there a danger the ECB is reacting too mechanically 
to deviations from its target? 
Let me first put things straight: I do not consider that we have an inflation target. We have a 
quantitative definition of price stability over the medium term and we assess the risks to price 
stability according to our two pillars, the real economy and the monetary pillar. We see that 
both pillars show a lot of positive developments. There is resilience in output, and there is 
reduction of slack in the economy and the labor market. But overall there is still slack in the 
system. Then we see this is happening in an environment of abnormally low inflation. We will 
probably  move  into  negative  territory  from  spring  until  early  summer  if  we  mechanically 
adjust our projections. This brings us into a zone of discomfort. 
We have not precisely defined what we understand as medium term, but it is not necessarily 
equal to our projection horizon. For example some of our measures that we have decided in 
December will last until 2019. The reinvestment and the liquidity effect of the recalibration in 
December  will  exceed  three  years.  We  will  be  seen  in  the  category  of  flexible  inflation 
targeters but not inflation targeters where we have a point landing promised on Day X. 
Does this indicate a hesitance about doing more in March? 
No,  each  time  we  meet,  we  assess  the  economic  situation.  And  each  time  we  have  new 
projections, we obviously reconsider whether our stance is still appropriate. I would not be 
carried away by analysts in some institutions who want us to do what they would like, what 
they  would  consider  as  helpful.  You  can  also  say  that  they  are  lobbying.  We  are  rather 
immune to these attempts. 
Has the ECB played a role in fanning these hopes? 
I hope that we were able to explain in plain English what we meant. We review and possibly 
reconsider  our  monetary  policy  stance  without  giving  any  indication  as  to  individual 
measures. Now if some people want to sell their favorite measures, they create hype. But it 
is not the ECB that is creating hype in this respect. Don’t forget that we have also very clearly 
said  that  by  March  we  might  see  the  necessity  for  technical  corrections  to  our  existing 
program. If it would be a little bit more looked at, what we have actually said, then we would 
not have been in the situation in December. And we certainly don’t want to be in this situation 
in March again. Part of what is perceived as a communication blunder in December came 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  from the fact that too much attention was attached to one or another statements. We are a 
collective decision-making body. So you cannot extrapolate one person onto 25 people. 
So  if  people  interpreted  the  last  press  conference  as  signaling  a  strong  increase  in 
stimulus in March, that’s incorrect? 
Again, this is misjudging the effects of what we decided in December which are still in the 
pipeline. After all it is €680 billion, which is more than a third of what we have announced at 
the  beginning.  Yes,  we  will  continue  to  have  an  accommodative  monetary  policy.  Yes,  we 
have to reassess our monetary policy stance in view of the deterioration since our December 
analysis. Does this reassessment of the analysis lead to the consequence that there will be 
the same, or different measures, or confidence that the existing measures will only have to 
be corrected? I think this is a policy decision that is ahead of us and I don’t want to deny that 
it is possible nor confirm that it has been decided. 
If  the  ECB were  not  to  do  anything  in  March  and  markets were  disappointed  again, 
does that pose questions about Mr. Draghi’s power to influence markets in the way 
that he wants to? 
You are hypothesizing that nothing will be done, which I cannot subscribe to. The only thing I 
can say is that sometimes I think people in the financial markets have to brush-up on their 
English lessons to understand when we say nothing yet has been decided for March. It is not 
our  communication  which  is  flawed,  it  is  the  hype  that  is  being  provoked  by  people  with 
vested interests. If you would look at what we communicate, I think this is quite clear. The 
situation  has  changed  since  December,  we  will  reexamine  and  reassess  and  possibly,  if 
needed,  also  correct.  And  we  are  fully  determined  to  fulfill  our  mandate.  This  has  been 
communicated by the ECB and it should be taken for what it is: a strong commitment. But to 
construct out of this already individual measures, that is speculation. 
Why  has  the  situation  changed  since  December?  You  highlighted  a  lot  of  positive 
things in the economy. 
There are several factors which have intensified. One is the oil price, which since December 
was at one point down close to 40%, now it’s only 20%. That is something to assess – the 
volatility – whether you look through it or whether there is a risk of it becoming entrenched. 
The  second  is  China  and  other  emerging  market  economies.  If  we  only  had  the  domestic 
economy, I would not say that downside risks have increased. From the domestic point of 
view we might be at neutral. 
What would buying bonds or cutting rates even more into negative territory do for the 
economy? 
You ask exactly the questions that we will discuss in March. Everything is on the table. 
Is unconventional monetary policy becoming conventional? 
Unconventional measures play an important role. They have been effective, but in a specific 
circumstance  of  a  very  prolonged  recessionary  and  deflationary  environment.  I  do  not 
consider that this is the new normal. If you ask me about secular stagnation, it’s a theory that 
we obviously take very seriously. But to say we accept it as the new normal would not be in 
line  with  what  the  ECB-President  has  said  at  his  last  press  conference:  “We  continue  to 
fight.” Normally you don’t fight the normal, you fight the abnormal. 
Are financial markets becoming too dependent on central banks coming to the rescue 
every time there is a drop in equity markets? 
What is moving us is not to support one sector or asset class over another. Our mandate is 
the overall health of the economy. But we need financial markets as a transmission channel. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  If you look at the media, there were a lot of headlines about a crash in stock markets. That 
can also affect psychology. But then, look at where we are with stock markets: about 10% 
below record highs, but more or less in line with where we were a year ago. It’s not exactly a 
crash. Volatility is always a burden. But among the major downward risks, I would say the 
potential slowdown of the emerging markets is probably a higher risk. 
Could the ECB expand the line-up of securities it purchases? 
In terms of fantasy, the sky’s the limit. But in the end, we have no constraint in the use, the 
diversity, or the volume of our toolbox as we see fit. I would not create any expectations in 
one direction or the other. 
Are  eurozone  banks  sufficiently  strong  to  channel  the  ECB’s  stimulus  to  the 
economy? 
It  is  not  an  easy  ride  for  the  banks,  but  in  terms  of  stability,  the  banks  have  greatly 
strengthened their position. The question for the banks is not so much capital right now, it’s 
much more one of profitability. 
You’ve been a central banker for almost two decades. Has the role of central banks 
changed over that time? 
This experience makes you very humble regarding how the economy works, or the ability to 
fine-tune it. One thing which is still the same is the great risk of short-termism. I still perceive 
central  banks  as  being  able  to  have  a  longer-term  view  of  the  situation,  and  it  is  quite 
important to continue to have such an actor in the economy and society. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
