  Jens Weidmann: An impossible trinity? The interplay of monetary, 
financial and fiscal stability 
Welcome  remarks  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and 
Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the 
Bundesbank  Spring  Conference  “Monetary,  financial  and  fiscal  stability”,  Eltville,  10  June 
2016. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I  would  like  to  welcome  all  of  you  to  the  Bundesbank  Spring  Conference.  It  is  a  great 
pleasure to have you here. 
An old joke about economics is that it’s “the only field in which two people can win a Nobel 
Prize for saying exactly the opposite thing”. But sometimes, it is also a field in which people 
say  exactly  the  same  thing  –  and  even  Nobel-prize-worthy  things  –  without  having  ever 
talked to one another beforehand. 
That was the case with Robert Mundell and Marcus Fleming – at least if anecdote is to be 
believed.  They  conducted  research  on  the  same  topic  –  stabilisation  policies  for  open 
economies; they worked at the same institution – the IMF; and they came to basically the 
same conclusions. But they did not join forces to produce the insights that form the basis of 
our understanding of open-economy macroeconomics to this day. 
One  of  the  insights  offered  by  what  is  known  as  the  Mundell-Fleming  model  is  that  you 
cannot  have  it  all  –  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  free  movement  of  capital  and  an  independent 
monetary policy – at the same time. This insight came to be known as the impossible trinity. 
Our  conference  today  will  not  be  dealing  with  the  ramifications  of  this  trinity,  although  it 
remains the subject of academic debate, as the research work by Hélène Rey, for example, 
shows. 
Instead,  it’s  another  trinity,  the  trinity  of  monetary,  financial  and  fiscal  stability,  that  is  the 
focus of today’s conference. And while this trinity should not be an impossible one, the recent 
financial  and  sovereign  debt  crises  suggest  that  it  might  be  a  more  improbable  one  than 
everyone perhaps thought ten years ago. 
Even  if  Robert  Mundell  and  Marcus  Fleming  are  counter-examples,  I  think  that  economic 
research benefits from an exchange of views. More often than not, it’s discussion with others 
that produces a new idea or uncovers a flaw in reasoning, whereas a breakthrough is seldom 
achieved working alone. 
What is true of economic research in general seems to be particularly true of research on the 
interplay of monetary, financial and fiscal policies, which is currently on the research agenda 
of so many different institutions. As a case in point, the Deutsche Bundesbank initiated the 
Trinity  research  network  along  with  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  under  the  auspices  of  Markus  Brunnermeier  (of 
Princeton University) and Eric Leeper (of Indiana University). 
The  aim  of  the  network  is  to  foster  high-quality  research  on  this  topic  and  to  boost 
interactions among the organising institutions as well as external researchers. Consequently, 
this  year’s  Spring  Conference  is  dedicated  to  the  Trinity  research  network,  and  I  am 
absolutely confident that it will make an important contribution towards achieving the aim of 
the network. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Monetary and financial policy 
2. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
In  the  years  before  the  financial  crisis,  we  had  almost  forgotten  that  generations  of 
economists had grappled with one central question: how to achieve macroeconomic stability. 
For many people, the success of the so-called “Great Moderation” provided the answer to 
this question. Inflation had apparently been conquered, and large swings in economic output 
seemed a thing of the past as well. By keeping prices stable, central banks also appeared to 
be  able  to  moderate  the  business  cycle,  thereby  providing  for  overall  macroeconomic 
stability. 
In  hindsight,  it  looks  as  if,  for  a  while,  confidence  had  turned  into  complacency.  But  the 
financial  crisis  has  reconnected  everybody  with  the  reality  that  the  success  of  monetary 
policy depends on conditions it cannot create on its own. In particular, it is dependent on a 
stable  financial  system.  And  as  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  reminded  us,  sound  fiscal 
policies remain as important as ever for monetary policy to be able to deliver price stability. 
In recent years, however, academic progress has been made on all counts: with regard to 
the effects of unconventional monetary policy instruments, the principles of a stable financial 
system and of sound fiscal policies. And one additional insight is that, while the instruments 
for these three policy areas are different, the areas are nonetheless interdependent. 
True to the adage that central bankers are concerned more with what they  cannot control 
than  what  they  can,  in  my  remarks  I  will  touch  upon  a  few  selected  issues  regarding 
monetary, financial and fiscal policy. These are: the interdependency between the monetary 
transmission process and financial market conditions, the minimum standards for bail-inable 
capital, the distortions stemming from the privileged regulatory treatment of sovereign debt, 
and the possible use of GDP-linked bonds as a tool through which private investors would 
bear fiscal risks. 
The financial crisis has shown in no uncertain terms that the transmission of monetary policy 
depends heavily on financial market conditions. When the financial markets were disrupted in 
autumn 2008 after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the traditional interest rate pass-through 
of our conventional monetary policy measures was obviously hampered. 
But  even  today,  the  effectiveness  of  our  monetary  policy  depends  on  financial  market 
conditions. This can be illustrated, for example, by the role asset managers play in how non-
standard monetary policy measures impact on longer-term interest rates. 
Recent research by Morris and Shin1 suggests that, in trying to avoid ranking last in short-
term performance tables, asset managers’ portfolio choices could lead to large jumps in risk 
premiums  in  anticipation  of small future  changes  in  central  bank  policy  rates.  Due to  their 
own payment arrangements, asset managers cannot usually afford to be the last to notice a 
switch  in  monetary  policy,  because  the  financial  loss  in  the  funds  under  management 
increases if many others try to sell their securities before them. 
Consequently, they might become increasingly nervous the longer monetary policymakers try 
to maintain the low-interest-rate policy. This, in turn, could raise the probability of a sudden 
hike  in  risk  premiums,  the  longer  forward  guidance  is  in  place  and  the  more  aggressively 
quantitative easing is pursued. Monetary policymakers have to take this into account in order 
to avoid unintended consequences. 
                                                
1   See Stephen Morris and Hyun Song Shin (2015), Risk Premium Shifts and Monetary Policy: A Coordination 
Approach,  Princeton  University  –  William  S  Dietrich  II  Economic  Theory  Center  Research  Paper 
No 075_2016, 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 the 
than 
financial 
individual 
focusing  on 
financial  system.  Rather 
 
 
But it is not only the behaviour of asset managers that is relevant to monetary policy. The 
crisis has reminded us that financial exuberance, too, is potentially a harbinger of unstable 
consumer prices. But this does not mean that monetary policy is the way to go in terms of 
pre-empting financial instability as well. 
Tinbergen’s timeless insight continues to apply: to reach each policy goal reliably, at least 
one separate instrument is needed for each policy area. The crisis has therefore spawned a 
whole new set of instruments – macroprudential policies – designed to target specific sectors 
of 
institutions, 
macroprudential policies that seek to prevent exuberance in entire financial sectors can take 
systemic interdependencies into account. 
What is a treasure trove for researchers – the host of questions surrounding the functioning 
of the new set of instruments – is tricky terrain for policymakers, and for central bankers in 
particular.  Shedding  light  on  the  use  and  effectiveness  of  different  macroprudential 
instruments therefore remains an eminent task of economic research, and I am positive this 
conference will provide a valuable contribution. 
Does this mean that monetary policymakers can ignore the financial stability implications of 
their actions? I don’t think so. While I am not in favour of a dual monetary policy mandate, I 
am convinced that monetary policy cannot stand on the sidelines when financial imbalances 
build up. 
First, we cannot be sure that macroprudential policies will eliminate financial imbalances. The 
experience with macroprudential instruments is still limited, and the toolkit is still incomplete. 
Second,  the  crisis  has  vividly  demonstrated  how  financial  instability  affects  inflation 
developments  and  the  capacity  of  the  central  bank  to  safeguard  price  stability.  Therefore, 
monetary  policy  would  be  wise  to  take  the  implications  of  financial  imbalances  for  price 
stability into account. 
As a first line of defence, however, it is financial regulation that has to bear the brunt of the 
financial stability burden. With regard to traditional microprudential regulation, the direction 
for  reform  seems  clear:  realigning  risk  and  reward  in  a  way  that  sets  incentives  for 
sustainable  action.  Privatising  gains  and  socialising  losses  is  not  only  socially  corrosive:  it 
also produces bad economic results, as financial actors are encouraged to take on excessive 
risks. 
A cornerstone of the international efforts to ensure the resolvability of systemic banks is the 
standard  for  bail-in  debt,  the  so  called  Total  Loss  Absorbing  Capacity  (TLAC).  It  requires 
those  banks  to  hold  a  minimum  of  debt  that  can  absorb  losses  in  the  case  of  a  bank 
resolution. This shields the taxpayer from footing the bill. 
Europe  already  has  a  bail-in  standard  of  its  own,  the  so  called  minimum  requirements  on 
eligible liabilities (MREL). For efficiency and financial stability purposes, one could argue that 
TLAC and MREL should be as similar as justifiable. 
Systemically  relevant  banks  pose  a  special  challenge  when  it  comes  to  resolving  them 
without creating substantial repercussions for the wider financial system. For that reason, the 
Single  Resolution  Fund  exists.  When  resolving  a  systemic  bank,  the  Single  Resolution 
Board, which is the relevant European authority, can draw on the resources of this fund – but 
only after at least 8 % of the banks’ liabilities have been bailed in. It seems therefore sensible 
that MREL for systemically important banks is guided by this threshold. 
When it comes to bailing in creditors, the fear of contagion is probably the most important 
reason for refraining from doing so. Naturally, contagion risk is high when the creditors who 
are to be bailed in are banks themselves. Currently, the MREL standards do not discourage 
banks from holding another institution’s bail-in debt. In the interests of financial stability, this 
has to change. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Fiscal and financial policy 
3. 
The importance of realigning risk and return has come to the fore with regard to yet another 
issue: the research of Todd Walker and of Sascha Steffen and Joseph Korte2 – both works 
will be presented at this conference – are examples of a growing body of scientific evidence 
that the zero-risk weighting of sovereign debt distorts capital allocation and therefore acts as 
a drag on growth. The absence of exposure limits also encourages loading up on sovereign 
debt, potentially creating cluster risks that can pose a threat to financial stability as well. 
The research is there; what is needed now are political results. The regulation of sovereign 
exposures is under discussion at both the European and the Basel level. And while progress 
at both levels is desirable, it is particularly urgent in the euro area. 
In contrast to other jurisdictions, the Eurosystem is forbidden to act as a lender of last resort 
for governments. Such a function would be tantamount to mutualising sovereign risk, which 
would be incompatible with the decentralised Maastricht framework. The risk profile of euro-
area sovereign debt is therefore different. 
Doing away  with sovereign debt as a cluster risk would also pave the  way for the orderly 
restructuring  of  sovereign  debt.  If  necessary,  an  orderly  restructuring  would  be  possible 
without endangering the stability of the overall financial system – and this would be good not 
only for euro-area countries but for other countries, too. In this case, financial risks would be 
borne  by  those  who  took  them:  the  private  investors.  But  an  orderly  restructuring  of 
sovereign debt is not the only way in which financial market participants can be involved in 
bearing fiscal risks in a structured way. 
A  recent  initiative  by  the  Bank  of  England  is  pushing  for  the  introduction  of  standardised 
GDP-linked  bonds.  By  tying  coupon  payments,  and  potentially  the  principal  as  well,  to  a 
country’s growth rate, investors share both the upside and the downside risk of a country’s 
economic development. That way, a country can potentially retain fiscal space even when 
faced with adverse economic events. GDP-linked bonds exhibit equity-like features, which of 
course gives rise to questions as well. 
How would a financial system cope with the fact that sovereign debt would cease to exist as 
a “safe asset”? How many investors would be interested in GDP-linked bonds and, leading 
on from there, how would a GDP-linked bond be priced? These are the questions that need 
to  be  answered  before  GDP-linked  bonds  can  ever  become  a  widespread  vehicle  for 
transferring fiscal risks – upside as well as downside ones – to private investors. But it is an 
avenue worth exploring. 
Limiting fiscal risks, however, should be the first line of defence. An effective mechanism to 
achieve this aim would  be to pursue a sound fiscal policy. This would  also help to plug a 
constant  source  of  uncertainty,  at  least  in  the  euro  area.  As  Eickmeier,  Metiu  and  Prieto3 
show,  this  might  help  to  increase  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  as  well.  When 
uncertainty  is  reduced,  actors  behave  in  a  less  risk-averse  manner,  which  heightens 
responsiveness to monetary policy impulses. 
The benefits of pursuing sound policies in a particular area are therefore not confined to that 
area, but extend to other policy areas as well. Triggering a virtuous cycle of sound monetary, 
fiscal  and financial  policies  therefore  seems  like  the  surest  and fastest way  to  resolve  the 
conundrum the euro area faces right now. 
                                                
2   Korte,  J,  and  S  Steffen  (2014),  “Zero  Risk  Contagion  –  Banks’  Sovereign  Exposure  and  Sovereign  Risk 
Spillovers”, Working Paper. 
3   Sandra Eickmeier, Norbert Metiu and Esteban Prieto (2016), “Time-varying volatility, financial intermediation 
and monetary policy”, IWH Discussion Papers No. 19/2016. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The euro area still has a long way to go, especially with regard to fiscal policy. Unfortunately, 
the spill-over from monetary policy – savings through lower interest expenses – has not been 
used as much as it could to press ahead with improving public budgets. 
4. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Macroeconomic stability is multidimensional, and this is essentially  what this year’s Spring 
Conference  seeks  to  capture.  While  sound  policies  have  to  be  pursued  in  each  area  to 
safeguard  overall  economic  stability,  the  benefits  of  pursuing  a  sound  policy  spill  over  to 
other areas as well. 
A virtuous circle of sound monetary, financial and fiscal policies is without doubt an enticing 
prospect,  not  only  for  the  euro  area,  and  I  am  confident  this  conference  can  enrich  our 
understanding of how to make it happen. 
I wish us all an exciting conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
