  Hiroshi Nakaso: Challenges toward financial stability and the policy 
frontier – unconventional monetary policy, macroprudence, and financial 
institutions’ low profitability 
Speech by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the IVA (The Royal 
Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences) – JSPS (The Japan Society for the Promotion of 
Science) Seminar, Stockholm, 21 March 2016. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. It is a great honor and pleasure for me to be able to 
speak to you at this esteemed institution today. 
Before I get into the substance of this speech, let me first thank the person who made this 
event possible: Mr. Robert Stenram. Mr. Stenram was the Tokyo representative of Swedbank 
in the 1990s, during the acute financial crisis in Japan. While he was posted in Tokyo, he 
was instrumental in liaising very closely with the Japanese banking industry. I benefitted from 
his deep insights and thoughtful advice based on his experiences as a professional banker. It 
was indeed the most turbulent of times, but we also became friends, and I have long enjoyed 
his friendship since then. I deeply regret that he no longer is with us, and wish to pay my 
tribute to the great work he has accomplished in linking Sweden and Japan in the world of 
finance. Robert, I will not forget how much we owe to you. May his soul, now joined by his 
beloved wife Siv, rest in peace. 
Over the years, both Sweden and Japan have confronted a few very difficult issues in terms 
of monetary policy and financial stability. In the late 1980s, we saw financial bubbles develop 
and burst. From 2008 to 2009, we tackled  the most recent global financial crisis together, 
and today the two countries are fighting deflationary headwinds. As you know, the Riksbank 
and the Bank of Japan have adopted negative interest rate policies so as to achieve their 
respective price stability targets. 
In order to discharge our responsibilities for maintaining price and financial stability, central 
banks  must  be  prepared  to  meet  new  challenges  as  they  appear.  Reflecting  on  my 
experiences, I have been on the front lines as a central banker during Japan’s financial crisis 
in  the  1990s  and  2000s,  and  during  our  Bank’s  long  battle  with  deflation  for  nearly  two 
decades. Not once during all those years could I forget the importance of financial stability. 
With this background, I will describe today the importance of financial stability and the policy 
implications of newly emerging challenges from three perspectives: unconventional monetary 
policy, macroprudence, and low profitability of financial institutions. 
Financial crisis and growth inflection 
To begin with, let me go back to the 1990s and explain my experiences during the bursting of 
the bubble economy in Japan. As I touched on at the beginning, both Sweden and Japan 
experienced financial bubbles. Nevertheless, the subsequent paths of the two countries were 
quite different (Chart 1). 
In Sweden after the crisis in the early 1990s, capital was quickly injected into the banking 
system and the stability of the financial system was restored. In addition, the Swedish krona 
was  floated,  and the  Riksbank  was  able  to  ease  monetary  policy. With  the  tailwind  of  the 
depreciating krona contributing, the Swedish economy began to recover as early as 1993. 
Furthermore, following Sweden’s accession to the European Union in 1995, factors such as 
the growth of the IT industry benefitting from the increases in inbound investment contributed 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
to productivity growth. In fact, Sweden’s potential growth actually increased after the bursting 
of the bubble. 
In contrast, Japan only managed to inject capital into financial institutions on a meaningful 
scale after the “Dark November” in 1997, when it experienced a series of failures of large 
financial institutions.1 That was nearly eight years after the bubble had burst. During those 
years,  financial  institutions’  behavior,  such  as  evergreening  their  loans  to  practically  failed 
businesses  by  extending  additional  loans, resulted  in  a further  buildup of  impaired  assets, 
which made it all the more difficult to cleanse financial institutions’ balance sheets of problem 
loans, and which distorted the allocation of resources. The layering of these multiple factors 
pushed  the  Japanese  economy  into  deflation,  and  concurrently,  productivity  growth 
declined.2 Furthermore, this period overlapped with rapid changes in demography, resulting 
from a declining working-age population against the backdrop of a low birth rate and aging. 
The confluence of the two currents – financial sector problems and demographic changes – 
significantly  pulled  down  Japan’s  potential  growth  rate (Chart  2). That  in  turn  exacerbated 
over-leveraging  in  the  corporate  sector  and  discouraged  corporate  investment.  From  a 
macroeconomic  perspective,  lower  investment  depressed  productivity  growth,  which  again 
negatively  impacted  potential  growth.  There  was  a  vicious  cycle:  over-leveraging  in  the 
corporate sector led to the decline in the potential growth rate, which in turn exacerbated the 
difficulty of resolving non-performing loans in the banking sector and over-leveraging in the 
corporate  sector.  Admitting  one  can  be  wise  only  after  the  event,  in  retrospect,  the 
forbearance  policy  at  an  early  stage  after  the  bursting  of  the  asset  bubble  and  the 
underestimation of the systemic nature of what was going on in the financial sector allowed 
the  problem  in  the  banking  sector  to  develop  into  a  full-blown  financial  crisis.3  This  is  the 
shorthand  account  of  the  extended  stagnation  and  deflation  following  the  bursting  of  the 
bubble: the so-called “lost two decades” in Japan. 
From this painful episode, we have learned two things. One is that financial stability is the 
foundation  of  sustained  growth  of  the  economy,  and  another  is  that  changes  in  potential 
growth amplify the financial cycle and consequently impact financial stability. The widespread 
recognition in the international policy fora of the need to take account of the macroprudential 
perspective  may  be  a  consequence  of  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  but  Japan’s 
predicament  that  preceded  it  seems  to  amply  underscore  the  importance  of  such  a 
perspective. To  me, this  was  a formative  experience  as  a  central  banker. I have  attached 
importance to macroprudence ever since. 
Stability consequences of QQE with a negative interest rate 
Next on my agenda today is the implementation of monetary policy by the Bank of Japan and 
its relationship with macroprudential policy. After the bursting of the bubble, the lowering of 
potential  growth  brought  about  a  large  decline  in  the  natural  rate  of  interest,  which  is  the 
guidepost for monetary policy formulation (Chart 3). As you know, monetary easing is used 
to bring down real interest rates below the natural rate of interest. Mindful of the prevailing 
views  then  that  there  was  a  zero  lower  bound  for  nominal  interest  rates,  quantitative  and 
qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE)  introduced  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  in  April  2013  was  a 
breakthrough  in  the  following  sense:  the  Bank  made  a  strong  commitment  to  achieve  the 
price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, which encouraged expected 
                                                
1   During  this  month,  as  many  as  four  financial  institutions,  including  internationally  active  ones,  failed  in 
succession: Sanyo Securities, Hokkaido Takushoku Bank, Yamaichi Securities, and Tokuyo City Bank. 
2   Caballero,  Ricardo  J.,  Takeo  Hoshi,  and  Anil  K.  Kashyap.  2008.  “Zombie  Lending  and  Depressed 
Restructuring in Japan.” American Economic Review, 98(5): 1943–77. 
3   Nakaso, Hiroshi. “The financial crisis in Japan during the 1990s: how the Bank of Japan responded and the 
lessons learnt,” BIS Papers No 6, October 2001. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
inflation  to  rise.  Concurrently,  the  Bank,  recognizing  that  there  was  only  limited  room  for 
short-term  interest  rates  to  decline,  exerted  downward  pressure  on  nominal  interest  rates 
across the entire yield curve by purchasing a large amount of long-term government bonds, 
so that together with higher inflation expectations, real interest rates would be brought down. 
The QQE with a negative interest rate framework that was introduced by the Bank of Japan 
this  January  aims  at  reinforcing  the  existing  QQE  and  supports  the  activities  of  firms  and 
households,  thereby  ensuring  the  earliest  attainment  of  the  2  percent  inflation  target.  The 
policy  will  work through the same channels, by bringing down real  interest rates. As I just 
noted, the conventional wisdom was that there was a zero lower bound for nominal interest 
rates, but the demonstration by a few European central banks, including the Riksbank, that 
such limitation could be overcome to some degree led the Bank of Japan to adopt the new 
policy  framework.  In  fact,  after  the  introduction  of  the  negative  policy  rate,  the  financial 
environment has further relaxed, with the yield curve shifting significantly lower and financial 
institutions lowering their lending rates (Chart 4). In addition, rebalancing of the portfolios of 
financial  institutions  is  also  starting  to  take  place,  with  increased  interest  in  investing  in 
foreign currency denominated bonds, although this trend is somewhat masked by the effects 
of recent market turmoil. 
Against  the  backdrop  of  these  positive  developments  in  financial  intermediation,  from  the 
macroprudential perspective, their effects on financial stability must be carefully monitored. I 
believe that we need to be mindful of two angles. One is the “overheating” risk, where the 
extremely  relaxed  financial  environment  could  destabilize  the  financial  system  through 
excessive risk taking. The other is the “contraction” risk, where low revenue streams resulting 
from  low  interest  rates  could  erode  the  risk  appetite  and/or  undermine  the  soundness  of 
financial institutions. 
For  the  time  being,  we  believe  that  there  is  generally  no  need  to  be  overly  concerned  as 
regards the overheating risk. There is evidence of increasing real estate transactions, with 
prices of apartments in the Tokyo area topping their previous peak during the bubble years, 
but  leverage  in  the  real  estate  sector  is  still  not  excessive.  Our  general  view  is  that  the 
financial sector has a robust capital base relative to risks taken and its resilience in the face 
of  stress  is  sufficient,  and  thus  it  could  undertake  positive  risk  taking  and  portfolio 
rebalancing under QQE with a negative interest rate framework. 
At the same time, we believe that the contraction risk at present is also small. The extended 
period  of  monetary  easing  has  tended  to  pressure  the  interest  rate  margins  of  financial 
institutions, negatively impacting their revenue streams (Chart 5). This is not something that 
is  unique  to  a  setting  of  unconventional  monetary  policy,  but  in  an  economic  environment 
where such exceptional policy needs to be adopted, there tends to be less room for deposit 
rates to fall – in other words, the interest rate margins are tighter than ever – and additional 
easing  of  policy  could  result  in  a  non-linear  compression  of  margins.4  Having  said  that, 
Japanese  financial  institutions  have  been  able  to  remain  sound  because  the  reduction  in 
margins thus far has been more than offset by revenue improvements against the backdrop 
of  improving  economic  conditions  under  monetary  easing,  such  as  increases  in  lending 
volume, lower credit costs, and higher investment incomes. 
The  policy  framework  of  QQE  with  a  negative  interest  rate  maintains  monetary  easing  in 
terms of quantity and quality and boosts it strongly with a negative policy rate. As such, it will 
strongly  influence  the  financial  system.  Accordingly,  the  Bank  of  Japan  must  thoroughly 
monitor and analyze the state of the financial system from a macroprudential perspective. To 
this end, the Bank of Japan is publishing its Financial System Report twice a year. In this 
report, it assesses the stability of Japan’s financial system from various angles, including the 
                                                
4   Borio, Claudio, Leonardo Gambacorta, and Boris Hofmann. 2015. “The Influence of Monetary Policy on Bank 
Profitability.” BIS Working Papers No.514. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
balance between the amount of risks borne by financial institutions and their financial bases, 
macro  stress  testing,  and  macro  risk  indicators  (i.e.,  the  “heat  map”).  I  believe  that 
independent  examination  of  developments  from  a  financial  perspective  will  enhance  the 
credibility of QQE with a negative interest rate. 
Macroprudential policy and monetary policy 
Even  if  the  risks  are  contained  at  this  juncture,  what  should  we  do  if,  in  the  future,  the 
overheating  risk  becomes  more  apparent?  There  are  two  contrasting  views  on  the 
relationship  between  monetary  and  macroprudential  policies:  the  separation  principle  and 
leaning against the wind. The former says to render unto monetary policy things that concern 
price stability, and render unto macroprudential policy things that concern financial stability. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  latter  holds  that,  if  the  amplification  of  financial  imbalances  is 
expected to threaten price stability in the long run, the central bank should resort to monetary 
policy  in  order  to  dampen  the  financial  cycle,  notwithstanding  a  temporary  deviation  of 
inflation from the target. Let me offer you my views, which are influenced by the experiences 
of the Japanese bubble. 
Up until the 1980s, the Bank of Japan was requiring banks to comply with guidance that set 
their  loan  growth  at  levels  individually  assigned  by  the  Bank.  This  arrangement,  called 
“window guidance” was then regarded as a tool for monetary policy, but under the current 
taxonomy,  it  would  be  regarded  as  a  time-varying  macroprudential  policy  tool,  akin  to 
regulation of loan-to-value (LTV) or debt-to-income (DTI). There were two schools of thought 
regarding the effectiveness of the tool: the “independent tool theory,” which held that window 
guidance  was  effective  by  itself,  and  the  “complementary  tool  theory,”  which  held  that 
window  guidance  had  to  be  used  alongside  the  mainstream  monetary  policy  of  official 
discount rate adjustments to be effective. The subject was actively discussed in academia, 
and  those  supporting  the  independent  tool  theory  argued  that  a  tightening  of  window 
guidance could dampen the financial cycle, even if the official discount rate was held steady.5 
The Bank of Japan, in the meantime, basically adopted the complementary tool theory and 
explained window guidance as a tool to support general policy instruments, such as changes 
to the official discount rate, rather than an independent policy instrument. 
Notwithstanding  such  an  official  position,  in  the  last  half  of  the  1980s,  as  the  call  for 
international  policy  coordination  necessitated  the  maintenance  of  a  low  interest  rate 
environment  with  a  view  to  expanding  domestic  demand, the  Bank  of  Japan  attempted to 
respond  to  signs  of  financial  excesses  through  the  tightening  of  window  guidance.  As  a 
result, the growth of bank lending slowed gradually, but large corporates were still able to 
raise funds from outside the banking sector through the issuance of bonds (Chart 6). The 
period coincided with the gradual relaxation of underwriting guidelines for corporate bonds, 
and the buoyant stock market, which was partly a reflection of monetary easing, that reduced 
the costs of equity financing, such as convertible bonds and bonds with embedded warrants. 
The  resulting  increases  in  capital  market  financing  sustained  the  relaxed  financial 
environment, and corporate balance sheets kept on expanding. The Bank of Japan could not 
effectively deal with the signs of overheating. 
Another notable feature of the Japanese bubble in the late 1980s was that potential growth 
and the natural rate of interest were both fairly high at the time (Charts 2 and 3). The degree 
of monetary easing at one particular level of the policy rate depends on whether the natural 
rate of interest is high or low. When the natural rate of interest and expected growth were 
high, there were likely to be strong incentives for both financial institutions and corporates to 
circumvent the restriction imposed by window guidance. 
                                                
5   Fukumoto,  Tomoyuki,  Masato  Higashi,  Yasunari  Inamura,  and  Takeshi  Kimura.  “Effectiveness  of  Window 
Guidance and Financial Environment,” Bank of Japan Review Series, 10-E-4, August 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
In light of the Japanese experiences, while I fully subscribe to the view that narrowly confined 
imbalances should be countered by macroprudential policy as the first line of defense, the 
effectiveness of such policy by itself is very uncertain, considering the changes in financial 
market structure due to deregulation and the level of the natural rate of interest. Accordingly, 
I  cannot  fully  uphold  the  separation  principle,  which  reflects  the  view  that  time-varying 
macroprudential  policy  measures  are  by  themselves  effective.  I  believe  we  should  leave 
open  the  possibility  of  responding  to  widening  financial  imbalances  with  fiscal  policy, 
including tax policy, and monetary policy. Such thinking is reflected in how the Bank of Japan 
conducts monetary policy, where the Bank examines economic and monetary conditions in a 
two-pillar approach: the deliberation of the most likely outcomes for the first pillar, and the 
deliberation  of  other  risk  factors  relevant  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  financial 
imbalances in particular, for the second pillar. 
Low profitability of financial institutions 
Let me now turn to the other risk: the contraction risk. What should we do if this risk becomes 
apparent?  More  specifically,  what  should  we  make  of  the  low  profitability  of  financial 
institutions from a macroprudential perspective? This question seems to be attracting more 
and  more  attention  in  Europe  as  well.  In  order  to  properly  think  about  this  issue,  it  is 
important  to  distinguish  between  low  profitability  due  to  acute  problems  and  that  due  to 
chronic issues. 
When  profits  of  financial  institutions  severely  decline  because  of  acute  stresses,  it  is 
necessary to have sufficient capital in order to maintain financial stability. Looking at current 
developments,  the  international  banking  system  has  significantly  raised  the  capital  ratio, 
reflecting  the  strengthening  of  the  capital  rules  following  the  recent  financial  crisis.  Such 
capital strength is also important for the effective transmission of monetary policy. Given that 
monetary easing pressures interest margins at financial institutions in the short run, weakly 
capitalized institutions will not be able to increase lending, undercutting the positive effects of 
easing. As I noted earlier, the fact that Japanese financial institutions were able to increase 
lending as the Bank of Japan implemented unconventional monetary policies and margins 
were compressed demonstrates how well capitalized the institutions are. 
In short, even if the economy suffers an acute stress and profits of financial institutions are 
negatively impacted, as the cushion provided by sufficient capital prevents the instability of 
the financial system, stimulus from monetary easing should provide the shot in the arm that 
would  turn  around  the  economy  and  thence  the  profits  of  financial  institutions.  Such  an 
outcome, however, is not assured when the financial system is confronted with more chronic 
stresses, even if current levels of capital are adequate. This is because the persistence of an 
environment in which financial institutions cannot get sufficient net returns on capital would 
eventually erode the capital of financial institutions. 
One  example  of  such  chronic  stress  is  foot-dragging  by  financial  institutions  in  their 
recognition  of  non-performing  loans  and  its  flip  side:  the  over-leveraging  of  corporates. 
Another is the inflection of the potential growth rate, which would lower firms’ expectations for 
growth and depress investment. In fact, in many developed economies, excess savings are 
observed  in  the  corporate  sector  (Chart  7).  With  the  stagnation  of  investment  comes  the 
decline in productivity growth, which would again negatively impact the potential growth rate. 
As the process unfolds, financial institutions would face downward pressure on their lending 
rates. Financial institutions facing the resulting compression of interest rate margins would 
then pursue volume to increase their revenue flows. Such increases in competitive pressure 
would further depress lending rates and revenues as well. Excessive competition by financial 
institutions in lending would thus make it easier for low-productivity firms to survive, hindering 
the efficient allocation of resources in the economy and the so-called “creative destruction,” 
and consequently would prevent the lifting of the potential growth rate. If the low levels of 
profits at financial institutions and the depressed potential growth rate are tied together by 
excessive lending competition by financial institutions, the risk that profits become “too low to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
recover”  could  gradually  increase,  unless  financial  institutions  succeed  in  changing  their 
business models. 
investment 
that  supports 
innovations  by  entrepreneurs  changes  gradually 
The quest for innovations in financial intermediation 
Joseph  Alois  Schumpeter,  in  his  seminal  The  Theory  of  Economic  Development,  stresses 
the important role played by the “banker,” as well as that of the “entrepreneur”6 The banker 
profits  from  her  ability  to  identify  those  entrepreneurs  who  develop  truly  innovative 
undertakings  that  are  high-quality  startups,  and  from  generating  information  that  leads  to 
improved corporate performance. Schumpeter expects that such profit motives of the banker 
backed  up  by  her  exceptional  ability  to  pick  winners  would  bring  about  a  more  efficient 
reallocation of risks in the macroeconomy and lead to an endogenous rise in the economic 
growth rate.7 
This role of the banker – promoting the creative destruction through financial intermediation – 
has not changed since the time of Schumpeter. However, as economies mature, the nature 
of 
from 
investments  in  tangible  assets  to  those  in  intangible  assets,  such  as  research  and 
development,  information  technology,  and  human  and  organizational  capital.  Accordingly, 
investment in intangible assets is now identified as an important element of new sources of 
growth in the developed economies.8 If I may point out the findings of one recent research 
study, investments in intangible assets are more sensitive to the availability of internal funds 
(or cashflow) compared with investments in tangible assets.9 If financial markets were perfect 
markets, the sources of funds – that is, internal financing or external financing including bank 
financing  –  would  be  completely  substitutable,  and  corporate  investment  would  not  be 
affected  by  the  availability  of  internal  funds.  Nevertheless,  the  fact  that  investments  in 
intangibles are more sensitive to the availability of internal funds suggests that firms could be 
facing  financial  constraints  due  to  information  asymmetries.  One  could  say  that  such 
asymmetries  result from  the  difficulty  of  assessing  the collateral  value  of  intangible  assets 
compared with tangible assets. Consequently, there are opportunities for the banker to profit 
from overcoming information asymmetries. 
In Japan, the ratio of investments in intangible assets to nominal GDP is lower than that in 
the United States and other major peers (Chart 8). If financial institutions are able to tease 
out the corporate demand for investments in intangible assets, that not only would enhance 
the  productivity  of  the  whole  economy  but  also  would  contribute  to  solving  the  structural 
problem of low profitability of financial institutions. The future path of the Japanese economy 
would  be  influenced  by  the  behavior  of  financial  institutions  whether  financial  institutions 
would continue their war of attrition under their existing business models or would expand 
their  business  frontiers  by  unearthing  new  financing  needs.  Just  as  in  human  beings,  for 
whom  chronic  syndromes  demand  fundamental  changes  in  lifestyles,  financial  institutions 
must  be  prepared  to  fundamentally  change  their  business  models  in  order  to  extricate 
themselves from a structural lack of profitability. 
                                                
6   Schumpeter,  Joseph  Alois.  1926.  Theorie  der  wirtschaftlichen  Entwicklung:  Eine  Untersuchung  über 
Unternehmergewinn,  Kapital,  Kredit,  Zins  und  den  Konjunkturzyklus,  2nd  revised  ed.  Leipzig:  Duncker  & 
Humblot. (The Theory of Economic Development, Translated by Redvers Opie, Transaction Publishers: New 
Brunswick, New Jersey, 1983.) 
7   Laeven, Luc & Levine, Ross & Michalopoulos, Stelios. 2015. “Financial innovation and endogenous growth,” 
Journal of Financial Intermediation, Elsevier, vol. 24(1), pages 1–24. 
8   OECD. 2011. “New Sources of Growth: Intangible Assets.” 
9   Morikawa, Masayuki. 2015. “Financial Constraints on Intangible Investments: Evidence from Japanese Firms,” 
in  Ahmed  Bounfour  and  Tsutomu  Miyagawa  eds.  Intangibles,  Market  Failure  and  Innovation  Performance, 
Springer, Ch.6, pp.139–155. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The  Bank  of  Japan  has  implemented  a  few  measures  that  would  encourage  financial 
institutions to implement their essential reforms. One is to adjust the way in which the Bank 
injects  liquidity  into  the  financial  system  –  for  example,  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to 
support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth,  and  purchases  of  ETFs 
composed  of  stocks  issued  by  firms  that  are  proactively  investing  in  physical  and  human 
capital.  These  measures  are  expected  to  play  catalytic  roles  in  enhancing  the  financial 
intermediation  functions  of  financial  institutions  and  capital  markets,  which  would  foster 
productivity  increases  and  ultimately  lead  to  improvements  in  the  potential  rate  of  growth. 
Another  set  of  measures  is  designed  to  enhance  the  function  of  financial  institutions  to 
efficiently  allocate  resources.  The  Bank  of  Japan  is  actively  providing  financial  institutions 
with information and know-how through seminars, etc., so that they can enhance the value of 
their financial intermediation through, for example, support for startup businesses, business 
matching, rejuvenating businesses, and utilizing information technology. These undertakings 
by  the  Bank  of  Japan  are  somewhat  different  from  those  found  in  the  conventional 
macroprudential  toolkit,  but  I  believe  that  they  perform  important  functions  in  promoting 
financial stability. 
Unconventional policy and beyond 
Before  concluding  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that,  if  changes  in  the 
potential  growth  rate  would  influence  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  and  macroprudential 
policies, and ultimately affect price and financial stability, that would naturally affect central 
banks’ thinking on policy formulation. As a matter of fact, in the area of monetary policy, the 
effectiveness of policy had been constrained in Japan by the concurrent decline in expected 
inflation under persistent deflation and in the potential growth rate. In this regard, the current 
pursuit by the Bank of Japan of the 2 percent inflation target through QQE with a negative 
interest rate will contribute to lifting potential growth through purging the deflationary mindset 
and encouraging capital formation. At the same time, in the area of macroprudential policy, 
the current focus on strengthening regulation does not solve the structural problem of low 
profitability at financial institutions. With regard to this problem, in the global policy fora, the 
jury  is  still  out,  so  to  speak,  as  regards  how  to  expand  the  policy  frontier.  Central  banks 
perhaps need to be a little more flexible in the designing of macroprudential policies to serve 
this  end.  Of  course,  structural  problems  cannot  solely  be  solved  by  central  bank  actions. 
Economic  policies  of  the  government  and  undertakings  by  firms  and  financial  institutions 
aimed at encouraging innovation are also essential. The Bank of Japan is working with these 
actors in order to tackle the new challenges in terms of financial stability. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
