   Mario Draghi: Plenary debate of the European Parliament on the ECB’s 
Annual Report 2014 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, to the 
plenary debate of the European Parliament on the ECB’s Annual Report 2014, Strasbourg, 
1 February 2016. 
 Mr Vice-President of the European Parliament, 
Mr Vice-President of the Commission, 
Honourable Members of the European Parliament, 
We are undoubtedly at a point in time when the cohesion of Europe is being tested. Many of 
the challenges we must confront are European, or even global in nature. And these challenges 
demand a strong European response. I am therefore grateful to be back in this assembly, a 
symbol of the need for European debates and European solutions. 
Today, we are discussing the Annual Report of the European Central Bank for 2014. In that 
year, the Governing Council adopted a series of measures to respond to the impairment of our 
monetary policy transmission channels and to the low inflation environment. These included 
two  reductions  in  the  key  ECB  interest  rates,  the  announcement  of  targeted  long-term 
refinancing operations and two purchase programmes for asset-backed securities and covered 
bonds. 2014 was also marked by the start of the activities of the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
and the completion of the comprehensive assessment. 
But rather than looking backwards, allow me to focus on the challenges that still lie ahead of 
us. 
First, I will briefly explain our current monetary policy and why we will re-assess our stance at 
our March meeting. 
Second, I would like to discuss the economic challenges we face and what it takes to address 
them. I am acutely aware that the focus of policymakers lies elsewhere for the moment. But let 
me be quite clear: economic success is also part of the solution in other fields. Therefore, 
mitigating economic risks deserves to be high on the political agenda. 
The ECB’s monetary policy: working and still flexible 
It was about three years ago that inflation started moving away from the ECB’s medium-term 
inflation aim of below, but close to, 2%. Since October 2013, inflation has been below 1%. 
Throughout  2015  headline  HICP  inflation  in the  euro  area  was  very  low  or  even  negative, 
remaining under the influence of low commodity prices, and euro area annual HICP inflation 
was estimated at 0.4% in January this year. 
In parallel to this trend, we had to continually revise our outlook for inflation: while at the start 
of  2015,  our  staff  was  forecasting  inflation  to  reach  1.5%  in  2016  and  1.8%  in  2017,  in 
December they projected a rate of only 1% for this year and 1.6% for 2017. 
Against this backdrop, the ECB decided in December to act again. Our assessment of the 
monetary policy stance had two parts. First, we noted that the measures put in place since the 
summer of 2014 had been very effective. The monetary stimulus that they introduced led to a 
broad-based easing of financing conditions, stimulated credit provision, and has since provided 
substantial support to the euro area recovery. Without these measures, the euro area would 
have been in outright deflation last year and prices would have fallen at an even quicker pace 
this year. Growth would have been significantly lower. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Second, while our measures were deemed effective, they were also judged to be insufficient 
in view of the deteriorating outlook for price stability. There was a concrete risk that without 
increasing  the  quantitative  stimulus,  the  date  by  which  inflation  would  settle  around  levels 
below, but close to, 2% would once more be pushed back beyond any relevant definition of 
medium term. 
Therefore we decided to recalibrate our monetary policy stance. We cut the deposit facility rate 
further to –0.3%, we extended the envisaged end-date for our monthly purchases to the end 
of March 2017, while maintaining its conditionality on the inflation outlook, and we announced 
that we will reinvest the principal payments of our purchased assets once they mature, for as 
long as necessary. We also decided to continue conducting the main refinancing operations 
and three-month longer-term refinancing operations as fixed rate tender procedures with full 
allotment for as long as necessary, and at least until the end of the last reserve maintenance 
period of 2017. 
Since  our  meeting  in  early  December,  conditions  have  once  more  changed.  A  moderate 
recovery of the euro area economy is under way, driven mainly by domestic demand. But 
downside  risks  have  increased  again  amid  heightened  uncertainty  about  emerging  market 
economies’ growth prospects, volatility in financial and commodity markets, and geopolitical 
risks. Inflation dynamics are also tangibly weaker than we expected in December. While the 
most recent wave of disinflation is mainly due to the renewed sharp fall in oil prices, weaker 
than anticipated growth in wages together with declining inflation expectations call for careful 
analysis of the channels by which surprises to realised inflation may influence future price and 
wage-setting in our economy. 
Therefore, at our last meeting in January we judged that it will be necessary to review and 
possibly reconsider our monetary policy stance at our next monetary policy meeting in early 
March, when the new staff macroeconomic projections become available. 
Strengthening the euro area recovery 
Our monetary policy is working; and the ECB is willing to contribute its share to ensuring that 
the recovery remains firmly on track. But there are risks that – if they were to materialise – 
could undermine its course. The policy challenges we face are fourfold. They relate to: the 
global environment; the situation of the financial system; the economic and fiscal policies of 
Member States; and the political uncertainty surrounding the European project. 
First, as regards the global environment: growth prospects are slowly improving in advanced 
economies, but the outlook in emerging markets is more subdued. Overall, growth is low by 
historical  standards.  Moreover,  emerging  markets  are  facing  economic  and  financial  risks: 
some are suffering from structural impediments and macroeconomic imbalances; others have 
to adjust to lower commodity prices. They remain vulnerable to an abrupt shift in risk sentiment 
that could tighten financing conditions. A key issue is how emerging markets will be impacted 
by tighter financing conditions (and the ensuing capital outflows) and to what extent this will 
have  repercussions  for  euro  area  foreign  demand.  Against  this  background,  ensuring  the 
continued resilience of the euro area economy is paramount. 
Second, there are policy challenges related to our financial markets. The euro area financial 
system weathered several episodes of stress in the second half of last year. This is a sign that 
a lot has already been achieved with the establishment of banking union, which, however, is 
not complete yet. To make our financial system truly safe and sound we need to progress in 
two main domains, which complement each other. On the one hand, we need to finalise and 
implement  the  work  we  started  when  establishing  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and 
Single  Resolution  Mechanism  as  the  initial  pillars  of  banking  union.  This  includes  further 
regulatory  work  to  harmonise  our  rules  for  supervisory  action  and  ensure  a  consistent 
application of the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive’s bail-in provisions. On the other 
hand, we need a common public backstop for the Single Resolution Fund to strengthen its 
credibility and we need to ensure that confidence in the safety of deposits is equally high in all 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
euro  area  Member  States  by  establishing  a  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme.  “Risk-
reduction” and “risk-sharing” measures are two sides of the same coin and should be pursued 
in parallel: they are all essential to protecting the stability of the European banking sector. 
Third, there are challenges related to the fiscal and economic policies of Member States that 
require decisive policy action. Fiscal policies should contribute to the economic recovery. At 
the same time, they should be in full compliance with the requirements of the Stability and 
Growth Pact. This is important to maintain confidence in the European fiscal framework and in 
the sustainability of public finances. Moreover, countries would benefit from a more growth-
friendly  composition  of fiscal  policies. This  could  involve  greater  efficiency  of  public  sector 
services as well as moving to a more growth-friendly tax system. 
But  the  ongoing  cyclical  recovery  in  the  euro  area  should  also  be  supported  by  effective 
structural  policies,  particularly  actions  to  improve  the  business  environment,  including  the 
provision of an adequate public infrastructure. Such actions are vital to increase productive 
investment, boost job creation and raise productivity. If reforms are credible, carefully chosen 
and well designed, their positive effects can be felt quickly, particularly in the context of our 
supportive monetary policy stance. 
Fourth and finally, there is still political uncertainty surrounding the European project. This is 
true in the broader context of our Union. A solution that would anchor the United Kingdom 
firmly within the EU while allowing the euro area to integrate further would boost confidence. 
The  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  architecture  also  remains  an  unfinished  construction. 
Citizens and markets are too often unsure about our capacity to act jointly in a spirit of common 
responsibility. We should prove them wrong. 
Let me conclude and come back to the subject of our debate, your resolution on our Annual 
Report for 2014. Let me assure you that we are reading this document closely. It reminds us 
of our duty as a public institution to conduct our business in a transparent and accountable 
manner. The publication of the diaries of Members of the Executive Board that starts this month 
is only one example of this. 
I am now looking forward to the debate and thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
