   Vítor Constâncio: Interview in Börsen-Zeitung 
Interview  with  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in 
Börsen-Zeitung, conducted by Mr Mark Schrörs and published on 31 December 2015. 
 Mr Constâncio, when you became Vice-President of the European Central Bank (ECB) 
in 2010, could you have imagined that one day the ECB would be using all available 
means to drive up the rate of inflation instead of trying to curb rising prices? 
That would never really have occurred to me at that time. It was completely unexpected for 
everyone.  However,  it  is  not  just  an  issue  for  the  euro  area.  Inflation  is  currently  very  low 
worldwide. 
Many people, particularly in Germany, consider it crazy that a central bank like the ECB 
is trying to create inflation in any way it can. 
As the ECB, we have a clear mandate and a clear target. The mandate is price stability, which 
we defined in 2003 as an inflation rate below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. We do 
not want inflation to be too high, above our target. But we also do not want it to be too low. 
That is our maxim, and that is why we are doing what we are doing. 
Nevertheless, many people are asking themselves what is so bad about an inflation rate 
of around 0%, whether that doesn’t actually mean stable prices. 
You  could,  of  course,  question  whether  price  stability  does  not  mean  0%  inflation.  At  first 
glance, that would appear to be a good thing for people. But you should also ask yourself why 
almost all major central banks have an inflation target of around 2%. There must be good 
reasons – and indeed there are. 
And what are they? 
First, measuring inflation accurately is difficult and both experience and the literature show that 
inflation numbers have a tendency to be higher than inflation actually is. When statisticians say 
that  inflation  is  0%,  it  is  highly  probable  that  it  is  in  fact  below  0%.  That  could  lead  to  a 
potentially very dangerous situation. In addition, when inflation goes down, real interest rates 
rise. 
You mean nominal interest rates adjusted for inflation or expected inflation. 
In view of the decline in potential growth and productivity in the developed economies, it is 
estimated  that  the  “real  equilibrium  interest  rate”,  which  provides  full  employment  without 
creating inflation, is currently negative in the United States and probably also in the euro area. 
When inflation is so low, it is difficult to bring the economy into balance. Another reason is that 
wages are not flexible. Wages cannot simply be lowered when inflation falls. This means that 
labour costs rise, which makes production more costly and reduces competitiveness. 
But many savers are worried about their pensions. 
Savers are confused by the “money illusion”. They look at nominal interest rates. But what 
really  counts  are real  interest  rates  –  what  is  left  after  deducting  inflation. In Germany, for 
example, the real interest rate on deposits in 2007 was around 0%, because interest rates of 
2.2% were offset by inflation of 2.4%. Now it is 0% again. 
So is all the concern about expropriation through the current low interest rate policy 
overblown? 
Allow me to quote the Bundesbank, which in 2014 came to the following conclusion: “negative 
real rates of interest have been the norm, rather than the exception, over recent decades.” 
There is absolutely no basis for blaming the ECB for the problems of savers. Interest rates will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   only  rise  when  growth  and  inflation  pick  up  again.  That  is  precisely  what  we  are  trying  to 
achieve. 
At  the  beginning  of  December,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  decided  on  further 
monetary easing. The financial markets were disappointed; they had expected more. 
The volatility was bigger than it has been for years. What lessons does the ECB draw 
from this? 
That was undoubtedly the largest gulf so far between what we intended to do and what the 
markets expected. Both sides need to learn lessons. The markets need to understand our 
decision-making  processes  better,  and  must  not  allow  themselves  to  get  carried  away  by 
wishful  thinking.  But  we  also  have  to  communicate  better. We  made  the  decision  that  we 
wanted to make. However, we did not want to give the markets such a surprise. 
What does “communicate better” mean? Why did the ECB’s Governing Council not try 
to dampen expectations in advance? 
It is difficult enough to calibrate monetary policy correctly. But it is even more difficult to fine-
tune market expectations. Sometimes our statements are over-interpreted. 
Will the ECB’s Governing Council, and in particular the ECB’s President, Mario Draghi, 
find it more difficult to guide the markets after this incident? 
We should also not exaggerate the importance of this one episode. 
With regard to the future, there are very different expectations in the market. Some say 
the ECB has now “finished” or, at least, that the barrier to further loosening is very high. 
Others say that further measures are only a matter of time. Who is right? 
It is too early to speculate about further steps. I would prefer it if our monetary policy did not 
have to change again in the foreseeable future. However, we are, of course, always dependent 
on the data. The decisive thing for us is the inflation outlook. Over 15 years we have achieved 
an inflation rate of 1.9% on average – i.e. below, but close to, 2%. We have kept the euro safe. 
We have delivered and we will continue to deliver. We have the tools that could help us reach 
our goal, and, if it becomes necessary, we will use them. 
If the projections of ECB economists for 2018, which will become available in March 
2016, show inflation persistently falling short of almost 2%, would that be a trigger for 
further support? 
The deviation of inflation expectations from our medium-term target is what counts for us. 
How concerned are you about the risk of deflation? 
I have always said that I do not believe that the euro area as a whole could slide into deflation. 
But as I said, even inflation that is positive but too low poses significant risks. It weighs on 
inflation expectations if it persists, which then has an impact on wage and price decisions. That 
can make it even more difficult to reach our target. We have to be very vigilant about second-
round effects. 
Should the ECB’s Governing Council believe that further measures are necessary, what 
would be the preferred instruments? For example, why has it now considered it more 
effective to extend the asset purchase programme (quantitative easing (QE)) until March 
2017 instead of increasing the monthly purchases of around EUR 60 billion? 
Letting the programme end in September 2016 would probably not have been enough to bring 
inflation to where we want it to be by the end of 2017. That is why we extended our programme 
– so that it has longer to take effect. 
So there is more of a tendency to extend the programme? 
The extension is what we considered appropriate and decided to do. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
The Governing Council also further lowered the interest rate for its deposit facility to –
0.3%. When will negative interest rates become a risk to financial stability? 
I  very  much  hope  and  believe  that  negative  deposit  rates  are  a  temporary  phenomenon 
worldwide and not a permanent feature of normal monetary policy. When potential growth picks 
up and inflation rises, they will be a thing of the past. Now, however, this instrument is being 
tried in many countries because normal interest rates are close to zero and central banks are 
faced with the problem that the real equilibrium interest rate is negative and inflation is so low. 
Neither development was created by central banks, but they are trying to overcome them. 
Which isn’t easy. Do you not feel simply overwhelmed as a central banker every now 
and then? 
There have been calmer times for central bankers, I guess. 
Is “helicopter money” one of the tools available to the ECB, i.e. the idea that a central 
bank prints money and gives it directly to the public? 
The original idea of helicopter money refers to the direct financing of public expenditure. That 
is not an option for us. That is not something that we are considering. As President Draghi has 
said  on  this  topic,  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union  prohibits  direct 
financing of governments in the euro area. 
Isn’t there a great danger that the ECB’s stance undermines the necessary adjustments 
in the economy, as the cheap money makes balance sheet adjustments unnecessary or 
keeps  unviable  banks  and  businesses  alive?  Some  critics  warn  that  the  ECB  is 
ultimately creating “Japanese conditions”. 
That is certainly not the case. Of course, no policy is completely “clean” – there are always 
side effects. But the responsible authorities must stick to their given target. For us, it is an 
inflation rate that is below, but close to, 2%. We do not ignore the consequences of our actions. 
But we must also fulfil our responsibility and others have to fulfil theirs. That also applies to 
potential risks to financial stability resulting from current monetary policy – basically, a task for 
macroprudential supervision, not monetary policy. 
The Federal Reserve (the US central bank) has increased its key interest rate for the first 
time after seven years of a policy of zero interest rates. Does that make the ECB’s job 
easier or more difficult in the long term? 
Both scenarios are possible. Our task would be more difficult if bond yields in the euro area 
were to increase along with US interest rates in the medium term, but that is not likely. What 
is likely, however, is that the interest rate increase will have an impact on emerging market 
economies. That may lead to a further dampening of growth in these countries, which is already 
weakening. That would make it harder for us. In contrast, it would be easier if, for example, the 
“lift off” ultimately leads in the medium term to an increase in the foreign currency price of US 
exports. That would help to normalise inflation worldwide. 
Some  observers  fear  turbulence  in  the  financial  markets  as  a  result  of  the  almost 
unprecedented divergence between the monetary policy of the Federal Reserve and the 
ECB. 
I don’t see any particular source of risk there. Everyone understands that both central banks 
are reacting to their domestic situations – to growth, employment, inflation. And both history 
and theory clearly show that when countries ensure equilibrium in their national economy, that 
is positive in the end for the equilibrium of the global economy as a whole. 
So  you  don’t  share  the  concerns  that  the  dollar’s  appreciation  could  turn  out  to  be 
stronger  than  expected,  with  negative  consequences  for  the  United  States  and 
emerging economies? 
It is nearly impossible to predict exchange rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
The biggest impact of QE appears to be on exchange rates. The ECB has therefore been 
accused of pursuing, at least indirectly, a policy of depreciation. 
We do not have any sort of target for the exchange rate. 
We have spoken about the ECB’s mandate and target. Would you consider it meaningful 
to review both of these in the future, as you did in 2003? 
No  central  bank  is  changing  its  inflation  target  at  the  moment  and  we  are  not  considering 
anything like that either. I do not see any need to engage in such a discussion now. 
President Draghi said at the start of December that, in the future, the Governing Council 
will have to take into account the fact that inflation has been well below 2% for a long 
time.  This  reminded  some  of  the  idea  of  price-level  targeting,  whereby  if  a  target  is 
missed, that shortfall must be made up for later. Is a rethink on the horizon? 
That is certainly one of the over-interpretations which I mentioned earlier. I would never agree 
to price-level targeting. That is also not a consideration for us. 
During the financial crisis and the euro area debt crisis, the ECB has continually gained 
more power and become a political player. What will be the consequences of this in the 
long run? 
I don’t agree with your assumption that we have become more political – that is simply not true. 
We  had  to  be  courageous  in  the  crisis  and  make  use  of  some  exceptional,  non-standard 
instruments. We have become more visible as a result of this, but not more political. 
So you’re not worried about the independence of the ECB? In US politics, efforts are 
being made to exert greater control over the Federal Reserve. 
Some  people  don’t  feel  comfortable  with  what  the  central  banks  have  done  in  the  crisis.  I 
sincerely hope, however, that the majority understands that central banks played a decisive 
role  in  preventing  the  global  economy  from  falling  into  a  deep  depression.  As  regards  our 
independence, history shows just how essential the independence of central banks is. 
But,  in  fact,  isn’t  this  independence  at  risk  if  the  ECB  rises  to  become  the  biggest 
creditor of euro area states with QE? 
Compared  with  our  purchases,  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  the  Bank  of 
England have bought more sovereign bonds relative to the economic output of their respective 
countries. When we believe that an exit from the present policy is justified at some point in the 
future, we will take this step and there won’t be major problems. 
The ECB is calling for a “quantum leap” in terms of integration within Europe and the 
euro area. But it seems that there is hardly any desire for this in politics and among the 
general public. Should we always count on there being crises? 
The  lesson  from  the  crisis  is  quite  clear,  namely  that  we  need  more  integration  within  the 
monetary union. But, of course, everyone sees that the political willingness to realise this is 
rather low right now. That is the result of the economic crisis, the high unemployment. This is 
destabilising social and political systems in Europe. But I believe that the fundamental logic of 
the European project remains valid: in an increasingly interconnected world the countries of 
Europe have joined forces so that they are better able to promote their interests. Also, the 
European Union is already now an historic achievement which brought decades of peace and 
which nobody should risk light heartedly. I trust that further steps will be taken towards greater 
integration. 
And what if that doesn’t happen? 
The alternative would be to call into question the whole edifice of Europe – and that would 
harm the interests of everyone. We must certainly be on guard: from time to time history can 
go mad. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Does the refugee crisis also call into question “the whole edifice”? 
First, please allow me to say one thing: I very much admire how Germany behaved in response 
to the initial shock of the refugee crisis – the willingness to welcome large numbers of refugees 
without solidarity from other European countries. Now, as regards your question, we were all, 
and are still, concerned about the possible consequences, especially given the rapid turn of 
events in the beginning. However, it is my impression that the process is now under better 
control. At the end of the day, this could be a very good thing for Europe. 
What exactly do you mean by that? 
Europe is facing a serious demographic problem. The proportion of the population which is of 
working age is already receding significantly and, if nothing happens, this trend will continue. 
That puts downward pressure on potential growth and makes the financing of social security 
and pension systems an increasingly difficult task. An influx of people that are able to work, 
who can be integrated into the labour market, can help prevent this, but the practicalities are 
not straightforward and not a task a central bank can advise on. 
The refugee crisis has superseded the crisis in Greece. During the summer it was said 
for the first time that, with Greece, a country could make an exit from the euro area. To 
what extent did this damage trust in the euro? 
Only a country can decide on its own to leave the euro, it cannot be legally expelled, although 
pressure can be exerted. However, just to make it quite clear: the ECB has no say as regards 
the entry or an exit of a country. We are responsible for securing the euro and the integrity of 
the  monetary  union  –  regardless  of  its  composition.  Now,  as  regards  your  question:  any 
discussion about the possible exit of a country weakens the monetary union as a whole and 
also means additional financial costs for all countries. Fortunately, the Greek crisis has now 
been overcome. 
Really? Athens is again lagging behind vis-à-vis the reform plan. 
There is an agreement and it is now the responsibility of Greece – and also of the other euro 
area countries – to meet their commitments. 
Recently,  ANFA  –  the  secret  Agreement  on  Net  Financial  Assets  which  covers  the 
securities purchases of euro area national central banks – created quite a stir. There’s 
a suspicion of clandestine monetary financing of states. The ECB has rejected this. But 
perhaps the most important question remains open: why is it that the ANFA volumes 
increased so strongly exactly in the crisis years? 
I find that the discussion about ANFA misses the point. Firstly, we have a decentralised system 
of central banks. Each national central has its own tasks and costs and can decide on how 
these are covered. But, above all, the following also applies – no national central bank is able 
to increase its balance sheet indefinitely or freely. There are strict limits, which are decided on 
each year, as regards the size of these net financial assets of each national central bank. And 
this is closely monitored by the Eurosystem; all the more so given that we want to maintain a 
structural  liquidity  deficit  in  the  banking  sector  so  that  financial  institutions  come  to  us  for 
liquidity. 
But that neither answers the question nor explains why some countries have made more 
use of it than others. 
Now  regarding  the  numbers,  you  should  take  into  consideration  that  some  of  the  figures 
mentioned in public are not correct, partly because they include emergency liquidity assistance 
(ELA) which exists only in very few countries. Excluding it the numbers must also be put into 
perspective: at the end of 1999, all net financial assets amounted to EUR 251 billion out of a 
balance sheet total of EUR 1.1 trillion. At the end of 2014 there was a figure of EUR 534 billion, 
against a balance sheet total of EUR 2.2 trillion. So, in relative terms, that’s more or less the 
same. Moreover, the annual rate of increase of 5.5% on average corresponds to the increase 
in  liabilities,  for  example,  as  related  to  more  banknotes  in  circulation  and  higher  minimum 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   reserves. Alone banknotes in circulation rose by 9.2% a year since they were issued. Part of 
those net financial assets include net holdings of gold and less than one half of the EUR 534 
billion is accounted for by domestic sovereign bonds – and that’s on outstanding government 
debt of EUR 8.5 trillion. And something else is readily overlooked. 
What’s that? 
When we took the decision to purchase sovereign bonds in January, we said that not more 
than 33% of a country’s debt would be bought by the Eurosystem. And that’s including ANFA. 
Under  the  agreement,  if  a  central  bank  buys  domestic  government  securities  for  its  own 
financial  assets,  the  Eurosystem  will  buy  less  if that  is  necessary  to make  sure  the  above 
mentioned limit is not violated. The whole ANFA debate is thus a pointless distraction. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
