  Raghuram Rajan: Words matter but so does intent 
Speech by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 12th National 
Institute of Bank Management (NIBM) Convocation, Pune, 20 April 2016. 
 Congratulations  to  the  graduating  class,  to  their  professors,  and  to  their  proud  parents, 
siblings and friends. 
If you are typical, you are happy to be leaving university and embarking on a new journey, 
sad to be leaving familiar settings behind, and worried whether you will measure up to the 
challenges  of  wherever you  are  going for  work or  higher  studies.  You  are  also  concerned 
about whether you have taken, or will take, the right next step. 
This is all perfectly normal. Given that you have been trained well at NIBM, the answer to the 
question  of  whether  you  will  measure  up  is  almost  surely  “Yes!”  As  to  whether  you  have 
taken the right next step, the answer is less comforting – you will never know. My task is to 
leave you with some last thoughts as you graduate. As I reflected on what I should speak on, 
I  thought  I  would  speak  on  a  recent  experience  that  offers  what  the  Americans  call  “a 
teachable moment”. And then I want to give you some career advice, for what it is worth. 
To  get  to  the  experience,  start  first  with  where  India  is.  India  is  the  fastest  growing  large 
country  in  the  world,  though  with  manufacturing  capacity  utilization  low  at  70%  and 
agricultural growth slow following two bad monsoons, our potential is undoubtedly higher. 
Growth, however, is just one measure of performance. The level of per capita GDP is also 
important. We are still one of the poorest large countries in the world on a per capita basis, 
and have a long way to go before we reasonably address the concerns of each one of our 
citizens. We are often compared with China. But the Chinese economy, which was smaller 
than ours in the 1960s, is now five times our size at market exchange rates. The average 
Chinese citizen is over four times richer than the average Indian. The sobering thought is we 
have a long way to go before we can claim we have arrived. 
As  a  central  banker  who  has to  be  pragmatic, I  cannot  get  euphoric  if India  is  the fastest 
growing  large  economy.  Our  current  growth  certainly  reflects  the  hard  work  of  the 
government and the people of the country, but we have to repeat this performance for the 
next 20 years before we can give every Indian a decent livelihood. This is not to disparage 
what  has,  and  is,  been  done.  The  central  and  state  governments  have  been  creating  a 
platform for strong and sustainable growth, and I am confident the payoffs are on their way, 
but until we have stayed on this path for some time, I remain cautious. 
We must remember that our international reputation is of a country with great promise, which 
has under-delivered in the past. This is why we are still the poorest country on a per capita 
basis  among  the  BRICS.  We  need  to  change  perceptions  by  delivering  steadily  on  our 
promise for a long time – by implementing, implementing, and implementing. We cannot get 
carried  away  by  our  current  superiority  in  growth,  for  as  soon  as  we  believe  in  our  own 
superiority and start distributing future wealth as if we already have it, we stop doing all that 
is required to continue growing. This movie has played too many times in India’s past for us 
to not know how it ends. 
So in speaking to a foreign journalist the other day, who asked what it felt like to be the bright 
spot in the world economy, I used the phrase “Andhon mein kana raja” or “In the Land of the 
Blind, the one-eyed man is king”. The proverb has a long multinational history. The Dutch 
philosopher, Erasmus, used it in Latin when he wrote “In regione caecorum rex est luscus”, 
but he probably was inspired by earlier work. 
My intent was to signal that our outperformance was accentuated because world growth was 
weak, but we in India were still hungry for more growth. I then explained that we were not yet 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
at our potential, though we were at a cusp of a substantial pick-up in growth given all the 
reforms that were underway. 
In our news-hungry country, however, our domestic papers headlined the phrase I used. To 
be fair, they also offered the surrounding context, but few read beyond the headline. So the 
interview  became  moderately  controversial,  with  the  implication  that  I  was  denigrating  our 
success rather than emphasizing the need to do more. 
More generally, every word or phrase a public figure speaks is intensely wrung for meaning. 
When words are hung to dry out of context, as in a newspaper headline, it then becomes fair 
game for anyone who want to fill in meaning to create mischief. Worst, of course, are words 
or  proverbs  that  have  common  usage  elsewhere,  because  those  can  be  most  easily  and 
deliberately misinterpreted. If we are to have a reasonable public dialogue, everyone should 
read words in their context, not stripped of it. That may be a forlorn hope! 
I do, however, want to apologize to a section of the population that I did hurt, the blind. After 
all, the proverb suggests that a one-eyed man is better than a blind one. A moment’s thought 
suggests this is not true. For the blind can develop capabilities that more than make up for 
their disability. Indeed, the sheer willpower and hunger to succeed of the disabled can help 
them  become  over-achievers  in  a  seeing  man’s  world.  Moreover,  because  their  other 
faculties such as touch, smell, and hearing, are more finely honed, the blind may add new 
perspectives and new variety to our world, making it richer and more vibrant. So I am indeed 
sorry for implying the blind were otherwise than capable. 
But this leads to an important question. How much of our language is tinged with meaning 
that is liable to misinterpretation? How forgiving should we be of a bad choice of words when 
the intent is clearly different? 
Let me give you two examples. Gandhiji used to say “An eye for an eye will only make the 
whole world go blind”. Clearly,  what is implied is that the whole world  going blind is not a 
desirable state of affairs. One might take umbrage since it suggests blindness is an inferior 
state  to  that  of  being  able  to  see,  and  the  saying  could  be  seen  as  discriminatory.  Yet 
Gandhiji’s focus was on the absurdity of a policy of revenge, not on blindness, and his intent 
was not to disparage the blind. 
My second example comes from a faculty meeting I once attended where a male professor 
used the phrase “As a rule of thumb” to make his point. A female history professor became 
visibly agitated and angry. She explained that “the rule of thumb” referred historically to the 
maximum width of the stick with which a man could beat his wife without breaking the law. 
She was angry the male professor used the phrase so lightly, seemingly condoning domestic 
violence. He, of course, had no clue of the historical origins of the phrase, and apologized 
profusely.  Clearly,  his  ignorance  suggested  he  had  no  intent  to  offend,  yet  the  female 
professor was offended. 
There are two important issues here. First, if we spend all our time watching our words and 
using inoffensive language or hedging everything with caveats, we will be dull and will not be 
able to communicate because no one will listen. 
For  instance, “An  eye  for  an  eye  will  only  make  the  world  go  blind”  could  be  replaced  by 
“Revenge  reduces  collective  welfare”.  The  latter  is  short,  inoffensive,  and  pithy,  but 
meaningless for most listeners. Alternatively, we could say “The taking of any body part for 
another will temporarily reduce the collective capabilities of the population thus affected, until 
they  develop  the  faculties  that  will  allow  them  to  compensate for  the missing  body  parts.” 
This restatement is more correct than the original, but lacks zing and therefore the ability to 
persuade. 
At  the  same  time,  not  paying  attention  to  words  or  phrases  that  give  offense  risks 
perpetuating debilitating stereotypes that prevent advancement. When referring to bankers, 
scientists,  engineers,  or  surgeons  in  the  abstract,  we  often  refer  to  them  as  “he”  thus 
perpetuating the unfortunate stereotype that these are not jobs for women. Clearly, in doing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
so we ignore the increasing presence, and even dominance, of women in these fields. What 
should we do to remedy matters? 
I think we all have work to do to improve public dialogue. Speakers have to be more careful 
with words and not be gratuitously offensive. At the same time, listeners should not look for 
insults everywhere, and should place words in context so as to understand intent. In other 
words, for effective communication and debate, rather than the angry exchanges that we see 
on some TV shows, we need both respect and tolerance. The greatest danger of all is that 
we  do  not  communicate  or  debate,  for  then  we  will  allow  distorted  stereotypes  to  flourish 
unchallenged, and divisiveness to increase. In a country like ours, conceived and flourishing 
in diversity, that will truly be a disaster. 
Enough food for thought. But here is my promised career advice; Most of us are ambitious 
and have career goals in mind. We think we will be happy if we are successful – become 
CEO of a major multinational corporation; win the Nobel prize; become a mega movie star, 
and so on. And to achieve these goals we sometimes take jobs we dislike for we think the 
pain will be worth the eventual gain. 
When  we  reason  like  this,  I  believe  we  have  causality  backwards.  You  are  rarely  happy 
simply because you are successful, but you are much more likely to be successful if you are 
happy, doing work you enjoy. Indeed, there are careful studies suggesting this. So when you 
choose what to do, don’t focus on the end point. Instead, focus on whether you like the work 
itself. Not only will you be more likely to reach your goal, even if you don’t arrive at that end 
point, you will have had a joyful life. Advice over, congratulations to all of you, and I hope you 
enjoy a well-deserved break. Good luck and thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
