  Andréa M Maechler: Developments on the financial markets and Swiss 
National Bank’s experience with negative interest in Switzerland 
Introductory  remarks  by  Ms  Andréa  M  Maechler,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Swiss  National  Bank,  at  the  media  news  conference  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  Berne, 
16 June 2016. 
 I will begin with a review of developments on the financial markets, before commenting on 
our experience of negative interest in Switzerland. I shall conclude with some remarks about 
important innovations affecting financial market infrastructure relevant to the SNB. 
Situation on financial markets 
Let  me  start  with  developments  on  the  financial  markets.  Risk  sentiment  deteriorated 
markedly  at  the  beginning  of  2016  due  to  weak  economic  data  worldwide  and  a  sharp 
decline in oil prices. Volatility increased temporarily during this period, leading to significant 
losses on the equity markets (slide 1). In mid-February, investors’ risk appetite returned for a 
time, thanks to a stabilisation of oil prices and, in particular, improved economic data in the 
US, China and the euro area. However, by the beginning of June, investor confidence had 
once again come under pressure due to concerns about a possible exit of the UK from the 
EU. With the exception of the US and the emerging markets, the major share indices are 
trading significantly lower than at the beginning of the year. 
This turbulence caused many market participants to seek refuge in safe investments. Yields 
declined substantially on the major government bond markets. Very long-dated bonds were 
in particularly high demand – a fact which resulted in a flattening of the yield curves. Yields 
on ten-year government bonds in both the US and Germany have fallen by around 60 basis 
points since the beginning of the year, due in part to the monetary policy decisions of the 
major central banks. For instance, the Bank of Japan’s decision in January to apply negative 
interest  to  central  bank  deposits  took  markets  by  surprise.  In  March,  the  ECB  decided  to 
further expand its asset purchase programme and took its deposit rate deeper into negative 
territory. In the same month, the US Federal Reserve signalled that interest rates were likely 
to rise less quickly than originally anticipated. 
Yields on the ten-year government bonds of some highly rated countries like Switzerland and 
Germany  touched  new  lows  in  June.  In  Switzerland,  for  example,  the  yield  on  ten-year 
Confederation bonds fell to –0.5%. Most recently, they have been trading around 40 basis 
points lower than at the beginning of the year. More than 90% of outstanding Confederation 
bonds are currently negative yielding (slide 2). However, Switzerland is certainly not the only 
country  witnessing  this  scenario,  which  has  now  become  a  global  phenomenon;  some 
17 states  are  currently  reporting  sub-zero  yields  on  government  bonds  and,  overall,  more 
than a quarter of government bonds outstanding worldwide are trading at negative yields. 
On the foreign exchange markets, the US dollar and pound sterling have depreciated on a 
trade-weighted basis since the beginning of the year (slide 3). The weakening of the pound is 
principally due to uncertainty surrounding next week’s EU referendum in the UK. However, 
the Japanese yen – and, albeit to a lesser extent, the euro – have appreciated despite the 
monetary policy easing of the respective central banks. The Swiss franc has moved within a 
narrow range, appreciating only slightly since the beginning of the year. This is likely due in 
part to the SNB’s monetary policy – that is, to the negative interest rate and our willingness to 
take an active role in the foreign exchange market, as necessary. 
Experience of negative interest rates 
This brings me to our experience of negative interest. For about one and a half years, we 
have been charging negative interest of –0.75% on sight deposits held by banks and other 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
financial market participants at the SNB. As Thomas Jordan has already explained, negative 
interest  helps  to  maintain  the  interest  rate  differential  between  the  Swiss  franc  and  other 
currencies. This differential is necessary in order to make investments in Swiss francs less 
attractive.  If  interest  rates  in  Switzerland  were  the  same  as  those  abroad,  Swiss  franc 
investments  would  clearly  be  favoured  in  the  current  environment.  Negative  interest  thus 
helps ease upward pressure on the Swiss franc. 
The  negative  interest  rate  continues  to  have  the  desired  effect  on  the  money  and  capital 
markets. Money market rates have been tracking close to the SNB’s negative interest rate for 
a  number  of  months  now.  Money  and  capital  market  interest  rates  have  fallen  by  over 
60 basis  points  since  the  introduction  of  negative  interest  (slide  4).  Interest  rates  on  bank 
loans have reacted much less strongly to negative interest, however. 
The SNB does not charge negative interest on all sight deposits, but grants banks and other 
financial market participants exemption thresholds, so that the banking system does not have 
to carry the full burden resulting from the high level of sight deposits. Due to the significant 
expansion  of  liquidity,  most  banks  have  now  completely  exhausted  these  exemption 
thresholds. If the SNB supplies the system with additional Swiss franc liquidity – notably, by 
selling Swiss francs in exchange for other currencies on the foreign exchange market – the 
banks’  interest  rate  burden  increases.  This  makes  holding  additional  Swiss  franc  liquidity 
even less attractive. 
Innovations affecting financial market infrastructure 
I  now  come  to  my  final  topic  –  innovations  affecting  financial  market  infrastructure  that  is 
relevant  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  SNB’s  mandate.  The  changes  relate  to  the  new  trading 
platform  for  repo  transactions  and  the  next-generation  Swiss  Interbank  Clearing  (SIC) 
payment  system  –  both  key  components  of  Switzerland’s  financial  market  infrastructure 
operated  by  SIX  and  its  subsidiaries.  Both  Switzerland’s  finance  industry  and  the  SNB 
depend on a reliable, secure and efficient financial market infrastructure. It is an important 
prerequisite for the SNB to be able to fulfil its statutory duties – providing the money market 
with liquidity as well as facilitating and securing cashless payments. 
New money market platform goes live 
The new electronic money market trading platform for repo transactions began operating at 
the end of February and has completely replaced the old system. The new trading platform’s 
name, CO:RE, is short for “Collateral & Repo”. The technical changeover to the new system 
went smoothly for all parties involved. 
The new trading platform gives more than 160 national and international participants a single 
access point for procuring and investing Swiss franc liquidity as well as managing collateral 
(i.e. pledged securities). It also enables the SNB to carry out its open market operations on 
the  money  market.  After  more  than  15  years  of  service,  the  system  which  CO:RE  has 
replaced  was  no  longer  able  to  meet  the  needs  and  technical  requirements  of  market 
participants. 
As  you  know,  the  SNB  is  currently  implementing  its  monetary  policy  using  exceptional 
measures – negative interest on sight deposits and foreign exchange market interventions. In 
these circumstances, standard money market instruments – repo transactions and SNB Bills 
– are not being deployed. It is nonetheless important that counterparties are in a position to 
carry  out  these  transactions  seamlessly.  The  SNB  therefore  conducts  small-volume  tests. 
When a series of tests conducted in autumn 2014 revealed that some market participants 
were no longer sufficiently familiar with operational implementation, a second round of tests 
was launched in May 2016. This exercise will be concluded at the end of July. These kinds of 
test  operations,  which  help  ensure  counterparties’  operational  readiness,  are  greatly 
appreciated by market participants. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Next-generation SIC payment system 
The thoroughly redesigned SIC payment system known as “SIC4” came on stream in April 
2016.  Based  on  cutting-edge,  forward-looking  technology,  this  new  system  reinforces  the 
principles of security, reliability and high performance that have proved their worth for more 
than 30 years. It is particularly crucial for Switzerland’s finance industry that transactions can 
be effected with the highest possible levels of security. The SNB therefore welcomes the fact 
that the former security infrastructure for accessing the SIC system has been overhauled and 
that a tailor-made security solution will be used from now on. 
A large proportion of cashless payment transactions in Swiss francs is settled via the SIC 
system. In 2015, SIC settled a daily average of approximately 1.7 million transactions worth 
CHF 154 billion, including both client and interbank payments in Swiss francs. Moreover, SIC 
is an important system through which the SNB implements its monetary policy. We therefore 
have a keen interest in the ongoing development of the SIC system to ensure that it is able to 
meet changing technical and professional requirements. 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
      4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5 
