  Sarah Breeden: Taming international banks – time for some new tricks? 
Speech by Ms Sarah Breeden, Acting Executive Director of International Banks Supervision 
Directorate  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Guest  Lecture  Series  on  International  Finance, 
Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 22 March 2016. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Andy  Murfin,  Stephen  Rutherford,  and  Tanveer  Hussain  for  their  help  in  preparing  these 
remarks,  as  well  as  Ben  King,  Robert  Hills,  and  other  colleagues  at  the  Bank  of  England  for  their  helpful 
comments. 
Some  might  compare  international  banks  to  lions.  They  have  the  potential  to  inflict  great 
damage  on  others  if  not  handled  carefully.  Our  job  as  regulators  is  to  tame  these  lions 
through our regulation and supervision – just like a lion tamer tames a lion. 
Based on the experience of the last decade – a tumultuous one for the global economy and 
for the financial services sector in particular – our approach to taming these lions appears not 
to  have  worked  terribly  well.  There  were  many  underlying  reasons  for  the  global  financial 
crisis. But the risks that came with international banking were certainly among them. 
International  banking  is  not  inherently  a  bad  thing  –  quite  the  reverse.  We  want  an  open 
global economy, with international trade in goods and services helping support global growth. 
International  banking  has  a  key  role  to  play  in  supporting  such  growth,  through  financing 
trade and providing access to deep capital markets. It has justifiably become a cornerstone 
of  our  global  economy,  which  thrives  on  openness,  including  in  international  financial  and 
banking services. 
But such openness makes domestic economies more vulnerable as a result of contagion and 
spillovers from shocks that originate elsewhere – whether from other international economies 
or global capital markets and the international financial system. In addition, when banking is 
international,  it  can  generate  problems  of  effective  oversight  and  coordination,  and  so 
difficulties in ensuring a full understanding of the risks being run within that sector. To get the 
benefits of international banking safely, these risks need to be managed. We need to work 
out how to be better lion tamers to create a safe environment for all. And we should aim to 
get to the point where we are happy that even in a crisis it is safe to put our heads in the 
lions’ mouths. 
Globally, the regulators of financial services activity have been prominent in their response to 
the crisis. We have sought to improve the resilience of banking, domestically and globally, 
thereby supporting financial stability. But in pursuing this objective, we need of course to look 
at the costs as well as the benefits of our approach. We need in particular to ensure that that 
resilience and stability is not achieved at the expense of what might colloquially be described 
as  the  “stability  of  the  graveyard”.  Put  another  way,  we  do  not  want  to  tame  international 
banking  to  such  an  extent  that  it  is  unable  in  practice  to  support  international  trade  and 
growth,  or  that  it  does  so  at  too  high  a  cost.  We  do  not  want  the  lions  to  be  completely 
sedated. 
My focus today is not on the improved regulatory standards for banks that have been set by 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision under the leadership of the Financial Stability 
Board and that have applied to all banks since the crisis. Rather my focus is on the who and 
the what of how we regulate international banks – those that operate across national borders 
– and in particular how in the absence of a single global banking regulator we can seek to 
ensure  that  the  risks  posed  by  these  international  banks  are  well  managed.  How  the 
domestic regulators can work together to not just tame the risks facing their own economies, 
but the risks facing the global one – in the same way that lion tamers can work together.  
Given the highly interconnected, dynamic nature of these firms, it makes for an interesting 
challenge.  And  it  is  one  that  interests  the  UK  in  particular  given  our  perspective  as  host 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  supervisor of around 170 international banks from over 50 jurisdictions, and including every 
one of the 30 Globally Systemically Important Banks (G-SIBs). I believe many of the changes 
that  have  been  made  provide  a  stronger  platform  to  allow  our  approach  to  regulation  to 
recognise the benefits whilst containing the risks of international banking in a balanced way. 
In  terms  of  “hosting”  international  financial  services,  the  UK  and  the  US  are  the  two  most 
important markets in the world. So as regulators we both have a major role to play in setting 
the tone and framework not only for financial stability in our own economies but also for our 
contribution to global financial stability. Today I will set out how we are taking forward host 
supervision of international banks in the UK– our “new tricks” designed to address the risks. 
How do we, at the Bank of England, tame the risks that we face from international banks? 
What is our approach to taming these lions? 
The benefits and costs of international banking 
In absolute terms the UK and the US are by some measure the two largest host jurisdictions 
for financial services activity in the world. And if you scale activity relative to GDP, the UK is 
substantially larger than the US. UK banking sector assets have risen from around 100% of 
GDP to around 450% over the last 40 years – the corresponding figure for the US stands at 
around  70%1.  Not  only  that,  but  overseas  banks  comprise  almost  half  of  those  banking 
assets in the UK2. In comparison, US overseas banking assets as a share of total banking 
assets  are  around  a  fifth3.  That  means  that  the  UK  has  three  times  as  many  assets  from 
overseas  banks  as  a  share  of  GDP  as  does  the  US  from  all  banks  operating  there.  In 
addition we supervise in the UK more than a third as many assets from US banks as do US 
regulators from US banks operating in the US. Furthermore we have almost twice as much 
international banking activity booked in the UK as anywhere else. Understanding the benefits 
and risks of international banking matters a lot to us. 
We also have a unique perspective given the range and nature of business undertaken in the 
UK.  We  are  host  to  the  largest  investment  banks,  and  to  global  capital  markets  trading 
activities in particular. This makes us and the US one of the most interconnected countries in 
the  global financial  system. Given  the  inter  connectedness  and  potential  complexity  of  the 
UK’s  part  of  the  financial  system,  its  health  undoubtedly  matters  a  lot  for  global  financial 
stability. But in addition we are host also to a great many firms which are neither focused on 
the domestic UK economy nor are they globally systemically important. These banks instead 
use the UK as a base for wholesale banking activity and trade finance whether their roots are 
in  Europe,  the  Middle  East,  Africa,  Asia  or  the  Americas.  This  degree  of  interconnectivity 
between  the  UK  and  the  rest  of  the  world  is  such  that  the  IMF  noted  in  2011  that,  “the 
stability  and  efficiency  of  the  UK  financial  system  is  a  global  public  good  due  to  potential 
spillovers and thus requires the highest quality of supervision and regulation”4. 
As  a  major  host  to  international  financial  services  activity,  we  are  highly  attuned  to  the 
importance of international trade and international banking to a successful world economy. 
Openness  and  trade  support  economic  dynamism  through  many  different  channels.  They 
promote  efficient  allocation  of  capital  and  risk,  support  greater  competition,  utilise 
comparative advantage, expand the size of the global market, and build economies of scale. 
                                                
1  Why  is  the  UK  banking  system  so  big  and  is  that  a  problem?;  Bush,  Knott,  &  Peacock;  Bank  of  England 
Quarterly Bulletin 2014 Q4. 
2  Prudential Regulation Authority Annual Report and Accounts 2015. 
3  Foreign Banks in the US: A primer; Goulding and Nolle; November 2012. 
4  Spillover Report on the United Kingdom for the 2011 Article IV Consultation; Country Report No. 11/225; IMF; 
July 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  International wholesale  banking has a critical role in facilitating these flows, contributing to 
the  efficient  allocation  of  capital  globally,  and  so  developing  the  world  economy.  Trade 
finance  is  of  course  essential  to  support  trade. Deep  global  capital markets  benefit  savers 
and  borrowers  from  around  the  globe.  International  banking  also  brings  benefits,  such  as 
diversification of risks, efficiency, competition, and the advantages of specialisation. 
So, if those are the benefits, what about the potential risks of international banking? 
The  risks  from  banking  are  well  known  –  that  the  failure  of  an  institution  can  lead  to 
contagion  and  spillovers  that  may  have  direct  and  indirect  impacts  on  financial  stability. 
These risks may be amplified, accelerated, and transmitted through the increased degree of 
interconnectedness that international banking brings. This could be through greater exposure 
to cyclical global macroeconomic trends, or through a greater appetite and capacity for risk 
without appropriate controls. 
Successive crises have clearly demonstrated the effects of international banks, and capital 
markets, “freezing”. Contraction in credit supply is a powerful channel through which financial 
crises  hit  global  and  domestic  economies.  And  the  balance  between  international  and 
domestic  services  can  shift  rapidly  in  a  recession  as  international  banks  serve  the  home 
market.  In  2008–09  for  example,  UK  resident  banks  cut  cross-border  lending  by  30%5, 
significantly  more  than  lending  in  the  UK.  The  same  patterns  were  seen  internationally. 
Lehman  of  course  had  global  effects,  but  numerous  other  entities  had  substantial  cross 
border  effects  too.  The  crisis  showed  us  all  too  clearly  that  international  banking, 
interconnectedness, and unrestricted capital flows carry risk as well as rewards. 
All  this  underlines  the  importance  of  delivering  effective  oversight  of  international  banks. 
Prudent international regulatory standards are a necessary part of this, but are not on their 
own  sufficient.  Rather  we  need  effective  supervision  as  well,  something  that  is  inevitably 
harder given the cross border nature of the activity and the potential both for gaps and for 
different priorities. That creates a need for close cooperation between both home and host 
supervisors to deliver effective global consolidated supervision of international banks. 
The changing approaches we’ve seen since the crisis 
There  is  a  spectrum  of  approaches  that  supervisors  can  take  to  the  supervision  of 
international  banks.  In  the  absence  of  a  single  global  consolidated  supervisor,  let  me 
describe the two logical extremes. 
First one can have a model of pure home supervisor responsibility, based on branches of the 
parent group  and  where  the  host  supervisor relies  completely  on  the  home  supervisor.  By 
allowing the most rapid allocation of capital around the globe, this model delivers the greatest 
benefits. But it simultaneously creates the greatest risks to financial stability in host countries 
because of the potential lack of clarity of remit, information, and responsibility and powers to 
deal with the risks international banking brings. 
Alternatively one can have a pure host-led approach. This would require operations overseas 
to be undertaken in subsidiaries, with those subsidiaries supervised in the same fashion as 
domestic banks, in effect treating the overseas entity as independent and standalone. This 
model reduces the risk of an abrupt cessation of financial services following events overseas 
and so, at first sight, does a better job of protecting financial stability. But it makes the cost of 
entry much higher. And the threat of contagion from the parent may remain anyway. 
There are of course a myriad of shared approaches between these extremes as well. What 
have we seen in practice? 
                                                
5  Understanding international bank capital flows during the recent financial crisis; Hoggarth, Mahadeva, Martin; 
September 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
I would describe the approach in the run up to the crisis as one of fragmentation – with host 
supervisors  focused  on  local  risk  in  local  entities  and  home  supervisors  unappreciative  of 
some  of  the  risks  taken  overseas.  Host  supervisors  did  not  fully  consider  risks  from  the 
parent group. Information sharing was fitful. Colleges – gatherings of relevant supervisors – 
were  fairly  rudimentary.  And  while  there  were  some  attempts  to  increase  home-host 
coordination,  in  practice  there  were  material  gaps.  This  meant  that  neither  host  nor  home 
supervisors had sufficient information to assess the risks to domestic financial stability posed 
by overseas firms. 
A key lesson we learnt in the crisis as host supervisor was the manifestation of global risks in 
local  entities,  and  the  importance  of  home-host  information  sharing  and  coordination.  For 
example on the wholesale side, Bear Stearns and Lehman both saw problems occur outside 
their UK operations, where we had little sight of developments, and which led to uncertainty, 
loss of confidence and a flight of short term wholesale funding. Similar issues arose on the 
retail side, where some overseas banks had taken significant amounts of retail deposits very 
quickly whilst others had provided significant lending to UK borrowers. As host supervisors 
we learnt all too clearly the need to get sufficient detail on the significance of overseas banks’ 
branch  activities  to  understand  their  potential  impact  on  UK  financial  stability,  the  need  to 
understand  the  major  risks  run  by  a  global  parent  and  the  impact  that  might  have  on  UK 
operations, and the potential need for early supervisory intervention. 
In the immediate aftermath of the crisis, and reflecting these lessons, there was a change in 
approach from this fragmentation to regulatory balkanisation. This approach is aligned with 
the  pure  host-led  model  I  described  earlier  and  is  based  on  the  premise  that  host  entities 
should  be  clearly  separable  and  separated  from  their  parent  group.  At  the  extreme,  this 
treats  local  subsidiaries  in  isolation  from  the  parent  group,  with  a  sufficient  local  pool  of 
capital and liquidity so that it is self-sustainable in the event of failure, ensuring that the entity 
can be resolved on its own. 
On the face of it, this provides for domestic financial stability. However, it is not without cost. 
The  benefits  of  international  trade  and  capital  flows  are  reduced.  Total  global  capital 
requirements are higher since the benefits of diversification in international banking are not 
recognised.  And  how  realistic  anyway  is  the  premise  of  self-sustainability  at  the  individual 
country level for businesses that are inherently global and closely integrated – as opposed to 
groups that represent in effect a collection of standalone retail banks. 
Views  on  that  judgement  need  in  my  view  to  be  taken  in  the  round  alongside  the  other 
regulatory changes that we have seen since the crisis. The subsequent post crisis response 
has  been  centred  on  putting  in  place  the  right  prudential  standards  to  improve  resilience 
globally and locally. This has meant banks cutting leverage, raising capital, raising liquidity, 
and  providing  for  better  governance,  risk  management,  and  disclosures.  Global  financial 
stability has also been targeted through having greater requirements for globally systemically 
important institutions. 
Beyond  resilience,  one  of  the  other tenets  of  our  post-crisis  regulatory  reform  agenda  has 
been to address “too big to fail” by ensuring institutions are resolvable. The intention behind 
this work on resolution is to create a coherent and deliverable approach to resolving banking 
entities – either together as a group through so-called “single point of entry” resolution, SPE, 
of the whole group; or through “multiple point of entry” resolution, MPE, where local entities 
or regional subgroups are treated as standalone and can be resolved in isolation from their 
group6. Effective resolution is a cornerstone for providing confidence that capital and liquidity 
                                                
6  Authorities and firms have a choice in resolution planning. The choice of resolution strategy will depend on 
several factors. What is the firm’s business model; how separable are the local entities and their businesses; 
to  what  extent  do  they  share  common  critical  services  and  common  management;  how  can  these  best  be 
managed in resolution. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  will be moveable in a stress to where it is needed rather than needing to be prepositioned in 
case stress arises. Resolution is also supported by additional total loss absorbing capacity 
(TLAC) requirements on firms to absorb losses and recapitalise as needed in the event of a 
resolution. 
The balkanisation that was the initial response of regulators to the crisis supports locally-led, 
uncoordinated  resolution.  Strong  local  requirements  are  in  place  to  ensure  multiple  local 
resolutions of failed entities.  
However, this is likely to be a suboptimal outcome for all concerned. Local entities and the 
critical functions they provide may not in reality be able to survive resolution separated from 
their  parent.  Furthermore,  uncoordinated  actions  by  authorities  increase  the  risk  of  “asset 
grabs”  and  a  general  need  for  more  resources  across  the  group  as  a  whole.  Coordinated 
resolution, and for highly integrated groups an SPE strategy, can better support international 
banking and international capital flows. With coordinated resolution, the need for regulatory 
balkanisation  can  be  reduced,  with  host  supervisors  reassured  by  an  internal  TLAC 
requirement that transforms debt into equity and so ensures capital resources can be down-
streamed from the parent group in a stress when needed, rather than pre-positioned “just in 
case”. 
Let me return now to the key lesson we took as host supervisors from the crisis – that of our 
greater appreciation of the connectivity between the entities we supervise and their parent 
groups.  This  is  present  in  franchises  and  business  models,  in  financial  exposures  and  in 
operational support. And it means that for the largest, most systemic entities in particular, in 
all likelihood the subsidiary will not survive the death of its parent. (For that matter, it is likely 
also that for many groups neither would the parent survive the death of a major subsidiary). 
This  suggests  that,  as  well  as  a  coordinated  approach  to  resolution  (with  SPE  for  highly 
integrated firms) so we need also to have close and committed supervisory cooperation. 
The third phase: how we take international supervision forward 
The post-crisis regulatory reforms have, I think, laid the foundations for a constructive and 
integrated  approach  to  national  supervision  of  international  banks  –  one  that  can  take  us 
away from the initial response of regulatory balkanisation and towards what I have termed 
committed cooperation. 
Given the benefits that international banking brings, we are keen to be open for business, 
provided that business is undertaken safely. But what’s safe depends on what business is 
being carried out, what legal entity it’s carried out in, and what policy regime applies to those 
entities. 
For example, we have a clearly articulated risk appetite for activity undertaken in non-EEA 
branches, published in 2014. Our appetite is not limitless. It is driven by the equivalence of 
the home regulator, an appropriate agreed split of responsibilities with the home regulator, 
and  assurances  over  resolution  from  the  home  regulator  which  embeds  a  coordinated 
approach to resolution. 
We  pay  close  attention  to  the  activities  carried  out  within  the  branch,  particularly  if  such 
activities  are  important  to  UK  financial  stability.  We  are  clear  that  we  do  not  wish  to  see 
branches  undertaking  critical  retail  banking  functions  (like  taking  transactional  deposits) 
beyond a minimal level unless there is some good reason and importantly a very high level of 
assurance  on  resolution.  But  the  approach  also  recognises  that  some  activities  may  be 
important  to  global  financial  stability,  so  putting  a  domestic  wall  around  them  may  be 
counterproductive.  And  we  recognise  that  we  need  to  play  our  part  in  host  supervision  of 
branches by supervising their effects on UK and global financial stability, their effects on the 
group and by working with the home regulator. 
More broadly, and reflecting the concentration of global capital markets and trading activities 
in the UK, we have a responsibility to look at capital market developments and deliver good 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  supervisory outcomes for the firms involved in order to support global financial stability. Much 
of this activity takes place in subsidiaries. But given the  way trading firms in particular are 
structured, we often see only part of the risks run in particular books. Booking models are 
such that the UK may have the global book for some products but only part of the book for 
other businesses. And while we of course want sensible transparent booking models based 
on  a  coherent  business  and  risk  management  rationale  (as  opposed  to  an  arbitrary  –  or 
worse an arbitraged – allocation of business) we will still need to work closely with the home 
regulator to share understanding of the risks being run. We also need to remember that the 
business model, financial and operational connectivity between the entities we supervise and 
their  parent  groups  means  that  in  all  likelihood,  as  with  Lehman,  the  subsidiary  will  not 
survive the death of its parent. So we need to work closely with the home regulator to gain 
appropriate insight into risks run at the group level. 
We therefore seek to adjust our approach to supervision for those international groups that 
are  highly  integrated.  In  particular  since  the  links  between  them  mean  that  they  are  not 
separable in any meaningful sense of the word, we support SPE resolution for such firms. In 
addition we aim both to judge the risks of the UK entity in the context of the global group, and 
to judge the risks to the UK entity from the global group. And as with branches, we play our 
part as host supervisor of subsidiaries by supervising their effects on UK and global financial 
stability and by working with the home regulator. 
We do have expectations of the local business. Whilst recognising that subsidiaries are not 
fully independent of the group, we would not expect them to be designed to be structurally 
loss making. And we expect subsidiaries to be capable of accreting a portion of their own 
capital, rather than being fully dependent on a  drip-feed of capital from the parent, as this 
creates  poor  incentives  and  can  become  problematic  if  the  parent  gets  into  trouble.  We 
expect high standards of governance (including clear accountability for the management of 
local entities via the new Senior Manager’s Regime) and risk management, consistent with 
these firms’ importance to the financial system. 
At  this  juncture  we  have  chosen  not  to  apply  either  domestic  system  wide  stress  tests  or 
local capital buffers to reflect the systemic importance domestically of these institutions. We 
instead  seek  to  develop  close  dialogue  and  greater  information  sharing  with  the  home 
regulator on the stress exposures they see for the group as a whole, and to allow us to judge 
how these will affect the UK entity. 
All  this  is  cooperation.  But  what  about  the  risk  that  this  coordination  and  insight  might 
disappear, particularly in the event of stress? How do we create committed cooperation? In 
that event, the ability to set internal TLAC is key. By turning debt into equity in the event of 
stress, internal TLAC gives host supervisors the ability to upstream losses in bad states of 
the world and so creates a binding commitment to downstream capital from the group when it 
is needed. Together with supervisory cooperation internal TLAC ensures the home regulator 
is  fully  sighted  on  and  committed  to  act  to  mitigate  financial  stability  risks  inside  the  host 
country. It can credibly act as a counterweight against the host supervisors’ natural desire for 
higher local equity capital to be pre-positioned. At the same time internal TLAC can also help 
to ensure that there will be sufficient locally held capital to enable an orderly wind down of 
that entity in the event of stress. 
This approach recognises the integrated nature of many international groups. It recognises 
that  having  a  clear  agreed  resolution  strategy,  combined  with  committed  cooperation 
including  in-depth  sharing  of  information  between  the  home  and  host  supervisor,  is key  to 
understanding  the  risks  that  are  shared  by  the  parent  and  subsidiaries  of  large,  complex 
groups.  But  it  also  seeks  to  ensure  that  the  potential  risks  of  a  disorderly  resolution  are 
mitigated. 
In summary there are a number of key components to committed cooperation. 
a. 
A  credible  resolution  strategy  and  equivalence  of  the  home  resolution  regime, 
supported by internal TLAC. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 b. 
c. 
d. 
A  high  degree  of  commercial,  operational,  and  financial  entanglement  between 
subsidiary and parent. 
Transparency over the financial position of the parent group, its capacity to support 
the subsidiary, and the equivalence of the home supervisory regime. 
Transparency over the intervention framework, including host and home discretion 
and triggers for action. 
 If  we  can  move  to  a  position  where  sufficient  and  appropriately  committed  loss  absorbing 
capacity is in place on a global basis in order for these groups to deliver outcomes for both 
home and host supervisors, then we will be better able to realise the benefits of international 
banking – and to do so safely. 
In  conclusion,  international  banking  benefits  the  global  economy.  However  it  carries  risks. 
And  because  of  their  cross-border  nature,  international  banks  are  inherently  harder  to 
supervise  due  to  the  risk  of  duplication  and  gaps.  There  is  in  addition  a  danger  of 
international  banks  being  supervised  sub-optimally  in  a  balkanised  manner.  As  the  largest 
host  supervisor  globally  by  many  measures,  the  UK  is  more  exposed  to  these  risks  than 
most. 
In my view the best approach to try to tame these risks is to act globally, through committed 
cooperation between home and host supervisors. We can get to the point where we are not 
in fear of international banking, and that the risks that it brings are appropriately managed – 
just like a lion tamer controlling their lions – and under control. As host supervisors we are 
committed  to  playing  our  part  in  global  consolidated  supervision  and  resolution  of 
international banks. This supports international banking and flows of capital – and supports a 
strategy of being “open for business” as long as it is safe. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
