  Stephen S Poloz: Opening statement before the Standing Senate 
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Standing 
Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, Ontario, 20 April 2016. 
 Good morning, Mr. Chairman and committee members. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and 
I  are  happy  to  be  back  to  discuss  the  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR),  which  we 
published last week. 
It has been 18 months since Carolyn and I were last here. And it was about that time, in the 
fall of 2014, when the Canadian economy first started to feel the effects of a massive shock 
to our terms of trade, brought about by a sharp drop in the price of oil and other commodities. 
Because Canada is such an important producer of resources, particularly oil, this shock was 
a major setback. It set in motion a difficult adjustment process that has been very disruptive 
for many Canadians. Investment and output in resource industries have fallen precipitously, 
the decline in national income has curbed household spending and the resource sector has 
seen significant job losses. These negatives have clearly outweighed the benefits of lower 
energy costs for households and businesses. 
From a monetary policy perspective, the shock posed a two-sided threat to our economy last 
year. First, it was a clear downside risk to our ability to reach our inflation target. Second, by 
cutting into national income, it worsened the vulnerability posed by household imbalances as 
seen in our elevated debt-to-income ratio. To address both threats and to help facilitate the 
necessary  economic  adjustments,  we  lowered  our  policy  interest  rate  twice  last  year, 
bringing it to 0.5 per cent. 
While we recognized the possibility that this reduction could, at the margin, exacerbate the 
vulnerability posed by household imbalances, the more important effect of lowering the policy 
rate last year was to cushion the drop in income and employment caused by lower resource 
prices. 
Another natural consequence of the shock to our terms of trade has been a decline in the 
Canadian-dollar  exchange  rate.  It’s  important  to  note  that  this  is  not  unique  to  Canada. 
Indeed, many resource-reliant countries have seen similar depreciations in their currencies. 
Both our policy moves and the lower currency have been helping to facilitate the economic 
adjustments,  which  have  been  playing  out  over  two  tracks.  While  weakness  has  been 
concentrated  in  the  resource  sector,  the  non-resource  economy  continues  to  grow  at  a 
moderate pace. And within that, non-resource exports are clearly gathering momentum. 
By  the  time  we  reached  the  new  year,  there  was  a  clear  sense  of  anxiety  among  many 
financial  market  participants.  The  outlook  for  global  growth  was  being  downgraded  again, 
and commodity prices were plumbing new lows. At the Bank, we had new intelligence that 
Canadian  energy  companies  would  be  cutting  investment  even  more  than  previously 
thought. In this context, we said that we entered deliberations for our January interest rate 
decision  with  a  bias  to  easing  policy  further,  but  decided  to  wait  to  see  details  of  the 
government’s fiscal plan. 
Since  January,  we’ve  seen  a  number  of  negative  developments.  First,  projected  global 
economic growth has once again been taken down a notch for 2016 and 2017. This includes 
the US economy, where the new profiles for investment and housing mean a mix of demand 
that is less favourable for Canadian exports. 
Second,  investment  intentions  in  Canada’s  energy  sector  have  been  downgraded  even 
further. True, oil prices have recovered significantly from their extreme lows. But Canadian 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
companies  have  told  us  that  even  if  prices  remain  around  current  levels,  there  will  be 
significant further cuts beyond what we foresaw in January. By convention, we incorporate 
the average oil price from the few weeks before we make our forecast, letting us look through 
variability in markets. Because of this, our oil price assumptions are only $2 to $3 per barrel 
higher than they were in January. 
Third, the Canadian dollar has also increased from its lows. Our assumption in our current 
projection is 76 cents US, four cents higher than in January. While there are many factors at 
play, including oil prices, most of the increase appears to be due to shifts in expectations 
about monetary policy in both the United States and Canada. The higher assumed level of 
the dollar in our projection contributes to a lower profile for non-resource exports, as does 
lower demand from the United States and elsewhere. 
As  the  Bank’s  Governing  Council  began  its  deliberations  for  this  month’s  interest  rate 
announcement, we saw that these three developments would have meant a lower projected 
growth  profile  for  the  Canadian  economy  than  we  had  in  January.  This  may  sound 
counterintuitive,  given  the  range  of  monthly  economic  indicators  that  started  the  year 
strongly. However, some of this strength represents a catch-up after temporary weakness in 
some  areas  during  the  fourth  quarter,  and  some  of  it  reflects  temporary  factors  that  will 
unwind in the second quarter. 
The other new factor we had to take into account was the federal budget. For the purposes 
of  our  MPR  and  interest  rate  announcement,  we  took  a  close  look  at  the  Finance 
Department’s projections of the multiplier effect of the fiscal shock. Our analysis is that the 
Department’s projections are reasonable in that they are within the range of estimates you 
would  find  in  the  economic  literature,  as  well  as  in  our  own  staff  research.  There  is,  of 
course, greater uncertainty as to how the budget measures will affect growth in the longer 
term, particularly since they will need to work their way through the household sector. In our 
report,  we  outlined  the  risk  that  households  may  be  more  inclined  to  save  than  historical 
experience would suggest. 
Taking all of these changes on board, our projected growth profile is generally higher than it 
was in January. We are now projecting real GDP growth of 1.7 per cent this year, 2.3 per 
cent next year and 2 per cent in 2018. Our forecast suggests that the economy will likely use 
up  its  excess  capacity  somewhat  earlier  than  we  predicted  in  January  –  sometime  in  the 
second half of 2017. However, there is more than the usual degree of uncertainty around that 
timing.  It  is  always  tricky  to  estimate  an  economy’s  potential  output,  and  the  difficulty  is 
compounded when the economy is going through a major structural adjustment, as Canada 
is right now. We know that the collapse in investment in the commodity sector will mean a 
slowdown  in  the  economy’s  potential  growth  rate.  In  the  near  term,  we’ve  lowered  our 
estimate of potential output growth from 1.8 per cent to 1.5 per cent. 
In terms of the Bank’s primary mandate, total CPI inflation is currently below our 2 per cent 
target.  The  upward  pressure  on  imported  prices  coming  from  the  currency  depreciation  is 
being more than offset by the impact of lower consumer energy prices and the downward 
pressure  coming  from  excess  capacity  in  the  economy.  As  these  factors  diminish,  total 
inflation is projected to converge with core inflation and be sustainably on target sometime in 
the second half of next year. 
To sum up where we are, while recent economic data have been encouraging on balance, 
they’ve  also  been  quite  variable.  The  global  economy  retains  the  capacity  to  disappoint 
further, the complex adjustment to lower terms of trade will restrain Canada’s growth over 
much of our forecast horizon, and households’ reactions to the government’s fiscal measures 
will bear close monitoring. We have not yet seen concrete evidence of higher investment and 
strong firm creation. These are some of the ingredients needed for a return to natural, self-
sustaining growth with inflation sustainably on target. 
With that Mr. Chairman, Carolyn and I would be happy to answer questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
