  Dimitar Radev: Assessment of the banking system in Bulgaria 
Statement by Mr Dimitar Radev, Governor of the Bulgarian National Bank, on the occasion of 
the completion of the asset quality review and stress test of the banks in Bulgaria, 11 August 
2016. 
 Today the Governing Council of the Bulgarian National Bank adopted the results of the asset 
quality review and stress test of the banks, as summarized by the international professional 
services company Deloitte. 
The main objective of the review was to present a thorough and independent assessment of 
the banks and the banking system as a whole. In its scale the exercise was unprecedented 
in the Bulgarian banking history and engaged more than 900 experts, including experts from 
the most reputable international audit firms, which acted under the direction of the BNB. 
The detailed results for each individual bank and the system as a whole will be announced at 
1  PM  on  Saturday  as  per  the  formerly  communicated  announcement  date.  Following  the 
announcement, the Bulgarian National Bank will be ready to address any specific questions 
related to the results. 
The asset quality review and stress test were mandated to the Bulgarian National Bank by 
law and they stem from the Government’s National Reform Programme. On that ground, I 
have  presented  the  report  on  the  outcomes  to  the  Finance  Minister  and  on  Monday  I  will 
submit it to the National Assembly. 
I am pleased to inform the public that based on the outcome of the review and stress test, 
the Governing Council have concluded the following: 
1. 
The  Bulgarian  banking  system  is  stable.  The  main  indicator  of  a  bank’s  financial 
resilience,  the  ratio  of  bank  common  equity  tier  one  capital  to  its  risk-weighted 
assets,  or  the  CET  1  ratio,  remains  significantly  above  the  required  minimum 
regulatory  requirements  on  a  system  level  and  is  above  the  EU  average  as 
announced  in  the  latest  European  stress  test.  The  CET1  ratio  adjusted  for  the 
results of the asset quality review is 18.9% on system-wide level compared to the 
minimum regulatory requirement of 4.5%. The stress test indicated that if the latest 
2018  macroeconomic  forecasts  materialize,  the  CET1  ratio  would  increase  to 
22.2%.  In  the  case  of  a  severe  economic  crisis,  which  is  very  unlikely,  the  CET1 
ratio would decline to 14.4%. For the European banks, the results are significantly 
lower – 13.9% and 9.4% respectively. Therefore, banks’ capital adequacy is strong 
and banks have the capacity to absorb shocks in unfavorable market conditions. 
The capital adequacy of each bank after potential adjustments from the asset quality 
review remains above the minimum regulatory requirements. Indeed, the individual 
results  vary  across  banks.  Follow-up  plans  have  been  developed  in  line  with 
individual results and include measures aimed at maintaining existing capital buffers 
for some banks or increasing capital buffers and decreasing risk-weighted assets for 
others. The concrete follow-up measures and timeline for their implementation will 
be announced on Saturday, 1 PM, as part of the published results. Implementation 
of the measures will begin on Monday, 15 August 2016. They will be incorporated in 
the  individual  bank’s  capital  management  plans,  as  well  as  in  the  supervisory 
process conducted by the BNB. 
The  results  do  not  necessitate  any  public  support  to  the  banks  with  state  budget 
funds.  The  follow-up  measures  aimed  at  maintaining  or  strengthening  the  capital 
position of all banks are based entirely on available market solutions and funds from 
private sources. 
2. 
3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In closing, I would like to stress out that the asset quality review and the stress test were not 
an  isolated  event  but  an  important  step  in  the  18-month  reform  plan  for  the  institutional 
development  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  which  I  announced  upon  my  election  as  a 
Governor in July 2015. Other key aspects of this plan include significant improvement of the 
BNB’s  supervisory  process  and  the  development  of  an  institutional  framework  that  is 
effective in resolving issues in the banking system. The strict execution of the plan to date 
has strengthened our disciplined approach and contributed to improving financial results in 
the banking sector. The markedly high half-year results of the banks are a solid platform for 
implementing the follow-up measures identified as a result of the asset quality review and the 
stress test. 
I would like to assure the public, that we will be consistent in our disciplined approach and we 
will continue to follow our plan for reforms in the banking sector focusing not on the issues of 
the  past  but  on  addressing  effectively  the  challenges  of  the  future  in  order  to  maintain 
financial stability and integrate successfully in the European financial infrastructure. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
