   Rameswurlall Basant Roi: Recent Developments in Regulation and 
Supervision 
Speech by Mr Rameswurlall Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the IMF’s Africa 
Training Institute, Ebène, 29 July 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Good morning 
This visit is my first to the Africa Training Institute of the IMF in Mauritius and I am pleased to 
address you on the concluding day of the course on Core Elements of Banking Supervision. 
Thank you, Mr Ravi Mohan, Adviser to the AFRITAC, for giving me this opportunity to reflect 
briefly on a subject like regulation and supervision of banks that has increasingly occupied a 
centrally important seat in policy discussions in the past quarter of a century. 
The Africa Training Institute is by now a well-established training institution for the region in 
economics, finance and central banking matters. I have no doubt that this well-inspired session 
on banking supervision has equipped you all with critical knowledge and useful professional 
skills to perform your job better and better. 
Seventeen years ago, more specifically, in December 1998, in my first stint as the Governor 
of  the  Bank,  I  gave  my  first  address  to  a  gathering  of  the  main  players  in  the  Mauritian 
economy.  The  Asian  crisis  was  hitting  hard  a  few  of  the  Far  Eastern  economies.  I  had 
announced that the Bank of Mauritius would completely overhaul and recast its regulatory and 
supervisory  framework  in  line  with  international  best  practices.  Deposit-taking  institutions 
would  be  required  to  adhere  to  a  comprehensive  set  of  prudential  norms.  To  this  effect, 
guidelines would be issued. On-site and off-site examinations of banks would be re-styled and 
would be made more rigorous than before. External auditors would be required to be familiar 
with the Basel Core Principles and to see to it that banks are operating in line with established 
prudential norms. Oblivious of the fact that banks, by the very nature of their deposit-taking 
activities, are the most leveraged enterprises on the planet, many disliked this initiative of the 
Bank of Mauritius. The Bank’s initiative was perceived as an unwarranted intervention by the 
regulator in what was a free market-based banking industry. Bankers and external auditors 
had continued to comfortably hang on to the belief that markets are self-regulating and efficient. 
How could an unregulated individual be deemed self-regulating? In the Bank’s thinking, self-
regulation  meant  no  regulation  at  all.  Quite  expectedly,  regulation  of  banks’  activities  and 
operations  attracted  hateful  criticisms. The tendency  of  some  groups,  like  a special-forces 
warrior, to fight every new regulation had reached a vexing point. Despite resistance from 
pressure groups to resist, the Bank had proceeded with its regulatory reforms and soldiered 
on effectively. It took quite some time for players in our economic system to fully realise that 
banking is a different kind of business and financial systems are not and will never be totally 
free  market  systems.  Over  the  years  much  has  been  achieved  in  terms  of  the  health 
improvement of deposit-taking institutions in the country. 
Effective banking supervision is an evolving discipline. Free flows of capital in a globalised 
world marked by all kinds of disruptions, unleashed by economic and non-economic forces, 
the quests for high returns by investors and quick profits by speculators, fraudulent practices, 
excessive risk-taking and violent economic cycles, amongst others, have made regulation and 
supervision of financial institutions an unprecedentedly challenging task. The regulator’s job 
has become increasingly complex and demanding in terms of skills and clairvoyance, more so 
after the August 2007 international financial crisis. 
As  regulators,  we  need  to  constantly  bear  in  mind  that  any  capitalist  economy  inevitably 
progresses from  conservative  finance  to reckless  speculation. The  economy  has financing 
regimes under which it is stable and financing regimes under which it is unstable. In other 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  favouring  stability-enhancing  and  discouraging 
 
words, over a period of prosperity, a capitalist economy transits from financial relations that 
make for a stable system to financial relations that make for an unstable system. We also need 
to bear in mind that it’s in the personal interests of the CEOs of banks to show profits, often by 
any means, for the benefit of their shareholders. And it is simply not true that the pursuit of 
their individual interests will lead to financial stability. What’s good for an individual CEO may 
not be necessarily good for the banking industry as a whole. The self-interests of bankers and 
levered investors do occasionally lead to economic contractions and a loss of human welfare. 
I need not emphasise to a crowd like this one that financial stability is an indispensable pre-
condition  for  economic  growth  and  human  welfare.  There  is  every  reason  for  regulatory 
authorities to act proactively in order to prevent financial crises from developing in the first 
place. With the recent experience that the Bank of Mauritius had with regard to an ailing bank, 
I cling to the view that regulators must broaden their scope and take initiatives to prevent the 
development  of  practices  that  favour  financial  instability.  Jurisdictions  that  have  regulatory 
gaps are more prone to fraudulent practices. Regulators must guide the evolution of financial 
institutions  by 
instability-augmenting 
institutions and practices. 
Regulators often have to act as bomb disposal experts when confronted with a potential risk 
of financial instability. Those at the helm of regulatory authorities bear in mind one thing: if they 
don’t hear any explosion, it means they are dead already. 
Last year, the Bank of Mauritius revoked the banking license of a 7-year old bank that was part 
of one of the biggest corporate bodies in the country. It was a systemically important Group of 
companies. Poor corporate governance, fraudulent practices, related party transactions, poor 
asset quality, capital deficiency, liquidity crisis, amongst so many other factors, brought down 
the bank. This bank failure provided us with invaluable lessons that regulation and supervision 
of financial institutions cannot be taken lightly. No bank forming part of a broader group of 
companies should ever be overseen by the regulator in isolation from the other related entities. 
Regulatory framework should indispensably allow for consolidated supervision. Those who fail 
to learn from history are doomed to repeat it. The economic and social costs of policy errors 
are enormous and, indeed, very painful. 
As I said earlier, regulation and supervision of financial institutions has kept evolving and will 
keep on evolving. As we have been progressively moving along over the last twenty five years, 
we  have  faced  new  challenges  in  terms  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  improvement.  I  will 
digress here to say that in a small open economy like Mauritius, we have an additional but very 
tricky regulatory challenge: to get the balance right such that the solution does not become 
part  of  a  bigger  problem.  In  the  wake  of  the  2007  financial  crisis,  effective  regulation  and 
supervision of financial institutions was brought back to the table with an elevated sense of 
seriousness. Basel III gained greater importance worldwide. This awakening has brought with 
it several new challenges for regulatory authorities, not only in sub-Saharan African countries 
but  also  the  world  over.  Digital  technology  has  made  far-reaching  inroads  in  the  financial 
industry. The inherent risks associated with digital technology in banking and finance cannot 
be understated. Regulatory authorities in most parts of the world face a formidable task: to get 
the right kind of skills for a job that needs to be done right now!! One of the most obvious 
challenges is capacity building. 
We, at the Bank of Mauritius, have been constantly tooling and re-tooling, equipping and re-
equipping and beefing up our regulatory and supervisory capacity in the past fifteen years. It’s 
a never-ending exercise and will never be. 
I understand many of you here are from regulatory authorities in the region. I am sure, you 
must have acquired additional knowledge for sharpening your regulatory and supervisory skills 
over the past two weeks. I wish you a pleasant trip back home. Those who are from the Bank 
of Mauritius, get back to work. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
