  Janet L Yellen: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress 
Testimony by  Ms Janet L Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  US  Senate, 
Washington DC, 21 June 2016. 
 Chairman  Shelby,  Ranking  Member  Brown,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am 
pleased  to  present  the  Federal  Reserve’s  semiannual  Monetary  Policy  Report  to  the 
Congress.  In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  briefly  discuss  the  current  economic  situation  and 
outlook before turning to monetary policy. 
Current economic situation and outlook 
Since my last appearance before this Committee in February, the economy has made further 
progress  toward  the  Federal  Reserve’s  objective  of  maximum  employment.  And  while 
inflation  has  continued  to  run  below  our  2  percent  objective,  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC) expects inflation to rise to that level over the medium term. However, the 
pace of improvement in the labor market appears to have slowed more recently, suggesting 
that our cautious approach to adjusting monetary policy remains appropriate. 
In the labor market, the cumulative increase in jobs since its trough in early 2010 has now 
topped  14  million,  while  the  unemployment  rate  has  fallen  more  than  5  percentage  points 
from  its  peak.  In  addition,  as  we  detail  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report,  jobless  rates  have 
declined for all major demographic groups, including for African Americans and Hispanics. 
Despite these declines, however, it is troubling that unemployment rates for these minority 
groups remain higher than for the nation overall, and that the annual income of the median 
African American household is still well below the median income of other U.S. households. 
During the first quarter of this year, job gains averaged 200,000 per month, just a bit slower 
than last year’s pace. And while the unemployment rate held steady at 5 percent over this 
period, the labor force participation rate moved up noticeably. In April and May, however, the 
average pace of job gains slowed to only 80,000 per month or about 100,000 per month after 
adjustment for the effects of a strike. The unemployment rate fell to 4.7 percent in May, but 
that decline mainly occurred because fewer people reported that they were actively seeking 
work. A broader measure of labor market slack that includes workers marginally attached to 
the workforce and those working part-time who would prefer full-time work was unchanged in 
May  and  remains  above  its  level  prior  to  the  recession.  Of  course,  it  is  important  not  to 
overreact to one or two reports, and several other timely indicators of labor market conditions 
still look favorable. One notable development is that there are some tentative signs that wage 
growth may finally be picking up. That said, we will be watching the job market carefully to 
see whether the recent slowing in employment growth is transitory, as we believe it is. 
Economic  growth  has  been  uneven  over  recent  quarters.  U.S.  inflation-adjusted  gross 
domestic product (GDP) is currently estimated to have increased at an annual rate of only 
3/4 percent in the first quarter of this year. Subdued foreign growth and the appreciation of 
the dollar weighed on exports, while the energy sector was hard hit by the steep drop in oil 
prices  since  mid-2014;  in  addition,  business  investment  outside  of  the  energy  sector  was 
surprisingly  weak.  However,  the  available  indicators  point  to  a  noticeable  step-up  in  GDP 
growth  in  the  second  quarter.  In  particular,  consumer  spending  has  picked  up  smartly  in 
recent months, supported by solid growth in real disposable income and the ongoing effects 
of the increases in household wealth. And housing has continued to recover gradually, aided 
by income gains and the very low level of mortgage rates. 
The  recent  pickup  in  household  spending,  together  with  underlying  conditions  that  are 
favorable for growth, lead me to be optimistic that we will see further improvements in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  labor  market  and  the  economy  more  broadly  over  the  next  few  years.  Monetary  policy 
remains accommodative; low oil prices and ongoing job gains should continue to support the 
growth of incomes and therefore consumer spending; fiscal policy is now a small positive for 
growth; and global economic growth should pick up over time, supported by accommodative 
monetary policies abroad. As a result, the FOMC expects that with gradual increases in the 
federal funds rate, economic activity will continue to expand at a moderate pace and labor 
market indicators will strengthen further. 
Turning  to  inflation,  overall  consumer  prices,  as  measured  by  the  price  index  for  personal 
consumption expenditures, increased just 1 percent over the 12 months ending in April, up 
noticeably  from  its  pace  through  much  of  last  year  but  still  well  short  of  the  Committee’s 
2 percent objective. Much of this shortfall continues to reflect earlier declines in energy prices 
and lower prices for imports. Core inflation, which excludes energy and food prices, has been 
running close to 1-1/2 percent. As the transitory influences holding down inflation fade and 
the labor market strengthens further, the Committee expects inflation to rise to 2 percent over 
the  medium  term.  Nonetheless,  in  considering  future  policy  decisions,  we  will  continue  to 
carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward our inflation goal. 
Of course, considerable uncertainty about the economic outlook remains. The latest readings 
on  the  labor  market  and  the  weak  pace  of  investment  illustrate  one  downside  risk  –  that 
domestic  demand  might  falter.  In  addition,  although  I  am  optimistic  about  the  longer-run 
prospects  for  the  U.S.  economy,  we  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  expressed  by  some 
prominent economists that the slow productivity growth seen in recent years will continue into 
the  future.  Vulnerabilities  in  the  global  economy  also  remain.  Although  concerns  about 
slowing growth in China and falling commodity prices appear to have eased from earlier this 
year, China continues to face considerable challenges as it rebalances its economy toward 
domestic demand and consumption and away from export-led growth. More generally, in the 
current  environment  of  sluggish  growth,  low  inflation,  and  already  very  accommodative 
monetary policy in many advanced economies, investor perceptions of and appetite for risk 
can change abruptly. One development that could shift investor sentiment is the upcoming 
referendum  in  the  United  Kingdom.  A  U.K.  vote  to  exit  the  European  Union  could  have 
significant  economic  repercussions.  For  all  of  these  reasons,  the  Committee  is  closely 
monitoring global economic and financial developments and their implications for domestic 
economic activity, labor markets, and inflation. 
Monetary policy 
I will turn next to monetary policy. The FOMC seeks to promote maximum employment and 
price stability, as mandated by the Congress. Given the economic situation I just described, 
monetary  policy  has  remained  accommodative  over  the  first  half  of  this  year  to  support 
further improvement in the labor market and a return of inflation to our 2 percent objective. 
Specifically, the FOMC has maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 1/4 to 
1/2  percent  and  has  kept  the  Federal  Reserve’s  holdings  of  longer-term  securities  at  an 
elevated level. 
The Committee’s actions reflect a careful assessment of the appropriate setting for monetary 
policy,  taking  into  account  continuing  below-target  inflation  and  the  mixed  readings  on  the 
labor  market  and  economic  growth  seen  this  year.  Proceeding  cautiously  in  raising  the 
federal funds rate will allow us to keep the monetary support to economic growth in place 
while we assess whether growth is returning to a moderate pace, whether the labor market 
will  strengthen  further,  and  whether  inflation  will  continue  to  make  progress  toward  our 
2 percent  objective.  Another  factor  that  supports  taking  a  cautious  approach  in  raising  the 
federal  funds  rate  is  that  the  federal  funds  rate  is  still  near  its  effective  lower  bound.  If 
inflation were to remain persistently low or the labor market were to weaken, the Committee 
would have only limited room to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate. However, 
if  the  economy  were  to  overheat  and  inflation  seemed  likely  to  move  significantly  or 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  persistently  above  2  percent,  the  FOMC  could  readily  increase  the  target  range  for  the 
federal funds rate. 
The FOMC continues to anticipate that economic conditions will improve further and that the 
economy will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds 
rate.  In  addition,  the  Committee  expects  that  the  federal  funds  rate  is  likely  to  remain,  for 
some  time,  below  the  levels  that  are  expected  to  prevail  in  the  longer  run  because 
headwinds – which include restraint on U.S. economic activity from economic and financial 
developments  abroad,  subdued  household  formation,  and  meager  productivity  growth  – 
mean that the interest rate needed to keep the economy operating near its potential is low by 
historical  standards.  If  these  headwinds  slowly  fade  over  time,  as  the  Committee  expects, 
then gradual increases in the federal funds rate are likely to be needed. In line with that view, 
most  FOMC  participants,  based  on  their  projections  prepared  for  the  June  meeting, 
anticipate that values for the federal funds rate of less than 1 percent at the end of this year 
and less than 2 percent at the end of next year will be consistent with their assessment of 
appropriate monetary policy. 
Of course, the economic outlook is uncertain, so monetary policy is by no means on a preset  
course and FOMC participants’ projections for the federal funds rate are not a predetermined 
plan for future policy. The actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on economic and 
financial developments and their implications for the outlook and associated risks. Stronger 
growth or a more rapid increase in inflation than the Committee currently anticipates would 
likely  make  it  appropriate  to  raise  the  federal  funds  rate  more  quickly.  Conversely,  if  the 
economy were to disappoint, a lower path of the federal funds rate would be appropriate. We 
are  committed  to  our  dual  objectives,  and  we  will  adjust  policy  as  appropriate  to  foster 
financial conditions consistent with their attainment over time. 
The  Committee  is  continuing  its  policy  of  reinvesting  proceeds  from  maturing  Treasury 
securities  and  principal  payments  from  agency  debt  and  mortgage-backed  securities.  As 
highlighted in the statement released after the June FOMC meeting, we anticipate continuing 
this  policy  until  normalization  of  the  level  of  the  federal  funds  rate  is  well  under  way. 
Maintaining  our  sizable  holdings  of 
longer-term  securities  should  help  maintain 
accommodative financial conditions and should reduce the risk that we might have to lower 
the  federal  funds  rate  to  the  effective  lower  bound  in  the  event  of  a  future  large  adverse 
shock. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
