Peter Praet: Transmission channels of monetary policy in the current 
environment 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the Financial Times Festival of Finance, London, 1 July 2016. 
 I would like to thank Fédéric Holm-Hadulla for his contributions to this speech. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Since the onset of the financial crisis in 2007/2008, the euro area, like many other economies, 
has been hit by a barrage of shocks with adverse macroeconomic fall-outs. The ECB, like 
many  other  major  central  banks,  has  responded  to  these  shocks  with  forceful  and  often 
unprecedented monetary policy measures – and it is firmly determined to ensure price stability 
and financial stability in the euro area. 
By now, our policy response has taken the key ECB interest rates to record lows, bringing the 
rate on banks’ overnight deposits with the ECB to negative territory, and we expect our policy 
rates to remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time. In parallel, we have 
adopted a range of central bank asset purchase programmes, addressing securities of different 
issuers – private and public. And we have rolled out a set of targeted longer-term refinancing 
operations for euro area banks with an in-built incentive for lenders to pass on the favourable 
financing conditions – including negative borrowing costs – to firms and households provided 
they create more credit. 
This comprehensive package of measures provides strong support to the euro area recovery 
and guards euro area financial conditions against external shocks. 
In  today’s  speech  I  will  discuss  the  mechanisms  by  which  we  expect  these  measures  to 
transmit  to  the  economy.  And  I  will  present  recent  evidence  which  indicates  that  this 
transmission is gradually strengthening, in a context of elevated risks, especially originating 
from the external environment. 
In  my  remarks,  I  will  subdivide  the  transmission  mechanism  into  two  parts  –  one  linking 
monetary policy actions to financial market conditions and the other linking financial market 
conditions to spending decisions of households and firms. 
Impact of our measures on financial conditions 
Let me start with a discussion of how our measures are supporting financial conditions in the 
euro  area.  Here,  I  will  put  particular  focus  on  how  our  negative  interest  rate  policy, 
accompanied by our forward guidance, reinforces the impact of the liquidity injections provided 
through our asset purchases and longer-term refinancing operations, since this is an aspect of 
our  policy  that,  I  believe,  is  often  misunderstood  in  debates  on  the  transmission  of  our 
measures. 
After a steady sequence of interest rate cuts since end-2011, the deposit facility rate (DFR) 
has first entered negative territory in June 2014. Further rate cuts have followed, putting the 
DFR to minus 40 basis points at the current juncture. At first sight, the implications of these 
recent rate cuts to negative levels are similar to those of equally-sized rate cuts taking place 
in positive territory. They induce a decline in short-term money market rates which, via financial 
market arbitrage, transmits along the yield curve and to a wide range of asset classes. The 
resultant  loosening  in  financial  conditions  induces  firms  and  households  to  bring  forward 
consumption and investment decisions. 
This inter-temporal substitution from future to current spending supports the cyclical recovery, 
although a high degree of Knightian uncertainty regarding political and economic prospects 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
   may affect this channel. Further support for the impact of monetary policy comes from the 
cross-sectional incidence of monetary policy accommodation, which tends to divert funds from 
net savers with a lower marginal propensity to spend to net borrowers with a higher marginal 
propensity to spend.1 
But two mechanisms reinforce the impact of a given cut in monetary policy interest rates when 
they move into negative territory. First, negative rates discourage – individually rational but 
economically  costly  –  liquidity  hoarding  by  banks.  Second,  they  mitigate  the  monetary 
tightening bias that arises when market expectations on future interest rates are truncated by 
a perceived lower bound. 
Via the first mechanism, negative interest rate policies strengthen the accommodative impact 
per unit of liquidity injected into the euro area financial system through our conventional and 
unconventional monetary policy. Banks on the receiving end of these liquidity injections face a 
choice whether to lend it on to the real economy, through direct credit provision to firms and 
households or asset purchases; or to hoard the liquidity and deposit it back with the central 
bank. The former option supports the economic recovery, the latter option retards transmission 
and mutes the stimulus that the central bank intends to inject into the system. 
In  negative  territory,  banks  face  a  stronger  inducement  to  rebalance  their  portfolios  by 
redeploying excess liquidity holdings through lending to the real economy or asset purchases 
at maturities that allow them to escape the negative rates. While, on aggregate, the banking 
system will not be able to elude the cost of negative rates, the higher propensity to recycle 
their liquidity holdings strengthens the overall easing potential of our policies. 
ECB staff analysis indicates that these mechanisms are indeed operational, especially in 
countries with strong economic fundamentals: according to regression estimates at the level 
of  individual  banks,  the  propensity  for  banks  to  translate  excess  liquidity  holdings  into 
lending has increased substantially since the deposit facility rate has fallen into negative 
territory  –  raising  the  growth  rate  of  bank  lending  in  these  countries  from  around  4%  to 
slightly below 5% – an increase by almost 20% compared to a scenario without negative 
rates.2 
And the April 2016 Bank Lending Survey also saw a large share of banks indicate that the 
negative  ECB  deposit  facility  rate  has  led  to  declining  interest  rates  on  loans  to  firms  and 
households. 
Meanwhile, these improvements in pass-through have been accompanied by a pronounced 
decline in the dispersion in bank lending rates across euro area countries since mid-2014. As 
a consequence, our comprehensive package of measures has also been conducive to a more 
even transmission of our policy to jurisdictions that had previously not been able to reap the 
full benefits of the accommodative monetary policy stance. 
Besides this impact on the incentives for liquidity hoarding, there is a second factor by which 
the negative rate environment reinforces the impulse from other policy tools. This factor relates 
to the way expectations about the future path of monetary policy are reflected in market interest 
rates. At any point in time, a wide range of future interest rate paths are conceivable and market 
participants  assign  probabilities  to  different  parts  of this  distribution. The  yield  and  forward 
curves observed in the market comprise all future rate constellations that investors consider 
conceivable,  weights  them  by  their  respective  probabilities,  and  aggregates  them  across 
market participants. 
                                                
1   See Tobin, J. (1982), “Asset Accumulation and Economic Activity: Reflections on Contemporary Macroeconomic 
Theory”, University of Chicago Press. 
2   For  further  detail, see  Praet, P.  (2016),  “The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  response  to  disinflationary  pressures”, 
speech at the ECB Watchers Conference, Frankfurt, 7 April 2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   In  normal  conditions,  this  aggregated  expectation  on  future  interest  rates  tends  to  largely 
coincide with the rate path that investors consider most likely to prevail – in statistical terms, 
this means it reaches levels at or close to the median of the predictive distribution of future 
rates. 
However, the presence of a binding lower bound on monetary policy rates drives a wedge 
between  actual  market  rates  and  the  rate  path  that  investors  consider  most  likely.  This  is 
because the lower bound truncates the distribution of conceivable future short-term rates from 
below: interest rates below the perceived lower bound are, by definition, eliminated from the 
set of conceivable outcomes; vice versa, rates above the lower bound receive a higher relative 
weight and the expected value of interest rates is mechanically pushed up. 
Accordingly,  the  truncated  asymmetric  distribution  of  expected  future  rates  leads  to  a  less 
accommodative  interest  rate  path  than  that  resulting  if  markets  could  efficiently  price  their 
expectations into market rates. And the resultant tightening bias, in turn, can be very costly as 
it tends to arise in situations of strong disinflationary pressures that persist although the central 
bank has already engaged in sizeable rate cuts. 
A policy of negative interest rates mitigates this bias. In particular, the observation that central 
banks are, indeed, prepared to take interest rates to levels below zero induces a re-evaluation 
of technical feasibility constraints. (A salient feature of this re-evaluation is the disappearance 
of  the  qualifier  “zero”  in  the  economic  debate  on  lower  bound  constraints.)  Via  this  re-
evaluation, negative rates loosen the perceived lower bound on the future distribution of short-
term interest rates and, thereby, squeeze out the wedge between the rate path priced into 
market rates and actual market expectations. 
In this way, the negative interest rate policy reinforces the effectiveness of our measures in 
pushing down the longer end of the yield curve. 
Overall, there is increasing evidence that these effects are borne out in practice. Risk-free yield 
curves have consistently shifted down, thus bringing important easing at the initial stages of 
the  transmission  process.  Meanwhile,  this  easing  has  exerted  important  spill-overs  across 
asset classes and, particularly important for a bank-based economy like the euro area, our 
policy measures have compressed the levels and dispersion of bank lending rates across euro 
area countries as explained earlier. 
While we are mindful of potential adverse implications for bank profitability, we do not see 
those implications outweighing the benefits for the economy at this stage. In fact, there is some 
evidence that the beneficial effects of our policy on the valuation of banks’ securities holdings, 
on banks’ lower funding costs, and on banks’ expanding asset volumes and better credit quality 
– as the demand for intermediation rises in a growing economy and credit becomes less risky 
– are still offsetting the downsides of reduced unit intermediation margins. 
At the same time, while the favourable impact of our policies on banks’ intermediation activities 
and  on  credit  quality  should  strengthen  through  time  as  the  economic  recovery  firms,  the 
funding cost relief for banks will sooner or later run out of scope – and that will happen when 
banks’ entire liability structure will have repriced to the lower level of interest rates. This will 
detract from one force which – despite the difficult low-rate environment – is still contributing 
positively to banks’ capacity to generate earnings at present and is providing an important 
buffer  against  the  decline  in  interest  rates  on  the  asset  side  of  the  bank  balance  sheet  – 
especially for banks with a large share of assets remunerated at variable rates. 
A further important buffer derives from the new targeted longer-term refinancing operations 
(TLTRO-II),  the  first  of  which  was  allotted  last  week.  Under  TLTRO-II,  banks  can  access 
Eurosystem funding for a maturity of up to four years at very attractive rates – potentially falling 
to levels as low as the deposit facility rate for banks that display a strong lending performance. 
Besides  providing  an  inducement  to  expand  lending  volumes  and  reduce  lending  rates  to 
compete  for  good  credit,  TLTRO-II  will  thus  also  allow  banks  to  reduce  recourse  to  more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   expensive  wholesale  funding  and  replace  it  with  attractive  funding.  This,  in  turn,  will  be 
conducive to their profitability. 
Against this background, it is important to assess the impact of our policies on bank profitability 
not by looking at individual measures but by considering the combined effect of the full package 
of  policy  tools,  including  via  their  mutually  reinforcing  positive  impact  on  macroeconomic 
prospects. 
Nonetheless, we are monitoring developments in bank profitability and the time dimension of 
factors influencing lenders’ costs of liabilities and returns on assets to ensure that bank-based 
transmission remains effective, which may become less favourable if interest rates remain low 
for  a  protracted  period of  time.  Meanwhile,  other  policy  actors  will  have  to  do their  part to 
provide a viable perspective on the future path towards completing Banking Union in Europe 
– a point I will return to later. 
Impact of changes in financial conditions on the economy 
The second leg of the monetary transmission process links changes in financial conditions to 
the broader economy. 
Typically this part is more sluggish since it takes time for firms and households to adjust their 
economic  behaviour  to  changes  in  financial  conditions.  And  we  have  indeed  seen  a  more 
delayed response to our credit easing than we might have expected. That is in part because 
the euro area economy has been hit by several shocks since we launched those measures, in 
particular  the  slowdown  in  emerging  markets,  which  have  dampened  the  observational 
response of output and inflation to our policy impulses. It is also because we are still emerging 
from a protracted crisis that has made firms and households more hesitant to take economic 
risk. 
We are nevertheless now seeing increasing signs that the effects of our monetary stimulus are 
materialising, in at least three ways. First is the impact of easier borrowing conditions on the 
economy, which is visible in the most interest-sensitive demand components – consumption 
of durables and investment. 
After several years of contraction, consumption of durable goods in the euro area has been 
rebounding, growing at rates not seen since before the crisis. The contribution of fixed capital 
formation to growth, which was extremely weak in the early phases of the euro area recovery, 
has  also  been  progressively  rising.  Indeed,  in  the  first  quarter  of  2016,  investment  and 
consumption  contributed  almost  equally  to  the  strong  GDP  outturn.  Collectively,  this  has 
contributed to a recovery in the euro area that is now largely driven by domestic demand. 
Of course, these recent data do not yet reflect the renewed uncertainty originating from the UK 
referendum.  Such  uncertainty  may  weigh  on  economic  confidence  and  partly  reverse  the 
recent improvements in investment and consumption, also in the euro area. Accordingly, it is 
essential to swiftly establish an orderly process that governs the path towards a new post-
referendum  steady  state  so  as  to  allow  households  and  firms  to  swiftly  adjust  their  inter-
temporal economic decisions to the new environment. 
Alongside new borrowing, our monetary policy is also supporting consumption and investment 
through a second channel: the impact of lower interest payments on outstanding debt. 
Much  has  been  made  of  the  adverse  implications  of  the  low  interest  rate  environment  on 
interest earnings of households. But, for euro area households, interest payments have also 
declined  substantially,  coming  down  by  about  3  percentage  points  relative  to  disposable 
income  since  2008.  As  interest  earnings  and  interest  payments  have fallen  by  roughly  the 
same amount, the disposable income of aggregate euro area households has been largely 
unaffected. But what we have seen is a redistribution of purchasing power among different 
types of households. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   While this redistribution is an unintended side-effect of monetary policy, it is not neutral for the 
cyclical environment. Specifically, resources have moved from net savers with a low marginal 
propensity to consume to net borrowers with a high marginal propensity to consume, creating 
an overall positive impact on aggregate consumption. This boost to disposable income has not 
so far been offset by increases in household saving rates in the euro area. 
Also  for  euro  area  firms,  the  impact  of  lower  interest  payments  has  been  significant  on 
aggregate. Since 2008, net interest payments have come down by about 7 percentage points 
to just 2% of gross operating surplus today.3 
This provides substantial support to firms’ profitability which is positive for future investment. 
Improved profitability expectations, coupled with low discount rates, have also supported a 
strong decline in corporate debt-to-equity ratios – measured by market metrics – driven by 
valuation  effects  in  equity  markets.  This  ‘asset  price’  deleveraging  should  in  principle  feed 
through into a lower cost of equity for firms, giving further impetus to investment. 
Monetary policy has also contributed to the recovery in a third way. As domestic demand in 
the euro area has rallied, the contribution of external demand to output has declined in tandem 
with the major slowdown in international trade. But the decline has been more muted than we 
would have predicted on the basis of historical records. Indeed, over the past 20 years, the 
growth rate of international trade has been lower than in 2015 only twice: in the aftermath of 
the dotcom bubble burst in the early 2000s, and again after the collapse of Lehman Brothers 
in 2009. Both episodes saw a contemporaneous sharp slowdown in euro area growth to a rate 
close to or below zero. 
In 2015, however, the unexpected sharp drop in trade was not associated with a slowdown in 
the euro area economy. In fact, year-on-year growth even picked up throughout 2015, despite 
the slump in world imports, as euro area exporters, after a long spell of losses, were able to 
regain market shares in world demand. The divergence between the monetary policy path of 
the  euro  area  and  that  of  other  major  economies  was  one  factor  explaining  this  atypical 
resilience of euro area exports. 
Still, the fact that these improvements have taken place in tandem with the economy receiving 
new shocks – such as the steep fall in oil prices in 2014 and 2015 – poses an identification 
problem. Put simply, how do we know that the recovery would not have happened anyway? 
Addressing  such  questions  requires  models  which  can  provide  indications  of  how  the 
macroeconomy  would  have  fared  in  the  absence  of  monetary  policy  support.  We  have 
undertaken such an exercise across the Eurosystem, and the analysis tells a clear story. 
Using  a  large  and  varied  suite  of  models,  Eurosystem  staff  find  that,  relative  to  the 
counterfactual scenario, our measures (excluding the March 2016 decisions) have provided 
significant support to output and inflation. In the absence of our policy package inflation would 
have been negative in 2015. In 2016 it would have been at least half a percentage point lower 
than we forecast currently and around half a percentage point lower in 2017. The impact of the 
policy  measures  on  euro  area  GDP  is  also  sizeable  (again  excluding  the  March  2016 
decisions). According to the Eurosystem staff assessment, our policy is contributing to raise 
euro area GDP by around 1.5% in the period 2015–18. 
Conclusion 
Let me summarise. The ongoing recovery has shown signs of strengthening, also on the back 
of an accelerating pass-through of our monetary policy measures to the broader economy. 
This  accelerating  pass-through  shows  that  monetary  policy  is  working.  And  the  ECB  is 
                                                
3   This decline reflects a pronounced reduction in the level of interest payments and a more moderate increase in 
gross operating surplus, which had collapsed in the recession following the 2007/2008 financial crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   determined to continue playing its pivotal role in consolidating the upswing in the economic 
cycle. 
At the same time, the euro area continues to be exposed to a number of uncertainties. Some 
are external, including the still-fragile global recovery and the impact of the UK referendum. 
But some are also internal. Most important is the lack of clarity for firms and households over 
the future institutional architecture of EMU, which remains incomplete in core areas, especially 
banking union. Key to removing that uncertainty is a clear roadmap for completing monetary 
union, which lays out both the end-point for the reform process and the sequence of steps that 
will lead to it. 
Without a clear roadmap, there is a risk that this combination of economic and institutional 
uncertainty will hold back the recovery in the euro area. And it has the potential to undermine 
the effectiveness of monetary policy as firms and households become less willing to engage 
in inter-temporal substitution by exploiting the favourable interest rate environment to frontload 
consumption and investment decisions. It weakens the capacity of the banking sector to act 
as a bridge between present and future spending decisions by intermediating between savers 
and borrowers – an issue that requires close monitoring. 
Against this background, monetary policy cannot be the only remedy to our current economic 
challenges. Instead, a broader set of actors needs to step into the breach, adopting a common 
approach to support the economic recovery in a context of persistent headwinds and to create 
durable and resilient improvement in economic performance going forward. This requires a 
concerted  effort  in  the  fiscal  and  structural  policy  domain  to  support  the  ongoing  cyclical 
upswing; and a common strategy to complete and improve the institutional set-up of monetary 
union. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
