  
 
Manuel Sánchez: Mexico – economic integration, challenges and outlook 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  United 
States-Mexico Chamber of Commerce, California Regional Chapter, Los Angeles, 5 August 
2016. 
 It is certainly a pleasure to be back in Los Angeles to share my views with you on Mexico’s 
economic  prospects.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  California  Regional  Chapter  of  the  United 
States-Mexico Chamber of Commerce for the kind invitation. 
I will organize my presentation in three parts. First, I will briefly discuss Mexico’s growing and 
very  dynamic  partnership  with  the  United  States.  I  will  follow  with  a  focus  on  growth  and 
financial developments for the Mexican economy, in conjunction with these close ties. And 
finally, I will make some comments on inflation and monetary policy in Mexico. 
As usual, my remarks are entirely my own and do not necessarily reflect the position of the 
Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. 
Economic integration with the U.S. 
A natural starting point for this discussion is the tight relationship between our two countries. 
Mexico is increasingly linked to the United States, through high levels of bilateral exports and 
imports, significant FDI and technology transfers, and substantial remittances, among other 
channels.  These  bonds  have  yielded  dividends  on  both  sides  of  the  border,  including 
business  and  job  creation,  wider  and  more  advantageous  consumer  choices,  and  higher 
living standards.1 
California, home of a long border and migration history with Mexico, is one of the country’s 
most  important  trade  and  cultural  partners.  Merchandise  trade  has  expanded  continuously 
through  recent  years.  Mexico  and  California,  the  world’s  sixth  largest  economy,  both  gain 
greatly from these mutually beneficial exchanges. 
One  of  the  most  profound  and  longstanding  links  between  Mexico  and  the  United  States 
comes  through  tightly  integrated  industrial  operations.  This  is  more  than  clear  in  the  high 
correlation between U.S. industrial and Mexican manufacturing data over time. 
Recently, structural reforms undertaken by Mexico have opened up even more opportunities 
for  the  two  countries.  The  overall  reform  agenda  is  extremely  ambitious,  encompassing 
broader  and  greater  access  to  telecom  services  via  more  competition,  an  unprecedented 
opening of the energy sector to private investment, and changes to rules governing the labor 
market.  However,  its  ultimate  effectiveness  obviously  depends  on  the quality  and  depth  of 
implementation over the coming years.2 
In any case, some of the reforms are indeed in their first phase of implementation, and they 
have likely only begun to produce results. Furthermore, the advantages they bring could very 
well be enhanced down the road through a more effective rule of law, better public security, 
and improvement to Mexico’s physical infrastructure. 
                                                
1  For a discussion of the U.S.-Mexico economic relationship, see Villarreal, M.A. (2015). U.S.-Mexico Economic 
Relations: Trends, Issues, and Implications. Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, pp. 1–9. 
2   For an online progress report on Mexico’s structural reforms, see Presidencia de la República, Reformas en 
Acción, http://reformas.gob.mx. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Growth and financial developments 
Let me move on to the second part of this talk, which covers shorter-term developments. On 
a  year–on-year  basis,  since  2014  Mexico’s  GDP  has  grown  at  an  average  rate  of 
2.3 percent,  not  far  from  the  historical  performance,  with  a  dip  occurring  in  the  second 
quarter this year. 
Behind this relatively stable backdrop in the past two and a half years, two opposing forces 
have  been  at  play.  Momentum  in  services  has  been  offset  by  a  slowdown  in  industrial 
production. 
Softening  industrial  output  in  Mexico  seems  to  result  from  two  shocks.  One  is  falling  oil 
extraction due to the near depletion of Pemex’s most profitable oil fields. The other is slowing 
U.S.  industrial  production.  Consistent  with  this  panorama,  manufacturing  exports  to  the 
United States have been on the downswing, aggravating the drag exerted by low demand for 
Mexican products from other countries. 
U.S.  manufacturing  appears  to  have  a  larger  impact  on  Mexican  exports  to  the  U.S.  than 
does  the  bilateral  exchange  rate.  Econometric  estimates  for  the  long-term  behavior  of 
Mexican  manufacturing  exports  to  its  northern  neighbor  point  toward  an  elasticity  to  U.S. 
manufacturing  production  almost four times  as  high  as  that for  the  bilateral  real  exchange 
rate.3 
However, a weaker peso may be partly responsible for the fact that Mexican exports have 
captured greater U.S. market share. For example, in the last four and a half years, the share 
of Mexico’s automotive exports in total U.S. automotive imports has increased by almost five 
percentage points. 
Private consumption has been a driver of economic expansion, partly compensating for the 
loss of steam from external demand. Consumption growth seems to have been supported by 
several factors, including improvement in labor market indicators. 
Since  2012,  the  unemployment  rate  has fallen from five  percent to  less  than four  percent, 
close to the long-term average. Note that this improvement has occurred in conjunction with 
relatively stable labor force participation. Additional favorable factors are foreign remittances 
and consumer lending, exhibiting an almost coincident rebound with consumption. 
Investment, on the other hand, is contracting, sending up a warning sign on possibilities for 
future improvement. Also, forward-looking indicators such as purchasing managers’ indexes 
for  both  manufacturing  and  nonmanufacturing  are  declining,  with  the  latter  breaching  the 
contractionary  zone.  As  is  the  case  in  the  United  States,  Mexico  is  expected  to  face  a 
slowdown this year, while growth next year should pick up moderately.4 
Mexico’s growth scenario faces risks. The world economy may decelerate further, affecting 
U.S. prospects. A greater-than-expected slowdown in U.S. imports and industrial production 
could  hurt  the  outlook  for  Mexico.  Also  on  the  radar  are  weaker  consumer  and  producer 
confidence,  a  worse-than-expected  drop  in  crude  oil  output,  and  potentially  more  volatile 
financial markets, which could bring constraints for financing in both the public and private 
spheres. To the upside, structural reforms might yield more benefits. 
In  financial  markets,  since  the  middle  of  2014,  an  international  trend  toward  greater  risk 
aversion  has  hurt  emerging  markets  in  particular.  In  emerging  economies,  the  financial 
                                                
3  For an econometric estimation of the effects of U.S. manufacturing production and the bilateral real exchange 
rate  on  Mexico’s  manufacturing  exports  to  that  country,  see  Banco  de  México  (2016).  Quarterly  Report 
October – December 2015, Box 1. 
4  See IMEF, (2016). “Indicador IMEF del Entorno Empresarial Mexicano (IIEEM),” July. Analysts’ estimates for 
GDP in the United States and Mexico are, respectively, 1.9 and 2.3 percent in 2016, and 2.2 and 2.6 percent 
in 2017. See Consensus Forecasts and Latin American Consensus Forecasts, July 2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  variable  most  affected  has  been  the  exchange  rate,  with  a  tendency  toward  generalized 
depreciation against the U.S. dollar. To date this year, the Mexican peso has been hit harder 
than other currencies in this group. The obvious question is why this has been so. 
Exacerbated  peso  depreciation  may  stem  from  several  factors.  One  is  the  role  of  the 
Mexican  peso,  the  most  traded  currency  among  emerging  economies,  as  an  international 
hedge mechanism. Increased risk aversion has been a constant for currencies, bonds and 
other investments in the last couple of years, and investors appear to have latched onto the 
tactic  of  shorting  the  Mexican  peso  as  an  easy  way  to  hedge  their  risks  when  other 
emerging-market assets face headwinds.5 
Another  factor,  however,  is  Mexico’s  weakened  fiscal  position.  The  nation  has  seen  a 
longstanding rising trend in overall public-sector debt over GDP. Additionally, Pemex net oil 
export revenues have dropped drastically. 
A  stronger  fiscal  stance  is  necessary  given  a  historic  balance  of  public-sector  borrowing 
requirements that has grown 14 percentage points relative to GDP in a matter of just a little 
more than seven years. This situation is more critical given the worsening of Pemex finances 
and the persistence of low oil prices, with widening negative net income in the state-owned 
company. The difference between revenues and expenditures maps very closely the rising 
oil deficit in Mexico’s current account.6 
Finally, holdings of peso government securities by nonresidents have fallen lately, driven by 
drops  in  those  of  short  maturities.  This  bears  watching,  given  that  further  bouts  of 
international financial volatility could easily occur. 
On the world stage, in the wake of Brexit, deeper monetary accommodation is foreseen in 
most developed countries. Partly as a result, leverage is rising worldwide. Furthermore, the 
perception of the low effectiveness of monetary policy in terms of intended goals may hurt its 
credibility.7 
A highly unusual characteristic of the overall scenario is that advanced nations are saddled 
with increasing proportions of public and private debt with negative yields. Geopolitical jitters 
will likely continue. Also, European banks suffer not only from squeezed margins in light of 
the low and negative interest-rate environment, but also from weak balance sheets. Finally, 
doubts  over  the  sustainability  of  the  Chinese  economic  recovery  and  policy  interventions 
there persist. 
Monetary policy and inflation 
Let us now focus on monetary policy and inflation in Mexico. Since last year, annual inflation 
has remained moderate. For 15 consecutive months, it has been below the 3 percent target. 
This is unprecedented and calls for consolidation of the trend. 
This benign result has been supported by unusually low noncore price increases, including 
soft  international  agricultural  and  domestic  government-determined  prices.  On  the  other 
hand,  core  inflation  has been  rising gradually,  reflecting the  effect  of  peso  depreciation on 
tradable goods prices. This is very clearly shown by the behavior of merchandise inflation. 
Additionally,  an  accelerating  rise  in  the  producer  price  index  also  reveals  an  impact  from 
peso weakening. 
                                                
5  See BIS (2014). “Triennial Central Bank Survey of foreign exchange and derivatives market activity in 2013,” 
detailed tables. 
6  See  SHCP  (2016).  Informes  sobre  la  Situación  Económica,  las  Finanzas  Públicas  y  la  Deuda  Pública, 
Segundo trimestre de 2016. 
7  See BIS (2016). BIS Statistical Bulletin, June, Table F2.3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Medium-term  inflation  expectations,  as  measured  by  analysts’  surveys,  have  remained 
relatively  stable,  albeit  above  the  target.  Market-derived  expectations  appear  to  show  a 
recent spike.8 
In this context, monetary policy has been preemptive, with interest rate hikes seeking to avert 
deviations of inflation expectations and to anchor them on the target, particularly in the face 
of significant peso depreciation. The resulting flattening of the yield curve seems to reflect 
confidence that inflation will continue to be contained. 
It is worth emphasizing that the Bank of Mexico does not target any level of the exchange 
rate. Its primary objective is maintaining low inflation, and Mexico adheres to a freely floating 
exchange-rate regime. This does not mean that movements in the exchange rate have no 
impact  on  inflation.  In  fact,  as  mentioned,  moderate  pass-through  has  occurred  from  the 
exchange rate to consumer prices, concentrated in durable goods. But this may change, and 
monetary policy should remain vigilant. 
Some risks to the consolidation of convergence of inflation to the 3 percent permanent target 
prevail. The most notable danger is more weakening of the peso with a generalized impact 
on  prices,  knocking  inflation  expectations  off  track.  Also,  rises  in  noncore  prices  could 
accelerate, returning to historic rates, possibly producing second-round price effects. Finally, 
given uncertainty on the level of potential GDP, aggregate demand pressures could surface. 
Conclusions 
Over the course of many years, Mexico and the United States have benefited from increased 
integration,  both  cultural  and  economic.  Mexican  economic  activity,  however,  has  recently 
decelerated and confronts downside risks, among them, the possibility that the U.S. industrial 
sector’s performance will turn out to be softer than anticipated. 
Other dangers are weaker consumer and producer confidence, a steeper-than-expected fall 
in oil output, and possibly more volatile financial markets. The latter might squelch financing 
for the government and private firms. 
Greater  risk  aversion  could  become  exacerbated  by  geopolitical  events.  In  this  context, 
Mexico’s fiscal stance should be fortified, and its monetary policy must continue to employ 
complete  flexibility  in  order  to  consolidate  the  convergence  of  inflation  to  the  permanent 
target, thereby shielding the economy with stronger macroeconomic fundamentals. 
                                                
8  See Banco de México (2016). “Encuesta sobre las Expectativas de los Especialistas en Economía del Sector 
Privado: Julio de 2016,” August. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
