  Benoît Cœuré: The case for rethinking international capital flows 
Dinner  speech  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  SUERF/PSE/CEPII  Conference  on  “Rethinking  Capital  Controls  and 
Capital Flows”, Paris, 15 September 2016. 
 The  rise  of  financial  globalisation  is  a  defining  phenomenon  of  the  past  30  years.  In  the 
aftermath of the global financial crisis, financial globalisation stalled.1  
While it appears to be picking up again on some measures, it is not clear whether this recent 
episode  marks  a  new  era  of  somewhat  lower  integration,  signals  the  start  of  a  wider 
“deglobalisation” trend, or is merely a pause. 
For  long,  the  prevailing  consensus  among  economists  and  international  organisations  had 
been that financial globalisation is unconditionally desirable, and a key to development and 
growth.  Recent  events  –  including  the  global  financial  and  the  European  sovereign  debt 
crises – shattered that consensus. There is now widespread acceptance that where financial 
markets are imperfect and regulatory and supervisory policies inadequate, capital inflows can 
fuel costly boom-and-bust cycles. 
I  believe  that  reducing  financial  integration  and  restricting  capital  flows  alleviates  the 
symptoms, without addressing the root causes. Worse, the remedy of financial protectionism 
has  –  just  as  with  trade  protectionism  –  adverse  side-effects  of  its  own  that  reduce 
economies’ growth potential. Over time, these adverse side effects may reduce welfare by 
more than the problems they seek to address. 
We have to redefine the concept of globalisation. For this, we should adopt policies that allow 
us to reap the benefits from financial globalisation, while at the same time reduce its risks. 
Let me call this financial globalisation 2.0. 
The key  theme  of these  policies  should  be  that they  target  the  root  causes  of the risks of 
capital  flows.  To  best  harness  the  growth  potential  of  financial  globalisation,  policymakers 
need  to  ensure  it  is  efficient,  enduring  and  equitable.  Making  financial  globalisation 
efficient involves channelling capital flows to productive uses, rather than fuelling inefficient 
consumption-led  boom  and  busts.  Making 
involves 
monitoring, and where necessary tilting the composition of flows towards less volatile types 
and  avoiding  risky  gross  positions,  reducing the  likelihood  of  sudden  stops.  And  making  it 
equitable involves addressing its distributive impact, both across and within countries. 
While  my  talk  today  is  of  worldwide  relevance,  it  is  particularly  pertinent  to  the  euro  area. 
Freedom  of  movement  of  capital  is  one  of  the  four  basic  freedoms  of  the  single  market. 
Increasing financial integration by completing the capital markets union will help ensure that 
capital  flows  to  where  it  can  be  most  productively  used  to  boost  growth  and  employment, 
while minimising its side effects. 
financial  globalisation  enduring 
                                                
1  The  strong  upward  trend  in  de  facto  stock  measures  of  international  financial  integration  (such  as  gross 
foreign assets and liabilities as outlined in Lane and Milesi-Feretti’s External Wealth of Nations Database; see 
http://www.philiplane.org/EWN.html) as well as de jure measures of capital account openness (for example as 
developed in Chinn and Ito (2006), “What matters for financial development? Capital controls, institutions, and 
interactions,”  Journal  of  Development  Economics,  Elsevier,  vol.  81(1),  pages  163–192)  observed  since  the 
1990s stalled in 2008/09, but have started to exhibit some increase in recent years again. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The benefits and risks of financial globalisation 
Let  me  spend  a  few  moments  recalling  the  textbook  benefits  of  financial  globalisation.  In 
principle, free capital flows allow for risk sharing and a better allocation of resources across 
economies.2  
They  also  help  economies  to  catch  up  in  terms  of  technology  and  financial  market 
development through the transfer of knowledge, a critical determinant of growth. In addition 
to these basic growth channels, economists have pointed out that financial globalisation can 
foster growth by facilitating risk-sharing and consumption smoothing (particularly at a time of 
severe  demographic  challenges),  by  allowing  specialisation,  and  by  imposing  external 
discipline on domestic economic policies. 
But recent academic analysis and policy experience, both globally and at the euro area level, 
have revealed that the story is not quite as simple.3 
Capital  flows  can  pose  risks.  They  can  be  volatile  and  pro-cyclical,  fuelling  economic  and 
financial cycles, and eventually asset price bubbles.4 
Such  bubbles  are  typically  associated  with  a  misallocation  of  resources,  which  can 
persistently  drag  on  growth  and  employment.5  And  international  gross  positions  can  also 
reflect  to  a  large  extent  regulatory  or  tax  arbitrage,  and  therefore  arise  from  an  uneven 
regulatory playing field rather than from an optimal co-operative equilibrium.6 
The composition of flows has important implications for the likelihood of sudden stops and 
reversals.  In  particular,  financial  globalisation  in  assets  with  longer  maturity  and  state-
contingent payoffs – such as equity and foreign direct investment (FDI) – has been shown to 
be less volatile than one based on short-term bank or portfolio flows.7  
FDI is also more desirable as it is much less sensitive to global push factors, such as global 
risk  aversion  or  monetary  policy  in  major  economies.8  The  evidence  for  positive  growth 
effects of FDI in the literature is much more robust than for portfolio flows.9 
Furthermore, the focus of the discussion on financial globalisation had typically rested on net 
flows, as reflected by the current account. However, the global financial crisis has shown that 
                                                
2  See  Obstfeld,  M.  (1994),  “Risk-Taking,  Global  Diversification,  and  Growth”,  American  Economic  Review, 
Vol. 84, no. 5, pp. 1310–1329. 
3  For  a  more  elaborated  exposition  of  these  issues,  see  also  “Paradigm  lost:  Rethinking  international 
adjustments”  Speech  by  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB,  Egon  and  Joan  von 
Kashnitz Lecture, Clausen Center for International Business and Policy, Berkeley, 21 November 2015. 
4  See  Caballero,  J.  A.  (2014),  “Do  surges  in  international  capital  inflows  influence  the  likelihood  of  banking 
crises?” Economic Journal. 
5  See  Borio,  C.,  E.  Kharroubi,  C.  Upper  and  F.  Zampolli  (2016),  “Financial  cycles,  labour  misallocation,  and 
economic  stagnation”,  BIS  Working  Paper  534.  Benigno,  G.,  N.  Converse,  and  L.  Fornaro  (2015),  “Large 
capital inflows, sectoral allocation, and economic performance”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 
volume 55, pp. 60–87. 
6  See  Obstfeld,  M.  (2010),  “Expanding  gross  asset  positions  and  the  international  monetary  system,” 
Proceedings  –  Economic  Policy  Symposium  –  Jackson  Hole,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City, 
pp. 463-478. 
7  See Kose, M. A., Prasad, E., Rogoff, K. and Wei, S.-J. (2009), “Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal”, IMF 
Staff Papers, vol. 56(1). 
8  See Cerrutti, E., S. Claessens and D. Puy (2015), “Push Factors and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: Why 
Knowing Your Lender Matters More Than Fundamentals”, IMF Working Paper 15/127. 
9  See Kose et al. (2009), op. cit. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  gross,  rather  than  net,  international  financial  flows  and  positions  are  crucial  for  the 
assessment of financial stability.10 
In particular, financial actors engage in maturity and liquidity transformation within different 
currencies, regardless of their home lender of last resort, and this opens the door to financial 
fragility.11 
The backlash against financial globalisation 
The  challenges  posed  by  financial  globalisation  and  revealed  first  by  regional  economic 
crises in parts of the emerging world, and then by the global financial crisis, have been met 
by  various  policy  responses.  These  include  the  use  of  so-called  capital  flow  management 
measures (CFMs), as well as other “hidden” barriers related to regulatory policies. 
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, a new  international consensus on the use of 
CFMs  has  emerged.  This  new  view  is  more  open  to  acknowledging  potential  benefits  of 
temporary capital flow restrictions.12 
In  particular,  in  circumstances  of  large  and  volatile  capital  flows  it  may  be  admissible  and 
more effective to complement appropriate monetary, exchange rate, and prudential policies 
by temporary and well-targeted CFMs.13 
But many of the barriers to global capital flows are more indirect and hidden. The build-up of 
systemic  risk  on-  and  off-the-balance-sheet  of  regulated  (and  unregulated)  intermediaries 
resulted  in  a  widespread  adoption  of macro-prudential  policies.  Certain  of  these measures 
have negative side effects on capital flows including: regulatory ring-fencing, currency-based 
measures,  financial  repression  policies,  crisis  resolution  policies  with  a  national  bias,  and 
some financial sector taxes.14 
These barriers, together with the actual or perceived cost of AML/CFT enforcement actions, 
have  led  to  a  retrenchment  of  cross-border  banking  flows,  evidenced  inter  alia  by  the 
shrinking correspondent banking relationships network.15 
                                                
10  See Lane, P. (2013), “Financial Globalisation and the Crisis,” Open Economies Review 24(3), 555–580, July 
2013. 
11  See  Bruno,  V.  and  H.S.  Shin  (2015),  “Cross  Border  Banking  and  Global  Liquidity”,  Review  of  Economic 
Studies,  vol  82,  no  2;  Obstfeld,  M.  (2012).  “Does  the  Current  Account  Still  Matter?”  American  Economic 
Review, 102(3): 1–23; Borio, C. (2015), “On the centrality of the current account in international economics”, 
Keynote  speech  at  the  ECB-Central  Bank  of  Turkey  conference  “Balanced  and  sustainable  growth- 
operationalising the G20 framework”, Frankfurt, 28 August 2015. 
12  See  G-20  Coherent  Conclusions  for  the  Management  of  Capital  Flows,  October  2011,  available  at 
http://www.g20.utoronto.ca/2011/2011-finance-capital-flows-111015-en.pdf  and  International  Monetary 
Fund (2012), “The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows: An Institutional View”, November. 
13  For  an  assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  CFMs,  see  Forbes,  K,  Fratzscher,  M.  and  R.  Straub  (2015), 
“Capital-flow management measures: What are they good for?”, Journal of International Economics, Elsevier, 
vol.  96(S1),  pages  S76-S97.  With  respect  to  international  spillovers  of  CMFs,  see  Forbes,  Kristin  & 
Fratzscher, Marcel & Kostka, Thomas & Straub, Roland, 2016. “Bubble thy neighbour: Portfolio effects and 
externalities  from  capital  controls,”  Journal  of  International  Economics,  Elsevier,  vol.  99(C),  pages  85–104. 
With respect to domestic distortions created by capital controls, see e.g. Forbes, Kristin J., 2007. “One cost of 
the Chilean capital controls: Increased financial constraints for smaller traded firms,” Journal of International 
Economics, Elsevier, vol. 71(2), pages 294–323, April. 
14  See Beck, R. J. Beirne, F. Paternò, J. Peeters, J. Ramos-Tallada, D. Reinhardt, L. Weissenseel and J. Wörz 
(2015), “The side effects of national financial sector policies: Framing the debate on financial protectionism”, 
ECB Occasional Paper No. 166. 
15  See Lagarde, C., “Relations in banking: Making it work for everyone”, speech at the New York Fed, 18 July 
2016,  and  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures,  “Correspondent  Banking”,  Bank  for 
International Settlements, July 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Indeed, our current version of financial globalisation comes with a number of adverse side 
effects  for  the  financial  sectors  of  both  home  and  host  countries  of  capital  flows.  And 
therefore,  some  of  the  imposed  policy  measures  are  justified  and  have  reduced  systemic 
risk. 
But  the  general  backlash  against  financial  globalisation  carries  the  risk  of  significantly 
impairing  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  economy  at  global,  regional  and  national  levels, 
which  make  it  particularly  worrisome.  The  answer,  I  believe,  is  not  to  put  the  break  on 
financial globalisation, but transform it by aiming for a higher quality version of it, which for 
the purpose of this speech I will call financial globalisation 2.0. 
Financial globalisation 2.0 
There  are  many  elements  to  successfully  implementing  financial  globalisation  2.0,  but  I 
would like to highlight three of them. 
First,  policymakers  need  to  ensure  capital  flows  are  used  efficiently  where  they  are  most 
productive. 
Second, they need to incentivise state-contingent capital flows so that financial globalisation 
is enduring and less susceptible to short-term volatility. 
Finally, they need to address the distributional impacts of financial globalisation, by reducing 
international spillovers across countries and mitigating asymmetric impacts within countries 
so that the benefits are equitably shared by everyone. 
Let me now elaborate on each of these three dimensions. 
The  first  stage  is  to  put  far  greater  emphasis  on  improving  countries’  absorptive  capacity. 
Financial  globalisation  should  be  underpinned  with  institutional,  regulatory  and  structural 
reforms  that  strengthen  domestic  financial  markets,  improve  their  resilience  and  increase 
their capacity to efficiently allocate funds to productive uses. Investment in infrastructure and 
education and structural reforms to promote flexible product and labour markets all increase 
flexibility in the economy, improving absorption. 
This  is  not  a  new  theme:  it  was  recognised  in  the  wake  of  the  Asian  financial  crisis  that 
financial  openness  had  to  observe  the  right  sequencing,  starting  with  stronger  domestic 
financial systems.16 
But  evidence  has  accumulated  and  it  is  now  clear  that  a  threshold  of  institutional 
development  is  required  in  order  to  allocate  incoming  flows  to  productive  investment 
projects.17 
Given the already close financial integration between member states of the European Union, 
increased  absorptive  capacity  is  vital.  In  the  euro  area,  in  particular,  structural  reforms, 
required  to  support  growth  and  enhance  growth  potential,  will  only  succeed  if  capital  is 
reallocated to the most productive sectors.18 A similar reasoning applies at the global level, 
with the difference that institutional frameworks can be improved before the financial account 
is liberalised. 
                                                
16  See  Obstfeld,  M.,  and  Taylor,  A.  Global  Capital  Markets  –  Integration,  Crisis,  and  Growth.  Cambridge 
University Press, 2004. 
17  See  Kose,  A.,  Prasad,  E.  and  Taylor,  A.  (2011),  “Thresholds  in  the  process  of  international  financial 
integration,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 30(1), pp. 147–179. 
18  See Cœuré, B., “Structural reforms: Learning the right lessons from the crisis”, speech at the Latvijas Banka 
Economic Conference, Riga, 17 October 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  One  key  element  of  the  necessary  institutional  framework  is  legal  certainty.  An  efficient 
intermediation of foreign savings into productive domestic uses can only occur with a proper 
and  enforceable  legal  framework  in  place.  In  the  case  of  banks,  the  latter  should  include 
reliable legal frameworks for corporate insolvency and for the resolution of non-performing 
loans (NPLs) which hold down credit growth and economic activity, in particular in Europe.19 
With  more  resilient  institutional  arrangements  in  place,  the  second  step  is  to  improve  the 
quality of capital flows. Their composition should be tilted away from short-term debt flows 
towards more enduring longer-term and state-contingent flows. The predominance of easily 
reversible short-term debt flows in the current context is an equilibrium outcome driven by the 
risk and return perceptions of independent economic agents.20 
Specifically, investors favour flows that can be quickly reversed where they perceive there to 
be inadequate financial regulation, weak rule of law and property rights. The euro area crisis 
has  also  shown  the  dangers  of  a  financial  integration  model  based  on  short-term  cross 
border interbank flows rather than longer-term lending or equity investment, which has  led 
capital to be allocated to low-productivity sectors and sown the seeds of financial instability. 
But what does tilting the composition towards state-contingent, loss absorbing flows mean in 
practice? Do we just mean more equity investments or should we also promote innovative 
state-contingent sovereign debt instruments such as GDP-linked bonds?21 
Such  instruments  have  to  date  rarely  been  used  in  practice  –  only  as  part  of  a  debt-
restructuring mechanism and some limited issuance of catastrophe bonds. We know little as 
yet  at  what  prices such instruments  could  be traded  in  the market place,  and  whether the 
underlying index can be robust enough to create investor trust, as is the case with inflation-
linked  bonds.  To  gain  such  an  experience,  international  financial  institutions  could  play  a 
catalytic role, as potential issuers of GDP-linked bonds.22 
At the same time, we should carefully reflect upon the trade-offs created by loss-absorbing 
instruments. 
First,  they  might  create a  conflict  between  ex-ante  and  ex-post  incentives.  Loss-absorbing 
instruments, while protecting taxpayers and providing the right incentives to investors, might 
lead  to  unexpected  distributive  consequences  depending  on  which  investors  are  ultimately 
holding these instruments. 
Second, issuing more state-contingent liabilities rather than traditional debt instruments might 
exacerbate the shortage of global safe assets. There is already an excess demand for highly 
liquid, non-state contingent assets driven in particular by regulatory restrictions, and a rise in 
risk  aversion.  A  further  reduction  of  their  supply  can  be  particularly  problematic  in  an 
environment in which interest rates are already structurally low and further depressed by a 
high demand for safe assets.23 
                                                
19  See  Aiyar,  S.,  W.  Bergthaler,  J.  Garrido,  A.  Ilyina,  A.  Jobst,  K  Kang,  D.  Kovtun,  Y. Liu,  D. Monaghan  and 
M. Moretti  (2015)  “A  strategy  for  resolving  Europe’s  problem  loans”,  IMF  Staff  Discussion  Note  No  15/19, 
International Monetary Fund, and European Central Bank, “Draft guidance to banks on non-performing loans”, 
September 2016. 
20  See Tirole, J. (2006), “The Theory of Corporate Finance”, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
21  See  Blanchard,  O.,  P.  Mauro  and  J.  Acalin  (2016),  “The  Case  for  Growth-Indexed  Bonds  in  the  Advanced 
Economies Today”, Policy Brief No, Peterson Institute for International Economics. 
22  See  Griffith-Jones,  S.  and  D.  Hertova  (2013),  “Growth-linked  Bonds”,  CESifo  DICE  Report  3 33  /2013 
(September). 
23  See Caballero, R J, E Farhi, and P-O Gourinchas (2015), “Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB”, 
mimeo, October. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Let me underline also that, the first two elements necessary to upgrade financial globalisation 
complement  each  other.  Improvements  with  respect  to  corporate  governance,  the  overall 
quality of the institutional framework and transparency are likely to be helpful in encouraging 
longer-term flows.24 
In  Europe,  where  more  cross-border  equity  investments  are  not  only  desirable  from  a 
financial  integration  but  also  from  a  financial  development  point  of  view,  capital  markets 
union will help achieving these objectives.25 
The third element in a successful upgrade to financial globalisation 2.0 is to ensure that the 
benefits are equitably distributed, both across and within countries. The introduction of CFMs 
represents  a  push-back  against  cross-country  spillovers  caused  by  financial  globalisation. 
For  a  recent  clear  example,  consider  the  impact  of  the  2013  “taper  tantrum”,  where 
perceptions  of  changes in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  monetary  policy  had  a  marked  impact  in 
emerging  market  economies.  Improving  the  absorptive  capacity  of  these  economies  and 
tilting  the  composition  of  capital  inflows  will  mitigate  these  spillovers.  But  we  may  need  to 
move towards a regime of greater international cooperation and policy alignment to mitigate 
the  externalities  triggered  by  national  policies.  The  IMF’s  search  for  a  wider  span  of  the 
Global Financial Safety Net can be seen as an effort in this direction. 
There are also distributional impacts within countries that need to be better addressed. There 
is a direct parallel here with the debate on trade openness. While the academic literature is 
more favourable in its assessment of the benefits of trade than for financial globalisation, it 
also  stresses  the  distributional  implications  of  trade  openness.  Ideally,  the  gains  of  trade 
globalisation are redistributed by taxation from those made better off to those made worse 
off. But the current public scepticism, if not outright hostility, towards free trade agreements 
and  the  surge  in  trade  restrictions  documented  by  the  WTO26  suggests  that  that  such 
redistribution is not effective, if at all achieved. 
Indeed, trade openness and financial globalisation are interconnected. Financial globalisation 
has  made  it  increasingly  easy  for  multinational  corporates  to  shift  their  profits  to  low-tax 
countries and for wealthy individuals to move funds to undeclared bank accounts in offshore 
tax havens.27 
This tax avoidance facilitated by financial globalisation has reduced government tax bases 
worldwide and limited their ability to redistribute the gains from trade integration. 
We  need to  think  of  ways  to  co-ordinate  better to  ensure  that  the  benefits from  trade  and 
financial globalisation ultimately accrue to everyone. And working together at the European 
and at the global level is still the best way to solve the new challenges we face.28 
The popular disenchantment with trade and financial globalisation will not be overturned until 
governments cooperate better, and it is now quite apparent that such cooperation will not be 
a loss of sovereignty but will allow them to regain sovereignty over their ability to redistribute 
wealth equitably. The European Commission’s action plan on fair and efficient corporate tax 
system  in  the  European  Union  and  investigation  into  undue  tax  benefits  are  steps  in  this 
                                                
24  See  e.g.  Anginer,  Deniz,  Asli  Demirgüç-Kunt,  Vojislav  Maksimovic,  and  Mete  Tepe  (2015),  “Is  Short-Term 
Debt  a  Substitute  or  a  Complement  to  Good  Governance?”  Chapter  2  in  “Global  Financial  Development 
Report 2015/16,” World Bank, Washington, DC. 
25  See European Central Bank (2016), “Financial Integration in Europe”, April, Frankfurt. 
26  World Trade Organisation, Report on G20 trade measures, 21 June 2016. 
27  See Zucman, G. (2014), “Taxing across Borders: Tracking Personal Wealth and Corporate Profits”, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, vol. 28(4), pp. 121–148. 
28  See  Draghi,  M.,  “Reviving  the  spirit  of  De  Gasperi:  working  together  for  an  effective  and  inclusive  Union”, 
speech by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB, at the presentation ceremony of the De Gasperi award, Trento, 
13 September 2016. http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160913.en.html. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  direction.29 At the global level, similar efforts are taking place with the action plans on base 
erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) initiated by the OECD.30 
Conclusion 
The  question  we  face  today  is  how  financial  globalisation  should  evolve,  and  whether  we 
should  seek  to  limit  it.  Because  globalisation  has  evolved  to  date  in  a  way  that  has  let 
underlying risks build up and erupt in crises, economic openness has come at the expense of 
safety. Quite naturally, public opinion is now ready to trade one against the other, and accept 
less  openness  for  what  they  believe  will  make  their  jobs  and  income  safer.  The  time  has 
come to make the case that financial globalisation can be made more efficient, enduring and 
equitable so that it can deliver openness without compromising safety – and to implement it 
in a convincing way. 
                                                
29  See https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/docs/body/com_2015_302_en.pdf. 
30  See http://www.oecd.org/ctp/beps-2015-final-reports.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
