  Erkki Liikanen: Digitalisation – old game, new rules or an entirely new 
game? 
Remarks  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Payments  Forum, 
Helsinki 10 May 2016. 
 Digitalisation and the economy 
Digitalisation means wide-ranging use of information and communications technology in the 
renewal of business models. Digitalisation is a technological change that both enables new 
ways  of  doing  things  and  introduces  new  instruments  to  all  the  sectors  of  the  economy. 
Long-term economic growth and the rise in the standard of living are based on improvements 
in labour productivity. Digitalisation can be an important factor in this equation. 
Productivity growth means that we achieve more with the same resources. Digitalisation may 
also  help  create  entirely  new  products  and  services  in  which  productivity  is  higher  than 
before. At the same time, new players will challenge traditional ones. That is precisely why 
digitalisation and related innovations have great potential. 
There are positive expectations associated with digitalisation, but also concerns. On the one 
hand, it is expected that digitalisation will increase productivity and improve competitiveness. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  fears  that  digitalisation  will  increase  income  disparities  and 
inequality. 
Among economists, there are two prevailing views on the opportunities and significance of 
digitalisation.  The  pessimists  consider  that  digitalisation’s  accelerating  effect  on  economic 
growth is already fading. The best is already behind us. 
The  optimists,  in  turn,  predict  that  new  technologies  will  trigger  a  sharp  increase  in 
productivity in the near future. They point out that development often pleasantly surprises us 
in the long term. 
Why would we now be on the threshold of a new breakthrough in digitalisation? After all, we 
have  been  using  computers  and  digital  technology  for  a  long  time  now,  and  the  financial 
sector has already experienced a revolution as a result of digitalisation in the 1990s. 
We  are  living  in  a  very  different  technological  environment  than  a  decade  ago.  Use  of 
information and communications technology, or ICT, has increased massively and the price 
of communications has plunged as a result of competition and technological development. 
ICT has become such an inseparable part of everyday life that it is often difficult to notice the 
speed  and  scope  of  change.  A  decade  ago,  one  quarter  of  Finns  had  never  used  the 
internet. Today, the corresponding figure is a few per cent. In 2003 40% of Finns used the 
internet daily. Last year, over 85% of them were doing so.1 
Use  of  smartphones  and  tablets  in  particular  has  grown  rapidly.  The  amount  of  data 
transferred on mobile networks has nearly doubled every year for the last decade.2 
At  the  same,  real  consumer  prices  for  information  and  communications  technology  have 
fallen  steeply.  During  the  past  two  decades  in  Finland,  prices  of  communication  services 
                                                
1  Source: Eurostat, Information Society Statistics, accessed 2 May 2016. 
2  Source:  Finnish  Communications  Regulatory  Authority,  Mobile  data  transmission  volume,  accessed  2  May 
2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  have fallen by a half and prices of information processing devices have tumbled to less than 
one tenth of their former level.3 
Moore’s  Law  is  a  familiar  concept.  In  1965,  Intel  founder  Gordon  Moore  observed  an 
important trend in the efficiency of computers. Moore’s Law, which is named after him, states 
in  its  present  form  that  the  number  of  transistors  in  a  dense  integrated  circuit  doubles 
approximately every two years. Although the breakdown of the trend has been anticipated for 
a  long  time,  Moore’s  Law  has  described  development  surprisingly  accurately  over  the  last 
few decades. 
Economists  are  fairly  unanimous  that  the  most  significant  impact  on  economic  and 
productivity growth arises from so-called general-purpose technologies. The steam engine, 
electricity,  and  computers  have  been  inventions  that  could  be  utilised  widely  in  different 
sectors of the economy. They have enabled the organisation of production in completely new 
ways, and accelerated productivity growth enormously. 
ICT  also  fits  the  definition  of  a  general-purpose  technology  very  well.  It  is  possible  to  use 
information  and  communications  technology  in  nearly  every  sector  of  the  economy. 
Digitalisation,  too,  is  all  about  the  harnessing  of  new  technologies  for  use  throughout  the 
economy. The financial sector is no exception in this. 
In recent years, digital platforms and the platform economy have become an integral part of 
the current technological revolution. Many of the world’s most valuable companies in terms of 
market capitalisation have been in business for only a few years. Of course, when examining 
market values it’s worth remembering that they can change very quickly, as happened in the 
dot-com bubble around the turn of the millennium. 
In  any  case,  the  success  of many  companies  that  have  grown  rapidly  in  recent  years  has 
been based precisely on platforms. Uber, Facebook, Alibaba and Airbnb are all companies 
whose  business  is  based  on  a  digital  platform.  A  platform  is  an  operating  model  that 
facilitates value-creating interaction between external producers and consumers. 
A platform has two functions: it provides a framework for interaction, and it sets the ground 
rules for interaction. The aim of a platform is to create a favourable environment for various 
parties  where  they  are  free  to  innovate  and  generate  added  value  from  which  everyone 
benefits. 
It’s said that Uber is the world’s biggest taxi company, even though it doesn’t own a single 
taxi.  Facebook  is  the  world’s  most  popular  media  company,  even  though  it  produces  no 
content itself. Alibaba is the world’s most valuable retailer, even though it has no inventory. 
And Airbnb is world’s biggest accommodation provider, even though its owns no real estate.4 
Underlying  the  enormous  growing  power  of  platforms  are  network  effects.  The  value  of  a 
platform for its users grows as the platform grows. Each new user also increases the value of 
the platform for old users. 
Successful platforms have succeeded in creating a virtuous circle, which feeds on itself. New 
digital technologies have removed constraints on growth, enabling rapid scaling of business 
operations. 
The significance of platforms is emphasised in sectors where information is a key production 
factor. That’s  why  platforms  are  closely  associated  with  payments,  because  payments  are 
essentially exchanges of information. 
In  many  sectors,  new  digital  platforms  have  not  only  accelerated  development;  they  have 
shaped the nature of an entire activity in a fundamental way. Digitalisation has brought new 
                                                
3  Source: Statistics Finland, Consumer Price Index, accessed 2 May 2016. 
4  Source: Tom Goodwin, The Battle Is For The Customer Interface, Techcrunch, 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  players  on  to  the  field  and  changed  the  rules  of  the  game.  Like  many  other  sectors,  the 
financial sector also has a major issue to confront: Will digitalisation simply bring speed to an 
old game, or will it be a totally new game? 
It is important that Finns are involved in the development of the platform economy – not just 
using existing platforms, but also developing new ones. 
The EU has done much towards the development of a digital single market. Technological 
standards, freedom of movement, uniform copyright and information security legislation, and 
the availability of affordable broadband connections are prerequisites for an innovative and 
competitive digital economy in Europe. 
It  should  be  remembered  that  Finland  has  not  been  without  success.  In  its  time,  Nokia 
succeeded in creating the largest platform in its sector, and this was highly significant for the 
entire economy. 
When we consider the role of the central bank as digitalisation changes the financial sector, 
in this we can also see some characteristics of a platform. As a member of the Eurosystem, it 
is  the  Bank  of  Finland’s  task  to  maintain  price  stability.  Price  stability  is  an  important 
prerequisite  for  sustainable  economic  development.  People  and  companies  can  focus  on 
innovations  and  creating  wellbeing,  instead  of  wasting  their  energy  protecting  themselves 
against inflation. 
With regard to financial stability, the Bank of Finland’s task is to ensure the credibility and 
efficiency of the financial system and to participate in its development. The central bank is 
the bankers’ bank. The services that the central bank provides are a platform for interaction 
between banks. 
The central bank and the financial supervisory authority also participate in setting common 
ground rules. The ultimate role of ground rules – and regulation in general – is to create for 
the  interaction  of  the  various  economic  actors  a  setting  in  which  a  stable  financial  system 
contributes to promoting growth and wellbeing. 
An important characteristic of a platform is that it brings different actors together to interact 
with each other. That’s why the Bank of Finland has convened the Payments Forum today, 
for the tenth time. Its aim is to promote cooperation between Finnish actors and the formation 
of a shared vision on the development of payments. 
Digitalisation in the financial sector 
Digitalisation  also  facilitates  completely  new  kinds  of  operating  practices  in  the  financial 
sector. Are we now at an inflection point where digitalisation will change much of, or even the 
whole, sector decisively? To assess this, it’s worth looking back in time. 
Banks invested heavily in information and communications technology in the 1980s. In this, 
Finnish  banks  were  in  the  vanguard  of  development.  Internal  processes  were  modernised 
and ATMs appeared everywhere. 
In  the  second  half  of  the  1980s,  deregulation  gained  momentum.  Capital  imports  were 
liberalised. Bank lending increased sharply and the indebtedness of citizens and businesses 
grew.  Then  the  bubble  burst  and  was followed  by  a  banking  crisis.  Among  other things,  it 
forced  the  bloated  banking  sector  to  increase  its  productivity  rapidly.  Utilising  the  ICT 
investments  made  under  the  protection  of  regulation,  operations  were  rationalised,  the 
branch network was pruned and productivity was increased. 
Shortly after the banking crisis came the breakthrough of the internet. Customers began to 
access online banking services from home. Banks provided services in branches, via ATMs, 
by  telephone  and  with  online  banking.  Finnish  banks  soon  succeeded  in  persuading  their 
customers to use online banking services, and as a result the number of bank branches in 
Finland is now low by European standards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  What are the effects of digitalisation today? The smartphone, open APIs, open source codes, 
cooperation  and  platforms  are the key  words  of  digitalisation.  Digital financial  services  are 
generally  obtained  just  as  easily  or  even  more  conveniently  than  from  a  branch.  In  some 
countries, branchless banks have also appeared alongside the multi-channel banks. 
What  kind  of  change  is  the  financial  sector  now  facing?  Can  it  be  compared  with  the 
transformation seen in the 1990s? 
In  addition  to  traditional  competition,  those  operating  in  the  financial  sector  are  now  also 
being  challenged  from  many  new  directions.  On  the  one  hand,  the  big  players,  such  as 
Apple,  Google,  Amazon,  Facebook  and  Alibaba,  are  exerting  pressure  on  traditional 
providers of financial services. They are operators whose success is based on the intelligent 
harnessing of digital platforms and networks. When it comes to payments or trade financing, 
they are already operating in the field. 
On the other hand, there are also small start-up companies that are developing specialised 
financial  services.  They  focus  on  some  specific  area  of  expertise,  and  strive  to  make 
competitive products there. Ease of use is often a competitive advantage. 
In  the  new  competitive  situation,  some  of  the  traditional  operators  have  forged  new 
partnerships with each other or have started cooperating with new players. Many banks have 
established  start-up  accelerators  and  incubators  for  Fintech  businesses  or  have  made 
significant private equity investments in start-up companies. 
We will hear more on these topics in the morning presentations of this Payments Forum. 
In digital markets, expertise and speed play key roles. In competition, among the strongest 
players  are  those  who  are  able  to  develop  innovations  and  disseminate  them  rapidly. 
Development costs are high, distribution costs are generally low. 
Finland’s  population  is  small,  even  though  the  country  is  large.  In  relation  to  our  size, 
however,  we  have  a  lot  of  technological  know-how  and  a  highly  developed  infrastructure. 
Other important factors are access to capital and financing at different stages of the life cycle 
as well as an innovation-friendly business environment. 
What  are  the  visible  expressions  of  platforms  and  networks  in  the  digitalisation  of  today’s 
financial sector? 
Notable financial market platform phenomena include, for example, peer-to-peer lending and 
crowdfunding platforms. In peer-to-peer lending, the financing mediator, such as a bank, is 
replaced  with  a  peer-to-peer  lending  platform,  and  lenders  provide  finance  directly  to 
borrowers. 
Platforms also offer equity-based and other rewards-based crowdfunding. Investors may be 
private  individuals  in  addition  to  institutional  investors.  In  Finland,  loan-  and  investment-
based crowdfunding for business activity will be regulated through the coming Crowdfunding 
Act. 
Platforms  and  networks  are  also  at  the  heart  of  blockchain  technology.  Blockchain 
technology,  which  drives  Bitcoin,  for  example,  also  facilitates  transactions  as  well  as  the 
saving  and  distribution  of  information  without  a  trusted  third  party.  The  technology  can  be 
applied  in  many  different  ways.  Thus  there  are already  plans  to  store  securities,  contracts 
and transactions using blockchain principles. 
If  blockchains  are  used  only  for  more  efficient  storage  of  information  and  ensuring 
consistency, the change will not be revolutionary. But if blockchains result in a redefinition of 
the role of trusted parties, the changes may be potentially very great. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Digitalisation in the payments market 
Digitalisation in its various forms has already been a theme at previous Payments Forums. 
The effects of digitalisation have been powerfully reflected in the payments market in recent 
years. Many new actors, offering their own new payment applications, have appeared. 
It should be noted, however, that these applications often make use of traditional payment 
instruments, notably card payments and credit transfers, operating in the background. As a 
result, changes in the background payment systems, have been quite limited. 
In the future, the situation may be different if numerous studies under way, for example to 
exploit blockchain technology, prove to be successful. 
One  essential  driver  of  digitalisation  is  young  people  who  are  accustomed  to  doing 
everything  via  the  internet,  often  on  a  mobile  device.  In  their  view,  payments  must  be 
convenient and easy for the user and available 24 hours a day. 
New players entering the market have created operating models that place the user at the 
centre of payment services. This challenges traditional operators, who must respond to the 
challenge. 
Perspectives  on  future  payment  trends  are  provided  by  a  Payments  Council  electronic 
booklet  published  today:  How  will  we  pay  in  the  2020s?  [In  Finnish  only]. The  subject  will 
also be discussed in the panel that ends this Payments Forum. 
Ease and convenience are the features required of payments in the future. From a monetary 
authority’s perspective, security and reliability should be added to the list. Without trust, even 
the easiest to use payment method will not survive in the market. 
Real-time payment transmission will be an essential element of the digitalisation of payments 
in  the  future,  as  will  24/7  availability  of  services.  This  is  also  an  area  of  focus  in  the 
Eurosystem. The Euro Retail Payments Board, in turn, is promoting the introduction of pan-
European instant payment solutions. 
Technological advances and the entry into the market of new actors and practices are also a 
challenge to regulation. It is important to strike a balance: on the one hand regulation must 
ensure  the  reliability  and  safety  of  payment  services,  but  on  the  other  hand,  it  must  also 
enable the introduction of new innovations. 
In  Finland,  many  important  payment-related  projects  are  under  way,  such  as  utilising  the 
data content of electronic invoices, bank statement information and information contained in 
purchase transactions, and also the construction of an income register. The projects may, if 
successful,  bring  significant  benefits  and  cost  savings  to  consumers,  businesses,  financial 
service providers and also to the public sector. 
Reliable and secure payment systems are vital for the financial system and the functioning of 
society  as  a  whole.  Reliable,  secure  and  efficient  payment  services  that  openly  and 
extensively  utilise  the  opportunities  of  digitalisation  may  also  help  stimulate  productivity 
growth in the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
