   Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Challenges and opportunities for the 
insurance industry 
Address by Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, 
at the International Insurance Society Global Insurance Forum, Singapore, 13 June 2016. 
 Mr Michael Morrissey, President & CEO, International Insurance Society 
Distinguished delegates 
1. Let me first say how pleased we at the MAS are that you have chosen to hold your meeting 
in Singapore. We are especially humbled by your decision to host the meeting in Singapore in 
rotation with New York and London, henceforth, so that we meet in Asia, in Singapore, once 
every three years. 
2. It’s a challenging time for the insurance industry, and more broadly, for everyone involved 
in  the  business  of  providing  assurance  in  retirement.  But  it’s  also  a  time  of  opportunity, 
especially in Asia, where the opportunities for insurance are multiplying. I’ll talk a little about 
the challenges the industry faces before highlighting some opportunities. 
Ensuring retirement security 
3. The challenges come about for reasons that go well beyond the cyclical forces. We are 
faced with structural trends around the world, that are making the business of insurance and 
pension funds and everyone concerned with retirement security more difficult. 
4. The principle challenge lies in the combination of meeting the needs of societies getting 
older and living for longer and an environment of low interest rates. 
5. We know the current over-reliance on monetary policy to solve the problems arising from 
the global financial crisis has had downsides for long term finance, particularly pension funds 
and  insurance  funds.  The  costs  and  benefits  of  low  or  negligible  interest  rates  are  being 
debated,  but  there  is  no  doubt  about  the  increasing  burden  they  pose  for  pension  and 
insurance funds. 
6. But the problem is not merely to do with current monetary policies, and not fundamentally 
of a cyclical nature. Low real interest rates are very likely here to stay, and for reasons 
that are essentially structural. 
7. There are two main forces behind this. 
8. The first  is ageing itself, and its implications for savings behaviour, particularly in 
today’s advanced countries. A baby boom generation is reaching retirement, and they also 
expect to live significantly longer than their parents did. They will have to save more, for some 
time to come, in order to sustain themselves through retirement. Higher savings will in turn 
mean that a continuing surplus of savings over investment globally, a stubborn gap, and 
it also means that interest rates over the medium to long term, even after the normalisation of 
monetary policy, will remain low. 
9. This is accentuated by shifts in asset allocation, as the baby boom generation is also likely 
to allocate more funds to bonds and other fixed income instruments, and gradually reduce 
holdings  of  equity.  This  is  a  normal  ‘life  cycle’  allocation  of  assets,  where  people  entering 
retirement seek to reduce the risk in their investments, and aim for some stability in income. 
This  coming  shift  in  asset  allocation  towards  bonds  over  the  medium  to  long  term  is  itself 
expected to add to the downward pressure on interest rates. 
10.  And  low  interest  rates  are  themselves  leading  to  increases  in  savings  rates,  particular 
among  older  people. It  is  debated  between  economists:  whether  low  interest rates  lead  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   higher or lower savings. But we are seeing how in some countries, older people responding to 
low interest rates not by going out and spending more, but by saving more so as to be able to 
assure themselves of a the level of income that they desire in retirement. 
11. So we are in a situation where there are self-reinforcing forces. People are getting older, 
they expect to live for longer, they are saving more and they are allocating more of their funds 
to bonds. Interest rates remaining low as a result. Older people saving more as a result of low 
interest rates. The structural gap between savings and investment remains, in turn keeping 
interest rates low. A self-reinforcing cycle that we are going to have to live with for some time 
to come. 
12. There is a second major factor that adds to this, which is the slowdown in the underlying 
growth  of  economies  around  the  world.  This  is  happening  particularly  in  the  advanced 
world, but even in the emerging world there has been a slowdown in potential growth. No one 
can say for sure if this is a permanent state of affairs. There is some debate among economists 
as to whether the productivity slowdown is a short term or long term phenomenon. But certainly 
the demographics will still be with us, societies will get older and labour force growth weaker, 
and economic growth is going to be significantly slower in the next 10 to 20 years than it has 
been in the past. Investment is unlikely to pick up very significantly in this context, and it does 
mean taken together with the savings trend, a lower long term real rate of interest in the global 
economy. 
13. So putting the two together – trends in ageing and in economic growth, I think we have to 
live with the fact of low real interest rates for many years to come. 
14.  It  will  pose  a  challenge  for  retirement  security,  and  especially  for  pension  funds  and 
insurance funds. As you know, it hits you on both your assets and your liabilities. It means a 
lower return on your assets. And it pushes up the value of liabilities because the discount rates 
has gone down. 
15. It is not a temporary challenge but a long term challenge. As life expectancy goes up, 
liabilities will be pushed out further, and the gap in maturity between your liabilities and your 
assets is likely to grow. This mismatch in durations, together with low interest rates, means we 
have a growing problem. 
16. We cannot address this fundamentally through changes in asset allocation strategy among 
insurance  and  pension  funds,  taken  as  a  whole.  There  have  been  recent  shifts  towards 
alternative assets. There has been a search for yield, and some funds have seen improvement 
in their return on their assets. But we have to bear in mind that globally, there is a limited 
supply of quality alternative assets. Funds are moving into private equity, real estate and 
some other alternative assets but more money going into these assets doesn’t raise yields. It 
can only mean a lower return on these assets over time. The search for yield doesn’t raise 
yields overall, it just redistributes yields among different players. So there are limits to 
this strategy for the pension and insurance fund industry as a whole. 
17. I should note that the challenge we are talking about in retirement security is not a problem 
only  for  the  advanced  economies.  Several  emerging  economies  too  are  entering  a  phase 
where their societies are ageing, and some are quite unprepared for it. 
18. Brazil is the most pronounced case, where the unsustainability of its social security system 
is reaching crisis proportions. Past promises have not been funded, are soon going to have to 
be funded, and they are not going to be able to fund it. China has also begun ageing. It has a 
complex system of retirement security, with multiple pension schemes in different provinces 
and for different groups. But China is in the process of reforms, integrating its systems and 
seeking to provide adequate coverage for all workers, and I think they will be getting there. 
19. Even in ASEAN, Thailand is going to begin ageing before long. And the Asian countries 
that grew quickly a few decades ago are also entering the ageing phase – societies like Japan, 
Singapore, Korea, Taiwan and Hong Kong. We don’t face quite the same problems as the rest 
of the world in Singapore – we have a defined contribution pension scheme which doesn’t have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   the  same  problems  of  sustainability.  But  this  is  a  global  challenge.  Low  interest  rates  and 
societies that are ageing and fortunately living longer will pose challenges to retirement security 
everywhere. 
20.  Globally,  therefore,  we  need  fundamental  reforms.  We  can’t  fix  the  problem  through 
investment strategies, certainly can’t fix it by monetary policies. It needs fundamental reforms. 
21. First, we have to enable people to work for long than they used to, in virtually every society 
that’s getting older, and make it attractive for older people to work. Fortunately, each new 
generation of people entering their senior years is also healthier. But in a situation where we 
are going to have much longer lives, it is critical that we have the ability to earn a living and to 
save money over more years, so as to provide security and assurance through our retirement 
years. 
22.  It’s  true  everywhere  in  the  world.  Some  countries  have  already  recognised  it  through 
legislation. Denmark is a good example, of having linked their retirement age and pension age 
to life expectancy. Sweden intends to follow. Several other countries are considering the same 
thing. 
23. But it is not just about pushing back the retirement age or pension age. It is critical 
that we make it attractive for older citizens to work. That means not just providing jobs but 
rearranging  the  work  place  so  that  it  becomes  part  of  the  culture  to  have  older  persons, 
experienced persons, in the team, in the work place. The culture of the work place has to 
change and the culture of the consumers has to change in a whole range of industries so as 
to accept and celebrate the presence of older persons at work. 
24. So that’s one important reform over the next 10 to 15 years – enabling older persons to 
work for longer, it may be full time or part time, but make it attractive to work. 
25. The second important reform concerns the financial industry. We have to reduce the costs 
that ordinary savers face in saving for the retirement. 
26. There has over the last 30 years been a shift in the pensions industry towards defined 
contribution  schemes  –  away  from  defined  benefit  schemes,  because  of  the  latter’s 
unsustainability.  But  this  shift  towards  defined  contribution  schemes  has  also  led  to  a 
fragmented market place in many countries, and one where responsibility is placed on the 
individual to manage his or her funds and take on the risks. It is also by and large a landscape 
of  funds  that  actively  manage  investments,  rather  than  passively.  So  it’s  a  fragmented 
marketplace, people have to choose between different funds to invest in and take their 
own risks, and the funds are largely actively managed. It’s the case in the US, several 
countries in Europe, and in the UK and Australia, for example. That combination of factors, 
particularly  the fragmentation  of  the  pensions  market  and  active  management, has  meant 
higher costs than are sustainable in the long term. 
27. The  solution  has  to be greater pooling of funds and a greater reliance on passive 
investment management. Active management is not all it has been cracked up to be: it has 
not proven its worth for most ordinary savers preparing for their retirement. We do have to 
move towards a system, in a whole range of countries, of helping people save for the long term 
through  passive  investment funds,  and  pool  savings to  avoid  fragmentation  and  excessive 
marketing costs. The savings in fees and charges matters: 
• 
If we can take one percentage point out of the fees and charges that ordinary savers 
pay  in  many  market-based  pension  schemes,  that  one  percentage  point  makes  a 
large  difference  in  retirement  savings.  Taken  over  a  lifetime  of  work,  that  one 
percentage point will mean at least a 25% improvement in retirement savings. 
In a whole range of countries, the experience has been that it has been difficult for 
people to manage their own funds. They don’t make the right investment decisions. 
We have to think hard about the reforms that pool and collectivise savings, to reduce 
the costs for ordinary savers. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
28.  A  third  challenge  has  to  do  with  reforming  healthcare  systems.  The  advances  in 
healthcare have been remarkable and that’s largely why people are able to live for much longer 
than we used to. We are living healthier lives. But by and large, in a whole range of countries, 
we have extremely inefficient healthcare systems. Too much treatment takes place in hospitals 
rather than in primary care or in the community. And it is also a system where subsidies have 
been dispensed on an untargeted basis in many countries. The system is not sustainable and 
is going to take up a lot of resources in the future: both private and public resources that could 
otherwise  be  used  to  strengthen  retirement  adequacy  and  incomes.  This  is  an  important 
challenge, not just for sake of healthcare, but for the sake of retirement security. We need to 
move towards a fair, progressive and sustainable healthcare financing systems. If we 
don’t, then our ability to afford decent retirement for all our citizens, in a whole range of 
countries, is going to be severely compromised. 
Emerging opportunities for insurance 
29. Let me move now to some of the emerging opportunities in the insurance industry. It is a 
difficult environment in many respects – I’ve spoken about low interest rates, here to stay for 
the long term. It’s also a crowded market in traditional insurable risks. You know that better 
than  me.  Too  much  capital  is  chasing  after  the  same  risks  in  traditional  insurance  lines 
(property and casualty for instance), and that doesn’t help returns. 
30. But there are still many viable options for growth, and here in emerging Asia especially, 
there are major new underwriting opportunities. 
• 
The insurance market in emerging Asia is projected to grow by 9% per year over the 
next 10 years, which is substantially above the global growth of the insurance industry. 
By 2020, Asia is expected to account for 40% of the insurance business. 
• 
31.  There  are  three  major  opportunities  that  I  will  highlight  briefly,  besides  traditional 
underwriting opportunities. 
Infrastructure financing 
32. First, infrastructure financing. It is a huge opportunity in Asia. Whichever infrastructure you 
look  at  –  transportation,  communication  and  power  links,  water  and  environmental 
sustainability  –  in  every  area  the  needs  are  growing,  the  need  to  remove  bottlenecks  to 
economic growth and social development are growing. 
33.  Traditionally,  it  has  been  a  sector  that  has  been  financed  by  governments  and  banks. 
Governments will be constrained in the future, across the region. Although banks currently 
have ample liquidity, they too will over time become more constrained. So that combination of 
governments and banks isn’t going to be able to cope with the rapid growth in financing for 
infrastructure in the future. 
• 
This  is  why  institutional  investors  –  insurers,  pension  funds  and  other  long  term 
investors – have become very important. For insurers, infrastructure is an attractive 
asset class. It is attractive as a potential diversifier of assets, and has the potential to 
provide  reliable  inflation-linked  returns  over  time,  and  with  low  correlation  to  other 
conventional assets. 
34.  But  we  need  quality  data  for  infrastructure  to  take  off  as  an  asset  class  for  long  term 
investors. We need quality data for reliable performance benchmarks to be constructed, and 
to allow long term investors to perform asset allocation on a reasonably reliable basis. That 
quality data doesn’t yet exist but it is being put together by the EDHEC Infrastructure Institute 
in Singapore. By the end of this year they expect to have usable performance benchmarks, 
including  for  unlisted  infrastructure  debt  and  equity.  The  data  has  not  been  transparent, 
especially for privately-held investments, it has not been put together, and this is what EDHEC 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   is doing. So that’s one dimension of it. Getting the data together to allow institutional investors 
to allocate a desired portion of funds to infrastructure as an asset class. 
35. Second, the regulatory treatment for insurers has to evolve so as to make possible 
long term investments, including infrastructure investment. Some rethinking is already 
underway globally on the design of capital frameworks for insurers. It has to be aimed first of 
all at ensuring that individual insurers are on a sound prudential footing, not just for the short 
term but for the long term. It should also support efforts to ensure that our economies are able 
to grow and to remain healthy, which is also in the interests of every player. This means we 
have to support long term investment. 
• 
The  European  regulators  are  already  in  close  consultation  with  the  industry,  on 
providing some measure of capital relief for long term investments. Globally too we 
have to do this. We need lower risk charges for equity held by insurers for the 
long  term,  including  infrastructure.  I  hope  globally  regulators  will  arrive  at  an 
understanding that makes this possible. 
Here in Singapore, MAS is engaging closely with the industry in this regard. We will 
be having another round of public consultation at the end of this month on our 
risk-based  capital  framework  for  insurers  (or  “RBC  2”).  The  aim  is  to  finalise  our 
proposals for providing capital relief for long-term assets which match the cash flows 
of the liabilities. We will also be raising questions, as part of this review, on the merit 
of having a different set of risk charges for infrastructure in particular. 
 Catastrophe insurance 
36. The second major opportunity is in catastrophe insurance. The economic cost of natural 
disasters is growing. It’s certainly growing here in Asia, a consequence partly of economic 
growth itself, a consequence of urbanisation and the growing concentration of wealth in cities 
in Asia, and a consequence of a higher incidence of natural disasters. 
• 
Lloyd’s  has  estimated  that  even  a  modest  an  increase  in  penetration  rates  for 
catastrophe will allow for a large reduction in the economic costs that are being borne 
by governments and local communities in Asia. 
37. So far the take-up of catastrophe insurance in Asia has been woefully low. Part of the 
reason has to do with a lack of insurance awareness among businesses around the region. 
But it also has to do with data gaps – the industry needs good data on the frequency, location 
and  economic  impact  of  natural  disasters,  so  that  insurers  and  reinsurers  can  price  risks 
adequately. So we have had a limited supply of insurance coverage, that has itself led to higher 
cost of protection, which in turn discourages demand for insurance against catastrophe risks. 
38. But we can solve this problem. We can overcome the fragmentation of data in Asia, pool 
data so as to facilitate more efficient underwriting of catastrophe risks. Here too, we have an 
initiative in Singapore called the Natural Catastrophe Data Analytics Exchange (Nat Cat DAX). 
Nat Cat DAX is a public-private partnership, involving several leading global insurers, 
• 
the public sector and our research institutes; 
It is using high resolution data obtained through remote sensing technologies – from 
satellites, drones and UAVs – and combining that with industry data to much richer 
database on natural disasters; 
We welcome more in the industry to join the founding members in this initiative. 
  Cyber insurance 
39. The third major, emerging opportunity is in cyber insurance. The good news is that Asia is 
the most rapidly growing digital market globally. But it also means increasing costs of cyber 
attacks. This is a global problem, and we face it here in Asia. The frequency, sophistication 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   and the sheer audacity of cyber-attacks is growing. It will pose huge costs to our economies, 
and to corporate and personal privacy. 
40. The demand for protection will grow, not just the need to insure against losses but also the 
demand from businesses who wish to strengthen their resilience and to recover more quickly 
from security breaches. 
41. But the market needs development. It’s still in its infancy. We have to increase awareness 
of the importance of insurance in dealing with cyber risk. Again, however, the data needed for 
efficient  underwriting  of  risk  is  weak.  We  need  to  strengthen  collaboration  between  the 
industry,  government  and  academia  to  build  reliable  databases  and  analytical  tools  to 
enable the efficient underwriting of cyber risk. 
• 
We have set up the Cyber Risk Management Project in Singapore. It was launched 
recently,  involving  the  Nanyang Technological  University’s  (NTU)’s  Insurance  Risk 
and  Finance  Research  Centre  (NTU-IRFRC),  and  supported  by  leading  industry 
players and the Cyber Security Agency (CSA) in Singapore. 
Conclusion 
42. It is, to conclude, a difficult and challenging environment for insurers globally. We have to 
live with a low interest rate environment for a long time to come, even as our societies are 
getting older. It’s a challenge for everyone in the retirement business, including insurers. We 
have to find ways to make savings for affordable for ordinary savers as they prepare for their 
retirement. 
43. But we also have to meet new opportunities in the insurance industry. Asia is growing in 
every  segment  of  the  insurance  business,  but  I  want  to  highlight  the  importance  of 
infrastructure financing as an opportunity for insurers, as a way in which you can play a useful 
role in the economic growth of the region. I also want to highlight the criticality of catastrophe 
insurance and cyber insurance. Public-private collaboration is the way to go in all these areas 
and I’m glad we are off to a good footing in our relationship with industry leaders, and in tying 
together collaborations with the academia and research institutions. When we next meet three 
years from now in Singapore, we should be in a slightly better place. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
