  Andrew Gracie: Ending too big to fail – getting the job done 
Speech by Mr Andrew Gracie, Executive Director of Resolution of the Bank of England, at 
Deloitte, London, 26 May 2016. 
 When G20 Leaders were putting together the post-crisis financial reform agenda in 2009 in 
London and Pittsburgh, the imperative to find a solution to too big to fail (TBTF) was clear. 
Feelings  were  rightly  raw  given  the  scale  of  public  support  provided  to  banks  and  the 
damage  to  the  global  economy.  But  there  was  scepticism  that  resolution  -  managing  the 
failure  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions  without  taxpayer  support  and  without 
crashing  the  financial  system  -  would  ever  work.  Naysayers  thought  that  bail-outs  would 
always be necessary for larger banks, especially those operating cross-border. The work that 
has  been  done  since  has  met  this  challenge.  With  the  publication  of  the  final  Total  Loss-
absorbing Capacity (TLAC) Standard1 in November last year a major milestone was passed. 
We  have  come  a  long  way  to  making  G-SIB  resolution  feasible  and  credible,  and  with 
implementation of the measures already agreed, and the tying of loose ends, the task will be 
complete. Today I want to review what we have done and what remains to be done to make 
G-SIBs resolvable. 
But  before  turning  to  resolvability  of  firms  let  me  say  something  first  about  the  FSB  Key 
Attributes (KAs) of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions2 and the process of 
resolution planning, both of which are driving the building out of the new resolution paradigm. 
The KAs, which were agreed by the FSB and endorsed by G20 Leaders at their summit in 
Cannes 2011, are the foundation on which all else has been built: 
a. 
The  KAs  set  out  our  shared  objective  as  authorities  –  to  be  able  to  manage  the 
failure of a G-SIB without adverse impact on system stability, and without recourse 
to taxpayer funds. 
They  list  the  minimum  elements  needed  for  a  statutory  resolution  regime  to  be 
effective. As countries have implemented the KAs at national level, this has provided 
a convergent framework of resolution regimes internationally, smoothing the way for 
resolution to work consistently cross-border. 
Finally,  the  KAs  instituted  a  process  of  resolution  planning  for  global  systemically 
important banks (G-SIBs) in crisis management groups (CMGs). 
b. 
c. 
The power of this should not be underestimated. The status quo pre-crisis was built on the 
belief moral hazard was better managed through constructive ambiguity. It is fair to say that 
this did not work out so well. The new paradigm is for authorities to be clear ex ante as to 
how  resolution  will  work  and  to  ensure  it can.  Clear  with  the  market,  so  shareholders  and 
creditors are under no illusion as to the risks they are taking. And clear as authorities with 
each  other to  confront  the  obstacles  and  difficult questions  around firm failure  upfront  and 
find answers to them. 
Resolution  planning  will  be  a  constant  from  here  for  firms  and  authorities.  CMGs  held 
annually or semi-annually have been central to this effort. Incrementally, resolution plans for 
G-SIBs  have  come  into  focus  in  CMGs.  The  resulting  plans  have  then  been  endorsed  by 
senior  policymakers  from  the  authorities  around  the  table  in  CMGs  in  the  Resolvability 
Assessment Process (RAP). In RAPs for each firm, the plans have been reviewed, barriers 
                                                
1  Financial  Stability  Board  (2015)  ‘Principles  on  Loss-absorbing  and  Recapitalisation  Capacity  of  G-SIBs  in 
Resolution: Total Loss-absorbing Capacity (TLAC) Term Sheet’. 
2  Financial Stability Board (2014) ‘Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions’. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  to resolvability identified and agreement reached on how, and on what timeframe, they will 
be removed. This way commitment has been secured from all the authorities in CMGs to the 
plan ex ante. But perhaps more importantly, there is a network of people who have worked 
through  these  questions  together  and  have  a  degree  of  mutual  trust  and  reliance  that  will 
enable us to get to a co-operative outcome cross-border in a way that has often failed us as 
authorities in the past. We will need to continue to ensure that these contacts are maintained 
and deepened. Ultimately they are what will make resolution work for international banks. 
This answers to the call that often comes from industry that we should nail down everything 
in  Cooperation  Agreements  (CoAgs)  or  work  towards  some  kind  of  global  treaty.  I  do  not 
think this is necessary to ensure resolution will work effectively. There is a level of detail and 
complexity in the resolution plans that does not lend itself to a quasi-legal document like a 
CoAG. 
But  more  importantly  emphasis  on  CoAgs  misses  how  the  process  has  evolved.  The 
metaphor  originally  conceived  for  resolution  plans  was  living  wills.  This  was  powerful, 
comprehensible by all. It captured the notion that the failure of large banks would not be left 
to chance in future but instead would be worked through in advance and part of what it would 
be to be a responsible, regulated entity. But it also gave the impression that each plan would 
be idiosyncratic, unique to the firm. 
In fact, as time as gone on it has become clear that for G-SIBs many of the elements of the 
plans  are  similar  and  the  identified  barriers  generic.  Indeed  discussions  in  CMGs  for 
individual G-SIBs has translated into minimum requirements for resolvability at the level of 
the FSB. In the way that we are removing barriers, we are expressly setting out to provide a 
platform for cooperation to work, ensuring that home and host interests in this process are 
aligned. 
The FSB’s TLAC standard is a good example of how the dynamic of resolution planning in 
CMGs has provided the impetus for the policy changes. Put crudely, if the KAs set out what 
legal powers resolution authorities needed, they did not describe the resolution transaction – 
how the resolution powers should be applied to G-SIBs. 
Work since in CMGs has confirmed the transaction is a bail-in. And, in a way, this is what the 
TLAC  standard  really  represents  –  agreement  among  authorities  that  it  is  not  feasible  or 
credible to take a G-SIB apart at the operating company level during a resolution weekend. 
Rather the key operating companies need to be recapitalised by bail-in to support continuity 
in critical economic functions (CEFs), and to buy time for the subsequent reorganisation of 
the firm (to the degree that is required). The precise tool used, and the point in the group at 
which  resolution  powers  are  applied, may  vary.  But  at  the  heart  of  all  the  resolution  plans 
drawn up in the CMGs is a bail-in transaction. 
If TLAC implies a bail-in transaction, what is required to make this transaction work? I want to 
cover three dimensions: the quantity, quality and distribution of instruments to be bailed in. 
The  principles  that  cover  the  Term  Sheet  provide  the  best  guide  to  the  policy  intent.  As 
regards quantity, the principles provide a robust minimum global standard so that G-SIBs can 
fail  without  placing  the  rest  of  the  financial  system  or  public  funds  at  risk  of  loss.  The 
principles require resolution authorities to make a prudent assumption about losses incurred 
on  the  way  into  resolution  and  the  need  for  prudent  valuation  at  that  point.  Resolution 
authorities must also ensure that a firm can continue to meet conditions for authorisation and 
to be sufficiently well capitalised to command market confidence post-resolution. 
These  principles  are  reflected  in  the  final  TLAC  calibration:  we  worked  on  the  basis  that 
minimum capital requirements would be eroded on the way into resolution, and that G-SIBs 
would need to be recapitalised to at least a level to continue to meet minimum conditions for 
authorisation and maintain market confidence on the way out. The FSB agreed that TLAC 
corresponding to 18% of risk weighted assets (RWAs), or 6.75% of leverage, would provide 
the minimum necessary to meet these goals, but that more may be necessary depending on 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  firm-specific  considerations.  Indeed,  in  transposing  TLAC  in  domestic  regulation,  several 
jurisdictions have already indicated that they consider higher requirements to be appropriate 
for  G-SIBs  based  in  their  jurisdictions.  But  the  common  floor  provides  a  base  level  that 
should allow G-SIBs to operate cross-border with something of a level playing field. 
If this is the agreed minimum end-point for TLAC, in the course of the last year, on the basis 
of a quantitative impact study (QIS), we also agreed a viable transition path for G-SIBs to 
implement TLAC. This is reflected in the two-stage conformance period under which G-SIBs 
need to comply with TLAC of 16% RWAs and 6% leverage by 2019 and at least 18% and 
6.75% by 2022. It was felt that extending implementation to 2022 provided sufficient time for 
firms to reissue maturing debt as TLAC or complete any additional issuance in a way that 
minimises any impact on the cost of funding or the supply of credit to the real economy. 
Turning to the quality of TLAC, the principles covering the Term Sheet set out: the need for 
bail-in to be legally enforceable on TLAC; that bail-in should not give rise to systemic risk; 
that  TLAC  instruments  should  be  stable,  long-term  claims;  and  that  holders  should  have 
clarity on the order in which they would incur losses. 
Taken  together,  these  principles  underscore  the  importance  of  subordination  of  TLAC  to 
operating  liabilities.  Subordination  provides  clarity  to  investors  and  avoids  bail-in  being 
complicated  or  inhibited  by  compensation  claims  that  arise  if  creditors  are  treated  less 
favourably  than  in  insolvency.  This  need  to  ensure  that  the  bail-in  of  TLAC  instruments  is 
credible as well as feasible was reflected too in the provisions in the final Term Sheet for a 
5%  limit  on  liabilities  that  could  sit  pari  passu  with  TLAC  and  for  exclusion  of  structured 
notes.  Making  TLAC  consistent  with  bail-in  also  led  to  clarification  in  the  Term  Sheet  that 
after 2022 all TLAC should be issued out of resolution entities: debt issued out of SPVs and, 
in  groups  subject  to  SPE  strategies,  Tier  2  subordinated  debt  issued  to  the  market  out  of 
operating companies will no longer count as TLAC. 
Where TLAC is issued in a group brings me to the final key dimension of TLAC – distribution. 
One of the big innovations of TLAC is to go beyond previous capital accords to address the 
distribution  of  loss  absorbency  within  groups.  This  was  always  going  to  be  necessary  for 
resolution which operates at legal entity, not group level. And it is essential to engender trust 
and  time  consistency  between  authorities  cross-border.  As  it  is  set  out  in  the  principles 
covering the Term Sheet, host authorities must have confidence that there is sufficient loss 
absorbing  and  recapitalisation  capacity  available  to  subsidiaries  in  their  jurisdictions  with 
legal  certainty  at  the  point  of  entry  into  resolution.  Internal  TLAC  –  prepositioned  loss 
absorbency  down-streamed  from  the  resolution  entity  to  material  subgroups,  equivalent  to 
75–90% of the subgroup’s needs – is designed to achieve this, without pushing up overall 
TLAC  requirements  for  the  group  as  a  whole.  It  also  provides  a  mechanism  in  an  SPE 
strategy  through  which  by  converting  the  internal  TLAC  via  contractual  terms,  the  key 
operating subsidiaries can be kept outside resolution and the losses can be transmitted to 
the  top  of  the  group  for  the  resolution  to  take  place  in  one  legal  entity,  be  that  a  holding 
company or a parent bank, in one jurisdiction. Again this addresses the concerns that some 
have expressed about making resolution work cross-border in different legal regimes. 
So if those are the trees, what is the wood? Agreement of the TLAC standard signifies that 
authorities in FSB have put in place the last major piece of the financial reform architecture. 
They  have  agreed  the  amount  of  gone  concern  loss-absorbing  capacity  that  is  needed  to 
balance  the  going  concern  requirements  in  Basel  III.  TLAC  is  also  based  on  a  shared 
approach to resolution through bail-in. In other words, the end goal is in sight. 
So what happens next? For TLAC the priority is national implementation. With three years to 
2019 and the need for G-SIBs to set out their capital plans for investors, there is no time to 
waste. US and Swiss authorities started the ball rolling. We in the UK followed at the end of 
last  year  with  a  Consultation  Paper  on  the  Bank’s  approach  to  setting  a  minimum 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL). We are considering the responses 
received and are aiming to come out with a final policy statement soon.3 I hope that greater 
certainty about requirements and firms’ plans to meet them will reduce the risk premium that 
attaches to debt financing now and drives a wedge in pricing between instruments that are 
economically equivalent, particularly between the US and Europe. 
Clarification of national approaches to implementation of TLAC will also provide the platform 
on which to build internal TLAC. There is technical complexity to work through here – how in 
keeping  with  the  high  level  principles  in  the  Term  Sheet  to  design  the  instruments.  For 
example how should internal TLAC be subordinated, should it always be issued directly to 
the resolution entity, what maturity should instruments have and how should they adjust as 
the risk profile of the material sub-group changes? And perhaps most importantly how should 
the joint contractual trigger that allows internal TLAC to be written down outside of resolution 
work in practice? The FSB is working on these issues and a consultation paper will be issued 
later in the year. 
Implementation  of  internal  TLAC  may  also  prompt  the  questions  as  to  how  internal  TLAC 
relates to existing capital requirements – is there trapped capital, located in a subsidiary or 
holding company but which cannot be moved to the subsidiary that needs it? If so, in a world 
of  internal  TLAC,  can  it  be  released?  Where  should  buffers  be  located  in  groups?  Host 
regulators  will  still  want  subsidiaries  to  hold  adequate  capital  and  potentially  additional 
buffers if these entities are systemically important to the domestic economy. But they may for 
example become more comfortable about a higher share of capital being held at group level. 
CMGs and supervisory colleges will provide the setting to think these issues through. 
Finally, now we have TLAC, we need to complete the work on how we will use it. That is, 
how in practice we will execute a bail-in. Part of this is ensuring that the right mechanics are 
in  place.  For  example,  that  between  the  G-SIB,  share  registrar  and  the  relevant  Central 
Securities  Depositories  (CSDs)  or  International  CSDs,  as  resolution  authorities  we  have 
worked  out  the  plumbing  to  find  a  way  to  distribute  the  shares  already  in  issue  (or  new 
equity) to the bondholders that will take ownership of the firm via the bail-in. Most of this is a 
matter  of  building  on  existing  technology  and  market  conventions  that  are  used  in  liability 
management exercises and sovereign or other debt restructurings. A difference perhaps is 
that as regulators we need to ensure shareholder control thresholds are observed and that 
we are comfortable with any resulting change in control. 
Equally  important  is  the  question  of  how  and  when  we  will  carry  out  valuations  for  the 
purpose  of  the  bail-in  and  how  we  will  comply  with  listing  and  disclosure  requirements 
through the process. In the event of a G-SIB failure we are unlikely to be in a position to fix 
bail-in amounts at the resolution weekend. Rather, come Monday morning, we will announce, 
first the universe of debt that has been immobilised (and thus the solvency we can put back 
into  the  balance  sheet  of  the  bank  in  resolution);  and  second  the  independent  valuation 
process  that  will  ensue.  Valuation  and  setting  the  terms  of  the  bail-in  might  take  several 
months. We may have  suspended listings on the equity or debt we have immobilised – in 
some  jurisdictions  instruments  and  listings might  be  cancelled  altogether  –  but  it  does  not 
mean we can escape making some disclosure on the condition of the firm in the intervening 
period. We want, at FSB level, to think this through so as to have a path for bail-in execution, 
that  works  domestically  and  cross-border,  meets  securities  law  requirements  and  is 
transparent to shape and manage market expectations. 
                                                
3  The UK’s consultation on the minimum requirement for eligible funds and liabilities, through which the UK will 
implement the TLAC standard for relevant firms, was published on 11 December 2015. See Bank of England 
(2015) ‘The Bank of England’s approach to setting a minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities 
(MREL)’. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  I have described how, on the Monday morning of the resolution, by pointing to the debt that 
we have available to bail in, we can communicate that the G-SIB has sufficient resources to 
be  recapped  and  carry  on.  Indeed  part  of  the  Monday  morning  announcement  will  be 
confirmation  by  relevant  regulators  that,  at  operating  company  level  at  least,  all  relevant 
entities continue to meet their capital requirements. But while TLAC is necessary to achieve 
this, it is not in itself sufficient. 
What else, then, is required to stabilise a firm in resolution, to make it resolvable? I want to 
set out the other work we have done, and are continuing to do, to stabilise a G-SIB going 
through a resolution process. The first is ensuring continuity in financial contracts in keeping 
with  the  KAs.  Across  FSB  members,  we  have  addressed  this  issue  domestically  in  our 
respective  jurisdictions  with  statutory  powers  to  stay  close-out.  But  that  has  left  a  risk  of 
cross-border close-out under foreign law contracts. That could be solved by statute if hosts 
had powers recognise or support home country resolution actions. Indeed this is included in 
the  KAs.  But  in  some  important  cases,  including  the  US,  resolution  regimes  have  been 
implemented  without  statutory  powers  of  recognition.  Absent  a reliable  statutory  approach, 
changes in all relevant contracts were needed instead. 
This  underlines  the  importance  of  the  achievement  we  have  made  in  getting  the  ISDA 
Protocol4, and credit is due to industry and ISDA for making that happen. Most of the G-SIBs 
have already adhered to the expanded Protocol covering not only OTC derivatives but also 
securities financing transactions. By the end of this year, the remaining advanced economy 
G-SIBs will also have adhered. But more importantly, with the jurisdictional modular protocol 
in place and regulation requiring adherence published for the largest jurisdictions the way is 
clear for the rest of the market, in particular buyside firms, to adhere. The Protocol effort was 
built around the principle that entry into resolution in itself should not give counterparties the 
right  to  close  out,  at  least  not  while  a  bank  in  resolution  continues  to  perform.  This 
encapsulates the new paradigm of resolution. We need to ensure that other market contracts 
and  conventions  are  set  up  in  a  similar  way.  I  want  to  mention  one  where  we  have  just 
finished work in FSB and one where we are just starting. 
The  former  is  operational  continuity.  Last  autumn,  FSB  published  for  consultation  draft 
guidance5 for how shared services IT and operational processes should be set up in G-SIBs 
for  them  to  be  resolvable.  Again  this  builds  on  resolution  planning  work  in  CMGs  and 
identification via the RAP process of operational continuity as a generic barrier to resolution. 
The draft guidance not only addresses the setup of contracts and service level agreements 
(SLAs) with third parties and internal service companies to provide for continuity at point of 
entry to resolution but also restructuring or wind-down of services post bail-in. 
Relatedly  we  have  started  work  in  FSB  on  continuity  of  access  to  financial  market 
infrastructures (FMIs6). This is not only at the level of the FMI itself but also where G-SIBs 
connect  to  FMIs  indirectly  through  agency  banks  or  correspondent  banks.  The  same 
principle should apply here – if the bank in resolution remains authorised and continues to 
perform on its obligations then it should be able to secure continuity of access to services 
provided  by  FMIs.  But  unlike  the  market  standard  agreements  addressed  in  the  Protocol, 
scheme rules and commercial agreements provided by agency banks vary and preserve a 
good deal of discretion for the FMI or G-SIB acting as a quasi FMI. We are exploring how far 
that  discretion  can,  or  needs  to  be,  constrained.  Ultimately,  there  is  a  potential  collective 
action problem we need to address. It should be in the interests of FMIs and agency banks to 
allow the resolution to succeed. After all, in an SPE strategy the legal entity they are dealing 
with  is  likely  to  stay  outside  resolution.  But  the  temptation  must  be  there,  if  you  can  in 
International Swaps and Derivatives Association (2015) ‘ISDA 2015 Universal Resolution Stay Protocol’. 
                                                
4 
5  Financial Stability Board (2015) ‘Guidance on Arrangements to Support Operational Continuity in Resolution’. 
6 
In the US these are known as Financial Market Utilities (FMUs). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  resolution, to grab collateral or to increase margin calls on an extraordinary basis. This is the 
behaviour we saw at various points in the crisis. We need to plan to avoid a repeat of that. 
This brings me to the other consultation paper7 issued recently by FSB, related to funding in 
resolution. If it is clear on Monday morning that a bank in resolution can meet its obligations 
falling due, then the incentive for counterparties to remove liabilities or seize collateral should 
be reduced. The funding in resolution principles represent a step toward achieving this. They 
put  the  emphasis  on  self-insurance,  or  firms  having  adequate  liquid  resources  and  the 
internal  infrastructure  to  identify  needs  and  mobilise  collateral,  to  be  able  to  see  them 
through  the  resolution  process.  But  they  also  describe  a  potential  role  for  credible  public 
backstops to instil confidence and manage the perception that the firm cannot self-insure. A 
backstop for funding in resolution is likely to be separate from ordinary central bank facilities. 
But that should not necessarily mean that the bank in resolution is cut off at the central bank. 
To  some  extent  the  same  principle  that  we  want  to  apply  to  other  market  participants  in 
dealing  with  a  bank  in  resolution  should  apply  also  to  central  banks  –  that  is,  if  the  bank 
remains authorised and continues to perform, it should have continuity. As long as a bank in 
resolution continues to meet the eligibility criteria applied to other banks, it should not, as a 
general  rule,  be  excluded  from  central  bank  operations.  The  adequacy  of  a  G-SIB’s  liquid 
resources  through  resolution  is  part  of  the  resolution  planning  discussion  in  CMGs.  In  a 
cross-border setting, coordination around resources and availability of backstops will depend 
on  the  resolution  strategy  –  in  an  MPE  strategy  responsibilities  will  sit  locally  with  the 
authorities of each resolution entity; in an SPE strategy the home authority will need to play a 
stronger coordinating role. But this discussion will stand on the firm foundation provided by 
TLAC.  Whether  for  market  counterparties,  central  banks  or  backstop  providers,  lending 
decisions are much easier to contemplate where solvency is assured in the operating entities 
that need funding. 
Work in FSB to date has concentrated on what is necessary to stabilise G-SIBs at the point 
of  entry  to  resolution,  whether  changes  to firms  to  make  them  resolvable  -  like  TLAC  and 
operational continuity requirements - or to market contracts and conventions - like the ISDA 
Protocol or access to FMIs. But bail-in is not the end of the task. It is a prelude to whatever 
reorganisation is necessary to restore a firm to viability or to wind it down. Importantly though 
bail-in buys the time for that process to be orderly. 
Post  bail-in  restructuring  runs  as  a  thread  through  some  of  the  other  initiatives  I  have 
mentioned. It is part of the operational continuity principles. And, as part of the access to FMI 
work we are keen to investigate how easy it would be in resolution to dismantle the quasi-
FMI  functions  –  payment  services,  clearing  and  custody  –  provided  by  G-SIBs  to  clients, 
financial and non-financial. However easy or difficult it is to transfer or wind-down services 
provided by a G-SIB, clients may have contingency providers themselves or may want to rely 
on the portability of their positions to move. If they are to move we need to find a way for that 
to happen in an orderly way. 
Post  bail-in  restructuring  is  also  where  ring-fencing  of  UK  banks  fits  in.  Parliament  has 
enacted legislation to ensure there will be no doubt about the separation of retail activity in 
the  major  UK  banking  groups  at  the  point  of  failure.  The  PRA  now  has  the  task  of 
implementing that legislation to complete the work of making ring-fenced banks separable ex 
ante.  Similar  developments  in  the  restructuring  space  are  underway  in  other  jurisdictions. 
The  splitting  off  of  domestic  retail  banks  in  Swiss  G-SIBs  and  the  requirement  for  large 
foreign  banks  in  the  United  States  to  form  Intermediary  Holding  Companies  (IHCs)  are 
examples. Another aspect being explored in resolution plans is the scope for orderly, solvent 
wind-down of trading books in investment banks in recovery or resolution. This goes to the 
general principle that it is important for us as resolution authorities to understand the options 
                                                
7  Financial Stability Board (2015) ‘Guiding principles on the temporary funding needed to support the orderly 
resolution of a global systemically important bank (“G-SIB”)’. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  we have to restructure critical functions if we need to in resolution. I can imagine that in time 
via  planning  in  CMGs  we  will  see  more  convergence  in  approaches  in  this  area  across 
jurisdictions. 
In conclusion, much has been done to achieve what is necessary to make G-SIB resolution 
work. TLAC is symptomatic of the distance travelled and represents a true game-changer. 
Resolution planning will continue in CMGs to bring refinements in some of the other areas I 
have described – operational continuity, access to FMIs, funding in resolution and post bail-in 
restructuring.  Over  the  coming  months  we  will  continue  implementing  these  to  make 
resolution work in practice for large, cross-border firms. 
References 
Bank of England (2015) ‘The Bank of England’s approach to setting a minimum requirement 
for  own  funds  and  eligible  liabilities  (MREL)’,  Consultation  on  a  proposed  Statement  of 
Policy,  available  at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/resolution/ 
mrelconsultation2015.pdf. 
Financial  Stability  Board  (2014)  ‘Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  for 
Financial Institutions’, available at http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/r_141015.pdf. 
Financial  Stability  Board  (2015)  ‘Guidance  on  Arrangements  to  Support  Operational 
Continuity  in  Resolution’,  Consultative  Document,  available  at  http://www.fsb.org/wp-
content/uploads/Guidance-on-Arrangements-to-Support-Operational-Continuity-in-
Resolution.pdf. 
Financial  Stability  Board  (2015)  ‘Guiding  principles  on  the  temporary  funding  needed  to 
support the orderly resolution of a global systemically important bank (“G-SIB”)’, Consultative 
Document, 
http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/Funding-in-Resolution-
Guiding-Principles-Consultative-Document.pdf. 
Financial  Stability  Board  (2015)  ‘Principles  on  Loss-absorbing  and  Recapitalisation 
Capacity  of  G-SIBs  in  Resolution:  Total  Loss-absorbing  Capacity  (TLAC)  Term  Sheet’, 
available  at  http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/TLAC-Principles-and-Term-Sheet-for-
publication-final.pdf. 
International Swaps and Derivatives Association (2015) ‘ISDA 2015 Universal Resolution 
Stay Protocol’, available at http://assets.isda.org/media/ac6b533f-3/5a7c32f8-pdf/. 
available 
at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
