  Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Promoting innovation in finance in 
Singapore 
Speech  by  Mr  Tharman  Shanmugaratnam,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the Launch of the Singapore FinTech Festival, at the Asia Society, New York 
City, 12 April 2016. 
 I’d like to thank the Asia Society for hosting us this evening, for the launch of the Singapore 
FinTech  Festival.  The  Festival  will  take  place  over  5  days  in  November  this  year  in 
Singapore, bringing together technology players, financial institutions, FinTech players and 
regulators. 
We are launching the festival in New York City, and that is not as surprising as it may first 
seem. It says something about how we view innovation in finance. It is an inherently open 
system.  Innovation  is  about  ideas  and  enterprise  flowing  between  cities,  and  connections 
between  players  everywhere.  We  can’t  predict  how  those  connections  will  unfold,  but  we 
know that there’s no neat geography that will define financial innovation. 
It’s also why we shouldn’t focus too much on the rankings of different financial centres at this 
stage of the game. You know what they say about the rankings of colleges and universities. 
If you rank very well, the rank is extremely important. And if you are not ranked well, they are 
unimportant, irrelevant, and they don’t get to the heart of what you are really trying to do. 
Well, we are nicely on both sides of that. Singapore does rank well in the FinTech stakes, but 
I have to tell you that it’s a distraction at this stage and it really doesn’t get to the heart of 
what we are doing. 
Our aim is not to see if we can be above other financial centres, but to push the envelope 
and transform finance: to encourage players to find new ways of doing the business, and in a 
way  that  makes  more  sense  to  the  customer  –  the  borrower,  the  lender,  the  middle-class 
investor, or someone who makes payments or receives them. Transforming finance to be 
more tailored to their needs, something that’s if possible cheaper, or more convenient 
and accessible to the customer. That’s our aim. 
But we are at an early stage in FinTech. We are at the cusp of the new wave of innovation. 
There’s no assurance that it will succeed, and no telling who will succeed. But it shows much 
promise –promise of delivering better value to the customer. 
There’s a second reason why the rankings are really not the end game, and that’s because 
FinTech  probably  more  so  than  conventional  finance  is  going  to  involve  tie-ups  and 
collaborations – between players and between cities, at the same time that it’s an extremely 
competitive business. 
The  Asia-Pacific  has tremendous  untapped  potential  in finance. There  is  a  very  significant 
underserved market in the Asia Pacific, in Southeast Asia, in China, in  India. A very large 
base of the pyramid, so to speak, that’s not well served by the financial sector in Asia. So 
there’s  tremendous  scope  for  innovation  in  finance  as  a  way  of  reaching  out  to  far  more 
people and meeting their needs. 
And there’s a new generation of tech-savvy individuals in Asia like elsewhere. They are also 
averse to paying fees. They too are a prime market for FinTech in Asia. 
We are promoting innovation in finance in a comprehensive way in Singapore. It requires a 
whole  ecosystem.  It  requires  bringing  a  whole  range  of  players  together  –  the  technology 
players, finance players, start-ups, and both global and local Singapore players. 
We are also looking at every segment of the financial business. There is scope for innovation 
across the business – in credit, savings, investing, payments and so on. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
But  importantly  too,  we  intend  to  be right there at  the frontier  with  regard  to  the common 
technology platforms, or the utilities that can be a very important enabler for innovation in 
finance  –  the  common  platforms  that  help  individual  players,  produce  network  effects  as 
more players come on board, and help the market work better. 
We  are  looking  at  each  of  the  industry  verticals  to  see  what  common  platforms  might  be 
needed. Ravi will talk more about this. In trade finance, for example, where we are making 
good progress. 
There  are  also  the  horizontal  infrastructures  that  can  underpin  innovation  in  a  range  of 
industry verticals. Such as the infrastructure for centralised addressing for real time mobile 
payments. And the efficient and secure storage of data in the cloud. And critically – no one 
has done this very well in in an organized way, having open APIs, whether private or public 
APIs  in  each  of  our  established  players.  Open  APIs  can  spur  innovation  in  banking  and 
finance. 
There will be tensions as we go forward with FinTech, tensions inherent in a new wave of 
innovation, that we must accept and manage. 
First,  the  tension  between  new  players  and  established  players,  or  the  tension  between 
disruption of existing players  and collaboration with them.  Many  FinTech  players  see 
themselves as disrupters. But there’s also a fair bit of collaboration that’s taking place. 
Established financial institutions have been partnering or acquiring new, smaller players with 
new technologies. Acquiring them either as a defensive mechanism or as a way of bringing 
disruptive  technologies  within  their  own  organisation  with  the  hope  of  strengthening  what 
they offer customers. 
It’s  hard  to  say  how  this  will  play  out  in  the  years  to  come  –  hard  to  say  whether  the 
disrupters will indeed disrupt the existing financial business in a significant way. I think it’s too 
early to say. 
In  China,  we  have  some  major  FinTech  players,  they  are  no  longer  new  now,  those  like 
Alibaba and Tencent. They have become established names. Elsewhere it hasn’t made too 
much of a difference yet. It is early days. 
It’s  entirely  possible  that  some  new  FinTech  players  will  eventually  make  their  mark  as 
enduring  brands  in  finance.  But  we  are  also  likely  to  see  the  growing  collaboration  I  have 
talked  about,  between  established  players  and  start-ups.  It  is  not  a  zero  sum  game.  And 
FinTech  ventures  are  also  acting  as  a  catalyst  for  existing  players  to  reengineer  legacy 
systems. 
But most importantly, FinTech is promoting a shift from the traditional focus on products to a 
focus on customers. It’s about understanding their needs, and finding a way of delivering 
cheaper, or more convenient and more tailored services to the customer. 
The  second  tension  is  also  important,  and  which  we  must  be  willing  to  manage.  It’s  the 
tension  between  allowing  for  experimentation  in  finance  and  preserving  trust  and 
credibility  in  our  financial  system.  They  are  both  important  and  we  must  be  willing  to 
manage the tension. 
There  was  I think,  in  the first  wave  of  FinTech,  a  certain  breathlessness  in  the  way  which 
new  businesses  were  coming  up,  and  in  the  way  which  they  were  perceived  and  talked 
about. Such as, in the (Peer-to-Peer) P2P lending platforms, where the name of the game 
was  often  to  lend  as  quickly  as  you  can,  leveraging  on  investments  in  these  FinTech 
companies. 
The scene is now maturing. Some of these new lending platforms in the US and elsewhere 
are now more concerned with the quality of loans they make. Like banks, whose business is 
credit underwriting, they have to be good at both data analytics and judgment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Most FinTech ventures, globally, have indeed not succeeded to date. The real stress test of 
any new idea in finance is the economic and credit cycle. But even where new players 
fail,  they  usually  leave  behind  an  idea  –  an  idea  to  be  modified,  taken  over  or 
improved. 
We must allow for this experimentation, but we must do it in a way that preserves trust and 
credibility in our financial system. That is foremost in our minds. 
So regulators are watching this carefully. We have to allow for innovation. But any player that 
acquires a meaningful scale in finance should expect to be regulated like any other financial 
institution in their business. There must be a level playing field, and there are to begin with 
good reasons for why regulations exist. 
We cannot stifle innovation. We must let people come up with new ideas, and let them run 
with  it.  But  once  they  acquire  meaningful  scale  in  the  financial  sector,  they  should  expect 
regulation. 
Ten  years  from  now,  finance  will  be  very  different.  We  can’t  say  exactly  how.  But  we  in 
Singapore intend to be a key player in innovation in finance. A key player in advancing ways 
to  help  consumers  with  their  needs  as  lenders,  borrowers,  as  makers  of  payments.  In 
Singapore  and  the  Asia-Pacific.  We  will  go  about  this  very  energetically  in  Singapore, 
especially in developing common infrastructure or utilities, as I just mentioned. 
Ravi  will  be  going  through  some  of  our  strategies.  We  are  going  to  put  grants  to  work  – 
grants for any financial innovation in Singapore – on a competitive basis. 
Very importantly, we are going to develop the skills and capabilities required to make this a 
new wave, not just a passing trend. It requires many new skills, as well as some of the old 
instincts  that  help  ensure  sustainability  across  the  cycles.  And  which  preserve  trust  in 
finance. 
We have a major national program in Singapore called SkillsFuture which we are putting a lot 
of effort into. Finance will be an important vertical in SkillsFuture: investing in the skills of the 
future. 
Finally,  we  will  ensure  that  the  overall  environment  is  supportive  of  start-ups  and 
innovation.  Not  many  of  the  new  players  will  succeed,  not  many  will  last.  But  they  will 
always leave an idea behind, to be modified, taken over or improved. 
Thank you very much. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
