   Øystein Olsen: Managing Norway’s oil wealth 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen, Governor  of  Norges  Bank (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
“Desemberkonferansen” oil and gas conference, Kristiansund, 3 December 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found on the Norges Bank’s website: Charts (PDF). 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
In 1969, on the day before Christmas Eve, Norway as a nation received the gift of the century: 
we  struck  oil!  The  Ekofisk  oil  field  was  the  largest  subsea  oil  field  ever  discovered.  The 
discovery of oil was the start of an extraordinary era for the Norwegian economy. 
Chart: OECD countries’ per capita GDP in 1971 
When  the  first  oil  was  brought  to  the  surface  in  1971,  income  levels  in  Norway  were  low 
compared with other western countries. 
Chart: OECD countries’ per capita GDP in 2014 
The picture has reversed since then. We have gradually caught up with the wealthiest nations. 
Measured by GDP per capita, Norway now ranks at the very top. 
It  was  established  at  an  early  stage  that  Norway’s  oil  and  gas  resources  belong  to  the 
Norwegian people. The tax system and framework conditions for the petroleum industry were 
designed so that the large revenues from this sector would accrue to the state. The stage was 
set for greater prosperity, with prospects for growth in both public and private consumption. 
The discovery of oil in the North Sea generated a wealth of opportunity for Norwegian business 
and industry. The extraction of oil at great sea depths would require the development of new 
technologies. This entailed the building up of expertise in our own country, which would secure 
a full order book for many years ahead – and not only off our own shore. The activities on the 
Norwegian continental shelf would also provide a boost to other industries in Norway. 
Chart: A new market for the shipbuilding industry 
And the timing was perfect: economic stagnation and competition from Asian countries had 
brought the Norwegian shipping industry to the brink of a crisis. With the discovery of oil, an 
adaptable shipbuilding industry and the oil companies were soon on good terms. 
Building up a new industry and spending the revenues generated also brought a new set of 
challenges,  and  in  1974  these  challenges  were  the  subject  of  a  government  white  paper, 
Report no. 25 to the Storting, entitled “The role of the petroleum industry in Norwegian society”. 
To  provide  room  for  the  oil  sector  and  higher  consumption  of  goods  and  services,  other 
industries had to give way. The mechanisms described in the white paper are familiar: 
“A  transfer  of  production  and  jobs  between  firms  and  industries  can  occur  via 
increased domestic cost pressures.” 
So, the nation was prepared for restructuring and for the costs this would involve. But the white 
paper also made it clear that, in order to reap the benefits of economic growth, restructuring 
would be necessary. 
We  now  know,  more  than  40  years  later,  that  structural  changes  were  indeed  made.  The 
industry structure of our economy has changed. A growing number of firms, and not only in the 
engineering  industry,  have  targeted  the  oil  industry.  Labour  shedding  in  some  sectors  has 
freed up labour for other uses. 
Chart: High wages in the oil industry 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Oil companies have had the capacity and the willingness to pay. Tax rules have favoured 
investment spending and earnings have been solid. Oil company employees have been wage 
winners here in Norway. 
A state-of-the-art oil service industry has emerged. New products and technological solutions 
have been developed. For many firms, the contracts on the Norwegian continental shelf have 
been a springboard to new export markets. 
Chart: Growth in oil investment 
High  oil  prices  and  a  profitable  petroleum  production  industry  have  led  to  record-high  oil 
investment in recent years. The level of investment in 2014 was equivalent to that of all the 
domestic non-oil industries combined. The positive spillovers to the oil service industry and 
other firms have been substantial. Employment has remained high and unemployment low, 
even when the financial crisis hit in 2008. 
A large share of the business sector and the labour market is now linked to the oil industry. A 
relatively small number of jobs are directly involved in oil and gas production. But if account is 
taken of all the suppliers to the petroleum sector, about 1 in 9 jobs in Norway, a total of about 
300 000, were linked to the oil industry in 20141. A growing number of these jobs are related 
to exports of oil extraction equipment. 
The oil and gas industry has played a decisive role in the strong growth of the Norwegian 
economy over the past 40 years. The past 15 years stand out in particular. But this dependence 
on oil has also made the Norwegian economy vulnerable to changes in oil prices or a decline 
in petroleum revenues. 
Chart: High wage growth (not incl. the krone depreciation over the past two years) 
High domestic labour costs have also increased the Norwegian economy’s vulnerability. The 
cost level in the Norwegian  business sector has increased  sharply in comparison with  our 
trading partners. 
A rise is followed by a fall, and oil prices have fallen by more than half since last summer. As 
activity and earnings from the petroleum sector decline, oil service companies must seek entry 
into other markets. With a high domestic cost level, that task may prove demanding. 
Chart: Fall in petroleum investment 
A decline in activity on the Norwegian continental shelf has long been anticipated. The fall in 
oil prices has accelerated and amplified an announced decline in activity. Norwegian exports 
to other oil-producing nations are also in decline. 
This does not mean that the oil age is now nearing an end. Nearly half of known oil and gas 
reserves  on  the  Norwegian  continental  shelf  have  not  yet  been  extracted2.  Large  new 
discoveries have been made over the past few years and the Norwegian oil service industry is 
still  receiving  new  orders.  Nevertheless,  the  Norwegian  economy  must  now  adapt  to 
considerably lower demand from the oil sector. 
After many years of relatively high wage growth in Norway, the domestic cost level must again 
be brought more closely into line with that of our trading partners. A necessary adjustment of 
the cost level can occur in two ways: through lower wage growth than in other countries or 
through a depreciation of the krone exchange rate. 
                                                
1   Estimate  based  on  calculations 
in  Blix  Prestmo,  Strøm  and  Midsem  (2015):  Ringvirkninger  av 
petroleumsnæringen  i  norsk  økonomi  [Spillovers  from  the  petroleum  industry  to  the  Norwegian  economy]. 
Forthcoming report from Statistics Norway. Petroleum-related exports from mainland Norway are also included. 
Including reserves approved for development by holders of oil rights and other proven resources in fields and 
discoveries. See The shelf in 2014, Norwegian Petroleum Directorate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2  
2 
    
Over  time,  monetary  policy  can  only  influence  inflation.  Monetary  policy  cannot  assume  a 
primary  responsibility  for  delivering  the  necessary  structural  changes  in  the  Norwegian 
economy. But via the exchange rate channel, monetary policy can help facilitate the necessary 
restructuring process. 
Chart: High wage growth (incl. the depreciation of the krone) 
Without our own national currency the situation would have been more challenging. The social 
partners would have had to go it alone. The experience of some European countries shows 
that this can be demanding. With a floating exchange rate, the necessary adjustment of the 
cost level can take place faster and be less painful. The krone exchange rate functions as a 
stabiliser. The depreciation of the krone through the past year indicates that this mechanism 
is functioning. 
As long as there is confidence that inflation will remain low and stable over time, the krone can 
depreciate markedly even if the key policy rate is low. The benefit of a national currency is lost 
if the temporary rise in inflation due to the depreciation is countered by higher pay increases. 
The result could then be a higher key policy rate and a stronger exchange rate than would 
otherwise  be  the  case,  and  higher  unemployment.  The  social  partners  have  a  particular 
responsibility in this regard. 
Oil companies had already given notice of lower investment, workforce reductions and cost 
cuts in winter 2014. This tendency has been reinforced by the sharp fall in oil prices, resulting 
in spillover effects on the mainland economy and rising unemployment. 
Chart: Key policy rate reduced 
As long as inflation expectations are firmly anchored, monetary policy can serve as a first line 
of defence when the economy turns down. Since December 2014, Norges Bank has reduced 
the key policy rate by a total of 0.75 percentage point, to 0.75 percent. The weaker outlook for 
the Norwegian economy has been given weight in our assessments. 
From the end of the 1990s, the price of North Sea oil rose from about USD 10 per barrel to 
over USD 100 per barrel. Large shares of the sizeable revenues from the petroleum sector 
over the past 20 years have been transferred to the oil fund. Norway’s sound public finances 
have been a great advantage to the economy, particularly through the financial crisis. But the 
management  of  the  government’s  large  petroleum  revenues  through  our  40  year-long  oil 
history  has  not  always  been  equally  well  planned.  In  the  mid-1970s,  the  budget  deficit  – 
including petroleum revenues – reached a high level. And we could not know then that oil 
prices would more than double a few years later – with the second oil shock in 1979, known 
as OPEC II. 
But we learned from our mistakes. The oil fund mechanism in 1990 and the fiscal rule in 2001 
were introduced to discipline fiscal policy in such a way that Norway’s petroleum wealth would 
also benefit future generations. Oil fund assets are now equivalent to more than twice the GDP 
of Norway’s mainland economy, and the oil fund, or the Government Pension Fund Global 
(GPFG), is today one of the world’s largest sovereign wealth funds. 
The GPFG represents the nation’s savings, to be managed for the benefit of both current and 
future generations. As an investor, the GPFG makes capital available to other countries for 
economic activity, and the return on that capital will depend on the economic performance of 
those countries. 
The GPFG is a long-term, responsible investor. The objective of investment management is to 
achieve the highest possible return at an acceptable level of risk. 
Chart: Change in market value since January 1998 
So far, our nation has earned a solid return on its financial assets. The cumulative return on 
the GPFG since its inception amounts to over NOK 2 600 billion, equivalent to about a third of 
total GPFG capital at the end of 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Chart: Lower yields 
Over a third of the GPFG is invested in bonds. Real yields on high-grade government bonds 
provide a basis for the rate of return that can be expected ahead. In recent years, those yields 
have been close to zero. 
Low bond yields reflect global economic conditions: Governments, businesses and households 
are seeking to save more, while demand for safe investments has increased. Central banks’ 
substantial asset purchases are pushing in the same direction. However, low yields may also 
reflect modest expectations of economic growth further ahead. 
There  is  no return  without  risk. The GPFG features  a  very  long  investment  horizon  and  a 
sizeable  capacity  to  bear  short-term  risk.  This  is  why  the  chosen  allocation  to  equities  is 
relatively high. It is also the reason why the GPFG has moved into real estate. The authorities 
have asked Norges Bank to assess whether the allocation to real assets should be increased. 
Any increase in the allocation to real assets will probably be at the expense of bonds. 
Chart: Spending of petroleum revenues almost level with revenues 
Petroleum  revenue  spending  over  the  fiscal  budget  has  increased  since  the  turn  of  the 
millennium.  The  revenue  stream  from  the  continental  shelf  is  now  declining.  We  are 
approaching  the  point  where  government  spending  of  petroleum  revenues  will  exceed  the 
revenues deriving from the petroleum sector. 
Chart: Transfers to GPFG at an end 
At today’s oil prices, transfers to the GPFG will soon fall towards zero. We will then be in a 
situation  where  the  GPFG’s  current  income  is  limited  to  interest  and  dividend  income. 
According to the 2016 government budget, some of the return on the GPFG will be used to 
cover the non-oil budget deficit. 
Oil prices have fallen sharply over the past six months. Even if prices edge up again, we have 
been reminded of the uncertainty associated with future revenues. The oil fund mechanism 
shields fiscal policy from such revenue fluctuations in the short term. 
We have the fiscal space to stimulate overall demand if this should prove necessary again. But 
we must also remember that, with lower oil prices, the government will over time have less 
money  to  spend.  Fiscal  tightening  may  become  necessary  further  ahead.  Refraining  from 
increasing petroleum revenue spending further from today’s level is a sensible risk adjustment. 
The era of rising petroleum revenue spending should for the most part be behind us. 
The more than 40-year old white paper about the role of the petroleum industry in Norwegian 
society  was  both  far-sighted  and  accurate.  The  restructuring  it  described  has  occurred, 
although the growth in prosperity that followed in its wake was more difficult to predict. The 
emergence  of  an  advanced  oil  service  industry  is  an  industrial  success  story.  We  have 
extracted large quantities of oil and gas in a period of very high prices. And we have set aside 
a large proportion of the revenues – for the benefit of future generations. In spite of some 
mistakes and a fair share of luck along the way, we would have to say that Norway’s petroleum 
wealth has so far been managed well. 
Norway’s oil age is far from over. But activity in the petroleum sector has passed the peak. We 
must also be prepared for lower returns in the oil industry. In the period ahead, we should keep 
an important insight in mind: the key to economic progress is the ability to restructure. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
