  R Gandhi: New paradigm in banking: banking is necessary, not banks – 
really? 
Valedictory speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
FIBAC 2016 “New horizons in Indian banking”, Mumbai, 17 August 2016. 
 1. 
“Banking  is  necessary,  but  banks  are  not”,  I  am  quoting  here  Bill  Gates,  what  he 
said  as  Chairman,  Microsoft,  way  back  in  1994.  Today,  after  twenty  two  years,  has  his 
prediction or forewarning come true? I intend to explore this in today’s discussion with you. 
It is usual for many of us who lecture others to say “We are at cross roads”, “The 
2. 
Paradigm shifts that are staring us” etc. That’s because it takes time to discern the trends 
that  are  taking  place  in  any  sector  and  unless  we  pause  to  look  carefully,  the  emerging 
patterns are easy to be missed, at great cost to many stakeholders. And when we do pause 
and observe, we can’t but say “We are at cross roads”, “The Paradigm Shifts that are staring 
us” etc. 
3.  
In  the  PWC  Report  in  July  2014  on  “The  future  shape  of  banking  –  Time  for 
reformation of banking and banks?” they said that at the macro level, they had identified five 
global ‘megatrends’ whose impacts, intersections and collisions are re-shaping the business 
world. While  these  all  are  relevant  to  banking,  they  pointed  out  the  most  influential  of  the 
trends  to  be  “the  demographic  and  social  change,  creating  new  customer  demands  and 
stakeholder  expectations;  and  technological  breakthroughs  changing  everything  from 
customer relationships to business models”. 
4. 
A Willis’ research report published in Resilience in April 2015 said that the financial 
institutions industry – including banks, asset managers and financial technology companies – 
is currently faced with a paradigm shift caused by a number of key mega trends. It identified 
the  regulatory  capital  requirements,  digitalisation  and  technological  advances,  new  market 
participants, demographic and behavioural changes in the new generation of customers as 
some of these trends. 
5. 
A Report on “Connecting the Dots of the New Paradigm Shift in Banking: Where Are 
We Now?” by Scope Ratings said in June 2016 “Looking at the current trends, we view the 
crossroads for banks being laid rather precariously at the intersection of three powerful winds 
of change: Technology, Regulations and Macro developments (mainly sluggish growth and 
low-for-long rates)”. 
6. 
So  what’s  common  among  all  these  researches?  It  is  the  emerging  trends  in 
technology,  regulatory  changes  and  consumer  behaviour  and  expectations  which  are 
redefining  banking  and banks’ role  and  even  endangering  banks’  existence. Why  do  I  say 
redefining banks’ existence? That’s because, as PWC did put it, if the banks were to not take 
full account of these trends and developments, they would risk emerging from the financial 
crisis “recapitalised, restructured, reformed …. but irrelevant”. That’s a profound statement in 
my opinion. 
Technology, consumers and regulation 
7. 
Banks  today  are  forced  to  make  rapid  and  irreversible  changes  due  to  the 
developments in technology, customer behaviour and regulation. Let us explore a bit more 
on these developments. 
Technology 
8. 
Channels – FinTechs – Apps-social media, are the buzz words. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  9. 
Technological developments are changing the way the banks and their customers 
interact. These  developments  have  created  opportunities for  new  entrants,  not  necessarily 
new  bankers,  to  disrupt  traditional  business  models  and  penetrate  new  markets.  The 
plethora  of  technological  products  and  services,  such  as  the  World  Wide  Web,  mobile 
phones  and  Apps,  have  helped  emergence  of  FinTech  companies  who  offer  lower  cost 
services  for  traditional  services,  such  as  e-payments  and  online  trading.  Social  media 
companies such as Facebook, Twitter and Google have a huge customer following and are 
entering into the financial sector, bringing new sources of competition. 
Consumers 
10. 
Millennials- instant gratification – No loyalty, these are the buzz words. 
11. 
There  is  a  new  generation  of  young  people  (known  as  millennials).  They  have 
different expectations and their ways of interacting with banks are also different. They prefer 
not  to  come  to  banks  for  banking  services.  Rather  they  would  prefer  to  avail  the  services 
through  online  and  social  media  based  platforms.  They  are  using  social  media  not  just  to 
connect  and  communicate  among  themselves,  but  also  connect  and  communicate  with 
banks. Even to complain, they prefer online and social media and they do not have traditional 
customer loyalties. If Millenials behave this way, the Mature customers and Older / Retirees 
are demanding improved returns from investments and demand greater transparency. 
Regulation 
12. 
Standards – Consumer protection – Ring fencing – Capital, are the buzz words. 
13. 
Since the financial crisis, regulatory emphasis have focussed more on capital. This 
has  led  many  banks  to  divest  themselves  of  ‘risky’  or  capital  intensive  assets,  businesses 
and even markets; this has also brought a sea change in bankers’ attitude towards risk and 
clearly marked the boundary between retail and wholesale banking. Banks have also been 
investing and recruiting heavily in compliance to meet new regulatory requirements. 
14. 
Another  offshoot  of  the  stricter  enforcement  of  regulations,  is  the  increasing 
business  and  growth  of  non-banking  financial  institutions,  the  shadow  banks  that  are  not 
subjected to the same degree of intense regulation; they are offering competing services to 
bank clients, establishing specific funds or offering private equity. 
15. 
and banks. 
Thus you will all readily agree that these three trends have clearly redefined banking 
I also said these emerging trends are endangering banks’ existence. Am I echoing 
Banking and banks – redefinition 
16. 
Bill Gates? 
17. 
From the time the concept of money was understood, the concepts of lending and 
borrowing  came  into  existence.  But  the  concept  of  banking  wasn’t  there.  However,  the 
organized  way  of  lending  and  borrowing  happened  when  the  prototypes  of  modern  banks 
were established some 700 years ago. Banks undertook another service i.e. the remittance 
service.  Thus,  what  the  banks  did  viz.,  borrowing,  lending  and  remittances,  came  to  be 
known as banking. Banking is what a bank does. Or banks are those who do banking. Our 
Banking Regulation Act says so. 
18. 
The mega trends that we discussed have redefined banking and banks. Actually it is 
not redefinition, but de-definition. Banking is no longer what a bank does; it is also what a 
non-bank does. Banks are no longer those entities who do banking exclusively; now others, 
the non-banks also do banking. 
19. 
Chunking of banking is the norm; and for undertaking each of these chunks, there 
are  some specialist  entities  who  undertake  only  those  chunks.  Payment service  providers, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  P2P  services,  P2B  services,  (SME  financing),  consumer  retail  financing,  disintermediation, 
crowd funding, open ended mutual funds, money market mutual funds, deposit alternatives, 
trade  financing,  invoice  financing,  bill  discounters,  bill  collectors,  credit  referrals,  account 
aggregators,  interest  free  products,  syndicators,  investment  bankers,  MFIs,  co-ops,  HFCs 
and credit raters are some of the entities who chipped away chunk after chunk of banking. Is 
there an element of banking that remains the exclusive privilege of banks? Sadly no. That’s 
why Bill Gates said what he said – “Banking is necessary, but banks are not”. 
20. 
which chunked away or which enabled chunking away the different elements of banking. 
How this happened? Admittedly, it is the technology and the customer expectations 
Will banks really cease to exist? 
21. 
That’s a moot point. At least, as the PWC research report says “While we are not 
looking at the end of banking, we are surely looking at the end of banking and banks as we 
currently know them”. 
22. 
The chunking away of banking from the banks have given enormous business and 
growth for these non-banks. With their specialization and focussed service rendering, they 
are able to offer that chosen service at greatest efficiency, speed and at very affordable cost 
to the consumers. This has stumbled the growth of banks today and has every potential to 
lead to de-growth and ultimately the decimation of banks in future. 
23. 
As  we  know,  unconventional  policies  are  rampant  in  the  world.  First  it  was  low 
interest; then it was near zero or zero interest. People thought that zero is the lower bound 
and  one  cannot  breach it.  Now  the  lower  bound  has  been  breached  and  negative  interest 
has  come  on  the  scene.  Jurisdiction  after  jurisdiction  is  ushering  in  negative  interest  rate 
regime. Is there any lower bound for negative interest? 
Can banks survive if this trend persists? 
24. 
Another  set  of  questions  are  about  the  justification  for  banks  to  exist.  Why  the 
society should accord the privilege of banking to banks i.e. why should there be a licensing 
for  undertaking  banking  activity?  Let  us  recall  that  the  West  no  longer  officially  designate 
anybody as a bank; they have only a depository institution or a credit institution. Our FSLRC 
recommended  Indian  Financial  Code  also  reflects  similar  thinking.  The  other  day,  Shri 
Mohandas Pai asked me, given the way the non-banks do banking, what is the justification 
for the banks to impose a cost in the form of the Net Interest Margin of 3% on the society. In 
what way rendering banking services under one umbrella is relevant any longer? 
25. 
Yet another challenge for the banks’ existence is the reaction by the society to the 
financial  crisis  –  the  consumer  distrust  in  banks.  Remember  the  movement  against  Wall 
Street?  The  Dodd-Frank  Act?  The  Liikanen  and  Vickers  Reports?  The  ring  fencing  of 
wholesale and retail banking? Faced with the challenge of dramatically decreased consumer 
trust  in  the  post-crisis  financial  services  market,  financial  institutions  are  increasingly 
acknowledging the need for new perspectives and paradigms in financial services. 
26. 
One more onslaught on banks existence is the net effect of regulatory requirements 
on capital and leverage and market and public expectations on their capability to leverage 
their  capital.  Banks  by  definition,  as  we  know  of  all  these  days,  are  the  highly  levered 
institutions.  However,  if  we  go  by  these  factors  about  which  just  now  I  mentioned  –  viz., 
regulatory capital, market and public expectations – we should be dropping the definition of 
banks  being  ‘highly  levered’  institutions.  If  we  add  the  capital  requirement  as  per  TLAC 
prescriptions,  bankers’  usual  cautionary  additional  capital,  yet  another  add  on  as  per  the 
public expectation as a fallout of stress test assessments, I am afraid, we will end up banks 
having  a  debt  equity  ratio  of  about  4:1,  which  is  not  too  different  from  highly  levered 
corporates.  That’s  one  of  the  reasons  why  we  are  very  cautious  and  hesitant  about 
supporting TLAC whole hog. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  27. 
banks of the future are not going to be the banks of yesterdays and todays. 
Therefore, the clear prognosis is that either the banks will be dead or at least the 
What to do? 
28. 
I  regret  that  at  the  very  end  of  these two  days  deliberations  on  future  of  banks, I 
have  to  paint  such  a  dismal  future  for  your  existence  as  banks.  My  point  is  we  have  to 
recognize the realities of the day, the compulsions of the new driving forces that demand a 
new paradigm in banking and reflect on future course of action. 
29. 
There are hopes. First is to take full advantage of the technological developments 
and enmesh in them to meet the customer expectations. The new consumer is addicted to 
connectivity, convenience and freedom. They want not just Value Added Services, but such 
services Anytime Anywhere Anyhow – so nicely said by Derrydean Dadzie the Chief Doer of 
DreamOval Ltd. 
30. 
Another prescription by some like Hennie Bester, Jeremy Gray and David Saunders 
suggests that while banks may have the urgent need to identify new avenues for growth and 
the need to embrace new information-based technologies, what is of paramount importance 
is  a  positive  shift  towards  increased  recognition  of  the  social  responsibility  of  the  financial 
services providers. They argue that, ultimately, balancing profitability with customer benefit 
must remain at the heart of any new paradigm. 
31. 
Can  you  hear  some  ringing  in  the  bell?  The  Priority  Sector  concept?  The  much 
touted, the much despised, the much maligned, yet rising like the Phoenix? May be yes. But I 
would think that this time around it is with a much larger perspective. In Financial Inclusion, 
Green financing, AML / CFT and even in anti-tax avoidance efforts, banks can play a much 
larger socially relevant role than any of the chunked away entities. 
32. 
One big area, you vacated and / or let others to occupy by your lackluster attitude is 
there for your rightful reclaim, if only you make concerted and conscious effort. That is SME 
financing.  Small  and  medium  sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  are  a  major,  yet  often  overlooked 
sector by formal financial institutions. The SMEs reportedly account for more than half of the 
world’s gross domestic product (GDP) and employ almost two-thirds of the global work force. 
However,  they  are  the  neglected  lot  world  over.  As  reported  by  the  International  Financial 
Corporation  (IFC),  a  “funding  gap”  of  more  than  $2 trillion  exists  for  small  businesses  in 
emerging markets alone. I am not going into the reasons for this state of affair. 
In recent years, the FinTech companies and the market place lending have entered 
33. 
into this vacuum and have become immensely and instantly successful and have become a 
powerful trend. This trend has the potential to become a game changer for small businesses. 
Because FinTech solutions are efficient and effective, the FinTech’s disruptive power is good 
display. If only the banks can change their current reluctant attitude towards SME financing, 
they can be a good antidote for these risks and therefore will display their socially relevant 
role, which in turn can justify their existence for the future. 
34. 
relevant in economic sense alone, you can have hopes to exist. 
35. 
I can only conclude with the idea that if you make yourself socially relevant, not just 
Thank you for your patient attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
