   Andrew Hauser: A new RTGS service for the United Kingdom – a 
platform 9¾ for sterling payments? 
Remarks  by  Mr  Andrew  Hauser,  Executive  Director  for  Banking,  Payments  and  Financial 
Resilience of the Bank of England, on the panel “Towards a single platform for all payments”, 
at SWIFT’s SIBOS conference, Geneva, 28 September 2016. 
 People wanting to travel north out of London by train are spoiled for choice. Spread along a 
half-mile stretch of the city’s Euston Road are no less than three major stations: Euston, King’s 
Cross and St Pancras. Each provides slightly different facilities, with trains ferrying passengers 
at different speeds to different locations. But the basic service – train travel – is much the same 
in all three cases, and many of the destinations served by different stations are within a few 
miles of each other. Indeed some are identical. There are for example nearly 100 trains a day 
to Newark Northgate, split equally between King’s Cross and St Pancras!  
The reasons for such an apparently complex system are of course historic, dating back to the 
period of intense competition between train lines in Victorian times. Euston was built in 1837 
for the London and Birmingham Railway, King’s Cross in 1852 for the Great Northern Railway, 
and St Pancras in 1868 for the Midland Railway. Given a free hand, it is inconceivable that 
anyone  would  design  such  arrangements  from  scratch  today.  Yet  tens  of  millions  of 
passengers use each station every year: business is booming. 
The situation in UK payments today is rather similar. Customers wishing to make a domestic 
retail  payment  can  choose  between  physical  cash (drawn from their  bank,  or  via  the  LINK 
system of ATMs), a paper cheque, a credit or debit card via the Visa or Mastercard systems, 
a real-time payment over FPS, or a batch payment across Bacs. Wholesale payments may be 
made through the CHAPS high-value scheme, operated on the Bank of England’s Real-Time 
Gross Settlement System (RTGS) or through the embedded payment schemes of CREST or 
LCH. Those making cross-border payments may use their correspondent bank, a direct link to 
an overseas RTGS system or CLS the foreign exchange settlement service. Taken together, 
one can easily list 10 or 15 payments pathways without even trying. 
Each  of  these  systems  is  devoted  to  meeting  the  needs  of  their  customers,  which  vary 
materially. Yet at their most basic level, all involve a simple transfer of value. The fragmented 
way in which that core service is delivered poses at least three types of economic challenge. 
First, those having to make different types of payment over time must bear the direct costs of 
meeting  multiple  different  payments  protocols,  technological  requirements,  fees  and 
governance  standards.  Second,  those  costs  create  potential  barriers  to  entry  for  would-be 
payments  providers,  holding  back  innovation  and  competition.  And,  third,  it  is  a  potential 
challenge  for  system-wide  resilience,  if  payments  meant  for  one  system  cannot  easily  be 
rerouted through another in the event of a system outage. 
Those challenges have been with us for some time. But the pressure for change is intensifying 
from a number of directions. First, consumers are increasingly demanding a more seamless 
payments experience – in real time, and indifferent to time zone, country or currency. That 
pressure has been most evident in retail markets – but is spreading to corporate and larger-
value markets too. Second, intense cost pressures on traditional business models since the 
financial crisis have pushed banks and other financial institutions to look for more radical ways 
to find efficiency savings, particularly in back office and ancillary services such as payments.  
Third, advances in technology have made it much easier to deliver or contemplate genuinely 
mobile  payments  platforms  and  distributed  payments  and  database  systems.  Fourth,  new 
regulation – building on the painful lessons of the financial crisis – has increased the need for 
financial  firms  to  be  able  to  mobilise  significant  stocks  of  highly  liquid  assets  quickly  and 
seamlessly  across  systems.  And,  fifth,  the  growing  threat  of  cyber-attack  and  reduced 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   tolerance for operational outages driven by the move to real-time payments has made users 
ever more demanding in terms of the resilience of payment ecosystems. 
All of these forces are pushing towards greater convergence in payments systems. But that 
convergence could take a number of different forms. At its most radical, it could imply a single 
universal payments system, run on a single platform, and handing all payment types. Or it 
could mean retaining separate systems, but with a common “backbone”, including a shared 
language, operating standards and access protocols. 
Before discussing these alternative models in greater detail, I should say a word about why 
central banks like the Bank of England have such a central interest in the outcome. Our primary 
role is to maintain stability in sterling payments arrangements – and we do that in two key 
ways. First, by ensuring that as many payments as possible settle in (or are backed by) central 
bank money, we aim to minimise so-called “settlement risk”: the risk that a payment fails to 
reach  its  destination  because  the  intermediary  fails,  or  confidence  is  undermined  in  the 
payments medium. Central bank money, whether physical (banknotes) or electronic (reserves) 
in form, is the ultimate risk-free means of final payment. And, second, central banks seek to 
maximise  the  operational  resilience  of  core  payments  systems,  by  operating  high-value 
payment systems directly and supervising the other systems through our regulatory powers. 
Although public debate about operational resilience has, rightly, intensified in recent years, 
payments systems have a generally good track record: for instance, most operated flawlessly 
throughout during the financial crisis, unlike some other key bits of the financial system.  
It is sometimes claimed that central banks’ focus on stability stands in the way of innovation or 
consumer  interests.  But  neither  needs  to  be  true.  Efficiency-enhancing  innovation  and 
competition  has  an  important  part  to  play  in  promoting  financial  stability,  through  reducing 
market concentration, identifying new risk-reducing technologies, and increasing the scope for 
electronic  settlement  in  central  bank  money.  And  surveys  regularly  identify  resilience  and 
safety as being at the very top of consumers’ demands for payments services. So we do want 
to enable innovation, but only where that can be done without impairing stability. 
What  do  we  make,  then,  of  those  two  alternative  models  for  payments  convergence  I 
mentioned  a  moment  ago?  An  all-encompassing  payments  platform  hosted  on  a  single  IT 
system has clear appeal from the point of view of simplicity and clarity of purpose. And there 
are  some  important  case  studies  globally  –  including  in  Mexico,  whose  central  bank  is 
represented on the panel today. But it would be a big change from the model we have in the 
United Kingdom today, and poses at least three significant risks. First, it would involve putting 
all our eggs in one basket operationally: if the system and its backups were to go down, for 
any reason, all payments in the UK would stop. So, just as it would be unwise to try to channel 
all 100m passengers a year to Euston, King’s Cross and St Pancras through a single train 
platform, diversity has some operational merits! Second, it would be potentially very complex 
to ensure that all of the different functions currently offered by the various payment systems 
were replicated on the single system. In all probability this would end up being impossible, and 
compromises would be made – what started as being everything to everyone could end up 
being much less. Third, someone would need to pay – and there is a good chance that such a 
large project might fall to the public authorities. That is not the model that has developed for 
UK  retail  payments  –  and  such  a  single  dominant  infrastructure  could  well  have  negative 
implications for innovation and competition. 
Over the medium- to long-term, it is possible that some of these challenges may be overcome 
as  new  technologies  –  including  the  distributed  ledger  –  mature.  Central  banks  could 
themselves have a role to play in the operation or underpinning of any such system, through 
the  issuance  of  a  Central  Bank  Digital  Currency  or  otherwise.  But  there  are  so  many  big 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   questions around such a scheme – policy, legal, technological, even social – that this is still 
very much in the realm of research rather than implementation1. 
In the nearer term, the UK is therefore embracing the second convergence concept – that of 
joining  separate  systems  together  around  a  common  backbone,  embracing  so-called 
“interoperability”. Underpinning that, I would pick out two key drivers – the first in wholesale 
payments, and the second in retail. 
The first driver is the Bank of England’s consultation on a new medium-term vision for its high-
value  RTGS  service,  which  we  published  just  a  few  days  ago2.  RTGS  has  delivered  an 
extended period of stability in sterling payments, has a range of risk-mitigation features that is 
at least the equal of other systems globally, and is generally well thought of by its users. But, 
after two decades of operation, its capacity to deal with the accelerating pace of change in 
payments that I described earlier is limited. That poses three risks to the achievement of the 
Bank’s  mission  over  the  medium  term.  First,  we  could  see  a  reversal  in  the  proportion  of 
payments settled in central bank money if systems develop outside the RTGS net, harming 
financial stability. “Ubering” for central banks, if you like. Second, we may end up impeding 
stability-enhancing innovation and competition. And, third, we risk a future diminution in service 
quality, whether in terms of meeting user needs or operational continuity. 
Our consultation paper sets out a vision for responding to that change – retaining the core risk-
mitigating  functions  of  the  current  generation  of  RTGS,  but  fundamentally  refreshing  the 
technological base of the service and delivering strategic change in four key areas: broader 
access (including for smaller banks, and non-banks); even greater resilience (in particular to 
cyber-threats); stronger inter-operability (including through the adoption of ISO 20022); and 
better  user  functionality  (including  true  or  near-24x7  operating  capability,  better  liquidity 
management  tools  and  richer  data  provision).  Further  detail  is  given  in  Table  A.  Taken 
together, these changes aim to safeguard stability in a rapidly-changing payments ecosystem 
whilst  enabling  that  innovation  to  take  place:  by  putting  a  modern  and  responsive  RTGS 
service at its heart. We are seeking feedback on these proposals by 7 November, and will 
publish a final blueprint in early 2017. 
Alongside  that  change  to  RTGS,  reform  is  also  underway  in  the  sterling  retail  payment 
systems. In many respects, the UK starts from a good position: for instance, we have high 
rates of mobile and internet banking access, and have had real time retail payments available 
on a 24/7/365 basis since 2008, when Faster Payments was introduced. But, as I noted at the 
start,  the  landscape  is  quite  a  fractured  one,  using  different  messaging  standards  and 
technology platforms, with relatively high levels of tiering. Last year saw the establishment of 
a Payments Strategy Forum, drawing together a wide range of industry and user participants 
to plot a new vision for retail payments. The forum’s own consultation on a future strategy has 
just  concluded,  and  includes  a  number  of  recommendations  for  the  simplification  and 
streamlining  of  both  the  governance  and  technology  underpinning  retail  payments.  This 
touches  on  some  of  the  same  themes  as  the  Bank’s  proposals,  including  in  particular  a 
recommendation to move to a common interoperable messaging standard. 
An  important  and  as  yet  not  fully  answered  question  is  whether  interoperability  in  retail 
payments means just the adoption of common messaging standards, governance and access 
criteria  by  otherwise-separate  retail  technologies  –  or  whether  it  also  means  limited 
technological convergence, for example with multiple “overlay” services using a common “pipe” 
to receive and transmit payments. Such a model would be consistent with the increased use 
of Application Programming Interfaces (or APIs) and regulation such as the Second Payments 
                                                
1  The  Bank  of  England  is  actively  engaged  in  this  work  through  its  digital  currency  research  programme 
(http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/banknotes/Pages/digitalcurrencies/default.aspx)  and  its  fintech  accelerator 
(http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/Pages/fintech/default.aspx). 
2   http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/paymentsystem/cp160916.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Services Directive. But significantly further thought is required about the form any such pipe 
might  take,  how  it  could  be  designed  in  a  general  enough  way  to  accommodate  multiple 
different payment services, and who would pay and operate it. A high-volume retail payments 
pipe  would  have  a  number  of  characteristics  of  a  public  utility  –  but,  unlike  in  some  other 
countries, we would not envisage that the Bank of England would build or operate this type of 
infrastructure. 
These types of challenge are eminently solvable – and are in no way unique to payments. To 
return to where I began, the UK railways have explored ways to combine common ownership 
of the track network and timetable with competing rail service providers whilst making use of 
those old, eccentrically-located stations. And energy and telecommunications have found their 
own solutions to similar problems, including across national borders. But the history of those 
industries  suggests  it  will  not  be  entirely  plain  sailing:  and  the  stakes  in  payments  are 
particularly high. That is why the Bank of England and the Payment Systems Regulator are 
working very closely together to ensure that their twin statutory objectives of systemic stability 
and enhancing competition are met by whatever structure ends up being proposed. 
I said earlier that I thought that a genuinely single technology platform for the UK was unlikely 
to be feasible in the near term, drawing an analogy with having a single platform for those three 
train stations. If a spread of platforms, drawn together through a common set of standards and 
norms, is a more plausible target, how does RTGS fit in? 
Those of you particularly familiar with London’s King’s Cross station will know that there is a 
spot  (ironically  between  platforms  8  and  9),  where  a  half-submerged  luggage  trolley 
commemorates the mythical “Platform 9¾” from Harry Potter. Platform 9¾ is of course the 
gateway to the magical secrets of Hogwarts – but is invisible to “muggles” (ie normal human 
beings), requiring travellers to fling themselves head first at a potentially unyielding wall to gain 
entry. If there may have been some parallels between this fictional construct and the role of 
RTGS in the past – both in the vital role it plays, and in its relative obscurity – it is our firm 
intention that there should not be in the future. The vision we have just published is designed 
to underscore and throw new light on the special role that RTGS has, of maintaining stability 
by providing final settlement in central bank money for all payments, and on a real-time gross 
basis for those that are most systemically important. But it also recognises the need to broaden 
access to RTGS and improve its ability to communicate with a wide range of other systems 
seamlessly and resiliently if it is to keep pace with a changing environment. We look forward 
to hearing the responses to our consultation. 
Thank you. 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Source: “A new RTGS service for the United Kingdom: safeguarding stability, enabling innovation”, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/paymentsystem/cp160916.pdf 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    5 
