   Agus D W Martowardojo: Maintaining financial stability amid continued 
economic growth deceleration 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Agus  D  W  Martowardojo,  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the 
Discussion and Launching of the Financial Stability Review Book, Jakarta, 10 December 2015. 
 Honorable, 
Our Predecessors Governors of Bank Indonesia, 
Members of the Board of Governors of Bank Indonesia, 
Officials in the Ministries and State Agencies, 
Banking  Leaders 
Representatives  of Industry Associations 
Academicians and Economic Observers 
Attendees and Invitees, 
Assalamu’alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh,  
Good afternoon and best wishes to us all, 
First of all, let us pray our praise and gratitude to Allah SWT, the God Almighty for only upon 
His grace and blessing, we can all gather here in good health to participate in the discussion 
and  launching  of  the  Book  on  Financial  Stability  Review  (Kajian  Stabilitas  Keuangan-KSK) 
No. 25, September Edition Year 2015. 
The  development  of  this  KSK  constitutes  a  part  of  the  transparency  and  accountability  of 
Bank  Indonesia’s  duty  implementation  in  the  field  of  macro-  prudential.  As  one  of  the 
routine semester publications, KSK contains the  results of assessment and review of Bank 
Indonesia toward the condition of the national financial system. 
Such assessment also covers our monitoring to the sources of vulnerability and imbalance of 
the financial system that can be found in the financial markets; financial agencies/institutions, 
namely  households  and  corporates;  banking;  and  Non-Bank  Financial  Institutions  (Institusi 
Keuangan Non-Bank-IKNB); and also financial infrastructures. 
Due  to  the  deceleration  of  economic  growth  experienced  by  Indonesia,  it  is  critical  for 
Bank  Indonesia  as  the  authority  in  the  field  of  macro-prudential  to  continue  maintaining 
the  stability  of  financial  system.  Especially,  as  the  dynamics of the global financial system 
continue to remain under uncertainties. 
Therefore, the edition of KSK this time takes up the theme of “Maintaining Financial Stability 
amid Continued Economic Growth Deceleration” We are convinced that our duty in maintaining 
the stability of economy will be more challenging. Hence, we expect that depth assessment 
and review on the condition of national financial system will be a valuable reference for us in 
taking measures in the future. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  condition  of  Indonesia’s  financial  system  in  2015  in  general  is  still  overwhelmed  by 
various challenges  and fluctuations, both sourced from global  and domestic. The still weak 
global economic recovery, the continued declining  price of commodities and the decreasing 
capital inflows to developing countries  have become the pressure trigger to the developing 
countries’ economics  including  Indonesia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Those  conditions  are  also  hardened  by  the  uncertainty  and  magnitude  of  the  Fed interest 
rate  normalization  as  well  as  the  measures  of  monetary  easing  by  European  countries, 
Japan, and China in the efforts to recover their economic  growth. One of the China’s efforts, 
i.e. by unexpectedly devaluating Yuan  currency,  has also triggered fluctuations in the global 
financial market and  given additional pressure to the developing countries. 
From the domestic side, the development of financial system in Indonesia also  encountered 
several challenges. Amidst the slowdown of economic growth,  pro-cyclical  banking  reflected 
in  the  slowdown  of  credit  growth  needs  to  be  looked  more  closely.  Besides,  the  high 
pressure  against  Rupiah  exchange  rate  as  well  as  the  non-optimal  absorption  of  fiscal 
budget also colors the dynamics  of Indonesia’s financial system. 
Attendees, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  response  to  the  increasing  pressure  against  the  economic  stability  derived  from  global 
and  domestic,  Bank  Indonesia  as  the  macro-prudential  authority  has  pursued  the  policy 
which  focused  to  encourage  the  realization  of  macro-  economic stability while maintaining 
the momentum of growth. 
Efforts carried out by Bank Indonesia has been taken through loosening  measurable macro-
prudential  policies  in  order  to  give  space  for  recovery,  for  the  economic  sectors  with 
relatively controlled risk. 
The easing macro-prudential policies taken, i.e.: 
• 
Loan to Value Ratio (LTV) magnitude adjustment for property loan, and a  decrease 
in  advance  for  motor  vehicle  loan  in  order  to  provide  stimulus  from  the  demand 
side. 
Improvement of regulation of statutory reserves (Giro Wajib Minimum-GWM) of Loan 
to  Funding  Ratio  (GWM-LFR)  to  expand  space  for  banking  in  channeling  loans, 
including MSME’s credit, by taking into account commercial papers (securities) issued 
by banks as third party fund components. 
 In  addition  to  that,  Bank  Indonesia  also  performed macro-prudential  supervision,  among 
others  was  realized  by  implementing  surveillance  and  joint  audit with  OJK  toward  banks 
that  have  highest foreign  exchange risk  exposure,  in  order  to  mitigate  the  emergence  of 
systemic risk in banking in the midst  of  weakening  pressure  of  Rupiah  exchange  rate.  To 
strengthen  that,  Bank  Indonesia  also  continues  conducting  assessments  to  the  overall 
national  financial system. 
Furthermore,  the  maintained  financial  stability  system  has  also  been  the  result  of  Bank 
Indonesia  policy-mix  synergy,  namely,  by  exercising  monetary  policy  carefully  and 
consistently,  as  well  as  solid  coordination  with  the  Government  and  relevant  authorities, 
both  in  the  form  of  bilateral  coordination  and  within  the framework of Financial System 
Stability Coordination Forum (Forum Koordinasi Stabilitas Sistem Keuangan-FKSSK). 
Attendees, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  Banking  industry  as  the  main  part  of  the  national  financial  system,  currently  is  in  a 
maintained  state.  The  banking  capital  is  maintained  at  high level, far above the minimum 
requirement. Whereas, the ratio of non-  performing loan also remains relatively low. 
Therefore,  the  banking  industry  resilience  represented  the  largest  asset  share 
the 
domestic  financial  system  is  still  quite  strong  to  absorb  arising  risk  potential, especially 
credit risk, market risk and liquidity risk. 
Moreover, non-bank financial industry is also still capable to stay at a safe level,  although 
with  a  risk that tends  to increase,  following  the  still  weak global  economic  recovery,  the 
deceleration  of  domestic  economy,  and  the  continued  declining  commodity prices. 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   In  the  household  sector,  credit  risk  is  still  relatively  maintained  although  we  need  to 
remain  cautious  as  there  is  increasing  Debt  Service  Ratio  (DSR).  The  increase  of  DSR 
reflects the decrease in the ability of the household sector in  paying their debts in line with 
the slowdown of domestic economy. 
On the side of financial system infrastructure, we are grateful that implementation of payment 
system  has  been  able  to  run  safely,  efficiently  and  reliably  so  that  it  become  one  of  the 
main supporting factors of the maintained  financial system stability. 
In  the  effort to continue strengthening the  national  financial infrastructure,  consecutively  in 
June  and  November  2015,  Bank  Indonesia  has  implemented  National Clearing  System 
of Bank Indonesia (Sistem Kliring Nasional Bank  Indonesia-SKNBI) and Real Time Gross 
Settlement  (RTGS)  as  well  as  Scriptless  Securities  Settlement  System  (SSSS)  of 
Generation II. 
The overall effort of strengthening, both in the context of retail payment  activities  and  high 
value, is intended to enhance the efficiency of the national  payment system and to increase 
the protection and speed of service for customers.  With  the  availability  of  increasing  quality 
of  the  payment  system  service,  the  supports  to  the  activities  in  the  financial  system, 
which  in  turn  contributed  in  maintaining  the  financial  system  stability,  are  also  expected 
to  continue  improving. 
Nevertheless, the stability of the financial system is still not immune from the  risk potentials, 
whether  liquidity  risk,  credit  risk  or  market  risk.  Therefore,  Bank  Indonesia will constantly 
take macro-prudential policy directed at efforts to  control  key  risks  that  could  potentially 
pose  a  systemic  risk  and  maintain  the  balance of the financial system. 
Attendees, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In the future, the global  economy will still be  faced with the tough  challenges,  especially if 
the  deceleration  of  China’s  economic  structural  still  continues,  commodity  prices  still 
experience pressures, and the plan of The Fed monetary  policy normalization continues to 
create fluctuation in the global financial  market. Those three factors will impact significantly 
to the Indonesia’s economy  and the condition of the financial system. 
In  the midst  of those  challenges,  the  policy  of financial  system  stability  needs  to continue 
to  be  strengthened  in  order  to  enhance  financial  system  resilience  against  various  risk 
potentials,  and all  at once  to  motivate  the  function  of banking intermediation to be more 
efficient and equitable to support the financing of the economy. 
In  the  effort  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  national  financial  system,  which  is  our  joint 
responsibility,  Bank 
intensive 
communication with the Government and relevant Authorities in  responding  to  the  existing 
challenges.  We  believe  that  the  key  to  overcome  various challenges in the future is to 
establish a close synergy among all  stakeholders  in Indonesia. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, Attendees, 
Thereby,  what  we  can  convey  as  an  introduction.  We,  naturally,  hope  that  the  book  on 
Financial Stability Review – Bank Indonesia could become an increasingly quality reference 
in  the future,  and so that this discussion forum  also  contributes  in  expanding  the  insight, 
in  building  the  understanding,  and  in  encouraging  constructive  measures  in  the  effort  to 
create  the  stability  of  financial system in Indonesia. 
In closing, may Allah the God Almighty always bless us and lighten our steps. 
Thank you,  
Wassalamu’alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh. 
Indonesia  will  always  promote  coordination  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
