  Mario Draghi: The international dimension of monetary policy 
Introductory speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB 
Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, 28 June 2016. 
 In recent years central banks across advanced economies have been engaged in the same 
task, namely raising inflation and inflation expectations back to levels consistent with price 
stability.  Each  has  faced  conditions  particular  to  its  own  jurisdiction.  Each  has  deployed 
measures appropriate to its own context. And each has acted to fulfil the mandate laid down 
in its own constitution. 
And yet, the fact that all central banks have faced a common challenge of low inflation is not 
coincidental. There are global factors at play. And this begs the question, what is the best 
way for us to deal with them? 
At one extreme, central banks can take global conditions as entirely exogenous and set their 
policies  accordingly.  At  the  other  extreme  is  explicit  coordination  of  monetary  policies.  In 
between is a range of informal solutions. 
Whatever one’s views on these options, what is clear is that the question of the international 
dimension  of  monetary  policy  is  becoming  more  pertinent,  since  the  common  factors 
affecting central banks are increasing. 
The global drivers of inflation 
Indeed,  a  growing  literature  suggests  that  globalisation  has  created  a  common  factor  in 
inflation  developments,  which  goes  beyond  fluctuations  in  energy  or  commodity  prices. 
Higher  import  volumes  have  increased  the  importance  of  international  prices  and  wages 
relative to domestic ones, making the global output gap more relevant.1 
In that context there are two types of factors that are significant for the global low inflation 
environment  we  face  today:  more  cyclical  factors  that  have  put  downward  pressure  on 
prices;  and  more  structural  factors  that  have  lowered  the  equilibrium  real  rate  and  slowed 
down the response of the economy to monetary policy. 
The first type of factors includes the large negative output gaps generated by the financial 
crisis and its aftermath, which still average 1% among G7 economies today.2 
This  global  slack  has  dampened  in  particular  import  and  producer  price  inflation,  both  of 
which  have  been  weak  for  several  years  among  advanced  economies.  Prices  set  by 
producers  in  the  euro  area  and  those  set  by  producers  in  trading  partner  countries  are 
indeed highly correlated.3 
Also depressing global inflation has been the slump in demand for energy and commodities 
linked  to  the  slowdown  in  emerging  markets. This  has  fed  not  just  into  lower  headline 
                                                
1 
Inflation as a global phenomenon has been documented e.g. by M. Ciccarelli and B. Mojon (2010), “Global 
Inflation”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92:524–535. Measures of global economic slack are good 
predictors  of  national  inflation  in  advanced  countries,  as  shown  empirically  e.g.  by  C.  Borio  and  A.  Filardo 
(2007),  “Globalisation  and  inflation:  New  cross-country  evidence  on  the  global  determinants  of  domestic 
inflation”  BIS  WP  no.  227;  and  in  New  Keynesian  open  economy  models  e.g.  by  R.  Clarida,  J.  Gali,  and 
M. Gertler,  (2002)  “A  Simple  Framework  for  International  Monetary  Policy  Analysis,”  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics 49: 879–904. 
IMF estimates. 
2 
3  See ECB (2015), “The impact of oil prices on euro area inflation”, Box 3, Annual Report 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  inflation,  but  also  into  lower  underlying  inflation  through  its  effect  on  costs  and  imported 
prices.  Indeed,  if  one  decomposes  inflation  for  the  average  advanced  economy,  one  finds 
that since mid-2014 there has been a notable rise in the global component, linked largely to 
oil and commodity price falls.4 
These  various  factors  may  originate  only  in  parts  of  the  global  economy  –  some  originate 
more in advanced economies, other more in emerging markets – but in an integrated world 
they have global effects. Cyclical weakness has spilled over through various channels into a 
similar challenge for all. 
The second type of factors is more structural in nature. They concern the global forces that 
have led to very low real equilibrium interest rates across advanced economies, and hence 
made it more complicated for monetary policy everywhere to provide the appropriate boost to 
global  demand given  an  effective  lower  bound  on  nominal  interest  rates.  In  particular, this 
has  led  many  central  banks  in  the  advanced  economies  to  engage  in  large-scale 
unconventional policies. 
That  low  interest  rate  environment  is  a  consequence  of  a  global  excess  of  desired  saving 
over  planned  investment,  which  results  from  rising  net  savings  as  populations  plan  for 
retirement; from increased demand for and lower supply of safe assets; from relatively less 
public capital expenditure in a context of slowing population growth in advanced economies; 
from the secular shift from industries intensive in physical capital to those more intensive in 
human  capital;  and  from  a  slowdown  in  productivity  growth  that  reduces  returns  on 
investment.5 
Again,  those  factors  may  not  be  distributed  homogenously  across  economies,  but  their 
effects  are  global  because 
through  global  financial  markets.  With 
internationally mobile capital, the clearing interest rate that balances saving and investment 
is  more  a  global  concept  than  a  local  one.  And  accordingly,  estimates  of  the  equilibrium 
interest rate suggest that it is very low, possibly even negative, in the euro area, the US and 
other advanced economies.6 
None  of  this  means  that  central  banks  should  give  up  on  pursuing  their  domestic  price 
stability mandates. We have demonstrated with our unconventional tools that it is possible to 
engineer accommodative financial conditions even when the equilibrium interest rate is low. 
And we have shown that this can be effective in supporting domestic demand and stoking 
domestic price pressures even when disinflationary headwinds are blowing from the global 
economy. 
But the global nature of low inflation does have two important implications. 
they  propagate 
Coping with monetary policy spillovers 
The  first  is  that  operating  against  persistent  headwinds  arising  from  abroad  has  forced 
central banks to deploy monetary policy  with more intensity to deliver their mandates, and 
that in turn results in higher financial stability risks and spillovers to economic and financial 
conditions in other jurisdictions. 
                                                
4  See  Draghi,  M.  (2015),  “Global  and  domestic  inflation”,  speech  at  the  Economic  Club  of  New  York, 
4 December 2015. 
5  See  Constâncio,  V.  (2016),  “The  challenge  of  low  real  interest  rates  for  monetary  policy”,  speech  at  the 
Utrecht School of Economics, 15 June 2016. 
6  See Holston, K., Laubach, T. and Williams, J. (2016), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International 
Trends  and  Determinants”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank of  San Francisco Working  Paper  Series, Working  Paper 
2016–11. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Such spillovers are not necessarily all negative for the global economy. On the contrary, by 
securing economic and financial stability in their own jurisdictions, advanced economies also 
help stabilise other economies through trade and financial linkages. The empirical evidence 
suggests  that  the  net  spillover  effect  of  the  measures  taken  during  the  crisis  has  been 
positive, especially at times – such as after the Lehman crash – when countries have faced 
common global shocks.7 
At  the  same  time,  monetary  policy  has  inevitably  created  destabilising  spillovers  as  well, 
especially  when  business  cycles  have  been  less  aligned.  The  large  exchange  rates 
fluctuations between major currencies, and the pressures some emerging economies have 
experienced  from  capital  flows,  are  testament  to  that.  This  is  not  so  much  a  result  of  the 
measures central banks have employed8, but rather of the intensity with which they have had 
to be used. 
These  negative  spillovers  have  led  to  a  revival  of  interest  in  the  topic  of  monetary  policy 
coordination.9 
But formal monetary policy coordination is complex, for well-known reasons.10 Central banks 
have national mandates, not global ones, and are accountable to their domestic parliament. 
This does not mean, however, that we cannot achieve a better global solution than we have 
today. 
We have seen, for instance, how divergent monetary policies among major central banks can 
create uncertainty about future policy intentions, which in turn leads to higher exchange rate 
volatility and risk premia. That then has to be countered with more expansionary monetary 
policy, increasing spillover effects for others. We also know that competitive devaluations are 
lose-lose for the global economy, since they lead only to greater market volatility, to which 
other central banks are then forced to react to defend their domestic mandates. 
So we  would all clearly  benefit from enhanced understanding among central banks on the 
relative paths of monetary policy. That comes down, above all, to improving communication 
over our reaction functions and policy frameworks. 
The  global  economy  could  also  benefit  from  cooperation  among  spillover-initiating  and 
spillover-receiving economies on how to mitigate unwanted side effects. 
One aspect that we need to understand better is how domestic monetary regimes affect the 
transmission of foreign monetary policy shocks. There has been a debate in recent years as 
to  whether  the  famous  “trilemma”  of  international  macro  has  collapsed  into  a  “dilemma”, 
whereby  floating  exchange  rates  no  longer  guarantee  autonomy  for  domestic  monetary 
policy, and policy independence is only possible if capital flows are in fact managed.11 But 
                                                
7  See Ammer et al. (2016), “International Spillovers of Monetary Policy” IFDP Notes. See Georgiadis (in press), 
“Determinants  of  global  spillovers  from  US  monetary  policy”,  Journal  of  International  Money  and  Finance; 
Feldkircher  and  Huber  (2015),  “The  International  Transmission  of  U.S.  Structural  Shocks  –  Evidence  from 
Global  Vector  Autoregressions”,  European  Economic  Review,  vol.  81(C),  pages  167–188;  Kim  (2001), 
“International  transmission  of  U.S.  monetary  policy  shocks:  Evidence  from  VARs”,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics, vol. 48(2), pp. 339–372. 
8  See Ammer et al. (2016, op cit.). 
9  See  Rajan  (2016),  “Towards  rules  of  the  monetary  game”,  Speech  at  at  the  IMF/Government  of  India 
Conference on Advancing Asia: Investing for the Future, New Delhi, 12 March 2016. 
10  For a fuller discussion see Cœuré, B. (2014), “Policy coordination in a multipolar world”, speech at the 5th 
annual Cusco conference organised by the Central Reserve Bank of Peru and the Reinventing Bretton Woods 
Committee: “70 years after Bretton Woods: Managing the interconnectedness of the world economy”, Cusco, 
22 July 2014. 
11  See  Rey  (2015),  “Dilemma  not  Trilemma:  The  global  Financial  Cycle  and  Monetary  Policy  Independence”, 
NBER Working Papers, no. 21162; Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015), ”World Asset Markets and the Global 
Financial Cycle”, NBER Working Papers, no. 21722. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  there is also evidence that exchange rate regimes still matter. Various recent studies support 
the  traditional  view  that  exchange  rate flexibility  affords  at  least  some  degree  of  insulation 
from global shocks.12 
Another  aspect  is  understanding  the  role  of  domestic  policies  more  broadly  in  mitigating 
negative  spillovers.  A  large  body  of  empirical  work  in  recent  years  has  shown  that  fiscal, 
macro-prudential, regulatory and supervisory policies can help mitigate the adverse effects of 
foreign  monetary  policy  on  domestic  financial  stability.13  Indeed,  the  experience  with  the 
taper tantrum in 2013 showed how differences in domestic policy frameworks shaped how 
severely different economies were affected by financial spillovers.14 
In other words, it has become clearer since the crisis that the famous “Tinbergen principle” 
which  we  apply  at  the  domestic  level  also  needs  to  be  applied  at  the  global  level. 
Policymakers  need  to  have  sufficient  instruments  to  deliver  on  their  objectives.  And  when 
they do have them, they must use them. 
The need for policy alignment 
The  second  implication  of  the  global  nature  of  low  inflation  is  that  there  is  a  common 
responsibility for addressing its sources, whatever and wherever their origin. 
Indeed, to the extent that the environment in which we operate is more affected by the global 
output  gap,  and  the  global  savings-investment  balance,  the  speed  with  which  monetary 
policy can achieve domestic goals inevitably becomes more dependent on others – on the 
success of authorities in other jurisdictions to also close their domestic output gaps; and on 
our collective ability to tackle the secular drivers of global saving and investment imbalances. 
In  a  recent  speech  in  Brussels  I  made  a  similar  point  regarding  the  interaction  between 
monetary  policy  and  other  policies  at  the  domestic  level,  such  as  fiscal  and  structural 
policies.15  I  maintained  that  central  bank  independence  could  best  be  described  as 
independence  in  interdependence,  since  monetary  policy  can  always  achieve  its  objective 
eventually, but it will do so faster, and with less collateral effects, if the overall policy mix is 
consistent. 
What I am saying here is that the same applies at the global level. We may not need formal 
coordination  of  policies.  But  we  can  benefit  from  alignment  of  policies.  What  I  mean  by 
alignment is a shared diagnosis of the root causes of the challenges that affect us all; and a 
shared commitment to found our domestic policies on that diagnosis. 
Today, for  instance,  the  way  in  which  domestic  policies  respond  to  a  shortage  of  demand 
globally will vary: in some cases, the emphasis may be on increasing public investment; in 
                                                
12  For  a  review  see  Frankel  (2016),  “International  Coordination,”  presented at  the  2015  Asia  Economic  Policy 
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 
13  See,  for  example,  Blanchard  et  al.  (2015),  “Can  Foreign  Exchange  Intervention  Stem  Exchange  Rate 
Pressures  from  Global  Capital  Flow  Shocks?”,  NBER  Working  Papers,  no.  21427;  Forbes  et  al.  (2015), 
“Capital  flow  management  measures:  What  are  they  good  for?,”  Journal  of  International  Economics,  vol. 
96(S1),  pp.  S76-S97;  Afanasieff  et  al.  (2015),  “Implementing  loan-to-value  ratios:  the case  of auto loans in 
Brazil (2010–11),” Central Bank of Brazil Working Paper Series, no. 380; Wong et al. (2015), “Using macro-
prudential  tools  to  address  systemic  risks  in  the  property  sector  in  Singapore”,  SEACEN  Financial  Stability 
Journal, vol 4, pp. 27–41; Ostry et al. (2012), “Tools for managing financial-stability risks from capital inflows”, 
Journal of International Economics, vol. 88(2), pp. 407–421; Habermeier et al. (2011), “The effectiveness of 
capital controls and prudential policies in managing large inflows”, IMF Staff Discussion Note, SDN/11/14 ;Lim 
et  al.  (2011),  “Macro-prudential  policy:  What  instruments  and  how  to  use  them?  Lessons  from  country 
experiences”, IMF Working Paper WP/11/238. 
14  See Eichengreen and Gupta (2013), “Fed tapering and emerging markets”, VOXeu.org. 
15  See  Draghi,  M.  (2016),  “On  the  importance  of policy  alignment to  fulfil  our  economic  potential”, 5th  Annual 
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa Lecture at the Brussels Economic Forum 2016, Brussels, 9 June 2016. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  others, on supporting private demand through more growth-friendly tax and regulatory policy, 
and of course through monetary policy. The relative stance of stabilisation policies will differ 
across countries depending on cyclical positions. But the sign of the effect on global demand 
needs to be positive. 
Similarly,  structural  policies  that  aim  at  raising  participation  and  productivity  may  take 
different forms in different places, but they need to achieve the same outcome, which is to 
increase long-term growth rates and raise equilibrium interest rates.16 Here fora such as the 
G-20 can play an essential role in bringing about the appropriate alignment of policies. It is 
key that what is agreed in those fora is translated in the concrete policy actions. 
The  disappointing  outcome  of  the  G-20  commitment  to  raise  global  growth  by  2%  with 
structural measures is one example of how intentions and actions can diverge. It contrasts 
with the more successful example that was provided by coordinated global fiscal expansion 
in  2008–09.  Such  fora  of  course  cannot  bind  countries  into  specific  actions.  But  mutual 
recognition of their common interest can act as a form of coordination device. 
That common interest today is a faster closing of the global output gap, more stable global 
inflation, higher long-term global growth and greater global financial stability. 
And  such  an  improved  policy  mix  would  help  reduce  unwanted  side  effects  of  monetary 
policy, since the burden of stabilisation would be better shared across policies. For instance, 
in  the  current  environment  of  global  slack,  the  international  spillovers  from  growth-friendly 
fiscal policies are likely to be wholly positive, since they primarily boost domestic demand in 
the home country. That is also true within regions, such as the euro area, where there are 
different local output gaps. 
The upshot is that, in a globalised world, the global policy mix matters – and will likely matter 
more as our economies become more integrated. So we have to think not just about whether 
our domestic monetary policies are appropriate, but whether they are properly aligned across 
jurisdictions. 
We have to think not just about the composition of policies within our jurisdictions, but about 
the  global  composition  that  can  maximise  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  so  that  our 
respective  mandates  can  best  be  delivered  without  overburdening further  monetary  policy, 
and so as to limit any destabilising spillovers. This is not a preference or a choice. It is simply 
the new reality we face. 
                                                 
16  For a discussion on the interaction between demand- and supply-side policies at the global level see Cœuré, 
B.  (2015),  “Paradigm  lost:  Rethinking  international  adjustments”,  Egon  and  Joan  von  Kashnitz  Lecture, 
Clausen Center for International Business and Policy, Berkeley, 21 November 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
