   Ashraf Mahmood Wathra: Payment systems and correspondent banking 
in the SAARC region 
Speech  by  Mr  Ashraf  Mahmood  Wathra,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the 
National Institute of Banking & Finance (NIBAF), Islamabad, 16 May 2016. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: Assalam-o-Alaikum and Good Morning. 
I am privileged to welcome all the distinguished participants and speakers on behalf of SBP, 
my colleagues and SAARC friends at the seminar who have gathered here today to exchange 
views on payment systems and correspondent banking. 
At  the  outset,  let  me  share  with  you  that  since  the  10th  SAARC  summit  in  1998,  the 
SAARCFINANCE Group has been a key gateway that has allowed regulators to gather at the 
forum and share their experiences about the efficacy of the existing policy framework, identify 
the emerging challenges, and brainstorm ideas to tackle these challenges. Over the years, the 
SAARCFINANCE Group has taken a number of constructive initiatives to achieve the objective 
of regional economic cooperation and trade facilitation. Since the year 2002, State Bank of 
Pakistan has been organizing seminars under the umbrella of SAARCFINANCE; these events 
have  covered  topics  as  diverse  as  monetary  policy,  SME  financing,  BASEL-II,  consumer 
protection, risk management and internal audit. 
One  of  the  major  objectives  of  the  SAARCFINANCE  Group  is  to  strengthen  payment 
mechanisms to boost intra-regional trade. To achieve this, I feel it is imperative that regulators, 
especially those from our region, interact and coordinate with each other to address the policy 
gaps and bottlenecks impeding intra-regional trade, commerce and remittance flows. 
During the last few years, State Bank of Pakistan has taken a number of steps to improve the 
efficiency of our domestic payment system. We have a comprehensive Payment Systems Act, 
a well functioning RTGS, and a Branchless Banking system that provides payment related 
services to ordinary customers through an expanding network of around 300,000 agents. We 
also have the Pakistan Remittance Initiative (PRI) that is playing a significant role in facilitating 
overseas Pakistanis in sending home remittances through legal channels, in partnership with 
commercial banks. Pakistan has also implemented the International Bank Account Number 
(IBAN),  which  plays  an  important  role  in  integrating  various  domestic  and  cross  border 
payment systems. Recently, we have also issued regulations governing the security of internet 
banking services offered by commercial banks to ensure that international security standards 
are being implemented in the banking system. 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
The world is now more inter-connected; this offers not only benefits but also poses risks for 
our banking and payment systems. Due to rapid technological innovations, consumers are now 
especially demanding instant funds transfer facilities, both at domestic and cross border levels. 
We need to understand these changing consumer preferences and find ways to address them. 
This is vital, not only for the growth of domestic and regional trade and commerce, but for 
facilitating  home  remittance  transfers  by  overseas  nationals  as  well.  At  the  same time,  we 
cannot afford to ignore the risks related to anti money laundering and counter financing of 
terrorism (AML/CFT) that are increasingly being faced by financial institutions in today’s world. 
You are all aware that correspondent banking is the contractual relationship between banks 
that  provide  payment  services  for  each  other.  However,  as  identified  by  international 
stakeholders like BIS and the World Bank, correspondent banking relationships are weakening 
due to various factors, such as higher costs and increased KYC requirements, especially for 
firms  operating  in  risky  jurisdictions.  As  a  result,  smaller  banks  in  weak  jurisdictions  have 
suffered the most. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   To address these weaknesses, Central Banks of the SAARC region must work together and 
support banks in their respective countries in addressing these challenges. This can be done 
through  policy  development  that  supports  mutual  coordination  and  communication  with 
regards to sharing of customer due diligence information and effective compliance with AML/ 
CFT  regulations,  as  recommended  by  international  bodies.  The  regulators  can,  therefore, 
focus on the following broader areas: 
First, A risk-based approach needs to be adopted to identify, assess and understand money 
laundering  and  terrorist  financing  risks  in  the  area  of  correspondent  banking,  and  the 
corresponding  AML/CFT  measures  that  are  largely  implemented  but  still  needs  more 
reinforcement.  Banks  also  need  to  be  more  proactive  in  their  customer  due  diligence  by 
gathering and sharing sufficient information among themselves, in a timely manner. 
Second, as highlighted by the Financial Stability Board (FSB), the reduction of correspondent 
banking  relationships  or  what  is  now  commonly  called  DERISKING  has  implications  for 
financial  inclusion  in  general  and  for  the  remittance  transfer  business  in  particular.  This  is 
important because financial inclusion has lately emerged as a priority policy objective for many 
central  banks  in  developing countries  across  the  world. Therefore,  regulators  need to  take 
steps to address this issue. 
And finally, the importance of modern and robust domestic payment systems in strengthening 
and  complimenting  correspondent  banking 
jurisdiction  cannot  be 
overemphasized.  Some  recent  events  related  to  security  breaches  in  banking  sector 
underscore  the  importance  of  enhanced  safety  and  security  measures,  especially  in  the 
domain of international payments. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Now, there is no denying that a direct implication of these measures will be an increase in the 
cost of correspondent banking services and consequently cost of transactions to tackle this, 
innovative solutions need to be explored. For example, in the SAARC region, we can create a 
correspondent banking model that will facilitate smaller banks and provide services at lower 
cost, while also adequately managing risks. One way of doing this can be to designate one 
bank in each of our countries that will provide correspondent services to all the respondents in 
their respective jurisdictions. These designated correspondent banks can then interact with 
each other to facilitate payments and settlements within the SAARC region sounds primitive 
but can be good starting point. This, I am sure, will reduce transaction costs, while at the same 
time mitigate risks, especially those related to anti money laundering and counter financing of 
terrorism. 
Finally, I will request all of you to take full advantage of this seminar to discuss the challenges 
facing the correspondent banking business and then suggest regulatory measures that can be 
adopted to strengthen the regional correspondent banking framework. A modern, intra-regional 
payment and trade facilitation system is paramount for our collective economic growth and 
prosperity. 
I wish you a pleasant stay in the beautiful city of Islamabad and hope you find time to explore 
the surroundings. 
Thank you. 
in  a  particular 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
