  Ravi Menon: An electronic payments society 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  Sim  Kee  Boon  Institute  Conference  on  FinTech  and  Financial  Inclusion, 
Singapore, 19 August 2016. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
Singapore has embarked on a journey to become a Smart Nation. 
• 
We  want  to  embrace  innovation  and  harness  technology  so  as  to  increase  the 
productivity of our businesses and enhance the welfare of our citizens. 
increase efficiency; 
manage risks better; 
create new opportunities; and 
improve people’s lives. 
The financial services sector is well placed to play a leading role in the Smart Nation project. 
MAS  has  been  partnering the financial  industry  to create  a  Smart  Financial  Centre,  where 
innovation is pervasive and FinTech is used widely. We want to do this to: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
A key component of the FinTech agenda is payments. 
• 
• 
• 
That future is digital and mobile, and it is already here. 
• 
All of us – as consumers, employees, or businesses – use payments. 
Payments impacts every sector of the economy. 
So, getting payments right is important; and we need to get it right for the future. 
Our wallets are overflowing with cards of every type and form. We can dip them, tap 
them, and now, add them to our mobile phones. 
All the major mobile wallets – Apple Pay, Android Pay, Samsung Pay – are available 
in Singapore. 
They can be used at any merchant that accepts contactless Visa, MasterCard, or 
American Express payments. 
  Our  banks  have  been  active  in  payments  innovation,  with  several  home  grown  mobile 
payments apps. 
• 
• 
DBS has PayLah! and Standard Chartered has Dash. 
These pioneering apps allow users to easily pay friends and businesses that use the 
same app. 
And the newer apps can do even more. 
– 
OCBC’s Pay Anyone allows customers to send money to friends in Singapore, 
using only their mobile number, Facebook ID, or email address. 
UOB  has  created  UOB  Mighty,  an  all-in-one  mobile  banking  app  and  wallet 
similar to Android Pay. 
  But the rest of the world has not been standing still. China, for instance, has been a hotbed 
for payments innovation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   WeChat integrates social media and payments to let users make seamless peer-to-
peer payments, shop online, and even pay at physical merchants. 
These solutions have made themselves an indispensable part of their users’ daily 
lives. 
 So,  while  there  has  been  quite  a  bit  of  payments  innovation  in  Singapore,  our  payments 
experience needs to be as good as the best we see globally. 
Our vision is to make Singapore an electronic payments society. A society: 
• 
• 
• 
that spurs continuous innovation in payments technology; 
that gives consumers maximum convenience and confidence in making payments; 
that  enables  firms  to  increase  productivity  through  payments  integrated  with 
business processes; and 
where swift, simple, and secure payments is a reality for everyone. 
• 
MAS has been working closely with the financial industry and other government agencies to 
drive  electronic  payments.  We  have  also  engaged  KPMG  Advisory  to  study  Singapore’s 
payments landscape; KPMG’s report will be released later today. 
Let me elaborate on the four key strategies to create an e-payments society: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
streamlined regulation; 
inclusive governance; 
interoperable infrastructure; and 
pervasive digitisation. 
Streamlined regulation – targeted, activity based, risk appropriate 
First,  we  will  streamline  our  regulatory  framework  for  payments;  strengthen  consumer 
protection; and make regulation more targeted based on the specific payment activities that 
businesses undertake. 
The  existing  regulatory  framework  for  payments  cuts  across  the  Money-Changing  and 
Remittance  Businesses  Act  (“MCRBA”)  and  the  Payment  Systems  (Oversight)  Act 
(“PS(O)A”). 
The MCRBA was introduced in 1979, an era when bricks-and-mortar money changers and 
remittance agents were the norm. 
• 
• 
For more than three decades, it has served us well. 
We  have  a  thriving  remittance  industry  that  provides  an  essential  service  to 
residents, including the many foreign workers in Singapore. 
The PS(O)A was enacted in 2006, with the objective of keeping our key payment systems 
safe and efficient. 
• 
The  PS(O)A  also  protects  customer  funds  held  in  widely-accepted  stored  value 
facilities such as the Ez-Link and NETS FlashPay cards that commuters on public 
transportation use every day. 
Thanks  to  the  PS(O)A,  our  key  payment  systems  continue  to  operate  safely  and 
efficiently. 
 But FinTech is changing the face of payments. 
• 
Every month, MAS meets many FinTech firms that do not fit neatly into categories 
like remittance or stored value. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Most internet-based stored value wallets today would be regulated under both the 
MCRBA and PS(O)A. 
It is not efficient for companies to be regulated under two pieces of legislation, which 
were not written with the FinTech solutions of today in mind. 
 The nature of risk in the payments ecosystem is also changing. 
• 
The  current  regulatory  regime  aims  to  ensure  financial  stability,  protect  stored 
values, and prevent money laundering and counter the financing of terrorism. 
But  with  the  proliferation  of  innovative  e-payment  solutions  and  the  rise  of 
e-commerce, payment firms have become more enticing targets for cyber criminals. 
MAS will therefore update its regulatory framework. 
• 
We will streamline the MCRBA and PS(O)A to create a single piece of legislation 
governing both traditional and innovative payment companies. 
We  will  enhance  the  provisions  for  consumer  protection  and  strengthen  cyber 
security requirements. 
We will make regulation modular and activity-based, so that firms need to meet only 
those regulations pertinent to the specific payment activities they undertake, rather 
than the full gamut of payments regulations. 
What will this new framework mean? 
• 
Providers  of  payment  services  will  require  only  one  licence  to  conduct  multiple 
payment activities. 
Users of payment services – consumers or businesses – can take more comfort that 
their financial information is safe from the threat of cyber-attacks and theft. 
    Inclusive governance – a payments council 
Second  key  strategy:  we  will  put  in  place  an  inclusive  governance  framework  that  brings 
together different stakeholders to guide the development of Singapore’s payments landscape 
in a coherent way. 
Specifically, MAS is considering the formation of a broad-based Payments Council that will 
include senior representation from both providers and users of payments systems. 
The Council will help to align payment initiatives with national strategies and public interest. 
Specifically, this means to: 
• 
• 
• 
develop common payments infrastructure; 
promote open access and inter-operability in payments solutions; 
enhance  the  quality  of  payments  systems  through  the  adoption  of  relevant 
standards and best practices; and 
make electronic payments accessible to all. 
• 
MAS  will  put  out  next  week  for  public  consultation,  proposals  for  updating  our  payments 
regulatory framework and forming a Payments Council. 
Inter-operable infrastructure 
The  third  strategy  for  an  e-payments  society  is  a  payment  infrastructure  that  is  inter-
operable, that will enable swift, simple, and secure electronic payments for everyone. 
We are starting from a good position. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   To  quote  the  KPMG  report  on  Singapore’s  payment  landscape,  “the  underlying 
infrastructure is world-class” 
And  Singapore  has  one  of  the  highest  smartphone  penetration  rates  in  the  world 
and wireless internet access is pervasive. 
 For consumers, the use of cash for daily payments is high. 
For businesses, the use of cheques is relatively high. 
Yet, our payments preferences remain largely paper-based: cash and cheques. 
• 
• 
As pointed out by the KPMG report, “consumer payments in Singapore are unique among 
highly developed economies”. 
• 
Cash in circulation in Singapore is 8.8% of GDP, compared to 4.4% in Australia and 
2.12% in Sweden. 
12.7  cheques  per  person  were  written  in  Singapore  in  2014,  compared  to  7.1  in 
Australia. 
In Sweden, the total number of cheques issued is so small that it is effectively zero 
on a per person basis! 
  The economic cost of this heavy reliance on cash and cheques is not trivial. 
• 
Our studies, conducted together with KPMG, estimate that the social costs of cash 
and cheques is around 0.5% of GDP, or about S$2 billion per year. 
A good part of these costs can be attributed to the cost of securing cash, both in 
transit and in storage, and processing cheques. 
 The encouraging thing is that a growing number of our consumers and businesses would like 
to move towards e-payments. 
• 
• 
The infrastructure is there. 
But  we  need  to  make  the  payment  experience  seamless  and  convenient  before 
adoption can take off. 
Let me highlight the key infrastructure initiatives: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
promote online fund transfers; 
simplify acceptance of card payments at retail outlets; 
facilitate online payment of bills; and 
enable mobile payments for public transport. 
Online fund transfers – FAST and central addressing 
As I mentioned earlier, we have a world-class infrastructure for electronic fund transfers. 
• 
In 2014, Singapore became one of the first countries in the world to build a 24/7, 
real-time inter-bank fund transfer system. 
We call it FAST; Fast and Secure Transfers. 
• 
FAST is almost as convenient as cash, but safer and cheaper. 
• 
You can make a payment securely from your computer or mobile device at any time 
of the day. 
You can receive confirmation of payment within seconds. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 4 
   If you are a company, near-instant payment and confirmation round-the-clock makes 
a huge difference to cashflow management. 
 But FAST is grossly under-utilised. One key barrier is that making a payment through FAST 
requires you to know the bank account number of the person you are sending money to. 
• 
Most of us, I think, do not remember our own bank account numbers, let alone will 
know the account numbers of those we want to send money to. 
The Association of Banks in Singapore, or ABS, is therefore developing a Central Addressing 
Scheme (or CAS). 
• 
CAS will allow payments to be made through FAST using only a recipient’s mobile 
number, or NRIC number, or Unique Entity Number. 
The industry is also working to provide a seamless and common user interface for 
making FAST transfers regardless of the customer’s bank. 
If  all  goes  well,  by  this  time  next  year,  we  will  no  longer  need  to  remember  bank 
account numbers for a majority of our electronic fund transfers. 
  A second key barrier to using FAST is cost. 
• 
SMEs have told us that some banks can charge up to $10 for fund transfers using 
FAST. But they offer free cheque payments every month! 
This  is  surprising. Our  own  studies  indicate  that  the  marginal  cost  of  e-payments, 
including FAST funds transfers, should be far lower than that of cheques. 
Cheque processing is a resource intensive operation that is far from costless. 
Banks  should  not  be  reluctant  to  accurately  reflect  the  true  marginal  cost  of  their 
various payment instruments. 
  Acceptance of card payments – unified point-of-sale terminals (UPOS) 
Debit  and  credit  cards  are  widely  used  by  Singaporeans  but  the  experience  at  the 
acceptance points in our retail outlets and restaurants needs to be enhanced. 
• 
Not all cards can be used everywhere, and we often have to ask merchants if our 
card of choice is accepted. 
A common sight in Singapore stores is the array of multiple point-of-sale terminals 
cluttering up cashiers’ counters. This is confusing for customers and unproductive 
for counter staff. 
 The ABS has tapped on the payments industry to develop a unified point-of-sale terminal or 
UPOS,  which  can  accept  all  major  card  brands,  including  those  that  are  contactless  or 
embedded in smartphones. UPOS terminals are already being rolled out. 
• 
About 1,000 of them have been deployed at convenience stores such as 7-Eleven 
and other retailers. 
Another 10,000 are expected to follow over the next two years. 
Large supermarket chains, such as Cold Storage, FairPrice, and Sheng Shiong are 
also piloting and gradually deploying these UPOS terminals. 
 Online payment of bills – seamless payments and collections 
Payment of bills in Singapore needs to be made less cumbersome. The future should be one 
where we can securely and seamlessly pay our bills online, without having to: 
• 
fill in our card details for the umpteenth time; or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  fill out lengthy paper-based GIRO forms to authorise standing payment instructions 
which take weeks to be approved. 
 Our vision is to create a bill payment experience where consumers and businesses can: 
• 
• 
electronically apply for GIRO bill payments; 
seamlessly  pay  bills  via  a  “request  for  payment”  function  that  leverages  off  FAST 
fund transfers without needing to bank with the same bank as the biller; and 
manage their standing payment instructions online or on their mobile phones. 
• 
MAS is working with the banks and the payments industry to create seamless bill payments 
and collections. 
Mobile payments for public transport – account-based ticketing 
The way we pay for public transport is also due for a refresh. The Land Transport Authority 
has  recently  announced  that  by  the  end  of  this  year,  it  will  be  conducting  a  pilot  for  its 
Account-Based Ticketing System. 
• 
This system will allow commuters to use their existing contactless credit and debit 
cards to pay for train and bus rides. 
No longer will users have to queue to top-up their stored value transit cards. 
Users will even be able to use their mobile wallets to pay for public transport. 
• 
• 
An Account-Based Ticketing System will bring Singapore in line with other cities with world-
class public transport payment infrastructure such as London. 
Pervasive digitisation – maximising productivity gains from e-payments 
The fourth strategy is to help businesses to digitise their processes and integrate them with 
electronic payments solutions, so as to maximise productivity and efficiency gains. 
Minister Iswaran spoke yesterday about how government agencies are working with SMEs to 
help  digitise  their  business  processes  and  take  advantage  of  e-payments.  I  need  not 
elaborate. 
I will just give an example. 
• 
It often does not make sense, especially for an SME, to adopt an e-payment solution 
or platform but continue to use paper invoices. 
Reconciliation  of  paper  invoices  with  e-payments  becomes  a  challenge,  and  the 
potential efficiency gains from e-payments will remain elusive. 
Only  if  the  business  processes  from  front-to-back  are  all  digitised  and  integrated 
with e-payments, will it make commercial sense and raise productivity. 
  Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
This is a conference on FinTech and financial inclusion. Of all the developments in FinTech, 
it  is  in  payments  where  the  gains  in  financial  inclusion  are  potentially  strongest  –  for  the 
simple reason that we all need to use payment services to participate in the economy and 
society. 
As  we  proceed  along  our  path  towards  becoming  an  e-payments  society,  the  way  we  live 
and work will change. 
• 
Diners will pay for dinner seamlessly and securely with a mobile phone. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Parents will send pocket money to their children via an app. 
Young couples will make the down-payment for their HDB flats on their tablets using 
FAST. 
SMEs  will  use  electronic  inventory  management  platforms  to  make  and  receive 
payments. 
 An e-payments society will be inclusive, innovative, and perhaps, even inspiring. 
Thank you. 
Social  costs  include  costs  incurred  by  banks,  infrastructure  providers,  and  merchants  in 
using the payment systems, such as IT costs, manpower, etc., but do not include fees paid to 
other parties in the payments landscape. e.g. merchant acquiring fees paid by merchants to 
banks would be netted off when considering the entire payment landscape as a whole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
