   Vítor Constâncio: Margins and haircuts as a macroprudential tool 
Remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the ESRB 
Conference on Macroprudential Margins and Haircuts, Frankfurt am Main, 6 June 2016. 
 The Footnotes can be found at the end of the speech. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to speak here today at the ESRB conference on macroprudential margins and 
haircuts. In my view, macroprudential margins and haircuts have the potential to become tools 
for controlling the build-up of excessive leverage in the financial system. Importantly, these 
tools would reach beyond the banking system and also address the build-up of leverage and 
liquidity risks in parts of the financial system, where we have seen rapid growth in recent years. 
Before  I  elaborate  further  on  the  specific  need  for  macroprudential  margins  and  haircuts, 
possible  tools  and  how  to  implement  them,  allow  me  to  set  a  more  general  stage  for  the 
important discussions we will be having and briefly touch upon a key lesson from the history 
of financial crises. 
In  recent  years,  convincing  evidence  has  been  provided  showing  that  excessive  leverage, 
credit booms and subsequent de-leveraging episodes were at the heart of recurrent episodes 
of financial instability since the late 19th century.[1] Let me single out two major crises where 
the build-up of leverage and the subsequent de-leveraging played a key role. 
First, the stock market bubble of 1927–1929 and the subsequent “Great Crash” of 1929 were 
accompanied by an extraordinary growth followed by contraction of leveraged trading in stock 
markets,  amplified  by  margin  calls.[2]  The  ensuing  Great  Depression  brought  real,  severe 
economic consequences. While there is still debate on its ultimate causes, the Great Crash is 
widely considered as a major factor. Notably, the Great Crash motivated the establishment of 
the so-called “Regulation T” which allowed the Federal Reserve Board to set minimum margins 
for  partially  loan-financed  transactions  of  stocks.  And  from  1947  until  1974,  the  Federal 
Reserve Board frequently changed these minimum margin requirements. The evidence on the 
success of this macroprudential tool in curbing excessive credit in securities transactions and 
stock market volatility is at best mixed.[3] Importantly, however, the limited scope of Regulation 
T – which allowed investors to avoid its impact by substituting other forms of borrowing for 
margin loans – has been identified as a key flaw.[4] I will return to this issue later on in this talk. 
The second major crisis – the 2007–2009 global financial crisis – is still fresh in our minds. The 
build-up of excessive leverage and subsequent deleveraging in the banking sector[5] and within 
financial markets more generally[6] , is widely viewed as one of the main causes of the global 
financial crisis. Notably, an important conclusion of this literature is that leverage and liquidity 
were closely interlinked and reinforced the stress in the financial system. 
One of the key lessons from the history of financial crises is that the negative externalities of 
excessive  leverage  and  associated  liquidity  risks  that  give  rise  to  systemic  risk  provide  a 
fundamental rationale for macroprudential policies. These limit the build-up of leverage in the 
financial system in a pre-emptive manner. In pursuit of excess returns, market participants 
engage  in  excessive  leverage  without  internalizing  systemic  costs  of  their  risk-taking 
behaviour. These comprise spillovers to counterparties and financial networks[7] or asset price 
declines triggered by fire sales.[8] A large and growing literature[9] supports the conclusion that 
these systemic externalities of excessive leverage call for macroprudential policies that restrict 
the use of leverage pre-emptively, as a way to improve general welfare. 
The next crisis will likely come in a different form and perhaps involve different markets and 
entities, but history tells us that it is a fair bet to say that excessive leverage will again play a 
major role. To the extent that derivatives and securities financing transactions (SFTs) are the 
main means to create leverage, in particular in the non-bank financial sector, this calls for pre-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   emptive regulatory action in these markets. Let me now explain in more detail why I believe 
we should equip macroprudential authorities with the power to set margins and haircuts. 
Macroprudential margins and haircuts as tools to control leverage and avoid liquidity 
spirals 
Margins and haircuts are a determinant of the build-up of leverage via derivatives and SFTs, 
and are strongly interlinked with the procyclicality of that leverage. For derivatives, the initial 
margin determines the amount of exposure that can be created for a given amount of equity. 
In turn, the size of the haircut on SFT collateral, particularly in repos, determines the amount 
of funding market players can obtain for a given amount of collateral. 
Importantly, in the current situation where margin- and haircut-setting is left to the discretion of 
market participants, margins and haircuts are strongly procyclical.[10] In exuberant times, low 
volatility and risk-aversion as well as competitive pressure lead to low margins and haircuts, 
supporting  the  build-up  of  leverage. When  the  cycle  turns,  higher  volatility  and  higher  risk 
aversion  feed  into  higher  margins  and  haircuts,  amplifying  de-leveraging  pressures.  As  a 
result, a vicious cycle can emerge, where higher margins and haircuts force de-leveraging and 
more sales, generating a liquidity spiral. That is what Gary Gorton called “the run on repo” 
during the recent financial crisis. 
The  crisis  revealed  the  important  contribution  of  these  dynamics  in  derivatives  and  SFT 
markets to systemic stress. Financial stability concerns related to derivatives and SFTs are 
now widely discussed in a growing academic literature, highlighting the systemic relevance of 
these markets.[11 For derivatives, the most prominent example relates to the case of AIG whose 
significant positions in credit default swaps were a major factor that triggered its bail-out. The 
build-up of its large derivative portfolio was facilitated by the ability to avoid posting margin on 
these trades, creating serious stress when facing margin calls. For SFTs, particularly repos, a 
key  concern  relates  to  excessive  reliance  on  short-term  wholesale  funding  via  these 
transactions.  Indeed,  SFTs  were  identified  as  a  major  source  of  leverage  in  the  financial 
system and as an important determinant of banks’ vulnerability to funding and liquidity shocks. 
For  example,  evidence  for  US  broker  dealers  showed  that  their  leverage  was  strongly 
procyclical  and  changes  in  repos  were  the  primary  driver  of  adjustments  in  their  balance 
sheets.[12] 
In regulatory circles, the potential for setting margins and haircuts as a policy tool to address 
systemic risks in derivatives and SFT markets was already identified shortly after the global 
financial crisis. Indeed, the Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS) concluded that 
margining  practices  in  OTC  derivatives  and  haircut-setting  in  SFTs  are  a  source  of 
procyclicality in the financial system, and recommended enhancements to these practices in 
order to dampen the build-up of leverage in good times and soften the system-wide effects in 
bad  times.[13]  Furthermore,  the  CGFS  encouraged  macroprudential  authorities  to  consider 
measures that involve countercyclical variations in margins and haircuts. 
Since then, regulatory progress has been made to limit systemic risk arising in derivatives and 
SFT markets. In 2009, the G20 committed to major reforms in the OTC derivatives market, 
including  the  aim  to  significantly  increase  central  clearing  of  derivatives  and,  where 
appropriate, to move them to organised markets. Moreover, several reform packages have 
been  agreed  at  the  international  level.  These  include  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB) 
“Regulatory  framework  for  haircuts  on  non-centrally  cleared  SFTs”[14]  ,  the  FSB  work  on 
“Standards and Processes for Global Securities Financing Data Collection and Aggregation”, 
the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  and  Board  of  the  International 
Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  “Margin  requirements  for  non-centrally 
cleared derivatives[15] and the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure and IOSCO 
“Principles for financial market infrastructures for cleared transactions”.[16] One aim these rules 
have in common is to limit the procyclical effects of margins and haircuts: for example, the 
BCBS-IOSCO rules authorise the inclusion of periods of stress in internal models and provide 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   for standardised margin and haircut schedules as an alternative to calculations with internal 
models.  In  turn,  the  FSB  minimum  haircut  framework  provides  for  a  backstop  against 
excessively low haircuts. At the EU level, a large part of the international framework have been 
already  implemented  in  the  European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR)  and  the 
Securities Financing Transactions Regulation (SFTR). 
However, there are some limitations in these current frameworks. For example, with respect 
to the scope of coverage, the framework for non-centrally cleared OTC derivatives exempts 
counterparties with gross notional OTC exposures below EUR 8 billion – an uncomfortable 
high threshold in my view, effectively exempting a large number of non-bank financial entities 
from  the  shadow  banking  sector.  More  importantly,  none  of  the  current  rules  covering 
derivatives  and  SFTs  provide  authorities  with  specific  macroprudential  tools  to  set,  and  if 
necessary, change minimum margin and haircut levels to prevent the build-up of excessive 
leverage in the financial system. While both the BCBS-IOSCO margin framework as well as 
the  FSB  minimum  haircuts  framework  note  the  possibility  for  national  authorities  to  use 
macroprudential  margins  and  haircuts,  such  tools  have  not  yet  been  developed  and 
implemented in Europe to date. 
What tools should be made available 
The key question that comes up is: what macroprudential tools should be made available to 
competent authorities? What tools can be effective both in limiting the build-up of leverage and 
in  dampening  the  procyclical  and  potentially  destabilizing  influence  of  margin  and  haircut 
increases in the downturn of the cycle? In the ECB’s response to the European Commission’s 
consultation  on  the  review  of  the  European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR),  we 
suggested “that macroprudential intervention tools be included in Level 1 of EMIR” and noted 
“two policy instruments that potentially could reduce or limit leverage through derivatives and 
SFTs and the pro-cyclicality of margins and haircuts: (a) permanent minimum requirements, 
and (b) time-varying minimum requirements or buffers.[17] 
” More specifically: 
“Permanent minimum margin requirements and haircuts 
Floors  on  margins  and  haircuts  help  to  limit  the  build-up  of  leverage  in  a  benign  market 
environment and reduce the size of any “shock effect” of a sudden increase of margins and 
haircuts. 
Time-varying minimum requirements/buffers 
Time-varying minimum margin and haircut requirements can either be applied by introducing 
minimum requirements that are varied over time or by applying a countercyclical add-on on 
top  of  existing  minimum  margin  requirements.  The  aim  is  to  reduce  leverage  in  the 
expansionary part of the financial cycle, but it may also reduce the “shock effect” of sudden 
margin increases by ensuring that any increase in margins due to increased volatility happens 
from a higher level. It should be emphasised that recourse to such tools would not lead CCPs 
to be under-margined with respect to the financial risks they face. These requirements would 
still allow CCPs to set margins and haircuts above the levels specified by the macro-prudential 
authority.” 
A  Special  Feature  article[18]  in  the  latest  ECB  Financial  Stability  Review  provides  further 
analyses of the merits of these different policy tools. Allow me to share these analytical results, 
before I conclude on how to implement such macroprudential tools in practice. The Special 
Feature  combines  recent  theoretical  insights[19]  with  a  new  empirical  analysis[20].  The  key 
results are threefold. 
First, macroprudential powers to set margins and haircuts should have a broad scope. That is, 
any regulation should capture both derivatives and SFTs, and both centrally cleared and non-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   centrally cleared transactions. This is a key result from the calibrated general equilibrium model 
which shows that regulation with limited coverage is doomed to be ineffective due to leakages. 
Notably, the potential for regulatory arbitrage in case of tools that only target specific markets 
is  a  central  issue  in  macroprudential  policy  more  generally.  Moreover,  as  I  already  noted, 
research shows that the fact that the Federal Reserve Board had the limited power to only set 
time-varying margins on listed equities bought on margin, was an important reason for the 
limited effectiveness of Regulation T in the decades after the Great Crash of 1929.[21] 
The second key result is that setting minimum margins and haircut floors – on a broad scale – 
would limit the build-up of leverage and reduce the procyclicality of current margin and haircut 
setting  practices.  With  minimum  margins  and  haircuts,  the  same  minimum  quantitative 
requirements would apply over the financial cycle. Basically, such a minimum floor assures 
conservative margins and haircuts, and would have prevented the very low baseline margin 
and haircut levels that we have seen before the global financial crisis.[22] 
Importantly, introducing minimum floors can also limit the need for market participants to raise 
margins  and  haircuts  in  a  downturn,  since the  initial  margin  and  haircut  levels  are  already 
higher when the cycle turns. 
Third, and finally, both the theoretical and empirical results suggest that allowing competent 
authorities to add time-varying add-ons on top of minimum margin and haircut requirements 
could have the potential to increase welfare even more than a minimum floor would. 
Overall,  the  theoretical  and  empirical  findings  in  the  Special  Feature  support  intervention 
powers  for  macroprudential  authorities.  Taken  together,  the  key  message  is  that  only  a 
comprehensive  regulation  of  margins  and  haircuts  applied  on  several  different  types  of 
securities or transactions can reduce the build-up of leverage and asset market volatility in an 
economically meaningful way. 
In practice, I envisage minimum margins and haircut floors on both centrally cleared and non-
cleared derivatives and SFTs as an essential reform to enhance the resilience of the financial 
system. 
Let me now step away from these analytical underpinnings and conclude with some thoughts 
on how to design and implement such macroprudential tools in practice, and the challenges 
we face. 
How to design and implement a macroprudential framework for margins and haircuts 
The  existing  evidence  and  experience  in  previous  crises  in  my  view  presents  a  case  for 
providing  macroprudential  authorities  with  the  power  to  intervene  in  margin  and  haircut 
requirements. For the next steps of designing and implementing such a framework, there is a 
range of practical and governance issues that need to be overcome and agreed upon.[23] Let 
me outline three important issues that warrant special attention: 
First,  to  facilitate  implementation  and  to  ensure  that  macroprudential  tools  effectively 
complement  existing  microprudential  rules  on  margin  and  haircut  setting  practices,  the 
macroprudential  framework  should  build  on  the  current  regulatory  frameworks  and  policy 
recommendations as applicable to derivatives and SFTs, at the EU and global level. These 
frameworks  include  standardised  margin  and  haircut  schedules  that  are  simple  and 
transparent and should form the basis for setting macroprudential margins and haircuts. These 
schedules would serve as a starting point to calibrate minimum margins for the various classes 
of derivatives, as well as for minimum haircuts applied to different types of securities serving 
as collateral. 
Second,  ensuring  non-bank  entities  are  appropriately  affected  by  margins  and  haircut 
requirements would be a key aspect of any future macroprudential regime. To a significant 
extent, non-banks currently access derivatives markets indirectly by channelling their activity 
through larger financial institutions, which act as principals to the transactions. Macroprudential 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   tools would need to be designed at the level of transactions and their participants to ensure 
they can be fully “passed through” to non-banks. 
Last, the calibration and institutional design of the tools would need to avoid arbitrage across 
products  and  across  jurisdictions:  the  tools  would  need  to  be  applied  consistently  across 
cleared and uncleared transactions so as to preclude a shift away from central clearing. The 
tools would also need to be designed in such a way that counterparties cannot evade them by 
booking their transactions in a different jurisdiction. A sound implementation principle would 
be  to  apply  these  tools  directly  to  transactions,  regardless  of  the  market,  jurisdiction  or 
infrastructure where the transactions were booked. One way to ensure consistency and avoid 
arbitrage would be to set these requirements via market-wide regulation in Union law, in line 
with  the  implementation  approach  recommended  by  the  FSB  for  their  minimum  haircut 
framework. With such an approach, any derivative transaction or SFT by a European entity 
would be subject to a margin or haircut floor, irrespective of whether this transaction is with an 
EU or non-EU counterparty or of the centrally clearing entity used. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  As  I  stated  in  a  recent  speech,  one  of  the  overarching  principles  of 
macroprudential policy is to act in a pre-emptive and strongly counter-cyclical manner against 
the  build-up  of  systemic  risk.[24]  To  fulfil  this  role,  macroprudential  authorities  need  to  be 
equipped  with  tailor-made  tools.  For  the  banking  sector,  macroprudential  policy  is  already 
operational.  However,  we  need  to  avoid  that  reforming  regulation  on  banks  increases  the 
incentives for risky leverage build-up outside the banking sector. Non-banks and market-based 
financing expanded enormously and their role in financing the economy continues to grow at 
a fast pace. This diversification of finance sources has many positive aspects. However, it 
enhances the responsibility of regulators in ensuring that it does not lead to the build-up of 
systemic risk. 
Thank you for your attention. 
[1]  Schularick,  M.  and  A.M.  Taylor  (2012).  Credit  Booms  Gone  Bust:  Monetary  Policy,  Leverage  Cycles,  and 
Financial Crises, 1870–2008. American Economic Review 102(2), 1029–1061. 
[2]  White, E.N. (1990). The Stock Market Boom and Crash of 1929 Revisited. Journal of Economic Perspectives 
4(2) 67–83. Brumm, J., M. Grill, F. Kubler and K. Schmedders (2015), Margin Regulation and Volatility, Journal 
of Monetary Economics 75, 54–68. 
[3]  Fortune,  P.  (2001).  Margin  Lending  and  Stock  Market  Volatility,  New  England  Economic  Review  4,  3–26. 
Hardouvelis, G. and P. Theodossiou (2002). The Asymmetric Relation Between Initial Margin Requirements 
and Stock Market Volatility Across Bull and Bear Markets, Review of Financial Studies 15(5), 1525–1559. 
[4]  Moore, T. (1966). Stock Market Margin Requirements. Journal of Political Economy 74,158–167. Fortune, P. 
(2001). Margin Lending and Stock Market Volatility, New England Economic Review 4, 3–26. 
[5]  Adrian,  T.  and  H.S.  Shin  (2010).  Liquidity  and  Leverage.  Journal  of  Financial  Intermediation  19,  418–437. 
Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2014). Procyclical Leverage and Value-at-Risk. Review of Financial Studies 27(2), 
373–403.  Baglioni,  A.,  E.  Beccalli,  A.  Boitani,  and  A.  Monticini  (2013).  Is  the  Leverage  of  European  Banks 
Procyclical?  Empirical  Economics  45(3),  1251–1266.  Beccalli,  E.,  A.  Boitani  and  S.  Di  Giuliantonio  (2015), 
Leverage Pro-Cyclicality and Securitization in US Banking. Journal of Financial Intermediation 24, 200–230. 
Nuño,  G.  and  C.  Thomas  (2016).  Bank  Leverage  Cycles.  American  Economic  Journal:  Macroeconomics, 
forthcoming. 
[6]  Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Pedersen, Lasse Heje (2008). Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity. Review of 
Financial Studies 22(6), 2201–2238. Brunnermeier, M.K. (2009). Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 
2007–2008. Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1), 77–100. Geanakoplos, J. (2010). The Leverage Cycle. 
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009 24, 1–65. Gorton, G. and A. Metrick (2012). Securitized Banking and the 
Run On Repo. Journal of Financial Economics 104, 425–451. Gorton, G. and G. Ordoñez (2014). Collateral 
Crises. American Economic Review 104(2), 343–378. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   [7]  Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer and R.W. Vishny (2013). A Model of Shadow Banking. Journal of Finance 68(4), 1331–
63. Acemoglu, D., A. Ozdaglar and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2015). Systemic Risk and Stability in Financial Networks. 
American Economic Review 105(2), 564–608. 
[8]  Cifuentes,  R.,  G.  Ferrucci,  and  H.S.  Shin  (2005).  Liquidity  Risk  and  Contagion.  Journal  of  the  European 
Economic Association 3(2–3), 556–566. Stein, J.C. (2012). Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 57–95. Caballero, R.J. and A. Simsek (2013). Fire Sales in a Model of 
Complexity. Journal of Finance 68(6), 2549–2587. 
[9]  Geanakoplos, J. (2010). The Leverage Cycle. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, Vol. 24, 1–65. Bianchi, J. 
(2011).  Overborrowing  and  Systemic  Externalities  in  the  Business  Cycle.  American  Economic  Review  101, 
3400–3426. Thurner, S., J.D. Farmer and J. Geanakoplos (2012). Leverage Causes Fat Tails and Clustered 
Volatility. Quantitative Finance 12(5), 695–707. Aymanns, C. and J.D. Farmer (2015). The Dynamics of the 
Leverage Cycle. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 50, 155–179. Korinek, A. and A. Simsek (2016). 
Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage. American Economic Review 106(3), 699–738. 
[10]  Brunnermeier,  M.K.  (2009).  Deciphering  the  Liquidity  and  Credit  Crunch  2007–2008.  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives 23(1), 77–100. 
[11]  Brunnermeier, M.K. and Pedersen, L.H. (2008). Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity. Review of Financial 
Studies  22(6),  2201–2238.  Biais,  B.  F.  Heider  and  M.  Hoerova.  Optimal  Margins  and  Equilibrium  Prices. 
Forthcoming. Brunnermeier, M.K. (2009). Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007–2008. Journal of 
Economic  Perspectives  23(1),  77–100.  Adrian,  T.  and  H.S.  Shin  (2010).  Liquidity  and  Leverage. Journal  of 
Financial Intermediation 19, 418–437. Geanakoplos, J. (2010). The Leverage Cycle. NBER Macroeconomics 
Annual 2009 24, 1–65.. Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2014). Procyclical Leverage and Value-at-Risk. Review of 
Financial Studies 27(2), 373–403. Gorton, G. and G. Ordoñez (2014). Collateral Crises. American Economic 
Review 104(2), 343–378. Brumm, J., M. Grill, F. Kubler and K. Schmedders (2015), Margin Regulation and 
Volatility, Journal of Monetary Economics 75, 54–68. 
[12]  Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2010). Liquidity and Leverage. Journal of Financial Intermediation 19, 418–437. 
[13]  CGFS (2009). The Role of Valuation and Leverage in Procyclicality, CGFS Papers No. 34. CGFS (2010). The 
Role of Margin Requirements and Haircuts in Procyclicality. CGFS Papers No. 36. 
[14]  Financial  Stability  Board.  Regulatory Framework  for  Haircuts  on  Non-centrally  Cleared  Securities  Financing 
Transactions, November 2015. 
[15]  Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and International Organization of Securities Commissions. Margin 
Requirements for Non-centrally Cleared Derivatives, March 2015. 
[16]  Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure and International Organization of Securities Commissions, 
Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures, April 2012. 
[17]See  ECB  response  to  the  European  Commission’s  consultation  on  the  review  of  the  European  Market 
Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR), September 2015. 
[18]  Battistini, N., M. Grill, P. Marmara and K. van der Veer (2016), A case for macroprudential margins and haircuts, 
Special Feature A in ECB Financial Stability Review, May, 110–119. 
[19]  Brumm, J., M. Grill, F. Kubler and K. Schmedders (2015), Margin regulation and volatility, Journal of Monetary 
Economics 75, 54–68. 
[20]  Battistini,  N.  and  K.  van  der  Veer,  Procyclicality  of  margin  requirements:  Determinants,  mitigation  and 
measurement, forthcoming. 
[21]  Hsieh, D. A. and Miller, M. H. (1990). Margin Regulation and Stock Market Volatility. Journal of Finance 45, 
3-29. 
[22]  See  i.e.  Gorton,  G.,  &  Metrick,  A.  (2012).  Securitized  banking  and  the  run  on  repo.  Journal  of  Financial 
Economics, 104(3), 425–451. 
[23]  See also Battistini, N., M. Grill, P. Marmara and K. van der Veer (2016), A case for macroprudential margins 
and haircuts, Special Feature A in ECB Financial Stability Review, May, 110–119. 
[24]  V. Constâncio “Principles of Macroprudential Policy”, speech at the ECB-IMF Conference on Macroprudential 
Policy, Frankfurt am Main, 26 April 2016 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
