   Karnit Flug: Israel’s Credit Information Bill 
Remarks  by  Dr  Karnit  Flug,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  to  the  Knesset  Economic 
Committee regarding the Credit Information Bill, Tel Aviv, 14 March 2016. 
 In recent years, the Bank of Israel has been acting in various ways to increase competition in 
the  banking  system  in  general,  and  in  the  retail  credit  market  in  particular.   An  important 
component of increased competition in the credit market is providing a solution to the problem 
of asymmetric information.  The banking ID card that all banking customers received a few 
days ago is an important measure in this area.  The credit information database is expected to 
provide  a  complete solution  to this  issue.  The database  will  serve  as an  additional  tool  in 
increasing  competition  and  expanding  access  to  credit  while  reducing  the  discrimination 
derived from a lack of information.  In addition, the database and the anonymous information 
it will include will assist the Bank of Israel in monitoring developments in the credit market from 
the standpoint of financial stability. 
In view of this, and since the Bank of Israel has the experience and the know-how necessary 
to advance projects of this kind, the Bank of Israel has decided to take upon itself the challenge 
of establishing and operating the database, with all that this involves. 
To that end, the Minister of Finance and I have appointed a higher steering committee led by 
the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel and the Director General of the Ministry of Finance, 
and including the Director General of the Bank of Israel, the Deputy Budget Director at the 
Ministry of Finance, and representatives of the National Economic Council and the Ministry of 
Defense.  We have also established professional teams at the Bank of Israel to deal with ways 
to  handle  the  challenges  posed  by  the  project,  including:  establishing  and  operating  the 
database; security of the information that will be fed into the database, found in it and provided 
by it; maintaining the interests of customers and protecting their privacy; and more. 
The  higher  steering  committee  and the  work teams  are  working  in  synergy  with  all  parties 
involved in the process, and with the utmost cooperation of the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry 
of Justice, the National Economic Council, and other entities. 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the representatives of the various ministries who 
took part in the formulation of the bill, and particularly the representatives of the Bank of Israel 
in the legislative process: the Deputy Governor and the Director General of the Bank of Israel, 
who  took  upon  themselves  the  leadership  of this  complex  and  important  project,  and  Adv. 
Shirley Avner, who led the legal aspect. 
I  would  like  to  relate  to  a  number  of  main  points  that  arose  during  the  discussions  in  this 
committee: 
1. 
Protection  of  privacy:  The  Bank  of Israel  attributes  tremendous  importance to the 
protection  of  privacy,  and  we  are  aware  of  the  responsibility  placed  upon  the  Bank  in  the 
context  of  establishing  and  operating  the  database.  We  are certain  that  the  Supervisor of 
Privacy Protection, whom I will appoint in accordance with the bill, will fulfill the role in the best 
way possible, and will assist us in ensuring maximum protection of privacy as part of the credit 
database. 
“Consumer protection”: The Bank of Israel attributes great importance to giving the 
2. 
proper attention to the protection of the rights of consumers regarding whom information will 
be held in the database.  For this purpose, the bill sets out, inter alia, that I am to appoint a 
credit information supervisor, whose roles will include maintaining the interests of customers 
and  ensuring  the  proper  actions  of  the  credit  information  bureaus  and  other  entities.   The 
supervisor will also constitute the address for clarifying and handling public enquiries regarding 
the activity of the credit bureaus, sources of information sent to the database, credit information 
users, paid representatives, and any other entity involved in the database.  In addition, as part 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   of the bill, the supervisor will be given control and supervision authorities over the activity of 
the credit bureaus, including concerning the statistical models, among other things. 
By  the  way,  the  consumer  supervision  standard  that  will  be  implemented  regarding  the 
database, similar to the existing standard at the Banking Supervision Department, is worthy of 
being implemented for customers of all financial entities, both those already existing and those 
that will be established. 
3. 
The sources of information and entities that will be required to provide information for 
the database:  In determining the scope of information to be found in the database, a balance 
will be struck between the various objectives of establishing and operating the database.  It is 
important  to  us  that  the  information  appearing  in  the  database  will  be  comprehensive  and 
broad, but at the same time, we do not want to collect information that is not relevant or that is 
not of sufficiently high quality. 
It is important to note that the value of the information in the credit database for increasing 
competition and improving the customer’s status will increase as the financial literacy of the 
public becomes deeper, because the consumer’s ability to derive benefit from the solution to 
the  information  problem  I  outlined  depends  first  of  all  on  his  own  financial  behavior.   It  is 
therefore important that the government act to advance actions that will help increase financial 
literacy among the public. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
