   Peter Praet: The ECB’s monetary policy – back to medium-term price 
stability of below, but close to, 2% 
Opinion piece by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, published in Süddeutsche Zeitung, 13 January 2016. 
 ECB remains faithful to its monetary policy strategy 
The EU Treaties define the maintenance of price stability as the European Central Bank’s 
(ECB) primary task. They leave open the exact numerical definition of price stability. In 1998 
the Governing Council of the ECB defined price stability as a medium-term inflation rate of 
below 2%. In 2003 it provided additional clarification that it was striving for an inflation rate of 
below, but close to, 2%. Since mid-2013 inflation has been below 1% and, after months of 
negative rates of inflation, it stood at 0.2% in December. Critics who see the ECB’s efforts to 
raise the current inflation rate as a change in its monetary policy strategy are mistaken. On the 
contrary: abandoning the inflation objective of close to 2% in the medium term would mark a 
change in its monetary policy strategy. At a time when achieving the objective seems harder, 
this would be opportunistic and would damage the ECB’s credibility. It is precisely in turbulent 
times that the objective needs to be kept. 
Too low inflation is damaging in the long term and deflation is dangerous 
Since February 2013 inflation in the euro area has moved away from the ECB’s medium-term 
objective.  The  persistently  low  inflation  has  also  affected  medium  and  long-term  inflation 
expectations, which are significantly below the levels of previous years. 
Low inflation in the longer term provides only a small buffer against sustained deflation. The 
expectation of falling prices delays purchases and investment. Rising real wages relative to 
productivity impose a burden on firms and employment. Added to this is the fact that the real 
value  of  nominal  debt  increases  when  there  is  deflation.  Not  least,  deflation  can  limit  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy, as the central bank can lose control over real interest rates. 
Playing down the risk of deflation would be negligent, especially in times of persistently low 
inflation. Although falling oil prices have recently played a significant role in low inflation, the 
effect on inflation is not negligible or temporary. For example, falling oil prices quickly affect 
other sectors, such as transportation. They also foster second-round effects on inflation, e.g. 
through lower wage settlements. 
The ECB’s measures are effective 
The ECB’s monetary policy measures make a key contribution to ensuring price stability in the 
euro area. They also support growth and employment. 
On 3 December 2015 the ECB expanded its asset purchase programme (APP) by extending 
it until at least March 2017 and reinvesting maturing bonds. At the same time, it cut the interest 
rate on the deposit facility by 10 basis points to –0.3%. 
The decision to expand the existing measures provides continuity with the measures adopted 
since June 2014 and is based on the finding that the APP and the negative interest rates are 
extremely  effective.  In  particular,  the  APP  has  helped  to  counter  the  fall  in  inflation 
expectations, as well as reduce the risk of deflation. More stable inflation expectations are a 
necessary condition for a return to medium-term price stability. 
Added  to  this  are  the  positive  effects  resulting  from  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy 
stimulus to the financing conditions for enterprises and households. For example, the financing 
costs for enterprises and households in the markets have improved considerably, while the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
cost of credit at banks for enterprises has fallen. The positive effects were greater in those 
countries in which the monetary policy transmission mechanism was temporarily affected, with 
our measures also helping to create a more uniform monetary policy across the euro area. The 
volume of bank loans to enterprises and households has also begun to recover. For example, 
the most recent “Survey on the access to finance of enterprises” showed that it is precisely 
small and medium-sized enterprises that are finding it easier to access credit. In general, the 
improved financing possibilities have increased demand in the euro area, even though global 
growth and demand from emerging economies in particular have weakened. 
The benefits outweigh the costs 
Much of our work at the ECB is also concerned with quantifying and evaluating the costs of 
measures and their unintended side effects. We see no sign of doomsday scenarios, as the 
critics like to paint. Rates of increase in house prices, for instance, are lower in most euro area 
countries than before the crisis, and in all countries they are below the trend that could be 
considered  normal  on  the  basis  of  historical  averages.  Besides,  price  increases  become 
particularly problematic when they are mainly driven by huge credit growth. In the euro area 
we are currently struggling more with restrained credit growth. In other markets too, such as 
those for corporate bonds or shares, developments are currently within the range of historically 
comparable processes. 
Also, since the crisis the banking system has become significantly more resilient to negative 
shocks.  The  banks  have  strengthened  their  capital  base.  The  ECB,  since  becoming  the 
banking  supervisor  under  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  has  played  a  part  in  banks 
Europe-wide  complying  with  high  and  uniform  standards.  Should  problems  arise  however, 
macroprudential instruments are best positioned to counteract financial sector risks, enabling 
monetary policy to focus on its primary objective of maintaining price stability. 
The ECB’s measures are undoubtedly part of monetary policy 
Traditionally, monetary policy works via changes in the key rates. In response to the financial 
crisis, the ECB, like other major central banks, has expanded its toolkit. The negative interest 
rate follows the traditional approach involving the key rate change, only with the special feature 
that it should make the holding of liquidity less attractive in order to stimulate bank lending in 
a targeted way. 
In addition to that, the asset purchase programmes are necessary for monetary policy. By 
influencing longer-term interest rates, which are particularly important for investments and the 
purchase  of  consumer  durables,  monetary  policy  can  therefore  preserve  its  room  for 
manoeuvre – in an economic environment in which traditional monetary policy is reaching its 
limits. 
Special attention was paid in the design of the asset purchase programme to avoiding market 
distortions. Thus the purchases in that sense are market-neutral; on average they are spread 
uniformly  across  assets  in  the  market.  We  are  also  constantly  monitoring  liquidity  in  the 
markets where we make purchases. It is important as well that the ECB only buys up to 33% 
of each bond to avoid having a market-dominant position in any security. Market participants 
can then freely set their prices and market-oriented premia can be established for credit and 
liquidity risks. 
When, in January 2015, the Governing Council decided on the purchase of government bonds, 
there was consensus on the Council that such purchases in principle represent a legitimate 
monetary policy instrument for ensuring price stability. Bond purchases undoubtedly also have 
an influence on countries’ refinancing costs. That, of course, changes nothing in respect of the 
monetary policy nature of the measures in the current situation of persistently too low inflation. 
And in any case, the traditional instrument of key rate changes influences countries’ refinancing 
costs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   What matters is that governments at national and European level also play their part 
Against this background, however, it is all the more important that governments continue their 
fiscal consolidation process. The common monetary policy can only be successful if, as the 
ECB has frequently stressed, the structural problems in the euro area are tackled at source. 
Here, governments bear the responsibility and have to do more. At national level, governments 
must consistently pursue the consolidation of their finances and increase growth potential. The 
necessary structural reforms on the labour and product markets should not be delayed either. 
But at European level, too, we need more from the political side. It is time to complement 
monetary  union  with  deeper  economic  union.  In  the  long  run,  it  is  very  hard  to  imagine  a 
complete monetary union without economic union. Further steps towards economic union will 
also make the task of monetary policy easier. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
