  Thomas Jordan: Why a strong education system must be an important 
concern for the Swiss National Bank 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the opening ceremony of the Faculty of Economics and Management at the 
University of Lucerne, Lucerne, 6 September 2016. 
 The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (http://www.snb.ch/). 
A  strong  education  system  is  a  cornerstone  for  a  country’s  prosperity.  Switzerland  has  a 
federally structured, flexible, high-quality education system. It stands out for its focus on the 
goal of employability, which is particularly reflected in the dual vocational training system that 
is closely aligned to the real needs of companies. The education system contributes to an 
innovative,  flexible  and  robust  Swiss  economy  which  –  given  structural  and  technological 
changes – can continue to be successful in future. The labour market would not work nearly 
as  well  without  solid  education,  and  the  culture  of  stability  would  be  less  well-anchored  in 
society. These strengths allow the Swiss National Bank (SNB) to conduct a monetary policy 
geared toward long-term stability. 
Attractive  universities  are  an  important  component  of  a  good  education  system.  The  SNB 
maintains an intensive exchange of information and ideas with academia, with the focus on 
topics relevant to central bank policy. For it can only fulfil its mandate optimally if the relevant 
research  results  flow  adequately  into  the  decision-making  process.  In  addition,  the  SNB 
recruits and employs many economists itself. Maintaining close ties with the universities is a 
necessary  prerequisite  for  SNB  economists  to  remain  on  top  of  the  latest  economic 
knowledge and for the SNB to be an attractive employer. However, the SNB also considers 
itself  a  provider  of  research  and  teaching  services.  To  the  extent  possible,  it  publishes  its 
own research results and also makes available other economic expertise, e.g. in the area of 
statistics. 
An academic education is a privilege for which society justifiably expects something in return. 
For graduates, this presupposes an especially large commitment to making a contribution to 
Switzerland’s prosperity and success. The SNB also would like universities to make concrete 
and  useful  suggestions  for  Swiss  economic  policy,  e.g.  with  regard  to  the  pension  system 
and  healthcare.  This  is  because  convincing  solutions  in  these  areas  make  it  possible  for 
monetary policy to continue to take full effect. 
In addition to the economic function, the strong education system also has an eminent civic 
one,  namely  by  providing the glue  that  holds the  whole  society  together.  First,  a good all-
round education enables voters to form their own opinions about complex substantive issues. 
This is essential in order for the advantages of direct democracy to be fully realised. Second, 
an  education  system  structured  in  a  way  to  maximise  labour  market  access  for  as  many 
people as possible is a significant factor for integration. And third, owing to its high quality 
and flexibility, it prevents class mentality and elitism. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
