   Yannis Stournaras: “European Banking Supervision: The first eighteen 
months” 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the 
presentation  of  the  book  by  Dirk  Schoenmaker  and  Nicolas  Veron:  “European  Banking 
Supervision: The first eighteen months”, Athens, 14 July 2016. 
 We are really pleased and honored to have you here for the presentation of the study related 
to the first eighteen months of the European Banking Supervision. I strongly believe your work 
brings  valuable  insight  in  an  era  involving  new  policy  regimes  that  have  brought  forward 
profound change to the European banking landscape.  
I  also feel  the  work  presented  here  today  is  essential  as  it  provides  an  excellent  overview 
related to SSM’s operations as well as the response to several challenges. Needless to say if 
we were having this discussion a couple of years ago it would have been hard to anticipate 
that a major organization of this size would be fully operational at such an early stage and truly 
competent in dealing with major issues in the euro-area.  
It is equally important to understand that these challenges have not changed much over the 
past few years: asset quality deterioration, market segmentation and business model viability 
are still issues to be tackled by monetary policy and supervisory decision makers in our days.  
It is worthwhile examining a persistent characteristic during these years, indicative of these 
considerations: shares of European banks have been trading at a discount to tangible book 
value, while those of the largest US banks trade at a premium to book value. A comparison of 
capital-adequacy ratios can no longer explain this difference in valuation multiples, as capital 
ratios for euro area banks have risen from about 8 percent in 2008 to about 14 percent today. 
On the contrary, they are indicative of a European banking sector undergoing a transformation 
that  demands  a  comprehensive  and  radical  adjustment  of  the  core  business  model  of 
operation.  
I feel that, eight years after the financial crisis, we are still witnessing a transition phase. Banks 
are definitely stronger than one decade ago, capital adequacy ratios do demonstrate that, but 
they are still adjusting their business models to a post-crisis world. At the same time, they also 
have  to  address  legacy  issues  with  problems  of  non-performing  exposures  adding  to  the 
overall assessment of investment considerations.  
The euro-area financial crisis, as originated in the end of the previous decade, provided the 
perhaps most serious challenge to the stability of the European Union; it is now well understood 
that a monetary union is not viable in the absence of a banking union. More recently, with the 
recovery in the euro area still fragile, new geopolitical tensions have led to an unprecedented 
refugee crisis and increased uncertainty. Finally, matters such as the consequences of Brexit, 
different approaches among member states regarding banking union, and the slow progress 
in  establishing  a  single  European  deposit  insurance  scheme,  have  been  hindering  further 
progress in securing the financial system architecture needed to enhance stability.  
SSM  has  been  the  catalyst  for  the  Banking  Union  of  the  EU.  It  provides  a  framework  for 
common  rules  and  policies  across  the  euro  area  banking  sectors;  it  enhances  single 
supervisory  treatment  over  segmented  national  practices.  But  it  also  has  to  cope  with 
increased uncertainty in two areas: the possibility of major changes in the future regulatory 
framework and the way that new regulation is going to be applied.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
