  Hendar: Producing competitive human capital for economic 
empowerment 
Keynote  Speech  by  Mr  Hendar,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the  Islamic 
Development  Bank  (IDB)  Seminar  “Producing  Competitive  Human  Capital  for  Economic 
Empowerment”, Jakarta, 13 May 2016. 
 Bismillahi rahmani rahiim, 
• 
 Distinguished: Director General of Resources for Science, Technology and Higher 
Education , Prof. Ali Gufron Mukti; 
Distinguished:  Director  General  of  Islamic  Research  and  Training  Institute-Islamic 
Development Bank, Prof Azmi Omar; 
Distinguished panelist, ladies and gentlemen 
• 
Assalamu’alaikum Warrahmatullah Wabarakatuh, 
A very good morning to all of you. 
1. 
Praise  to  Allah  the  Almighty,  the  Most  Gracious  and  the  Most  Merciful,  for  His 
Blessing  so  that  we  are  able  to  take  part  on  this  meeting  in  good  health  and  high  spirits. 
Prayers and peace be upon the Last Prophet of Allah, the prophet Muhammad, his family, 
his companions and followers. 
First of all, allow me to warmly welcome all of you in this seminar on Human 
2. 
Capital  Development  in  Jakarta,  and  welcome  to  Bank  Indonesia.  It  is  an  honor  for 
Indonesia to be the host of the 41st Islamic Development Bank Group Annual Meeting, which 
formally will be held in the next few days. In conjunction with the IDB Group Annual Meeting, 
there  are  series  of  side  events  organized  by  the  IDB  Group  in  collaboration  with  various 
institutions  in  Indonesia.  Our  seminar today  is  the first  program  among those  events. This 
seminar  is  organized  by  Bank  Indonesia  in  collaboration  with  the  Islamic  Research  and 
Training  Institute  (IRTI),  a  member  of  the  IDB  Group  which  takes  the  theme:  “Producing 
Competitive Human Capital for Economic Empowerment”. 
Muslim  population  has  a  huge  potential  to  develop  Islamic  economic  and 
3. 
finance globally. In the last two decades, we have seen so much development which takes 
shapes in terms of outreach, financial products, business volume, and financial subsectors. 
However, if we want to see the Islamic economic and finance stand equally with its 
conventional counterpart and serve as the other formidable economic pillar to sustain 
the  national  economic  development,  more  progressive  actions  needs  to  take  place. 
This  forum  demonstrates  our  commitment  towards  better  quality  of  Islamic  human  capital. 
theme  of  “Producing  Competitive  Human  Capital  for  Economic 
Therefore, 
Empowerment” is very relevant for us to think through the future directions of the human 
capital development. 
the 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We  have  witnessed  significant  global  growth  in  Islamic  Economics  and 
4. 
Finance. Since the global financial crisis, the islamic finance institution has grown at double 
digit rates, outpacing growth of the conventional sector. Based on Islamic Financial Services 
Industry Stability Report 2016, the global Islamic financial services industry has reached an 
overall total value of USD1.88 trillion in 2015. 
Despites those achievements, the industry still suffers from certain technical 
5. 
flaws namely relatively low operational efficiency, availability of full range of financial 
products  to  entertain 
the  customers,  and  appropriately  designed  regulatory 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 finance  results 
to  misperception 
in  understanding 
Islamic  economic  and 
 
 
framework.  In  most  instances,  these  lacks  are  associated  with  the  low  quality  of  human 
capital involved in the development of Islamic finance industry. Poor promotion strategy that 
leads 
in 
unnecessary burden to the industrial development program. I am of a view that we should 
pay more attention on improving low quality of human resource. 
This  unfortunate  phenomenon  has  been  a  common  fact  in  many  countries 
6. 
including Indonesia.  The  lacks  of  adequate  number  of  universities,  available  high  quality 
reading  material,  and  dedicatedly  designed  curriculum  have  prevented  the  industry  from 
achieving progressive developments. We realise that the quality of human resources cannot 
be  developed  over  night.  This  requires  very  deep  and  comprehensive  analysis  and 
implementation program. In order to maximise its benefits, the human capital development 
program should be able to cover all segments in the society besides the level of education. 
The  organization  of this  seminar  that  is  aimed at  exchanging  information  is  very  important 
and timely. 
Allow  me  to  offer  three  basic  ingredients  that  can  be  adopted  when 
7. 
developing human capital in Islamic economic and finance. First is ‘link and match’. 
The  universities  that  offer  Islamic  economic  program  should  be  able  to  provide  teaching 
materials  that  has  relevance  to  the  current  challenges.  The  graduates  produced  by  the 
educational institutions, formal as well as vocationals, should be ready for fierce competition 
and  understand  all  the  requirements  demanded  by  the  market.  The  combination  between 
Islamic  economic  specific  and  fluency  in  general  knowledge  is  very  important.  Second, 
technology based development program. Now is era of digital technology. There so many 
development and invention by young entrepreneurs using information technology. In area of 
financial  technology  (fintech), many  startups  provide  financial  services  with  lower  cost  and 
easier  requirements.  Some  startups  also  begin  using  Islamic  finance  as  their  business 
model. In my views, the graduates of should acquire certain level of knowledge in the area of 
technology  considering  that  the  financial  industry  has  become  technologically  intensive. 
Failure in acquiring certain level of technology would fail the economic agents in winning the 
competition. Third, establishing solid platform for cooperation among the educational 
institutions globally as well as domestically. With the technology in hand, the cooperation 
between different parties may be conducted more easily. 
5. 
Islamic  Development  Bank  has  involved  in  many  education  development  project 
conducted in any countries. IDB intervention in Indonesia has been conducted in terms of the 
physical  development  of  university  building.  I  hope  that  further  intervention  may  also 
cover  the  development  of  curriculum  so  that  the  universities  offering  Islamic 
economics  and  finance  may  equip  young  generation  with  the  knowledge  and  skills 
which relevant to the market requirement. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  this  occasion,  allow  me  to  share  Bank  Indonesia  initiatives  in  the  area  of 
6. 
Islamic  economics  and  financial  development,  especially  in  the  human  capital 
development.  In my  opinion,  when  driving  Islamic  economics  and finance  as  an  inclusive 
system  in  the  national  economy,  human  capital  serves  as  the  main  pillar.  Therefore,  we 
support  the  development  in  three  components  of  human  capital  in  the  market  that 
consist of academics, practitioner and society. 
First, at academic side, Bank Indonesia has enhanced the collaboration and 
7. 
cooperation  with  universities,  particularly  in  the  area  of  research,  public  lecture, 
scholarships  and  research  grant.  In  addition,  Bank  Indonesia  has  published  a  number  of 
books on Islamic Economics and Finance serving as academic references to the academics. 
The most recent book launched by Bank Indonesia entitled “The journey of Islamic Banking 
in  Indonesia:  Institution,  policy  and  challenges”.  Beside  universities,  Bank  Indonesia  also 
allocated its resources to human capital development on earlier education including Islamic 
Boarding  Schools  or  “Pesantren”.  Currently,  Bank  Indonesia  is  preparing  a  set  of  lecture 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  modules  which  cover  the  area  of:  i)  Islamic  social  finance,  including  zakat  and  waqf; 
ii) Empowerment  of  Micro  and  Small  Enterprise;  and  iii)  Entrepreneurship  development. 
Expectedly, these materials are ready to launch by next July and adopted by 5 universities. 
Moreover,  in  order  to  encourage  and  foster  research  activities  in  the  area  of  Islamic 
Economics,  Monetary  and  Finance,  Bank  Indonesia  has  launched  Journal  of  Islamic 
Monetary Economics and Finance. The latest volume has just been issued in February 2016. 
We hope that this journal will be a bridge between theory and practice in the area Islamic 
Economics, Monetary and Finance.  
Second,  at  practitioners’  side,  Bank  Indonesia  also  continuously  conducts 
8. 
capacity building programs to enhance the competence of human resource in Islamic 
Finance industry. We maintain good cooperation with local and international institutions, for 
facilitating  expert  visit  to  Indonesia,  conducting  seminars,  workshop  and  facilitating  joint 
research  activities  on  Islamic  Economics  and  Finance.  Next  week,  we  will  organize  Sukuk 
Master  Class Workshop  to  develop  the  competence  of  practitioner  of  Islamic  banking  and 
finance community, particularly in sukuk issuance. In our views, corporate sukuk should be 
encouraged along with the development of sovereign sukuk. 
Third,  at  society’s  side,  in  order  to  enhance  awareness  and  commitment  of 
9. 
stakeholders  in  supporting  Islamic  economic  acceleration,  Bank  Indonesia  organize 
Indonesia  Sharia  Economic  Festival  since  2014.  This  event  provides  intellectual 
discussions  and  business  avenues  among 
leaders, 
regulators and Shariah scholars to spur the future growth of Islamic finance. 
10. In terms of organization, after sharia banking department moved to OJK, Bank Indonesia 
has established new department on Shariah Economics and Finance. It is our commitment to 
strengthen some initiatives to achieve Indonesia as regional center of Islamic Economic and 
Finance. 
industry  practitioners,  business 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Please  allow  me  to  end  my  speech  by  expressing  appreciation  and  sincere 
10. 
gratitude  to  all  speakers  and  participants,  particularly  the  willingness  to  attend  this 
special event. I also would like to wish you all a productive discussion and deliberation in 
this important event. I am confident that supported by all participants in this room, we can 
achieve  significant  outcomes  that  are  beneficial  to  promote  human  capital  development  in 
the area of Islamic economy and finance. 
Finally, allow me to thank all the hard-working and dedicated staff, both from Bank 
11. 
Indonesia and IRTI-IDB, for making this seminar possible. However, we fully understand that 
the seminar one way or another is still far from perfect. In this respect, therefore, we would 
like to seek forgiveness for any inconveniences occur in this seminar. I once again welcome 
you to this seminar and wish you every success in your deliberations. 
Thank you very much. 
Wa billahi tawfiq wal hidayah. 
Wassalamu’alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
