  Salvatore Rossi: The Banking Union in the European integration process 
Speech  by  Mr  Salvatore  Rossi,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the 
Conference “European Banking Union and bank/firm relationship”, CUOA Business School, 
Altavilla Vicentina, 7 April 2016. 
 How we got to a Banking Union 
The Banking Union is the latest born sectorial union in Europe. Differently from the Monetary 
Union, it was not born in a positive and joyful climate, as that accompanying the new pro-
European  thrust between  the  80s  and  90s  of  last  century.  It  came  into being  as  a  hurried 
response to a situation of extremely serious crisis, which threatened the very essence of the 
European Union, at the start of this decade. 
Immediately  after  the  outbreak  of  the  global  financial  crisis  –  an  epidemic  which  spread 
quickly  from  the  original  US  onset  to  the  rest  of  the  world  –  Europe  started  to  be  worried 
about  its  banks.  There  was  a  widespread  belief  that,  in  the  presence  of  big  European 
intermediaries  operating  on  a  global  scale,  national  supervisory  and  crisis  management 
systems were getting increasingly less effective. 
The  European  reaction  was  typical  for  the  EU  institutional  architecture:  a  stratification  of 
complex  bureaucratic  bodies  with  unpronounceable  acronyms.  Since  2011,  the  national 
regulatory and supervisory authorities and the European Committees coordinating them were 
placed under the umbrella of the European System of Financial Supervision (EFSF), made 
up  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  and  the  three  sectorial  European 
Supervisory  Authorities  (ESA):  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA),  the  European 
Insurance  and Occupational  Pensions  Authority  (EIOPA)  and  the  European  Securities  and 
Markets Authority (ESMA). 
This  complex  and  heavy  structure  began  to  crumble  when  the  so-  called  “sovereign  debt 
crisis” became serious in Europe. Let us not be deceived by the highly technocratic sound of 
this expression. It was actually a rapid and wide spread of a basic doubt on the very meaning 
and  purpose  of the  European  Union  and  on the  single  currency  in  particular.  A  doubt that 
began  to  creep  in  not  only  among  academics,  but  also  among  leaders  and  peoples  of  all 
European  countries.  The  genie  got  out  of  the  lamp  and  since  then  it  has  not  been  put 
completely in again. 
The  crisis  was  triggered  by  the  disclosure  of  the  very  poor  conditions  of  the  Greek  public 
accounts  between  late  2009  and  early  2010.  It  was  like  a  long  compressed  spring  being 
released. The Northern European countries voiced loud and clear that they did not trust the 
will of Southern countries to make their economies more healthily competitive and financially 
sound. Southern countries on their turn started to complain about the inadequacy of a strict 
financial  orthodoxy  at  a  time  when  it  was  necessary  to  avoid  sinking  into  a  new  big 
depression  by  means  of  expansionary  policies.  International  markets  and  investors 
understood immediately that the possibility of a political split on the euro could no longer be 
ruled out and started to “price” it in when assessing government bonds which – one day in 
the  future  –  might  be  denominated  in  a  reborn  national  currency  (either  very  devalued  or 
revalued). We saw the spread between the yield of the bonds of “peripheral” countries and 
that of the German bund peak to levels that should be unthinkable in a monetary union. 
It was immediately clear that banks were the weak link in the chain. 
There’s indeed an obvious link between the public finance and the financial statements of the 
banks in a given country. Banks normally – I would say naturally – invest a considerable part 
of  their  assets  in  government  bonds  of  the  countries  where  they  operate,  mainly  for  the 
management of their liquidity; if yields go up, the value of those bonds falls and banks must 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  record  losses  in  their  accounts;  at  the  same  time  raising  funds  on  the  wholesale  market 
becomes  more  expensive.  Banks  undergoing  difficulties  raise  the  suspicion  in  the  market 
that they will be saved by the State, which makes the perspectives for the public budget even 
worse. A vicious circle that must be broken1. 
Hence the idea of a Banking Union. European banks – it was stated – must be perceived as 
a  European,  not  a  national,  issue:  if  one  of them goes  into crisis  it must  be  clear that  the 
solution will be found at a European, and not at a national, level. The Four Presidents’ Report 
illustrating the project was presented in June 2012. 
However  it  was  immediately  clear  that  the  implementation  of  this  project  would  be 
undermined by the geopolitical conflict that was tearing Europe apart. It consisted in three 
key pillars and a “joint”. The key pillars were: a single resolution mechanism for banks within 
the euro area – the main pillar – together with a single deposit insurance scheme in case of a 
bank’s  liquidation  and  a  single  supervisory  authority,  operating  on  the  basis  of  common 
standards  and  practices.  The  “joint”  was  a  sort  of  public  and  common  financial  safeguard 
clause  (backstop),  supporting  both  crisis  resolution  procedures  and  the  deposit  insurance 
scheme. This joint had already been identified as the existing European Stability Mechanism 
(ESM). 
The  view  that  the  prerequisite  for  all  this  was  the  creation  of  a  single  supervisor  was 
immediately put forward, because this would have helped eliminate the mutual distrust, and 
so it had to be the starting point. The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) was set up in a 
record  time:  it  was  made  up  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  national  supervisory 
authorities,  and  became  operational  in  November  2014.  Such  rapid  implementation  was 
possible  thanks  to  a  provision  in  the  Treaty  expressly  assigning  the  ECB  prudential 
supervision functions. In addition, the SSM could right from the beginning rely on a whole set 
of  common  prudential  rules  (single  rulebook),  contained  in  the  package  of  regulations 
CRR/CRD4 which had already transposed Basel III agreements in Europe. 
In the meantime, crises of banks of different sizes had spread in many European countries, 
due to reasons ranging from the burst of real estate speculative bubbles, as was the case in 
Spain  and  Ireland,  to  the  contagion  of  “toxic”  instruments  in  structured  finance,  as  in 
Germany. Banks in distress were saved using public resources (bail-out): 240 billion euro in 
Germany, borne by German taxpayers, 50 billion in Spain, financed with the European funds 
collected by the ESM, 40 billion in Ireland and almost the same amount in the Netherlands, 
and so on. In Italy public intervention was only a tiny fraction of those just mentioned and – 
what’s more – took the form of a loan, very profitable for the State. On the other hand, in Italy 
the burden of deteriorated loans was getting heavier and heavier, mainly as a consequence 
of the long recession. 
The massive public bailouts of European banks ended in the first half of 2013. In July 2013 
the  European  Commission  issued  a  Communication  laying  down  guidelines  on  State  aid, 
binding  for  all  the  member  States.  Since  then  State  aid  could  be  granted  only  under  very 
stringent  conditions  and  subject  to  a  “burden  sharing”  by  shareholders  and  subordinated 
bondholders:  a  principle  similar  to  the  “bail-in”  underpinning  the  new  European  Bank 
Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), which was being drafted. 
The new way of solving banking crises 
In April 2014, the European Parliament approved the BRRD, which fully introduced, as from 
2016, the bail-in principle. Since the beginning of this year the Single Resolution Mechanism 
(SRM) has become fully operational in the euro area, the first – and central – pillar of the 
                                                
1  As  to  the  nature  of  the  vicious  circle  see  L.  F.  Signorini,  Speech  for  the  round  of  meetings  “Towards  a 
European Banking Union”, Università Cattolica di Milano, 27 March 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Banking  Union,  managed  by  yet  another  new  authority,  the  Single  Resolution  Board, 
supported by similar newly set-up national authorities. 
The founding principle of this new regulation is not: “European banks are a European issue”, 
but:  “European  taxpayers  must  be  protected  against  banking  crises”,  those  in  their  own 
countries  and  especially  those  in  other  countries.  The  cost  of  a  banking  crisis  should  no 
longer be borne by the taxpayer but by the saver/investor. 
The idea is that if a bank goes into crisis, to the point of being “failed or likely to fail”, and no 
market solution can be found, there are only two viable options: to liquidate it, i.e. to close it 
down  permanently,  stopping  all  operations  and  freezing  all  creditors  until,  years  later,  it  is 
clear what remains after the liquidation of assets; or, in case of an overt public interest in the 
bank’s  survival,  to  bail  it  in,  placing  the  burden  of  covering  losses  and  reconstituting  the 
required regulatory capital primarily on shareholders, bondholders and large depositors, i.e. 
those with more than 100.000 euro (not protected by deposit insurance schemes). If those 
resources  are  not  enough,  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  intervenes.  This  fund  is  privately 
financed by the contributions of all the other banks belonging to the system. 
The first applications of this scheme, in Portugal and in Italy, despite the partial form in force 
until  the  end  of  last  year  (i.e.,  the  burden  sharing),  have  shown  limitations  and  risks.  The 
sacrosanct  principle  of  taxpayer  protection  is  not  being  questioned,  but  a  debate  is  still 
possible  and  necessary  about  its  rigid  and  mechanical  application,  in  a  context  of  equally 
rigid,  when  not  misinterpreted  and  analytically  unsound,  protection  of  competition  in  the 
banking market; it is like treating banks as all other businesses, such as a supermarket or an 
advertising agency; and not like companies that, while competing with each other, rely on the 
confidence of savers, that is an impalpable and volatile public good, the loss of which may 
threaten  the  stability  of the  entire financial  system, thus  of  the  entire  economy.  Taxpayers 
and  savers  are  not  alien  to  one  another,  but  they  represent,  as  a  whole,  the  same 
community, that of citizens. 
Thus, the functioning of the SRM from now on appears to be affected by uncertainties. 
On the one hand, decisions on the introduction of completely innovative standards and rules 
have been centralized in Brussels. Some of the BRRD rules leave room for discretion, aimed 
at balancing the different objectives of a “resolution” procedure: protection of taxpayers, but 
also of systemic stability, depositors’ protection, continuity in the supply of essential financial 
services. These objectives may conflict: pragmatism, flexibility, and reasonableness will be 
necessary to reconcile them2. 
On the other hand, the regulatory framework is still evolving; the international standards for 
the Total Loss Absorbing Capacity (TLAC), issued last November by the Financial Stability 
Board for large global banks, will have to be transposed in Europe, consequently modifying 
the current provisions of the BRRD. 
During the technical negotiations on BRRD held in 2013 the Italian authorities (the Bank of 
Italy  and 
formally  argued,  presenting  supporting 
documentation3, in favour of applying the bail- in tool only to newly issued bonds expressly 
containing a contract term entrusting the authorities with the power to write-down or convert 
them  upon  the  occurrence  of  the  conditions  for  resolution.  In  addition,  to  allow  time  for 
investors to become aware of the new rules and for banks to provide an adequate buffer of 
bail-inable liabilities, we insisted on the need to defer the entry into force of the new rules to 
2018. The objections raised in technical contexts, by both the Bank of Italy and the Ministry 
the  Ministry  of  Finance),  had 
                                                
2  For  a  discussion  of  the  application  and  procedural  aspects  of  the  new  crisis  management  system,  see  F. 
Panetta, Hearing at the Finance and Treasury Commission of the Senate, 29 October 2015. 
I. Visco, Speech at 22nd Congress ASSIOM FOREX, 30 January 2016. 
3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  of  Finance,  were  not  taken  into  account.  The  political  pressure  coming  from  the  Northern 
European countries prevailed. 
A temporary public backstop still needs to be designed for cases where the application of the 
bail-in  might  exacerbate,  rather  than  alleviate,  the  risks  of  systemic  instability.  It  would  be 
fully consistent with the provisions of the Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes of 
the Financial Stability Board, that are the global standards for the resolution of large financial 
intermediaries’ crises. 
The lack of such instrument is not accidental: it reflects the unwillingness of many European 
countries  to  consider  the  possibility  that  the  taxpayers  of  country  A  may  pay,  even 
temporarily, for the crisis of a bank in country B. According to this view, banks, although now 
supervised  and  subject  to  resolution  by  European  institutions,  must  ultimately  remain  a 
national matter. 
The single deposit guarantee scheme 
The second key pillar of the Banking Union (the European deposit insurance scheme) seems 
to be still a long way in the future. 
The last Five Presidents’ Report of June 2015 underlined the need to continue moving ahead 
in relation to the single deposit insurance, because without it the euro runs the risk of being 
unable to absorb generalised confidence shocks; the Report recalled that – in comparison to 
national systems – a common guarantee scheme is more likely to be neutral over time for 
public finances, because risks are more spread and contributions are levied on a wider range 
of intermediaries4. 
The European Commission recently made a proposal – submitted to Ecofin last December – 
to  change  the  SRM  Regulation  in  order  to  create  a  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme 
(EDIS),  fully  funded  by  private  resources  provided  by  all  banks  in  the  euro  area.  The 
proposal  was  submitted  for  consideration  to  the  Council,  which  set  up  a  special  working 
group. 
The EDIS is intended to establish a mutual system of private deposit insurance based on the 
Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF), to which the already existing national funds would gradually 
transfer the resources collected by the participating banks. The scheme would guarantee the 
same protection in all the countries participating in the SSM; it would increase confidence in 
the European banking system on a level playing field. 
The EDIS should be established in three stages. In the first one (reinsurance, until 2019) the 
DIF would cover up to 20 per cent of the financial requirement or the losses of national funds. 
In this stage the DIF would provide assistance only after the national funds have used all the 
available resources (both ex-ante contributions and ex-post ones, in case additional funding 
is needed). In the second stage (co-insurance, from 2020 to 2023) the share of the financial 
commitment and of the cost of the assistance borne by DIF would gradually increase (up to 
80 per cent); in this stage the intervention by the DIF and by the national funds would occur 
in parallel. In the third and last stage (full insurance, from 2024), the DIF would provide all 
funding. 
Thus, we are talking about a scheme which does not envisage any public backstop, and has 
a  very  long  transition.  Nonetheless  such  proposal  has  faced  firm  opposition  from  some 
countries  (among  which  Germany,  the  Netherlands  and  Finland).  They  call  for  the 
harmonisation  of  major  national  regulations  –  bankruptcy  laws,  collateral  framework,  tax 
rules, company law and consumer protection – before mutual guarantee schemes are even 
                                                
4  For  an  in-depth  study  of  the  Five  Presidents’  Report,  see  I.  Visco,  European  Union:  progress  or  regress?, 
Speech at the 50th Anniversary Conference of Istituto Affari Internazionali, 13 November 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  discussed; and, above all, they call for the preliminary introduction of prudential requirements 
for banks’ sovereign exposures. Discussions seem to be deadlocked. A climate of mistrust 
still prevails along national borders. 
 Let me sum up. The Banking Union original plan envisaged that if a European bank went into 
crisis,  the  first  common  funds  to  be  used  to  save  it  should  be  private,  but,  if  that  were 
necessary to preserve financial stability, then also public funds should be used; should the 
crisis not be resolved and the bank be wound up, deposits below a certain threshold should 
be guaranteed, again with common private funds, but, if need be, with public ones as well; a 
unified approach to banking supervision at the European level would prevent suspicions of 
favouritism and moral hazard by national authorities. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism has been fully in place since a year and a half now. It is 
working,  despite  having  been  developed  in  a  very  short  time  and  despite  the  objective 
coordination  difficulties  among  authorities  with  different  histories,  traditions  and  practices. 
Cooperation  between  the  national  and  the  central  level,  after  some  initial  friction,  is  now 
smoother. 
The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  has  only  recently  become  fully  operational  and  differs 
from the  original  project.  It  presents  implementation  issues  and  also risks for the  systemic 
financial stability. 
The single deposit guarantee scheme is still missing and there are heated discussions about 
its design. 
Therefore the Banking Union implemented so far is neither perfect nor complete. 
Its difficulties are those of the entire European Union. Those who recognize its indispensable 
role and care about its fate must work with renewed determination to strengthen it. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
