   Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Leveraging capabilities and synergies for 
banking excellence 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  First  General  Membership  Meeting  of  the  Bankers 
Institute of the Philippines (BAIPhil), Makati City, 15 July 2016. 
 It is always a pleasure to be at the general assembly of the officers and members of BAIPHIL, 
the training arm of the Philippine banking industry, one of the most important pillars of our 
economy.  
Given that the environment within which we operate is far from static and is in reality, quite 
dynamic, BAIPHIL’s role is quite challenging. I am glad therefore that BAIPHIL is up to this 
challenge.  
Under the leadership of its immediate past president Rhoneil Fajardo, BAIPHIL adopted for its 
theme  “Building  Capacity  Towards  Financial  Inclusion  and  Integration.”  This  reflected  the 
industry’s  efforts  in support  of  the  BSP’s  thrust  to  develop  an  inclusive financial  system to 
promote inclusive growth and long-term stability. And you walked your talk. We also saw this 
in the way BAIPHIL escalated its increasingly popular financial education program for teachers 
and parents and for other marginalized sector groups. Congratulations!  
This time, with BAIPHIL President Liza Ortiz at the helm (from July 2016 to June 2017), your 
theme is “Leveraging Capabilities and Synergies for Banking Excellence.” Indeed, this is the 
call of the times.   
The dramatic changes we have been seeing in the financial system are unparalleled. We are 
witnessing a sea change via global reforms, regional initiatives and domestic developments. 
The market’s underlying architecture is being re-shaped and this has also changed what we 
expect of bankers as professionals.  
Global best practices continue to evolve and the bar set to ever higher standards. But beyond 
standards, what all these really mean is that it is no longer enough for financial professionals 
to focus only on their own institutions. Proper planning requires a more holistic view of market 
developments  and  how  these  changes  can  create  and  possibly  lead  up  to  system-wide 
dislocations. 
It is the identification and mitigation of these system-wide dislocations that now drive the efforts 
of financial regulators. The build-up of systemic risk should be a collective concern because 
we have seen the extent of dislocation and the high costs that it can bring.  
This is the mindset for the pursuit of “financial stability” as the new global prudential norm -- 
our  efforts  are  organized  towards  preventing  another  systemic  collapse  of  the  financial 
markets.  
This is very apparent in the global reform agenda where containing “too-big-to-fail” financial 
institutions  and  addressing  the  consequences  of  inter-connectedness  are  prominent 
objectives.  Basel  3  runs  under  the  mantra  of  “making  banks  stronger”.  It  does  so  by 
institutionalizing  better  quality  capital,  introducing  loss-absorbency  parameters  for  capital-
compliant instruments, improving market transparency and setting prescriptive caps/floors for 
prudential purposes.  
On the other hand, new standards completely redefine the risk governance for Financial Market 
Infrastructures or FMI. This is done with an increased appreciation for contagion risk and the 
need for stronger IT security protocols. Consumer protection and financial literacy are now 
considered prudential norms rather than as optional add-ons. This is because the decisions 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   and  behavior  of  informed financial  consumers  are  itself  effective  stabilizers  against market 
shocks. 
From  the  perspective  of  the  market,  these  reforms  increase  the  cost  of  doing  business. 
Granted, these regulatory premia have cost implications; but it would be costly to have yet 
another crisis.  
We should also factor in, that new standards now cover more risks and look at the same risks 
at a higher prudential bar. The “new market landscape” is defined not only by tighter regulations 
but by wider coverage of risks and a more definitive handling to mitigate further build-up of 
known risks into systemic proportions. 
It can be said that new norms change our understanding of the market -- from allocating scarce 
resources  into  one  that  allocates  risk  capital.  By  extension  then,  the  key  commodity  is 
information that drives decisions across various options. It is important that reforms are put in 
place and safeguards continuously updated to uphold the integrity of that information so that it 
is not abused.  
Excellence starts from core competencies 
Ladies and gentlemen, it should be apparent that the preferred market architecture today is 
substantially different from what we had in the past. If we aspire to excellence in banking, it 
must start from developing core competencies. 
However,  let me  be clear --  the  need for  continuing  education  has  not changed;  what  has 
changed is the mindset for achieving “banking excellence”. We still need to know about market, 
credit and operational risks; but beyond these, we now need to also appreciate risks that are 
not so apparent -- like contagion, concentration, leverage and liquidity.  
These four risks -- of 2 Cs and 2 Ls -- are important. At the BSP, we refer to them as “CL-2 
risks”. These CL-2 risks are systemic because exposures to them are formed through a chain 
of bilateral transactions. Once any single point of the chain is compromised, the entire chain is 
weakened. Monitoring this chain of counterparty dealings is a challenge for each institution, 
but it is precisely the basis for systemic risk that concerns regulators. 
An added challenge is that financial stability cannot be defined in absolute terms. Building core 
competencies therefore will be an exercise not only of “what is” but increasingly more of “what 
can be”. This is where judgment, perspective and collaboration play a critical role. While the 
market may be more complex and empirics-based, in the end, it is still the human factor that 
will be needed to execute transactions. 
In many ways, the task of achieving banking excellence thru synergies is no different from 
operating a dragon boat.  
• 
There is a sweep whose task it is to steer the boat with an oar and to protect the safety 
of the crew by avoiding collisions.  
There is a drummer whose rhythmic pounding of the drum establishes synchronicity. 
Considered  the  heartbeat  of  the  dragon  boat,  the  drummer  decides  when  it  is 
appropriate to increase or decrease the pace of the team.  
• 
And there are the paddlers whose collective and coordinated strokes move the boat.  
If the dragon boat crew does not work together, the boat itself will not move. But as a team, 
one can see that the beauty of cadence and the commitment to collaborate will propel the 
dragon boat to move with direction, purpose and urgency. 
 Final thoughts 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  all  these  simply  reiterate  that  financial  markets  warrant  a  strong 
framework  for  risk  governance  because  of  the  network  of  linkages  between  transactions, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   stakeholders and product lines. Thus, the reform agenda has instigated a tighter framework 
that now recognizes new risks and treats old risks in a different light. 
The responsibility of achieving financial stability and sustaining the strength of the financial 
market rests on all industry stakeholders. We are all in this together, and therefore, we should 
work together. Like wisdom, strength cannot be granted; strength must be earned.  
To move forward stronger and better requires that we all collaborate and work on a common 
vision and policy direction. To me, this is the essence of your theme: “Leveraging Capabilities 
and Synergies for Banking Excellence.”  
I see BAIPhil scaling up its role within the banking industry. You can serve as the dragon boat 
drummer, be the heartbeat of the industry thru trainings, calibrating coverage and content to 
what is needed most at any point in time.  
And BAIPHIL’s role should continue to go beyond addressing gaps in technical skill sets. It is 
important for BAIPHIL to broaden and deepen its coverage of human behavior, values, ethics, 
and the need to maintain financial integrity at all times. In particular, BAIPHIL can address the 
need to cascade governance standards across banks to levels below Directors. 
And through BAIPHIL, the banking industry stands to benefit even more, from having global 
experts you can learn from and benchmark with, in your conferences and training courses.     
Ladies and gentlemen. It has been said that we can have a good future only if we prepare 
ourselves today. We need the cadence and rhythm of a dragon boat to navigate uncertain 
waters that challenge stability and the pursuit of excellence.  
Under its new set of officers, I am confident that BAIPHIL will continue to be a positive force in 
the banking industry.  
  Mabuhay ang BAIPHIL at ang ating banking industry! 
  Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas!  
  Mabuhay po tayong lahat!  
Maraming salamat! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
