  Patrick Njoroge: Financial inclusion in Sub-Saharan Africa 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Patrick  Njoroge,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
TICAD VI/Alliance Forum Foundation & Comesa, Nairobi, 26 August 2016. 
 Good Afternoon! 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  be here today,  to  speak  to such  a  distinguished group  about financial 
inclusion in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
History  teaches  us  that  every  nation  in  every  epoch  faces  many  challenges  but  also 
opportunities. Africa faces many challenges, including realizing sustainable growth to reduce 
poverty and provide meaningful employment to its young population. At the same time, there 
are  opportunities  that  are  provided  by  two  significant  trends  –  globalization  and  the  IT 
revolution. As we see it, in the financial sphere, financial inclusion combines these two trends 
to provide great promise in dealing with the present-day challenges. 
Financial inclusion holds the promise of harnessing collaboration between financial service 
providers  and  technology  service  providers  to  achieve  social  ends  such  as  inclusive 
economic growth, sustainable development and poverty alleviation. 
This  forum  provides  an  excellent  occasion  to  reflect  on  the  achievements  made,  the 
challenges that remain, and the opportunities that lie ahead in actualizing this promise. My 
focus  today  will  be  to  highlight  the  role  that  innovation  and  related  policies  play  in 
establishing financially inclusive ecosystems that do not marginalize people on the basis of 
income or geographical location. 
As is well recognized, Kenya has leveraged mobile phone technology and made remarkable 
strides  in  financial  inclusion.  There  are  currently  38.3  million  mobile  phone  subscribers  in 
Kenya. This has allowed access to formal financial services to grow from 26 percent in 2006 
to over 75 percent currently. Similarly, other countries in the region have increased financial 
inclusion; recently reported numbers are Mauritius at 88 percent, South Africa at 83 percent, 
Tanzania at 57 percent, and Nigeria at 48 percent.  
While efforts need to be sustained to further increase inclusion and access, the focus has 
now turned to the products and services that are available. The question at hand is how to 
expand the digital financial services ecosystem beyond basic money transfer, savings, and 
micro-credit. Innovative solutions are needed to provide a range of digital financial services, 
from  simple  money  transfer  platforms  to  payment  solutions,  savings,  micro-insurance, 
financial  planning  and  access  to capital  markets  securities. What framework  would  ensure 
that the benefit of financial inclusion are sustained? 
Let me turn to a few considerations to help set a framework for the path ahead. 
First,  there  is  the  perennial  question  of  the  cost  of  such  services.  Developing  sustainable 
digital  services  that  are  affordable  by  low-income  households  and  vulnerable  groups  is 
imperative.  While  prices  of  phone  sets  continue  to  fall,  the  transition  by  financial  service 
providers  from  Unstructured  Supplementary  Service  Data  (USSD)-based  SMS  services  to 
proprietary  apps  is  not  without  concerns.  Consumers  should  also  benefit  from  reduced 
marginal  cost  of  additional  digital  financial  services,  as  provided  by  the  underlying 
technologies. 
However, it is also true that the reliability of the services provided is crucial for consumers. 
For instance, recent studies on enhancing access to clean water in informal settlements in 
Kenya (Mathare and Kibera) indicate that low-income households are disposed to pay twice 
as much to water vendors for reliable water services. This may therefore be an opportune 
time to start a discussion of the cost of these digital financial services. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Secondly,  we  are  seeing  increased  standardization  of  processes,  structures,  and  rules, 
across  technological  platforms.  But  do  common  standards  have  an  impact  on  innovation? 
Are they synonymous with interoperability? 
Technological standards support the production process and market penetration of products, 
and  therefore  have  a  significant  collective  effect  on  innovation,  productivity,  and  market 
structure.  However,  the  existing  market  dynamics  with  dominant  leaders,  coupled  with 
standardization,  are  bound  to  have  a  considerable  impact  on  switching  costs  and  network 
effects. These would run counter to the long-term objective of enhancing market access with 
evolving technology.  
I believe that it is safe to say that the more an industry depends on interoperability, the more 
the standards will be evidenced. My fear is that standardization has the potential of creating 
an  over  reliance  on  certain  technologies,  thereby  limiting  the  adoption  of  new  and  more 
efficient  technologies.  Open  digital  platforms  can  improve  interoperability  and  widen 
consumer  choice  by  expanding  the  network  of  available  access  points  for  consumers  and 
service providers. 
Thirdly, the growing adoption of digital financial services also raises a number of consumer 
protection concerns. These include: a lack of safeguards for funds held by institutions outside 
the financial regulatory perimeter; limited disclosure of fees, terms and conditions; insufficient 
agent  liquidity;  irresponsible  lending  through  digital  channels,  and  agent  fraud;  system 
downtime that prevents access to funds; and unclear or limited recourse systems. 
What is clear is that a sound consumer and data protection framework is essential, especially 
for vulnerable consumers with limited resources to absorb losses. Questions of data privacy 
amidst the explosion of cybercrime are of particular concern. Questions about ownership and 
control  of  the  vast  data  that  is  generated  through  the  digital  financial  services  also  need 
urgent attention. 
Building  a  sound  framework  with  evolving  capabilities  will  require  sound  governance  and 
practices at all levels and by all actors in this sector. A pilot “test-and-learn” approach may 
also  be  adopted  for  innovations,  through  which  the  necessary  safeguards  are  applied  to 
mitigate the potential risks. 
Before  I  conclude,  I  want  to  underscore  that  a  great  deal  of  innovation  and  innovative 
thinking  is  needed  to  ensure  that  the  benefits  from  greater  financial  inclusion  are  fully 
realized. This forum facilitates progress in this direction. 
I look forward to interesting and lively interactions and discussions this afternoon. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
