  Hiroshi Nakaso: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Hiroshi  Nakaso,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Okinawa, 3 March 2016. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative, 
financial, and business leaders in Okinawa Prefecture. I would like to take this opportunity to 
express my sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan’s 
Naha Branch. 
At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  at  the  end  of  January  2016,  the  Bank  decided  to 
introduce  “Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Monetary  Easing  (QQE)  with  a  Negative  Interest 
Rate.” Today, before exchanging views with you, I would first like to explain the Bank’s view 
on the recent developments in and outlook for economic activity and prices. I will then move 
on  to  its  recent  conduct  of  monetary  policy  while  elaborating  on  “QQE  with  a  Negative 
Interest Rate” that the Bank has decided to introduce. 
I. 
Recent developments in and outlook for economic activity and prices at home 
and abroad 
Current situation of Japan’s economic activity and the bank’s projection in the 
January 2016 outlook report 
To start with, let me talk about economic developments in Japan. Although global financial 
markets have been volatile since the turn of the year, I believe there is no need to be too 
pessimistic as the fundamentals of Japan’s economy have been firm. 
With regard to Japan’s recent economic activity, domestic demand has followed an uptrend, 
with a virtuous cycle from income to spending being maintained in both the household and 
corporate sectors. In the corporate sector, profits clearly have continued to improve, reaching 
a  record  high,  with  support  from  an  improvement  in  the  real  economy  as  well  as  the  low 
crude  oil  prices  and  the  correction  of  the  yen’s  appreciation  (Chart  1).  Against  this 
background,  business  fixed  investment  has  been  on  a  moderate  increasing  trend.  In  the 
household  sector,  labor  market  conditions  have  continued  to  tighten.  The  active  job 
openings-to-applicants  ratio  and  the  diffusion  index  for  employment  conditions  in  the 
December  2015  Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan  (Tankan)  have 
improved  to  almost  the  same  levels  as  around  the  first  half  of  1992.  Moreover,  the 
unemployment rate has been declining and in the range of 3.0–3.5 percent for the first time 
since  1997.  The  labor  market  is  in  a  situation  close  to  “full  employment,”  where 
unemployment  is  due  solely  to  mismatches  between  job  openings  and  job  applicants 
(Chart 2). Reflecting the tightening of labor market conditions, employee income has been 
increasing  moderately.  Under  such  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income 
situation, private consumption has been resilient. 
Looking ahead, domestic demand is likely to follow an uptrend, with a  virtuous cycle from 
income to spending being maintained in both the household and corporate sectors. Exports 
are expected to increase moderately on the back of emerging economies moving out of their 
deceleration phase. Against this backdrop, Japan’s economy is likely to be on a moderate 
expanding trend. As in the January 2016 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook 
Report), it is estimated that the economy will continue growing at a pace above its potential 
through fiscal 2016. In fiscal 2017, it is projected to maintain positive growth, although with a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
slowing in its pace to around a level somewhat below the potential growth rate, reflecting the 
effects of a front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the 
consumption tax hike, as well as the cyclical developments in the economy. The medians of 
the Policy Board members’ forecasts for the real GDP growth rates are also indicated in the 
January  Outlook  Report,  and  those  for  fiscal  2015,  2016,  and  2017  are  1.1 percent, 
1.5 percent, and 0.3 percent, respectively (Chart 3). 
Price developments in Japan and the outlook 
Let me now turn to price developments in Japan. Ａsignificant change in price developments 
has  been  observed  after  the  introduction  of  QQE.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the 
consumer  price  index  (CPI,  all  items  less  fresh  food),  which  had  been  minus  0.5  percent 
before the introduction of QQE, improved to as high as 1.5 percent in April 2014, excluding 
the effects of the consumption tax hike (Chart 4). Thereafter, the year-on-year rate of change 
in the CPI has declined, marking about 0 percent recently, but this was largely attributable to 
a  substantial  fall  in  crude  oil  prices  since  summer  2014.  As  for  the  underlying  trend  in 
inflation, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food and energy – both 
of which are with large fluctuations – had been negative before the introduction of QQE, but 
turned  positive  in  October  2013.  Since  then,  it  has  remained  positive  for  28  consecutive 
months and increased to 1.1 percent recently. The share of price-increasing items minus the 
share of price-decreasing items in the CPI has been increasing clearly, suggesting that price 
rises have been observed in a wide range of goods and services (Chart 5). 
In  brief,  the  forecasts  of  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)  are  obtained  by  adding  the 
underlying  trend  in  inflation  to  the  contribution  of  energy  items  to  the  CPI.  The  January 
Outlook  Report  assumes  that  Dubai  crude  oil  prices  will  rise  moderately  from  the  recent 
35 U.S. dollars per barrel to the range of 45–50 dollars per barrel toward the end of fiscal 
2017, which marks the end of the projection period. The contribution of energy items to the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is estimated to be slightly 
more than minus 1 percentage point and is at its highest level recently. However, under the 
aforementioned  assumption  of  crude  oil  prices,  the  contribution  is  projected  to  decrease. 
Meanwhile, since the underlying trend in inflation is likely to rise steadily, this is likely to be 
seen clearly in the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. Therefore, the underlying trend in 
inflation  has  been  improving  steadily  and  the  baseline  scenario  would  be  as  follows:  the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to accelerate toward the price stability target 
of 2 percent as the economy is likely to be on a moderate expanding trend. Taking these 
factors into account, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is 
projected to reach around 2 percent – the price stability target – around the first half of fiscal 
2017. 
Global financial markets and overseas economies 
On the other hand, global financial markets have been nervous since the turn of the year; the 
yen has appreciated as investors sought a safe haven due to elevated risk aversion against 
the backdrop of declining global  stock prices resulting from the further decline in crude oil 
prices and looming uncertainty such as over future developments in the Chinese economy. 
Next, I would like to explain the current situation of and outlook for overseas economies that 
are creating turmoil in global financial markets. 
To give an overview of the recent developments, overseas economies – mainly advanced 
economies  –  have  continued  to  grow  at  a  moderate  pace  on  the  whole,  despite  the 
slowdown in emerging economies. By region, the U.S. economy has continued to steadily 
recover, reflecting the firmness in household spending. Some market participants are holding 
a cautious view toward developments in the U.S. economy, but no new concerns are being 
observed, and therefore I suppose their view is too pessimistic. The European economy also 
has continued to recover moderately (Chart 6). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
It  is  true  that  the  Chinese  economy,  which  has  been  attracting  the  world’s  attention,  has 
continued to be in a state of deceleration due to downward pressure from an overhang of 
production capacities and inventory adjustments in the manufacturing sector (Chart 7). Other 
emerging  economies  and  commodity-exporting  economies  as  a  whole  also  remain  in  a 
situation  of  deceleration,  as  the  effects  of  the  slowdown  in  the  Chinese  economy  have 
spread  to  them  and  as  the  decline  in  commodity  prices  has  been  protracted.  Some 
economies in Asia, however, have seen a pick-up in IT-related demand. Looking ahead, the 
Chinese economy is likely to broadly follow a stable growth path, albeit at a somewhat slower 
pace mainly in the manufacturing sector, as authorities proactively carry out policy measures 
to  support  economic  activity.  Other  emerging  economies  and  commodity-exporting 
economies as a whole are expected to gradually increase their growth rates, due mainly to 
the  effects  of  the  recovery  in  advanced  economies  and  of  economic  stimulus  measures, 
although  some  commodity-exporting  economies  are  likely  to  remain  in  a  situation  of 
deceleration for the time being. 
II. 
The bank’s Monetary Policy Management 
Basic mechanism of monetary easing 
However, after the turn of the year, the global financial markets have continued to be volatile, 
as I have mentioned earlier. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held at the end of January 2016, 
many Policy Board members pointed out that there is an increasing risk that such volatility in 
global  financial  markets  might  delay  an  improvement  in  business  confidence  of  Japanese 
firms  and  conversion  of  the  deflationary  mindset,  and  might  also  negatively  affect  the 
underlying  trend  in  inflation.  To  preempt  the  manifestation  of  this  risk  and  to  maintain 
momentum  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  the  Bank  decided  to 
introduce “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” 
Now, I would like to focus on the Bank’s monetary policy management. To begin with, let me 
review  the  basic  transmission  mechanism  of monetary  easing  that the  Bank  had  pursued, 
and then talk about the newly introduced “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” 
Generally speaking, the main transmission channel of monetary easing would be as follows: 
it will cut the real interest rate – that is, interest rate adjusted by inflation expectations – and 
stimulate  economic  activities  such  as  business  fixed  investment  and  housing  investment. 
Inflation  expectations  are  taken  into  account  because,  if  prices  are  expected  to  rise, 
corporate profits and wages also are likely to increase, and thus the real interest rate, which 
means the real cost of borrowing, will become lower than the nominal interest rate. 
When  deciding  to  what  extent  the  real  interest  rate  should  be  lowered,  policymakers  can 
focus on the natural rate of interest as a reference level. Every country has its own natural 
rate  of  interest,  which  is  neutral  to  economic  activity  in  that  it  will  neither  accelerate  nor 
decelerate the economy. The effects of monetary easing will be produced by reducing the 
real  interest  rate  to  a  lower  level  compared  to  the  natural  rate  of  interest.  In  general,  the 
natural  rate  of  interest  will  be  determined  largely  by  the  potential  growth  rate,  which 
represents  the  economy’s  growth  potential.  In  Japan,  the  potential  growth  rate  was  in  the 
range of 3–4 percent during the 1980s but declined significantly after the turn of the 1990s. 
Recently, it is estimated to be around 0.5 percent or lower. 
Bearing  these  factors  in  mind,  monetary  policy  since  the  1990s  can  be  summarized  as 
follows.  With  the  aim  of  taking  measures  to  bring  about  recovery  following  the  economic 
recession after the burst of the bubble, the Bank gradually cut the policy interest rates. As a 
result,  short-term  interest  rates  reached  approximately  0  percent  at  the  end  of  the  1990s. 
However,  at  the  same  time,  the  potential  growth  rate  became  low,  and  accordingly  the 
natural rate of interest declined. Even though the Bank had lowered the nominal short-term 
interest rate to 0 percent, it was unable to reduce the real interest rate to a level significantly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
below the natural rate of interest due to the widely spread deflationary sentiment among the 
public. 
In order to make a breakthrough in this situation, the Bank introduced QQE in April 2013. 
This policy measure aimed at lowering the real interest rate by two means (Chart 8). The first 
is to raise inflation expectations through the Bank’s strong commitment to achieving the price 
stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. The second is to make use of the 
room for lowering the nominal interest rate. Although short-term interest rates already had 
declined to as low as 0 percent, long-term interest rates still had room to fall. Therefore, the 
Bank decided to massively purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs), thereby putting 
downward pressure across the entire yield curve; i.e., not only short-term interest rates but 
also  long-term  interest  rates  including  10-year  JGBs,  as  well  as  super-long-term  interest 
rates of JGBs with maturities of 20 years or longer. 
By referring to some specific data, let me briefly explain how the intended effects have been 
spreading so far. Yields on 10-year JGBs already had been lowered to a record low level 
before  the  Bank  decided  to  introduce  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate,”  and  thus  the 
entire yield curve has been pushed down to an extremely low level (Chart 9). At the same 
time,  inflation  expectations  have  been  rising  on  the  whole  from  a  somewhat  longer-term 
perspective.  According  to  various  survey-based  indicators,  inflation  expectations  generally 
have been raised by about 0.5 percentage point under QQE (Chart 10). The decline in the 
nominal interest rate and the rise in inflation expectations suggest that the real interest rate 
has been largely pushed down. In fact, after the introduction of QQE, the real interest rate 
has remained in negative territory. Thus, as I have mentioned, the real interest rate, having 
declined  to  the  record  low  level,  stimulated  domestic  demand,  resulting  in  a  moderate 
recovery in Japan’s economy and an improvement in the underlying trend in inflation. 
Zero lower bound of interest rates and framework for “QQE with a negative interest 
rate” 
The  newly  introduced  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate”  maintains  and  reinforces  the 
basic mechanism of QQE, which has produced its intended effects. For a long period of time, 
a  common  understanding  has  made  us  believe  that  the  nominal  interest  rate  cannot  fall 
below the zero lower bound. However, at present, some central banks in Europe, including 
the European Central Bank (ECB), are in fact implementing negative interest rate policies. 
The following two points were considered to be reasons why the nominal interest rate cannot 
turn negative. First, financial institutions’ profits would be squeezed if a negative interest rate 
were applied to their current accounts at the central bank. If a negative interest rate were to 
massively squeeze financial institutions’ profits – which I would view as an extreme case – 
functioning  of  financial  intermediation  could  be  hampered  and,  as  a  result,  the  intended 
effects  of  monetary  easing  would  wane.  Second,  a  larger  negative  interest  rate  would 
incentivize  financial  institutions  to  withdraw  more  cash  from  their  current  accounts  at  the 
central  bank  in  an  attempt  to  avoid  a  negative  interest  rate  being  applied.  Since  financial 
institutions, by holding a large amount of cash, have to suffer various costs including that of 
delivery and storage, as well as run new risks such as theft, it is unlikely that they will largely 
replace  their  current  account  balances  with  cash  holdings  as  soon  as  the  interest  rate  on 
current accounts becomes negative. This implies, however, that there could be a certain limit 
to  the  depth  of  the  negative  interest  rate.  In  other  words,  if  these  two  concerns  were 
dispelled, negative short-term interest rates could be formed by applying a negative interest 
rate to current accounts at the central bank, thereby pushing down the short end of the yield 
curve. 
The Bank came up with a solution to the challenges regarding a negative interest rate. This 
is  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate,”  through  which  the  outstanding  balance  of  each 
financial  institution’s  current  account  at  the  Bank  will  be  divided  into  three  tiers  and  a 
negative interest rate will only be applied to a certain tier. The three-tier system has been 
adopted  partly  in  consideration  of  the  impact  on  financial  institutions’  profits  as  well 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
(Chart 11).  The  outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  is  divided  into  three  tiers,  and  a 
positive interest rate of 0.1 percent will continue to be applied to a vast majority of an existing 
balance. Practically, as the “first floor” of the three-tier system, the “Basic Balance” is defined 
as the average outstanding balance of current accounts in January through December 2015. 
In the “Basic Balance,” the 0.1 percent positive interest rate continues to be applied to about 
210 trillion yen; in other words, the amount outstanding exceeding the required reserves, to 
which a zero interest rate had been applied under the old scheme. 
Next, a zero interest rate will be applied to the “second floor.” For the most part, the second 
floor is intended to keep the amount to which a negative interest rate is applied from building 
up over time. Therefore, the balance of the “second floor” will be adjusted at an appropriate 
timing in the future. Some lending programs by the Bank, such as the Loan Support Program 
and the funds-supplying operation to support financial institutions in disaster areas, will be 
implemented at a zero lending rate from now on. A zero interest rate will be applied to the 
amounts outstanding of these facilities so that a negative margin incurred between lending 
rates and the interest rate applied to the corresponding balance of current accounts at the 
Bank would not disincentivize financial institutions from using the facilities. In a similar vein, 
the interest rates applied to the required reserves will continue to be zero. 
A  negative  interest  rate  of  minus  0.1  percent  will  be  applied  only  to  a  portion  of  current 
account balances exceeding the amounts outstanding of the “first” and “second” floors. This 
is  the  “third  floor”  of  the  three-tier  system  and  is  called  the  “Policy-Rate  Balance”  as  a 
negative interest rate is applied in the course of monetary policy. Admittedly, it is true that an 
interest rate of minus 0.1 percent is applied to current account balances at the Bank, but in 
practice,  as  I  just  explained,  a  negative  interest  rate  is  applied  only  to  the  “Policy-Rate 
Balance.”  At  the  start  of  the  negative  interest  rate  policy,  the  balance  amounts  to  about 
10 trillion yen, consisting of a small portion of the total current accounts outstanding of about 
260 trillion yen. 
Therefore, an adverse impact on financial institutions’ profits will be largely mitigated while 
the negative interest rate policy will powerfully produce its intended effects of pushing down 
the  short  end  of  the  yield  curve.  This  is  because  prices  of  any  new  financial  transactions 
such as JGB transactions are determined based on a “marginal” cost, as economic jargon 
puts  it.  Consequently,  a  negative  interest  rate  of  minus  0.1  percent  applied  to  a  marginal 
increase in the current account balances at the Bank will define the short end of the yield 
curve. 
Besides the costs incurred by holding current account deposits at the Bank, the downward 
shift  of  the  entire  yield  curve  itself  admittedly  can  have  a  negative  impact  on  financial 
institutions’ profits. It should be noted that this is always the case with monetary easing in 
general and there is nothing special with a negative interest policy in this regard: the gist is 
that it is a mere reflection of monetary easing effects. Looking ahead, as the negative interest 
rate policy will exert its intended effects, private demand such as business fixed investment 
and  housing  investment  is  expected  to  increase.  In  that  sense,  the  negative  interest  rate 
policy will accelerate the process of overcoming deflation. This could be a quicker way to get 
out of the low interest rate quagmire as well as bring about favorable business conditions for 
financial institutions. Financial institutions may want to properly consider this point, and we 
do hope that they will  proactively explore potential borrowing needs, thereby creating new 
business opportunities. 
Spillover effects of “QQE with a negative interest rate” 
In addition to the transmission mechanism for QQE, which intends to push down long-term 
interest rates through massive purchases of JGBs, “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” aims 
to  lower  the  short  end  of  the  yield  curve  by  applying  a  negative  interest  rate  of  minus 
0.1 percent  to  a  certain  tier  of  current  accounts  at  the  Bank,  thereby  exerting  further 
downward  pressure  on  interest  rates  across  the  entire  yield  curve.  “QQE  with  a  Negative 
Interest Rate” already has brought tangible effects. The JGB yield curve has been declining 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
further; yields on shorter-than-around 10-year JGBs have been negative (Chart 9). Reflecting 
the  declines  in  JGB  yields, financial  institutions’  benchmark  lending rate  and  housing  loan 
interest rates also have been declining clearly. Looking ahead, I am confident that the effects 
of the declines in these interest rates will steadily spread to the real economy and prices. 
Some may have concern that financial institutions’ retail deposit interest rates also might turn 
negative. Admittedly, each financial institution makes its  own decision on interest rates for 
their  depositors.  In  the  meantime,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  negative  retail  deposit 
interest rates are hardly seen even in some European countries, where a negative interest 
rate  policy  has  already  been  adopted  with  much  lower  rates  compared  to  Japan  –  minus 
0.75 percent in Switzerland, for example. Given those European experiences, I am sure that 
there are no grounds for retail deposit interest rates turning negative in Japan (Chart 12). 
Under a negative interest rate policy, there is no doubt that a wide range of interest rates will 
decline. However, this does not mean that deposit interest rates will turn negative owing to 
the monetary policy. Rather, this policy will bring about positive effects on borrowers through 
a declining cost of borrowing. In the wake of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” housing 
loan interest rates, for example, have declined more significantly than deposit interest rates, 
which already had been extremely low. The decline in housing loan interest rates will spur 
housing investment and lead to economic expansion. The unquestionable fact is that, not just 
a negative interest rate policy, but any kind of monetary easing reduces interest rates. The 
changes in interest rates could have different effects across individual entities in the short 
term; however, looking at the economy as a whole, a decline in interest rates brought about 
by monetary easing would likely stimulate domestic demand and expand the economy. 
The bank’s determined commitment toward overcoming deflation and sustainable 
economic growth 
Japan has been mired in deflation for more than 15 years. For Japan to achieve sustainable 
economic  growth  in  the  future,  the  utmost  priority  is  to  overcome  deflation  at  the  earliest 
possible time. In order to indicate its unwavering will to attain this target, the Bank decided to 
introduce  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate.”  Japan’s  economy  has  steadily  progressed 
toward overcoming deflation for the past three years after the introduction of QQE, but we 
are only halfway to achieving the price stability target. Meanwhile, the Bank has devised the 
framework  of  monetary  policy  in  various  ways  so  as  to  adjust  to  economic  and  financial 
developments. 
Related to this point, I will touch on the supplementary measures decided at the Monetary 
Policy Meeting in December 2015 to facilitate smooth implementation of QQE. Specifically, 
we took the measures of (1) expanding eligible collateral for the Bank’s provision of credit 
and (2) extending the average remaining maturity of JGB purchases. As for the expansion of 
eligible  collateral,  as  the  Bank  continues  its  massive  purchases  of  JGBs,  the  amount  of 
eligible  collateral  of  private financial  institutions has  been  on  the  decrease.  Expanding  the 
range of eligible collateral will contribute to smooth asset purchases in the future. As for the 
extension of the average remaining maturity of JGB purchases, it aims at more flexible and 
smooth asset purchases while assuring liquidity in the JGB markets. As is indicated by these 
measures,  not  only  “a  negative  interest  rate”  but  additional  monetary  easing  in  terms  of 
“quantity” and “quality” dimensions will naturally remain a policy option. I am convinced that 
this  new  policy  framework  will  be  a  drastic  measure  to  fulfill  the  Bank’s  responsibility  to 
overcome deflation. 
Raising growth potential of Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
In order to achieve sustainable economic growth, Japan’s economy inevitably should tackle 
the challenges to raising medium-term growth potential, on top of overcoming deflation. As I 
have  noted,  the  potential  growth  rate  in  Japan  is  estimated  to  have  declined  to  around 
0.5 percent or lower. Taking a shrinking population as a given, an overall increase in labor 
productivity will be a key to raising the potential growth rate. In this sense, looking ahead, a 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
structural reform needs to be promoted not only in an economic context but also in a social 
context,  and  should  focus  on  developing  a  productivity-enhancing  mechanism  and 
environment. I strongly  expect the government to continue committing to such a structural 
reform without loosening the reins. 
The  Bank  also  can  contribute  to  raising  the  growth  potential  because  powerful  monetary 
easing will dispel people’s deflationary mindset and provide a favorable environment for firms 
to make investment proactively and take actions to improve productivity. Furthermore, while 
the Bank has been purchasing exchange-traded funds (ETFs) at an annual pace of about 
3 trillion yen under QQE, it additionally has established a new program for purchasing ETFs 
at an annual pace of about 300 billion yen, composed of stocks issued by firms proactively 
investing  in  physical  and  human  capital.  This  program  will  be  enacted  next  month.  We 
already have received various encouraging opinions and comments from market participants 
in the run-up to the start-up of the new program on which we place our hope for enhancing 
growth  potential.  With  such  encouragement,  we  are  working  diligently  on  setting  eligible 
criteria and the operational framework for purchases. 
As I have noted so far, I believe that monetary policy to overcome deflation and the structural 
reform  to  raise  the  potential  growth  rate  must  be  pursued  in  tandem  to  bring  Japan’s 
economy  back  on  track  toward  sustained  growth.  Now  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  taken 
monetary  easing  one  step  further  by  introducing  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate,”  I 
expect  the  original  third  arrow  of  Abenomics, the  growth  strategy,  to fly  higher  and faster. 
Moreover,  I  hope  that  households  and  firms  will  take  bold  steps  towards  economic 
prosperity,  making 
is  more 
accommodative than ever. 
financial  environment,  which 
full  use  of 
the  current 
Conclusion 
In concluding, let me touch on the economy of Okinawa Prefecture. 
The economy has continued to expand on the whole. This is attributable to a high level of 
public  investment  and  to  an  increase  in  tourism  demand  mainly  supported  by  the  weaker 
yen, an increase in the volume of international flights, and the easing of visa requirements. 
The buoyant construction and tourism sectors have been leading the expansion of corporate 
activity,  which  has  steadily  improved  the  employment  and  income  situation.  In  terms  of 
private consumption recently, more consumers are inclined to purchase high-end products. 
These developments point to a virtuous cycle from income to spending being in operation. 
This is evidenced in the Naha Branch’s September and December Tankan last year, in which 
business sentiment registered a new record high for two consecutive quarters. 
Let  me  focus  on  buoyant  tourism  demand.  Led  by  a  significant  increase  in  tourists  from 
China  and  other  foreign  regions,  the  number  of  tourists  to  Okinawa  Prefecture  in  2015 
increased  by  0.7  million  from  a  year  earlier  and  registered  a  new  record  high,  marking 
7.76 million in total. Even after the turn of the year, its increasing trend has continued, and 
the effects of the slowdown in the Chinese economy have not been observed thus far. As 
tourism demand increases, hotel occupancy rates and spending per tourist have been rising. 
I have heard that, due to an increase in tourists from overseas, many domestic tourists even 
had  to  give  up  visiting  the  prefecture  during  the  high  season  last  year.  This  uptrend  in 
tourism  demand  is  likely  to  continue  on  the  back  of  the  overseas  travel  boom  seen  in 
neighboring  economies  and  an  expansion  of  the  runways  at  the  Naha  Airport.  Okinawa 
Prefecture  has  been  assigned  as  the  National  Strategic  Special  Zone  for  international 
tourism, leading to an increase in domestic fixed investment, such as construction of hotels. 
Increasing  demand  for  duty  free  goods  and  souvenirs  is  reflected  in  favorable  corporate 
profits in the retail and wholesale sectors. 
With regard to the outlook for the tourism industry, the major industry in Okinawa Prefecture, 
the  prefecture  aims  at  achieving  1  trillion  yen  in  tourism  revenue  and  10  million  tourist 
arrivals. With the aim of attaining these targets, it plans to develop the world’s highest quality 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
resort area in an attempt to attract high-end inbound tourists. To realize this goal, it is vital to 
make the best use of its nature-rich environment as well as historical and cultural properties 
that have been inherited from the Ryukyu Kingdom dating back to the 15th century, while 
further upgrading the tourism industry. 
In terms of efforts to make use of its geographical characteristics, on the logistics front, the 
setting  up  of  the  Okinawa  international  logistics  hub  that  aims  to  enable  high-speed 
transportation  to  major Asian  cities  has  been  progressing steadily. The  decision  has  been 
made  to  build  a  new  international  convention  facility,  with  an  expectation  that  this  will 
encourage demand for MICE (i.e., meeting, incentive, convention, and exhibition/event) and 
promote  business  matching.  The  creation  and  improvement  of  infrastructures  are  likely  to 
largely contribute to further development of Okinawa Prefecture in line with economic growth 
in neighboring economies. 
There  is  an  old  phrase  in  Okinawa  Prefecture:  bankoku  shinryo  (i.e.,  bridge  between 
nations).  I  heard  that  the  origin  of  this  phrase  goes  back  to  the  15th  century,  when  the 
Ryukyu  Kingdom  –  which  was  in  close  proximity  to  Japan,  China,  Korea,  and  Southeast 
Asian  regions  –  prospered  as  a transit  trade  country.  Bankoku  shinryo  expresses  that  the 
Ryukyu  Kingdom  will  serve  as  a  bridge  that  connects  the  entire  world  through  its  trading 
vessels,  making  use  of  geographical  advantages.  This  phrase  fits  today’s  Okinawa 
Prefecture  even  better,  since  it  provides  bridges  between  countries  all  over  the  world  in 
terms of not only a gateway of international logistics but also a tourism site. 
The Bank, centering on its Naha Branch, hopes to contribute as much as possible to further 
development that takes full advantage of the economic features of the prefecture. 
In  closing,  I  wish  all  the  best  for  the  further  development  of  the  economy  of  Okinawa 
Prefecture. 
Thank you. 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13 
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
