  Ignazio Visco: Banks’ sovereign exposures and the feedback loop 
between banks and their sovereigns 
Concluding remarks by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the conference 
“Euro50 Group. The Future of European Government Bonds Markets”, Rome, 2 May 2016. 
 An intensely debated topic in the context of possible further financial reforms, in Europe and 
internationally,  concerns  possible  actions  to  address  the  negative  loop  between  sovereign 
risk  and  bank  risk.  The  sovereign-bank  nexus  was  one  of  the  main  amplifying  factors  of 
financial distress during the euro area crisis. Banks’ difficulties affected sovereigns directly, 
through  the  bailout  of  troubled  intermediaries,  and  indirectly,  through  the  impact  of  the 
disruption of lending on the economy. Sovereigns’ difficulties affected banks’ ratings, funding 
costs, and balance sheets, while the recession worsened their lending portfolios. 
Before the euro-area sovereign debt crisis, sovereign defaults were regarded as a problem of 
emerging economies. Indeed, no advanced (OECD) country defaulted on its domestic debt 
between 1950 and 2010.1 Therefore, it is not surprising that virtually all national supervisory 
authorities  have  exercised  the  regulatory  option  to  exempt  banks’  exposures  to  their 
domestic  sovereign,  denominated  and  funded  in  domestic  currency,  from  the  standard 
prudential  banking  regulation.  These  exposures  are  de  facto  subject  to  no  concentration 
limits and to a zero risk weight regime. 
Following the recent euro-area sovereign debt and banking crises, it has been argued that 
this  preferential  prudential  treatment  should  be  amended.  Interestingly,  this  debate  is  not 
new.  Initially  it  took  place  in  the  early  eighties,  when  Basel  I  was  crafted.  Reaching  a 
consensus  on  the  framework  was  difficult.  Two  proposals  were  eventually  tabled, 
recommending a 20 percent risk- weight on domestic sovereign exposures, and a zero-risk 
weight,  respectively.  Eventually  the  solution  to  apply  a  zero-risk  weight  was  chosen, 
apparently  without  any  empirical  analysis.2  A  key  role  in  the  choice  was  played  by  the 
recognition of the crucial role of sovereign bonds and securities in the functioning of financial 
markets, with the aim of fostering the development of local bond markets, and the desire to 
avoid interference with fiscal policy and monetary policy. 
In  the  current  debate,  possible  options  range  from  the  “baseline  option”,  i.e.  keeping  the 
current framework unchanged for exposures to the domestic sovereign, to assigning these 
exposures a non-zero risk weight and/or subjecting them to concentration limits.3  
Those who advocate changing the current framework argue that assigning banks’ sovereign 
exposures  a  non-zero  risk  weight  increases  capital  and  thus  the  resilience  of  the  banking 
system.  Similarly,  introducing  rules  to  discourage  a  high  concentration  of  sovereign 
exposures would increase banks’ chances of surviving a sovereign default, preventing them 
from playing a “shock amplifier” role, as in recent cases of distress of sovereigns with weak 
economic fundamentals.4 Furthermore, if risk weights accurately reflect sovereign risk, they 
                                                
1  Reinhart,  C.M.  and  K.S.  Rogoff  (2011),  “The  Forgotten  History  of  Domestic  Debt”,  Economic  Journal, 
121(552). 
2  Goodhart, C. (2011), The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. A History of the Early Years 1974–1997, 
Cambridge University Press. 
3  J.  Weidmann,  “Stop  Encouraging  Banks  to  Load  up  on  State  Debt”,  Financial  Times,  1  October  2013; 
European Systemic Risk Board (2015), Report on the Regulatory Treatment of Sovereign Exposures; Dutch 
Presidency  note  on  Strengthening  the  banking  union  and  the  regulatory  treatment  of  banks’  sovereign 
exposures, prepared for the informal ECOFIN meeting of 22 April 2016. 
4  Battistini, N., M. Pagano and S. Simonelli (2014), “Systemic Risk, Sovereign Yields and Bank Exposures in 
the Euro Crisis”, Economic Policy, 29 (78). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  can incentivise banks’ risk management of sovereign exposure by recognising that the higher 
return from riskier counterparties comes at a cost of increased incurred risk. Also, in case a 
crowding out of private lending by public debt exists, a risk sensitive approach for sovereign 
risk could reduce this effect and promote the more efficient allocation of resources, leading to 
higher investment and higher potential GDP growth. 
Advocates of the “baseline option” also advance several arguments. 
First, this option does not really mean “no change”, as recent amendments of the regulatory 
and  legal  framework  have  already  made  substantial  progress  towards  breaking  the  bank-
sovereign loop. In Europe, the banks-to-sovereign causal link has been addressed by bank-
related  reforms,  beginning  with  the  BRRD.  On  the  prudential  front,  banks’  sovereign 
exposures  are  taken  into  consideration  in  the  capital  exercise  and  stress  test  frameworks 
applied since the end of 20115 – the results of which are nowadays taken into account in the 
Pillar 2 capital buffers required within the SREP – and through the forthcoming introduction of 
the leverage ratio. Furthermore, the European fiscal framework has been enhanced across 
several dimensions, thus addressing the sovereign-to-bank nexus: the Stability and Growth 
Pact  has  been  amended,  reinforcing  both  its  preventive  and  its  corrective  arm;  member 
countries  have  strengthened  their  national  budgetary  processes  and  institutions;  and  a 
surveillance  mechanism  has  been  set  up 
for  early  detection  and  correction  of 
macroeconomic imbalances. Finally, the European Stability Mechanism was established. 
Second, tightening regulatory standards on sovereign exposures can hardly be sufficient to 
safeguard banks against their domestic sovereign default. Direct exposures are just one of 
the channels that transmit sovereign risk to the domestic banking system. Sovereign defaults 
are associated with severe economic crises, which have a  widespread negative impact on 
domestic banks quite independently from the degree of their direct exposure.6  
Third, preventing an excessive concentration of risks may be desirable in principle. However, 
the  historical  experience  shows  that  in  a  “normal”  economic  environment  EU  banks 
autonomously reduced their sovereign portfolios (as well as the concentration) without any 
need for regulatory nudges (Fig. 1). Indeed, the evidence suggests that most EU countries’ 
sovereign  holdings  behaved  counter-cyclically:  they  declined  during  the  “normal  period” 
between  the  introduction  of  the  euro  and  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis;  increased 
during the crisis period; and started once more to decline in the last two years, as the crisis 
began to subside (see the cases of Italy - Fig. 2 – and Spain).7 This pattern suggests that 
regulation  is  not  an  important  driver  of  banks’  exposures  towards  their  own  sovereign: 
throughout  this  entire  period,  the  prudential  treatment  of  sovereign  exposures  remained 
broadly  unchanged.  It  also  indicates  that  high  sovereign  exposures  are  a  symptom  and  a 
consequence, rather than a driver, of the crisis.8  
Fourth, whereas in “normal” times banks’ sovereign exposures declined spontaneously, the 
imposition  of  risk  weights  or  –  worse  –  tight  concentration  limits  could  create  substantive 
difficulties  in  “crisis”  times. They  could  be  particularly  disruptive  for  banks’  ability  to  act  as 
shock  absorbers  in  the  event  of  sovereign  stress.  There  is  evidence  that  sovereign  debt 
                                                
5  To be precise, in the EU the capital exercise in 2011 and the subsequent stress tests have amounted to the 
introduction of a capital charge on sovereign exposures. In spite of this, exposures continued to increase until 
the sovereign crisis subsided, in 2014. 
6  Committee on the Global Financial System (2011), “The Impact of Sovereign Credit Risk on Bank Funding 
Conditions”, BIS, CGFS Papers, No. 43. 
7  Lanotte,  M.,  G.  Manzelli,  A.M.  Rinaldi,  M.  Taboga  and  P.  Tommasino  (2016),  “Easier  Said  than  Done? 
Reforming the Prudential Treatment of Banks’ Sovereign Exposures”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e 
Finanza (Occasional Papers), 326. 
8  Angelini  P.,  G.  Grande  and  F.  Panetta  (2014),  “The  Negative  Feedback  Loop  Between  Banks  and 
Sovereigns”, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 213, Banca d’Italia. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  is 
the  surge 
this  pattern 
the  clearest  recent  example  of 
markets  are  prone  to  self-fulfilling  crises:  if  investors  believe  a  sovereign  faces  fiscal 
problems,  required  yields  will  be  higher,  which  can  exacerbate,  or  even  create,  the  fiscal 
problems.9  Probably 
in 
“redenomination  risk”  in  the  euro  area,  connected  with  undue  fears  of  a  break-up  of  the 
Monetary  Union. To the extent that banks act as contrarian investors (selling assets when 
markets  overheat  and  buying  when  they  are  excessively  bearish),  purchases  of  sovereign 
debt  when  the  sovereign  experiences  difficulties  notwithstanding  relatively  solid  economic 
fundamentals  are  actually  beneficial  to  financial  stability.  There  is  clear  evidence  that 
domestic investors played such contrarian role during the EU sovereign debt crisis, buying 
sovereign bonds as foreign investors were fleeing (Fig. 2 again for the Italian case; similar 
patterns have been documented for Spain).10  
Imposing  risk  weights  or  setting  large  exposure  limits  on  domestic  sovereign  exposures 
would  impair  this  shock-absorption  ability.  Exposure  limits,  in  particular,  could  act  as  a 
coordinating device for speculative attacks. Since a change in banking regulation would likely 
herald  a  similar  change  in  other  parts  of  the  financial  system  (most  notably  the  insurance 
sector), the entire domestic financial sector could be affected. 
Finally, a system which differentiates the risk weights according to the sovereign’s credit risk 
could  end  up  relying  upon  ratings  issued  by  the  Credit  Rating  Agencies  (CRA).  Even 
advocates of a change in the prudential treatment of sovereign exposures admit that credit 
ratings  of  sovereigns  have  serious  shortcomings.  In  particular,  they  tend  to  be  backward-
looking  and  to  foster  herd  behaviour.  As  such,  they  could  exacerbate  pro-cyclicality  and 
ultimately increase financial instability risk. 
Overall, I believe that today, as 30 years ago, the mere recognition that there is no truly risk-
free  asset  does  not  per  se  warrant  a  change  in  the  regulatory  treatment  of  sovereign 
exposures. I doubt that further changes in prudential regulation are the right instrument for 
addressing  the  sovereign-  bank  nexus,  taking  into  account  that  sovereign  risk  should  first 
and  foremost  be  addressed  by  strengthening  the  sustainability  of  public  finances.  In  this 
regard,  while  member  states  should  attain  sound  fiscal  positions  so  as  to  make  their 
sovereign paper safer, enhancing economic growth represents the most important factor for 
putting the public finances on a sustainable path. 
This  is  clearly  shown  by  the  example  of  Italy,  where  the  debt  to  GDP  ratio  has  risen  by 
33 percentage  points  since  2007.  Back-of-the-envelope  calculations  show  that  if  Italian 
nominal GDP had since grown at a similar rate as in the previous ten years, the debt to GDP 
ratio would now be just 3 points, and not 33 points, higher than in 2007 (actually, it would be 
slightly below the 2007 level, once the financial support to other European countries is taken 
into account).11 This suggests that efforts to rebalance the public finances must be part and 
parcel of an economic policy designed to create the conditions for robust and lasting growth. 
I  also  believe  that  any  reform  proposal  should  be  based  on  a  comprehensive  approach, 
avoiding partial equilibrium analyses and capturing all the relevant effects; also, it should be 
evaluated  by  focusing  on  potential  benefits  and  costs  in  a  financial  stability  perspective, 
taking  into  account  potential  unintended  consequences.  Considering  the  pervasive  role 
played  by  sovereign  bonds  in  modern  economies,  these  can  arise  in  various  sectors,  well 
beyond banking. 
                                                
9  De  Grauwe,  P.  and  Y.  Ji  (2013),  “Self-fulfilling  Crises  in  the  Eurozone:  An  Empirical  Test”,  Journal  of 
International Money and Finance, 34(C). 
10  The  reason  why  such  a  shock  absorption  role  can  be  beneficial  is  not  because  it  “enables  sovereigns  to 
expand  the  budgetary  stance”,  as  stated  in  the  Dutch  Presidency  note  cited  in  footnote  3,  but  because 
markets can be subject to excessive movements. 
11  “Audizione  preliminare  all’esame  del  Documento  di  economia  e  finanza  2016”,  testimony  by  the  Deputy 
Governor of the Bank of Italy, L. F. Signorini, Chamber of Deputies, Rome, 18 April 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  To  this  end,  a  deep  understanding  is  needed  of:  the  extension  and  potential  effect  of  any 
reallocation of bank sovereign exposures across banks; the interactions with other rules of 
the Basel framework, including in particular the rules on liquidity; the impact of changes in 
regulation on the provision of loans to the broader economy; the consequences for monetary 
policy;  the  effects  on  the  functioning  of  sovereign  debt  markets  and  on  governments’ 
financing conditions; the impact on other financial market segments. 
Several of these issues are being investigated at the BIS and also at the EU level, within the 
European Systemic Risk Board and the Economic and Financial Committee. The impact on 
market  liquidity  has  been  examined  in  this  conference.  Changes  in  the  current  prudential 
framework  leading  to  stricter  capital  requirements  on  sovereign  bonds  could  incentivise 
banks  to  further  reduce  the  two  pillars  of  market-making:  sovereign  bond  inventories  and 
repo activities, which are eroding liquidity in secondary markets. 
The  effects  of  a  regulatory  change  requiring  substantive  bank  recapitalisations  could  be 
destabilising in the transition phase, as it would  entail a temporary but negative impact on 
credit to the economy – an important effect, in the presence of stubbornly low nominal growth 
and  deflation  risk.  Such  an  effect  is  hard  to  capture  analytically,  as  non-linearities  are 
possible, especially in the presence of financial tensions, and multiple equilibria cannot be 
excluded. Envisaging a long transition period is unlikely to help, as market participants will 
probably  respond  immediately  by  front-loading  future  changes  in  regulation,  in  order  to 
exploit “first mover” advantages. 
Ratings have important drawbacks, but practical alternatives are hard to find. If the decision 
is  eventually  taken  to  adopt  risk  weights  on  sovereign  exposures,  mechanisms  based  on 
fiscal sustainability indicators, such as those computed by the EU Commission or by the IMF 
could be considered as an alternative to – or in a suitable combination with – credit ratings.12  
To conclude, the debate on changing the prudential regulation of sovereign exposures was 
prompted by the recognition that “sovereign debt is not risk-free”. There is no doubt that this 
is true. However, at the current stage a broad agreement has been reached on the pros and 
cons  of  different  reform options,  not  on  their  overall  balance.  My  personal  view  is  that  the 
potential benefits of a reform are uncertain, while the potential costs could be sizeable. Be 
that as it may, as long as such a balance remains uncertain, a prudent stance would be to 
wait  for  the  financial  system  to  fully  recover  and  adapt  to  the  important  set  of  reforms 
implemented  since  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  before  making  further  changes.  This  would  be 
consistent  with  the  approach  chosen  by  the  Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision  in  their 
recent statement that new regulatory reforms should “not significantly increase overall capital 
requirements”. 
 
                                                
12  European  Commission,  Directorate  General for  Economic  and  Financial  Affairs  (2012),  Fiscal  Sustainability 
Report, European Economy, No. 8; IMF (2014), Fiscal Monitor, April; Lanotte et al (2016), cit. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    Note:  Foreign  holders,  alternative  definition:  foreign  holders  excluding 
Eurosystem  and  round-trip  foreign  portfolios  and  funds,  i.e.  securities  held 
by  foreign  investors  net  of  those  held  by  the  Eurosystem  (excluding  the 
Bank of Italy) and those held by foreign individually managed portfolios and 
investment funds but attributable to Italian investors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
