  William C Dudley: Economic opportunity and income mobility 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Association for Neighborhood and Housing Development 
Annual Community Development Conference, New York City, 11 April 2016. 
 Good  morning.  I  am  very  pleased  to  speak  at  the  6th  Annual  Community  Development 
Conference. I would like to give a special thanks to the Association for Neighborhood and 
Housing  Development  for  organizing  this  conference  about  issues  of  importance  to  the 
community development industry and to the future of New York City. 
At the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, we develop a wide variety of research and data 
products  to  gain  a  deeper  understanding  of  regional  economic  conditions.  We  track  the 
health of household balance sheets at the state and local level using data from the New York 
Fed’s  Consumer  Credit  Panel.  We  also  conduct  an  annual  poll  of  small  businesses  to 
understand their credit needs and credit availability. My meeting with you today is part of our 
continuing efforts to understand what is going on at the grassroots level of our economy and 
to share insights from the New York Fed. 
The Federal Reserve has dual objectives, set by Congress, with respect to monetary policy – 
maximum sustainable employment and price stability. I would like to focus my remarks today 
on the first of these objectives. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views 
and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve 
System.1  
The  Federal  Reserve’s  employment  objective  can  be  viewed  both  narrowly  and  broadly. 
Narrowly,  we  focus  on  the  degree  of  slack  or  tightness  in  the  labor  market.  This  leads  to 
discussion  of  many  measures  of  the  labor  market  such  as  the  unemployment  rate,  the 
participation  rate  and  the  growth  of  wages.  Broadly,  the  economy’s  potential  growth  rate 
depends  on  effectively  investing  in  and  taking  advantage  of  all  of  the  resources  in  the 
economy  –  in  particular,  we  need  to  achieve  the  full  potential  of  the  human  capital  of  all 
Americans. For the United States to reach its maximum economic potential, all Americans 
must have the opportunity to reach their potential. 
The United States has always prided itself on being “the land of opportunity.” Parents hope 
that their children can achieve more than they did. Over the course of our history, immigrants 
have journeyed to America in search of a better life, a chance to live the “American Dream.” 
What  defines  the  American  Dream?  President  Reagan  thought  that  one  element  of  the 
American dream is “the opportunity to grow, create wealth, and build a better life for those 
who  follow,”  while  President  Obama  has  described  it  as  follows:  “A  child’s  course  in  life 
should be determined not by the zip code she’s born in, but by the strength of her work ethic 
and  the  scope  of  her  dreams.”  One’s  destination  in  life  should  not  depend  on  where  the 
journey begins. 
Equal opportunity does not imply equal outcomes – some people may work harder, be more 
fortunate in terms of their disposition and endowments, or just be luckier in how their lives 
evolve. But it does require that income mobility – in particular, upward mobility – be widely 
evident and remain part of the fabric of the nation. 
It is important to keep in mind the distinction between income mobility and income inequality. 
Income mobility is a dynamic concept – the degree to which individuals or families can move 
                                                
1   Rajashri Chakrabarti, Andrew Haughwout, Giorgio Topa, Joseph Tracy and Wilbert van der Klaauw assisted in 
preparing these remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
up or down in the income distribution over time. Income inequality is a static concept – how 
unequal are individual or family incomes at a particular point in time. 
Recognizing that rising income inequality in the United States is an important issue, my focus 
today will be mainly on income mobility. I don’t think the issue of income mobility receives the 
attention  it  deserves. It  is  a foundational  element for  a  well-functioning  democratic  society 
and  provides  evidence  about  the  ability  of  an  economy  to  provide  opportunities  for  its 
citizens. 
A  standard  approach  to  measuring  income  mobility  is  to  compare  where  a  child  is  in  the 
income distribution relative to where the parents were in the income distribution. A striking 
result is that intergenerational income mobility in the U.S. – a child’s chances of moving up in 
the  income  distribution  relative  to  her  parents  –  has  remained  stable  over  the  past  half 
century. However, because of the increase in income inequality, the consequences of being 
born to low-versus high-income parents are larger today than in the past. One explanation for 
the lack of a correlation between income inequality and income mobility in the U.S. is that 
income inequality is strongly influenced by the top one percent of the income distribution, but 
there is little correlation between income mobility and this top income percentile.2  
While income mobility in the United States has been relatively unchanged, it remains well 
below several other nations. According to Stanford economist Raj Chetty, the probability of 
moving  from  the  bottom  quintile  to  the  top  quintile  is  7.5  percent  in  the  United  States,  as 
compared  to  11.7  percent  in  Denmark  and  13.5  percent  in  Canada  –  two  countries  with 
relatively high levels of intergenerational mobility.3 So effectively the chance of achieving the 
American Dream is not the highest for children born in America. 
Importantly, Chetty finds even more significant variation in intergenerational mobility across 
different  metro  and  rural  areas  within  the  United  States.4  While  some  regions  in  the  U.S. 
match the highest mobility levels among developed countries, others persistently offer less 
mobility than in most other developed countries. Relative income mobility is highest in the 
Mountain West and the rural Midwest and lowest in the Southeast. Now these differences 
could be caused by the experience of living in  different neighborhoods, but they  may also 
simply  reflect  differences  in  the  people  living  in  these  neighborhoods.  In  an  effort  to 
distinguish  between  these  two  possible  explanations,  Chetty  and  fellow  economists  study 
children  from  families  who  changed  their  neighborhood  during  childhood  and  provide 
evidence  that  much  of  the  variation  in  upward  mobility  reflects  the  experience  of  living  in 
particular  neighborhoods.  Their  findings  imply  that  upward  mobility  depends  strongly  on 
where you grow up as a child. 
This  research  indicates  that  it  is  the  places  themselves,  rather  than  the  families  who  live 
there, that affect the outcomes for children. An important question is what specific features of 
neighborhoods are associated with greater upward mobility. Chetty and co-authors find that 
higher upward mobility is associated with areas that are less residentially segregated by race 
or income, have lower income inequality (i.e. a bigger middle class), higher quality schools,5 
stronger social networks, higher community involvement and stable family structures. 
The finding that intergenerational mobility is primarily a local problem has two broad policy 
implications.  The  first  is  the  need  for  place-based  policies  to  invest  more  in  at-risk 
communities to improve their childhood environments. The second is to facilitate families to 
be able to move into areas with better childhood environments. 
                                                
2   Piketty and Saez (2003) and Chetty, et al. (2014). 
3   Chetty, et al. (2014). 
4   Chetty and Hendren (2015), Chetty, et al. (2014). 
5   Measured by income-adjusted test scores, drop-out rates, average class size and per-pupil spending. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
With respect to the first, I would initially like to talk about the importance of schools―and in 
particular, strong public education. Consistent with the findings by Chetty, there exists a large 
literature that has established the importance of high-quality education as a key determinant 
of economic mobility. While there are differences of opinions on the most relevant measures 
of school quality, there is ample evidence that children who attend better schools on average 
end up with better outcomes later in life – such as higher levels of educational attainment 
and higher earnings. It is also well known that there exist large disparities in the quality of 
education by geography and socioeconomic background. Compared to children born to low-
income parents, those born to higher-income families can better afford to move and live in 
areas with high-quality schools. 
The sorting of families by income and their desire for better educational opportunities leads 
to enclaves of higher-quality and higher-spending schools that are separated from areas of 
economically  less-advantaged  populations  and  lower-quality  schools.  To  a  degree,  this 
residential segregation has been perpetuated by our system of school financing that relies 
heavily on local property tax funding. Local financing of public schools leads to a bundling of 
two  distinct  choices  – residential  choice  and  school  choice  –  and  increases  the  degree  of 
socioeconomic segregation across school districts. 
We can promote greater income mobility by unbundling the residential and school choices. 
This can be done in one of two ways. The first is to work to equalize school quality across 
location, while the second is to allow parents more choice of schools from a given location. 
Along the lines of the first approach, New York Fed research has shown that school finance 
reforms  that  seek  to  equalize  funding  across  school  districts  by  reducing  the  role  of  local 
property taxes can go a long way in decreasing residential segregation and equalizing quality 
of  education.6  The  key  mechanism 
that  such  reforms  make  underperforming 
neighborhoods  more  attractive,  thus  reducing  socioeconomic  segregation  and  leading  to 
consequent  gains  in  peer  quality  in  previously-challenged  enclaves.  This  in  turn  reduces 
disparities in school quality stemming from reduced socioeconomic segregation. 
On the second approach, there exists research indicating that school vouchers that enable 
students to move to private schools or better-quality public schools can lead to improvements 
in public school quality and student performance by increasing competition among schools.7 
It is important to note, though, that not all  voucher programs are created equally, and the 
design of the program matters in how vouchers impact school quality. Charter schools have 
provided  another  source  of  school  choice  in  education.  More  research  into  evaluating  the 
effectiveness of voucher programs and charter schools at raising student achievement would 
be desirable in terms of informing public policy choices.8  
The importance of education is not limited to elementary and secondary levels. In fact, there 
exists  convincing  evidence  from  the  child  development  literature  that  suggests  that 
educational investments early in childhood have especially large rates of returns in terms of 
lifetime earnings and other outcomes. Take, for example, the Perry Preschool program for 
low-income African-American children, a two-year preschool program experiment in the mid-
1960s. Recent research shows that this program had very large beneficial long-term effects, 
with participants experiencing higher rates of high school graduation, higher salaries, higher 
homeownership, more stable family structures, fewer arrests and lower welfare dependence. 
The large positive economic externalities from these investments in children imply that such 
programs  more  than  pay  for  themselves  over  the  long  term.  Estimates  indicate  that  the 
aggregate  benefits  over  the  life  of  a  child  exceeded  by  eightfold  the  program’s  per-pupil 
is 
                                                
6   Chakrabarti and Roy (2015). 
7   Hoxby (2003), Chakrabarti (2008) and Chakrabarti (2013). 
8   Dobbie and Fryer (2011), Dobbie and Fryer (2015), Angrist, et al. (2016). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
cost.9  Almost  equally-large  gains  were  reported for  children  who  enrolled  in  Head  Start,  a 
federally-funded nationwide preschool program for low-income children.10  
Related literature on neighborhood effects has found that labor market outcomes for adults 
are also significantly affected by the type of neighborhoods where people reside. The role of 
labor market networks and referrals has been amply-demonstrated as affecting the likelihood 
of finding a job, the quality of matches between employers and workers, and the earnings 
associated  with  these  jobs.  Several  studies  show  that  many  of  these  networks  have  a 
significant local neighborhood component. Further, workers who live in neighborhoods with 
higher-quality networks are more likely to move to jobs with higher wages.11  
Let me now turn to policies aimed at improving upward income mobility through increased 
residential mobility. There is some striking evidence that shows providing more opportunities 
for families to move to wealthier areas may improve upward mobility while also being cost-
effective.12  In  the  mid-1990s,  as  part  of  a  lottery-based  housing  mobility  experiment 
sponsored by HUD – called the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) experiment – families in high-
poverty  housing  projects  were  given  housing  vouchers  to  move  to  lower-poverty  mixed-
income neighborhoods. While this project appears to have had little impact on the economic 
outcomes  of  the  adults  and  older  children,  the  program  appears  to  have  had  remarkable 
long-term impacts on children who moved to such neighborhoods at a young age, with the 
impacts  increasing  by  the  number  of  childhood  years  they  ended  up  living  in  the  better 
environment. 
Analysis  of  the  data  from  the  experiment  shows  that  those  who  moved  to  lower-poverty 
areas when they were 12 or younger were found to earn about 30 percent more, on average, 
in their early- to mid-twenties compared to those who did not move, were 27 percent more 
likely  to  have  entered  college,  and  30  percent  less  likely  to  be  a  single  parent. The  MTO 
experiment  again  illustrates  the  importance  of  neighborhood  effects  on  child  development 
early  in  childhood.  It  also  demonstrates  that  grants  to  move  families  to  lower-poverty 
neighborhoods may reduce the intergenerational persistence of poverty. 
Of course, mobility of the sort that Chetty and other researchers have emphasized interacts 
in  a  very  important  way  with  the  availability  of  affordable  housing.  Making  high  quality 
neighborhoods  accessible  to  families  from  all  socioeconomic  backgrounds  is  a  major 
challenge for public policy. Of course, illegal racial and other discrimination has played a role 
in  preventing  access  to  high-quality  neighborhoods.  However,  part  of  the  challenge  arises 
from the fact that in a free-market economy, the quality of the environment is reflected in the 
price of land – and thus housing – in that place. This means that the neighborhoods with the 
best schools, the best access to jobs, shopping, recreation and other amenities will be the 
most  desirable  and  will  have  the  highest  cost  of  land  and  housing.  Simply  put,  families 
seeking  the  upward  mobility  that  better  neighborhoods  can  promote  may  well  find  that 
housing in these neighborhoods is unaffordable. 
Some  kinds  of  public  policies  may  exacerbate,  rather  than  lessen,  the  tendency  of  the 
housing market to price some families out of good neighborhoods. Zoning and other land use 
regulations are sometimes enacted to artificially reduce the supply of housing, thus driving its 
price up even further. Take, for example, minimum lot size zoning which specifies a minimum 
amount of land per housing unit. When this regulation is binding, it reduces the number of 
housing units that can be built in a given area, and thus introduces artificial scarcity into the 
housing market, thereby raising prices. 
                                                
9   Heckman (2006). 
10   Deming (2009). 
11   See Bayer et al. (2008), Schmutte (2015), Hellerstein et al. (2011), Aslund et al. (2011). 
12   Chetty et al. (2015). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Zoning can also be used to promote affordable housing – to include, rather than exclude low-
and moderate-income families by setting aside space for those families in exchange for the 
right  to  develop  market-rate  units.  This  is  a  strategy  that  New  York  and  other  large  cities 
have  pursued  for  many  years,  and  in  these  cities  it  is  easy  to  point  to  units  that  were 
developed under the program. Nonetheless, these programs are often controversial – some 
economists  and  others  argue  by  increasing  the  cost  of  development  they  restrict  supply. 
Thus, while some percentage of new units developed will be affordable, fewer new units will 
be developed with uncertain effects on affordability overall. 
It’s perhaps informative to contrast this kind of program with one that has historically been 
the main mechanism by which the supply of affordable housing has increased. The program I 
have in mind here isn’t a housing program, but, in my view, it has extremely important effects 
on  the  housing  market.  I’m  talking  about  intra-urban  transportation,  which  can  serve  to 
dramatically  increase  the  locations  available  for  development,  and  thus  promote  the 
availability  of  affordable  housing.13  I  believe  that  safe,  reliable,  affordable  and  efficient 
transportation  to  job  locations  should  be  a  crucial  element  in  an  effective  housing  policy. 
Such a program indisputably increases the supply of sites available for development, which 
is a key way to get the benefits of lower prices to a broader set of families. Indeed, it is clear 
that cities’ ability to grow and attract new residents requires them to either increase density – 
essentially  meaning  taller  buildings  –  or  to  expand  outwards  by  increasing  transportation 
access. 
Access to affordable credit is yet another pillar of a policy program that promotes housing 
affordability.  We  at  the  Federal  Reserve  have  long  worked  to  ensure  that  credit  flows 
equitably and that financial services are available to all U.S. citizens. The Fed’s research on 
these  subjects  ranges  from  the  pioneering  study  of  redlining  by  a  team  of  Boston  Fed 
economists, to a very recent New York Fed study on “banking deserts” that appeared in our 
Liberty Street Economics blog just last month, as well as ongoing community credit work. We 
understand the importance of credit in allowing communities to grow, and the importance of 
the  Community  Reinvestment  Act  in  requiring  financial  institutions  to  make  investments  in 
their communities. But, as my remarks here have indicated, credit is only one factor – and 
perhaps not the most important one – that affects the affordability of housing in our cities. 
I’ve addressed the importance of geographic mobility in supporting income mobility from the 
perspective  of  providing  parents  options  for  better  neighborhoods  in  which  to  raise  their 
children. Geographic mobility is also important in terms of individuals receiving the highest 
return to their human capital. Local economic shocks can depress employment and wages in 
some labor markets. This creates a strong incentive for individuals to move to an alternative 
labor market in order to more fully utilize their skills. Financial frictions to geographic mobility 
can  reduce  this  movement  of  individuals  across  labor  markets  leading  to  less-efficient 
outcomes for the economy. Income mobility can be enhanced through policies that attempt to 
limit  these financial frictions. This  argues for  avoiding,  where  possible, policies  that  create 
“in-place” subsidies where the household can access the benefits only while remaining in a 
specific location. 
The Federal Reserve has the twin objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price 
stability. Achieving the first of our objectives requires that every individual has the opportunity 
to achieve her full potential in life. Where you happen to be born should not determine your 
chance of living the American Dream. Research is highlighting possible key determinants of 
economic  opportunity  and  income  mobility.  More  research  is  necessary  to  inform  future 
policy choices in this critical area. 
                                                
13   See Baum-Snow (2007) and Jackson (1987). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  References 
Angrist, Joshua, Sarah Cohodes, Susan Dynarski, Parag Pathak and Christopher Walters. 
2016. “Stand and Deliver: Effects of Boston’s Charter High Schools on College Preparation, 
Entry, and Choice,” Journal of Labor Economics, 34(2): 275–318. 
Aslund,  Olof,  Per-Anders  Edin,  Peter  Fredriksson  and  Hans  Gronqvist.  2011.  “Peers, 
Neighborhoods, and Student Achievement: Evidence From a Placement Policy,”  American 
Economic Journal Applied Economics, 3(2): 67–95. 
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. 2007. “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, 122(2): 775–805. 
Bayer,  Patrick,  Steven  L.  Ross  and  Giorgio  Topa.  2008.  “Place  of  Work  and  Place  of 
Residence:  Informal  Hiring  Networks  and  Labor  Market  Outcomes,”  Journal  of  Political 
Economy, 116(6): 1150–1196. 
Chakrabarti,  Rajashri  and  Joydeep  Roy.  2015.  “Housing  Markets  and  Residential 
Segregation:  Impacts  of  the  Michigan  School  Finance  Reform  on  Inter-  and  Intra-district 
Sorting,” Journal of Public Economics, 122: 110–132. 
Chakrabarti, Rajashri. 2008. “Can Increasing Private School Participation and Monetary Loss 
in  a  Voucher  Program  Affect  Public  School  Performance?  Evidence  from  Milwaukee,” 
Journal of Public Economics, 92(5-6), 1371–1393. 
Chakrabarti,  Rajashri.  2013.  “Impact  of  Voucher  Design  on  Public  School  Performance: 
Evidence  from  Florida  and  Milwaukee  Voucher  Programs,”  B.E.  Journal  of  Economic 
Analysis and Policy: Contributions, 14(1): 349–394. 
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, Emmanuel Saez and Nicholas Turner. 2014. 
“Is  the  United  States  Still  a  Land  of  Opportunity?  Recent  Trends  in  Intergenerational 
Mobility”, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 104(5): 141–147. 
Chetty,  Raj  and  Nathaniel  Hendren.  2015. 
Impacts  of  Neighborhoods  on 
Intergenerational  Mobility:  Childhood  Exposure  Effects  and  County-Level  Estimates”. 
Harvard University and NBER. 
Chetty,  Raj,  Nathaniel  Hendren,  Patrick  Kline  and  Emmanuel  Saez.  2014.  “Where  is  the 
Land  of  Opportunity?  The  Geography  of  Intergenerational  Mobility  in  the  United  States” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1553–1623. 
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2015. “The Effects of Exposure to 
Better  Neighborhoods  on  Children:  New  Evidence  from  the  Moving  to  Opportunity 
Experiment” Harvard University and NBER. 
Deming,  David.  2009.  “Early  Childhood  Intervention  and  Life-Cycle  Skill  Development: 
Evidence from Head Start”, American Economic Journal Applied Economics, 1:3, 111–134. 
Deming, David. 2011. “Better Schools, Less Crime?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4): 
2063–2215. 
Deming, David, Justine Hastings, Thomas Kane and Douglas Staiger. 2011. “School Choice, 
School Quality and Postsecondary Attainment”. NBER Working paper No. 17438. 
Dobbie,  Will  and  Roland  Fryer.  2011.  “Are  High-Quality  Schools  Enough  to  Increase 
Achievement  Among  the  Poor?  Evidence  from  the  Harlem  Children’s  Zone,”  American 
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(3): 158–187. 
Dobbie, Will and Roland Fryer. 2015. “The Medium-Term Impacts of High-Achieving Charter 
Schools,” Journal of Political Economy, 123(5): 985–1037. 
Heckman, James J. 2006. “Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged 
Children”, Science, 312, 1900. 
“The 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Hellerstein,  Judith  K.,  Melissa  McInerney  and  David  Neumark.  2011.  “Neighbors  and  Co-
Workers:  The  Importance  of  Residential  Labor  Market  Networks,”  Journal  of  Labor 
Economics, 29(4): 659–695. 
Hoxby, Caroline. 2003. “School Choice and School Productivity (Or, Could School Choice be 
the  Tide  that  Lifts  all  Boats?)”,  The  Economics  of  School  Choice,  University  of  Chicago 
Press, Chicago. 
Jackson, Kenneth T. Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States. Oxford 
University Press, 1987. 
Piketty,  Thomas  and  Emmanuel  Saez.  2003.  “Income  Inequality  in  the  United  States, 
1913–1998,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (1): 1–41. 
Schmutte, Ian M. 2015. “Job Referral Networks and the Determination of Earnings in Local 
Labor Markets,” Journal of Labor Economics, 33(1): 1–32. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
