  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Tapping into our strengths - opportunities, 
threats and challenges for 2016 and beyond in the Philippines and Asia 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the 2016 Presidential Conference on WASH in Schools 
hosted by Rotary International, Pasay City, 18 March 2016. 
 It is always a pleasure to speak before Rotarians, a group very much involved  in key and 
critical issues affecting communities, especially children and the youth. 
You may wonder why a central bank governor, whose primary mandate is price and financial 
stability, would be speaking at a Conference on “water, sanitation and hygiene.” I wondered 
this at first, when your Conference Chair and Past Governor Sid invited me to speak today. 
But as I thought about it, I realized that your goal of providing water, sanitation and hygiene 
to schools is not that unrelated to our own goals as a central bank. 
Let us consider a fundamental tenet in economics – Scarcity value determines the price of a 
resource.  Often,  scarcity  is  only  perceived.  This  occurs  when  the  source  of  supply  is  not 
sufficiently  connected  to  demand.  When  supply  meets  demand,  there  is  price  equilibrium. 
This  is  the  goal.  On  this  premise,  I  realize  we  are  looking  at  the  same  problem  but  with 
different lenses. 
In  the  BSP,  we  look  at  the  issue  primarily  from  the  price  stability  angle,  in  your  case,  the 
convergence of supply and demand is the end view. Ultimately, we are both looking at the 
scarcity problem with welfare enhancement – improving the quality of people’s lives – as our 
overarching goal. 
Another  similarity  is  that  we  –  Rotarians  and  the  BSP  –  both  embrace  the  value  of 
partnership and collaboration. Sid invited me to give an overview of opportunities in 2016. In 
my message, I will identify areas where collaboration is possible. I shall also mention how we 
can harness the potential of evolving consumer patterns and technology toward our shared 
goal of national development. 
Eliminating the perception of scarcity 
The Philippines has abundant water resources (421 principal rivers, 59 natural lakes, 4 major 
groundwater  reservoirs,  and  numerous  individual  streams1).  One  would  think  that  making 
water  readily  available  to  its  populace  should  not  be  a  problem.  Theoretically,  per  capita 
water availability is twice as much as the rest of Asia, and about six times above the global 
scarcity threshold2. But, over 400 of our municipalities3 remain waterless. 7.5 million Filipinos 
do  not  have  access  to  improved  water  supply  facilities.  Inequalities  in  access  are  starkest 
and  most  persistent  for  rural  areas.  93%  of  the  richest  rural  households  have  access  to 
improved sanitation, as compared to only 27% among the poorest quintile. 69% of the richest 
quintile enjoys piped water house connections, while only 4% of the poorest quintile does4. 
There is a disconnect between availability and the quality of, and access to water services. 
Moreover,  an  estimated  55  Filipinos  die  every  day  because  of  waterborne  diseases5  –  a 
tragedy  entirely  preventable  by  providing  adequate  sanitation  facilities,  education  and 
                                                
1   Llanto (2013) 
2   World Resources Institute 
3   1,634 municipalities as of  end 2015 
4   Data source: USAID 
5   USAID (2015) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  promotion  of  good  hygiene  habits.  I  believe  this  is  the  essence  of  the  WASH  in  schools 
program. 
We face a parallel challenge as central bankers. How do we enable a greater trickle-down 
effect so that opportunities and benefits of a healthy and growing economy are cascaded to 
the grassroots? 
Harnessing opportunties 
The  motivation  to  address  this  compelling  need  is  behind  the  BSP’s  push  on  financial 
inclusion.  Increasing  financial  services  access  is  a  challenge  for  an  archipelagic  country 
where nearly 600 municipalities6 remain unbanked. 
The BSP has institutionalized financial inclusion following a three-pronged approach, namely: 
access  and  usage,  financial  literacy  and  education,  and  increased  financial  consumer 
protection.  To  push  access  and  usage,  a  regulatory  environment  is  being  created  to 
encourage  innovation  and  maximize  safe  technology  use.  In  particular,  an  ecosystem  is 
being  created  where  the  unbanked  are  granted  financial  services  through  alternative 
providers, without need for brick and mortar bank branches or facilities. 
Recognizing,  however,  that  the  task  of  financial  inclusion  is  so  great,  last  year,  the  BSP 
engaged  twelve  other  government  agencies  to  launch  the  National  Strategy  for  Financial 
Inclusion  (NSFI).  The  NSFI  aims  to  unify  various  initiatives  on  financial  inclusion  into  a 
coherent  platform  so  we  can  exploit  economies  of  scale  and  expertise  across  various 
government  agencies.  Many  private  sector  agents  have  come  to  work  with  us  under  the 
NSFI – including telcos. We also hope to elicit interest from those here in the room. We are 
convinced financial inclusion is one of the ways to make economic growth more broad-based 
and inclusive. 
That said, we also recognize that inclusive growth will only be realized if our countrymen are 
given sustainable access – not just to finance- but also to basic human necessities: including 
safe and clean water. Here, public-private partnerships are a feasible solution to the low level 
of investments in the water supply sector. 
ASEAN  integration  is  another  area  of  opportunity.  With  the  passage  of  Republic  Act  No. 
10641, full entry of foreign banks into the Philippines is now allowed. Qualified ASEAN banks 
can  enter  the  local  market.  We  recently  signed  an  agreement  with  Malaysia  under  the 
ASEAN  Banking  Integration  Framework.  The  BSP  Monetary  Board  has  also  approved  the 
application of six foreign banks to set up Philippine branches. This liberalized regime should 
further enhance the quality of competition among our banks. This environment will result in 
promising opportunities to encourage innovations that will ultimately benefit the economy and 
the general public. 
Another source of opportunity is the country’s large, young and highly literate population. In 
the Philippines, the median age of the population is 247. In Japan, it is 47. In the U.S., it is 38. 
We are entering a “demographic window” historically proven to be the most prosperous years 
of  a  country,  where  millennials  comprise  a  significant  consumer  segment.  As  the  largest 
portion of the workforce, they are identified to play a key role in driving growth and economic 
development. It is an exciting time and the future is bright with possibility! 
This young generation will also make adoption of cutting-edge technology more likely. This 
can lead to opportunities for greater innovation including for the water supply chain industry 
in  terms  of  safeguarding  water  sanitation,  waste  water  management  and  protecting  the 
environment. 
                                                
6   594 out of a total number of municipalities of 1,634, as of end 2015 
7   CIA World Factbook (2015) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For the banking industry and suppliers of goods and services, this can be significant. Modern 
digital financial services and changes in how we make payments and money transfers will be 
provided. Related to this, the BSP is developing a National Retail Payment System (NRPS). 
Through the NRPS, we aim to establish a safe, efficient and reliable means to transfer value 
built  upon  an  effective  and  interoperable  interface  of  various  electronic  payment  channels. 
This is an integral reform given that of 2.5 billion payment transactions per month, only 1% is 
made through electronic means. The NRPS will expand the reach of financial services and 
will  promote  efficiency,  transparency  and  development  of  business  models  improving 
economic competitiveness. 
The backdrop of the economy 
I hope I have encouraged you to consider some opportunities to help us achieve our shared 
goal  of  economic  development.  Let me  round off my  remarks  with  views  on  our  operating 
macroeconomic environment moving forward. This may help guide you to take advantage of 
these prospects. 
The  Philippines  entered  2016  in  a  position  of  relative  strength.  In  2015,  average  full  year 
GDP growth was 5.8%. This is among the highest in Asia. The 4th quarter 2015 growth of 
6.3%  brought  the  number  of  consecutive  quarters  of  positive  economic  growth  to  an 
astounding 68 quarters. 
The  Philippine  banking  system  continued  to  expand.  Over  the  past  six  years,  total  assets 
roughly doubled owing to a steady growth of deposit liabilities. Bank loans also doubled and 
nonperforming loans continued on a downward trend. Philippine banks are well-capitalized, 
with capital adequacy ratios above national and international standards. Our external liquidity 
position is strong. Our end- February GIR of US$81.3B is sufficient to cover 10.4 months of 
imports and payments of goods and services. 
 That said, in 2016, there are still challenges to our positive position. These will come mostly 
from  the  external  side.  There  is  divergence  in  the  monetary  policies  in  the  advanced 
economies. The US Fed is poised to raise rates (albeit now at a slower pace in 2016 than the 
Fed  first  indicated  in  December  2015),  while  ECB  and  BOJ  are  in  negative  interest  rate 
territory. 
This  may  raise  near  term  financial  market  volatility.  But  we  are  hopeful  that  the  policies 
adopted would result in a sustainable growth trajectory for these countries and would create 
positive ripples to our own trade and growth prospects. 
Another cause of concern is the Middle East, where oil prices fell sharply. While oil importers 
like the Philippines benefit from the price drop, low oil prices are double-edged. Oil exporters 
may cut back on capital expenditures. This may have an adverse effect on the Philippines in 
general,  and  on  overseas  Filipinos,  should  oil  producers  cut  costs  and  trim  staff.  There  is 
need  to  manage  the  near-term  impact  on  financial  market  volatilities  and  the  government 
should  consider  more  long-term  solutions  to  possible  disruptions.  Domestic  considerations 
include intensification of the El Niño phenomenon (a very clear concern we share) and the 
persistence of infrastructure gaps. Results of the upcoming national and local elections may 
also influence global perception of Philippine growth prospects. 
These  risks,  notwithstanding,  we  expect  to  see  the  country  continue  on  the  path  of  low 
inflation,  steady  growth.  Our  confidence  stems  from  the  buffers  we  built:  a  strong 
commitment to price stability, a stable banking system, a robust external liquidity position and 
a safe, sound and efficient payments and settlements system. 
Closing 
I began with the issue of the perception of scarcity, owing to the disconnect between supply 
and demand of resources. I then shared some opportunities to scale up services and further 
improve the quality of people’s lives; create and nurture innovative partnerships; recognize 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  and  value  our  common  and  significant  consumer  segment;  leverage  on  technological 
innovation  and  increase  our  efforts  for  development  of  our  respective  nations.  These  are 
consistent with the Rotary Club's mottoes of “Service Above Self” and “One Profits Most Who 
Serves Best.” 
It is incumbent on us to make the connections, technological, mechanical, and regulatory. As 
solutions  to  a  problem:  water  scarcity  and  security,  access  to  financial  services  and 
achieving overall inclusive growth are ultimately, solutions for all. May we commit to an even 
stronger engagement and partnership as we face challenges and opportunities the unfolding 
operating environment offers. 
Thank you and good evening. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
