  
 
R Gandhi: Regulating financial innovation - P2P lending platforms design 
challenges 
Valedictory address by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Mint Marketplace Lending Summit, Mumbai, 17 May 2016. 
 1. 
I am very happy to be addressing this Conclave to debate the Discussion Paper that 
the Reserve Bank has recently presented for public discourse on regulating the Peer to Peer 
Lending  Platforms.  Let me first  explain  the  rationale  for financial  regulation  in  general  and 
regulation on financial innovations in particular. Let me also discuss the different approaches 
that  the  Reserve  Bank  had  employed  in  the  past  in  dealing  with  financial  innovations  and 
finally the challenges that we have on hand in designing an appropriate regulatory approach 
to the Peer to Peer Lending Platforms. 
Financial Regulation 
2. 
The  traditional  neo-classical  economic  theory  argues  that  unrestricted  or  laissez-
faire  competitive  equilibrium  is  the  most  efficient  economic  arrangement.  This  is  built  on 
Pareto equilibrium and on the assumptions of perfect competition, with no externalities and 
no destructive competition. 
3. 
 Many  academic  liberals  are  doubtful  of  the  benefits  of  regulation  of  financial 
services.  Their  case,  as  effectively  summarised  by  David  Llewellyn  in  his  paper  “The 
Economic Rationale for Financial Regulation”, goes like this: there are no market failures or 
imperfections;  if  they  do  exist  they  are  not  sufficiently  serious  to  warrant  regulation; 
regulation may not in practice solve these failures; or if it does, it can do so only by imposing 
costs that exceed the costs of the original problem; serious moral hazards may arise when 
regulation  is  imposed;  and  regulation  imposes  a  wide  range  of  costs  which  are  paid 
ultimately by consumers. 
 Another  set  of  argument  against  regulations  is  that  financial  regulations  actually 
4. 
serves the interests of the financial service providers and mostly detrimental to consumers, 
particularly because regulation results in reduced competition. As G.J. Benston points out, 
this  happens  because  financial  regulations  typically  include  restrictions  on  entry,  controls 
over products, restrictions on allowable business, restraints on prices, portfolio restrictions, 
restrictions on geographical diversifications, etc. 
5. 
 However,  several  other  academics  find  that  the  validity  of  the  neo-classical 
assumptions, when applied to the financial sector, do not hold good as there are in reality 
imperfections, information asymmetry, incompleteness, and failures in perfectly competitive 
or laissez-faire financial markets. 
6. 
 They  argue  that  financial  systems,  markets  and  participants  need  regulation. 
Arguments range from the need for regulation per se to the need to avoid consequences of 
absence of regulations. 
7. Prof Charles Goodhart, in his book “Financial Regulation: Why, How  and Where Now?” 
argues that the private sector, left to itself, produces market failure, or at least sub-optimal 
results. In his view, there are three main reasons for financial regulation. They are: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
To protect the customer against monopolistic exploitation 
To provide smaller, retail (less informed) clients with protection, and 
To ensure systemic stability 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  8. 
 According  to  David  Llewellyn,  financial  regulations  have  three  objectives  viz.,  to 
sustain systemic stability, to maintain the safety and soundness of financial institutions and to 
protect  the  customers.  He  argues  that  the  case  for  regulation  depends  on  various  market 
imperfections and failures which, in the absence of regulation, produce sub-optimal results 
and reduce consumer welfare. In other words, the purpose of regulation should be limited to 
correcting identified market imperfections and failures. 
9. 
 One critical argument in favour of financial regulation relates to what happens in the 
absence  of  regulation.  As  Prof  Charles  Goodhart,  says  “Whatever  the  social  costs  and 
benefits of an externally imposed system of regulation may be, public revulsion at the effects 
and outcome of failures of unregulated financial systems can force the establishment of …. 
external  regulation”.  Similarly,  Randall  Dodd  argues  “No  matter  how  much  responsibility  is 
granted to individuals or no matter how much self-reliance is promised by private enterprises, 
when troubles become big and bad enough, they all turn to the government and demand that 
prompt action be taken to rectify problem”. 
10. 
 Prof  Goodhart  also  cautions  “Interposing  regulation  and  supervision  into  an 
otherwise  free-market  context  weakens  the  incentives  for  the  owners  and  managers  to 
monitor and control themselves, and for their clients to exercise due diligence”. 
Financial Innovation 
 Innovations  bring 
11. 
 The  Journal  of  Financial  Innovation  defines  financial  innovation  as  “the  action  of 
creating  and  popularizing  new  financial  instruments  as  well  as  new  financial  technologies, 
markets and institutions. This includes innovation in the level of product, process and / or the 
institution”. We also know that innovations occur in businesses, when ideas are applied to 
meet  the  needs  and  expectations  of  the  customers.  It  may  be  new  needs,  or  hitherto 
unarticulated  needs,  or  existing  needs  met  in  unique  ways.  Innovations  are  also  driven 
sometimes by stringent rules & regulations. 
12. 
 There is a debate whether financial innovations should be regulated. Whether the 
innovators and entrepreneurs should be largely left alone, or whether public policy authorities 
should be actively involved in regulating those. 
13. 
in  efficiency,  productivity,  quality, 
competitiveness,  and  market  share,  among  other  factors.  However,  as  innovations  usually 
result in paradigm shifts, they are typically disruptive. It takes effort and time to understand 
them. The associated dangers include untested effects, lack of clarity on long term effects, 
and can lead to misunderstanding and misusing the innovation. Innovations can sometimes 
be bad per se; sometimes even good innovations can be misused. 
14. 
 The World Economic Forum opines that financial innovation has been more positive 
than negative and hence it will be better not to regulate them away by imposing excessively 
harsh standards or outright bans on new products. The Forum suggests that let innovation 
occur; but react appropriately and quicker to any flaws that become apparent and therefore 
the tendency should naturally be to err on the side of caution. 
15. 
 An  OECD  Report  argues  that  we  should  preserve  the  benefits  of  innovative 
activities, while ensuring that new products and services that prove harmful are appropriately 
contained. 
in  positive  changes 
Indian Experience 
16. 
 How have we been regulating financial innovations in India? The Reserve Bank has 
employed  several  approaches  while  examining  whether  a  financial  innovation  should  be 
regulated. They include: 
i. 
To ignore 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
17. 
manner as follows: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
  To watch out 
To regulate passively 
To regulate actively, and 
To ban 
 What  determines  the  approach?  I  can  answer  this  in  a  simple,  rule  of  thumb 
v. 
Can the innovation cause large scale damage; then ban it. 
Is the size or magnitude very small; then ignore it. 
Can informed decision be taken by the consumers; then caution them. 
Can  it  be  beneficial  to  many  consumers;  passively  regulate  it  with  light  touch 
regulation. 
Can it be beneficial to many consumers, but consumer protection issues loom over; 
then actively regulate it. 
18. 
 For example, the Prize chits and Money Circulation schemes have been banned, 
whereas with regard to the virtual currencies like Bitcoins, we cautioned the public about the 
risks  involved  in  dealing  with  them.  We  had  a  studied  stance  and  we  preferred  to  err  on 
caution based on the simplicity or complexity of the product or service. While we said “Yes” 
to micro finance, we said “No” to complex derivatives. In some other cases, we looked for 
risk  mitigants  and  permitted  them  only  after  they  are  available.  For  example,  we  did  not 
permit banks to engage agents to collect or pay moneys, until technology enabled Banking 
Correspondents  were  available.  We  permitted  Mobile  Banking  initially  only  for  very  small 
amounts  and  as  security  and  confidence  were  built  only  then,  higher  amounts  were 
permitted. 
19. 
 As  regards  Micro  Finance,  let  me  explain  a  little  more,  as  it  offers  a  good  case 
study. When Micro Finance came on the scene in early 1990s, we recognized it as a new 
paradigm,  with  immense  implications  and  were  very  supportive.  When  the  demands  for 
regulating the Micro Finance Institutions were made, Shri Jagdish Capoor, the then Deputy 
Governor, stated in 2001 “As MFIs are significantly different from commercial banks both in 
terms of institutional structure and product portfolio, application of the same set of regulatory 
and  prudential  guidelines  to  MFIs,  in  our  view,  not  only  runs  the  risk  of  distorting  the 
emerging  market  but  it  may  also  reduce  the  efficiency  of  these  institutions”.  When  the 
demands  gained  momentum  by  2005,  the  then  Governor,  Dr  YV  Reddy  stated  in  August 
2005, “Microfinance movement across the country involving common people has benefited 
immensely by its informality and flexibility. Hence, their organisation, structure and methods 
of working should be simple and any regulation will be inconsistent with the core-spirit of the 
movement”. Thus we were extending every possible support for a financial innovation which 
was  assessed  by  us  as  very  important for furthering financial  inclusion  in  the  country. We 
were  very  convinced  that  light  touch  regulation  was  sufficient  in  those  formative  years. 
However, as the sector grew, certain inadequacies and failures became apparent. As Shri 
Anand Sinha, my predecessor mentioned in April 2012, “In their eagerness to grow business, 
the institutions had given a go by to the conventional wisdom and good practices such as 
due diligence in lending and ethical recovery practices. Over-indebtedness of the borrowers 
led to difficulties in repayments and the forced recoveries by some MFIs led to public uproar 
and  the  subsequent  intervention  by  the  state  government”.  Consequently,  we  also  had  to 
tighten  our 
the  Malegam  Committee 
recommendations. 
regulations  on  micro-finance,  based  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Regulating P2P Lending Platforms 
  The  first  set  of  questions  that  we  need  to  answer  in  dealing  with  the  issue  of 
20. 
regulating the P2P Lending Platforms are: 
To regulate them or not? 
i. 
If to regulate, should it be ex-ante or ex-post? 
ii. 
Is it now the right time? and 
iii. 
If it is now the right time, should it be light touch or intensive regulation? 
iv. 
21. 
 In the Discussion Paper, we have noted that internationally there are every type of 
approach to dealing with the P2P Platforms, ranging from outright ban to total indifference. 
Our tentative assessment is that P2P Lending Platforms need to be regulated, it may be the 
right time now and it can be light touch. Let me re-emphasize that these are tentative. We do 
want the stakeholders to express their views – either affirming our assessment or reasoning 
out alternate assessment. 
22. 
 Given the MFI episode and the prescient words of wisdom by Prof Goodhart and 
Prof Dodd about public reaction to failures of unregulated entities, that I referred to earlier, 
we feel P2P Lending Platforms need to be regulated, even though they have not yet really 
taken serious magnitude. 
23. 
 Regulations  are  of  two  types  –  prudential  regulation  and  conduct  of  business 
regulation. While  the  prudential  regulation  focusses  on  solvency,  safety  and  soundness  of 
financial entities and financial system, the conduct of business regulation focusses on how 
the  financial  entities  deal  with  their  customers  and  includes  information  disclosure  by  the 
entities, their competence, their continuity and fair business practices. 
24. 
 It is clear that prudential regulation may have to be light for these Platforms, as they 
will not be handling the moneys of the lenders. Actually, we need to be prohibiting them from 
dealing in such moneys. Obviously, the conduct of business regulation will be appropriate. 
As the lenders “trust” the Platforms for getting to know the borrowers, and avail additional 
services  like  KYC  authentication,  credit  scoring,  legal  formalities,  recovery  assistance,  etc. 
code of conduct and fair practices norms will need to be applied. 
25. 
 Next set of questions relate to the Platform’s structure – should it be a corporate 
entity or other types as well, what should be its capital, how should its governance structure 
be, etc. We have given certain proposals in the Discussion Paper regarding these questions. 
These were primarily guided by the need for serious, fit and proper and long term players to 
maintain the Platforms. 
26. 
 Finally, the risk management structure focussing on operational risk and business 
continuity,  and  the  technology  and  customer  grievance  redressal  mechanisms  will  need 
attention.  As  lending  and  borrowing  is  a  maturity  transformation  matter,  continuity  and 
availability  will  be  the  essence  for  the  services  rendered  by  the  Platform.  Accordingly,  the 
expectations in this regard have been spelt out. 
Conclusion 
 In the end, let me reiterate that the Reserve Bank considers that the innovation of 
27. 
P2P Lending through Platforms facilitates direct interaction between small lenders and small 
borrowers,  and  hence  further  financial  inclusion;  as  consumer  protection  issues  can  get 
amplified, the role of the Platforms come into focus; with appropriate regulatory arrangement, 
we  hope  that  the  Platforms  will  be  worthy  of  the  trust  that  the  lenders  and  the  borrowers 
repose on them. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
