   Daniel Mminele: Conduct and culture in the banking and financial 
sectors 
Opening address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the G-30 Forum on Banking Conduct and Culture, Pretoria, 18 February 2016. 
 Governor Kganyago (SARB), Governor Sithole (Central Bank of Swaziland), Deputy Governor 
Mlambo  (Reserve  Bank  of  Zimbabwe),  Deputy  Governors,  Groepe  and  Naidoo  (SARB), 
Second Deputy Governor Sullivan (Central Bank of Seychelles), Sir David Walker (Vice Chair 
of the Group of Thirty Steering Committee), Dr Stuart Mackintosh (Executive Director of the G-
30), Ms Maria Ramos (Chief Executive Officer of Barclays Africa), the leadership of banks and 
other financial institutions, panel members, and esteemed delegates. 
It is a privilege and an honour for me to welcome you, on behalf of South African Reserve Bank 
(SARB), to this Forum on Banking Conduct and Culture, which we are co-hosting with the G-
30 and Barclays Africa. The G-30 has, over the years, played a significant role in bringing 
together members  of  the  banking, financial  and  regulatory  community  to  discuss  issues of 
common concern and examine the choices available to market practitioners and policymakers. 
Given the enormous trust deficit that has built up since the global financial crisis, the topic of 
conduct  and  culture  is  of  great  importance  and  highly  relevant  to  the  global  banking  and 
financial sector. 
Bankers have always had a delicate relationship with the societies they serve. It would appear 
that,  at  any  point  in  time,  it  is  almost  a  national  sport  across  the globe to  take  a  swipe  at 
bankers. Mark Twain famously said: “A banker is a fellow who lends you his umbrella when 
the sun is shining and wants it back the minute it begins to rain.” And J M Keynes asked: “How 
long will it take to pay city men so entirely out of proportion to what other servants of society 
commonly received for performing social services not less useful or difficult?” 
We would be terribly misguided to treat the current wave of discontent and deep mistrust as 
just another wave that will eventually subside. 
The most recent global financial crisis, from which almost nine years later we are still struggling 
to  recover,  shook  the  very  foundations  of  our  financial  system  and  almost  caused  its  total 
meltdown.  In  a  nutshell,  the  crisis  was  about  failures  in  conduct,  culture,  and  supervisory 
practices. The consequences are with us today in the form of multiple-agency and jurisdictional 
investigations, litigation, and massive penalties, the number and sizes of which are becoming 
difficult to keep pace with. 
The task at hand, to which our deliberations here today are meant to contribute, is to see how 
we can restore confidence and trust in the leadership and staff of banks and other financial 
institutions, in the effective and efficient functioning of financial markets, and lastly but not least 
in the ability of regulators to give the right level of comfort around their supervisory practices. 
Trust is the most essential prerequisite for a healthy and useful banking and financial system. 
Global  regulatory  standards  for  banking  which  were  refined  and  adopted  following  bank 
failures and other financial stresses in the system, including rules such as Basel III, can help 
explain how financial disasters transpire and in their construct seek to address the risks, but 
of  course  only  after  the  event.  Yet  these  rules  are  not  always  effective  in  pinpointing 
institutional weaknesses, particularly those of a behavioural nature. The role of individuals, but 
also of groups or networks of staff both within and outside the employee boundaries of banks, 
has come to the fore as a determinant of corporate culture, which in turn has led to isolated 
action  in  some  instances  and  institutional  action  in  others  that  have  eventually  led  to  the 
compromise or even complete demise of banks. Inappropriate behaviour has increasingly set 
the tone for organisational interactions within markets, or regions, among both collaborating 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   and competing banks. This phenomenon was especially evident among banks in the United 
States that issued sub-prime mortgages; only one example of improper practices. 
Banking  regulation  has  historically  been  formulated  by  global  agreement  with  the  intent  of 
setting  minimum  standards  of  risk  mitigation  for  banks  through  the  application  of  common 
measurement processes. To support these metrics, standard-setting bodies, in particular the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, have introduced principles for risk management and 
governance which have focused more on the technical attributes of organisational risk-taking 
than  on  individual  or  collective  behaviour.  While  the  ‘second  pillar’  of  Basel  III  –  with  its 
enhanced coverage of all material risks and inclusion of corporate governance, culture, and 
values in the supervisory process – is encouraging, it appears that the rules repeatedly fail to 
address  the  organisational  integrity  of  banks  and  bankers,  and  this  has  become  the  next 
frontier for ensuring the stability of domestic economies and the global financial system. 
It is not an objective of regulatory oversight to stifle effort, reward, or innovative behaviour. 
However, in the interest of global financial stability and to ensure the longevity of the role of 
banking in financial systems, it has become critical that guidelines are developed to address 
integrity within banks as well as between banks and their clients, counterparts, and competitors 
– guidelines which are globally relevant, robust over time, and aspirational, and which influence 
behaviour across society. 
The new frontier for standard-setting, however, comes with challenges. In the normal course 
of risk management, internal targets and banking rules take the form of a plethora of financial 
measures, numbers, statistics, and technical financial analysis, which form the primary toolset. 
The challenge is that these rules are a necessary precondition, but not a sufficient one. They 
help to guide compliance, which tends to speak to the letter of the rules, but seem insufficient 
in guiding culture, which goes further to also include the spirit of the rules. 
The current charge requires the establishment of codes which are normative for individual and 
corporate behaviour. This is challenging from at least two perspectives. The one is systemic: 
the legal paradigms of modern society protect individual rights, privacy, and autonomy. The 
other is practical: it is dramatically time-consuming to observe and analyse behaviour for non-
compliance with codes. This also has the potential to create inordinate distrust, and this should 
not be overlooked by regulatory authorities. 
Allow  me  to  touch  on  the  initiatives  currently  underway  in  South  Africa,  which  will  help  in 
strengthening market conduct and culture. 
Enhancing market conduct and culture in the banking and financial sectors: the Twin 
Peaks reforms 
South Africa is in the throes of one of the most significant reforms to the financial regulatory 
landscape since the 1980s: the introduction of the Twin Peaks model of financial regulation, 
the heart of which includes a proposed new approach to market conduct regulation. 
As most of you will know, the plan is to establish a Prudential Authority (PA) and a Financial 
Services Conduct Authority (FSCA). The reform process is an important opportunity to develop 
and  enhance  South  Africa’s  market  conduct regulatory framework. The soon-to-be-created 
FSCA, which will replace the current Financial Services Board (FSB), will be given the task of 
being an integrated market conduct regulator in the financial sector, with the following statutory 
objectives: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
For financial institutions, treating customers fairly means: 
Promote the fair treatment of financial customers. 
Enhance and support the integrity and efficiency of the financial system. 
Develop financial literacy and capability. 
Assist in maintaining financial stability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Pay due regard to the interests and needs of customers. 
Do not engage in unfair business practices. 
Be transparent, and fully disclose all risks and rewards. 
Solve eventual problems in a timely and effective manner. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
In the context of the Twin Peaks proposal, the expectation is that customers’ interests should 
be at the heart of how firms in the banking and broader financial sector do business. Customers 
should expect to obtain financial products and services which meet their needs from firms that 
they can trust. Meeting their reasonable and fair expectations should be the responsibility of 
firms,  not  of  the  regulators,  whose  role  should  rather  be  to  create  a  conducive  regulatory 
environment and, through their supervisory activities, encourage good conduct. 
It  is  important  to  emphasise  that  the  proposed  Twin  Peaks  reforms  are  not  an  adverse 
judgement on the country’s current regulatory architecture. Rather, they are aimed at making 
continuous  improvements  to  the  regulatory  framework  which  helped  the  domestic  financial 
sector weather the storm of the global financial crisis better than many other countries. The 
Twin Peaks reforms answer the following question: “How can we do better in what we are 
already doing very well?” 
The Financial Sector Regulation Bill provides for a broad mandate and scope for the FSCA to 
ensure improved market conduct outcomes in the South African financial sector. This mandate 
includes powers to issue conduct standards for product design, marketing, distribution, and 
disclosure.  It  also  places  an  important  onus  on  governance  arrangements  within  financial 
institutions  in  order  to  ensure that  such  arrangements  deliver  on  expected  market  conduct 
outcomes in support of the objectives of the FSCA. 
Clearly, organisational culture is at the heart of improved market conduct outcomes for financial 
institutions, as it is ‘the tone from the top’, so to speak, that has the greatest impact on how a 
financial institution treats its customers, contributes to financial integrity, and ensures market 
efficiency. 
Furthermore, the  culture  and  approach to risk  taking,  particularly for  material  risk  takers  in 
regulated institutions, are a critical consideration from both a prudential and a market conduct 
perspective. The Financial Stability Board has done much work in this area, specifically on the 
development of remuneration principles, malus and clawbacks for material risk takers. South 
Africa, as a member of the Financial Stability Board, subscribes fully to these principles. As 
such,  both  Twin  Peaks  authorities  envisage  having  powers  aimed  at  influencing  the 
governance arrangements in regulated entities in order to ensure adequate risk outcomes from 
both a soundness and a consumer protection point of view, including through remuneration 
arrangements. 
Failure to manage conduct risks can expose a financial institution to a variety of other risks 
which, if not managed properly, can threaten its solvency and sustainability. The regulatory 
regime  for  market  conduct  therefore  provides  a  framework  for  the  identification  and 
management of conduct risk as a complementary framework to prudential regulation. This is 
part of the motivation for rigorous coordination and cooperation arrangements between the PA 
and the FSCA envisaged by the Financial Sector Regulation Bill aimed at ensuring that all risks 
are holistically managed within an overarching financial stability policy framework. 
Strengthening conduct in wholesale OTC markets 
Another initiative has been the development of a code of conduct for South African wholesale 
over-the-counter (OTC) financial markets in a collaborative effort between regulators and key 
market participants. I will return to this aspect later. 
Against the background of various investigations undertaken in many foreign jurisdictions in 
relation to foreign exchange market manipulation, the SARB and the FSB launched a review 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   of  the  foreign  exchange  trading  operations  of  South  African  authorised  dealers  in  October 
2014. As the rand is a globally traded currency, the aim of the review was to establish whether 
there  may  have  been  any  spillover  into  our  markets  in  relation  to  any  misconduct  or 
malpractice. 
It  is  important  to  note  that,  unlike  in  other  jurisdictions,  the  South  African  review  was  not 
informed  by  whistle-blowing  or  any  allegations  –  or  indeed  concrete  evidence  –  of  any 
misconduct. We had no evidence of widespread malpractice in the South  
African foreign exchange market but felt that, given the broad-based nature of investigations 
in other jurisdictions (which also involved trading in emerging market currencies), it would be 
prudent to obtain comfort that our foreign exchange trading practices were in line with best 
practice. It was therefore a proactive step on the part of South African regulators. 
The Foreign Exchange Review Committee established for this purpose – chaired by former 
Senior Deputy Governor James Cross, who is with us today – released its report in October 
2015.  The  committee  reported  that  it  had  found  no  evidence  of  manipulation  or  serious 
misconduct in the domestic foreign exchange market during the period covered by the review, 
but  that  there  was  scope  for  improvement  in  relation  to  governance  and  conduct.  The 
committee also recommended that legislation be enhanced to give market conduct regulators 
wider powers to strengthen enforcement. South African regulators are in conversation with 
each other on how best to give effect to the implementation of the recommendations. 
There  was  also  the  recommendation  that  a  group  of  senior  market  professionals  and 
compliance  officers  form  a  Financial  Markets  Standards  Group,  akin  to  the  FICC  Market 
Standards Board in the United Kingdom or the Treasury Markets Practice Group in the United 
States. In December 2015, the FSB began interacting with the Acting Chair of the FICC Market 
Standards Board, seeking opportunities to discuss possible future cooperative arrangements. 
Early in the process of the review, it became apparent that South Africa would benefit from a 
unified code of conduct for wholesale OTC financial markets, and the decision was made to 
draft such a code in collaboration with market participants and other stakeholders, referencing 
a number of codes used in major international financial centres. The code is overarching and 
does not substitute market- or product-specific codes. Where applicable, the latter codes will 
be appended to the OTC code as subsidiary guidelines which contain detail relevant to each 
market and/or product. 
Following the conclusion at the end of last year of the first round of public consultation, the 
SARB  has  reviewed  the  comments  and  has  begun  engaging  with  fellow  regulators  and 
stakeholders  on  a  revised  code.  It  is  envisaged  that  this  process  will  be  completed  in  the 
coming months. 
The  OTC  code  aims  to  ensure  that  the  highest  levels  of  professionalism  and  integrity  are 
maintained in the South African financial markets. The code is also intended to serve as a 
template to assist authorities in supervising conduct in financial markets. 
The code will be a living document which will continually benefit from evolving best practice, 
including international codes such as the upcoming Global Code of the Bank for International 
Settlements (BIS). 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, while much work remains to be done, it is nonetheless very encouraging to note 
that  key  steps  have  already  been  taken  by  regulators  and  financial  institutions  alike  to 
strengthen behavioural standards in the industry. It is equally encouraging that South Africa, 
while largely sheltered from the global financial crisis, is embarking on measures to limit the 
risk  of  such  crises  occurring  locally  in  the  future,  including  strengthening  market  conduct 
regulations as part of the move towards a Twin Peaks system of regulation. Nonetheless, the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   evolution  of the financial  industry  will  bring  new  challenges for regulators  and  professional 
bodies alike. 
In an industry where the conclusion and enforcement of contracts is based on trust – trust from 
the provider of capital that he/she will be fairly rewarded for the risk of potentially losing some 
of his/her assets; trust from the borrower that he/she will be charged a fair price for access to 
capital – any breakdown in that confidence can quickly lead to incorrect pricing and, in turn, 
improper allocation of resources. A lack of confidence in the financial system generally means 
rising counterparty risk, requirements for higher risk premiums, and raising the overall cost of 
capital in the economy. Without sound values and proper conduct, we will not be able to restore 
trust, and this will affect confidence. And when there is little or no confidence, there are risks 
to stability, growth, jobs, and development. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
