  Mark Carney: £20 note character selection announcement 
Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, Turner Contemporary Gallery, Margate, 22 April 2016. 
 Though I’m surrounded by sublime art and architecture, typically for a Governor of the Bank 
of England, I want to begin by talking about money. 
Throughout  history  money  has  come  in  many forms  – gold  and  silver  coins;  English  “tally 
sticks” made of willow; even stone disks of up to twelve feet in diameter, pocket change on 
the Pacific island of Yap. It’s true; a Yap stone makes up part of the reserves of the Bank of 
Canada. 
Such  variety  has  meant  economists  have  struggled  to  define  money.  The  Nobel  Prize-
winning  economist,  John  Hicks,  simply  wrote  “money  is  what  money  does.”1  Wisdom  or 
sophistry? There’s a bit of Popeye or Forrest Gump in that.2 
But what does money do? 
To some, banknotes are mere “barren tokens.”3 These meagre pieces of paper – soon to be 
polymer – of no intrinsic value, actually serve vital economic functions. They facilitate trade. 
They store value. They serve as a unit of account. As the soon-to-be replaced incumbent of 
our £20 note, Adam Smith, wrote, they are the “universal instrument of commerce.”4 
Most fundamentally, Money is Memory.5 
Money supplants the need to keep track of promises to exchange goods and services across 
time; it is a simple, universal replacement for detailed record keeping. 
Money is memory in another sense. It bridges time. The money we spend today could have 
been earned from past accomplishments or could be borrowed from future ones. 
Money is also Memory for a country and its people. 
Money,  after  all,  can  be  a  piece  of  art  in  everyone’s  pocket.  Far  from  being  “barren”,  our 
banknotes are a celebration of the UK’s heritage, a salute to its culture, a testament to the 
great achievements of its most notable individuals. 
In short, money has not just economic value; it has cultural value. 
By depicting characters on our banknotes, we celebrate those who have advanced British 
thought, spurred innovation, shown exceptional leadership, shaped this diverse society and 
forged our common values. 
The  great  statesman  Sir  Winston  Churchill  will  feature  on  the  next  £5  note,  unveiled  on 
2nd June, and issued in September, replacing the prison reformer Elizabeth Fry. 
The renowned author Jane Austen will feature on the £10 note, which will be issued in 2017, 
replacing the ground-breaking scientist Darwin. 
                                                
1  Hicks, J R (1967), Critical Essays in Monetary Theory. 
2 
3  A  moniker  used  by  Kocherlakota.  See  Kocherlakota,  N  (1998),  “Money  is  Memory”,  Journal  of  Economic 
“I am what I am” or “Stupid is as Stupid Does”. 
Theory, 81 (2).  
4  Book  I,  Chapter  4  “On  the  Origin  and  Use  of  Money”  of  Smith,  A  (1776),  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and 
Causes of the Wealth of Nations. 
5  Kocherlakota (Ibid.) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
And  I  am  delighted  to  announce  that  on  the  £20  note  the  great  economist  and  moral 
philosopher, Adam Smith, will be replaced by Joseph Mallord William Turner. 
Why Turner? 
Turner is arguably the single most influential British artist of all time. 
His work was transformative. 
His influence spanned his lifetime and endures today. 
He inspired the French impressionists and, as Ruskin said, was “the father of modern art.” 
His works include masterpieces such as Dutch Boats in a Gale, The Slave Ship, and Rain, 
Steam and Speed – The Great Western Railway. He captured the age of sail, of the advent 
of steam, the very atmospherics of the British Isles, and lines between light, movement and 
colour. 
And his influence endures. When Mark Rothko visited an exhibition on Turner at the Museum 
of Modern Art in New York, he jokingly said: “This man Turner, he learnt a lot from me.” 
The  Margate  gallery  shows  Turner’s  continuing  legacy,  with  a  number  of  exhibitions 
influenced by Turner, including that of the Danish artist Joachim Koester – The Other Side of 
the Sky – which pairs his works with Turner watercolours. 
Turner’s story begins with humble origins. Born to a London barber and wig maker, his talent 
was unquestioned. He went to extremes in pursuit of the visceral artistic experience. 
Turner exhibited at the Royal Academy at 15, and became an Academician at 24. He was 
undeniably  prolific,  producing  more  than  550  oil  paintings,  2,000  watercolours,  and 
30,000 sketches and drawings. 
His work will now feature on another 2 billion works of art – our new £20 notes. 
How did we decide? 
How did we arrive at Turner? 
As befits Turner, we took the process of selecting a new banknote character out of the black 
box and brought it into the sunlight. 
In  December  2013,  the  Bank  of  England  committed  to  making  our  character  selection 
process much more open and transparent. 
First, the Banknote Character Advisory Committee was created and then decided the field of 
accomplishment. They chose visual arts, which had never before been properly displayed on 
a banknote. 
The  Bank then  invited  the  public  to  make  nominations  in  this field. They  proposed  artists, 
sculptors,  printmakers,  designers,  craftspeople,  ceramicists,  architects,  fashion  designers, 
photographers and filmmakers. 
Indeed,  the response  was  exceptional. We received  almost  30,000  individual  suggestions, 
between  them  nominating  590  different  eligible  characters  –  demonstrating  not  only  the 
depth of achievement of British art but also the public’s passion for it. 
This  pool  was  handed  to  our  expert  Banknote  Advisory  Committee  –  John  Akomfrah,  Sir 
David  Cannadine,  Andrew  Graham-Dixon,  Sandy  Nairne,  Alice  Rawsthorn,  Baroness  Lola 
Young,  and,  from  the  Bank,  Deputy  Governor  Ben  Broadbent  and  Chief  Cashier  Victoria 
Cleland.  They  used  their  considerable  knowledge,  supplemented  with  views  from  public 
focus groups, and whittled down to a shortlist of five characters. 
What were the criteria? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  First, an unquestioned contribution to the visual arts. 
Second, a wider contribution to British society. 
And third, an enduring influence. 
The strength of the other four characters on the final shortlist – filmmaker Charlie Chaplin, 
sculptor Barbara Hepworth, painter William Hogarth, and designer Josiah Wedgwood – gives 
a  sense  of  the  exceptional  pedigree  of  British  visual  arts  –  and  contextualises  Turner’s 
contribution. 
To develop this point, I’d like to now introduce a short film from the Committee members 
celebrating some of the nominated visual artists and outlining their views on the process that 
led to Turner being chosen. 
 So  as  Darwin  is  about  to  be  replaced  on  one  of  our  notes  and  Churchill  is  to  appear  on 
another, it’s fitting that Turner should be unveiled on the next. 
And here is the new image for the new Turner banknote. 
It features Turner’s self-portrait, from 1799, currently on display in the Tate Britain; and one 
of his most eminent paintings – The Fighting Temeraire – which can be seen in the National 
Gallery. 
This  painting  was  a  tribute  to  the  HMS  Temeraire,  which  played  a  distinguished  role  in 
Nelson’s victory at Trafalgar in 1805. It also commemorates the Age of Steam replacing that 
of Wind as this great warship is pulled into harbour by small tug boat. And in classic Turner 
fashion captures the interplay between light and vibrant colour. 
The novelist William Makepeace Thackeray called it “as grand a painting as ever figured on 
the  walls  of  any  academy,  or  came  from  the  easel  of  any  painter.”6  In  2005,  was  voted 
Britain’s greatest painting in a BBC poll.7 
The quote – “Light is therefore colour” – is from an 1818 lecture by Turner. It refers to his 
innovative  use  of  light,  shade,  colour  and  tone  –  one  example  of  his  unquestioned 
contribution to the visual arts in Britain and beyond. 
Turner rarely signed his paintings, so the signature on the banknote was taken from his will. 
It is fitting because, in that document, he bequeathed his paintings to the nation – a wider 
contribution  to  British  society.  Most  Turners  are  not  locked  away  in  private  collections  or 
spread  to  the  four  winds.  They  are  free  for  the  British  public  to  see  across  some  of  our 
greatest museums. 
And finally, Turner’s legacy endures. From his influence on art for more than two centuries, 
to  the  prize  that  bears his  name  and  celebrates  British  contemporary art  –  indeed, to this 
magnificent gallery, the Turner Contemporary. 
It is fitting we are here in Margate, where Turner visited frequently throughout his life. This 
gallery stands on the original site of Mrs Booth’s seafront guest house, where Turner stayed 
whenever he visited.8 More than 100 of his works were inspired by the East Kent coast, and 
he held that “the skies over Thanet are the loveliest in all Europe.” 
                                                 
6  P. Ackroyd, Turner (Vintage, 2006) p. 136. 
7  http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/4214824.stm. 
8  https://www.turnercontemporary.org/about/turner. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Money is memory. The £20 note will soon bear one of the greatest figures in UK history. Not 
a distant memory but a living one. The past sedimented in the present. An influence which 
endures. 
It’s even more fitting that we can celebrate Turner’s continuing influence by having one of our 
most eminent artists, someone whom Turner has influenced and one of Margate’s own, once 
Enfant Terrible, today Royal Academician, and master of confessional art, Tracey Emin, to 
share her thoughts with us now. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
