   Erkki Liikanen: Cash and the central bank 
Opening remarks by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Bank of Finland 
Conference on Going Cashless, Helsinki, 14 June 2016. 
 Dear friends and colleagues,  
I want to welcome you all to this conference organized around a very old and at the same time 
a most timely topic: cash.  
Central banks have always thought a lot about cash, of course. But until recently, it was mainly 
seen as a logistical and security matter. This is changing.  
Now, we have to consider the role and the future of cash from more fundamental perspectives.  
 One  perspective  is  the  effect  of  information  technology.  Technological  change  has  always 
shaped banking. Historically we see the impact of such inventions as the telegraph, the credit 
card, the ATM, and electronic fund transfers. But how about notes and coin? 
In essence, cash is a way to store and convey information: information about the purchasing 
power of the bearer. But cash is not the only possible way to do it. Information technology 
offers more and more alternatives, many of which compete in today’s marketplace. 
Technological development has made it possible to offer improved services and to increase 
efficiency in the payments industry. But the technological imperative is not the only force at 
play. Commercial incentives are also important. The utilization of the technological possibilities 
has sometimes been spurred by crises.  
Finland is an example of this. 
After the Nordic banking crisis in the early 1990s, our banking sector had to go through major 
cost-cutting  and  productivity  improvements.  During  the  1970s  and  1980s  the  banks  had 
invested  very  much  in  the  ICT,  which  was  made  possible  due  to  high  profitability.  In  this 
structural  change,  Finnish  banks  profited  from  these  investments  in  changing  their  way  to 
operate  and  they  became  forerunners  in  internet-banking.  This  shows  once  more  how 
necessity becomes the mother of invention. 
Today,  Finland  and  the  other  Nordic  countries  are  pretty  advanced  in  the  electrification  of 
payments, and most people can go about their daily lives perfectly well without touching cash. 
And many do so. Contactless payment cards are among the new developments which, by their 
convenience, pose a serious challenge to cash in terms of sheer technical efficiency and time-
saving.  
By the way, Finland was a pioneer in the use of contactless smart cards for payments. They 
were first introduced by the mid -1990’s in the public transit systems of several Finnish cities 
like Oulu and Tampere.  
Technology is not only about efficiency. Other features of cash are also challenged. Some are 
quick  to  claim  that  new  cryptocurrencies  such  as  Bitcoin  can  now  offer  users  the  same 
anonymity which has long been thought to be the unique quality of cash.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   It has even been said, that cash, that is, notes and coin, is “on trial”, to cite the title of a recent 
conference.1 The question we must be prepared to answer is: what is the justification for cash 
as a means of payment on the face of such developments.  
Answering that question could shed important light on some fundamental questions on the 
nature and role of central banking in general. This is one of the reasons this conference has 
been arranged. 
 Another reason for the discussion has recently been the low-interest rate environment which 
now  prevails  in  much  of  the  developed  world.  This  situation  has  focused  the  attention  of 
economists to the so-called zero lower bound of interest rate policy.  
The  zero  lower  bound  problem  results  from  the  availability  of  cash  as  a  liquid  investment 
alternative, with zero return (minus storage and insurance costs). The alternative constituted 
by cash makes it difficult, perhaps impossible, to push market rates very far into the negative 
territory.  
Practice is not quite as simple as theory. Recent experience tells us that interest rates can be 
somewhat  negative,  even  if  there  are  no  restrictions  on  banknote  holdings.  Holding  large 
amounts  of  cash  is  not  costless.  As  a  result,  the  effective  lower  bound  can  be  soft,  and 
somewhere below zero.  
In the proximity of the lower bound, central banks, ECB included, have supplemented their 
toolkit with forward guidance and with various unconventional measures, such as large-scale 
asset  purchases.  These  have  helped  to  keep  monetary  policy  effective  even  in  today’s 
exceptional low-interest environment. 
The question relevant for today is, is the lower bound for interest rates a serious problem for 
the efficiency of monetary policy? And if it is, is the problem persistent enough so that we 
should take radical measures to remove the lower bound? 
There are economists, such as Kenneth Rogoff, who think that it would be best to discontinue 
cash altogether, in order to liberate monetary policy from the lower bound, letting interest rates 
move more freely to both directions. I think this is not the mainstream view now, however. 
The seriousness of the lower bound problem in the future depends partly on what happens to 
the average level of interest rates. This in turn depends on the return of inflation tendencies in 
the economy, and the equilibrium level of the real interest rate in the future.  
Here we encounter one of the most interesting topics of economic discussion these days: the 
secular stagnation hypothesis. It has got a lot of attention but has not convinced everybody. 
The issue is intensely debated by academics.   
Many countries were hard hit by the global financial crisis. Recovery has been slow and uneven 
although it has been taking place. Productivity growth has been slowing down for many years, 
almost globally. 
For the future, we can think of two scenarios. In the first, the deceleration of growth would turn 
out to be temporary. In that case, the issues raised by the low interest rate environment and 
the lower bound problem would eventually become less topical. The equilibrium real interest 
rate would return to more customary levels, and any deflationary tendencies would recede. 
The average interest rate level would be normalized. 
I still inclined to think that scenario to be the likely one.  
                                                
1   See http://www.suerf.org/studies/6359/cash-on-trial. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   In the second scenario, we would face a permanent and significant slowdown of productivity 
growth. This would imply that the equilibrium interest rates could be very low for a very long 
time, perhaps occasionally negative. The central banks would be more likely to hit the lower 
bound for interest rates more often. 
That  would  be  the  case  in  which  removing  the  lower  bound  for  interest  rates  would  be 
something to think about.  
This is clearly a complicated matter:  
• 
The  experience  with  alternative  monetary  policy  measures  would  have  to  be 
assessed: how well can we substitute other monetary policy instruments for interest 
rate policy if needed?  
The realism of a world with occasionally negative nominal interest rates would have 
to be considered, not only in money markets, but in retail banking too. The customer 
resistance  to  negative  nominal  rates  for  their  savings  could  be  very  stiff.  Bank 
profitability could be a serious issue. 
Finally,  the  pros  and  cons  of  a  payment  system  without  cash  would  have  to  be 
examined. What would be lost in terms of convenience, resilience and privacy if cash 
was discontinued? Should it be replaced with something new? 
  Before a judgement could be passed regarding the future of cash, all these aspects would 
need to be carefully considered and balanced.  
 Currently, the role of banknotes in payments is diminishing, and the role of credit and debit 
cards is growing. Curiously, the total value of banknotes in circulation has not decreased in 
most countries, and has even been growing. This is an interesting puzzle which may be one 
of the results of the very low interest rates prevailing. 
Anyway, the infrastructure needed for cash withdrawals has gradually been downsized in some 
countries. The international differences are large. The Nordic region is leading the way. The 
number of ATMs has been diminishing for years here. Many bank branches do not handle 
cash any more. In the emerging situation, at least in Finland and the other Nordic countries, 
obtaining cash has probably become more time consuming and difficult for customers who 
prefer to use it. 
The  commercial  case,  apart  from  regulation,  for  maintaining  facilities  for  distributing  and 
receiving cash may vanish. We may be approaching a tipping point, where cash is not only 
losing market share, but may be increasingly disappearing as an option.  
For most of the population, for most purposes, and for most of the time, this trend is not very 
problematic. But the payment system is a utility which must be accessible to everybody, not 
only the majority of people. It must be inclusive. So that raises the issue of how social groups 
with special needs can cope without the option of using cash.  
Do we need new kinds of regulations on the right-to-access to electronic payments systems, 
or new regulations on the distribution and acceptance of cash? 
Another interesting hypothetical question is what should be the role of the central bank in a 
such an hypothetical economy where physical cash would no longer exist. Should the concept 
of  legal  tender  be  redefined,  and  should  the  retail  customers  have  access  to  central  bank 
money in such an economy?  
Different ideas have been floated. Some people think that citizens should be given the option 
of  opening transaction  accounts  at the  central  bank.  Some  have  proposed  that  the  central 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   banks could issue circulating digital currency by using the distributed ledger technology, like 
the Bitcoin does. There have been other ideas, too.   
 At present, central banks are not trying to actively direct the payment system away from cash, 
nor trying to promote its use. The commercial forces have been given a leading role, while the 
central banks have seen to it that legal tender is available when needed. This has worked well 
so far. But we must think ahead, and clarify our position on these issues, and interaction with 
researchers and experts is invaluable to help us in that. 
I  should  make  a  side  remark  here.  As  we  all  know,  the  Eurosystem  will  discontinue  the 
production  and  issuance  of  €  500  banknotes.  The  elimination  of  the  largest-denomination 
banknote is hoped to have an impact in limiting the underground economy and making all kinds 
of illegal transactions more difficult. Its use in ordinary transactions has not been large in any 
case. 
Some people have been disappointed by this decision, and interpreted it as a sign that the 
ECB is taking a more negative view on the future of cash in general. This is a misinterpretation. 
The decision should not be overdramatized. For a comparison, in the U.S. the $ 100 bill is the 
largest banknote. The ECB is not taking a radical step in discontinuing a € 500 banknote. At 
the same time the new series of € 200 and € 100 notes will be introduced to meet the all the 
demand. There is no change in our attitude on the future of cash. 
 To conclude, cash has never been more interesting than now. Increasingly, the central banks 
and  the  whole  society  need  analyses  which  go  to  the  foundations  of  the  monetary  and 
payments system. I trust this conference will make a valuable contribution to this fascinating 
research area.  
I thank you for your attention, and wish you a very productive conference day.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
