  Raghuram Rajan: India in the global economy 
Text of the First Ramnath Goenka Memorial Lecture by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the 
Reserve Bank of India, New Delhi, 12 March 2016. 
I thank Dr. Prachi Mishra and her team for assistance. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the  first  Ramnath  Goenka  lecture.  As  you  know,  Shri 
Goenka was a freedom fighter, who built the Indian Express into a national newspaper. In his 
time, it was arguably the best investigative newspaper in the country. He was instrumental in 
highlighting the excesses of the Emergency, which probably contributed to Indira Gandhi’s 
defeat when she lifted it. He continued to be a tireless scourge of corruption and government 
high-handedness, and was responsible for unsettling many a minister and business tycoon. It 
would be fitting in a lecture in his memory to speak about the efforts we are making in India 
today  on  increasing  transparency  and  curbing  corruption.  However,  I  have  said  what  I 
needed  to  on  that  elsewhere.  Instead,  I  will  speak  today  on  India’s  engagement  with  the 
global economy, and how best to manage it in these turbulent times 
The global economy is finding it hard to restore pre-Great Recession growth rates – every 
report of the IMF seemingly downgrades its previous growth forecasts. Why has the recovery 
been  so  slow?  The  immediate  answer  is  that  the  financial  boom  preceding  the  Great 
Recession  left  industrial  countries  with  an  overhang  of  debt,  and  debt,  whether  on 
governments,  households,  or  banks,  is  holding  back  growth. While  the  remedy  may  be  to 
write down debt so as to revive demand from the indebted, it is debatable whether additional 
debt fueled  demand  is sustainable.  At  any  rate, large-scale  debt  write-offs  seem  politically 
difficult even if they are economically warranted. 
But perhaps the debt overhang points to a deeper cause; the debt-fueled demand before the 
Great  Recession,  which  has  led  to  the  debt  overhang  now,  hid  a  fall  in  global  potential 
growth,  perhaps  because  of  the  difficult-to-understand  consequences  of  population  ageing 
across the industrial world, and the slowdown in productivity growth. 
Structural  reforms,  typically  ones  that  increase  competition,  foster  innovation,  and  drive 
institutional  change,  are  the  way  to  raise  potential  growth.  But  these  hurt  protected 
constituencies  that  have  become  accustomed  to  the  rents  they  get  from  the  status  quo. 
Moreover, the gains to constituencies that are benefited are typically later and uncertain. No 
wonder Jean-Claude Juncker, the former Luxembourg Prime Minister, said at the height of 
the Euro crisis, “We all know what to do, we just don’t know how to get re-elected after we’ve 
done it!” 
Instead, industrial countries are engaged in ever more aggressive monetary policy moves. 
This imposes tremendous risks on emerging markets like ours, as we are faced with surges 
of capital inflows one day when investors go into “risk-on” mode only to see outflows the next 
as  they  switch  risk  off.  At  the  same  time,  overcapacity  in  competitor  countries  threatens 
some of our key industries. 
What should India do? 
What  should  India  do  in  this  environment  where  the  international  investor  is  manic 
depressive in his behavior and all countries are striving for extra growth? Importantly, when 
global  growth  is  uncertain,  we  should  make  sure  that  our  domestic  environment  promotes 
strong,  sustainable,  and  stable  growth.  This  requires  a  firm  platform  of  macroeconomic 
stability. Let me elaborate. 
The recent central  budget  emphasized  fiscal  prudence  and  adhered to past  commitments, 
even while allocating resources towards capital spending and focusing on structural reforms, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  especially in agriculture. The subsequent fall in government bond yields suggests that market 
investors were calmed by the Government’s overall message. Fiscal consolidation, combined 
with lower commodity prices, has also led to a lower current account deficit. 
Inflation is also clearly down since the days of double-digit CPI inflation not so long ago. The 
RBI’s  inflation-focused  monetary  framework  will  be  strengthened  by  the  constitution  of  the 
monetary policy committee mooted in the Finance Bill. While the RBI Governor will no longer 
be able to set monetary policy unilaterally, I believe shifting the decision to a committee is in 
the  economy’s  interest.  Not  only  will  a  committee  aggregate  multiple  views  better  than  an 
individual can, it will offer more continuity, and be less subject to undue pressure. I believe 
the monetary reforms of this Government will stand out as one of its signal achievements. 
The  last  leg  of  the  stabilization  agenda  is  to  clean  up  the  stressed  assets  in  the  banking 
sector so that banks have the room to lend again. The problem in the past was that banks 
simply did not have enough powers to force promoters to pay, or to put stressed assets back 
on track. Unlike more developed countries, we do not have a functioning bankruptcy system, 
though a bill is currently before Parliament. Therefore, we first had to create an effective out-
of-court resolution system. Having done that, we are now working with banks to recognize 
and resolve stressed assets, even while getting them to raise capital where necessary. Our 
intent is to have clean and fully provisioned bank balance sheets by March 2017. 
Perhaps the hardest aspect of this stabilization agenda has been to persuade the economics 
commentariat  of the  need for macroeconomic  stability  when  growth  is  below  expectations. 
The  constant  call  of  the  economic  sirens,  seeking  to  lure  the  economy  onto  the  shoals  of 
economic  distress,  is  “Lord,  give  us  stability,  but  not  just  yet!”  Growth  is  always  more 
important,  no  matter  how  the  risks  build  up.  Usually,  the  sirens  call  on  you  to  not  be 
doctrinaire  (after  all,  only  academic  economists  care  about  fiscal  deficits),  to  be  practical 
(does  it  really  matter  if  an  NPA  is  recognized  a  quarter  or  three  later),  and  to  appreciate 
Indian realities (everyone may say they hate inflation but no one really wants to bear the pain 
of the disinflationary process). 
I  believe  we  are  in  the  process  of  proving  the  sirens  wrong.  Given  the  inhospitable  world 
economy  and  two  successive  droughts  in  India,  either  of  which  would  have  thrown  the 
economy into a tail spin in the past, our focus on macroeconomic stabilization must be part of 
the explanation why we have over 7 percent growth, low inflation, and a low current account 
deficit  unlike  some  of  our  emerging  market  counterparts.  Now,  we  have  to  build  on  this 
sound base. What will be particularly important is how we engage with the world economy. I 
want to talk specifically about trade, the exchange rate, capital flows, and ideas. 
International trade 
For  the  first  time  in  decades,  global  trade  has  consistently  grown  more  slowly  than  global 
output.  There  are  a  number  of  possible  explanations;  as  countries  get  richer,  non-traded 
services constitute a greater fraction of GDP, causing GDP to grow faster than trade. Also, 
with trade-intensive capital goods’ investment muted because of global overcapacity, trade 
grows more slowly than GDP. Finally, as industrial countries become more competitive, and 
as China moves up the value chain, more of the inputs going into final products are being 
sourced  from  inside  a  country  rather  than  from  outside  the  country.  Some  global  supply 
chains are therefore contracting. For all these reasons, the heady days when Indian trade in 
goods and services were expanding at a double digit pace will probably only be a memory for 
some time. 
It is useful to examine recent trade data to see how India compares with rest of the world. 
Figure 1 suggests the growth of Indian exports of goods and services broadly mirrors that of 
emerging markets. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Source. IMF Balance of Payment Statistics. Emerging markets (EMs) include Brazil, China, 
Indonesia, Mexico, Russian, South Africa, Thailand, Turkey, and India. The black line shows 
a simple average of growth rates across these EMs. 
Most  recently,  of  course,  emerging  market  commodity  exporters  have  been  hit  by  lower 
prices.  Nevertheless,  Indian  goods  exports  seem  to  be  doing  worse  recently  than  goods 
exports from emerging markets (see figure 2). 
 
Source.  IMF  Balance  of  Payment  Statistics.  Emerging  markets  (EMs)  include  Brazil,  China, 
Indonesia,  Mexico,  Russian,  South  Africa,  Thailand,  Turkey,  and  India.  The  black  line  shows  a 
simple average of growth rates across these EMs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  At the same time, the growth of Indian service exports seems to be doing somewhat better, 
perhaps because countries like the United States that we export services to are recovering 
more  strongly.  Of  course,  these  differences  are  over  very  short  periods,  so  it  is  probably 
unwise to draw strong conclusions from them. What one can probably take away is that India 
is not alone in suffering a fall-off in trade. 
 
Source. IMF Balance of Payment Statistics. Emerging markets (EMs) include Brazil, China, Indonesia, 
Mexico, Russian, South Africa, Thailand, Turkey, and India. The black line shows a simple average of 
growth rates across these EMs. 
However, as Indian trade slows, industry bodies are urging authorities to do something. Of 
course,  if  all  countries  are  experiencing  slower  trade,  the  remedies  may  be  beyond  the 
control of Indian authorities. While we can examine possible dumping in certain industries, 
we have to be careful that any remedies that increase prices in the protected industry do not 
render other domestic industries uncompetitive. 
It is at these times of slowing trade that our pundits look at the exchange rate and argue it is 
overvalued. Of course, I have just argued that we are not alone in experiencing a fall in trade, 
but let us examine the exchange rate. 
The exchange rate 
When most people think about the exchange rate, they think of the rupee’s value against the 
dollar. As Figure 4 indicates, the rupee seems to have weakened by about 6% against the 
dollar since the beginning of 2015, approximately the time our relative underperformance on 
goods exports started. This depreciation should have helped our exports, though the effects 
of depreciation show up only after a lag. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   But we should note that other currencies have depreciated against the dollar also. So while we 
have gained an advantage versus US producers, other foreign producers may have become 
even  more  competitive  because  their  exchange  rate  has  depreciated  more.  Economists 
therefore advise looking at an index of the nominal effective exchange rate, which compares 
the rupee’s value versus other exchange rates, weighing each by their share in trade. 
 
Sources. RBI and IMF. The indices are normalized to January 2013=100. An increase denotes 
an appreciation. 
By this metric in Figure 5, the rupee has remained relatively flat since early 2015. What we 
have given up against the dollar, we have gained against the Euro or the Real, so overall, in 
trade-weighted terms, the rupee has been flat. 
But wait a minute, our economist friends will say. Inflation in India is higher than inflation in 
most other countries. This affects competitiveness. If a widget cost a dollar to make a year 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  ago  in  the  United  States,  and  ₹63  in  India  then,  the  Indian  producer  would  have  been 
competitive with the United States because the dollar was worth ₹63. But if inflation in India 
is 5% and zero in the United States, it would cost the Indian manufacturer ₹66.2 to make it 
today. If the rupee stayed at ₹63 to the dollar, the Indian manufacturer would have become 
uncompetitive today – the US producer would be able to manufacture the widget at a cost 
equivalent of ₹63 only. In other words, to retain competitiveness, the rupee has to depreciate 
by the inflation differential vis a vis a trading partner. An index of how competitive we are is 
called the “real effective exchange rate”. Think of that as the nominal effective exchange rate 
adjusted for inflation. The higher it is, the less the exchange rate has depreciated to offset 
inflation, and the more uncompetitive we are. 
Sources. RBI and IMF. The indices are normalized to January 2013=100. An increase denotes an appreciation. 
 Figure  6,  where  I  plot  the  real  effective  exchange  rate,  shows  the  age  old  truth  that 
interpretation is in the eyes of the beholder. If a columnist wants to blame the exchange rate 
for our export slowdown, she can look at the index from the low point of September 2013 and 
argue it has appreciated 20% (based on the IMF measure). Of course, it would be hard to 
argue  that  the  low  point  our  exchange  rate  reached  in  September  2013  represented  an 
equilibrium rate. Moreover, our exports were doing quite well relative to emerging markets for 
much  of  that  period  (see  Figure  1).1  Indeed,  over  the  last  year  when  goods  exports  have 
slowed,  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  has  been  rather  flat.  So  someone  who  wants  to 
absolve the exchange rate of blame will point to the recent period. 
                                                
1  This is true even if we focus attention on manufacturing exports only. Based on data from the WTO, while 
manufacturing exports grew at an annual average rate of 6.3% for India during 2013–14, they grew at only 3% 
on average for emerging markets. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  But  there  is  another  reason  to  absolve  the  exchange rate  of  accusations  of  overvaluation. 
The real exchange rate is only one measure of competitiveness. Productivity also matters. In 
a  rich  country,  firms  are  already  at  the  productivity  frontier,  so  they  typically  can  improve 
productivity only through innovation. In a poor country, productivity can be improved simply 
by reducing existing bottlenecks or by moving a little closer to the productivity frontier through 
the adoption of already-known best practices. Productivity in India, for example, can improve 
simply  if  a  better  road  is  built  from  a  factory  to  the  rail  head,  or  if  the  firm  manages  its 
inventories  better.  One reason  Indian  manufacturing GDP  has  been  growing  so fast  when 
firms have been experiencing little increase in final sales is that firms have been focusing on 
improving  productivity.  So  offsetting  any  rise  in  the  real  exchange  rate  is  any  productivity 
differential we enjoy with respect to the rest of the world. Assuming conservatively that this is 
about  2  percent  a  year,  much  of  the  real  appreciation  that  economists  complain  about  is 
offset by productivity differentials. 
The bottom line is that even though Indian trade has been slowing, the slowdown is similar to 
what  has  been  happening  elsewhere,  with  a  significant  portion  due  to  a  fall  in  commodity 
prices, and a smaller share due to a fall in trade volumes. While goods exports may have 
suffered a little more over the last year, it is too early to discern a clear pattern, and certainly 
hard to pin the slow down on the exchange rate.2  
The goldilocks rate 
It is worthwhile to push this discussion a little further though. If the RBI could press a button 
and get the exchange rate it desired (as some economists imagine is possible) should it aim 
for a strong rupee or a weak rupee? Non-economists typically advocate a strong rupee – not 
only does it convey national strength, but you can buy more stuff with your rupee when you 
go abroad, and imports are cheaper. The non-economist is consumer focused. 
Of  course,  it  is  precisely  because  domestic  tourism  and  domestic  production  are 
disadvantaged relative to tourism abroad and foreign production that many economists prefer 
a weak rupee. Yet these modern day, producer-focused, mercantilists do not acknowledge 
that undervaluation is a subsidy to domestic producers paid for by domestic consumers and 
savers. The domestic consumer pays too high a price for foreign goods, and interest rates 
have  to  be  kept  artificially  low  so  as  to  reduce  the  cost  of  holding  the  enormous  foreign 
exchange reserves built up through intervention. There are costs over the long run also. A 
sizeable portion of the investment made in the country based on an artificially low exchange 
rate will turn out be uncompetitive when the exchange rate normalizes. One might argue that 
this  reflects  the  experience  of  Japan  in  the  1990s  and  possibly  the  experience  of  parts  of 
Chinese industry today. 
An  undervalued  exchange  rate  might  have  made  sense  in  the  past  for  countries  that  had 
weak firms and small domestic markets. India is in a very different position today from the 
export-led East Asian tigers when they embarked on their growth path. The ideal exchange 
rate for us is neither strong nor weak, it is just right. Typically, market forces get you to this 
Goldilocks  rate.  Yet  there  are  circumstances  where  rapid  capital  inflows  or  outflows  can 
move  the  rate  to  a  level  that  is  unlikely  to  be  supported  by  fundamentals.  While  the  RBI 
would not claim to know precisely what the equilibrium level of the exchange rate is at any 
given  point  in  time,  we  intervene  to  moderate  adjustment  whenever  we  believe  the 
movement is extreme, driven by sentiment, and likely to be reversed. Our intent is to prevent 
overshooting and undue volatility, rather than to stand in the way of the needed adjustment. 
                                                
2 
In  fact,  if  we  focus  on  manufacturing  exports  which  are  perhaps  less  susceptible  to  high  frequency  price 
movements, based on limited data for recent years we find that the magnitude of the slowdown in India over 
the last few years is comparable or even less than many emerging markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Of course, temporary irrationality in the market can overwhelm a central bank. Much like a 
bank  run,  a  falling  currency  can  prompt  further  fall  as  foreign  investors  attempt  to  get  out 
before  they  lose  everything.  To  maintain  orderly  movement  of  the  rupee  versus  other 
currencies,  we  believe  we  need  three  ingredients.  First,  good  policies  that  ensure 
macroeconomic stability and convinces investors their money is safe over the medium term. I 
have already discussed this earlier. 
Second, we should focus on attracting stable capital flows that will stay for the long run. This 
means resisting the temptation to open up too much to short-term- as well as foreign currency 
denominated debt flows in good times, no matter how low an interest rate they charge. In the 
last  few  years,  we  have  limited  foreign  portfolio  debt  investment  in  short  term  rupee  debt 
instruments. It is not that these investors cannot sell long term bonds and leave at a moment’s 
notice,  it  is  that  investors  in  longer  maturity  bonds  are  likely  to  be  a  little  more  stable  than 
investors  who  want  overnight  exposure  only.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  steadily  expanded 
investment limits for foreign investors in government bonds, and will continue doing so. 
Our new External Commercial Borrowing rules encourage infrastructure projects and other 
projects that have limited foreign earnings to either issue rupee Masala loans, or to borrow 
really  long  term  tenors.  This  limits  the  risk  that  they  will  be  required  to  repay  when  the 
exchange rate has moved adversely against them. 
Finally,  the  Government  has  been  encouraging  foreign  investors  to  “Make  in  India”.  One 
offshoot  of  this  campaign  has  been  a  sizeable  rise  in  foreign  direct  investment,  the  most 
stable sort of investment. With two months left in the year to go, net FDI is already at the 
second highest level ever, and comfortable higher than the current account deficit. 
 The bottom line is that our policy towards foreign capital flows is one of steady liberalization, 
where we try and not be tempted by cheap finance, but draw in the risk-bearing capital we 
need  to  finance  our  growth.  We  intend  foreign  investors  to  get  decent  returns  and  we  do 
intend to continuously ease both entry into and exit from the country. 
Finally,  our  third  line  of  defence  is  our  foreign  exchange  reserves.  We  intervene  in  the 
exchange markets to smooth volatility, and typically find ourselves buying dollars at certain 
times and selling dollars at others in any given year. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  How to increase exports 
So if the exchange rate is unlikely to be a helpful tool in our quest to increase what we make 
in  India,  how  should  we  export  more?  The  answer  is  simple  –  improve  productivity  by 
building  out  infrastructure;  improve  human  capital  with  better  schools,  colleges,  vocational 
and  on-the-job  training;  simplify  business  regulation  and  taxation;  and  improve  access  to 
finance. Fortunately, all this is what the government is focused on. 
I am often asked, “What industries should we focus on, what should we encourage?” Learning 
from our past, I would say let us not encourage anything; that might be the surest way of killing 
it. Instead, let us make sure we create a good business environment that can support any kind 
of  activity,  and  then  let  our  myriad  entrepreneurs  figure  out  what  new  and  interesting 
businesses  they  will  create.  In  the  1990s,  the  IITs  that  Pandit  Jawaharlal  Nehru  created  to 
supply  engineers to the  commanding public sector heights of the economy  instead supplied 
managers and programmers to body shops focused on dealing with the Y2K bug. These in turn 
evolved  into  our  world-beating  software  giants.  While  the  government  did  not  create  the 
software industry, it was not inconsequential by any means to its emergence and development. 
Similarly, let us enable business activity but not try and impose too much design on it. 
Ideas and analysis 
Before  concluding,  let  me  emphasize  one  additional  area  of  engagement  with  the  world, 
ideas and analysis. Today, we have a seat at most international tables, many countries want 
to draw us into bilateral and multilateral treaties. When we were unimportant, we used to rail 
against  the  proposals  that  were  inimical  to  us,  knowing  it  would  not  make  an  iota  of 
difference. As we get more power, we need to develop the capability of using it effectively. 
Today,  it  is  an  unfortunate  reality  that  international  meets  are  still  dominated  by  the  old 
powers.  But  it  is  less  through  brute  power  politics  and  more  through  the  power  of  ideas, 
agenda setting, and organization that they dominate. Agendas in the G-20 are still largely set 
by  elements  of  the  old  G-7,  and  often  we  find  that  they  have  already  agreed  on  their 
preferred approach. It is only when the big powers disagree that the rest of us have some 
hope of influencing outcomes. 
The fault is not in the power structure, it is in us. Unless we amongst the emerging world put 
forward  our  agenda,  build  the  intellectual  and  analytical  basis  for  pushing  it,  and  create 
coalitions to support it, we will have no chance of moving forward. Encouragingly, the BRICS 
do discuss policy issues and try and develop common approaches, but we need to do more. 
We also need to build coalitions with sympathetic industrial countries. In India, we need to 
build  capacity  in  our  think  tanks  and  universities  to  inform  our  policy  makers  on  how  to 
approach and shape the international policy agenda. We need to be well prepared when we 
negotiate bilateral and multilateral treaties, so that we do not wake up too late to the fact that 
we have given away the house with little in return. With careful analysis, engagement, and 
coalition building we will be able to influence the global agenda, and will stop being seen as 
an obstructionist but ultimately powerless country that we may have been in the past. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Shri Ramnath Goenka focused on unearthing facts that would help move 
the  public  debate  forward.  All  too  often,  our  public  debates  generate  more  noise  than 
illumination,  and  we  should  learn  from  the  example  he  set.  As  we  cope  with  the  global 
slowdown, and as we frame our policies going forward, we need to debate what our policy 
path will be, based on facts, empirical analysis, and sound arguments. I have laid out a view. 
I look forward to alternative viewpoints. Thank you for listening to me. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
