  Veerathai Santiprabhob: Financial connectivity in CLMVT (Cambodia, 
Lao PDR, Myanmar, Vietnam, Thailand) 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Veerathai  Santiprabhob,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
CLMVT Forum 2016 “Towards a Shared Prosperity”, Bangkok, 17 June 2016. 
 Your Excellencies, 
Honorable Speakers, Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
A very good morning to you all, 
It is my great pleasure to be here with you this morning. I would like to start by thanking the 
Thai Ministry of Commerce for inviting me to give a keynote address at this important forum. 
Let me take this opportunity to once again welcome all our guests, especially friends from 
CLMV countries, to Thailand. I am very delighted to have this opportunity to meet with many 
ministers, senior government officials, and business leaders participating in the first CLMVT 
forum. This forum provides a meaningful platform for all of us to share perspectives on how 
to sustainably enhance regional connectivity and unlock great potentials of our region. 
Over  the  past  decade,  economic  integration  in  our  region  has  strengthened 
impressively. Driven by international trade, direct investment and production networks, the 
share  of  intra-regional  trade  within  the  CLMVT  to  total  trade  volumes  has  nearly  doubled. 
Amid  a  slowdown  in  global  trade  due  to  gradual  and  fragile  recovery  of  major  industrial 
economies  and  China’s  economic  transformation,  cross-border  trade  and  investment 
activities within the region continue to grow at a fast pace. For Thailand, the share of exports 
to  CLMV  countries  to  total  exports  volumes  has  risen  steadily  to  be  over  10  percent 
surpassing  our  exports  to  27  euro-zone  countries  combined.  This  reaffirms  the  shared 
benefits  from  trade  and  investment  connectivity.  Owing  largely  to  complementarities  in 
various  dimensions  among  CLMVT  economies,  the  integration  should  continue  to  further 
strengthen in the future. 
Expanding  trade  and 
investment  has  been  accompanied  and  supported  by 
development of domestic service industries and enhanced connectivity in the service 
sector. A case in point is the burgeoning growth of the airline industry, both low cost and full 
service. Over the past few years, any frequent traveler would easily notice a marked increase 
in  a  number  of  flights  within  the  region,  particularly  those  operated  by  low-cost  airlines. 
Prices have been much more affordable, attracting travelers who otherwise would not travel 
by planes. The development does not only benefit the airline industry itself, but also unlocks 
potentials of many other industries and serves the citizens of CLMVT. More seamless travel 
promotes  the  tourism  industry,  reduces  logistic  costs,  and  overcomes  obstacles  to 
transportation, 
thus  allowing  closer  people-to-people  connectivity  and  opening  up 
opportunities for people to realize their fullest potentials.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Improved  airline  service  and  connectivity  might  only  be  one  aspect  of  enhanced  regional 
connectivity. Nevertheless, it serves us well as  a model to develop other domestic service 
industries and to promote regional connectivity in the service sector. The questions I would 
like to focus on today is what could we learn from the success of the airline industry? 
And,  how  will  we  make  this  happen  in  other  areas  of  the  service  sector  that  have 
potentials to serve the region? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
For  the  first  question,  the  fast  development  of  the  airline  industry  can  be  mainly 
attributed  to  two  factors:  the  right  business  model  for  our  market  and  the  enabling 
infrastructure and eco-system. 
On the private sector’s part, the low-cost airlines know the region’s untapped market 
and come to serve the large unmet demand with the right business model. Needless to 
say, they offer customers with simple products, including no-frills service with a single cabin 
class.  Their  business  model  is  successful  at  minimizing  operating  costs  by  using  a  single 
aircraft  model  and  by  choosing  the  most  fuel  efficient  plane  type  to  reduce  fuel  and 
maintenance  costs.  The  airlines  also  revolutionized  the  ticketing  system  by  first  offering 
internet booking, paperless tickets and mobile check-ins for greater convenience and lower 
costs. 
Apart from the right entrepreneurial spirit of the private sector, policymakers are to be 
credited  with  the  creation  of  the  airline  network  in  our  region.  There  are  at  least  five 
factors policymakers have contributed to the success of the regional airline industry. 
• 
First is the introduction of the “open sky” policy which has opened up opportunities 
for new potential players, at a scale large enough to create a strong viable network 
of airlnes providing regular services with more competitive prices. 
Second,  investment  in  necessary  infrastructure  has  been  undertaken,  such  as 
airport  facilities,  landing  slots,  and  aeronautical  radio  networks  to  facilitate  flight 
communication. 
Third,  rules  and  regulations,  especially  on  cross-border  of  services,  were  more 
harmonized  to  support  the  airlines’  operation.  Visa  requirements  and  custom 
procedures were also streamlined to accommodate travelers. 
Fourth, authorities lifted up standards for pilots, crews, and airlines’ staff, driving the 
airlines  to  actively  promote  their  human  resource  development  to  be  on  par  with 
international standards. 
Lastly, the airlines have been encouraged to leverage on investments in specialized 
facilities  in  other  countries  in  the  region  to  lower  costs,  for  instance,  by  using 
common aircraft maintenance centers and pilot training facilities. 
    This  combination  of  the  right  business  model  and  appropriate  policy  supports  has  yielded 
tangible  benefits  to  the  region.  A  stronger  regional  airline  network  brings  in  higher 
competition,  lower  costs  and  better  service  quality,  thus  improving  people’s  livelihood  and 
paving way for other types of businesses to benefit and grow. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The bigger question is how to replicate the low-cost airlines’ success story in other service 
industries in the region, where large rooms for improvement have yet to be addressed and a 
lot  of  potentials  to  be  unlocked.  Among  others,  the  finance  industry  is  one  with  many 
untapped opportunities. Currently, a wide group of people in our countries still needs a better 
access to finance and there are still lots of demand for financial services to be met  –  be 
they savings, loans, insurance products, or payment services for both domestic and cross-
border transactions. 
By applying the airline industry’ experiences for policymakers, let me lay out five key 
conditions  necessary  to  developing  domestic  financial  systems  and  nurturing 
financial connectivity in the CLMVT in the periods ahead. 
Analogous  to  the  “Open  Sky  Policy”,  the  first  factor  is  to  promote  domestic  financial 
liberalization  policy  and  a  well-integrated  regional  financial  system.  The  financial 
liberalization policy should aim to lessen the degree of domestic financial repression, thereby 
strengthening  financial  institutions’  performance,  and  broadening  their  offer  of  financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  products  and  services.  This  can  be  done  along  with  the  policy  to  enhance  financial 
connectivity by promoting the presence of capable players with regional focus. 
Under  our  mandate,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  aims  to  promote  financial  connectivity  through 
more connected banking networks and more integrated payment systems. Under the ASEAN 
Banking Integration Framework, countries in the CLMVT should gear up efforts to strengthen 
regional banking networks, which will serve a diverse range of businesses and local people 
to  gain  more  access  to  high  quality  banking  services  at  fair  prices.  I  am  glad  to  see  that 
several  banks  in  our  region  have  already  spread  their  wings  to  establish  representative 
offices,  branches  and  subsidiaries  in  neighboring  countries.  Last  month,  the  Thai  financial 
system had an opportunity to welcome a new representative office of Kanbawza bank from 
Myanmar. 
The  second  factor  is  for  our  countries  to  make  enough  investment  in  necessary 
financial  infrastructure.  Having  adequate  infrastructure,  including  a  backbone  payment 
system, a digital network and a credit bureau, will provide a sound basis to develop domestic 
financial  systems  and  facilitate  closer  financial  connectivity.  Technological  innovation, 
notably  Fintech,  also  allows  us  to  bypass  many  phases  of  traditional  financial  sector 
development. It is therefore crucial that we build necessary infrastructure corresponding to 
the changing financial landscape. 
In addition, as investment in these infrastructures, be it ATM pool or clearing and depository 
services,  typically  requires  a  large  amount  of  investment  costs  and  technical  expertise, 
countries  should  cooperate  to  build  shared  infrastructures  in  order  to  minimize  investment 
burdens. At present, under the National E-Payment Plan, Thailand is building the new retail 
electronic  payment  infrastructure,  which  can  be  used  to  promote  payment  systems 
connectivity for the AEC in general and for the CLMVT region in particular going forward. 
Under the ASEAN Payment Roadmap, our shared vision is to promote secure and efficient 
electronic payment channels, which will significantly lower business costs, reduce payment 
uncertainty, pave ways for growing e-commerce and promote financial inclusion. In this light, 
the  Bank  of  Thailand  is  keen  to  collaborate  with  our  regional  counterparts  to  promote 
payment systems connectivity within the region. 
The third foundation is the work towards standardized rules and regulations. Given our 
countries’  diverse  financial  systems,  the  harmonization  of  rules  and  standards  should  be 
given a priority so as to strengthen financial interconnectedness on a sustained basis. In the 
same  way  that  the  airline  industry  harmonizes  the  regulation  on  cross-border  supply  of 
services, the finance industry should aim at employing internationally accepted principles on 
finance, which already exist, to help drive harmonization of rules and regulations. 
Take  the  payment  systems  for  instance.  Currently,  different  legacy  systems  among  our 
countries  mean  that  we  are  not  able  to  “talk”  with  each  other  as  seamlessly  as  we  wish. 
Adhering to the same standards, such as the one on financial messaging schemes, can help 
overcome this challenge. At this stage, the work to achieve harmonization on diverse aspects 
of banking businesses is underway, and if completed, will make financial transactions within 
the region much easier. 
The fourth factor is human capital development. Financial professionals both working in 
the  finance  industry  and  regulators  must  be  well  equipped  with  a  set  of  skills  required  to 
serve  people  of  the  region.  The fast  pace  of technological  and  financial  innovation  indeed 
urges us to upgrade our capabilities in order to understand more complex financial activities 
and to cope with growing risks including those related to cyber security. At the same time, 
the  long-standing  challenges  to  promote  access  to  basic  financial  services  and  improve 
financial  literacy  of  the  people  at  large  remain  our  priorities.  For  this  reason,  we  need  to 
redouble our efforts to enhance our banking, finance and technological know-how. We also 
need to make sure that a wealth of knowledge and experiences is effectively shared among 
members of the CLMVT. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
The last one is to leverage on specialized financial services that some of our members 
are ready to offer. For Thailand, progress has been made to create financial ecosystem to 
meet  growing  regional  demand  for  specialized  financial  services.  In  the  capital  market, 
Thailand allows entities from CLMV countries to raise funds from the Thai capital market with 
the introduction of more accommodative rules on capital account and taxation. Since 2013, 
the Lao government and firms from Lao PDR have issued baht-denominated bonds, worth 
28 billion baht in total, to support large-scale infrastructure projects. In addition, the Bank of 
Thailand  supports  multinational  corporations  operating  in  the  region  to  establish  regional 
treasury  centers  in  Thailand.  As  of  now,  there  are  13  companies  holding  Treasury  Center 
licenses, of which 4 have been granted in the past 3 months. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The work to develop domestic financial sectors and strengthen financial connectivity 
will always be a work in progress. The Bank of Thailand is committed to working with 
our  counterparts  in  CLMV  countries  to  develop  the  financial  industry  and  enhance 
regional  financial  integration.  Much  progress  has  been  accomplished,  but  there  remain 
many more things that we can and should do to further promote more connected financial 
system. As we have done in the past decade, the Bank of Thailand will stand ready to work 
with our CLMV partners in various ways from development of human capital and regulatory 
frameworks to infrastructure building. 
If we can build strong domestic financial systems and regional financial connectivity, we will 
be able to reduce costs and create positive spillovers to several other industries. Livelihoods 
of our people will improve. Workers and investors can more easily and cheaply remit funds 
across countries. Merchants will find it easier to trade cross-border. The tourism sector will 
gain  even  more  momentum.  SMEs  will  be  able  to  utilize  e-commerce  and  e-payment  in 
selling their products regionally and globally. Financing of infrastructure projects can also be 
supported  by 
features. 
Furthermore,  financial  inclusion  and  financial  literacy  will  equip  households  and  small 
businesses with the needed resilience to go through the increasingly volatile world. 
financial  products  with  proper  risk  management 
long-term 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Just  ten  years  ago,  the  low-cost  airlines  were  still  at  their  infancy.  The  airlines  were  not 
household  brands,  and  it  would  be  difficult  for  most  of  us  to  imagine  how  fast  they  would 
grow  only  in  one  decade,  not  to  mention  the  positive  impacts  they  would  create  to  other 
industries and the wider public. The success of the airline industry, in turn, urges us to take 
action  to  tap  the  untapped  opportunities  of  several  other  service  industries  abound  in  our 
promising  region.  While  it  is  natural  to  give  emphasis  to  trade  and  investment 
connectivity, we must not forget the great potentials that the service sector have to 
offer to our region, especially financial services’ role to support trade and investment. 
Developing domestic financial sectors and enhancing financial connectivity are vital 
as sound infrastructure and conducive financial eco-system will enable us to ride on 
the growth potential while ensuring macro-financial stability.  
Building regional connectivity is like planting a tree. In the very same way that a root network 
helps the tree grow strong and branch out, financial connectivity is a necessary foundation 
which  nurtures  all  aspects  of  regional  economic  integration  –  be  it  trade,  investment  or 
tourism.  Without  a  strong  root  system,  it  will  certainly  be  difficult  for  our  tree  to  withstand 
economic storms in the increasingly volatile world. Like the planters who grow the tree with 
continued and delicate care, our concerted efforts from both public and private sectors are 
required to strengthen regional financial connectivity for the better livelihood of our people. 
Kob Khun Krub. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
