  Lim Hng Kiang: Sharpening risk management capabilities 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry  and  Deputy 
Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  43rd  Association  of  Banks  in 
Singapore Annual Dinner, Singapore, 28 June 2016. 
 Chairman and Council members of ABS, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to join you at the 43rd ABS Annual Dinner this evening. 
The global economy: slower for longer 
2. 
Since I addressed the ABS in 2014, the global economy has continued to recover. 
But growth has been lacklustre and uneven. Risks remain, not least the prospect of political 
instability and the possibility of a rise in protectionist tendencies in the major economies. 
3. 
In the near term, the unexpected results of the UK’s EU referendum or Brexit, would 
very  likely  continue  to  reverberate  across  financial  markets  around  the  world.  It  is  a  clear 
reminder  of  the  risks  that  we face  and  how financial  institutions  and  regulators must  work 
together to ensure the continued resilience of our banking system and financial sector. 
• 
MAS  had  been  prepared  for  this  possible  outcome,  and  had  taken  precautionary 
measures,  including  keeping  in  close  contact  over  the  past  weeks  with  banks  in 
Singapore, foreign central banks and regulators. Our markets continue to function in 
an orderly manner and our financial system remains sound. 
Beyond  the  immediate  market  turbulence,  Brexit  will  also  have  wider  economic 
4. 
implications  for  the  region  and  Singapore. While  it  is  too  early  to  make  a  firm  call  on  the 
longer term consequences of the event, it will certainly weigh on both market confidence and 
on an already listless global recovery. 
• 
Among the developed economies, the US has been most advanced in its recovery. 
This provided the impetus for the first interest rate hike in more than nine years in 
December  2015.  However, the  Federal  Reserve  has  since  held  back from further 
rate increases amid a moderation of growth in the US and in many other parts of the 
world, as well as a rise in financial market volatility. 
Some  central  banks  in  Europe  and  Japan  have  adopted  negative  policy  rates 
alongside other monetary easing measures to further support their economies, with 
mixed results. Central banks will have to be vigilant against undue financial market 
stresses arising from last Thursday’s referendum in the UK, and to be prepared for a 
period of heightened uncertainty that such an unprecedented event might entail. 
In Asia, China’s economic slowdown, softer commodities prices and weak demand 
in key export markets have been a drag on the region’s economies. Nonetheless, 
more  resilient  domestic  demand  conditions  have  continued  to  provide  support  to 
growth in many countries, including those in ASEAN. 
5. 
The  present  low-growth,  low-inflation  environment,  which  in  all  likelihood  will 
continue for some time, suggests that monetary policy settings in many parts of the world will 
remain accommodative, especially in advanced economies where inflation has been below 
target for a number of years. The prolonged period of low interest rates presents particular 
challenges for the banking sector. 
• 
First,  lower  interest  rates,  a  flattening  of  the  yield  curve,  and  lower  corporate 
investment mean net interest income and profits are being squeezed. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Second,  low  interest  rates  and  investment  returns  are  driving  a  search  for  yield 
among households, asset managers and institutional investors, which could lead to 
excessive risk-taking and growing financial vulnerabilities. 
Periodic bouts of heightened volatility in financial markets over the past few years, 
6. 
triggered  by  events  such  as  the  taper  tantrum,  normalisation  of  interest  rates  in  the  US, 
transition to a more market-based exchange rate system for the Chinese currency, and just 
days  ago,  the  UK’s  decision  to  leave  the  EU,  underscore  the  fragility  of  global  financial 
markets. At the same time, tightening financial conditions in the emerging market economies 
(EMEs)  as  a  result  of  a  stronger  US  dollar have  exposed  financial  vulnerabilities  due  to 
excessive corporate and household borrowings in some EMEs. 
7. 
This  means  that  banks  have  to  continue  to  update  their  risk  management 
capabilities to cope with a more uncertain environment. MAS as the financial regulator has 
also  been  strengthening  our  risk  surveillance  and  updating  aspects  of  our  regulatory 
framework. This evening I would like to touch on the following: 
• 
• 
• 
stress test exercises to ensure resilience to emerging risks; 
efforts to enhance cyber security; and 
guidelines to strengthen risk management of outsourcing arrangements. 
 Singapore banking system resilient under stress scenarios 
8. 
As  part  of  its  financial  stability  mandate,  MAS  conducts  an  annual  industry-wide 
stress test (IWST) of key financial institutions (FIs) in Singapore. When MAS first started the 
IWST in 2002, it was on a much smaller scale involving less than a handful of banks and a 
few  test  parameters.  Today,  the  IWST  exercise  involves  around  80  financial  institutions 
across the banking, insurance and capital market sectors. 
9. 
The  stress  test  involves  a  severe  adverse  scenario  incorporating  significant 
weakening  of  the  external  economic  environment  spilling  over  to  Singapore.  The  stress 
scenario includes 
• 
the  US,  Eurozone,  Japan  and  several  emerging  Asia  economies  slipping  into 
recession and China’s economic growth falling below 3%; 
sharp depreciation in regional currencies and halving of commodity prices; 
severe  and  protracted  recession  in  Singapore  with  unemployment  spiking  to 
historical highs and a large correction in the property market. 
10. 
Overall, the results indicate that our banking system remains resilient under such a 
stress scenario. Non-performing loans would increase but still remain below the peaks seen 
during  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis.  Under  the  prescribed  stress  scenario,  the  banks  also 
continue to meet Basel regulatory requirements comfortably and  would  still have sufficient 
capital and liquidity to cover potential loan losses and cash outflows. 
• 
The local banks and foreign bank subsidiaries have strong capital buffers, with their 
total capital adequacy ratios north of 15%, versus MAS’ regulatory requirement of 
10%.  In  addition,  the  local  banks’  all-currency  liquidity  coverage  ratio  (LCR)  are 
already  above  100%,  well  ahead  of  Basel’s  implementation  timeline  of  1  January 
2019. 
11. 
However,  we  should  not  be  complacent.  Banks  should  continue  to  improve  risk 
management processes, and watch out for risks arising from new and emerging trends such 
as  persistently 
financial 
institutions and markets, and the growing use of sophisticated technology. 
interconnectedness  between 
interest  rates, 
increasing 
low 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Stress  tests  will  become  an  increasingly  important  and  integral  part  of  risk 
12. 
management in the financial sector. 
• 
 For individual participating banks, the results facilitate discussions with MAS on their 
resilience  to  plausible  adverse  scenarios,  planned  responses,  and  actions  to 
mitigate risk management gaps identified from the exercise. 
For the banking sector, the stress test results help to identify common vulnerabilities 
across FIs, such as exposures to a particular sector or country. This helps banks 
enhance their risk mitigating responses. 
13. 
To make the exercise more useful, MAS encourages banks to compare the IWST 
results against their internal stress tests and sensitivity analyses and to assess whether the 
differences in scenarios and corresponding results reflect particular risk exposures faced by 
the bank. 
14. 
In addition to prescribed scenarios, MAS has also  been working with participating 
banks to conduct reverse stress tests. This involves banks describing scenarios under which 
their solvency could come under threat, thereby providing further insights on the risks that 
could impair the financial system. This allows MAS to assess the sensitivity of the financial 
system  to  different  stress  events  and  ensure  that  the  banking  system  remains  resilient  to 
severe but relevant stress scenarios. 
Strengthening cyber resilience 
Let me move on to cyber security and resilience. 
15. 
16. 
Cyber  security  has  emerged  as  a  major  priority  among  financial  institutions.  As 
banks increasingly leverage on digital technology platforms to process customer applications 
and  transactions,  raise  operational  efficiency  and  enhance  customer  engagement,  it  is 
paramount that banks continue to build cyber resilience in order to maintain credibility and 
customer  trust.  At  the  same  time,  cyber  attacks  are  becoming  more  frequent,  more 
sophisticated and more brazen. 
• 
Earlier  this  year,  security  software  company  Symantec  reported  more  than 
430 million new pieces of malware in 2015 alone, which was an increase by more 
than a third from 20141. Symantec also discovered a doubling of vulnerabilities in 
vendor software or zero-day vulnerabilities that could expose computer systems and 
networks to attacks by hackers. 
A  survey  by  Pricewaterhouse  Cooper2  reported  that  approximately  40%  more 
security  incidents  were  detected than  in  2015,  compared to  the  year  before.  This 
had  prompted  respondents  to  the  survey  to  increase  their  information  security 
budgets by close to 25% in 2015. 
More recently, millions of dollars were stolen from banks in different countries in a 
spate of audacious cyber heists, reminding us yet again of the pervasiveness and 
increasing sophistication of cyber threats. 
17. 
Cyber  criminals  and  hackers  often  probe  for  and  target  the  weakest  links  in  the 
system  to  gain  access  to  the  critical  IT  assets.  Within  an  FI,  the  weak  links  could  also 
manifest  in  the  carelessness  or  lack  of  cyber-security  awareness  by  individuals  or  lax 
processes, on top of vulnerabilities in adopted technology systems. 
                                                  
1   http://www.csoonline.com/article/3054570/security/symantec-zero-days-doubled-in-2015-more-companies-
hiding-breach-data.html. 
2   http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/cyber-security/information-security-survey.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
18. 
Banks therefore need to take a holistic approach to address cyber risk. A system of 
cyber-intelligence  exchange  to  identify  potential  vulnerabilities  and  frequent  testing  of  the 
robustness of cyber defences are key to this effort. 
19. 
MAS  has  been  working  closely  with  the  ABS  in  both  of  these  areas.  The  ABS 
Standing  Committee  on  Cyber  Security  (ABS  SCCS)  was  created  to  raise  overall  cyber 
awareness, to share cyber intelligence and build resilience among financial institutions. 
20. 
SCCS include: 
• 
Some  of  the  recent  initiatives  which  MAS  has  collaborated  closely  with  the  ABS 
ABS Penetration Testing Guidelines. These set out the industry best practices for 
the conduct of penetration testing. The results of members’ penetration tests have 
been shared with the ABS SCCS members to engender collective learning. 
Cyber  intelligence  and  information  sharing  through  various  channels,  such  as  the 
global  Financial  Services  Information  Sharing  and  Analysis  Centre.  Given  the 
interconnectedness of the financial eco-system, such information sharing is critical. 
 Enhancing risk management in outsourcing arrangements 
21. 
The  third  topic  is  Risk  Management  of  Outsourcing  Arrangements.  Banks  have 
entered into arrangements with third party service providers or other entities within banking 
group  to  perform  certain  operations  or  process  transactions.  These  include  information 
systems hosting, applications processing and other middle and back office operations. These 
outsourcing arrangements can bring cost reductions and productivity benefits. However, they 
may also expose the bank to reputational, compliance and operational risks. For instance, 
the  service  provider  might  fail  to  deliver  the  contracted  service,  experience  security 
breaches,  or  fall  short  of  the  legal  and  regulatory  standards  that  the  bank  is  required  to 
comply with for these operations. 
22. 
MAS  issued  a  set  of  Outsourcing  Guidelines  in  2004  to  promote  sound  risk 
management practices among financial institutions for their outsourcing arrangements. The 
key guiding principle is that MAS expects banks to manage outsourcing arrangements as if 
the services continue to be conducted in-house. 
23. 
some of the key changes. 
• 
MAS has consulted the industry on the revision of the guidelines. Let me highlight 
First, the Guidelines will set out MAS’ expectations on the use of cloud computing 
services by FIs. MAS recognises cloud services can offer various benefits such as 
scalability  and  advanced  functionalities,  and  is  amenable  to  banks  leveraging  on 
cloud services to fulfil their business and operational needs. MAS expects banks to 
ensure  that  their  risk  management  measures  are  commensurate  with  the  nature, 
scope and complexity of the cloud deployment models that they adopt. 
Second,  there  will  be  a  greater  emphasis  on  safeguarding  customer  information. 
MAS  views  seriously  the  responsibility  of  banks  to  safeguard  the  integrity  and 
security  of  customer  information  held  by  the  bank  and  its  service  providers.  To 
enhance  the  protection  of  critical  customer  information,  outsourcing  arrangements 
involving certain customer information will be subject to a higher standard of care. 
Third,  a  greater focus  on  FIs’  outsourcing  risk management framework.  FIs  were 
previously  expected  to  pre-notify  MAS  of  any  material  outsourcing  arrangements, 
and MAS would impose prudential requirements on the FI, where necessary. With 
the growing prevalence and complexity of outsourcing arrangements, such a case-
by-case approach has become less tenable. Instead, MAS will continue to assess 
and monitor the robustness of FIs’ outsourcing risk management frameworks while 
FIs will continue to be responsible for ensuring the safety of all of their outsourcing 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
arrangements. The revised Guidelines will no longer require FIs to pre-notify MAS of 
any outsourcing arrangements. 
24. 
The Guidelines are not intended to be exhaustive. MAS recognises that the diverse 
range of outsourcing arrangements and rapid pace of progress in digital technology preclude 
a  prescriptive  approach  to  risk management  practices for  outsourcing  or  a  one-size-fits-all 
set of rules. MAS will adopt a risk-based approach in implementing the guidelines. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
25. 
26. 
A tougher macrcoeconomic environment and growing complexity of operational and 
technology  risks  will  place  greater  demand  on  banks’  risk  management  and  compliance 
systems. Even as banks continue to upgrade their systems and processes to strengthen their 
risk  resilience,  it  is  equally  important  that  banks  regularly  test  the  robustness  of  their 
contingency  plans  and  capability  to  manage  tail  risk  events.  I  am  glad  that  the  industry 
continues to demonstrate its commitment to sound risk management with your investments 
in  systems,  technology  and  in  your  people.  MAS  appreciates  your close  co-operation to 
develop  and  update  our  risk  management  guidance,  and your  active  participation  in  IWST 
exercises. 
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
