   Erwin Riyanto: Unveiling macroprudential policy 
Speech by Mr Erwin Riyanto, Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the 10th International 
Conference  on  Bulletin  of  Monetary  Economics  and  Banking  and  book  launch,  Jakarta,  8 
August 2016. 
 Honorable,  
Governor of Bank Indonesia  
Bapak Agus Martowardojo  
Former Governors of Bank Indonesia  
Bapak Rachmat Saleh  
Bapak Arifin M Siregar  
Bapak Adrianus Mooy  
Bapak Syahril Sabirin  
Bapak Burhanuddin Abdullah  
Chairman of Indonesia Deposit Insurance Corporation  
Bapak Halim Alamsyah  
Directorate General of Culture Ministry of Education and Culture  
Bapak Hilmar Farid  
Head of Fiscal Policy Agency, Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Indonesia  
Bapak Suahasil Nazara  
Head of National Library of the Republic of Indonesia  
Bapak Muhammad Syarif Bando  
Head of National Archives of the Republic of Indonesia  
Mustari Irawan  
Former Bank Indonesia Board Members  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen  
Assalamu’alaikum Wr. Wb, 
Introduction – greeting & objectives  
1. It is a great honor for me to be here in this 10th International Conference and Book Launch 
event. Please allow me to divert your attention to review the next book entitled “mengupas 
kebijakan makroprudensial” or “unveiling macroprudential policy”. This book I believe is not 
just  any  other  book.  It  is  the  first  book  ever  published  about  macroprudential  policy  in 
Indonesia. It is one that is meant to educate the public with a better understanding of what is 
macroprudential policy, why is it important, what are the policy instruments, how it interacts 
with other policies and who should better have the mandate.  
2. Since work in the macroprudential field has only gained momentum globally following the 
2008 crisis, much of the concepts are still evolving. In this book, we will come across many 
new financial terminologies that in principle have already been around for some time but have 
not  yet  explored.  To  name  a  few  of  the  new  terminologies  are  systemic  risk,  contagion, 
interconnectedness, shocks, vulnerabilities, idiosyncratic vs cross-sectional risk dimensions 
and macroprudential. While macroprudential policy and the aforementioned terminologies are 
more understood by those directly involved in the field, there is a growing need to familiarize 
the notion to the public-at-large.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   3. Why? because evidently, implementation of macroprudential policy directly touches upon 
financial agents and more than often requires inter-agency support for its effectiveness. With 
proper  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  macroprudential  framework  including  the 
transmission  of  systemic  risk,  the  public  can  gauge  their  contribution  to  preserve  financial 
stability.  In  this  case,  limiting  the  tendency  for  risk  exuberance  behavior.  Furthermore,  the 
recent enactment of the Law on Financial System Crisis Prevention and Resolution not only 
compels the public to be equipped with a stronger understanding of systemic risk but also with 
regards to the importance of institutional arrangement and crisis management protocol.  
4. The Law on Financial System Crisis Prevention and Resolution provides a legal standing 
for  the  institutional  arrangements  between  BI,  OJK,  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Deposit 
Insurance as part of The Financial System Stability Committee.  
The Act stipulates the roles of each institution in deliberating coordination to safeguard financial 
system  stability,  mitigate  financial  system  crisis  and  handling  of  systemic  bank  problems; 
during normal and financial system crisis conditions. The Act was constructed on the basic 
principle of alienating the use of tax-payers money. This is achieved with reference to Basel III 
principles that focus heavily on mitigating systemic risk and strengthening banks’ resilience, 
particularly the ability of systemic banks to bail itself.  
The basic concept of macroprudential policy and systemic risk 
5.  The  next  question  is  then  what  is  systemic  risk?  What  is  macroprudential  policy? 
Macroprudential policy has been well defined in the IMF, BIS and FSB’s documents, as well 
as published papers. There are at least 3 (three) key elements to describe macroprudential 
policy. First, it aims to safeguard financial system stability. Second, the focus is on system-
wide perspectives instead of individual financial institution’s safety and soundness level. Third 
and most central element is that it aims to limit the build-up of systemic risk.  
6. Systemic risk itself is known as the risk of widespread disruption to the provision of financial 
services, which can cause serious negative consequences for the real economy. Systemic risk 
can  be recognized  through  vulnerabilities  related  to  the  build-up  of risks over  time  or from 
interconnectedness and the distribution of risks within a financial system at any given point in 
time.  By  mitigating  systemic  risk,  macroprudential  measures  ultimately  aim  to  reduce  the 
frequency and severity of financial crises.  
7. How can this be achieved? Lessons from the 2008 crisis taught us that microprudential 
policy  alone  tends  to  overlook  the  build-up  of  risk  taking  behavior  of  financial  institutions. 
Furthermore, long periods of low interest rates and a single monetary objective geared towards 
low inflation may also give rise to the build-up of systemic risk when uncoupled with sufficient 
prudential measures. Therefore, macroprudential policy aims to maintain a balance between 
macroeconomic and microeconomic objectives through implementation of prudential principles 
in the financial system. The notion is to limit risk-taking behavior of financial agents.  
The history of macroprudential policy in Indonesia  
8.  While  much  attention  and  work  on  addressing  systemic  risk  through  macroprudential 
policies became viral after the financial global crisis, a number of countries in the emerging 
market have used macroprudential tools well before. Bank Indonesia has implicitly paid due 
consideration and acknowledgement to the importance of macroprudential aspects in terms of 
maintaining financial system stability since early 2000. Such acknowledgment gave rise to the 
establishment of the Financial System Stability Bureau in 2003.  
9.  The  assessment  on  financial  system  stability  has  also  been  deliberated  through  the 
publication of the Financial Stability Review every semester since 2003. Inevitably, our early 
experience in managing financial stability following the Asian financial crisis in 1999 managed 
to salvage the Indonesian economy from adverse impact of the 2008 turmoil.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Why the central bank has an important role in macroprudential policy? 
10.  Now,  one  might  question,  who  should  be  most  suited  to  receive  the  mandate  for 
macroprudential  policy?  Observably,  there  are  considerable  differences  in  the  institutional 
arrangements across countries as there is no “one size fits all”. However, in most jurisdictions, 
regardless  of  the  type  of  institutional  setup,  the  central  bank  is  given  an  important  role, 
including veto powers in a committee setup.  
11. The pivotal role of the central bank is mainly supported by the uniqueness of the central 
banks  function  as  lender  of  last  resort  and  as  an  independent  authority.  The  ability  of  the 
central  bank  to  create  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  is  a  unique  advantage  in  preserving 
financial stability. The central bank as monetary authority also has considerable information 
advantage concerning the complex interactions of the financial intermediary system and the 
operation of the real economy. Such advantage would allow the central bank to gauge potential 
systemic  risk,  for  example  through  calibrating  the  impact  of  macro-stress  scenarios  to  the 
resilience of financial intermediaries. Furthermore, the primary objective of the central bank to 
achieve price stability, also goes hand in hand with financial stability; that is, they mutually 
reinforce  each  other  in  most  cases.  Another  unique  function  of  the  central  bank  is  in  the 
payment systems. The central bank has the information and expertise to identify potential risks 
and deadlocks in the payment system, which may cause serious disruptions to the financial 
system.  
Macroprudential policy mandate & the MP framework in Bank Indonesia 
12. Based on a joint progress report of the FSB, IMF and BIS to the G20, effectiveness of 
macroprudential policy is served by providing the relevant authority with a clear mandate. In 
this case, Bank Indonesia has the mandate to perform the role of a systemic regulator and to 
exercise macroprudential supervision as stipulated in the Act No.21 of 2011 concerning the 
Financial Services Authority. Given the role of Bank Indonesia as the systemic regulator, we 
continue to strengthen our expertise in monitoring systemic risk through developments in our 
macroprudential  policy  framework.  The  framework  must  provide  clear,  transparent  and 
accountable objectives with a focus on maintaining financial system stability.  
13.  The  macroprudential  policy  framework  maintains  financial  system  stability  through  four 
objectives that are: (i) early identification and mitigation of systemic risk, (ii) minimization of 
financial  imbalances  to  improve  the  quality  and  soundness  of  intermediary  functions,  (iii) 
efficient financial systems and (iv) improving access to finance by expanding SMEs access 
and financial inclusion. In an emerging economy, improving access to finance is a continuous 
effort integral to financial market development; either through financial broadening or financial 
deepening. It also aids in mitigating systemic risk that may arise from a financial system that 
is still concentrated in a particular corporate sector and certain segments of society.  
14. In order to operationalize these macroprudential objectives, there are 4 main elements to 
focus  on  that  are:  (i)  identification  of  the  sources  of  systemic  risk;  (ii)  macroprudential 
surveillance  through  monitoring  and  analyzing  identified  risks;  (iii)  formulation  of  policy 
responses  through  implementation  of  macroprudential  tools;  and  (iv)  crisis  management 
protocol.  
Sources of systemic risk: shocks and vulnerabilities 
15.  The  process  of  identifying  sources  of  systemic  risk  involves  identifying  shocks  and 
vulnerabilities. Materialization of systemic risk is triggered by an interaction between shocks 
and  vulnerabilities.  In  this  case,  a  shock  may  come  through  changes  in  macro-economic 
conditions. Meanwhile, vulnerabilities are associated with pre-existing fragilities of the financial 
system which will amplify and propagate the initial shocks to the financial system. Examples 
of vulnerabilities include high levels of leverage, maturity transformation, interconnectedness, 
and  complexity.  Bank  Indonesia  is  currently  developing  the  Balanced  Approach  Method  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   identify  the  key  source  of  potential  systemic  risks  that  will  be  considered  as  top  priority  to 
monitor and address.  
16.  It  is  important  to  highlight  that  while  shocks  are  inevitable,  identifying  and  addressing 
vulnerabilities becomes the key to ensuring robustness of the financial system. In addition, a 
number of early warning indicators and methodologies can be useful to assess vulnerabilities 
well  before  the  emergence  of  stress.  In  this  case,  Bank  Indonesia  has  employed  many 
indicators and developed several models to detect the vulnerabilities in the financial system as 
well as the build-up of systemic risk. We have also developed models to assess the systemic 
impact  and  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  to  systemic  risk,  such  as  the  Indonesian 
Financial Cycle as imbalances indicator, Financial System Stability Index as stress indicators, 
macro stress test and also top-down bank stress test models.  
17. Given that vulnerabilities and systemic risks may arise from different sectors as well as 
changes in market behavior and in macro-economic conditions, Bank Indonesia must have 
access to a wide-range of information sources. This includes the authority to conduct off-site 
and on-site examination if needed. It is worth highlighting that there is a considerable difference 
in  the  main  objective  of  Bank  Indonesia’s  examination  to  the  OJK.  That  is  to  identify  the 
potential systemic risk as an impact of macroeconomic condition to the bank’s resiliency, and 
its potential contagion impact to the industry. Furthermore, on-site examination will have an 
objective  to  ensure  compliance  of  Bank  Indonesia  regulation  covering  monetary,  payment 
system and macroprudential.  
Macroprudential policy instruments 
18. Furthermore, following the identification of possible systemic risks, macroprudential policy 
instruments  are  tailored  to  address  such  risks  in  both  time  and  cross  section  dimensions. 
Macroprudential instruments in the time dimension, aim at increasing resilience to shocks and 
contain pro-cyclical build-up of systemic risk. The instruments often used include (i) capital 
based tools (ii) asset side tools or loan restrictions and (iii) liquidity related tools. In a cross 
section dimension, macroprudential tools aim to reduce contagion risks by improving resilience 
of  systemic  institutions  for  example,  via  additional  capital  surcharge  and  loss  absorbency 
requirements.  Other  prudential  tools  in  the  cross  section  dimension  include  increasing risk 
weights and large exposure limits.  
19. Overtime, Bank Indonesia has implemented a broad range of macroprudential instruments 
including capital-related tools as required by Basel III such as Counter Cyclical Capital Buffer 
as  well  as  asset-side  tools  and  liquidity-related  tools.  Asset-side  tools  include  certain  loan 
restrictions,  such  as  LTV  caps  and  to  boost  credit  have  put  in  place  incentives  and 
disincentives in the form of reserve requirements linked to loan to funding ratios. To strengthen 
corporates resilience to exchange rate shocks, Bank Indonesia also introduced requirements 
for hedging ratio and forex liquidity ratio.  
Macroprudential policy interaction with others policies 
20.  In  the  areas  where  macroprudential  policy  interacts  with  microprudential  policy,  Bank 
Indonesia and OJK work hand in hand in formulating the optimum policies. For instance, Bank 
Indonesia has contributed work and research to the formulation of LCR requirements with OJK 
and in the identification of systemically important bank as mandated by the Law on Financial 
System Crisis Prevention and Resolution. Bank Indonesia and OJK have also established a 
bilateral coordination framework to facilitate and to optimize cooperation and coordination in 
carrying out the function, duties, and authorities of Bank Indonesia and OJK.  
21. Recognising the potential interaction of macroprudential policy with other policies that also 
have a bearing on systemic risk, requires strengthening of inter-agency coordination. Such 
interaction between macroprudential policy not only applies with microprudential policy but also 
with monetary and fiscal policies. As mentioned by the IMF in their recent stock taking paper, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   boundaries  and  interactions  between  policies  are  complex  and  can  give  raise  to  both 
complementarities  and  tensions  that  may  need  to  be  resolved.  For  example,  via  suitable 
institutional arrangements which we effectively already have in place.  
Closing remarks  
22. To conclude, it is my greatest hope that this book can serve as a gateway for the public to 
better  understand  macroprudential  terms  and  concepts  as  well  as  its  main  objective  in 
mitigating systemic risk. With better understanding of the systemic risk transmission, we as 
individuals can help contribute in preserving financial system stability by limiting exuberance 
risk taking behaviour. Hopefully, despite our inability to read the crystal ball of the next crisis, 
we  would  presumably  have  better  ammunition  to  deal  with  the  headwinds  and  financial 
turbulences that are yet to come.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
