   Turalay Kenç: The Turkish economic outlook and monetary policy – 
challenges and policy response 
Remarks by Mr Turalay Kenç, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, 
at the EU Ambassadors Meeting, Ankara, 28 January 2016. 
 I would like to start by thanking His Excellency Ambassador Cornelis van Rij for the opportunity 
to  share  with  such  distinguished  audience  some  views  about  the  Turkish  economy,  the 
challenges stemming from a very volatile external environment, and the policy approach that 
has  been  implemented  to  cope  with  these  challenges. The Turkish  economy  has  shown  a 
relatively robust performance in the face of major external and internal shocks. GDP growth is 
estimated at around 4 percent in 2015 with an expected gradual strengthening of economic 
activity in 2016 and in 2017. The rise in GDP growth rate observed in 2015 is mostly attributed 
to  strong  private  consumption.  Private  investment  recorded  a  moderate  recovery.  The 
challenging  external  conditions  especially  geopolitical  events  in  the  region  have  adversely 
affected exports. However, the economic recovery in most EU member states enabled Turkey 
to largely compensate its loss in other exports markets as Turkey increased exports to the EU 
countries by more than 10 percent in euro terms in 2015. This outcome also highlights Turkish 
exporters’ resiliency in adopting to adverse economic conditions.  
Of course, probably the most significant development of the last year or so has been the sharp 
decline in oil prices. Turkey, being an energy importing country benefited from lower oil prices 
in many dimensions. The current account deficit fell from $52 billion in June 2014 to below 
$35 billion in November 2015 in 12 month rolling terms. This sharp improvement in the current 
account  balances  is  also  greatly  helped  by  prudent  macro-economic  polices  including 
monetary, macro-prudential  and fiscal  policies. Tight monetary  policy,  well-targeted macro-
prudential measures and strong fiscal balances have all contributed to lower levels of domestic 
demand by stabilizing loan growth and reducing risk taking behavior. 
Going forward, the current levels in oil prices and depressed producer prices in most part of 
the  world  due  to  weak  economic  activity  are  expected  to  lead  to  further  improvements  in 
external balances. Therefore, it is highly likely that Turkey will record a current account deficit 
of below 4 percent of its Gross Domestic Product in 2016, representing a major achievement 
in satisfying the norm of the European Union’s Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure. 
Unlike  these  positive  developments  in  the  economy,  inflation  increased  and  its  outlook 
worsened in 2015 reflecting the pass-through from the TL depreciation, elevated food inflation, 
and markedly increased minimum wages. These factors together with some deterioration in 
inflation expectations led the MPC to revise its inflation forecasts for 2016 and 2017 up to 
7.5 percent and 6 percent respectively and postpone the projected realization year of the 5% 
target to 2018.    
Going ahead, we see there are three potential developments which would improve the inflation 
outlook a great deal. First, the latest improvement in the external balances together with the 
already strong fiscal balances is likely to boost the effectiveness of the monetary policy. The 
ongoing  tight  monetary  policy  stance  is  then  likely  lead  to  lower  inflation  than  otherwise. 
Second,  in  coming  years  the  implementation  of  the  structural  reforms  identified  in  the 
10th Development Plan aims to address the structural causes of inflation and hence is expected 
to  support  disinflation  process.  Finally,  the  Food  Committee  (the Food  and  Agricultural 
Products Markets Monitoring and Evaluation Committee) was founded in December 2014 with 
an objective of identifying policies to alleviate the contribution of structural and cyclical factors 
to elevated food inflation. 
Of course, the credibility of monetary policy is key to achieving price stability. Therefore, let me 
devote the final part of my talk to explaining our policy strategy to cope with current challenges. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Like  most  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  Turkey  has  also  faced  tightening  external 
financial  conditions  since  May  2013.  The  normalization  of  US  monetary  policy,  diverging 
monetary policies of advanced economies, uncertainty in commodity prices and the risk of 
China’s economic hard-landing all have created volatile global financial markets and widened 
spreads  for  EMEs.  The  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  has 
introduced  several  mutually 
complementary policies and announced a “road map” document back in August 2015 outlining 
monetary policy, foreign currency liquidity and financial stability related measures. 
The aim of the CBRT’s road map is to improve the resiliency of the economy to external shocks 
through  (i)  maturity  lengthening  –  encouraging  banks  to  shift  their  non-core  liabilities  from 
short-term to long-term; (ii) providing incentives to banks for borrowing and lending directly 
from and to the Central Bank on times when foreign players are reluctant to engage with banks 
in Turkey due to heightened volatility in global markets; (iii) bolstering safety-nets – making 
sure that the banking sector has access to adequate foreign exchange liquidity in times of 
market stress; (iv) supporting financial stability – providing incentives to banks to improve loan 
to  deposit  ratios;  and  (v)  simplifying  the  monetary  policy  framework  to  improve  the 
communication of the monetary policy stance. All but the interest rate corridor simplification 
step on the roadmap have already been taken and the focus is now firmly on fine-tuning their 
parameters. 
Overall, these measures ease the policy tradeoffs posed by the excessive volatility in cross 
border flows, enabling the interest rate policy to concentrate on the primary objective of price 
stability.  So  far  the  financial  market  performance  of  Turkey  suggests  that  the  measures 
undertaken since August 2015 have helped Turkey outperform many peer EM countries. Of 
course, on the way, Turkey also enjoyed the benefits of lower oil prices relatively more than 
many EMEs and reduced political uncertainty after the general election result in November 
2015. 
The  banking  sector  maintains  its  strong  and  sound  position  as  banks  in  Turkey  are  well-
capitalized with high quality and highly liquid assets and continue to offer solid rates of return 
on  capital.  As  a  result  the  banking  sector  still  provides  a  reasonable  loan  growth  for  the 
economy despite heightened uncertainty in global markets.  
To conclude given the ongoing challenging external conditions it will be essential to continue 
to  implement  a  tight  and  flexible  monetary  policy  in  order  to  lower  inflation  in  a  volatile 
environment. Meanwhile, taking liquidity stabilizing measures for the foreign currency market 
and ensuring the stability of the financial system are key to alleviate policy tradeoffs. Last, but 
not the least, maintaining the fiscal discipline; and adhering strictly to the announced structural 
reform agenda in order to lift potential growth in accordance with the country’s needs remains 
the key to stability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
