  John McDermott: How the Bank formulates and assesses its monetary 
policy decisions 
Speech  by  Dr  John  McDermott,  Assistant  Governor  and  Chief  Economist  of  the  Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand, to the Manawatu Chamber of Commerce, Palmerston North, 13 July 
2016. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for the opportunity to meet with you this afternoon. 
My comments today will focus on the process of making a monetary policy decision. I do not 
intend to send any particular messages about upcoming monetary policy announcements. 
Seven  times  a  year,  the  Bank  announces  a decision  to  set  the Official  Cash  Rate  (OCR). 
Four of these announcements are accompanied by a Monetary Policy Statement. 
Each  OCR  decision  and  Statement  publication  is  a  complex  process  involving  many  staff 
from across the Bank. The significant amount of background work reflects the uncertainty we 
face when setting monetary policy to achieve the objectives of the Policy Targets Agreement 
(PTA). 
As one example of this uncertainty, major economic data are often released with a significant 
lag, and remain subject to revision for some time. This makes interpreting even the current 
economic environment difficult. 
Inflation-targeting  central  banks  have  adopted  some  common  features  in  their  decision 
making  to  deal  with  uncertainty.  These  include  policy  discussions  within  a  committee 
environment, consideration of a wide set of information, a focus on transparency and clear 
communication  to  stakeholders,  and  generally  modest  moves  in  policy  settings  with  the 
chance for regular review. 
Today I want to focus on the Bank’s approach to two of these elements – committee decision 
making and reviewing our forecasts. My comments summarise some recent and upcoming 
Bulletin articles.1  
Making a monetary policy decision 
The  Bank  has  used  committees  in  its  monetary  policy  decision  making  process  for  many 
years.  Historically,  their  use  has  been  most  prevalent  in  policy  discussion  and  advice.2  In 
2013, the Bank maintained the advisory role of its committees, and strengthened the role of 
committees in making a monetary policy decision.3  
These  changes  mean  the  Bank  now  relies  less  on  the  single  decision  maker  model.  The 
Governing Committee was formed, with this committee responsible for reaching a decision 
                                                
1  See: Lees (2016), ‘Assessing forecast performance’, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, Vol. 79. No. 10. 
June  2016;  Reid  (forthcoming),  ‘Evaluating  the  Reserve  Bank’s  forecasting  performance’,  Reserve  Bank  of 
New  Zealand  Bulletin;  and  Richardson  (2016),  ‘Behind  the  scenes  of  an  OCR  decision  in  New  Zealand’ 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, Vol. 79. No. 11. July 2016. 
2  For a description of previous approaches to decision making at the Bank see: Brash (2001), ‘Making monetary 
policy: a look behind the curtains’, remarks by Donald Brash, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 
1 March 2001; RBNZ (2007), ‘Submission to the Finance and Expenditure Committee inquiry into the future 
monetary policy framework’. 
3  See Wheeler (2013), ‘Decision making in the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’, remarks by Graeme Wheeler, 
Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 7 March 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  on  the  appropriate  setting  for  monetary  policy.  The  Governing  Committee  consists  of  the 
Governor, the Deputy Governors and the Assistant Governor. The Governor retains statutory 
responsibility for policy decisions. 
The Governor’s decision making responsibility is similar to the arrangement at the Bank of 
Canada,  which  has  a  single  decision  maker  model  in  its  legislation,  but  makes  policy 
decisions  within  a  committee  framework.  Making  a  decision  by  committee  allows  the 
consideration  of  a  greater  range  of  viewpoints.  A  group  of  individuals  with  a  diverse  and 
differing  set  of  useful  information  should  make  generally  more  informed  decisions  than  an 
individual.4  
The  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  acts  as  an  advisor  to  the  Governing 
Committee on monetary policy issues. The MPC is made up of several senior staff (including 
the Governors) and two external advisors. 
After  extensive  background  analysis,  members  of  the  Bank’s  staff,  the  MPC  and  the 
Governing Committee work together over a 9-day period towards making a monetary policy 
decision and publishing a Statement (figure 1). 
In the first three days of this process, the Governing Committee has discussed with the staff 
and MPC: current economic and market developments; an initial set of economic projections; 
key  risks  and  judgements  that  make  up  the  projections;  and  a  number  of  alternative 
scenarios  and  policy  options.  This  is  supplemented  by  a  range  of  additional  information 
relevant  to  the  policy  outlook,  including  information  on  trends  in  household  and  business 
credit and unobservable variables like the output gap, inflation expectations and the neutral 
interest  rate.  Particular  effort  has  been  made  over  these  three  days  to  ensure  a  diverse 
range of views and opinions have been heard.5 The set of meetings conclude with a final set 
of  conditional  projections  for  the  economy  over  the  next  2–3  years  and  a  conditional 
projection for the 90-day bank bill rate. 
The monetary policy decision making process in New Zealand 
Figure 1 
 After  consideration  of  this  information,  the  Governing  committee  meet  on  day  five  of  this 
process to reach a broad range of decisions on monetary policy. The meeting has a number 
of goals. One aspect of the decision-making process is to reach a decision on the OCR. This 
decision is often the one that gains the most public focus. 
                                                
4  For a discussion of theory and evidence, see Blinder (2004), ‘The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes 
Modern’, Yale University Press. 
5  For a full description of this process see Richardson (2016). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However it is not just today’s OCR, but the full outlook for interest rates, which is important 
for influencing today’s consumer and business behaviour and ultimately inflation. As a result, 
the  Governing  Committee  also  puts  significant  focus  in  its  deliberations  on  reaching  a 
consensus  on the  outlook for  interest rates  consistent  with  the  objectives  of the  PTA. The 
Governing Committee also works towards a consensus on what key messages to include in 
the Statement. 
The meeting begins with the Governor summarising the written advice of the MPC (including 
members of the Governing Committee). The Governors then discuss the MPC advice, their 
own views, and points of difference. If there are competing viewpoints within the Governing 
Committee,  the  members  have  an  opportunity  to  reconsider  their  positions.  Once  the 
Governing  Committee  has  reached  a  consensus  on  the  range  of  policy  considerations the 
Governor then formalises the decision 
The  Governing  Committee  is  a  collegial  committee,  in  that  it  aims  to  reach  consensus  on 
appropriate policy settings through debate. The collegial approach is advantageous in that is 
helps the Bank to sharpen the communication of a policy decision. 
If  the  Governing  Committee  is  unable  to  reach  a  consensus  view  on  the  range  of  policy 
considerations, it will go with the majority view if one exists. If the views are balanced, the 
Governor will have final say on the policy outcome. Once a decision has been finalised, each 
member of the committee adopts the outcome as their own position when speaking in public, 
ensuring a consistent message and unified voice. 
Reviewing our performance 
Making  a  decision  in  a  committee  setting  is  one  way  the  Bank  deals  with  the  uncertainty 
faced  in  setting  policy.  Another  way  to  deal  with  this  uncertainty  is  to  regularly  review  our 
policy decisions and framework. This helps the Bank improve its state of knowledge of the 
economy and learn from any past errors. 
A number of reviews have been conducted on the elements of the Bank’s monetary policy 
framework. These include formal reviews, like in 2001 and 2007.6 In addition, the Bank often 
invites other central bank and academic economists to observe the decision-making process 
and  provide  comments  on  potential  areas  of  improvement.7  A  recent  study  by  the  BIS 
indicated that the Bank has self-commissioned more reviews than any other central bank.8  
One  further  avenue  of  review  is  to  assess  our  own  forecasting  performance.9  Reviews  of 
forecast performance help to update our understanding of economic relationships, evaluate 
risks to the current outlook and identify areas where we could improve our accuracy. 
The  Bank  will  always  make  forecast  errors,  reflecting  the  uncertainties  in  assessing  the 
current state of the economy and its outlook. For example, the vast majority of forecasters 
were  unlikely  to  have  been  able  to  accurately  predict  the  sharp  decline  in  oil  and  export 
commodity prices that occurred over 2014 and 2015 – one factor that has led to current low 
                                                
6  See:  RBNZ  (2001).  ‘The  monetary  policy decision-making process’,  Independent  review  of  the operation  of 
monetary policy supporting paper; RBNZ (2007) above. 
7  These  visitors  will  often  present  a  paper  containing  views  on  the  decision  making  process  and 
recommendations to improve the process. 
8  BIS (2016), ‘Self-initiated reviews of the central bank’s policy performance’, background note for the February 
2016 meeting of the Central Bank Governance Group. 
9  Past  forecast  performance  reviews  include:  McCaw  S  and  Ranchhod  S  (2002),  ‘The  Reserve  Bank’s 
forecasting  performance’,  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  Bulletin,  Vol.65,  No.4;  Turner  J  (2006),  ‘An 
assessment of recent Reserve Bank forecasts’, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, Vol.69, No.3; Labbe 
F and Pepper H (2009), ‘Assessing recent external forecasts’, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, Vol.72, 
No.4. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  inflation. To further illustrate the point, figure 2 shows the Bank’s central outlook for annual 
GDP growth and the error bands around this estimate implied by our past forecast errors. 
June Statement annual GDP growth forecast and error bands 
Figure 2 
Note: The error bands displayed above reflect the direction and magnitude of the Bank’s 
past annual GDP growth forecast errors at different forecast horizons, calculated over the 
period 2010q1-2016q1. To set the range of the error bands, the Bank’s forecast (in blue) 
is adjusted for bias using the Bank’s mean forecast error at each relevant horizon. The 
error  bands are  then set symmetrically  relative  to  this  bias  adjusted  forecast,  using  the 
standard deviation of the Bank’s past forecast errors at each relevant horizon. The dark 
shaded  areas  cover  +/-  one  standard  deviation.  The  light  shaded  areas  cover  an 
additional +/- one standard deviation. 
 To say the potential for forecast errors is large is an understatement. So why do  we even 
forecast at all? There are two  important reasons. First, monetary policy influences activity, 
including  wage-  and  price-setting  behaviour,  with  a  lag.  Second,  it  is  the  outlook  for  the 
economy that matters for the economic behaviour of firms and households today. Therefore, 
we need an understanding of the likely direction of the economy over the next few years, to 
guide our monetary policy strategy to achieve price stability. 
We do a number of things to deal specifically with the uncertainty of our forecasts. First of all, 
we use a range of additional information to supplement our projections and guide our policy 
decisions,  rather  than  relying  solely  on  model  driven  forecasts.  This  includes  market 
intelligence from our business liaison programme and the 120 or so presentations we make 
around the country to business and other groups each year. 
Second,  we  aim  to  highlight  the  conditional  nature  of  our  forecasts,  and  how  we  would 
respond  if  conditions  developed  differently.  That  way,  financial  market  participants  can 
anticipate our likely response when the economy evolves in an unexpected way. This helps 
to shift the yield curve towards levels consistent with medium-term price stability without the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  constant  need  for  comment  from  the  Bank.  The  Bank’s  approach  to  forward  guidance  is 
something I talked about in a speech earlier in the year.10  
Third,  we  regularly  investigate  what  we  can  learn  from  our  past  judgements.  Table  1 
presents the Bank’s forecast errors on key macroeconomic variables since the first quarter of 
2010. The Bank’s projections have been inaccurate in two specific respects over this period. 
CPI inflation has been consistently weaker than forecast, while the New Zealand dollar has 
been stronger than forecast. 
Mean forecast error (Monetary Policy Statement forecasts) 
Table 1 
 
Note:  This  table  presents  the  mean  errors  of  the  forecasts  from  the  Bank’s  Statement  made  over  the  period 
2010q1 to 2016q1. CPI inflation, 90-day rate and GDP errors are in percentage points and the TWI errors are 
index points. A positive number implies the outturns were lower than the Bank had forecast. 
One way to assess what we can learn from forecast errors is to benchmark our performance 
against  other  forecasts.  Lees  (2016)  and  Reid  (2016)  benchmark  the  Bank’s  forecasting 
performance against other forecasters and the Bank’s own statistical models respectively. If 
the  Bank’s  forecasts  are  significantly  less  accurate  than  other  forecasters  or  our  own 
statistical models, then we can  likely gain insights from these sources to improve our own 
modelling and forecasting framework. 
Generally,  the  Bank’s  recent  forecasts  have  performed  well  relative  to  these  benchmarks. 
Looking  at  the  period  since  the  financial  crisis,  the  Bank  has  been  one  of  the  better 
forecasters of New Zealand macroeconomic variables. In addition, the Bank’s forecasts are 
of  a  similar quality  to those  produced  by  our  suite  of statistical  models. Overall,  the  Bank, 
other forecasters and the Bank’s statistical models did not foresee the persistent weakness 
in  inflation  or  the  persistent  strength  in  the  New  Zealand  dollar.  This  is  a  reflection  of  the 
inherent uncertainty that analysts and policy makers have to deal with when forecasting the 
New Zealand economy. 
Despite this, the persistent period of weaker-than-expected inflation remains a focus for the 
Bank. Low inflation has been a common experience in most advanced and many emerging 
economies.  The  Bank  has  shifted  its  resources  in  recent  years  towards  more  fully 
understanding this low inflation environment, and this is a strategic priority in the Bank’s 2016 
Statement of Intent. 
The Bank has completed a range of research topics that have shed some light on the drivers 
of  low  inflation.  This  includes  an  assessment  of  international  influences  (including  the 
exchange  rate),11  a  review  of  our  frameworks  for  estimating  key  unobservable  variables,12 
                                                
10  McDermott (2016), ‘Forward guidance in New Zealand’, remarks by John McDermott, Assistant Governor of 
the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 4 February 2016. 
11  Richardson (2015), ‘Can global economic conditions explain low inflation in New Zealand’, Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand Analytical Note AN2015/03. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  assessing  the  inflationary  consequences  of  different  migration  drivers  and  strong  labour 
supply  growth,13  and  highlighting  the  potential  impact  of  adaptive  inflation  expectations  on 
current inflation.14 The Bank will continue to update the public on the drivers of low inflation in 
speeches, research articles and the Statement. 
Conclusion 
Each OCR decision and Statement publication involves a lot of work from a number of staff 
around the Bank. This staff involvement reflects the inherent uncertainty the Bank is faced 
with when making a monetary policy decision. We have set up processes to help deal with 
this uncertainty and improve the quality of our monetary policy decisions. 
For  much  of  the  Bank’s  history,  advisory  committees  have  been  a  key  element  of  this 
process.  Since  2013,  the  Bank  has  given  a  greater  role  to  committees  in  monetary  policy 
decision  making.  The  Governing  Committee  works  together  to  reach  a  decision  on  the 
appropriate setting of the OCR and the key contents of the Statement. 
A  further  important  element  of  the  Bank’s  decision-making  process  is  the  opportunity  for 
constant  review.  Since  the  financial  crisis,  inflation  has  persistently  been  weaker  than 
forecast,  and the  Bank  has  continually  reviewed  its forecast  performance  over  this  period. 
Recent  research  has  shown  that  the  Bank’s  forecast  performance  has  been  reasonable 
when compared to a number of benchmarks. This suggests that there were no obvious major 
sources  of  new  information  that  the  Bank  could  have  used  from  these  benchmarks  in  its 
decision making. 
Even  so,  the  persistent  period  of  weaker-than-expected  inflation  remains  a  focus  for  the 
Bank,  and  the  Bank’s  research  program  is  shedding  light  on  the  drivers  of  low  inflation. 
Increasing our understanding of low inflation is a strategic priority for the Bank. 
                                                                                                                                                   
12  See: Richardson and Williams (2015), ‘Estimating New Zealand’s neutral interest rate’, Reserve Bank of New 
Zealand  Analytical  Note  AN2015/05;  Armstrong  (2015),  ‘The  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand’s  output  gap 
indicator suite and its real-time properties’, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note AN2015/08; Lewis, 
McDermott  and  Richardson  (2016),  ‘Inflation  expectations  and  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  New 
Zealand’, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, Vol. 79. No. 4. March 2016. 
13  See: Armstrong and McDonald (2016), ‘Why the drivers of migration matter for the labour market’, Reserve 
Bank  of  New  Zealand  Analytical  Note  AN2016/02;  Vehbi  (2016),  ‘The  macroeconomic  impact  of  the  age 
composition of migration’, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note AN2016/03. 
14  See  Karagedikli  and  McDermott  (2016),  ‘Inflation  expectations  and  low  inflation  in  New  Zealand’,  Reserve 
Bank of Discussion Paper Series 2016/09. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
