  Benoît Cœuré: From challenges to opportunities – rebooting the 
European financial sector 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the SZ (Süddeutsche Zeitung) Finance Day 2016, Frankfurt am Main, 2 March 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
For those of you here who work in the financial sector, your job depends on your ability to 
assess and manage risk. What allows you to do this is the fact that many risks are tangible – 
they  can  be  identified  through  analysis,  measured  through  models  and  hedged  using 
financial instruments. Risk is not per se an obstacle to decision-making; it simply frames the 
parameters of those decisions. 
The  situation  is  different,  however,  when  risk  morphs  into  uncertainty1.  Uncertainty,  by 
definition, cannot be predicted or quantified. It is therefore much more of an impediment to 
decision-making.  And  that  brings  with  it  economic  costs:  firms  postponing  investment, 
households postponing consumption and increasing savings. 
In the European economy today we face several sources of uncertainty. We face uncertainty 
about the outlook for the global economy. We face uncertainty about the direction of Europe 
and  its  resilience  to  new  shocks  –  the  UK  referendum,  the  next  wave  of  migration.  And 
germane  to  this  conference,  we  face  uncertainty  about  the  way  forward  for  the  European 
financial sector. 
A significant amount of this uncertainty stems from the fact that, eight years after the crisis, 
we are still in a transition phase. Financial institutions are considerably stronger than in 2008 
but  they  are  still  adjusting  their  business  models  to  a  post-crisis  world.  We  have  a  new 
regulatory  regime,  whose  contours  are  not  yet  fully  defined.  And  the  new  regime  is  being 
overlaid  on  a  financial  sector  that,  in  some  cases,  still  has  substantial  legacy  issues  to 
address. That creates unavoidable frictions. 
But uncertainty can also be self-imposed, and policy decisions can play a role in that. In the 
still  fragile  environment  we  face  today,  what  is  essential  is  that  policy  works  to  reduce 
uncertainty – and does not become a source of uncertainty itself. 
At  the  same  time,  policy  cannot  be  an  excuse  for  financial  firms  to  put  off  revising  their 
business  models  and  updating  their  technologies.  To  build  confidence  in  the  European 
financial sector, all actors need to play their part. The post-crisis environment is a challenge, 
but it is also an opportunity: for the financial sector to become more profitable, more efficient 
and more stable. 
What I would like to do in my remarks today is look more closely at the sources of uncertainty 
we face today, and at what policymakers and private players can do to address them. There 
are  three  areas  in  particular  I  would  like  to  focus  on:  the  business  environment,  the 
regulatory environment, and the technological environment. 
Business environment 
The  business  environment  confronting  the  European  financial  sector  today  is  evidently 
challenging. 
                                                
1  See F. Knight (1921). Risk, Uncertainty and Profit, Boston: Hart, Schaffner and Marx. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Earnings among euro area banks continue to be weak, with their average return on equity – 
although  markedly  improved  since  the  crisis2  –  remaining  below  their  cost  of  equity.  Cost 
cutting and rationalisation has been ongoing since 2008, making further cost savings harder 
to  achieve.  Low  profitability  constrains  the  capacity  of  banks to  generate  capital  internally. 
And  new  challenges  have  arisen  in  the  face  of  an  uncertain  economic  outlook,  especially 
given the weakness in emerging markets and in commodity-producing sectors. 
So are there ways that policymakers can reduce this uncertainty? 
One topical issue is, of course, whether monetary policy is contributing to weak profitability. 
In particular, a concern has built up that, as central banks lower interest rates into negative 
territory, the impact of monetary policy on banks is becoming increasingly adverse. That is 
because bank lending rates fall linearly but their funding costs are non-linear – as interest 
rates on retail deposits are sticky – which puts a squeeze on net interest margins. 
Let me underline that we are well aware of this issue. We are monitoring it on a regular basis 
and  we  are  studying  carefully  the  schemes  used  in  other  jurisdictions  to  mitigate  possible 
adverse consequences for the bank lending channel. But I also think we need to qualify the 
narrative that banks’ challenges flow largely from our monetary policy. 
So  far,  many  banks  have  been  able  to  more  than  offset  declining  interest  revenues  with 
higher lending volumes, lower interest expenses, lower risk provisioning and capital gains. 
Last year, for example, euro area banks’ aggregate net interest income increased, especially 
as  crisis-hit  banks  refinanced  expiring  high-yield  liabilities.  And  negative  interest  rates  are 
complementary to our asset purchase programme, which has had clearly positive effects on 
asset  prices,  credit  risk  and  intermediation  volumes.  This  has  to  be  set  against  the  direct 
costs from our measures to net interest margins. 
Moreover,  in  an  environment  of  rising  global  uncertainty,  what  would  be  the  costs  for  the 
financial sector if monetary policy had not responded? We have seen from the recent sharp 
fall  in  bank  equity  prices  that  the  sector  is  highly  sensitive  to  a  weaker-than-expected 
economic outlook. In that context, our commitment to our price stability mandate is vital to 
anchor expectations of nominal growth. Those who call for a less accommodative monetary 
policy  have  to  ask  themselves  what  would  be  the  impact  on  banks’  lending  volumes  and 
loan-loss provisions if output were stagnant and prices falling. 
More generally, market jitters have particularly focused on banks perceived to have residual 
weaknesses – in particular those with high stocks of non-performing loans (NPL) and those 
perceived to lack sustainable business models. These are challenges that have little to do 
with the central bank. Reducing uncertainty from these sources requires other policymakers 
and private players to act. 
Two  priorities  stand  out.  The  first  is  moving  more  decisively  to  deal  with  legacy  assets. 
Progress in NPL resolution is still slow when compared with the volume of problem loans. In 
countries  most  affected  by  the  crisis3,  the  ratio  of  non-performing  exposures  to  tangible 
equity  and  loan  loss  provisions  –  the  so-called  “Texas  ratio”  –  currently  stands  at  around 
100% for many banks. That undermines confidence in their ability to absorb further losses, 
creating volatility in the event of economic bad news, as well as hampering loan growth to 
the real economy. 
All the preconditions are now there to accelerate NPL resolution: NPL levels and provisioning 
have been reviewed by the supervisory arm of the ECB as part of the Asset Quality Review. 
                                                
2  For the euro area banking sector, the annualised return on equity for the first three quarters of 2015 was 5.7% 
in 2015 compared with 3.4% in 2010. 
3  See ECB Financial Stability Review, November 2015. The analysis is based on publicly available data for a 
sample  of  60  significant  banking  groups.  Countries  most  affected  by  the  crisis  include  Cyprus,  Greece, 
Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Slovenia and Spain. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  challenge  now  is  to  speed  up  the  process  of  writing  off  and/or  disposal.  There  are 
various policy measures that can facilitate this process. 
One is improving insolvency regimes, which help separate viable from non-viable borrowers 
and  enable  the  valuation  of  assets  to  be  sold  off.  Another  is  increasing  the  efficiency  of 
judicial systems, which allows faster foreclosure of collateral underlying NPL portfolios. And 
in my view there are also merits in facilitating the carve-out of substantial portions of bank 
balance sheets. But this assumes, of course, that workable solutions exist for the transfer of 
legacy  assets  at  sensible  prices  to  investors  able  and  willing  to  manage  them.  It  also 
assumes decisive action to kick-start the market for loans in those jurisdictions where NPL 
ratios are the highest – that is, in Cyprus and in Greece. 
Second, banks with perceived business model risks need to do more to mitigate uncertainty 
by  reshaping  their  business  mix  and  their  operational  models.  Asset  carve-outs  could  be 
catalytic  here  as  well:  streamlining  their  balance  sheets  by  disposing  of  assets  can  allow 
banks to concentrate on developing new business, as opposed to managing legacy assets – 
in  other  words,  it  can  save  them  from  “zombification”.  Beyond  that,  banks  with  weak 
profitability need to find ways to increase non-interest income and, where possible, to reduce 
further their operating costs. There appears to be scope for this too.4 
On  the  earnings  side,  for  example,  we  have  already  observed  a  trend  among  banks  to 
compensate for lower interest income by increasing fees and commissions. There is some 
evidence  that  banks  are  offering  fee-based  products  to  clients  as  substitutes  for  interest-
based  products.  On  the  cost  side  savings  are  more  challenging  given  the  extensive 
rationalisation efforts of recent years, but there is still one obvious “low hanging fruit” to be 
picked: consolidation within the sector. 
Indicators  of  market  concentration  suggest  some  over-capacity  in  the  European  banking 
sector,  especially  in  countries  with  more  fragmented  banking  systems.  For  example,  the 
Herfindahl-Hirschman  Index  for  the  euro  area,  though  rising  in  recent  years,  still  stands 
below 750. As a general rule, a figure below 1000 signals low concentration.5 Cost-income 
ratios in some banking sectors also remain high. That implies there would be efficiency gains 
from consolidation without exacerbating “too-big-to-fail” problems. 
The fact that we now have a European supervisory and resolution regime presents the ideal 
conditions  for  banks  to  capitalise  on  new  cross-border  M&A  opportunities.  What  our 
economy needs is European banks operating in a European market: large enough to operate 
across borders and diversify risks, but small enough to be resolved with the resources of the 
Single Resolution Fund. This would reap the full benefits of banking union and improve the 
terms of the trade-off between financial stability and economic efficiency.6 
For that to happen, however, we need to remove any remnants of the regulatory framework 
that  implicitly  support  home  bias.  For  example, how  much  national  discretion  is  allowed  in 
implementing  rules;  how  fungible  are  liquidity  and  capital  across  borders;  how  regulations 
affect the choice of subsidiaries versus branches – all these issues will crucially shape the 
incentives  of  banks to  become  European.  And  if  we  do  not  get  them right, the  risk  is  that 
consolidation ultimately happens through the more painful route of resolution. 
                                                
4  See D. Nouy (2016), “Risks and resilience – the European banking sector in 2016”, speech at the Deutsche 
Bank – Bank Capital Forum, London, 23 February 2016. 
5  See ECB Report on financial structures, October 2015. The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) is defined as 
the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  market  shares  of  all  firms  within  the  industry,  where  the  market  shares  are 
expressed as fractions. As a general rule, an HHI below 1,000 signals low concentration, while an index above 
1,800  signals  high  concentration.  For  values  between  1,000  and  1,800,  an  industry  is  considered  to  be 
moderately concentrated. The range of the index lies between 0 and 10 000. 
6  See  B.  Cœuré  (2014),  “On  the  optimal  size  of  the  financial  sector”,  speech  at  the  ECB  conference  on  the 
optimal size of the financial sector, Frankfurt, 2 September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Regulatory environment 
This brings me to the second part of my remarks: the regulatory environment. Clearly, the 
European  financial  sector  is  facing  a  profoundly  changed  regulatory  environment  after  the 
crisis. That applies to quantity and quality of capital, to leverage, to funding profiles, to bail-in-
able  debt,  to  risk  management  practices.  Derivatives  markets  and  market  infrastructures 
have also been subject to a comprehensive reform agenda. 
Is  this  regulation  a  source  of  uncertainty?  Taking  a  longer-term  view,  I  find  it  difficult  to 
believe so. Thanks to regulatory initiatives, capital ratios for euro area banks have risen from 
around 8% in 2008 to close to 14% today. Leverage ratios have improved in most countries. 
And funding has become more stable: median loan-to-deposit ratios have fallen from more 
than  140%  in  2008 to  around  110%  now.  Forcing  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives  onto 
central clearing has also netted out counterparty risk and reduced uncertainty over who owns 
what in a crisis. 
All this contributes to a more robust financial sector that is better able to absorb shocks. And 
though there are always costs to regulation, most studies suggest that, in the steady state, 
the macroeconomic benefits outweigh them. For example, Commission simulations find that 
the new regulatory framework will deliver macroeconomic benefits of around 0.6–1.1% of EU 
GDP per year, compared with long-term costs of about 0.3% of EU GDP per year.7 
Where regulation can create uncertainty, however, is in two areas. The first is if there is a 
lack of visibility on what the future regulatory regime will look like. And the second is if there 
is uncertainty about how new regulation will be applied. 
The  volume  of  new  regulation  coming  in  has  created  uncertainty  in  the  financial  sector  in 
recent years. But I think the contours of the new regime are now clearer than before. The key 
unfinished  parts  of  the  Basel  III  agenda,  such  as  the  leverage  ratio,  reductions  in  the 
variability in risk-weighted assets, total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) and the fundamental 
review of the trading book, look set to be finalised in Europe by the end of this year. That 
should  help  provide  clarity  on  the  post-crisis  steady  state.  As  confirmed  by  G20  Finance 
Ministers  and Governors  at their meeting  in  Shanghai,  the  aim  is  now  to focus  on making 
Basel III effective without further increasing regulatory capital requirements.8 
But there are still some areas where, I think, more visibility would be beneficial. One is the 
timeline for the Directive on Markets in Financial Instruments, which was recently postponed. 
Regulators no doubt face a difficult trade-off between the urgency of reform and the need for 
such a fundamental change in regulation to meet technical and logistical reality. But it is also 
important that the process does not lose momentum, not least as this legislation will be the 
backbone of a future Capital Markets Union. 
Another  area  is  the  resilience,  recovery  and  resolution  of  clearing  houses,  on  which  the 
Commission  will  make  a  proposal  later  this  year  when  the  global  framework  has  been 
clarified.  The  CPMI,  IOSCO  and  the  FSB  are  making  good  progress  in  this  area  and  will 
deliver guidance ahead of the G20 Hangzhou summit.9 
                                                
7  See European Commission (2014), Economic Review of the Financial Regulation Agenda, May. 
8  See  Communiqué  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  Meeting,  Shanghai,  February  27, 
2016. 
9  Still  another  area  is  how  pension  funds  will  be  impacted  by  the  move  towards  central  clearing  for  OTC 
derivatives. Central counterparties generally only accept cash as margin, while pension funds typically hold 
few liquid assets. That is why, in June last year, the Commission agreed a two year exemption for pension 
funds to find a technical solution to this issue. Until it is resolved, however, there may be uncertainty among 
investors about how pension funds will be able to meet their clearing requirements without shedding profitable 
assets. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In terms of the application of regulation, we have also seen – perhaps inevitably – a degree 
of uncertainty as the new regime beds in. For example, some of the recent volatility we saw 
in  bank  shares  seems  to  have  coincided  with  uncertainty  around  how  pillar  2  capital 
requirements would be applied. But recent clarifications by the European Banking Authority 
(EBA)10 and additional communication by the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM)11 have 
now, I think, gone a long way towards allaying concerns. All things being equal, supervisory 
requirements will also not be increased further. 
What perhaps remains to be clarified is exactly how the new resolution framework will work. 
The  resolution  cases  in  Portugal  and  Italy  last  year  have  sparked  concerns  about  equal 
treatment, but it is important to underline that this was not an application of the bail-in tool in 
the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, but rather of the EU state aid rules. What is key 
now is that creditors have certainty about where they stand in the new resolution hierarchy. 
That would be enhanced, in my view, by ensuring that MREL (the minimum requirement for 
own  funds  and  eligible  liabilities)  is  consistently  implemented  across  the  EU,  including  a 
common EU framework on the degree of subordination of senior unsecured bank bonds12. It 
would  also  benefit  from  clarifying  the  interaction  between  MREL  and  TLAC  (total  loss-
absorbing-capacity),  in  particular  the  differences  in  subordination  and  the  treatment  of 
additional capital buffers. The ongoing MREL review,  which  will also implement TLAC, will 
need to address any remaining inconsistencies and uncertainties, as banks need clarity to 
start issuing the bail-in-able debt that will make the new resolution regime fully effective. 
I trust many of these issues will be addressed and finalised in the course of 2016. 
Technological environment 
Finally, let me say a word about the third and in my view the most important area of potential 
uncertainty  in  the  financial  sector:  the  evolving  technological  environment.  What  I  am 
referring  to  here  is  the  emergence  of  disruptive  new  technologies  –  so-called  “FinTech”  – 
which look set to profoundly reshape the structure of financial intermediation. 
FinTech  now  spreads  across  financial  market  segments  and  along  the  value  chain.  It  is 
present, albeit still at an early stage, in payments, credit provision, investment and financial 
advice,  insurance.  It  runs  from  front  office  to  back  office.  And  FinTech  innovations  are 
increasingly cascading into new areas. For example, the development of instant payments 
infrastructures has helped develop new markets for mobile P2P, e-commerce or point-of-sale 
payment solutions, which may become a new standard of payments in some areas. 
On the face of it, I have no doubt that this is a positive development for the financial sector. It 
leads to greater efficiency, better products and lower prices for consumers. It also has the 
potential  to  support  financial  inclusion.  In  short,  FinTech  can  be  part  of  the  answer  to  the 
fundamental questions facing our economies: lack of productivity and rising inequalities. 
That is why regulation is generally supporting opening up market access by introducing legal 
certainty  to  previously  unregulated  services.  For  example,  the  revised  Payment  Services 
Directive  is  expanding  the  list  of  activities  that  payment  service  providers  can  carry  out  to 
include  the  initiation  of payments  and  account  information  services. Where  the  uncertainty 
comes in, however, is how this will affect incumbents. 
                                                
10  See  Opinion  of  the  European  Banking  Authority  on  the  interaction  of  Pillar  1,  Pillar  2  and  combined  buffer 
requirements and restrictions on distributions. 
11  See SSM SREP Methodology Booklet. 
12  See  ECB  (2015).  Opinion  of  the  European  Central  Bank  of  2  September  2015  on  bank  resolution 
(Con/2015/31). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  FinTech  presents  an  opportunity  for  new  start-ups  to  compete  with  established  financial 
institutions  in  specific  financial  services,  but  without  the  costs  of  legacy  IT  systems  and  a 
compliance-oriented  business  culture.  FinTech  also  opens  the  market  for  “BigTech”  firms 
such as Apple, Google and Amazon, which have an in-built advantage in digital technology. 
This  threatens  to  take  business  away  from  banks  which  traditionally  offered  a  package  of 
services, potentially weakening their business models. 
What  is  more,  over  the  longer-term  technological  innovations,  such  as  distributed  ledger 
technologies  (DLTs),  could  have  profound  impacts  on  financial  intermediation.  DLTs  have 
the  potential  to  substantially  reduce  reconciliation  costs  for  market  participants,  to 
disintermediate incumbents in the financial value chain, and to allow for a more efficient use 
of  collateral.  Through  decentralised  update  and  validation  of  records,  they  may  even 
challenge the basic business models of intermediaries or central market infrastructures. 
So should policymakers be concerned about this? 
Generally  speaking,  it  is  up  to  market  incumbents  to  rise  to  this  challenge.  In  particular, 
banks facing questions about their business models should see the new wave of innovation 
as an opportunity – to reach out to new customers, to increase efficiency, to revamp their 
business models. After all, they still retain economies of scale unavailable to small start-ups 
and intellectual capital unavailable to outsiders. FinTech may be exactly the shock the sector 
needs to restructure after the crisis. 
But policymakers also need to monitor developments closely. As more firms enter the market 
it will be important to ensure a level playing field between entities providing similar financial 
services.  Moreover,  market  fragmentation  might  create  challenges  for  a  single  European 
market, as market innovators have a tendency to build closed-loop solutions or “silos”, and 
challenge  the  existing  approaches  towards  containing  systemic  risk.  For  example,  the 
emergence of popular retail payment platforms in one country could undermine the market 
integration already achieved in the context of SEPA. 
We  will  have  to  see  how  the  market  evolves  before  assessing  whether  regulation  should 
provide a steer in one direction or another, whether the new approaches will provide full legal 
certainty  to  market  participants,  and  whether  regulatory  space  can  be  provided  to  let 
innovation develop without hindering financial stability. But we have started moving along a 
steep learning curve. For example, the CPMI has launched work in partnership with IOSCO 
and  other  standard-setting  bodies  on  the  impact  of  the  distributed  ledger  technology  and 
related digital innovations on payments and market infrastructures. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The  euro  area  is  still  recovering from  a  once-in-a-generation  economic and  financial  crisis 
that has left deep scars on the economy. It urgently needs higher growth to bring down high 
unemployment, to deleverage the economy and to raise inflation back to our price stability 
objective. Uncertainty in the financial sector only blocks that path. 
To  reduce  uncertainty,  both  policymakers  and  financial  institutions  need  to  play  their  part. 
They  need  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  is  fit  for  purpose  and  able  to  finance  the 
recovery. And they need to do so today, not tomorrow. 
But we should keep in mind that the challenges facing the financial sector also present an 
opportunity.  A  tough  business  environment  can  push  banks  to  be  more  efficient.  A  new, 
stable  regulatory  environment  will  make  the  financial  system  safer.  And  a  disruptive 
technological environment can lead to new business models and better financial services. 
It is in all our interests to rise to this challenge. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
