  Gent Sejko: Seventh review of the arrangement with the IMF concluded 
Speech by  Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the joint press conference 
with the IMF mission and the Minister of Finance, Tirana, 22 March 2016. 
 In accordance with the agreed agenda, during the last two  weeks, we have held  intensive 
talks with the IMF mission, which focused on the Review of the Arrangement with the IMF. 
Also, in the framework of Article IV discussions, talks focused on identifying those structural 
problems that hamper economic development in Albania. 
The Review concluded that economic indicators and macro-economic policies have been in 
line  with  our  projections  and  commitments,  despite  the  challenges  facing  the  Albanian 
economy during this period. Moreover, Article IV discussions noted the need for accelerating 
structural reforms, which should pave the way for faster and steadier development. 
Let me now present a summarized opinion of the Bank of Albania on the country’s economic 
performance and the policies we have implemented and should continue to implement in the 
future. 
The Albanian economy continues to be on a positive development trajectory. Economic 
growth accelerated during 2015, driven by the expansion of investments and improvement of 
the  balance  of  trade  with  abroad.  Private  consumption  showed  signs  of  recovery  in  the 
second half of the year, whereas public consumption remained limited, in accordance with 
the fiscal consolidation strategy. 
During this period, economic activity expanded, among others, thanks to the monetary 
policy  and  supervisory  and  regulatory  measures  by  the  Bank  of  Albania.  Our 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  has  contributed  to  lowering  interest  rates  further 
down,  mitigating  liquidity  pressures  and  maintaining  the  confidence  of  financial  markets  in 
price  stability.  In  parallel,  our  supervisory  and  regulatory  measures  have  contributed  to 
reducing non-performing loans and improving the financial soundness of the banking sector. 
These developments are a prerequisite for sustainable crediting to the economy in the future. 
Inflation  remains  at  low  levels,  below  our  target.  This  performance  has  reflected  the 
unutilized production capacities in the Albanian economy, and the disinflationary tendencies 
arising from trade exchanges with abroad. 
In particular, over the first two months of 2016, inflation dropped, descending to 0.2% 
in  February.  Our  analyses  suggest  that  it  dropped  due  to  external  factors,  namely  the 
pronounced fall in food and oil prices in global markets. As such, the rapid drop in inflation 
and  its  low  levels  represent  a  supply  shock  to  the  Albanian  economy,  rather  than  a 
disinflationary  situation,  which  is  related  to  actual  or  expected  recessionary  situations.  Its 
effect  on  inflation  is  expected  to  persist  for  some  time  ahead;  however,  it  will  only  be  a 
transitory one. 
Regardless  of  these  conclusions,  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  constantly  monitoring  the 
situation.  It  has  all  the  proper  instruments  to  prevent  long-term  negative  effects  that  may 
arise from low inflation, and stands ready to use them, if necessary.  
Our projections suggest that the Albanian economy will improve progressively over 
the next two years. The improvement of the growth rate will contribute to strengthening the 
economic and financial equilibriums in Albania, and will be a determinant factor for the return 
of inflation to target in the medium term-horizon. 
The balance of risks surrounding this projection is mostly on the down side. Thus, the 
expansion  of  economic  activity  continues  to  be  decelerated  by  unfavorable  economic 
developments in the euro area, low oil prices in global markets, as well as the still hesitating 
behavior of many economic and financial agents to undertake long-term business projects. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Against  this  backdrop,  the  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  economic  policies  and  structural 
reforms should focus on the following: 
• 
Continuation  of  the  actual  combination  of  economic  policies,  based  on  the 
stimulating monetary policy and the consolidating fiscal policy. The monetary 
policy will remain accommodative over this horizon and the intensity of the monetary 
stimulus  may  be  further  strengthened  if  that  is  judged  as  necessary.  Fiscal 
consolidation mitigates the structural weakness in Albania and creates more space 
for expansion in the private sector. 
Implementation,  without  delay,  of  the  plan  of  measures  for  tackling  and 
finding a final solution for non-performing loans. This plan seeks to reduce the 
crediting  risk  and  increase  the  bank  credit  supply  in  Albania.  Its  success  is  an 
essential  precondition  for  the  medium  and  long-term  growth  of  the  Albanian 
economy. 
Acceleration  of  structural  reforms,  especially  in  relation  to  completing  the 
infrastructure,  improving  the  business  climate,  expanding  the  knowledge,  and 
improving the labor market. 
  In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  once  again  thank  the  IMF  Mission  for  the  useful  and 
constructive talks. 
Thank you for your attention! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
