  Andreas Dombret: What's going on in Europe? – A view from the 
Deutsche Bundesbank 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  World  Affairs  Council  and  American  Council  on  Germany,  San 
Francisco, 12 July 2016. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  in  San  Francisco  with  you  and  with  these  two 
distinguished organizations. 
You know, when we agreed on the title and the date of this event, I was expecting to give a 
talk on the economic situation in the euro area and its implications for monetary policy. This 
was because – like many – I was convinced that the United Kingdom would ultimately decide 
to remain in the European Union. 
As you know, events took a different course. At the end of June, the British people decided to 
leave  the  European  Union.  This  decision  is  certainly  a  turning  point  for  Europe.  Since 
Belgium,  France, Germany,  Italy,  Luxembourg  and  the  Netherlands founded  the  European 
Economic Community in Rome almost sixty years ago, European integration has only been 
going  in  one  direction:  towards  deeper  integration.  Now  this  process  has  hit  its  first  major 
roadblock. 
I  am  deeply  convinced  that  the  decision  to  leave  the  EU  will  benefit  neither  the  United 
Kingdom  nor  the  rest  of  the  EU.  Take  terrorism,  climate  change,  international  security  or 
migration. In my view  it  is the wrong decision to try to solve global problems with national 
policy. The idea of the European Union remains as relevant as ever. 
There is a real danger that Brexit might also sway public opinion across the EU on European 
integration  and  add  fuel  to  the  current  anti-EU  sentiment  in  some  member  states,  which 
ignores the Union's benefits. 
But the vote does not only reflect discomfort with the shared sovereignty that membership in 
the European Union brings with it. The EU has become a proxy for fear of immigration, open 
borders and, more generally, globalisation. This mood is also evident outside the European 
Union. If Brexit ends up feeding these currents, it may have implications beyond Europe. 
The European project was also a lesson from the wars that devastated the world in the 20th 
century. It was in this very city that the Charter of the United Nations was signed in 1945. 
And  it  was  the  same  spirit  that  led  Belgium,  France,  Germany,  Italy,  Luxembourg  and the 
Netherlands to sign the Treaties of Rome in 1957. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the full consequences of Brexit will probably be only fully evident in 
some time to come – all the more because formal relations between the United Kingdom and 
the EU will only be decided through a long negotiation process that has not yet started. The 
key question in these negotiations will be whether the United Kingdom will remain a member 
in the single market or not – and if so, under which conditions. 
Only after this question is settled will we be able to better assess the full consequences of 
this vote – economic and political. There is a strong case for negotiating co-operatively, but 
there must be no rebates on the obligations that come with participation in the single market. 
The  decision  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  leave  the  European  Union  requires  a  political 
response. This is not the core business of a central banker. So today, I will talk about the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  implications of Brexit for the economic outlook and for monetary policy. And I'll touch upon 
the potential longer-term implications for European integration. 
Economic consequences of Brexit 
2.1 Immediate financial market reaction 
Mark Twain once said that October is one of the "peculiarly dangerous months to speculate 
in  stocks.  The  others  are  July,  January,  September,  April,  November,  May,  March,  June, 
December, August, and February." 
Measured against this wisdom, the reaction of financial markets to the Brexit news was by 
and large orderly. The news obviously came as a surprise – there is no other explanation for 
the steep drop in the pound sterling of 11 % immediately after the referendum. But there was 
obviously no panic: 
Investors  have  bought  government  bonds  in  an  attempt  to  hunker  down  their  money.  For 
traditional safe-haven countries like the United States, Germany and Japan, this has brought 
down long-term interest rates even further. The steep increase in the long-term interest rates 
of  peripheral  euro-area  countries  immediately  after  the  referendum  reversed  itself  in  the 
following days. On balance, long-term interest rates for Italy and Spain declined – and all in 
all it is obvious to me that there is no euro-area break-up scenario dominating capital market 
sentiment. 
Stock prices dropped sharply on the day after the referendum. However, the situation had 
calmed down already in the afternoon. 
Only shares of financial institutions have dropped strongly and still remain significantly lower, 
not only for UK banks but also for banks in the euro area. This is a sign that the uncertainty 
about the possible implications of the Leave vote is primarily affecting the banking sector. In 
my view it's the short-term consequences of a possible economic slow-down and the longer-
term  consequences  of  Brexit  for  banks'  business  models  that  are  weighing  on  investor 
sentiment. 
However,  most  banks  have  taken  the  possibility  of  a  Brexit  sufficiently  seriously  and 
prepared  carefully.  Supervisors  asked  them  in  a  timely  manner  to  assess  the  risks 
associated  with  their  holdings  of  stocks,  bonds  and  foreign  currency.  And  banks  had  to 
engage in emergency planning. Thanks to stricter capital and liquidity regulation, banks are 
in better shape today than at the start of the financial crisis in 2007. 
Additionally,  immediately  after  the  referendum,  the  ECB  joined  other  central  banks  in 
declaring that it would stand ready to supply liquidity should the need arise. Up to now, no 
liquidity provisioning has been necessary, however. 
These  measures  certainly  helped  to  avoid  stronger  financial  market  reactions.  But  this 
doesn't imply that the financial markets have already found their new equilibrium. I cannot 
rule out further movements in prices and shifts of money from one asset class to another. 
But, we can be carefully optimistic that – with regard to financial markets – a panic reaction 
to Brexit is now rather unlikely. 
2.2 Economic outlook 
Further ahead, it is foggier. The economic consequences of Brexit are still uncertain. 
The UK decision to leave the EU comes at a time when the economy in the euro area is on 
the  path  of  a  slow,  but  continuous  recovery.  The  experts  of  the  Eurosystem  expect  the 
economy to grow by 1.6 % this year and 1.7 % next year, mainly on the back of domestic 
demand which is benefiting from low oil prices and a very expansionary monetary policy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However,  these  forecasts  do  not  include  the  consequences  of  Brexit.  In  fact,  one  of  the 
downside risks to the projection has now materialised – and the above-mentioned forecast 
seems to be a bit too optimistic. 
The  impact  on  medium-term  economic  growth  will  depend  strongly  on  expectations 
concerning the long-run economic consequences of the referendum, which in turn will hinge 
on the outcome of the exit negotiations. The chain of causality runs from the single market to 
productivity: The more the access to the single market is restricted, the more trade will be 
inhibited and the more productivity will be curbed – both in the UK and the EU. 
Before the referendum, the International Monetary fund had warned that if established trade 
relationships broke down, this could have serious regional and global consequences. It has 
also  pointed  out  that  uncertainty  created  until  an  exit  is  fully  negotiated  could  dampen 
investment. 
Hence, much depends on whether this period of uncertainty can be minimised. Negotiations 
about  the future relationship  between  the  UK  and  the  EU  should  be speedy  and  sensible. 
Neither party has an interest in re-erecting trade barriers. 
In the meantime, the depreciation of the pound sterling we have seen since the referendum 
provides some relief. It counteracts the uncertainty hanging over the economic outlook. So 
this means that the immediate consequences for the economic outlook may not be quite that 
dire. The same may even hold for the euro area, for the euro has also depreciated somewhat 
against the US dollar and the yen. 
In  any  case,  while  the  impact  of  Brexit  on  growth  will  be  negative,  fears  of  a  reduction  in 
growth by, say, 0.6 percentage points in 2017, as predicted by Consensus Economics, seem 
exaggerated to me. 
Implications for monetary policy 
Ending the uncertainty arising from the exit negotiations is a political task. Given the current 
set of economic indicators, I do not see the need for any monetary policy response to the 
outcome of the referendum. 
This  is  all  the  more  the  case  as  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  has  already  been  very 
expansionary  for  quite  some  time.  Unlike  the  Fed,  for  example,  the  Eurosystem  is  still 
expanding  the  size  of  its  bond  holdings.  Some  measures,  such  as  the  ECB's  Corporate 
Sector  Purchase  Programme  (PSPP),  have  only  begun  as  recently  as  last  month.  It  is 
therefore not clear to what extent a further loosening would stimulate the economy. 
The ultra-loose monetary policy in the euro area is a consequence of the very low inflation 
rates. Over the last two years, it was mainly the decline of the commodity prices that kept 
inflation low. This holds in particular for the price of oil. Changes in commodity prices will at 
some  point  automatically  cease  to  have  an  effect  on  inflation.  They  will  "wash  out  of  the 
inflation rate," as central bankers like to put it. 
But at the moment, low commodity prices are not the whole story. Low inflation rates are also 
a  result  of  a  subdued  domestic  price  pressure.  The  "core"  inflation  rate  –  which  excludes 
commodity and food prices – is also low. 
For this reason, an expansive monetary policy stance is currently warranted – which doesn't 
mean that one cannot disagree on specific unconventional instruments for monetary policy 
easing.  The  Bundesbank  has  always  been  –  and  in  fact  is  still  –  critical  with  respect  to 
purchases of government bonds by the Eurosystem central banks. 
When  I  am  abroad,  people  often  ask  me  why  I  am  having  concerns  with  regard  to  the 
purchase of government bonds by the Eurosystem, even though the Fed, the Bank of Japan 
and the Bank of England are using this instrument. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The  answer  lies  in  the  institutional  set-up  of  the  euro  area.  This  set-up  is  unique  and  not 
comparable to that of a single state. Although euro-area countries have decided to share a 
common monetary policy, they haven't mutualised fiscal policy. Every member state remains 
responsible for its own fiscal policy. To limit governments' inherent incentive to incur debt, 
however, fiscal rules were decided on and fiscal bail-outs by other member states or by the 
Eurosystem were explicitly excluded by the European Treaties. 
Although sovereign bond purchases by the Eurosystem are not forbidden per se in such a 
decentralised set-up, they risk leading to a dangerous commingling of monetary and fiscal 
policy as the Eurosystem could then become the biggest creditor to the euro-area member 
states. If governments adjust their policies to the very low level of financing costs by delaying 
structural reforms or fiscal consolidation – and this is what OECD studies on the willingness 
to reform and current indicators on the fiscal policy stance in the euro area are telling us – 
the Governing Council could come under political pressure in future to maintain its ultra-loose 
monetary policy even if its price stability objective suggested exiting from this policy. 
This risk of fiscal dominance is what troubles me because it could make it more difficult for 
monetary policy to fulfil its primary objective of price stability. 
Reforms for a more stable euro area 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Leave vote in the United Kingdom has led many to think about its 
political consequences. Some politicians – rather predictably in my view – immediately called 
for  deeper  European  integration.  But  this  deeper  integration  should,  on  the  one  hand,  not 
come at the price of more shared liability without more shared sovereignty. And in any case, 
it  would  have  to  be  ensured  that  the  common  decisions  are  taken  in  a  stability-oriented 
manner. On the other hand, the Brexit vote must in no case serve as an excuse to retard 
reforms or even turn back achievements in European integration. 
Proposals for further integration were already on the table prior to the referendum. Many of 
them contain proposals for more shared liabilities but ignore the issue of common decision-
making.  This  middle  path  will  not  be  enough  to  stabilise  the  euro  area  sustainably.  In  my 
opinion, what the currency union needs is a synchronisation of liability and control. 
Recent years have shown that the combination of 19 different fiscal and economic policies 
with a single monetary policy can lead to a situation in which member states have to mutually 
bear the consequences of individual member states' economic policy decisions. 
The  seemingly  endless  emergency  summits  at  which  member  states  bickered  about  the 
shape of rescue funds may have been one reason why the image of the European Union has 
suffered. 
They  illustrate  a  misalignment  of  liability  and  control  in  the  euro  area.  This  problem  was 
anticipated already during the negotiations of the Maastricht treaty that launched the single 
currency.  The  idea  was  to  use  a  combination  of  market  discipline  and  additional  rules  to 
restrict governments' propensity to expand public debt. 
The Treaty contained a no-bail-out clause that prohibits member states from assuming each 
other's  debt.  Investors  rather  than  tax-payers  were  intended  to  shoulder  the  risks  of  their 
investments. 
In addition, the Treaty contained restrictions on public debt levels and fiscal deficits in order 
to ensure that each member state could cushion a recession with its own fiscal policy without 
losing access to financial markets. 
Unfortunately, politicians obviously found it hard to difficult to adhere fully to the no-bail-out 
rule when financial markets lost trust in the sustainability of public finances of some member 
states. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This  was  because  banks  in  these  countries  were  loaded  up  with  sovereign  bonds.  A 
sovereign default would thus have put financial stability in the whole euro area in danger. 
As  a  comedian  from  Austria  once  put  it:  "Europe  consists  of  countries  that  refuse  to  be 
ordered to follow those rules that they themselves came up with." 
Since  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis,  things  have  only  become  worse.  There  are  now 
countries in which the fiscal deficit has been in excess of the limits set by the rules for seven 
years. 
And the application of the rules has become more and more politicised due to an increased 
scope  for  interpretation  by  the  European  Commission.  The  European  Commission  is 
interpreting its role in two ways: as the guardian of the Treaties, on the one hand, and on the 
other hand, as a political actor which seeks to balance the different interests of the member 
states. This has clearly not helped to make the rules more binding. 
So over time, the misalignment of liability and control that was entailed in the constitutional 
set-up of the euro area from its very beginning has become even worse. 
In fact, it requires bold steps to establish a consistent institutional set-up for the euro area. 
One such step is to jump to a full political and fiscal union. Common decision making would 
then go along with common liabilities. 
But even back  when the  Maastricht Treaty was signed, politicians did not think this option 
was deliverable. And, in the light of the debate in Europe today, it does not seem to have 
become more feasible today. 
But there is another option for aligning control and liability. It would require returning liability 
to the member states, where control still resides. It is at least as important to reinstate market 
discipline over member states' fiscal policies. 
To  make  this  decentralised  way  credible,  at  the  end  there  has  to  be  the  possibility  that 
member states can become insolvent. 
The  sovereign  debt  crisis  showed  us,  however,  that  this  requires  an  end  of  the  so-called 
sovereign-bank nexus as the insolvency of a member state must not be allowed to endanger 
financial stability in whole euro area. 
This cannot be achieved with a single measure. But there is no getting around one particular 
measure: To end the preferential regulatory treatment being granted to sovereign bonds. 
Unlike for corporate bonds, financial institutions do not have to hold equity against potential 
losses on their government bond holdings. Sovereign bonds are still regarded by regulators 
as risk-free. 
The sovereign debt crisis in the euro area has definitely shown that this assumption does not 
hold. If the preferential treatment of sovereign bonds on bank balance sheets is ended, this 
will force investors to take a closer look at the risk profile of sovereigns before making their 
investments.  Capital  markets  could  then  resume  their  function  of  disciplining  government 
fiscal policy. 
This is why the exemptions granted to sovereign bonds are now being debated in the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision. 
Final remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  do  not  want  to  stretch  your  attention  any  further.  As  some  wise 
person once said: There should never be too many  words between the  beginning and the 
end of a speech. I hope I have not violated that piece of advice too blatantly today. 
I have covered many topics – some of them only briefly. But it was my intention to provide 
some food for discussion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  As  a  last  remark,  I  want  to  thank  you  for  your  hospitality.  Please  be  assured  how  much  I 
enjoy being here in San Francisco. Citing one of your most famous inhabitants: "I'll be back." 
Thank you very much. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
