  
 
Juyeol Lee: Employment and growth: roles of macroeconomic policy and 
structural reform 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Juyeol  Lee,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  2016  Bank of 
Korea International Conference, “Employment and Growth: Roles of Macroeconomic Policy 
and Structural Reform”, Seoul, 30 May 2016. 
 Good morning, 
Ladies and gentlemen! 
I am delighted to welcome you all to the 2016 Bank of Korea International Conference. Let 
me begin by expressing special thanks to our keynote speakers, St. Louis Federal Reserve 
Bank President James Bullard, and IMF Deputy Managing Director Min Zhu, and to all of our 
session  speakers,  moderators,  discussants,  and  panelists.  I  would  also  like  to  express 
sincere  appreciation  to  Professors  Thomas  J.  Sargent  and  Barry  Eichengreen,  for  their 
contributions in preparing this conference. Without their devotion and support, the Bank of 
Korea International Conference could not have received the significant recognition that it now 
enjoys. 
Almost eight years have passed already since the global financial crisis. But global economic 
growth, which we had expected to gradually approach its pre-crisis trend level, has recently 
shown signs of deceleration. Employment conditions are also not clearly improving. Insome 
countries, including Korea, employment is increasing quantitatively, but in qualitative terms 
employment conditions are not improving. 
Considering  this,  I  believe  that  our  discussion  of  “Employment  and  Growth”  at  this  year’s 
conference is very meaningful and timely. 
Despite  active  policy  efforts  by  individual  countries,  to  enhance  their  economic  dynamism 
through various unconventional measures, economic recoveries are being delayed. And this 
suggests the possibility of structural changes in the global economy since the crisis. From 
the  aggregate  demand  perspective,  the  structural  change  is  associated  mainly  with 
population aging, growing debt and worsening income imbalances, which result in a decline 
in  consumption  and  investment.  From  the  aggregate  supply  perspective,  meanwhile,  a 
prominent cause is our inability to improve productivity in a timely manner due to a shortage 
of investment. 
We need to pay close attention to concerns about the so-called “secular stagnation” of the 
global economy, recognizing that such structural changes in the economic environment could 
make our current trend of low growth become chronic. 
If this  low  growth  is  attributable  in  large  part  to structural  changes  in  the  economy,  then  I 
think we need to shift our policy response paradigm to address it. Specifically, rather than 
working to enhance short-term growth, a more effective strategy will be seeking sustainable 
and balanced growth over a long-term horizon. 
There  are  of  course  a  multitude  of  tasks  that  we  must  push  ahead  with  to  promote 
sustainable and balanced growth. But I would like to focus here on employment, since that is 
today’s theme. 
I believe that the 2008 global financial crisis gave us an opportunity to rethink the importance 
of employment. Until the crisis, the role of employment had not moved beyond supporting the 
demand for labor needed for economic growth. 
Given the persistence of low growth since the crisis, however, it is now widely recognized 
that employment should play an active role in stimulating growth. And this seems to reflect 
an expectation that both the effective demand shortage on the aggregate demand side, and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
the stagnation in production capacity on the aggregate supply side, can be simultaneously 
addressed through employment policy. 
And  so  let  me  touch  briefly  now  on  some  policy  operations  necessary  to  ensure  that 
employment can drivegrowth. 
First,  we  need  to  boost  aggregate  demand  by  actively  pushing  policies  to  expand 
employment, the source of household income. To this end, we should strive to maintain the 
macroeconomy in a stable manner, so as to create conditions favorable to employment. And 
from  the  microeconomic  perspective,  we  should  also  implement  measures  to  create  new 
jobs,  by  for  example  encouraging  more  people  to  start  their  own  businesses,  and 
strengthening the competitiveness of the service sector with its huge job creation potential. 
Next, I would like to emphasize the need for efforts to ensure that the increase in income 
stemming from expanded employment also leads to an increase in consumption. To this end, 
it  is  necessary  to  alleviate  people’s  uncertainties  about  the  future,  by  reducing  the 
imbalances  in  wage  and  employment  conditions  among  workers,  and  strengthening  our 
social safety nets. 
What  I  want  to  point  out  lastly  is  the  greatimportance  of  nurturing  innovative  and  creative 
human resources. Many people anticipate that, after the ongoing digital innovation and the 
so-called “fourth industrial revolution,” the demand for labor will decrease and employment 
will shrink. But if more and more people become able to assimilate and utilize various digital 
technologies,  such  as  artificial  intelligence  and  big  data,  then  I  think  such  technological 
advancements will insteadpositively affect employment and growth. A bigger pool of creative 
talent will enable the creation of new industries and new markets, and as a result new jobs. 
This  will  in  turn  boost  effective  demand,  and  bring  about  a  virtuous  cycle  of  growth  and 
employment. 
Ladies and gentlemen! 
So far I have discussed how employment-led economicgrowth can be achieved. As recently 
emphasized by the IMF, however, a success of this policy requires that structural reforms in 
various  areas  such  as  the  labor  market,  industry  and  finance  should  be  implemented  in 
harmony. 
I  look  forward  to  a  variety  of  insightful  ideas  being  proposed  here  today  and  tomorrow, 
through  enthusiastic  discussions  and  constructive  sharing  of  opinions  among  conference 
participants. I hope that the ideas proposed here will lead to tangible outcomes. 
Thank you. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
