   William C Dudley: The US economic outlook and implications for 
monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the People’s Bank of China-Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Joint Symposium, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 29 February 2016. 
 Thank you, Deputy Governor Zhu, for the opportunity to speak at this inaugural People’s Bank 
of China and Federal Reserve Bank of New York 2016 Joint Symposium. It is a wonderful 
occasion  for  our  two  central  banks  to  meet  and  share  ideas  on  important  global 
macroeconomic and monetary policy issues. 
It is especially satisfying to me to be here in Hangzhou to see the result of my discussion last 
February with Governor Zhou about this kind of policy and research exchange. I thank you and 
the staff of The People’s Bank of China for developing this idea into such an ambitious work 
agenda, and for assembling such a distinguished group of contributors and participants for this 
symposium. We at the New York Fed look forward to future collaborative efforts to strengthen 
the relationship between our two institutions, especially given the key roles that China and the 
United States play in the global economy. By working together I believe we can achieve better 
outcomes for our countries and for the global economy. Today, although I will focus mainly on 
the  U.S.  economic  outlook,  I  also  will  discuss  how  global  economic  and  financial  market 
developments factor into my thinking about U.S. monetary policy. As always, what I have to 
say  today  reflects  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.1  
U.S. Economic Outlook 
Recent  economic  and financial  developments  have  not  yet  led  me to make  a fundamental 
change in my outlook for U.S. growth in 2016. At this point, I have marked down my growth 
outlook very modestly. However, financial market conditions have tightened since the start of 
the  year,  mostly  in  response  to  international  developments.  If  this  tightening  of  financial 
conditions  were  to  persist,  it  could  potentially  lead  to  a  more  significant  downgrade  to  my 
outlook. 
I continue to expect that the economy will expand over the course of this year at a pace slightly 
above its long-term trend – sufficient to push the unemployment rate down a bit further and to 
more fully utilize the nation’s labor resources. On inflation, we continue to fall short of our 2 
percent objective for the personal consumption expenditure (PCE) deflator. This shortfall looks 
likely to continue longer than I had earlier anticipated due to the persistent strength of the dollar 
and weakness in energy prices. However, I continue to expect a gradual return to our 2 percent 
objective as the transitory factors that have held down inflation dissipate. 
In assessing the current state of the U.S. economy, there are divergent signals, with weakness 
in  some  spending  and  production  indicators,  but  robustness  in  a  number  of  labor  market 
indicators. In the fourth quarter, investment spending for both equipment and structures fell, 
and net exports and inventory investment were drags on growth. These developments partly 
reflect the slowing of global growth and the impact of the dollar’s appreciation since mid-2014. 
This weakness has been particularly evident in U.S. manufacturing. However, the latest ISM 
non-manufacturing  index  suggests  the  possibility  of  a  slower  pace  of  growth  also  in  the 
                                                
1   Matthew Higgins, Jonathan McCarthy, Paolo Pesenti and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   services sector, which has been relatively robust. Consumer spending growth – which had 
been a brighter spot for most of 2015 – also slowed notably in the fourth quarter. 
In contrast, the U.S. labor market has remained healthy and supportive of growth. Over the 
course  of  2015,  payroll  employment  increased  an  average  of  about  228,000  per  month. 
Although the January increase of 151,000 was below last year’s pace, other aspects of the 
report were strong. The January data indicated substantial gains in wages and hours worked, 
which implies healthy real income growth for the household sector. Moreover, the amount of 
slack  in  the  labor  market  continues  to  diminish  based  on  a  number  of  measures.  The 
unemployment rate declined to 4.9 percent. This was accompanied by further declines in both 
the share of people working part-time that would like full-time work, as well as the share of 
people  not  part  of  the  labor  force.  Consistent  with  a  tighter  labor  market,  the  share  of  the 
working-age population that is employed has risen gradually, and the labor force participation 
rate has stabilized. 
While the weakness in some indicators has led me to make small reductions in my forecast, 
my  overall  outlook  has  not  changed  substantially.  In  making  this  determination,  a  central 
question is how to reconcile these cross-currents. One has to also factor in that the real GDP 
growth rate in the fourth quarter was only 1.0 percent and the four-quarter change was 1.9 
percent – low even by the subdued standards of this expansion. It is important, though, to 
recognize that a number of transitory factors held down growth in the fourth quarter – most 
notably  lower  utility  spending  due  to  warm  weather  and  a  decline  in  the  rate  of  inventory 
investment. 
As  these  transitory  factors  depressing  the  pace  of  economic  growth  dissipate,  the  core 
strengths  for  the  economy  should  reassert  themselves.  I  anticipate  that  consumption  and 
housing activity will expand at a moderate pace. Continued job and wage gains, as well as low 
energy prices, should support real disposable income growth and consumer spending. Retail 
sales in January provide evidence of this support. The housing market should remain on a 
solid trajectory, supported by rising employment and low mortgage rates. In addition, the fiscal 
2016 budget package passed at the end of last year, which extended a number of tax breaks 
and eased caps on spending, means that fiscal policy should provide a moderate stimulus this 
year.  I  believe  that  these  positive  factors  should  be  sufficient  to  offset  weakness  in 
manufacturing and business-fixed investment. 
Putting this all together, I expect real GDP growth of about 2 percent in 2016, slightly below 
the average pace of growth in this expansion, and a bit above my estimate of the potential 
growth of the U.S. economy. If this materializes, then we should see some further reduction in 
the unemployment rate to around my estimate of the rate – about 4¾ percent – that I view as 
consistent with stable inflation over the long term. 
Turning to the outlook for inflation, headline inflation on a year-over-year basis has begun to 
rise  as the  sharp falls  in  energy  prices  in  late 2014  and  early  2015  are  removed from  the 
calculations.  However,  inflation  still  remains  well  below  the  Federal  Reserve’s  2  percent 
objective. As the FOMC has noted in its statements, this continued low inflation is partly due 
to recent further declines in energy prices and ongoing impacts of a stronger dollar on non-
energy import prices. Although energy prices will eventually stop falling and the dollar will stop 
appreciating,  these  factors  appear  to  have  had  a  more  persistent  depressing  influence  on 
inflation than previously anticipated. 
This continued period of low headline inflation is a concern, in part, because it could lead to 
significantly lower inflation expectations. If this drop in inflation expectations were to occur, it 
would,  in turn,  tend to  depress future  inflation. Evidence  on  the  inflation  expectations front 
suggests  some  cause  for  concern.  In  particular,  market-based  measures  of  longer-term 
inflation compensation derived from nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities have 
fallen to very low levels. In addition, some survey measures of household inflation expectations 
have recently moved lower. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   With respect to the market-based measures, there are some reasons to discount the decline. 
Several term structure models, including those estimated at the New York Fed, attribute most 
of this decline to a decrease in term premiums – what investors demand for insurance against 
inflation  risks  –  and  not  to  a  decrease  in  long-term  inflation  expectations.  These  models 
suggest that, over the indicated horizon, investors anticipate that low growth will occur along 
with low inflation. Still, given the extent to which inflation compensation has fallen since mid-
2014,  I  believe  that  it  is  prudent  to  consider  the  possibility  that  longer-term  inflation 
expectations of market participants may have declined somewhat. 
What I find more concerning is the decline in some household survey measures of longer-term 
inflation expectations. For example, the median of three-year expectations from the New York 
Fed’s Survey of Consumer Expectations has declined over the past year to its lowest reading 
in the survey’s short history, and the longer-running University of Michigan measure is at the 
bottom of its historical range. Further declines in either measure would be worrisome. To date, 
these declines have not been sufficiently large for me to conclude that inflation expectations 
have  become  unanchored.  However,  these  developments  merit  close  scrutiny,  as  past 
experience shows that it is difficult to push inflation back up to the central bank’s objective if 
inflation expectations fall meaningfully below that objective. Japan’s experience is cautionary 
in this regard. 
In sum, I still anticipate that the combination of decreasing resource slack and anchored longer-
term inflation expectations will contribute to inflation rising to our 2 percent objective over the 
medium term. Even so, because of the more persistent effects of energy and commodity price 
declines and U.S. dollar appreciation, the return of inflation to that goal may be slower than I 
earlier anticipated. This does not deny the possibility of some upside surprise―such as a sharp 
upswing in wage growth triggered by low unemployment. But, on balance, I am somewhat less 
confident than I was before. Partly, this reflects my assessment that uncertainty to the outlook 
has increased and that downside risks have crept up, a topic to which I now turn. 
Assessment of Risks to the Outlook 
The forecast that I have just described is my best assessment of how the U.S. economy will 
evolve over 2016. But there is uncertainty and risk relative to this baseline forecast, which also 
needs to be taken into consideration in assessing the implications of the outlook for monetary 
policy. 
 
There are two key considerations to this risk assessment. First, are the perceived uncertainties 
about the forecast higher, lower or about average as compared to the past? Second, are the 
risks symmetric around the baseline forecast or skewed upward or downward? The level of 
uncertainty is important in that it relates to the expected magnitude of forecast errors. The 
balance of risks is important in that it relates to the expected sign of those forecast errors. 
At  the  New  York  Fed,  we  use  surveys,  internal  models  and  judgment  in  forming  our  risk 
assessment. Some surveys, such as the U.S. Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF), ask 
respondents  for  both  point  and  density  forecasts.  The  density  forecasts  take  the  form  of 
respondents  filling  out  a  histogram  of  their  probability  assessments  that  the  forecasted 
outcome will fall into given intervals. These histograms can be aggregated and the resulting 
aggregate  distribution  can  be  used  to  assess  both  the  level  of  uncertainty  as  well  as  the 
balance of risks. Recent U.S. SPF surveys have not indicated any significant changes in the 
overall degree of uncertainty around growth or inflation. The balance of risks have been roughly 
symmetric for inflation and tilted to the downside for growth. 
We supplement this survey evidence with assessments from internal models. These models 
are data-driven and estimate percentiles of the distribution of possible forecast outcomes for 
growth and inflation. Our estimated models have indicated a greater degree of uncertainty than 
reflected in the U.S. SPF, and suggest downside risk to both the growth and inflation forecast. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   But, I would caution that these models are still relatively new in terms of their development and 
their results need to be supplemented by judgment. 
Now,  putting  these  inputs  and  my  judgment  together,  I  see  the  uncertainties  around  my 
forecast to be greater than the typical levels of the past. This assessment reflects the divergent 
economic signals I highlighted earlier, and is consistent with the turbulence we have seen in 
global financial markets. At this moment, I judge that the balance of risks to my growth and 
inflation  outlooks  may  be  starting  to  tilt  slightly  to  the  downside.  The  recent  tightening  of 
financial market conditions could have a greater negative impact on the U.S. economy should 
this tightening prove persistent and the continuing decline in energy and commodity prices 
may signal greater and more persistent disinflationary pressures in the global economy than I 
currently  anticipate.  I  am  closely  monitoring  global  economic  and  financial  market 
developments to assess their implications for my outlook and the balance of risks. 
U.S. Monetary Policy in a Global Environment 
Thus far, my remarks have focused on the U.S. outlook and the risks relative to this outlook. 
This focus is appropriate. Like other central banks, our monetary policy mandate concerns 
domestic  objectives:  maximum  sustainable  employment  and  price  stability.  Our  monetary 
policy  actions,  however,  often  have  global  consequences  that,  in  turn,  influence  the  U.S. 
economy and financial markets. At the same time, external factors can impact the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism in the U.S. and influence the effectiveness of our monetary 
policy in achieving our objectives. We cannot appropriately calibrate policy without keeping 
these spillover and feedback effects in mind. 
In some cases, these effects can be significant. An example is the market volatility we saw in 
the spring and summer of 2013 during the so-called “taper tantrum.” In the U.S., we saw a 
spike in Treasury yields, with the 10-year rate rising by more than 100 basis points from early 
May  of  that  year  before  peaking  in  September.  Financial  markets  in  emerging  market 
economies (EME) were hit hard as well, with declines in equity prices, a widening in sovereign 
debt spreads and a sharp increase in foreign exchange volatility. 
Volatility in EME financial markets re-emerged last summer and has continued into this year. 
For EMEs as a group, declines in equity prices and currency values have been larger than 
what  we  experienced  during  the  taper  tantrum.  The  recent  episode,  however,  appears  to 
largely reflect concerns about risks emanating from EMEs themselves, rather than concerns 
about the direction of Fed policy. 
Three related concerns appear to  be  at the forefront.  First,  there  has  been  a  broad-based 
slowdown in EME growth. This slowdown is not new. Each year since 2012, EME growth has 
come in well short of expectations that existed at the start of the year. It is difficult, however, 
for market participants to recognize and adjust to large structural shifts in real time. There is 
still considerable uncertainty about the trajectory of long-term EME growth, and therefore the 
appropriate pricing of EME financial assets. In that context, heightened market volatility is not 
surprising. 
Second, this slowdown in EME growth is happening after a long upswing in credit expansion 
in these countries. Based on BIS data for 23 of the largest EMEs, since the end of 2007 credit 
to their private nonfinancial sectors has risen from roughly 80 to 135 percent of GDP. In several 
countries, the increase in private credit penetration exceeds 40 percent of GDP – roughly the 
same order of magnitude that we witnessed in other periods that preceded financial crises. 
Although the magnitude of the EME credit boom has been apparent for some time, with EME 
growth now on a more subdued trajectory and the global financial environment less forgiving, 
market participants have begun to sharpen their focus on the risk of larger than expected credit 
losses as the credit cycle reverses. 
Third,  China  has  entered  a  period  of  economic  transition,  from  a  growth  model  based  on 
investment,  manufacturing  and  rapid  state-directed  credit  growth  to  one  emphasizing 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   consumption,  services  and  more  sustainable  market-directed  credit  intermediation.  This 
transition also involves a downshift in China’s trend growth rate, which is inevitable given the 
level of economic development in China and the shrinking margin of underutilized labor market 
resources.  Economic  transitions  are  always  difficult  to  manage,  and  invariably  present 
policymakers with unexpected challenges. It is not surprising, then, that market participants 
are  focused  on  the  risk  that  the  downshift  in  Chinese  growth  could  prove  to  be  more 
pronounced than anticipated. I want to be clear. The rebalancing process now underway in 
China  is  both  necessary  and  appropriate,  and  will  unfold  over  a  period  of  years.  How  to 
pragmatically strike the best balance between progress on long-term reform and support for 
short-term growth is, of course, a matter for policymakers in China. You can be sure that you 
will  have  the  backing  of  the  official  international  community  as  you  oversee  this  important 
transformation. 
Finally, the slowdown in Chinese and broader EME growth has been a key factor behind the 
sharp  drop  in  global  commodity  prices  since  mid-2014.  The  income  streams  accruing  to 
commodity  export  countries  have  been  adversely  impacted,  requiring  sometimes  painful 
downward adjustments in investment and economic activity in these countries. Here, too, it 
may take time for markets to find a new equilibrium, as investment projects that were based 
on the price structure prevailing a few years ago are still coming online. 
In most cases, EMEs appear to have the tools and the resources to help manage their way 
through the current period of difficulties. There are fewer of the pegged exchange rate regimes 
that often came violently undone during past periods of acute market stress. Monetary policy 
regimes  are  generally  better  structured  and  more  coherent.  Banking  systems  are  better 
capitalized  and  supported  by  stronger  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks.  Foreign 
exchange  reserve  cushions  are  larger  and  generally  still  ample.  I  think  we  can  remain 
cautiously optimistic about EMEs’ prospects overall in the years ahead, although particular 
countries will face considerable challenges over the near term. 
How will we at the Fed take in and respond to these developments? As I’ve already noted, 
foreign  developments  factor  into  our  assessment  of  the  U.S.  outlook.  Recent  FOMC 
statements have sometimes made this connection explicit, noting that the Committee will be 
monitoring foreign economic and financial conditions closely. The weakness we have been 
seeing in EME economies and markets is one of the considerations behind the Committee’s 
assessment that the appropriate pace of policy normalization is likely to be gradual. 
The federal funds rate is only one element of the broader set of financial conditions affecting 
the U.S. growth and inflation outlook. Tighter financial conditions abroad do spill back into the 
U.S. economy, and policymakers must take this into account in their assessment of appropriate 
monetary policy. Of course, this does not mean that we will let market volatility dictate our 
policy stance. There is no such a thing as a “Fed put.” What we care about is the country’s 
growth and inflation prospects, and we take financial market developments into consideration 
only to the extent that they affect the economic outlook. 
Our focus on the global implications of our policies also has a broader dimension. Given the 
central  place  of  U.S.  markets  in  the  global  financial  system  and  the  dollar’s  status  as  the 
leading global reserve currency, we in the United States have a special responsibility to be 
good stewards of the global economic commons. This makes it all the more important that we 
conduct policy transparently and according to clear principles. 
This highlights the importance of effective Fed communication. I noted earlier our attempts in 
the spring of 2013 to provide guidance about the potential timing and pace of tapering may 
have  served  to  confuse  market  participants.  Market  participants  seemed  to  conflate  the 
prospective tapering of asset purchases with monetary policy tightening, and pulled forward 
their expectations about the likely timing of liftoff, thus raising their expected path for the federal 
funds  rate.  Since  then,  we  have  adjusted  our  approach  with  improved  results.  The  actual 
tapering of the Fed’s asset purchase program went smoothly and liftoff of our policy rate from 
the zero lower bound was in line with widely held market expectations. While the future path 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   of  policy  is  not  on  a  pre-set  course  and  must  remain  data  dependent,  we  will  strive  to  be 
similarly effective in our communications going forward. 
As you know, we’ve taken a number of steps in recent years to increase transparency and 
improve  our  communications.  This  includes  regular  press  conferences  by  the  Fed  chair 
following FOMC meetings; the publishing of growth, inflation, unemployment and federal funds 
rate projections by FOMC participants; a concerted attempt to lay out the guideposts that the 
FOMC will look at to assess progress toward our mandate; and an equally concerted attempt 
to  lay  out  how  our  various  policy  tools―such  as  interest  on  reserves,  overnight  reverse 
repurchase  (ON  RRP)  operations  and  reinvestment  of  principal  payments  from  our  asset 
holdings – will be used to pursue our objectives. 
We are also working to be better stewards in safeguarding financial stability. Simply put, we 
failed to act early enough and decisively enough to stem the credit excesses that spawned the 
financial crisis and Great Recession. The U.S. was not alone in this shortcoming, but, given 
our position in the global financial system, we should have done better. We’ve taken important 
steps  through  new  legislative  mandates  and  a  broader  effort  to  rethink  our  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework. In particular, systemically important banking organizations must now 
hold  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  that  are  better  aligned  with  their  risk  profiles.  Many  other 
changes have also been implemented, such as the central clearing of standardized over-the-
counter (OTC) derivatives contracts, which should help make the global financial system more 
resilient and robust. 
While these efforts remain a work in progress, I think they will reduce the risk of repeating the 
mistakes of the past decade, and enable us to take a more proactive stance toward addressing 
potential future vulnerabilities. Of course, we at the Fed are not alone here. Since the financial 
crisis, central banks worldwide have been engaged in a broad rethinking of how better to fulfill 
their mandates. 
Let me close with a final thought. Adam Smith in the Wealth of Nations introduced the concept 
of the “invisible hand.” Smith argued that individuals acting in their self-interest can collectively 
promote the public interest. This concept, I believe, also often applies to international monetary 
policy.2 The biggest problems that countries create for others often stem from getting policy 
wrong domestically. Recession or instability at home is often quickly exported abroad. Equally 
important, growth and stability abroad makes it easier to set policy at home. Central banks, 
therefore, by individually acting on their domestic economy mandates, can collectively promote 
the global economy. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
                                                 
2   There are important exceptions of course. Two noteworthy exceptions include “beggar-thy-neighbor” policies in 
which countries engage in unilateral competitive currency devaluation and trade protectionism. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
