  Haruhiko Kuroda: Re-anchoring inflation expectations via “Quantitative 
and qualitative monetary easing with a negative interest rate” 
Remarks by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium “Designing resilient monetary policy frameworks 
for the future”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 27 August 2016. 
Accompanying charts can also be found on the Bank of Japan’s website. 
 Introduction 
It is always a great pleasure to speak at the Economic Policy Symposium here in Jackson 
Hole.  I  would  like  to  thank  Ms.  Esther  George,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City, for inviting me to this panel. 
Over  the  past  two  decades,  Japan  found  itself  in  several  economic  difficulties,  such  as 
prolonged  deflation,  declining  potential  growth,  several  financial  crises,  and  structural 
impediments arising from a rapidly aging population and dwindling labor force. Given such 
experiences,  I  stress  one  observation  in  thinking  about  the  resilience  of  monetary  policy 
framework; that is, in the long run, low inflation and low nominal interest rates are most likely 
to coexist. Under such a circumstance, central banks have very little latitude for cutting policy 
rates due to the existence of the zero lower bound of nominal interest rates. In other words, 
the resiliency of monetary policy – more precisely, conventional or standard monetary policy 
– is considerably eroded. 
Soon  after  I  took  office  in  March  2013,  the  Bank  of  Japan  introduced  Quantitative  and 
Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) to overcome mild but protracted deflation. QQE has two 
key elements that enable the Bank to move beyond the previous monetary policy measures. 
The first is the Bank’s strong and clear commitment to achieving the price stability target of 
2 percent  at  the  earliest  possible  time,  which  is  underpinned  by  a  large-scale  monetary 
easing,  thereby  drastically  converting  the  deflationary  mindset  among  people  and  raising 
inflation  expectations.  The  second  is  to  put  downward  pressure  on  the  entire  yield  curve 
through massive purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs), financed by an equally 
massive  increase  of  the  monetary  base  (Chart  1).  These  two  elements  together  have 
reduced real interest rates and thus have produced strong easing effects. 
In  October  2014,  QQE  was  expanded  in  both  quantitative  and  qualitative  terms. 
Subsequently, in January 2016, it was augmented by adding a third dimension of negativity 
in nominal interest rates, as “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” QQE evolved into a flexible 
and  powerful  policy  framework  that  enables  the  Bank  to  make  full  use  of  the  three 
dimensions of policy measures: quantity, quality, and interest rates. 
Today, with this backdrop in mind, I will focus on the two key issues in considering how to 
ensure a resilient monetary policy framework: (1) the role of anchoring inflation expectations 
and (2) the transmission channels of a negative interest rate policy. 
I. 
Re-anchoring inflation expectations 
Crude oil prices and inflation expectations 
A. 
As  many  of  us  well  recognized,  crude  oil  prices  declined  significantly  from  the  summer  of 
2014. In terms of the inflation forecast, the decline in crude oil prices is generally taken to be 
temporary. Crude oil futures markets were not broadly anticipating a further decline in crude 
oil  prices  over  the  next  year.  Consequently,  long-term  inflation  expectations  were 
unchanged,  as  evidenced  by  fairly  stable  developments  in  6-  to  10-year  U.S.  inflation 
forecasts  collected  by  the  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters  (Chart  2).  In  contrast,  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  puzzling decline in long-term inflation forecasts was observed in Japan. Even considering the 
technical difference in the details of the data, it is hard to deny that the recent weakening in 
long-term inflation expectations in Japan was partly caused by the declines in crude oil prices 
from 2014. 
The headline consumer price index (CPI) inflation started to fall more or less in reflection of 
the  declines  in  crude  oil  prices,  which  were  largely  common  to  advanced  economies  after 
2014. However, a marked difference was observed in terms of the pace of recovery in the 
underlying  trend  of  the  CPI  inflation  between  the  United  States  and  Japan.  In  the  United 
States,  the  CPI  inflation  excluding  energy  rebounded  toward  2  percent fairly  quickly,  while 
the comparable CPI inflation indicator in Japan has remained relatively low so far: positive 
but significantly below 2 percent. It could be said that inflation dynamics in Japan are less 
resilient than those in the United States against significant external shocks, including large 
swings in crude oil prices. 
As mentioned earlier, oil price fluctuations should not produce persistent effects on long-term 
inflation expectations, in that they are typically perceived to be just temporary. This could be 
the case for the United States while something different must be factored in to understand 
the  case  for  Japan.  An  interpretation  of  different  inflation  dynamics  between  the  United 
States  and  Japan  could  be  that  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  yet  to  be  anchored 
around  the  2  percent target  in  Japan  while  they  are  relatively  well  anchored  in  the  United 
States. The impact of the declines in crude oil prices on realized inflation was amplified by 
weakening inflation expectations in the case of Japan. 
The  interpretation  of  the  interaction  between  realized  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  is 
still  a  hypothesis  that  requires  solid  empirical  analysis.  However,  some  symptoms  can  be 
found  in  the  data,  which  appear  to  support  such  interpretations.  The  U.S.  6-  to  10-year 
inflation forecasts have been broadly stable around 2 percent while the Japanese indicator 
has  been  much  more  volatile.  More  importantly,  it  appears  that  long-term  inflation 
expectations in Japan have been lower than 2 percent since the mid-1990s, although some 
signs of improvement can be found since early 2013, when QQE started. In line with these 
observations, a hypothesis worthy of empirical analysis is that Japanese inflation dynamics 
remained  vulnerable  to  adverse  shocks  as  the  economy  was  halfway  through  the  re-
anchoring process as of 2014. 
Understanding the learning process of inflation dynamics 
B. 
The contrasting behaviors with regard to long-term inflation expectations between the United 
States  and  Japan,  as  described  earlier,  lead  us  to  a  deeper  question:  how  do  people 
formulate their inflation expectations? 
There seems to be a consensus, in theory, that full information rational expectation models 
provide  a  useful  benchmark  for  monetary  policy  analysis;  in  practice,  however,  firms  and 
households  do  not  update  their  information  sets  so  frequently.  Noticeable  disagreements 
sometimes exist regarding long-term inflation expectations for a considerable period of time. 
It  is  often  argued  that  inflation  expectations  are  formed  in  an  “adaptive”  or  a  “backward-
looking”  manner.  The  arguments  in  favor  of  departure  from  full  information  rational 
expectation  models  do  not  necessarily  imply  that  people  formulate  their  expectations 
“irrationally.”  Existing  economics  literature  demonstrates  that  rational  agents  do  not 
necessarily  update  their  information  sets  in  a  constant  manner  if  information  collection  is 
costly. 
Looking back at Japan’s experiences from the 1990s, CPI inflation hovered at around zero 
percent  or  even  slipped  into  negative  territory  for  some  periods,  and  long-term  inflation 
expectations  showed  a  downward  trend  with  volatile  fluctuations  (Chart  3).  Unstable  long-
term  inflation  expectations  amplified  adverse  shocks  to  the  Japanese  economy,  including 
several  financial  crises,  and  forestalled  effects  of  a  variety  of  policy  measures  to  combat 
deflation, such as the zero interest rate policy and quantitative easing. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  light  of  Japan’s  experiences,  anchoring  long-term  inflation  expectations  at  near-target 
levels  is  definitely  a  prerequisite  for  a  resilient  monetary  policy  framework.  As  mentioned 
earlier, the Bank, with its commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent, is 
currently undertaking QQE with a Negative Interest Rate to overcome deflation. One of the 
key elements in our policy is to push up inflation expectations toward 2 percent price stability 
target and to re-anchor them there. 
II. 
Transmission channels of negative interest rate policies 
Negative interest rate policy: how it works in practice 
A. 
The other contemporary issue is the implementation of negative interest rate policies (NIRPs) 
at some central banks, including the Bank of Japan. NIRP has been included most lately in 
the  unconventional  policy  toolbox.  The  Bank  of  Japan  introduced  QQE  with  a  Negative 
Interest Rate in January 2016 by applying a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to a 
marginal  increase  in  the  current  accounts  that  financial  institutions  hold  at  the  Bank.  This 
new  policy  measure  reduced  the  marginal  funding  cost  for  financial  institutions,  thereby 
inducing interbank money market transactions to take place with negative interest rates. The 
JGB market and other financial markets reacted significantly to the introduction of QQE with 
a Negative Interest Rate. In particular, JGB yields with long- and super-long maturities saw 
sizable  declines  (Chart  4).  Subsequent  declines  in  long-term  borrowing  costs  have 
stimulated firms’ demand for long-term funding and households’ demand for mortgage loans, 
thereby  benefiting  a  wide  range  of  borrowers.  Among  other  factors,  new  developments  in 
corporate finance are notable as a significant increase in issuance of corporate bonds with a 
maturity of 20 years or even longer has been observed. 
As  evidenced  by  the  effective  implementation  of  NIRPs  at  some  central  banks,  the  zero 
lower bound of nominal interest rates is no longer an insurmountable constraint in practice. 
Competition  among  financial  institutions  and  arbitrage  in  money  markets  stretch  the 
application of negative interest rates into new financial transactions. Of course, removing the 
zero bound does not necessarily mean that central banks are able to cut the nominal interest 
rate to an arbitrarily negative level. It is natural to assume that another lower bound exists 
depending on the cost of holding cash currency, although the current level of the negative 
interest rate in Japan, at minus 10 bps, is still far from such a lower bound. Even with such a 
caveat, NIRPs certainly provide more leeway with central banks in coping with a variety of 
adverse shocks as a practical monetary policy tool. 
Impact of adding a negative interest rate to QQE 
B. 
Japan’s experience of QQE shows that real interest rates declined significantly, reflecting a 
rise in inflation expectations. But observed declines in JGB nominal yields appeared to be 
not so large until QQE with a Negative Interest Rate was deployed, partly because nominal 
yields were already at low levels when QQE started three years ago. So, why did adding a 
negative  interest  rate  to  QQE  produce  the  marked  reaction  of  the  entire  yield  curve?  By 
introducing  QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate,  the  marginal  deposit  rate  of  the  current 
accounts at the Bank declined by just 20bps, from plus 10bps to minus 10 bps. The resulting 
spillover  to  interest  rates  with  longer  maturities  was  considerably  large  compared  with  the 
experiences  of  the  European  economies.  A  natural  question  we  need  to  address  is:  what 
creates the difference in the size of “multipliers,” so to speak? In other words, what factors 
could determine the size of decline in longer-term yields per unit change in the interest rate 
applied to current accounts at the central bank? 
The question remains to be answered. Hypothetically, a multiplier could have been smaller or 
gone negative. That is, in response to an introduction of NIRP, yields with longer maturities 
can increase, reflecting some rises in long-term inflation expectations. However, this was not 
the  case  for  Japan  or  for  most  European  economies  deploying  NIRPs.  One  common 
observation  was  a  bull-flattening  of  the  yield  curves.  In  theory,  declines  in  term  premiums 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  along  with  longer  maturities  and  possible  downward  revisions  to  a  future  monetary  policy 
path can account for such bull-flattening. While both remain as possible factors to explain the 
observed  broad  downward  shifts  of  the  yield  curves,  focusing  on  a  future  monetary  policy 
stance  subject  to  the  zero  bound  can  provide  a  plausible  interpretation.  Namely,  suppose 
that  market  participants  had  been  expecting  that  the  central  bank’s  strong  easing  stance 
would continue for a lengthy period of time, and as a result, latent interest rates were much 
lower  than  the  observed  interest  rates.  Deploying  NIRP  removed  the  zero  bound  and 
uncovered the “true” nominal interest rates unconstrained by the zero bound. In this case, 
introduction of NIRP has a larger effect if the gap between latent and actual interest rates 
were large, which effectively means that NIRP’s initial effects depend on the extent to which 
the zero bound was a binding constraint on nominal interest rates with various maturities. 
Concluding remarks 
There  is  a  broad  consensus  that  central  banks’  strong  commitment  to  achieving  inflation 
targets influences expectation formations by firms and households. A commitment itself thus 
remains an important element for establishing a resilient monetary policy framework. 
Looking  ahead,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  carefully  examine  risks  to  economic  activity  and 
prices  at  each  monetary  policy  meeting  and  take  additional  easing  measures  without 
hesitation  in  terms  of  three  dimensions  –  quantity,  quality,  and  the  interest  rate  –  if  it  is 
judged necessary for achieving the price stability target. QQE with a Negative Interest Rate 
is an extremely powerful policy scheme and there is no doubt that ample space for additional 
easing  in  each  of  these  three  dimensions  is  available  to  the  Bank.  The  Bank  will  carefully 
consider how to make the best use of the policy scheme in order to achieve the price stability 
target of 2 percent, and will act decisively as we move on. 
Thank you. 
4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    5 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
