  Raghuram Rajan: Resolving stress in the banking system 
Speech  by  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  ASSOCHAM 
(Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India) – Interactive Meet with Industry & 
Trade, Bengaluru, 22 June 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Thank you very much for inviting me to give this talk. Ordinarily, in a city like Bengaluru, we 
would  talk  about  startups.  Today,  however,  I  want  to  talk  about  the  resolution  of  financial 
distress. I will argue that the slowdown in credit growth has been largely because of stress in 
the public sector banking and not because of high interest rates. As such, what is required is 
a  clean-up  of  the  balance  sheets  of  public  sector  banks,  which  is  what  is  underway  and 
needs to be taken to its logical conclusion. Specifically, I will describe what we have been 
doing  in  India  to  change  the  culture  surrounding  the  loan  contract. To start,  let  us  look  at 
public sector credit growth compared with the growth in credit by the new private banks. 
Public sector lending vs private sector lending 
As  Chart  1  (Credit  in  India)  shows,  public  sector  bank  non-food  credit  growth  has  been 
falling relative to credit growth from the new private sector banks (Axis, HDFC, ICICI, and 
IndusInd) since early 2014. This is reflected not only in credit to industry (Chart 2), but also 
in micro and small enterprise credit (Chart 3).1 The relative slowdown in credit growth, albeit 
not so dramatic, is also seen in agriculture (Chart 4), though growth is picking up once again. 
Whenever one sees a slowdown in lending, one could conclude there is no demand for credit 
– firms are not investing. But what we see here is a slowdown in lending by public sector 
banks vis a vis private sector banks. Why is that? 
The immediate conclusion one should draw is that this is something affecting credit supply 
from the public sector banks specifically, perhaps it is the lack of bank capital. Yet if we look 
at  personal  loan  growth  (Chart  5),  and  specifically  housing  loans  (Chart  6),  public  sector 
bank  loan  growth  approaches  private  sector  bank  growth.  The  lack  of  capital  therefore 
cannot  be  the  culprit.  Rather  than  an  across-the-board  shrinkage  of  public  sector  lending, 
there seems to be a shrinkage in certain areas of high credit exposure, specifically in loans to 
industry and to small enterprises. The more appropriate conclusion then is that public sector 
banks  were  shrinking  exposure  to  infrastructure  and  industry  risk  right  from  early  2014 
because of mounting distress on their past loans. Private sector banks, many of which did 
not have these past exposures, were more willing to service the mounting demand from both 
their traditional borrowers, as well as some of those corporates denied by the public sector 
banks. Given, however, that public sector banks are much bigger than private sector banks, 
private sector banks cannot substitute fully for the slowdown in public sector bank credit. We 
absolutely need to get public sector banks back into lending to industry and infrastructure, 
else credit and growth will suffer as the economy picks up. 
These charts refute another argument made by those who do not look at the evidence – that 
stress in the corporate world is because of high interest rates. Interest rates set by private 
banks  are  usually  equal  or  higher  than  rates  set  by  public  sector  banks.  Yet  their  credit 
growth does not seem to have suffered. The logical conclusion therefore must be that it is not 
the level of interest rates that is the problem. Instead, stress is because of the loans already 
                                                
1  
In  Chart  2,  the  latest  negative  growth  April  number  may  be  an  aberration  because  of  UDAY  bonds  being 
transferred from bank loan books to investments). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
on PSB balance sheets, and their unwillingness to lend more to those sectors to which they 
have high exposure. 
There  are  two  sources  of  distressed  loans  –  the  fundamentals  of  the  borrower  not  being 
good,  and  the  ability  of  the  lender  to  collect  being  weak.  Both  are  at  work  in  the  current 
distress. 
The sources of lending distress: bad fundamentals 
Why  have  bad  loans  been  made?  A  number  of  these  loans  were  made  in  2007–2008. 
Economic growth was strong and the possibilities limitless. Deposit growth in public sector 
banks  was  rapid,  and  a  number  of  infrastructure  projects  such  as  power  plants  had  been 
completed on time and within budget. It is at such times that banks make mistakes. They 
extrapolate past growth and performance to the future. So they are willing to accept higher 
leverage in projects, and less promoter equity. Indeed, sometimes banks signed up to lend 
based  on  project  reports  by  the  promoter’s  investment  bank,  without  doing  their  own  due 
diligence.  One  promoter  told  me  about  how  he  was  pursued  then  by  banks  waving 
checkbooks, asking him to name the amount he wanted. This is the historic phenomenon of 
irrational exuberance, common across countries at such a phase in the cycle. 
The  problem  is  that  growth  does  not  always  take  place  as  expected.  The  years  of  strong 
global growth before the global financial crisis were followed by a slowdown, which extended 
even to India, showing  how much more integrated we had become with the world. Strong 
demand  projections  for  various  projects  were  shown  to  be  increasingly  unrealistic  as 
domestic demand slowed down. Moreover, a variety of governance problems coupled with 
the fear of investigation slowed down bureaucratic decision making in Delhi, and permissions 
for  infrastructure  projects  became  hard  to  get.  Project  cost  overruns  escalated  for  stalled 
projects and they became increasingly unable to service debt. 
I  am  not  saying  that there  was  no malfeasance –  the  country’s  investigative  agencies  are 
looking into some cases such as those where undue influence was used in getting loans, or 
where actual fraud has been committed by diverting funds out of a company, either through 
over-invoicing  imports  sourced  via  a  promoter-owned  subsidiary  abroad  or  exporting  to 
related shell companies abroad and then claiming they defaulted. I am saying that, typically, 
there  were  factors  other  than  malfeasance  at  play,  and  a  number  of  genuine  committed 
entrepreneurs are in trouble, as are banks that made reasonable business decisions given 
what they knew then. 
The sources of lending distress: poor monitoring and collection 
The truth is, even sensible lending will entail default. A banker who lends with the intent of 
never experiencing a default is probably over-conservative and will lend to too few projects, 
thus  hurting  growth.  But  sensible  lending  means  careful  assessment  up  front  of  project 
prospects, which I have argued may have been marred by irrational exuberance or excessive 
dependence  on  evaluations  by  others.  Deficiencies  in  evaluation  can  be  somewhat 
compensated  for  by  careful  post-lending  monitoring,  including  careful  documentation  and 
perfection  of  collateral,  as  well  as  ensuring  assets  backing  promoter  guarantees  are 
registered and tracked. Unfortunately, too many projects were left weakly monitored, even as 
costs  increased.  Banks  may  have  expected  the  lead  bank  to  exercise  adequate  due 
diligence, but this did not always happen. Moreover, as a project went into distress, private 
banks were sometimes more agile in securing their positions with additional collateral from 
the promoter, or getting repaid, even while public sector banks continued supporting projects 
with fresh loans. Promoters astutely stopped infusing equity, and sometimes even stopped 
putting in effort, knowing the project was unlikely to repay given the debt overhang. 
The process for collection, despite laws like SARFAESI intended to speed up secured debt 
collection, has been prolonged and costly, especially when banks face large, well-connected 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
promoters. The government has proposed reforms to the judicial process, including speeding 
up the functioning of the Debt Recovery Tribunals, which should make it easier for banks to 
collect, but those legislative reforms are before Parliament. Knowing that banks would find it 
hard to collect, some promoters encouraged them to “double-up” by expanding the scale of 
the  project,  even  though  the  initial  scale  was  unable  to  service  debt.  Of  course,  the 
unscrupulous among the promoters continued to divert money from the expanded lending, 
increasing the size of the problem on bank balance sheets. 
The inefficient loan recovery system then gives promoters tremendous power over lenders. 
Not only can they play one lender off against another by threatening to divert payments to 
the  favored  bank,  they  can  also  refuse  to  pay  unless  the  lender  brings  in  more  money, 
especially  if  the  lender  fears  the  loan  becoming  a  Non-Performing  Asset.  Sometimes 
promoters can offer miserly one-time settlements (OTS) knowing that the system will ensure 
the banks can collect even secured loans only after years. Effectively, loans in such a system 
become implicit equity, with a tough promoter enjoying the upside in good times, and forcing 
banks to absorb losses in bad times, even while he holds on to his equity. 
Complete projects that are viable, even if it requires additional funds infusion. 
Viability does not depend on the debt outstanding, but on economic value. Debt may 
Cleaning up the banks: principles 
The world over, there are three cardinal rules when faced with incipient distress. 
1) 
have to be written down to correspond to what is viable. 
Because of changed circumstances, demand may be lower and project cash flows may be 
significantly lower than projected earlier. The project has economic value when completed – 
in the sense that operating cash flows are positive, but much less than the interest on the 
debt it carries. If the debt is not written down, the project continues as an NPA, even while 
the  promoter,  knowing  it  cannot  repay,  loses  interest.  If  neglected,  the  project  may  stop 
generating any cash flows and the assets may depreciate rapidly. 
2) 
Stalled  projects  do  not get  any  better  over  time.  If  there  are  small  investments  needed to 
complete the project, and the promoter has no funds, it may still make sense to lend to it, 
even  while  writing  down  the  overall  debt.  Essentially,  the  new  loan  makes  it  possible  to 
generate operating cash flows to service some debt, even if not all the outstanding debt. 
3) 
promise that debt will become serviceable. 
This is the opposite of (2). If the project is unviable, doubling its size does not make it any 
more viable. Promoters that have over-borrowed often propose an increase in scale so that 
the bank’s outstanding debt and new loans will all become serviceable. Perhaps it would be 
better for the bank to write down its loans to the initial project, rather than going deeper into 
the hole because the promoter may incur new cost-overruns as he expands. An incompetent 
or unreliable promoter will remain so even when scale expands. 
Don’t  throw  good  money  after  bad  money  simply  because  there  is  an  unreliable 
Bank moral hazard 
Unfortunately, the incentives built into the public sector banking system have made it more 
difficult for public sector bank executives to follow these principles (I should add that some 
private sector bank executives have also not been immune on occasion). The short tenure of 
managers  means  they  are  unwilling  to  recognize  losses  immediately,  and  more  willing  to 
postpone them into the future for their successors to deal with. Such distorted incentives lead 
to overlending to or “ever-greening” unviable projects. Unfortunately, also, the taint of NPA 
immediately makes them reluctant to lend to a project even if it is viable, for fear that the 
investigative agencies will not buy their rationale for lending. The absence of sound and well 
documented  loan  evaluation  and  monitoring  practices  by  banks  makes  such  an  outcome 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
more  likely.  So  excessive  lending  to  bad  projects  and  too  little  lending  to  viable  ones  can 
coexist. 
The regulator’s dilemma 
For regulator who wants the banking system to clean up so it can start lending again, this 
creates a variety of objectives, which can be somewhat conflicting. First, we want banks to 
recognize loan distress and disclose it, not paper over it by ever-greening unviable projects. 
Loan  classification  is  merely  good  accounting  –  it  reflects  what  the  true  value  of  the  loan 
might be. It is accompanied by provisioning, which ensures the bank sets aside a buffer to 
absorb likely losses. If the losses do not materialize, the bank can write back provisioning to 
profits. If the losses do materialize, the bank does not have to suddenly declare a big loss, it 
can  set  the  losses  against  the  prudential  provisions  it  has  made.  Thus  the  bank  balance 
sheet then represents a true and fair picture of the bank’s health, as a bank balance sheet is 
meant to. 
Second,  we  want  them  to  be  realistic  about  the  project’s  cash  generating  capacity,  and 
structure lending and repayment to match that. 
Third, we want them to continue lending to viable projects, even if they had to be restructured 
in the past and are NPAs. 
The problem is that any forbearance in labeling loans NPAs on restructuring makes it easier 
to  avoid  disclosure  and  indulge  in  ever-greening.  On  the  other  hand,  strict  disclosure  and 
classification rules could imply a cessation of lending to even viable projects. There are no 
clean solutions here given the kind of incentives in the system, and given the absence of an 
operational  bankruptcy  code  in  India.  Therefore,  the  RBI  has  had  to  adopt  a  pragmatic 
approach to the clean-up, creating new enabling processes. 
The RBI’s approach 
Our first task was to make sure that all banks had information on who had lent to a borrower. 
So we created a large loan database (CRILC) that included all loans over Rs. 5 crore, which 
we shared with all the banks. The CRILC data included the status of each loan – reflecting 
whether it was performing, already an NPA or going towards NPA. That database allowed 
banks to identify early warning signs of distress in a borrower such as habitual late payments 
to a segment of lenders. 
The next step was to coordinate the lenders through a Joint Lenders’ Forum (JLF) once such 
early signals were seen. The JLF was tasked with deciding on an approach for resolution, 
much  as  a  bankruptcy  forum  does.  Incentives  were  given  to  banks  for  reaching  quick 
decisions. We  have  also  tried  to  make  the forum  more  effective  by  reducing  the  need  for 
everyone to agree, even while giving those who are unconvinced by the joint decision the 
opportunity to exit. 
We  also  wanted  to  stop  restructuring  of  unviable  projects  by  banks  who  want  to  avoid 
recognizing losses – so we ended the ability of banks to restructure projects without calling 
them NPA in April 2015. At the same time, a number of long duration projects such as roads 
had  been  structured  with  overly  rapid  required  repayments,  even  though  cash  flows 
continued to be available decades from now. So we allowed such project payments to be 
restructured  through  the  5/25  scheme  provided  the  long  dated  future  cash  flows  could  be 
reliably established. Of course, there was always the possibility of banks using this scheme 
to  evergreen,  so  we  have  monitored  how  it  works  in  practice,  and  continue  tweaking  the 
scheme where necessary so that it achieves its objectives. 
Because promoters were often unable to bring in new funds, and because the judicial system 
often protects those with equity ownership, together with SEBI we introduced the Strategic 
Debt  Restructuring  (SDR)  scheme  so  as  to  enable  banks  to  displace  weak  promoters  by 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
converting debt to equity. We did not want banks to own projects indefinitely, so we indicated 
a time-line by which they had to find a new promoter. 
All these new tools (including some I do not have the space to describe) effectively created a 
resolution  system that replicated  an  out-of-court  bankruptcy.  Banks  now  had  the  power  to 
resolve distress, so we could push them to exercise these powers by requiring recognition. 
This is what the Asset Quality Review, completed in October 2015 and subsequently shared 
with banks, sought to accomplish. Since then banks have classified existing distressed loans 
appropriately, and since March 2016 are looking at their weak-but-not-yet-distressed portfolio 
for necessary actions. There is a change in culture, and banks have been quite willing to get 
into the spirit of the AQR. Many have gone significantly beyond our indications in what they 
have cleaned up by the quarter ending March 2016. Of course, once the banks have properly 
classified a non-performing loan and provisioned against it, their incentive to evergreen  or 
avoid writing down the debt to appropriate levels is diminished. 
Nevertheless, clean-up is ongoing work. The SDR scheme dealt with weak promoters. But 
some promoters are competent even while their projects are overly indebted. The ‘Scheme 
for  Sustainable  Structuring  of  Stressed  Assets’  (S4A)  is  an  optional  framework  for  the 
resolution of large stressed accounts. The S4A envisages determination of the sustainable 
debt level for a stressed borrower, and bifurcation of the outstanding debt into sustainable 
debt and equity/quasi-equity instruments which are expected to provide upside to the lenders 
when  the  borrower  turns  around.  Thus  capable-but-over-indebted  promoters  have  some 
incentive to perform, and because the project is not deemed an NPA if adequate provisions 
are made, public sector banks continue lending to it if necessary. 
Most recently, the government is contemplating a fund to lend into distressed situations, with 
significant participation by third parties, so that new loans can be made to viable distressed 
projects.  Provided  decision  making  is  not  dominated  by  banks  whose  very  loans  are 
distressed, this could be an effective vehicle to speed up resolution. 
Why so many schemes and why the constant tinkering 
The sources of borrower distress are many, and we have sought to provide lenders with a 
menu of options to deal with it, even while limiting their discretion to paper over the problem. 
Effectively the RBI has been trying to create an entirely new bad loan resolution process in 
the absence of an effective bankruptcy system. We have had to tinker, since each scheme’s 
effectiveness, while seemingly obvious when designing, has to be monitored in light of the 
distorted incentives in the system. As we learn, we have adapted regulation. Our objective is 
not  to  be  theoretical  but  to  be  pragmatic,  even  while  subjecting  the  system  to  increasing 
discipline and transparency. 
The good news is that banks are getting into the spirit of the cleanup, and pursuing reluctant 
promoters to take the necessary steps to rehabilitate projects. Indebted promoters are being 
forced  to  sell  assets  to  repay  lenders.  We  will  shortly  license  a  number  of  new  Asset 
Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) to provide a deeper market for stressed assets. We are 
also working on a framework to enhance efficiency and transparency of price discovery in 
sale of stressed assets by banks to ARCs. Bank investors, after initially getting alarmed by 
the size of the disclosures, have bid up PSB bank shares. To the extent that these are still 
trading at a fraction of book value, there is still room for upward valuation if the banks can 
improve the prospects of recovery. The new schemes, as well as the improving economy, 
should help. 
Fraud and willful default 
Even while we make it easier for committed promoters to restructure when they experience 
bad luck or unforeseen problems, we should reduce the ability of the fraudster or the willful 
defaulter, who can pay but simply is disinclined to do so, or the fraudster, to get away. This is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
why it is extremely important that banks do not use the new flexible schemes for promoters 
who  habitually  misuse  the  system  (everyone  knows  who  these  are)  or  for  fraudsters.  The 
threat of labeling a promoter a willful defaulter could be effective in the former case, and we 
have coordinated with SEBI to increase penalties for willful defaulters. For fraudsters, quick 
and effective investigation by the investigative agencies is extremely important. We should 
send the message that no one can get away, and I am glad that the Prime Minister’s Office is 
pushing prosecution of large frauds. The RBI has set up a fraud monitoring cell to coordinate 
the  early  reporting  of  fraud  cases  to  the  investigative  agencies.  And  for  those  who  have 
diverted money out of their companies, especially into highly visible assets abroad, a stern 
message sent by bankers sitting together with investigative agencies should help send the 
message that the alternatives to repayment can be harsh. 
Bank risk aversion 
Bankers often argue that the easiest people to label in a fraud are the bankers themselves, 
who  often  could  be  victims  rather  than  perpetrators.  Similarly,  they  accuse  the  vigilance 
authorities  of  excessive  zeal  when  loans  go  bad,  of  immediately  suspecting  bankers  of 
malfeasance when the bad loan could be an unintended consequence of sensible risk taking. 
Unfortunately,  all  too  often,  such  investigations  also  uncover  sloppy  due  diligence  or  loan 
monitoring  by  bankers.  After  the  fact,  it  is  hard  to  distinguish  sensible  risk  taking  from 
carelessness  or  from  corruption.  While  the  vigilance  authorities  continuously  attempt  to 
reassure bankers that they are not vigilantes, the bankers themselves know that their own 
enthusiasm and deficiencies can expose them to unwarranted accusations of corruption. 
Certainly, part of the solution is for bankers to pull up their socks. But another part of the 
solution is to not label a banker based on the outcome of a single loan but instead look for a 
pattern across loans. A banker who makes an excessive number of bad loans compared to 
his  cohort  deserves,  at  the  very  least,  to  be  questioned.  But  the  banker  who  makes  the 
occasional bad loan amidst a lot of good ones probably needs to be rewarded. Such pattern-
based monitoring by bank authorities, with serious punishment through vigilance action only 
if there  is  evidence  of money  changing  hands,  could  control  malfeasance  while  rewarding 
risk taking. This does require some changes in the current system, including de-emphasizing 
the  committee  based  approach  to  loan  approval  in  banks,  which  appears  to  diffuse 
responsibility for loan decisions. 
What responsibility does the RBI have? 
Bankers sometimes turn around and accuse regulators of creating the bad loan problem. The 
truth is bankers, promoters, and circumstances create the bad loan problem. The regulator 
cannot  substitute  for  the  banker’s  commercial  decisions  or  micromanage  them  or  even 
investigate them when they are being made. Instead, in most situations, the regulator can at 
best warn about poor lending practices when they are being undertaken, and demand banks 
hold adequate risk buffers. The important duty of the regulator is to force timely recognition of 
NPAs and their disclosure when they happen. Forbearance may be a reasonable but risky 
regulatory strategy when there is some hope that growth will pick up soon and the system 
will recover on its own. Everyone – banker, promoter, investors, and government officials – 
often  urge  such  a  strategy  because  it  kicks  the  problem  down  the  road,  hopefully  for 
someone else to deal with. The downside is that when growth does not pick up, the bad loan 
problem  is  bigger,  and  dealing  with  it  is  more  difficult.  It  is  when  the  bad  loan  problem  is 
allowed  to  accumulate  through  forbearance  or  non-recognition  that  regulators  have  the 
difficult task of bringing the system back on track. That is the problem we have had to deal 
with at the RBI. 
As  I  have  shown  you,  the  consequence  since  early  2014  of  the  past  build-up  of  stressed 
loans was a slowdown in public sector bank lending in certain sectors. The cessation of RBI 
forbearance and the Asset Quality Review in mid 2015 were therefore not responsible for the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
slowdown.  Instead,  high  distressed  exposures  in  certain  sectors  were  already  occupying 
PSB  management  attention  and  holding  them  back.  The  only  way  for  them  to  supply  the 
economy’s need for credit, which is essential for higher economic growth, was to clean up 
and recapitalize. 
The silver lining message in the slower credit growth is that banks have not been lending 
indiscriminately in an attempt to reduce the size of stressed assets in an expanded overall 
balance  sheet,  and  this  bodes  well  for  future  slippages.  In  sum,  to  the  question  of  what 
comes first, clean up or growth, I think the answer is unambiguously “Clean up!”. Indeed, this 
is  the  lesson  from  every  other  country  that  has  faced  financial  stress.  It  is  important, 
therefore,  that  the  clean-up  proceeds  to  its  conclusion,  without  any  resort  to  regulatory 
forbearance once again. 
Sometimes,  easier  monetary  policy  is  proposed  as  an  answer  to  reducing  the  bad  debt 
problem.  For  the  heavily  indebted  promoter,  however,  easier  monetary  policy  will  typically 
bring no relief. Even with lower policy rates, the bank, which is typically not made whole even 
if  it  grabs  all  the  borrower’s  cash  flows,  has  no  incentive  to  reduce  the  interest  rate  the 
borrower can pay. And few banks are competing for that borrower’s business, so there is no 
competition to force down loan rates. The bottom line is that easier monetary policy is no 
answer to serious distress, contrary to widespread belief. 
What can the government do? 
The government is in the process of speeding up the debt recovery process, and creating a 
new Bankruptcy system. These are important steps to improve the resolution process. In the 
near term, however, two actions will pay large dividends. 
The first is to improve the governance of public sector banks so that we are not faced with 
this situation again. The Government, through the Indradhanush initiative, has sent a clear 
signal  that  it  wants  to  make  sure  that  public  sector  banks,  once  healthy,  stay  healthy. 
Breaking  up  the  post  of  Chairman  and  Managing  Director,  strengthening  Board  and 
management appointments through the Banks Board Bureau, decentralizing more decisions 
to the professional board, finding ways to incentivize management, all these will help improve 
loan evaluation, monitoring and repayment. 
The  second  is  to  infuse  bank  capital,  with  some  of  the  infusion  related  to  stronger 
performance, so that better banks have more room to grow. Capital infusion into weak banks 
should ideally accompany an improvement in governance, but given the need for absorbing 
the losses associated with balance sheet clean up, better that government capital be infused 
quickly. Governments are sometimes reluctant to infuse bank capital because there are so 
many  more  pressing  demands  for  funds.  Yet,  there  are  few  higher  return  activities  than 
capitalizing  the  public  sector  banks  so  that  they  can  support  credit  growth.  Finally,  the 
Economic Survey has suggested the RBI should capitalize public sector banks. This seems a 
non-transparent  way  of  proceeding,  getting  the  banking  regulator  once  again  into  the 
business of owning banks, with attendant conflicts of interest. 
Better  that  the  RBI  pay  the  government  the  maximum  dividend  that  it  can,  retaining  just 
enough surplus buffers that are consistent with good central bank risk management practice. 
Indeed, this is what we do, and in the last three years, we have paid all our surplus to the 
government. Separately, the government can infuse capital into the banks. The two decisions 
need not be linked. Alternatively, a less effective form of capital, if the government cannot 
buy  bank  equity  directly  with  cash,  is  for  it  to  issue  the  banks  “Government  Capitalization 
Bonds” in exchange for equity. The banks would hold the bonds on their balance sheet. This 
would tie up part of their balance sheet, but would certainly be capital. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Conclusion 
The cleaning up of bank balance sheets, and the restoration of credit growth are vital, related 
elements in the growth agenda. The government and the RBI are helping our public sector 
bankers in this difficult but critical task. I know the process is working, so public sector banks 
will soon be set to finance the enormous needs of this economy once again. 
 
 
 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
        9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
