  Barry Whiteside: Recent developments and outlook for the Fijian 
economy 
Address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the Asco Motors 
Appreciation Luncheon, Suva, 13 July 2016. 
 The Chief Executive Officer of Asco Motors, Mr Jai Kumar 
Distinguished Guests 
Staff of Asco Motors 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory comments 
Bula vinaka and warm greetings to you all! I wish to thank Mr Kumar for his kind invitation. It 
is a pleasure to be here this afternoon to share with you some recent developments and our 
outlook for the Fijian economy. 
But  before  I  do  so,  I  understand  that  this  is  Asco  Motors’  27th  year  of  operations  under  its 
current trading name, and that it has been 53 years since the first Toyota passenger vehicle 
was shipped to Fiji in 1963. I still have visions of those early box-like models (and yes I do go 
back that far!). I distinctively remember that it was a time when anything Japanese was notably 
cheaper, with the connotation of being qualitatively inferior than models imported from Australia 
and other parts of the world. This is definitely not the case now, when anything manufactured 
in Japan seems to attract quite a high premium price! This clearly is a reflection of the drive to 
quality and efficiency over the years and the philosophy to be the best! 
Akio Toyoda, the Chief Executive Officer of Toyota Motor Corporation, famously said, “When 
consumers purchase a Toyota, they are not simply purchasing a car, truck or van. They are 
placing their trust in our company.” 
Today’s event, while labelled a customer appreciation day, can just as easily mark the many 
milestones achieved by Asco Motors over the years. The company has become an important 
cog in our automotive industry which, as a  whole, has contributed immensely to the Fijian 
economy and continues to play an important role towards lifting our growth potential. 
The Fijian economy 
My brief indicated that I should say a few words on the Fijian economy. Over the past three 
years (from 2013–2015) Fiji has grown, on average, by 4.7 percent. This easily exceeds the 
historical trend and is something I feel we should all be quite proud of, given the global trend 
has been moving in the opposite direction. 
Recently  we  have  seen  Fiji  flourish  in  an  environment  of  consistent  and  accommodative 
fiscal  and  monetary  policies,  strong  credit  growth,  improved  investor  and  consumer 
confidence  and,  with  the  return  to  parliamentary  democracy  –  political  stability  and  re-
engagement of our development partners. 
As a result, consumption and investment activity have been very robust. This is confirmed by 
trends in the various partial indicators. Improved disposable household incomes from lower 
taxes, government financial support and remittance inflows from Fijians abroad continue to 
underpin consumer spending. The vehicle industry has clearly benefitted under this climate 
and this has been further supported by favourable labour market conditions, as reflected in 
growing numbers of newly registered members with the Fiji National Provident Fund and job 
advertisements placed in the daily newspapers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Investment  activity  has  expanded  and  continues  to  grow  with  momentum  from  both  the 
private  sector  and  Government.  In  recent  years  the  Government  has  allocated  sizeable 
budgets for infrastructure development, which benefit both the public and private sectors and 
which will gradually unlock previously untapped resources across our major islands as our 
local entrepreneurs begin to play their part to develop their businesses. 
This  year,  despite  Tropical  Cyclone  (TC)  Winston  and  the  April  floods  brought  on  by  TC 
Zena,  the  Fijian  economy  is  still  forecast  to  grow  by  2.4  percent.  This  growth  reflects 
expected  strong  activity  in  our  tourism-related  industries,  including  transport,  wholesale, 
retail, accommodation & food services, which were relatively unscathed by the cyclones. In 
addition,  with  the  on-going  reconstruction  and  recovery  efforts,  construction  activity  is 
expected to remain strong, further boosting retail sales activity. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  know  that  imports  of  investment  and  consumption  goods  are 
projected to pick up as the domestic economy strengthens and reconstruction efforts post-
cyclones continue. When we couple this with expected lower exports of agricultural products 
as a result of the natural disasters, it is possible that we will see a small dent in our foreign 
reserves  towards  the  end  of  this  year.  Nonetheless,  at  the  moment,  our  official  reserves 
continue to remain comfortable, at just under $2.0 billion, or enough to pay for 5.5 months of 
retained imports. 
Inflation, another key macro-economic indicator which we monitor closely, spiked in June to 
5.3  percent  on  the  back  of  price  hikes  in  local  agricultural  market  items  following  the 
cyclones. This effect will be temporary, and in the near-to-medium term, we forecast inflation 
to be stabilised by the existing low world commodity prices. Our end-year number for inflation 
is closer to 3 percent. 
The  medium 
to  remain  positive. 
Notwithstanding any further adverse shocks, our current forecasts put growth at 3.6 percent 
for  2017  and  3.2  percent  for  2018.  Future  growth  is  expected  to  result  from  ongoing 
rebuilding efforts, as well as the faster pace of government capital spending, strong tourist 
numbers and good remittance inflows. 
the  Fiji  economy 
term  outlook 
is  expected 
for 
The automotive industry 
Ladies  and  gentlemen  we  are  here  for  Asco  Motors  so  let  me  share  a  little  on  Fiji’s 
automotive industry. I must acknowledge that our analysis depends primarily on the data we 
receive from the industry and I am sure the industry would probably be able to provide far 
better insight than I could. 
It goes without saying that the automotive industry plays a critical role in Fijian economic life. 
It has deep linkages that impact the growth of every sector of the economy. 
Strong growth in lending to this sector in the past three years (from 2013–2015) reflects the 
enormous opportunities from which the sector has benefited as a result of improved policies 
and the up-beat business environment. New bank loans to the transport and storage sector 
and  to  private  individuals  for  the  purchase  of  vehicles  averaged  an  annual  growth  of 
67 percent ($53 million) and 165 percent ($21 million), respectively. In addition to this, new 
loans by Credit Institutions (the other major lenders to the two sectors) grew by an average 
of 12 percent ($28 million) and 19 percent ($14 million) over the same three-year period. 
Data  on  vehicle  sales  and  vehicle  registrations  received  from  the  Fiji  Motors  Traders 
Association  and  the  Fiji  Land  Transport  Authority  confirm  these  developments.  From  just 
over  1,200  units  in  2010,  new  vehicle  registrations  grew  to  4,264  in  2014  before  falling 
slightly  in  2015  to  3,860  units.  Meanwhile  second  hand  vehicle  registrations  have  had  a 
phenomenal rise from 766 units in 2010 to 9,414 units last year (many of these, no doubt, 
being the Prius hybrids!). In the last three years to 2015, 11,806 new vehicles and 19,939 
second hand vehicles have been added to our roads! A LTA number I saw just recently puts 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  105,000  registered  vehicles  on  our  roads  this  year  (we  of  course  have  no  idea  about  the 
unregistered vehicles!). 
We  must  acknowledge  the  role  of  Government  in  facilitating  growth  in  this  industry.  Apart 
from  significant  Budget  allocations  for  infrastructure  development  in  recent  years,  the 
Government  has  put  in  place  a  number  of  policies  to  ensure  a  sustainable,  more 
environment-friendly and safer automobile industry. Specific policies related to the passenger 
car  industry  include  compliance  with  Euro  4  fuel  standards  and  lower  duties  on  both  new 
vehicles and fuel efficient cars, including hybrids. This is important, especially when we need 
to look critically at reducing our fuel imports bill, which stands at nearly 30 percent of our total 
imports bill each year. 
Looking ahead, I can see immense opportunity for the industry. Fiji’s growing economy has 
resulted  in  a  wider  consumer  base  and,  importantly,  today’s  automobile  industry  needs  to 
strike the right balance between meeting customer product demands, minimizing costs and 
their impact on the economy and protecting environmental standards. I understand that Asco 
Motors and Fiji’s automobile industry have moved towards introducing new models which are 
fuel efficient, affordable and have higher reliability and essentially transforming the future of 
mobility – which is timely for Fiji especially in the event that global fuel prices begin to turn 
around sharply. 
The  benefits  from  Government’s  higher  capital  spending  are  now  clearly  seen  in  our 
improved  roads  and  other  infrastructure.  However,  an  unintended  consequence  of  more 
affordable  automobiles  is  increased  congestion  on  our  roads,  as  I  have  highlighted  earlier 
with the growing number of registrations. I am sure we have all been a little frustrated, some 
more so than others, when caught in the morning and afternoon traffic jams in and around 
Suva. While the scale is no way near the level I have experienced in Manila or Bangkok we 
are slowly getting there and it will be critical that the future effectiveness and efficiency of our 
road systems are addressed in a timely manner. 
The  recent  experiences  we  have  been  facing  with  our  bridges  and  overloading  of  heavy 
trucks  not  only  exacerbates  the  delays  and  travel  times,  but  has  a  significant  economic 
impact for businesses in general. Therefore, in order to keep up with the growing economy 
and rising vehicle demand, the continued successful implementation of quality and adequate 
infrastructure as well as adherence to road standard requirements, are essential. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, in closing, let me just say that the economy has come a long way in 
recent years. Despite the cyclones this year, there is still a great sense of confidence when 
we talk with the private sector and when we analyse the consumption and investment data. 
This year Fiji will register its seventh consecutive year of growth. We have not had a similar 
period  of  sustained  growth  since  the  early  1970s.  Looking  into  the  future,  the  near  and 
medium term outlook for the Fijian economy remains positive. 
As  for  the  Reserve  Bank’s  twin  monetary  policy  objectives,  we  see  inflation  and  foreign 
reserves  as  within  acceptable  and  comfortable  ranges.  We  also  have  a  competitive  and 
stable financial system with ample liquidity to assist us on our growth path. 
The  challenge  for  us  all  going  forward  is  to  continue  our  efforts  towards  enhancing  a 
conducive  business  environment  that  will  bring  about  more  business  and  investment 
opportunities while boosting the country’s growth potential. 
On  that  final  note,  I  again  thank  Mr  Kumar  and  his  team  for  inviting  me  here  today  and 
congratulate Asco Motors for its ongoing success in Fiji and wish you all another successful 
year ahead. 
Vinaka Vakalevu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
