  Henry Ohlsson: Decision today, consequences far into the future 
Speech  by  Mr  Henry  Ohlsson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a  breakfast 
event, organised by Swedbank, Stockholm, 18 March 2016. 
 I would like to thank Bo Enegren, Hanna Köhler, Gustaf Norrefeldt, Cecilia Roos-Isaksson, Marianne Sterner and 
Ulf Söderström for their help with this speech. 
Accompanying figures and the table can be found at the end of the speech. 
Some of the decisions we make only have significance for the here and now. Others may 
have consequences for many decades to come, in some cases for the rest of our lives. Our 
choice  of  education  and  purchase  of  a  home  are  examples  of  decisions  that  have 
considerable significance over a long period of time. 
For a person who puts themselves in debt through decisions with long-term consequences, it 
is of course important how high the interest rates on the debt are. And this does not concern 
the interest rates paid now or in the medium term, but also interest rates several decades 
ahead. 
In recent years, interest rates have been at their lowest level in modern times. Several other 
central  banks  have  done  as  the  Riksbank  and  cut  their  policy  rates  below  zero,  and 
government bond yields at longer maturities are now at historically low levels. This is partly 
due to the prolonged recession following the financial crisis. 
However, in the really long term, it is structural factors such as long-term growth, propensity 
to  save  and  technological  progress  that  are  crucial  for  movements  in  interest  rates  rather 
than  short-term  fluctuations.  Let  us  begin  with  a  definition  that  can  help  us  bring  some 
structure to the discussion and to understand the challenges we are facing. The interest rate 
we normally see is nominal, and measures how much we pay in terms of money when we 
borrow  or  how  much  we  receive  when  we  save.  But  as  prices  usually  rise  over  time,  the 
value of our money also declines. To take this into account, one can look at the real interest 
rate, that is, the nominal interest rate minus the expected rate of inflation. The real interest 
rate  measures  how  much  we  pay  for  our  loans  in  real  terms,  that  is,  in  terms  of  our 
purchasing power. 
In  the  very  long  turn,  the  real  interest  rate  is  determined  by  structural  factors,  such  as 
savings  and  investment.  And  in  a  small,  open  economy  like  Sweden’s,  these  factors  are 
primarily  determined  by  international  developments.  Monetary  policy,  on  the  other  hand, 
does not have any marked effect on the real interest rate in the long run. However, monetary 
policy  does  influence  the  rate  of  inflation  and  inflation  expectations.  If  monetary  policy  is 
based on an inflation target that is perceived as credible, long-term inflation expectations will 
coincide with the inflation target. 
In  other  words,  we  can  say  that  the  long-term  nominal  interest  rate  is  determined  by  two 
factors: 
• 
the long-term real interest rate, which in turn is determined by structural factors and 
is global, and 
the inflation target, which monetary policy can make credible. 
• 
I shall discuss these two factors today and speculate how they may develop in the really long 
term. 
Firstly, I intend to take up the fact that real interest rates have shown a falling trend over a 
long period of time at a global level. What factors lie behind this? Will the trend prevail and, if 
so, what consequences will it have for monetary policy? And what will it mean for households 
and companies? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Secondly, I will discuss the inflation target. Here in Sweden the target has been 2 per cent 
since it was introduced in the mid-1990s. Most other countries with inflation targets also have 
their targets at around 2 per cent. What are their experiences of having a target at this level? 
Should the level be lower or higher? 
Interest rates have thus been very low for a long time now, but it is reasonable to expect that 
in  the  long  run  they  will  be  3–4  times  higher  than  they  are  now.  This  must  be  taken  into 
account; otherwise decisions taken today will have major consequences much further ahead. 
It is thus important to remember that the conditions applying today will not apply for decades 
into the future. 
Lower real interest rate trend since the 1980s 
As the process of financial and economic integration in the global economy has increased, 
common factors such as global growth and global saving have played an increasingly large 
role  with  regard  to  interest  rates.1  Real  interest  rates  have  fallen  around  the  world  which 
justifies calling this a global real interest rate. The fall is in the order of 4–5 percentage points 
since the 1980s.2  As Sweden is a small, open economy, the long-term global real interest 
rate can be regarded as an anchor for the Swedish real interest rate. During brief periods, 
the real interest rate in Sweden may deviate from the global real interest rate, but over longer 
periods of time the Swedish real interest rate will be determined by global factors. 
Figure 1 shows how the long-term real interest rate has developed in Sweden and the United 
Kingdom  since  the  mid-1980s.  More  specifically,  the  figure  shows  the  10-year  yield  on 
Swedish and British real government bonds. From the mid-1980s and ten years onwards, the 
real interest rate varied around almost 4 per cent in the United Kingdom, while in Sweden it 
was much more volatile and at a higher level. This was followed by a trend decline that has 
continued  until  today.  At  present,  the  Swedish  real  interest  rate  is  around  –0–5  per  cent, 
while the British one is around –1 per cent. 
It also appears that in most countries the lower real interest rates are the main reason for the 
fall in nominal interest rates during this period. During the 1990s, when a number of central 
banks introduced inflation targets, lower inflation expectations also contributed to the fall in 
nominal interest rates. 
Secular stagnation or debt adjustment? 
An international discussion has been going on for some years now with regard to the causes 
of  the  fall  in  the  global  real  interest  rate.  In  simpler  terms,  one  can  say  that  two  main 
explanations have been put forward in the debate.3 
According to one explanation, the fall is primarily due to factors determining the long-term 
trends  in  investment  and  savings,  such  as  demographic  developments.  This  is  partly 
connected to the discussion on secular stagnation initiated by Lawrence Summers, amongst 
others.4 In this view, long-term trends in saving and investment have pulled down the interest 
rate level compatible with full employment. The fall is so great that this interest-rate level is 
below zero. 
                                                
1  See IMF (2014). 
2  See King and Low (2014). 
3  See Armelius et al. (2014). 
4  See Summers (2014). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Representatives of the other explanation, for instance Kenneth Rogoff,5 put greater emphasis 
on more short-term factors directly linked to the financial crisis, such as high indebtedness 
and  increased  uncertainty,  which  have  held  back  investment  and  got  households  to  save 
more. 
Regardless  of  what  significance  one  attributes  to  the  financial  crisis,  it  is  clear  that  the 
downward trend in interest rates began much earlier. Back in the period prior to the financial 
crisis, the Federal Reserve Governor of the time, Alan Greenspan, described the low long-
term US interest rates as a mystery. 
Growth, savings and technology determine the real interest rate 
Regardless of which explanation one concurs with, most people consider the long-run global 
real interest rate to be primarily governed by expectations of potential growth, the propensity 
to save and technological advances. I will therefore first describe how the various factors can 
influence the real interest rate. I will then discuss possible explanations as to how growth, 
propensity to save and technology may change. 
Lower potential global growth gives lower global real interest rate 
According  to  economic  theory,  expected  growth  should  play  an  important  role  for  the 
development of the real interest rate; the lower the growth, the lower the real interest rate. 
International  organisations  such  as  the  IMF  and  the  OECD  have  made  downward 
adjustments to their assessments of the global growth trend in recent years. This could lead 
to a lower real interest rate. 
At the same time, one can note that global growth was both stable and relatively high during 
the 15–20 years prior to the financial crisis. It is thus not possible to explain the long-term fall 
in interest rates prior to the financial crisis as due to lower global growth. 
One possible explanation could instead be that the global population increase has fallen over 
a long period of time, and is expected to continue falling in the coming period. This could 
contribute to lower potential growth in that the labour force will increase at a slower pace. At 
the same time, this effect will be counteracted if labour productivity rises. 
Slower population growth and the fact that the working age population is shrinking indicate 
that  growth  will  remain  lower  than  in  the  pre-crisis  decades.  The  prospects  for  labour 
productivity  are  much  more  difficult  to  assess.  The  rate  of  increase  in  labour  productivity 
declined  in  connection  with  the  economic  downturn  following  the  financial  crisis  and  it  is 
uncertain how lasting the effects will be. 
Demography affects propensity to save and thus the real interest rate 
Demographic  developments  also  affect  the  propensity  to  save.  Life  expectancy  has 
increased and the birth-rate has fallen in recent decades. This has meant that the population 
has aged in most parts of the world. It applies especially in developed countries but also in 
countries such as China and several other emerging markets. Merely the fact that people are 
on average living longer means that they need to save more money for their old age, unless 
the  retirement  age  is  raised  at  the  same  pace  as  the  increase  in  life  expectancy. 
Developments have also entailed a percentage increase in the older working age population 
(40–65 years old) – which normally has a high level of saving – in recent decades. There is 
thus  good  reason  to  assume  that  demographical  developments  have  contributed  to  an 
increased propensity to save in the world and thus to a lower real interest rate. 
                                                
5  See Rogoff (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
The demographic effect on saving in China is worth mentioning in particular. The single-child 
policy  contributed  to  a  severe  decline  in  the  birth-rate.  At  the  same  time,  life  expectancy 
increased. The combination of weak social safety net and fewer children to provide for the 
elderly  was  probably  an  important  explanation  for  the  increase  in  saving  in  the  Chinese 
economy. As China has become increasingly integrated into the global economy, saving in 
China has also been increasingly channelled to other parts of the world for investment. 
Increased propensity to save in many emerging markets 
Many other emerging markets have also increased their savings, but partly for other reasons 
than  a  change  in  demographics.  Experiences  from  the  Asian  crisis  in  1998  contributed  to 
many  emerging  market  countries’  central  banks  building  up  their  currency  reserves  to  be 
able to withstand future currency outflows. The increased demand from these countries for 
low-risk assets, such as government bonds, led to yields being pushed down at the end of 
the 1990s and until the years prior to the financial crisis. The rising demand for safe assets 
also contributed to an increase in the differential between the risk-free rate and the rate on 
higher risk investments. 
More pensioners can in the long run lead to lower saving and thereby a higher real 
interest rate 
On the other hand, the saving may decline gradually as an increasingly large percentage if 
the  world  population  attain  the  age  of  retirement.  However  the  speed  and  strength  of  the 
impact that demographics will have on savings is uncertain. It depends partly on the extent to 
which older people choose to remain in work for longer and to what extent those who work 
save more for their retirement when their life expectancy rises. 
Greater income disparities also affect propensity to save 
Another factor that can explain why the propensity to save has increased is the increased 
income  spread.  In  most  developed  countries,  income  spreads  have  increased  since  the 
1980s. 
High-income  earners  normally  have  a  higher  propensity  to  save  than  low-income  earners. 
The increase in the income spread could therefore have meant that saving has increased. At 
the  same  time,  it  should  be  said  that  even  if  income  disparities  have  increased  within  a 
number of countries, they have declined on a global level in that the emerging markets are 
catching up with the developed economies. It is therefore difficult to say how global saving 
has been affected. 
Wages as a share of added value have declined 
The  greater  income  spreads  are  also  visible  in  other  ways.  The  trend  towards  increased 
saving has been so extensive that wealth has risen substantially in most industrial nations. 
Wealth  has  also  risen  faster  than  the  national  income.6  These  increases  in  wealth  are 
transferred and transformed into capital that is used in production. In most cases, this is done 
via the financial markets. The global real interest rate will in turn adapt so that the desired 
capital stock matches the available wealth. 
In recent decades, the upturn in wealth and capital in relation to national income has proved 
to be relatively greater than the downturn in the real interest rate. This has meant that the 
capital share of the added value (the ratio between the real interest rate multiplied by capital 
and national income) has risen despite the real interest rate declining. The capital share and 
the  wage  share  always  add  up  to  one.  Consequently,  wages  share  of  added  value  has 
                                                
6  See Piketty & Zucman (2014). Waldenström (2015) provides an account of the wealth/national income ratio in 
Sweden.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
declined in many countries.7 Another way of expressing this is that such large real interest 
rate cuts have not been needed for capital to absorb the increase in wealth. And this in turn 
is due to the production technology used. 
Following this discussion on what determines the development of the real interest rate in the 
long  run,  I  shall  now  go  on  to  discuss  the  inflation  target,  which  is  the  other  factor  of 
significance for nominal interest rates in the longer run. 
Inflation in the long run 
Most  of  Sweden’s  most  important  trading  partners  have  inflation  targets  in  one  form  or 
another. Usually, these are a target for the inflation rate of around 2 per cent a year, see 
Table 1. 
More common for interest rate to be limited by lower bound 
When the long-term level of the global real interest rate is low, there is an increased risk that 
the nominal interest rate will reach its lower bound in future economic downturns. Many have 
therefore argued in various contexts in favour of raising the inflation target.8 This increases 
the distance to the nominal interest rate’s lower bound and makes it easier to stimulate the 
economy  in  a  recession.  At  present,  for  instance,  the  Bank  of  Canada  is  reviewing  the 
country’s  inflation  target,  including  an  analysis  of  potential  consequences  of  raising  the 
inflation target.9 If the nominal interest rate remains at zero, the real interest rate can be cut in 
the short term to a lowest level of –2 per cent, with an inflation target of 2 per cent. If the 
inflation target and inflation expectations were instead 4 per cent, the real interest rate could 
be cut in the short term to –4 per cent. 
Even  though  interest  rates  have  fallen  below  zero  in  Sweden  and  a  number  of  other 
countries,  the  correlation  between  a  higher  inflation  target  and  a  short-term  possibility  to 
attain a lower real interest rate remains. 
Advantages and disadvantages of a higher inflation target 
The most obvious advantage of raising the inflation target to, say, 3 or 4 per cent would be 
that this increases the possibilities to stimulate the economy in future deep recessions and to 
bring up demand and inflation. The experience of the financial crisis shows that the risk of 
very  deep  and  prolonged  recessions  has  previously  been  underestimated.  Prior  to  the 
financial crisis the risks of deep economic crises were assessed on the basis of experiences 
during  the  post-war  period,  when  cyclical  fluctuations  were  small  and  it  was  thus  easy  to 
underestimate the risks. If one studies economic data extending much further back in time, 
one can see that large downturns have been much more common.  
At the same time, there are several factors that make raising the inflation target problematic, 
not  least  how  the  actual  transition  to  a  new  inflation  target  would  be  implemented.  For 
instance,  the  credibility  of  a  new  target  would  be  weakened  if  it  were  announced  in  a 
situation where inflation was far from the old target.  
It could also be problematic to introduce a new, higher inflation target in Sweden in isolation, 
if  other  important  central  banks  around  the  world  stood  firm  by  a  target  of  2  per  cent. 
Swedish competitiveness could be weakened, for instance, if inflation and wage increases in 
Sweden were higher than those abroad. In theory, the Swedish krona should weaken in this 
situation, so that competitiveness would be restored. But there are many factors affecting the 
                                                
7  See Karabarbounis & Neiman (2014) and Bengtsson & Waldenström (2015). 
8  See, for example, Ball (2014). 
9  See Kryvtsov and Mendes (2015).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
exchange  rate  and  an  adjustment  could  take  a  long  time.  And  during  this  time  Swedish 
competitiveness could deteriorate.  
There is also a risk that inflation could vary more if we had a higher target. This could mean 
that it became more difficult for economic agents to distinguish upturns in the general price 
level from relative price changes and thus more difficult to make good financial decisions.  
I have thus described the two factors that determine the nominal interest rate in the longer 
term. It is now time to put them together. 
The nominal interest rate in the long run 
Low interest rates for a long time... 
The fall in the global real interest rate naturally has consequences for monetary policy. Many 
central banks have cut their policy rates to historically low levels to stimulate demand and get 
inflation to rise. In Sweden, the Riksbank emphasises that nominal interest rates will be low 
for a long time to come. The Riksbank’s forecasts extend two or three years ahead. Figure 2 
shows the repo-rate path the Executive Board of the Riksbank decided on at the monetary 
policy meeting in February. 
The Riksbank’s forecast is that the repo rate will remain at the current level of –0.5 per cent 
until some time around the end of June/beginning of July 2017. At the end of 2018/beginning 
of  2019  the  forecast  is  that  the  repo  rate  will  have  risen  to  0.5  per  cent.  The  Riksbank 
assesses  that  this  expansionary  monetary  policy  is  necessary  to  get  inflation  to  rise  and 
stabilise around 2 per cent in 2017.  
The  low  interest  rates  mean  that  most  of  those  who  save  or  borrow  for  consumption  and 
investment  will  receive  or  pay  low  interest  rates  during  this  period.  But  there  are  also 
financial decisions that have much further reaching consequences. 
...but what then? 
Is it possible to say what nominal interest rates will be in 10, 15 or 20 years’ time? It would be 
presumptuous to attempt precise forecasts. But it is possible to reason out a scenario for a 
possible  normal  state  of  affairs  based  on  what  we  know  today  and  the  factors  I  have 
discussed today. In a “normal state of affairs” necessary debt adjustments in the wake of the 
financial crisis would be complete. 
Through higher global growth, we could expect higher global real interest rates. Growth can 
in principle come from employment or labour productivity beginning to increase at a faster 
pace. 
If we have lower global saving, we can expect higher global real interest rates. Saving can 
decline  if  the  percentage  of  elderly  rises  and  the  retirement  age  falls.  If  income  spreads 
decline, this can also lead to lower global saving. 
When saving declines, this can put further upward pressure on global real interest rates, as 
the competition for savings can be expected to increase among those wanting to invest in 
new  production  technology.  This  can  have  significance  for  the  development  of  the  real 
interest rate.  
Finally, there is the question of monetary policy. Will it be conducted with an inflation target? 
And, if so, what level will the target have? 
Nominal interest rates will become higher in the future 
The demographical changes we can see ahead indicate that global saving will decline. This 
would  imply  higher  global  real  interest  rates.  The  future  conditions  for  growth  are  more 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
uncertain, but if labour productivity were to begin to increase faster than today, there would 
be further upward pressure on global real interest rates.  
Let us therefore say that future global real interest rates will be in the order of 1.5–2.5 per 
cent. If we add to this an inflation target and inflation expectations of 2 per cent in Sweden, 
we get nominal interest rates of 3.5–4.5 per cent. 
Even if we do not see a return to the nominal interest rate levels we previously regarded as 
normal,  long-term  nominal  interest  rates  will  be  much  higher  than  they  are  today.  The 
important  thing  is  that  economic  agents  who  now  make  decisions  with  long-term 
consequences  bear  this  in  mind.  This  could  refer,  for  instance,  to  households  who  now 
borrow money to buy a home. In the future the interest rates on these loans can be three or 
four times higher than the current mortgage rates. 
I began by discussing the major differences in time horizons in the financial decisions we all 
need to make. Some decisions apply only here and now. If we make the wrong decision it is 
not  too  difficult  to  put  it  right.  In  other  cases,  we  make  decisions  today  that  have 
consequences  far  into  the  future.  It  is  then  important  not  to  assume  that  the  conditions 
applying today will apply for decades into the future. 
References 
Armelius,  Bonomolo,  Lindskog,  Rådahl,  Strid  and  Walentin  (2014)  “Lower  neutral  interest 
rate in Sweden?”, Economic Commentaries no. 8, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Ball,  L.  (2014)  “The  Case  for  a  Long-Run  Inflation  Target  of  Four  Percent”.  IMF  Working 
Paper WP/14/92, June. 
Bengtsson E & Waldenström D (2015) “Capital shares and income inequality: Evidence from 
the long run” CEPR Discussion Paper DP11022, December.  
IMF (2014) “Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates”, World Economic Outlook, April. 
Karabarbounis, L  &  Neiman,  B  (2014)  “The  Global  Decline  of the  Labor  Share”,  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61–103. 
King, M, Low, D, (2014) “Measuring the ‘world’ real interest rate”, NBER Working Paper No. 
19887. 
Kryvtsov,  O,  Mendes,  R  (2015)  “The  Optimal  Level  of  the  Inflation  Target:  A  Selective 
Review  of  the  Literature  and  Outstanding  Issues”,  Bank  of  Canada,  Discussion  Paper  
2015–8. 
Piketty,  T  &  Zucman,  G  (2014)  “Capital  is  Back:  Wealth-Income  Ratios  in  Rich  Countries 
1700–2010”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3),1255–1310. 
Rogoff, K (2015). “Debt supercycle, not secular stagnation”, VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal. 
Summers, L. “Reflections on the new ‘Secular stagnation hypothesis’”, VOX, CEPR’s Policy 
Portal, 30 October 2014. 
Waldenström,  D  (2015)  “Wealth-income  ratios  in  a  small,  late-industrializing,  welfare-state 
economy:  Sweden,  1810–2014”  Department  of  Economics,  Uppsala  University,  Working 
Paper 2015:4, October. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
