   Ben Broadbent: Central banks and digital currencies 
Speech by Mr Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
at the London School of Economics, London, 2 March 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to thank Robleh Ali, Victoria Cleland, Grellan McGrath and other colleagues at the Bank for helpful 
comments and suggestions. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of 
England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Introduction 
Hello! 
This morning I’m going to talk about money. 
This should be a routine topic for a central banker, particularly one whose job title includes the 
word “monetary”. It’s nonetheless ground on which one treads with a bit of trepidation. That’s 
partly because some of the big questions involved – what money is, why it exists, how and by 
whom its supply should be governed – seem to evoke very strong opinions. Even the great 
economist  John  Hicks,  formerly  of  the  LSE,  confessed  in  the  1930s  to  some  nervousness 
about  expressing  his  views  about  the  matter:  “It  is  with  peculiar  diffidence  and  even 
apprehension that one ventures to open one’s mouth on the subject of money”. 
It’s also because my particular focus – so-called “digital” currencies, including the possibility of 
a central bank variety – is an area of active interest and research, including at the Bank of 
England. So rather than try and give a lecture on monetary theory, or pre-empt the results of 
ongoing thinking on this issue, I’ll seek to make only a few very broad, conceptual points, 
touching  on  the  following  questions:  what  is  the  key  innovation  in  private-sector  digital 
currencies such as bitcoin? what is a “central bank digital currency”? and what might be the 
economic implications of introducing one? 
I’ll  be  brief  about  the  first,  not  least  because  there  are  good,  more  detailed  descriptions 
elsewhere – including in two excellent articles by Bank economists, published some time ago 
in the Quarterly Bulletin. The main point here is that the important innovation in bitcoin isn’t the 
alternative unit of account – it seems very unlikely that, to any significant extent, we’ll ever be 
paying  for  things  in  bitcoins,  rather  than  pounds,  dollars  or  euros  –  but  its  settlement 
technology, the so-called “distributed ledger”. This allows transfers to be verifiably recorded 
without  the  need  for  a  trusted  third  party.  It  is  potentially  valuable  when  there  is  no  such 
institution and when verifying such information on a multilateral basis is costly. 
Acting as a trusted third party is precisely what a central bank does. It performs that role only 
for one particular asset, central bank money (i.e. reserve deposits held largely by commercial 
banks at the central bank). But the function goes right to the heart of what central banks do 
and  how  they  came  about.  And  if  a  private-sector  digital  currency  uses  the  technology  to 
substitute for a third-party clearer, the central bank counterpart would do the opposite. The aim 
would be to widen access to the central bank’s balance sheet, beyond commercial banks. 
There’s no rigid correspondence here: in principle, one could introduce the technology and 
preserve the current arrangements, under which it is commercial banks that hold central bank 
deposits;  it’s  also  possible  to  increase  the  number  of  counterparties  without  it.  But  the 
distributed ledger would probably make it easier to do so. That might mean adding only a 
narrow set of counterparties – perhaps a wide range of non-bank financial companies, say. It 
might mean something more dramatic: in the limiting case, everyone – including individuals – 
would be able to hold such balances. So although they might share the same technology, and 
the same name, the private and central-bank versions of a digital currency are actually rather 
different. The one would expand what the other seeks to replace. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   As far as its economic effects are concerned, my guess is that much would depend on how 
exactly a central bank digital currency (CBDC) is designed – and in particular the extent to 
which it competes with the main form of money in the economy, commercial bank deposits. As 
individuals,  we  already  have  the  ability  to  hold  claims  on  the  central  bank,  in  the  form  of 
physical cash. If all a CBDC did was to substitute for cash – if it bore no interest and came 
without any of the extra services we get with bank accounts1 – people would probably still want 
to keep most of their money in commercial banks.  
But even then it’s likely you’d see some money moving out of existing deposits. That drain 
would be greater the more closely a CBDC resembles a genuine bank account. One imagines 
it would also be counter-cyclical – resources would flow out of commercial banks during times 
of financial stress, back towards them when risk aversion is low. 
Shifting deposits to the central bank, and away from the leveraged commercial banking sector, 
has two important implications. On the one hand, it would probably make them safer. Currently, 
retail deposits are backed mainly by illiquid loans, assets that can’t be sold on open markets; 
if we all tried simultaneously to close our accounts, banks wouldn’t have the liquid resources 
to meet the demand. The central bank, by contrast, holds only liquid assets on its balance 
sheet. The central bank can’t run out of cash and therefore can’t suffer a “run”. 
On the other hand, taking deposits away from banks could impair their ability to make the loans 
in the first place. Banks would be more reliant on wholesale markets, a source of funding that 
didn’t  prove  particularly  stable  during  the  crisis,  and  could  reduce  their  lending  to  the  real 
economy as a result. 
This is the really main point I want to get across. Some suggest that central banks will have to 
issue their own digital currency – i.e. to supply central bank money more widely, via some 
generalised  distributed  ledger  –  to  meet  a  “competitive  threat”  from  private-sector  rivals.  I 
suspect a more important issue for central banks considering such a move will be what it might 
mean for the funding of banks and the supply of credit. 
Private-sector digital currencies: the distributed ledger 
After  that  rather  lengthy  introduction,  let’s  begin  with  a  brief  over-view  of  what  a  “digital 
currency” is. As I say, I won’t take long over this. It’s a rich topic, goodness knows there are 
people who know more about computers than I do, and you can find a very good and more 
detailed description in the autumn 2014 edition of the Bank’s Quarterly Bulletin.    
One thing those articles make clear is that the key innovation introduced by something like 
“bitcoin”  is  not  so  much  that  it’s  “digital”,  if  by  that  we  mean  that  balances  are  stored 
electronically. At least in developed economies the overwhelming majority of money has long 
been held in bank accounts, rather than as physical cash (Chart 1 plots the history of both in 
the  UK);  almost  since  their  invention,  computers  have  been  used  by  banks  to  record 
transactions between, and balances on, such accounts. If a “digital” currency is one whose 
accounts are little more than a series of zeros and ones on some distant electronic machine, 
well that’s long been the case.  
And if the word “currency” indicates an alternative unit of account – the “bitcoin”, for example 
– nor is this likely to be of enduring significance. You can find goods and services quoted in 
bitcoin. In the United States, at a rough guess, there may have been as much as $5bn worth 
of such transactions last year2. But in a country where annual consumer spending is twelve 
and  a  half  trillion  dollars,  that’s  a  negligible  proportion  of  the  total.  In  the  opinion  of  most 
                                                 
1  
2   According to Coinbase, around 20% of bitcoin transactions – worth $25bn in total – were for retail purposes.  
I’m thinking here of things like direct debits, or the capacity to receive our monthly pay.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   economists,  it’s  pretty  unlikely  that  its  use  as  a  means  of  exchange  will  become  very 
widespread.  
It’s not just that the value of bitcoin is extremely volatile, though that’s certainly been the case 
(Chart 2; see also Ali et al (2014a and 2014b) and Yermack (2013) for the shortcomings of 
Bitcoin as a useable money). One should also recognise that established currencies have a 
significant built-in advantage. Rather like a common language, the benefit to any individual of 
using a particular unit of account is greater if others use it too. That gives a big head-start to 
the  incumbent.  Switches  do  very  occasionally  happen:  degrade  a  currency  sufficiently,  via 
hyperinflation  and  collapse  of  the  banking  system,  and  people  will  eventually  look  for 
alternatives. But that’s generally the sort of thing that has to happen: almost always, these 
currency  substitutions  occur  only  once 
the  existing  currency  has  become  deeply 
compromised3. Even then, the thing people naturally reach for is an existing, trusted currency 
– often the US dollar – rather than some entirely new unit of account.  
So if it’s neither the “digital” nor the “currency” aspect of bitcoin that matters, what is it that has 
sparked so much interest? Well perhaps a better name for what we’re talking about, albeit 
more  of  a  mouthful,  is  a  “decentralised  virtual  clearinghouse  and  asset  register”.  As  the 
Quarterly Bulletin articles explain, the key innovation in bitcoin is its settlement mechanism. 
Instead of relying on an independent third party to process and record transactions, holders of 
bitcoin use a decentralised computer system called the “distributed ledger”. The distributed 
ledger works by encouraging users to verify for themselves, and others, blocks of transactions 
made over time. As everyone in the system has the right to do this, and everyone can see the 
results, there is no need for a trusted, centralised clearer.  
In  principle,  this  technology  could  be  applied  to  many  things,  not  just  the  exchange  and 
registering  of  financial  assets.  A  recent  official  report  in  the  UK  suggested  that  distributed 
ledgers  might  eventually  be  used  for  a  wide  variety  of  government  services,  including  the 
collection of taxes, the delivery of benefits – potentially including new “smart” transfers that 
could target particular groups – the keeping of business registers and other things besides4. If 
so, then there may be similar potential uses in the non-financial private sector.  
However, it’s the application to the settlement of financial assets – above all financial securities 
like equities and bonds – in which the private sector has become most interested. There are 
several new firms seeking to exploit the opportunity.  
It remains to be seen whether these ventures prove successful. But one can understand why 
they’ve come about. What a distributed ledger would seek to replace, in the case of securities 
exchange, isn’t just a single “third-party centralised clearer”, but a complicated system with lots 
of institutional layers: custodians who look after the securities and perform basic services such 
as  collecting  dividends;  brokers,  through  whom  trade  orders  are  placed;  exchanges  and 
clearing houses where exchange and settlement occur. Each has its own particular function in 
the process; at each stage, there may be a degree of settlement risk; each is obliged to keep 
its own record of the same balances and transactions.  
It’s hard to know the combined cost of these services, but a recent study estimated that, in the 
G7 countries, the cost of clearing and settling securities was $54bn a year5. These are the 
economic resources it requires to transfer the assets, verify who owns what, and reconcile the 
various records. The hope is that, by displacing these various middlemen, a distributed ledger 
would result in a cheaper and more secure system for providing these services. 
                                                 
3   New currencies have sometimes been introduced by executive decision and in an orderly way. The most obvious 
example is the euro. But when currency substitution has occurred naturally it’s almost always done so only after 
the incumbent currency has been debauched by hyperinflation.  
4   Walport (2016). 
5   Autonomous Research (2016). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
   Central bank digital currency: who can bank at the central bank?  
What, then, of the exchange of money, the particular asset for which the distributed ledger 
technology was originally conceived? Well that too has its own layers. Broadly speaking, at 
least for a given currency, there are two: commercial banks and the central bank. 
As we saw in Chart 1, most of what you and I consider money is held as liquid claims on 
commercial banks, i.e. deposits. Most transactions in the economy involve transfers of these 
claims. That’s obviously a straightforward matter if the two parties to the transaction use the 
same bank. When there are different banks involved – and that’s going to be true most of the 
time – there needs to be a means by which one can transfer money to the other. 
This is done using their deposits at the central bank – so-called “reserves”6. That’s why the 
central bank is sometimes called “the banker’s bank”, and why reserves are often described 
as “the ultimate settlement asset”. The function of settling inter-bank transfers lies at the heart 
of what central banks do and, arguably, explains how they came about (Shafik (2016); see 
also Goodhart (1988)).  
A “central bank digital currency” (CBDC) would involve putting these reserve deposits on a 
distributed ledger. And if it allows for securities to be exchanged more cheaply and securely, 
might the same not be true for these money balances? 
Yes,  presumably.  It’s  not  clear  the  savings  would  be  as  large  as  those  for  exchanging 
securities. The current set-up, which has the central bank as a single hub through which all 
inter-bank  transfers  take  place,  already  involves  significant  economies  of  scale.  That’s 
precisely the advantage of having a single, trusted third party at the centre: you don’t need so 
many layers to begin with. There are certainly new technologies that can reduce, and indeed 
already are reducing, the costs of the front end of the existing payments system (i.e. the flow 
of commercial bank deposits round the economy). The ability to pay one’s bills over the internet 
is a case in point: the more that happens, the less the need for expensive bank branches. But 
that is happening independently of any changes at the back end of the system, by which I 
mean  the  infrastructure  for  exchanging  central  bank  money.  Compared  with  securities 
settlement, that process simply has fewer middlemen for a distributed ledger to replace. 
However, things do not end there. The point about the new technology is not just that it might 
make exchanging assets more efficient, to a greater or lesser extent. In principle, it also makes 
it easier to widen the access to those assets, perhaps dramatically so. If you create a platform 
on which the existing participants can more easily exchange central bank money, why not 
extend the right to others?  
As I said in the introduction, this certainly isn’t impossible under the current settlement system, 
known  as  RTGS  (for  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement).  There  are  already  some  non-bank 
institutions that have access to the Bank of England’s regular facilities7. As my fellow Deputy 
Governor Minouche Shafik recently explained, the Bank is currently undertaking a review of 
RTGS and the question of access will be one of the issues involved (Shafik (2016)).  
But it seems likely that a distributed ledger would make it that process easier, opening up the 
balance sheet to a wider variety of financial firms. One might go further, giving access to non-
financial firms, or perhaps even individual households. In the limit, a distributed ledger might 
mean that we could all of us hold such balances.  
If so, our accounts would no longer be a claim on commercial banks but, like banknotes, the 
liability of the central bank. 
                                                 
6   Banks can also transfer resources by buying and selling their own short-term debt in the “money market”, but 
ultimate settlement is made by exchanging central bank reserves. 
7   Carney (2013). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Would it compete with cash or with bank deposits? The CBDC and “narrow banking” 
But which would it be – an actual bank account, with all the extra services such things entail, 
perhaps including the payment of interest; or simply “e-cash” – something that can only be 
used for retail transfers and doesn’t receive any interest? 
This is an important question. If all it did was to reduce the demand for physical cash, it’s not 
clear the macroeconomic effects of a CBDC would be that significant. It’s possible the retail 
payments  system  might  become  more  efficient.  It’s  also  true  that,  were  a  CBDC  fully  to 
displace  paper  currency,  that  would  open  the  door  to  the  possibility  of  materially  negative 
interest rates (Buiter (2009), Rogoff (2014), Haldane (2015)).  
But that would require explicitly abolishing cash, not just introducing an electronic alternative. 
As long as it’s possible to hold something with a guaranteed nominal return of zero there’s a 
similar lower bound on all other forms of money, whether reserves at the central bank or a 
more widely available CBDC. Leaving aside the question of whether or not you should actively 
get rid of banknotes8, a purely cash-like version of a CBDC would mainly involve substituting 
one zero-yielding liability of the central bank for another.  
It seems to me that the more material effects of a CBDC would arise if it provided competition 
not just for banknotes but for commercial bank deposits as well. It’s not simply that there’s 
more money to play for (remember how much more is held in bank accounts). It’s that the 
assets backing the two are qualitatively quite distinct. Shifting resources from one to the other 
might therefore have an important effect on the relative supplies and prices of those assets. 
Charts 3 and 4 make the point. Modern commercial banks, whose sterling balance sheets are 
aggregated in Chart 3, have what is called a “fractional reserve” structure. Their holdings of 
liquid  assets,  including  reserves  at  the  central  bank,  are  much  smaller  than  their  deposit 
liabilities (the purple bar). Most of their assets are loans. 
But loans are “illiquid”: there’s no secondary market in which to sell them and, at least in the 
short run, their value to the creditor cannot be easily realised. Indeed, when banks attempt to 
do so – by demanding early repayment or abruptly curtailing lines of credit – they can cause 
great economic damage, as we (re-)discovered after the 2008–09 crisis. 
This “maturity transformation” – the combination of on-demand liabilities and illiquid assets – 
imparts  an  inherent  fragility  to  commercial  banks’  balance  sheets.  If  everyone  tried 
simultaneously to withdraw a bank’s deposits, it wouldn’t have enough liquid resources with 
which to meet the demand. That’s why banks are vulnerable to “runs”. Taken with the economic 
costs of deleveraging, it’s also why society regulates and under-writes the banking system, via 
deposit insurance and central banks’ lender-of-last resort facilities.  
By contrast, the central bank essentially holds nothing but liquid assets – largely government 
securities (Chart 49). Shifting deposits away from commercial banks, and towards the central 
bank, would therefore make for a “narrower” banking system – a “narrow” bank being one 
whose assets are as liquid as its liabilities. In principle, it would also make for a safer one. 
Backed by liquid assets, rather than risky lending, deposits would become inherently more 
secure. They wouldn’t be vulnerable to “runs” and we would no longer need to insure them.  
                                                 
8   Nor is it a live issue for the Bank. As the Governor recently said to the House of Commons’ Treasury Committee, 
“May I…be absolutely clear: there are no plans to abolish cash at the Bank of England”.  
9   The  Bank  of  England’s  balance  sheet  has  obviously  grown  following  QE.  Those  operations  have  been 
conducted via the  
  Asset Purchase Facility (APF), which is not directly on the Bank’s balance sheet – strictly speaking, the blue bar 
in Chart 4 is not direct holdings of gilts but a loan from the Bank to the APF. But the APF itself holds only gilts 
and, even before QE, the vast majority of assets on the Bank’s balance sheet were government securities.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
   The case for narrow banks has a long and distinguished pedigree. The classical economists 
Adam  Smith  and  David  Ricardo  favoured  such  a  system.  Famously,  during  the  Great 
Depression,  a  group  of  economists  at  the  University  of  Chicago  recommended  the  end  of 
fractional reserve banking (the so-called “Chicago Plan”). There have been similar calls since 
the 2008–09 financial crisis10. 
Proponents of narrow banking have generally argued it should be imposed by regulatory fiat, 
rather than via some sort of nationalisation of deposit-taking by the central bank. An exception 
is  a  1987  essay  by  the  economist  James  Tobin11.  To  avoid  relying  too  heavily  on  deposit 
insurance to protect the payments system, Tobin argued, the government should create what 
he called “deposited currency accounts” (DCAs) at the central bank. “I think the government 
should make available to the public a medium with the convenience of deposits and the safety 
of currency, essentially currency on deposit, transferable in any amount by check or other 
order.”  
There are two interesting points about Tobin’s proposal. One is that he made it long before 
anything like the “distributed ledger” was conceived (he suggested that DCA branches could 
be  housed  in  post  offices).  Another  is  that  he  fell  short  of  suggesting  the  wholesale 
nationalisation of deposit-taking: he thought there should still be room for commercial banks 
to raise deposits of their own and that they should continue to be insured12. 
One  reason  is  that  draining  deposits  from  commercial  banks  is  unlikely  to  be  costless.  In 
particular – and this is the potential catch with too widespread a CBDC – it might threaten their 
lending activity. If banks cannot use deposits for that purpose, how would their lending then be 
financed? And without a supply of bank credit, how would the real economy, in particular the 
part of it that cannot easily access securities markets, itself be funded? 
There is no easy answer to these questions. As far as the non-financial economy is concerned, 
it’s clear it would be hard seamlessly to replace bank loans with securities issuance. There are 
good reasons why it’s difficult for young firms, in particular, with little invested capital, to sell 
shares or bonds13. The same goes for households. If bank lending became scarcer, or more 
expensive, it’s likely that investment and economic activity would suffer.  
Furthermore,  several  economists  argue  that  there’s  a  degree  of  complementarity  between 
making loans, on the one hand, and issuing liquid liabilities on the other14. If so, you’d naturally 
expect to find the same institutions doing both – banks don’t exist in the form they do simply 
                                                 
10   Ricardo, writing at a time when money was held largely as physical cash, argued the note issue should be 
separated and protected from commercial lending (Ricardo (1823)). The specific proposal in the Chicago Plan 
was 100% reserve requirements on demand deposits of commercial banks (Simons et al., (1933)). The post-
crisis case has been put by Pennachi (2012) and, amongst others, by Martin Wolf of the FT (Wolf (2014)). Lainà 
(2015)  describes  how  calls  for  full-reserve  banking  tend  to  intensify  after  financial  crises.  Bossoni  (2001) 
provides a useful overview of the literature on narrow banking and comes to a more sceptical conclusion. A 
longer-term perspective on the debate is provided by Goodhart and Jensen (2015).  
11   Tobin (1987); there are echoes of this proposal in the more recent work of Barrdear and Kulmhof (2015).  
12   Under his proposal, however, deposit-taking banks would be “ring-fenced” from providing investment-banking 
services. Even so, commercial bank deposits would have to offer more attractive terms – in particular a higher 
rate of interest – than the DCAs. One implication is that, if the appropriate spread between the interest rate paid 
on commercial and central bank deposits were to widen during times of banking stress – and one imagines it 
would – the central bank would more often run up against the zero lower bound.  
13   See, for example, Diamond (1984); a useful summary can also be found in Freixas (2008).  
14   Kashyap et al. (2002) point out that there are technological similarities between holding deposits and making 
advances: both involve expertise in liquidity management. Diamond and Rajan (2001) go further, arguing that, 
given imperfect information on the part of depositors about the riskiness of individual loans on a bank’s balance 
sheet, the risk of a run is a necessary discipline on the bank.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   because we’ve partially insured their liabilities. And, at least to a degree, competing away their 
deposits would compromise banks’ ability to supply credit, or at least make it more expensive.15 
It  might  also  make  that  supply  more  variable.  With  an  easily  available  alternative,  banks’ 
remaining deposits would more readily migrate to the CBDC during times of stress. (It would 
certainly be more straightforward than stuffing cash under the proverbial mattress16.) Nor has 
the alternative source of funding the banks – raising debt in wholesale markets – proved that 
stable in the past. In fact, one striking feature of the financial crisis was that banks’ wholesale 
debt proved much less stable than deposits. That’s why regulators have since recommended 
that banks actually raise the share of (non-equity) funding that comes from deposits17. 
It’s hard to know how significant these effects would be. And, as I tried to explain earlier, a 
CBDC  that  sought  simply  to  replicate  cash  would  probably  have  a  greater  impact  on  the 
demand for banknotes than on commercial bank deposits, with more limited macroeconomic 
effects.  If  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  were  opened  up  only  to  non-bank  financial 
companies, and no wider, the issue probably wouldn’t arise to begin with.  
But as you widen that access, and the more closely a CBDC substitutes for existing deposits 
– i.e. the further towards the south-east you move across (the extremely stylised) Chart 5 – 
the  more  prominent  the  issue  becomes.  No  longer  would  a  CBDC  be  a  purely  technical 
decision, about the costs and security of exchanging money. It would become more a matter 
of prudential policy, not to say the fundamental structure of the financial system.  
Conclusion 
The word “digital” has become so ubiquitous that its meaning isn’t always clear. The word 
seems to get tacked on to just about anything, no matter how tenuous its connection with 
computers, simply in order to convey an appealing sense of the modern. A brief search – on 
the internet, appropriately enough – reveals advertisements for a course in “digital humanities”, 
opportunities in “digital agriculture” and even something called “digital parenting”, whatever 
that is. (If it means having to ask your 11-year-old son what’s gone wrong with the computer 
then I would certainly qualify as a “digital parent”).  
Whether or not “digital currency” is the right way to describe something like bitcoin, or its central 
bank counterpart, is also unclear. A better term for the underlying technology, the distributed 
ledger,  might  be  “decentralised  virtual  clearinghouse  and  asset  register”.  But  there’s  no 
denying the technology is novel. Prospectively, it offers an entirely new way of exchanging and 
holding assets, including money.  
It’s an irony, therefore, that some of the economic questions it raises have actually been around 
for a long time, for as long as economics itself. Some admirers of bitcoin see it as a means of 
bypassing central banks altogether. They are in some ways the descendants of the supporters 
of  “free  banking”  in  the  19th  century.  Conversely,  others  see  the  distributed  ledger  as  an 
opportunity for the central bank to expand its role, via a “central bank digital currency” available 
                                                 
15   If maturity transformation is a necessary feature of a market economy, you’d probably expect to find the private 
sector creating an alternative supply of liquid assets of its own, to help replace lost deposits. This would mitigate 
the impact on lending but it would also undermine any prudential benefits of a part-nationalised deposit-taking 
system (e.g. Goodhart and Jensen (2015)).  
16   Other than cash, the easiest way for individuals to shift exposure away from commercial banks and towards the 
safer public-sector balance sheet is to put money into National Savings and Investment certificates (NS&I). 
Flows into NS&I picked up markedly during the crisis (NS&I (2009)). 
17   The difference between loans and deposits – the so-called “funding gap” – has shrunk dramatically in recent 
years. Overall, the significant regulatory reforms since the crisis – in particular ring-fencing, the insistence on 
more  equity  and  other  loss-absorbing  forms  of  funding  and,  on  the  assets  side,  higher  holdings  of  liquid 
instruments – will have lowered materially the degree of maturity transformation within the banking system (see, 
for example, Lowe (2015)). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
   to a much wider group of counterparties. If it were a close substitute for bank deposits, a CBDC 
would represent a shift towards a “narrower” banking system. This too is an old debate in 
economics: should banks be prevented from creating liquidity, or is maturity transformation an 
inevitable and necessary feature of market economies? 
I’m  certainly  not  attempting  to  enter  that  debate  today.  It’s  in  the  nature  of  long-standing 
questions that the answers aren’t obvious. What I do want to do, however, is to point out that 
it  is  a  relevant  question  –  that  the  introduction  of  a  CBDC  probably  involves  more  than  a 
narrow,  technical  judgement  about  the  efficiency  of  the  payments  system,  very  important 
though that is.  
What’s also clear is that we have a lot more thinking to do. That’s why the issue of digital 
currencies  forms  an  important  part  of  our  One  Bank  Research  Agenda18.  It’s  also  why,  in 
publishing the Agenda a year ago, we asked for help, hoping to encourage “the wider academic 
community” to think about the big policy questions. So, in what is the heart of that community, 
and notwithstanding Mr Hicks’s caution, perhaps you’ll allow me to finish by re-iterating that 
request: all contributions welcome!      
References 
Ali,  R,  Barrdear,  J,  Clews,  R  and  Southgate,  J  (2014a),  “Innovations  in  payment 
technologies and the emergence of digital currencies”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 
54, No. 3 . 
Ali,  R,  Barrdear,  J,  Clews,  R  and  Southgate,  J  (2014b),  “The  economics  of  digital 
currencies”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 54, No. 3, pages 276–86. 
Autonomous Research (2016), “Financials and technology, tales from de-crypt”. 
Bank  of  England  (2015),  “One  Bank  Research  Agenda”,  Discussion  paper  available  at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/documents/onebank/discussion.pdf. 
Barrdear,  J  and  Kumhof,  M  (2016),  “The  macroeconomics  of  central  bank-issued  digital 
currency”, Bank of England Working Paper, forthcoming. 
Bossone, B (2001), “Should banks be narrowed?”, IMF working paper no. 159. 
Buiter, W (2009), “Negative interest rates: when are they coming to a central bank near you?”, 
Financial Times article available at http://blogs.ft.com/maverecon/2009/05/negative-interest-
rates-when-are-they-coming-to-a-central-bank-near-you/#_ftn1 
Carney, M (2013), “The UK at the heart of a renewed globalisation”, speech given at an event 
to celebrate the 125th anniversary of the Financial Times, London. 
Diamond,  W  (1984),  “Financial  Intermediation  and  Delegated  Monitoring”,  The  Review  of 
Economic Studies, Vol. 51, No. 3, pp. 393–414. 
Diamond, W and Rajan, R (2001), “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation, and Financial fragility: A 
Theory of Banking”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 109, No. 2, pp. 287–327.  
Goodhart, C (1988), “The evolution of central banks”, MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass).  
Goodhart, C and Jensen, M (2015), “A Commentary on Patrizio Lainà’s “Proposals for Full-Reserve 
Banking: A Historical Survey from David Ricardo to Martin Wolf”, Economic Thought, Vol. 4.2, pg 20-31.  
Haldane,  A  (2015),  “How  low  can  you  go?”  speech  given  at  the  Portadown  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Northern Ireland. 
                                                 
18   Bank of England (2015); see, in particular, section 5 “Response to fundamental change”.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   
Hills, S, Thomas, R and Dimsdale, N (2015), “Three Centuries of Data – Version 2.1”, Bank 
of England. 
Harris, M and Raviv, A (1990), “Capital Structure and the Informational Role of Debt”, The 
Journal of Finance, Vol. 45, No. 2 (Jun., 1990), pp. 321–349 
Kashyap, A, Rajan, R and Stein, J (2002), “Banks as liquidity providers: An explanation for 
the coexistence of lending and deposit-taking”, The Journal of Finance 57, 33–73. 
Lainà, P (2015), “Proposals for Full-Reserve Banking: History and Critique from David Ricardo 
to Martin Wolf”, Department of Political and Economic Studies, University of Helsinki, Finland. 
Lowe, P (2015), “The transformation in maturity transformation” speech given to Thomson 
Reuters’ 3rd Australian Regulatory Summit, Sydney, 27 May 2015. 
National  Savings  and  Investments  (2008–09),  Annual  Report  and  Accounts  available  at 
http://nsandi-corporate.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/13428-Annual-Report-Web.pdf 
Pennacchi,  G  (2012),  “Narrow  banking”,  Annual  Review  of  Financial  Economics,  Vol.  4, 
pp. 141–159, 2012 
Rogoff, K (2014), “Costs and benefits to phasing out paper currency”, NBER Working Paper 
No. 20126 
Shafik, M (2016), A New Heart for a Changing Payments System, speech given at the Bank 
of England. 
Simons, H, Cox, G, Director, A, Douglas, P, Hart, A, Knight, F, Mints, L, Schultz, H (1933): 
“Banking  and  currency  reform”,  Manuscript.  [Reprinted  in  Samuels,  Warren  (ed.)  (1990): 
Research in the History of Economic Thought and Methodology. Archival Supplement, Volume 
4. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.] 
Tobin, J (1987),”The Case for Preserving Regulatory Distinctions”, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City, 1987, pp. 167–183. 
Walport, M (2016), “Distributed ledger technology: beyond block chain”, Council for Science 
and Technology. 
Wolf, M (2014): “Strip private banks of their power to create money”, Financial Times, 24 April 
2014. 
Yermack, D (2013), “Is Bitcoin a real currency? An economic appraisal”, NBER Working Paper 
No. 19747. 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
   Chart 1 Most money held in bank accounts, 
not as physical cash  
Chart 2 Value of bitcoin is very 
volatile 
Sources: Hills, Thomas and Dimsdale (2015)19 and Bank of 
England  
Source: http://blockchain.info. 
Chart 3 Fractional reserves: Commercial banks’ 
liquid assets smaller than deposit liabilities  
Chart 4 Central bank holds only liquid assets  
Source: Bank of England 
Source: Bank of England Annual Report 2015 
                                                    
19   From 1997 total money holdings in the UK are given by notes and coin in circulation with the non-bank public 
plus the sum of households', PNFCs ' and non-intermediate OFCs' deposits (M4x). Prior to 1997 total money 
holdings are given by total M4 excluding repos and other short-term paper.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Chart 5: CBDC important when it competes with existing deposits 
  Increased participation 
 NBFI 
 All firms 
 Whole economy 
E-cash  
 
Payment of 
interest, 
increasing 
provision of 
banking 
services 
 
 
Full-service 
accounts at CB 
Closer 
substitute 
for 
deposits 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
