  Mario Draghi: Addressing the causes of low interest rates 
Introductory speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at a panel 
on “The future of financial markets: A changing view of Asia” at the Annual Meeting of the 
Asian Development Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 2 May 2016. 
 The mandate of each central bank is phrased in strictly domestic terms. But in an open and 
integrated  international  economy,  the  challenges  we  face  are  often  fairly  similar  across 
jurisdictions. Over the past few years, one particular challenge has arisen across a large part 
of the world. That is the extremely low level of nominal interest rates. 
Today,  18%  of  the  global  economy,  weighted  by  GDP,  operates  in  an  environment  of 
negative central bank policy rates, and the proportion rises to 40% if we include countries 
with zero to 1% rates. 
Very  low  rates  are  not  innocuous.  They  put  pressure  on  the  business  model  of  financial 
institutions  –  banks,  pension  funds  and  insurance  companies  –  by  squeezing  interest 
income. And this comes at a time when profitability is already weak, when the sector has to 
adjust to post-crisis deleveraging in the economy, and when rapid changes are taking place 
in regulation. 
Low  real  returns  also  affect  the  income  of  pensioners,  who  are  a  growing  constituency  in 
most advanced economies. Their consumption in retirement depends precisely on the return 
they get on their savings. Likewise low rates slow the rate of accumulation of pension assets 
of those not yet retired, which is again relevant as a larger cohort moves towards retirement. 
There is a temptation to conclude that since very low rates generate these challenges, they 
are  the  problem.  But  they  are  not  the  problem.  They  are  the  symptom  of  an  underlying 
problem, which is insufficient investment demand, across the world, to absorb all the savings 
available in the economy. 
It  is  this  phenomenon  –  the  global  excess  of  savings  over  profitable  investments  –  that  is 
driving interest rates down to very low levels. And so the right way to address the challenges 
raised by low rates is not to try and suppress the symptoms, but to address the underlying 
cause. 
This requires that we tackle both the long- and short-term drivers of lack of demand, and that 
we draw for that purpose on both monetary policy and other types of policy. 
The long-term perspective 
From  a  long-term  perspective,  nominal  bond  yields  have  been  on  a  declining  trend  in  all 
major economies since the 1980s. This is in part a welcome development, as it reflects the 
success  of  monetary  policy  in  overcoming  inflation.  That  has  reduced  not  just  expected 
inflation,  but  also  the  inflation  risk  premium  –  the  cost  levied  by  lenders  to  protect  them 
against uncertain price changes. 
But the decline in nominal yields has also been driven by a fall in real yields, which is the real 
return generated by the balance of saving and investment in the economy. 
A temporary period of policy rates being close to zero or even negative in real terms is not 
unprecedented  by  any  means.  Over  the  past  decades,  however,  we  have  seen  long-term 
yields  trending  down  in  real  terms  as  well,  independent  of  the cyclical  stance  of  monetary 
policy. 
The drivers behind this have been, among others, rising net savings as ageing populations 
plan  for  retirement,  relatively  less  public  capital  expenditure  in  a  context  of  high  public 
indebtedness, and a slowdown in productivity growth reducing the profitability of investment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  One study finds such factors can account for around 400 basis points of the 450 basis points 
fall in long-term real interest rates over the past 30 years.1 
The  forces  at  play  are  fairly  intuitive:  if  there  is  an  excess  of  saving,  then  savers  are 
competing  with  each  other  to  find  somebody  willing  to  borrow  their  funds.  That  will  drive 
interest rates lower. At the same time, if the economic return on investment has fallen, for 
instance due to lower productivity growth, then entrepreneurs will only be willing to borrow at 
commensurately lower rates. 
On both counts, it is structural factors that have lowered the real return on investment. And 
since we operate in a global capital market, this has exerted downward pressure on returns 
on savings everywhere. 
The  role  of  Asian  economies  in  this  story  has  been  well-documented,  for  instance  in  the 
“global savings glut” thesis.2 
But today the euro area is also a protagonist. We have a current account surplus over 3% of 
GDP, and our largest economy, Germany, has had a surplus above 5% of GDP for almost a 
decade. 
In the past, countries with such surplus positions may have been able to easily export excess 
savings towards countries willing to borrow them at higher rates. This would have prevented 
domestic interest rates from falling, as would otherwise have been the case. And that would 
have  been  good  for  the  global  economy  as  saving  flowed  from  ageing,  slower  growth 
economies to those with younger demographics and higher investment needs. 
But in a world where real returns are low everywhere, there is simply not enough demand for 
capital elsewhere in the world to absorb that excess saving without declining returns. 
So the long-term answer to raising real rates of return must be a structural rebalancing of 
global saving and investment. And since demographic-related saving is likely to remain high, 
that has to come through raising demand for capital. This is why structural reforms are so 
important today. They are key to raise productivity growth and hence make investment more 
attractive. 
The  ECB  Governing  Council,  the  European  Council  and  the  European  Commission  have 
repeatedly called for such structural action in Europe. It is also precisely the agenda that the 
G-20 has been advocating. Progress has been made in some countries, especially those in 
the euro area that suffered the crisis worst. But on the whole it is advancing too slowly. 
The short-term perspective 
Where does monetary policy enter the picture? 
While structural factors drive long-term real rates, monetary policy influences interest rates 
over  the  short-term.  But  it  does  so  only  at  the  margin:  central  banks  steer  market  rates 
relative to the level dictated by those structural forces. This alters the relative attractiveness 
of saving versus spending, and in doing so helps keep output around potential and ensures 
price stability. 
Today,  faced  with  a  persistent  output  gap  and  too-low  inflation,  our  monetary  policy  is 
stimulating  the  economy  by  steering  market  rates  below  their  long-term  levels.  And  since 
those  long-term  rates  have  fallen  very  low,  it  is  inevitable  that  market  rates  have  fallen  to 
                                                
1  Rachel,  L.  and  T.  Smith  (2015),  “Secular  drivers  of  the  global  real  interest  rate”,  Bank  of  England  Staff 
Working Paper No. 571. 
2  See Bernanke, B. (2005), “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit”, Sandridge Lecture, 
Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, Federal Reserve Board March 2005. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  very low and even negative levels for an extended period of time to achieve the right level of 
demand support. 
This has been the case not just for the euro area, but also for Japan, where central bank 
policy rates have been near zero since the mid-90s; for the US, where they have stayed near 
zero since 2008 and have been raised only once since, at the end of last year; and for the 
UK, where policy rates have been just above zero for 7 years now. 
If central banks did not do this – i.e. if we kept interest rates too high relative to their real 
levels  –  investing  would  be  unattractive,  because  the  cost  of  borrowing  would  exceed  the 
return. So the economy would stay stuck in recession. Conversely, by holding market rates 
below the real rate of return, we encourage the investment and consumption that is needed 
to  bring  the  economy  back  to  potential.  That  in  turn  creates  the  conditions  for  monetary 
policy to eventually normalise. 
It might seem at first glance that this policy is tantamount to penalising savers in favour of 
borrowers. But in the medium-term, expansionary policy is actually very much to the benefit 
of savers. 
For  a  start,  savers  can  still  earn  satisfactory  rates  of  return  from  diversifying  their  assets, 
even  when interest rates on deposit and savings accounts are very  low. For example, US 
households allocate about a third of their financial assets to equities, whereas the equivalent 
figure for French and Italian households is about one fifth, and for German households only 
one  tenth.  By  contrast,  German  households  keep  almost  40%  of  their  assets  in  cash  and 
deposits, and French and Italian households approximately 30%. The equivalent number is 
less than 15% for US households. 
But more fundamentally, it is key to appreciate that whatever financial assets savers hold, 
they  always  own  a  claim  on  the  output  of  the  economy.  So  their  interest  is  ultimately  the 
same as that of the economy as a whole. 
If central banks did not act to bring the economy out of slump, what would happen to those 
claims?  Not  only  would  output  rise  more  slowly  towards  potential,  but  more  importantly 
potential itself would be eroded. Since unemployment would remain high for longer, people 
would lose their skills; and as investment would remain subdued for longer, the productive 
capacity of the economy would suffer lasting damage. A crisis-induced loss of output would 
then become permanent, and the real wealth of savers would inevitably be lower. 
In other words, while low interest rates might appear to create a conflict between creditors 
and debtors, this is not true in the aggregate, and it is certainly not true over the medium-
term. Overall, savers and borrowers in fact have the same interest: that the economy returns 
to potential without undue delay and grows sufficiently strongly to generate enough income 
for  both.  That,  in  final  analysis,  is  the  only  way  to  truly  protect  the  long-term  interest  of 
savers. 
Thus the second part of the answer to raising rates of return is clear: continued expansionary 
policies  until  excess  slack  in  the  economy  has  been  reduced  and  inflation  dynamics  are 
sustainably consistent again with price stability. There is simply no alternative to this today. 
The only potential margin for manoeuvre is in the composition of the policy mix, that is, the 
balance of monetary and fiscal policy. In fact, those advocating a lesser role for monetary 
policy  or  a  shorter  period  of  monetary  expansion  necessarily  imply  a  larger  role  for  fiscal 
policy to raise demand and close the output gap faster. 
Conclusion 
Let me sum up. 
The global low interest rate environment is a symptom of challenges in the world economy, 
not  its  cause.  If  interest  rates  are  to  rise  again  to  sustainably  higher  levels,  it  is  those 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  underlying causes that need to be addressed. This is true at a global level, and it is true in 
the euro area. 
In  the  euro  area,  we  need  expansionary  macroeconomic  stabilisation  policy  to  support 
demand,  starting  of  course  with  monetary  policy.  That  will  allow  inflation  to  return  to  our 
objective and, in time, for policy interest rates to rise back to their long-term levels. 
But  monetary  policy  cannot  raise  long-term  real  rates.  That  can  only  be  achieved  by 
structural  reforms  that  elicit  a  structural  rebalancing  of  saving  and  investment.  Higher  real 
returns on savings must come through decisive action on the supply side. 
In  this  context,  there  is  also  a  third  type  of  policy  that  would  support  both  demand  in  the 
short-term and supply in the medium-term, and which is unique to Europe. That is committed 
reform of euro area governance that can remove lingering doubts about its future. 
There is little doubt that question marks over the future of the euro area, and the European 
Union in general, are contributing to uncertainty for individuals and firms, and that this can 
hold  back  consumption  and  investment.  Removing  this  uncertainty  will  help  boost 
consumption and unleash investment across the continent. 
There is therefore no doubt in my mind that institutional reform in the European Union and of 
the euro area has genuine economic benefits. For all those who want to see a return to more 
normal levels of interest rates, this is an essential part of the solution. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
