  Yves Mersch: Introductory remarks for the discussion panel “The Future 
of the Euro” 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Ambrosetti  Forum  “Intelligence  on  the  World,  Europe,  and  Italy”,  Villa  d’Este, 
Cernobbio, 3 September 2016. 
 As we are in the quiet period, I am speaking in general terms and not on future monetary 
policy stance or economic developments. 
As  the  European  Union  (EU)  approaches  the  25th  anniversary  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  it 
finds  itself  at  a  crossroads.  The  multiple  crises  that  have  challenged  Europe’s  stability, 
prosperity  and  security  have  undermined  people’s  trust  in  the  EU.  But  this  is  not  only  a 
European phenomenon. Nationalistic and xenophobic movements in other parts of the world 
are  vigorously  opposing  mainstream  politics  and  established  politicians.  Let’s  not  forget 
Churchill’s  remark  that  a  referendum  tells  us  less  about  the  question  and  more  about  the 
questioner. 
After  eight  years  of  crises  and  subdued  growth  the  issue  is  about  the  divide  between  the 
haves  and  the  have-nots.  On  the  one  hand,  globalisation  and  open  borders  have  created 
benefits that are perceived to have been appropriate by the well-connected few. On the other 
hand,  the  burden-sharing  needed  to  keep  our  financial  systems  afloat  and  preserve  our 
regional  community  is  also  perceived  as  being  unfair.  The  easy  way  out  is  to  blame  EU 
institutions. Indeed, the EU Commission, the EU Council and the Council of Ministers take 
many decisions that affect our daily lives. But they are not democratically elected and they 
cannot  be  sanctioned  either.  In  this  context,  the  outcome  of  the  UK’s  EU  referendum  is 
triggering a debate not just on the future relationship between the EU and the UK, but also – 
and  perhaps  more  importantly  –  on  how  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  EU  and  of 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) as one of its key elements. 
I have a central banker’s perspective, and I believe that the stability of a currency requires 
trust, cohesion and an ability to act as and when necessary. So today I will be considering 
how  we  could  boost  support  and  strengthen  the  institutional  arrangements  for  European 
integration. 
When  thinking  about  what  needs  to  be  changed,  it  is  also  important  to  build  on  the  EU’s 
strengths  and  to  protect  our  collective  achievements.  They  are  too  often  forgotten:  some 
people ask, what has the EU actually achieved? As if there was no good response. 
We  benefit  from  the  dividends  of  our  Union  day  in,  day  out:  peace,  democracy  and  the 
preservation  of  economic  wealth  across  the  continent  based  on  the  four  freedoms.  In  this 
respect, the EU and its institutions provide a forum where we can settle disagreements in a 
civilised  manner  and  arrive  at  joint  decisions.  EU  law  protects  our  most  fundamental 
principles and exercises significant normative power internationally. In material terms, the EU 
has  facilitated  a  level  of  prosperity  unprecedented  in  European  history, if  only  because  by 
ensuring peace it prevented the strife and destruction of the past. 
Our  economic  union  also  brings  very  concrete  benefits.  The  EU  brings  freedom  –  the 
freedom to study, travel, work, invest and do business across the continent. In opinion polls, 
this is considered the most positive result of the EU, alongside peace. Moreover, the euro is 
a  very  tangible  European  public  good that  is  perhaps  the  strongest guarantee that  we  will 
stand together even in times of crisis. Support for the euro and EMU is very high in the euro 
area, in fact much higher than support for the EU. The crisis tested our political commitment, 
and this commitment was reaffirmed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Indeed,  European  integration  has  brought  fundamental  benefits.  People  believe  in  Europe 
and  European  public  goods  when  they  are  tangible  and  deliver  results.  However,  we  also 
need to fully acknowledge the shortcomings of the status quo. For many, Europe is a proxy 
for  globalisation,  which  has  created  prosperity  as  well  as  strong  interconnections.  Our 
economies  are  so  intertwined  that  they  can  only  be  disentangled  with  great  difficulty. 
Consider the complex discussions under way in the UK on how to separate from the EU. Can 
borders protect us from capital flows, demographic ageing, secular trends in capital return, 
lower equilibrium interest rates or migration due to wars and human misery? For individuals it 
is increasingly difficult to distinguish origins at national, at European and at global level. The 
distortions  and  half-truths  of  the  Brexit  debate  has  shown  that,  first,  complexity,  second, 
uncertainty  about  pensions,  third,  low  growth,  and  fourth,  income  distribution,  offer  fertile 
ground for extremists. 
Economically,  the  pace  of  recovery  in  the  euro  area  remains  unsatisfactory,  with 
unemployment levels still too high. This is reflected in opinion polls on the economy and on 
the outlook for the months to come. It is clear that efforts to strengthen the recovery have to 
be undertaken. In the financial sector, remaining fragilities in the banking sector need to be 
fixed and the banking union completed. Otherwise, market participants will continue to fear 
that  local  vulnerabilities  could  eventually  spread  and  destabilise  the  European  banking 
system before all the firefighting tools are ready to be deployed. The aim must be to move 
forward swiftly on both risk reduction and risk sharing. Risk sharing involves both the public 
and private sectors, for example by ensuring the same level of deposit protection through a 
European deposit insurance scheme, but also by continuing to build a capital markets union 
in Europe. 
The  EU  and  EMU  also  need  to  face  up  to  their  institutional  weaknesses.  On  average, 
people’s  trust  in  both  national  and  EU  political  institutions  is  very  low.  As  regards  the 
national level, we know from the economic literature that strong institutions are crucial for 
sustainable  economic  growth  and  governance  indicators  suggest  that  there  is  room  for 
improvement in many Member States. 
As  regards  the  European  level,  the  gap  between  people’s  expectations  and  the  EU’s 
institutional setup is widening: 
• 
First,  the  perceived  legitimacy  of  the  EU  remains  low.  The  EU  is  not  regarded  as 
“efficient” and only a minority of citizens feel that their voice counts in the EU. 
Second, opinion polls suggest that citizens are not opposed to European decision-
making. Specifically, they want the EU to concentrate on their key concerns, notably 
to protect them better from economic and security risks, and to provide solutions. 
When responding to these expectations, the EU and EMU face however two challenges: 
• 
 The first has to do with subsidiarity: it should be made clearer where the EU has an 
advantage over Member States in terms of exercising competence and where not. A 
better  demarcation  of  competences  between  the  European  and  national  level  is 
desirable  –  but  not  easy.  Loose  coordination  at  European  level  may  give  the 
impression that a competence has been passed to the European level, when in fact 
it continues to be exercised by Member States. The result tends to be that the EU 
gets blamed for apparently seeking to interfere in national affairs when in fact it does 
not effectively have the power to do so. It should not be so surprising that in such 
situations the practical result is a lack of coherent action across the EU. This, in my 
view,  means  that  responsibilities  and  accountability  lines  should  be  more  clearly 
defined and assigned, as Europe has done with the single monetary policy and the 
creation of the European Central Bank. 
The  other  challenge  has  to  do  with  intergovernmentalism.  The  rationale  for  the 
intergovernmental  approach  is  to  ensure  that  decisions  respect  national  interests. 
The risk is however that decision-making becomes a diplomatic exercise, resulting 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
    in  protracted  and  opaque  negotiations,  a  lack  of  long-term  strategies  and  national 
interests being pitted against each other. However, it is an outdated belief that the 
nation state is the sole locus of legitimacy. The EU is not only a union of Member 
States but also of citizens. Where competences are assigned to the European level, 
they  should  be  part  of  the  Union  method,  with  clear  executive  powers,  full 
democratic accountability and rigorous judicial arrangements at that level. This also 
means  that  the  EU’s  agenda  should  be  set  by  those  who  were  duly  elected  at 
European level rather than by a few large Member States. In my view,  this would 
also have to be an essential principle guiding any future treaty revision. 
Decision-making on taxation and public spending is the core prerogative of national 
parliaments, and for good reason, but that does not mean that we should shy away 
from further fiscal integration in the long run. We just need to get it right. One of the 
ideas currently being discussed is a euro area treasury that would be responsible for 
fiscal policy decisions at European level. Such a treasury or finance ministry would 
clearly  need  a  high  degree  of  democratic  legitimacy  and  strong  parliamentary 
control.  Any  college  with  powers  delegated  from  intergovernmental  forums  would 
hardly satisfy those requirements. In my view, the European Parliament convening 
in  euro  area  composition  would  be  the  right  body  to  undertake  this  task.  It  would 
ensure that the actions of a European finance minister are legitimised at the same 
level at which decisions are taken. 
A common mistake is to underestimate the EU’s achievements and the strength of support 
for  tangible  European  projects  such  as  the  euro.  But  for  the  EU  to  regain  the  trust  of  its 
citizens,  it  needs  to  be  properly  equipped  to  handle  destabilising  events  and  respond  to 
people’s expectations. 
Trust  in  the  currency  can  also  be  undermined  by  extreme  measures  which  have 
unacceptable side effects. An independent central bank must be able to explain its actions 
and  take  account  of  political  economy  considerations.  Some  academic  proposals  seem  to 
prefer  sophisticated  models  to  social  psychology.  We  cannot  fulfil  our  mandate  with 
mathematical  equations,  but  only  with  instruments  that  maintain  trust  in  the  currency. 
Extreme measures or legal violations of our mandate are not among those instruments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
