   Ravi Menon: China-Singapore financial connectivity 
Speech by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the 
2nd RMB Internationalisation Summit, Singapore, 7 June 2016. 
 Mr Jiang Jianqing, former Chairman of Industrial and Commercial Bank of China 
His  Excellency  Mr  Chen  Xiaodong,  Ambassador  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  to 
Singapore 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
I am happy to join you and would like to thank ICBC for the invitation. 
China’s economic transformation 
China’s economy is at a major inflection point, balancing three objectives. 
• 
• 
First, to manage a moderation in its economic growth without undue disruption.  
Second,  to  resolve  vulnerabilities  in  its  economy  and  financial  system  without 
triggering a crisis of confidence.  
Third, to implement perhaps the most comprehensive and ambitious structural reform 
programme of any country in modern times.  
 In the short term, these three objectives may at times be in conflict, presenting a trilemma of 
difficult trade-offs for policymakers. But if successfully executed, they are mutually reinforcing 
and will lay the foundation for a more sustainable and vibrant economy. 
China’s economic restructuring has deep implications for Asia. A new configuration - a new 
regional value-chain - is taking shape across the region, driven by three features of China’s 
economic transformation.  
First,  China  is  shifting  from  a  labour-intensive  industrial  structure  to  a  more  skill  and 
technology-intensive one.  
• 
China  is  inshoring  more  high  value-added  production  within  China.  This  obviously 
poses challenges for competing high value-added producers in Asia.  
But  China  is  also  offshoring  lower  value-added,  labour-intensive  production.  This 
creates opportunities for the less-developed regional economies to catalyse their own 
industrialisation. 
 Second, China’s import composition is shifting in favour of consumer goods and services.  
• 
The more developed economies in the region are well-positioned to tap into China’s 
demand for financial services, healthcare, education, and tourism. 
Third, China is emerging as a significant source of capital for the region. 
• 
In the middle of last year, while the world’s attention was focused on the volatility in 
China’s  financial  markets,  an  important  development  took  place  that  went  largely 
unnoticed.  
China became, for the first time, a net exporter of direct investment.  
Chinese FDI in ASEAN has been increasing by an average of 25% every year, in the 
five years to 2014.  
 Vietnam and Cambodia are examples of countries that have become more plugged into the 
global markets as a result of becoming part of this new regional value chain.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Vietnam has emerged as a key assembly hub for electronic and electrical products.  
Cambodia  has  become  a  manufacturing  base  for  Chinese  garment  and  footwear 
companies, with three-quarters of its garment and footwear exports in 2014 headed 
for Europe and the United States.  
  Future of RMB internationalisation  
China has embarked on the formidable task of liberalising the capital account at a time when 
domestic growth is slowing, its financial system is still maturing, and US monetary policy is 
normalising. The process has therefore entailed careful calibration and periodic reassessment 
– crossing the river by feeling the stones. 
Since 2010, the offshore RMB market has experienced remarkable growth, driven by strong 
investor appetite and cross-border trade. In the near term, however, the trajectory of RMB 
internationalisation is likely to moderate, due to a confluence of factors. 
First, global trade, which is a key factor driving the overseas use of the RMB, has declined. 
• 
Merchandise trade flows between China and its trading partners are expected to be 
modest in the next year or so, reflecting cyclical headwinds. 
Second,  market  expectations  of  China’s  GDP  growth  affect  expectations  of  the  RMB’s 
appreciation or depreciation.  
• 
As  the  Chinese  authorities  forge  ahead  with  fostering  a  more  market-based  RMB 
exchange rate, greater two-way volatility can be expected, compared to what appears 
to have been a one-way trend appreciation in the past.  
This  could  have  a  bearing  on  investors’  expected  returns  on  RMB  deposits  and 
financial assets, and therefore their demand for offshore RMB.    
 Third, the liberalisation of China’s capital account is likely to proceed cautiously in the near 
term. 
• 
Policymakers will be more cautious in the short-term as they work to ensure that the 
market volatility and ensuing capital outflows in late 2015 and early 2016 do not have 
a lasting impact on market confidence. 
But I believe the Chinese authorities remain committed to liberalising the capital account and 
promoting the international use of its currency in the medium term.  
• 
The latest 13th Five-Year Plan, announced in March this year, has made clear the 
aim to reduce foreign exchange restrictions for both corporates and households and 
encourage the use of the RMB in cross-border payments and international reserves. 
Progress in RMB internationalisation will ultimately depend on getting right the sequencing of 
domestic economic and financial reforms. A strong and stable domestic financial system is a 
prerequisite for further capital account liberalisation and currency internationalisation. 
China-Singapore financial connectivity: the journey so far 
Singapore’s financial linkages with China have grown strongly over the years, particularly since 
the appointment of ICBC as Singapore’s RMB clearing bank in February 2013.  
• 
The offshore RMB market in Singapore has expanded, with a wide offering of RMB 
products, including deposits, bonds, derivatives, mutual funds, and trade financing.  
China  and  Singapore  have  set  up  cross-border  RMB  arrangements  for  Suzhou, 
Tianjin and Chongqing, enabling corporates in these areas to borrow from Singapore-
based  financial  institutions  as  well  as  repatriate  proceeds  from  bonds  issued  in 
Singapore.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
    But China comes to Singapore not only to do business in Singapore. It is to use Singapore as 
a launch-pad to do business in Southeast Asia. 
In recent years, Chinese corporates and financial institutions have been rapidly growing their 
operations and investments in Southeast Asia. Singapore offers an effective gateway for their 
expansion into the region. 
• 
• 
There are some 6,500 Chinese companies in Singapore.  
Many of them, such as Lenovo, have set up regional finance and treasury centres 
here to take advantage of Singapore’s banking and capital markets to finance their 
regional expansion.  
The seven Chinese banks in Singapore are also expanding their presence here to 
provide funding support for the activities of Chinese and regional corporates. 
 Singapore-based  financial  institutions  have  extensive  networks  in  the  individual  ASEAN 
countries and, have proven to be trusted partners for Chinese entities venturing abroad. 
• 
A  recent  example  is  China  Minsheng  Investment  Corporation,  one  of  the  largest 
private  investment  firms  in  China,  which  set  up  an  office  in  Singapore  with  the 
mandate to invest in companies in South-east Asia and North America. One of its first 
projects is the construction of an industrial park in Indonesia.  
Other Chinese companies, such as Baosteel, New Hope and Huaneng, have invested 
in Vietnam and the region through their Singapore subsidiaries, with financing support 
from local banks like DBS.  
 China-Singapore financial connectivity: the next chapter 
The next chapter in China-Singapore financial partnership will go beyond co-operation on RMB 
business and the use of Singapore as an Asian gateway. It will be a more broad-based financial 
partnership that will provide deeper support to China’s growing connectivity with Southeast 
Asia. Let me cite four concrete areas of partnership. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Capital management  
Risk management  
Infrastructure financing  
Asset management 
Capital management 
Chinese enterprises have mostly relied on domestic sources of funds such as bank lending to 
finance  their  international  expansion.  Many  Chinese  companies  have  also  listed  in  equity 
markets in the US, Hong Kong and Singapore. 
But as Chinese companies grow their global presence, they will have to think harder about 
how best to raise capital and how best to make use of their capital by tapping into offshore 
markets. 
First, bond markets offer a useful alternative to bank lending, especially for long-term funding. 
Deep  capital  markets,  anchored  by  a  large  institutional  investor  base  can  help  well-rated 
businesses to achieve efficient cost of funding. Chinese companies are becoming more active 
in Singapore’s bond market.  
• 
For  instance,  China  Oilfields  Services  Limited  successfully  raised  US$1  billion  in 
Singapore last year, including a 10-year medium-term note of US$500 million. 
Second, Chinese corporates with income-producing real estate and infrastructure assets could 
recycle their capital by securitising these assets through a trust vehicle.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  SGX saw its first China real estate investment trust or REIT last year, with Beijing 
Hualian Group raising close to S$400m through a REIT.  
  Similarly, Chinese banks can use loan securitisation to recycle bank capital and re-channel the 
funds to real economic activities back home. 
• 
• 
ICBC’s opening of its Asia Pacific Shipping Finance Centre is a good example of this.  
The  centre  will  help  ICBC  Singapore  securitise  its  shipping  and  related  loans 
originated in the Asia Pacific, by tapping the Singapore bond market. 
Risk management 
As Chinese corporates continue to venture abroad in Asia, they will confront a variety of risks. 
These risks need to be managed well. 
First, there are the usual foreign exchange and interest rate risks.   
• 
As the largest FX market in the Asia Pacific, Singapore offers Chinese corporates 
effective FX hedging solutions to manage their risk exposures.  
The Singapore Exchange has a strong suite of FX futures contracts, including Asian 
currencies, and the take-up rate has been strong.  
Many corporate treasurers have chosen Singapore for their regional treasury centres 
covering Southeast Asia, and even the Greater China region.  
  Second,  some  of  the  investments  by  Chinese  corporates  could  be  in  locations  that  are 
vulnerable to natural disasters. 
• 
Investors would need to take into account not only the immediate risk of loss due to a 
natural catastrophe but also the secondary impact on their supply chains and working 
capital.  
Singapore has a critical mass of specialty insurers who can provide appropriate cover 
against such natural catastrophe risk. 
 Third, infrastructure projects typically expose investors to significant political and credit risks. 
Such risks include defaults and insolvencies of trading partners, regulatory changes, 
• 
expropriation, labour unrest, and acts of terrorism.  
As the largest centre for structured trade credit and political risk insurance in Asia, 
Singapore can provide Chinese banks and corporates comprehensive and tailored 
risk management solutions.  
 Infrastructure financing 
China  is  playing  an  increasingly  important  role  in  helping  regional  economies  with 
infrastructure development through its “One Belt One Road” initiative.  
Chinese  corporates  and  financial  institutions  can  tap  into  Singapore’s  well-developed 
infrastructure financing ecosystem in the following ways. 
• 
Leverage  on  the  strong  network  of  multilateral  agencies,  banks  and  institutional 
investors to access regional infrastructure deals.  
Deepen their expertise in project structuring, risk allocation, and loan documentation.  
Gain  access  to  the  network  of  local  project  sponsors  who  are  traditionally  more 
accustomed to dealing with local and global banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 4 
    Asset management 
China is one of the key markets for Singapore-based fund managers, both as an investment 
destination as well as a source of capital.  
• 
There is strong interest from financial institutions here to tap Singapore’s RQFII quota 
and offer investments with China exposures.  
Last week, Blackrock secured RMB 20 billion of approved RQFII quota in Singapore, 
which is the second largest quota granted to-date. 
 At the same time, the Singapore market offers globally diversified investment portfolios for 
Chinese pension funds, insurance companies, and individuals.  
• 
There  is  a  growing  cluster  of  Chinese  asset  managers  that  are  keen  to  set  up  in 
Singapore,  attracted  by  our  pan-Asian  focus  and  broad  base  of  international 
investors.  
They cover a broad spectrum of investments, ranging from traditional asset managers 
to hedge funds to private equity funds. 
 Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The biggest story for Asia in the last three decades has been the rise of China. Asia’s biggest 
story in the next three decades will be the transformation of China.  
It will not be an easy transition, as China deals with the challenges of debt, deflation, and 
demographics. There will be dislocations and bouts of volatility along the way, with spillovers 
into Asia. But if China successfully addresses its vulnerabilities and restructures its economy, 
it will pave the way for more sustained growth and a more advanced economy. 
The new China that will emerge will open up new opportunities for Asian economies. The RMB 
will become more international and Chinese corporates and financial institutions more global. 
Singapore  is  well-positioned  to  partner  Chinese  companies  in  their  regional  journey  and 
deepen China’s connectivity to Asia through trade and investment. The next chapter of China-
Singapore financial partnership will be exciting and rewarding. 
I wish you fruitful discussions and a pleasant stay in Singapore. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
