   Stephen S Poloz: Life after liftoff – divergence and US monetary policy 
normalization 
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the Mayor’s Breakfast 
Series, Ottawa, Ontario, 7 January 2016. 
I would like to thank Bob Fay and Mark Kruger for their help in preparing this speech. 
 Introduction 
Good morning, and Happy New Year to all. 
Here we are at the beginning of 2016, almost eight years after the global financial crisis, which 
spawned the most synchronized worldwide economic downturn in history. A rerun of the Great 
Depression of the 1930s was averted, but the recovery has been anything but synchronized. 
In fact, the dominant theme across the global economy has become “divergence.” At one end 
of  the  spectrum,  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  has  just  started  its  interest  rate  normalization 
process after seven years of keeping its policy rate near zero. At the other end, the European 
Central Bank (ECB) recently cut its deposit rate to negative 0.3 per cent. Other central banks 
also cut rates in the past year, including the Bank of Canada. 
It is very important that we understand the reasons for these policy divergences. On one level, 
they simply reflect actions taken by central banks tailored to their own economies. But the 
underlying forces acting on the global economy are powerful, slow moving and affect various 
economies differently. This means that the theme of divergence – both financial and economic 
– is likely to remain with us for some time to come. 
Financial divergence 
The recent move by the Federal Reserve is the first step in a long and measured process of 
policy normalization. This is a welcome development because it means that the U.S. recovery 
has largely put behind it the conditions that led to the financial crisis. 
While this normalization process will be tailored to the U.S. economy, it will have implications 
for Canada. One effect we can expect to see over time is a decompression of global term 
premiums. Let me put that in plain language. 
Central banks such as the Fed, the ECB, the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan have 
used  large-scale  asset  purchases  (or  quantitative  easing,  if  you  prefer)  and  other 
unconventional policies, such as forward  guidance, to help push longer-term interest rates 
lower. This has given monetary policy a broader-based stimulative impact on the economy. 
Investors have demanded less of a premium to hold debt for a longer term – the so-called 
global term premium has been compressed. 
As U.S. monetary policy continues to normalize, longer-term interest rates in the United States 
will naturally rise as the term premium decompresses. Canada’s financial markets are closely 
linked with U.S. markets, and, historically, higher longer-term interest rates there have meant 
higher longer-term rates here. 
Take yields on 5-year Canadian government bonds, for example. These are a key benchmark 
for our mortgage market. On average over the past 30 years, when U.S. 5-year bond yields 
rose,  about  three-quarters  of  the  increase  was  reflected  in  Canadian  5-year  bonds.  If  a 
significant term premium decompression were to occur in the current context in Canada, it 
could introduce a downside risk into our inflation outlook. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Of course, what happens in both the U.S. bond market and our own over the next few months 
will depend on the circumstances prevailing at the time. The Bank of Canada doesn’t have a 
great deal of direct influence over longer-term interest rates. But we do have firm control over 
our  policy  rate  –  the  target  for  Canada’s  overnight  rate.  We  will  continue  to  conduct  an 
independent monetary policy in response to our own economic circumstances in order to meet 
our 2 per cent inflation target. That’s our primary mission. We have a number of tools at our 
disposal – both conventional and unconventional – to mitigate risks to our inflation target or to 
our financial system, should they arise. 
Economic divergence 
As I said at the start, the divergence we’re seeing in monetary policy globally  comes from 
central banks reacting to the particular needs of their own economies. 
One important force affecting virtually every economy is the sharp decline in energy and other 
resource prices that we’ve seen over the past year or so. This appears to be mainly the result 
of increased supply capability across a wide range of commodities – an oft-repeated, textbook 
cycle that has resulted from a prolonged period of high prices. This decline in commodity prices 
affects various economies very differently, depending on whether they are a net exporter or 
net importer of resources. 
Economists use a measure called the “terms of trade” to help gauge the impact of this type of 
shock on an economy. The terms of trade is the ratio of the prices a country receives for its 
exports to the prices it pays for its imports. A rising terms of trade therefore means that the 
country’s income is increasing. A falling terms of trade, on the other hand, means less income 
for the country overall. 
As a major exporter of resources, Canada saw its terms of trade move sharply higher from 
2001  through  2008,  and  this  was  largely  maintained  until  mid-2014.  Since  then,  however, 
falling world prices for oil and other commodities have reversed much of that rise. Measured 
at annual rates, this represents a loss of more than $50 billion in national income, or about 
$1,500 for every Canadian. 
This shock is leading to significant and complex economic adjustments in Canada – in effect, 
a reversal of the forces that drove our economy during the years when resource prices were 
rising. To help understand these forces, let’s recall what happened to the economy during the 
period of rising oil prices. 
Back in 2002, when oil prices were around US$25 per barrel, investment in the oil and gas 
sector represented about 17 per cent of total business investment here in Canada. By 2014, 
that figure had jumped to 30 per cent. The share of oil and gas in Canada’s merchandise 
exports almost tripled over that same period. This rise in the importance of our energy sector 
was a natural response to higher prices for oil – because the world was offering more for each 
barrel, we invested more in our capacity, and more Canadians moved to work in the oil patch. 
This is also why the impact of the sudden drop in oil prices has been so large. 
Net importers of natural resources, such as the United States and Europe, are seeing the 
opposite phenomenon. Their overall income is now higher because import prices are lower 
relative to their export prices. But other commodity-intensive economies, such as Australia, 
Mexico, Chile and Brazil, are working through conditions similar to those here in Canada. 
Of course, most countries have a diverse domestic economic structure. Certainly, that is the 
case  here  in  Canada.  So,  just  as  we  see  divergence  in  economic  performance  between 
countries in response to lower resource prices, so, too, we see divergence within Canada, 
among our different sectors and geographic regions. 
For  example,  the  unemployment  rate  in  the  energy-intensive  provinces  –  Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, and Newfoundland and Labrador – has risen more than two percentage points 
since  November  2014,  while  it  has  remained  unchanged  in  the  rest  of  the  country.  This 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
divergence is also evident in consumer spending. For example, motor vehicle sales have fallen 
by about 10 per cent in those three provinces over this period, while they’ve climbed by more 
than 10 per cent elsewhere. 
The fact is that a decline in commodity prices such as the one we have seen is one of the most 
complex shocks that a policy-maker can face. We know that the overall effect on Canada is 
unambiguously  negative  because  of  the  loss  of  income  from  exporting  commodities  I 
mentioned earlier. Nevertheless, at the global level, the positive effects on importing countries 
will more than offset the negative effects on exporting countries, yielding a net positive impact 
on global growth. 
However,  the  real  complexity  appears  beneath  the  surface,  where  the  drop  in  commodity 
prices sets in motion sectoral and regional forces that can take years to play out. These include 
higher  consumer  spending  in  response  to  lower  energy  costs,  falling  investment  and 
employment in the economy’s resource sector, and rising investment and employment in the 
non-resource sectors – in other words, the reverse of what we saw from 2002 to 2014. 
There is no simple policy response in this situation. The forces that have been set in motion 
simply  must  work themselves  out. The  economy’s  adjustment  process  can  be  difficult  and 
painful  for  individuals,  and  there  are  policies  that  can  help  buffer  those  effects,  but  the 
adjustments must eventually happen. 
The most important facilitator of adjustment in these circumstances is a flexible exchange rate. 
Indeed, this is exactly why countries choose to have flexible exchange rates – to help buffer 
the economy from shocks that cause this kind of divergence. 
We  have  seen  ample  evidence  of  this  adjustment  channel  in  recent  months.  Resource-
producing countries with falling terms of trade, such as Canada, Australia and Mexico, have 
seen their currencies depreciate against countries that are net consumers of resources, such 
as the United States. It is not a coincidence that the Canadian dollar is about where it was 
back in 2003 and 2004; oil prices are also about where they were back then. 
Let’s  consider for  a moment how  this  works.  As  I  said,  lower  resource  prices mean  lower 
income for Canada as a whole. Economic growth slows, as it did early last year. At first, the 
slowdown was concentrated in oil-producing regions as companies cut investment spending. 
But then it began to spill over into other sectors through supply chains and lower consumption 
spending as workers were laid off. In this context, and in anticipation of the spreading fallout, 
the Bank lowered interest rates to help buffer the economy and keep inflation aimed at our 
target. 
The depreciation of our currency is a natural part of the process. It does several things at once. 
First, it offsets a part of the drop in commodity prices, which are usually priced in U.S. dollars. 
In other words, Canadian-dollar revenues for commodity exporters fall by less than U.S. dollar 
revenues. 
Second, the depreciating dollar boosts Canadian-dollar revenues for exporters of other goods, 
which are also often priced in U.S. dollars. This then allows those companies to compete more 
effectively for future export sales. Those increased sales eventually mean more growth and 
rising investment in the non-resource sectors of the economy, and more employment. In other 
words, the exchange rate decline helps to facilitate a shift in the economy’s growth engine from 
the commodity sector to the non-commodity sectors. 
We have already seen stronger growth in exports of non-commodity goods such as machinery 
and equipment, furniture, pharmaceuticals, aerospace and electronics, to name a few. This is 
helping to offset the weakness in the resource sector tied to lower commodity prices, but this 
natural process will take time to translate into more investment spending and new job creation. 
Third – and this will sound like a less desirable part of the process – a lower Canadian dollar 
raises the price of imported goods for everyone. This spreads the impact of the loss of income 
across the entire economy, rather than leaving it just in the commodity-producing sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
Even so, there are large regional and sectoral differences in Canada’s economy – with the 
resource-producing  regions  taking  a  much  harder  hit.  The  exchange  rate  can’t  absorb  the 
shock in its entirety for any one sector or region, so those underlying adjustments will continue 
for some time. 
With this same story unfolding in other commodity-exporting countries, along with continued 
currency weakness in Japan and Europe, there has been a steady rise in the global value of 
the U.S. dollar. Some observers have voiced concerns about the disruptive effects of excessive 
exchange rate variability and suggested that a stronger U.S. dollar could derail global growth. 
Let me address both of those points in turn. 
First, it’s important to remember that variability in exchange rates and interest rates is natural; 
financial  markets  generally  react  to  movements  in  underlying  economic  fundamentals.  So 
when you think about movements in financial markets and how they might affect an economy, 
it’s important not to lose sight of the underlying cause of the movement and its impact. 
If financial markets did not respond to these underlying events, or if this financial variability 
was somehow suppressed, then all of the adjustment to the fundamental shock would be borne 
by the most important economic variables, such as employment and inflation. As a central 
banker, I want to see stability in those variables while much of the variability is absorbed by 
financial markets. Such variability acts as a shock absorber for the broader economy. 
To make this point concrete, consider what would happen if commodity prices fell significantly 
and  the  Canadian  dollar  started  to  decline,  but  the  Bank  of  Canada  acted  to  prevent  that 
depreciation.  That  would  mean  raising  interest  rates  and  slowing  the  entire  Canadian 
economy, and the process of adjustment to the commodity price shock would be made slower 
and more painful. 
Second, some commentators have expressed concern about the potential of a stronger U.S. 
dollar to stifle growth. Indeed, U.S. net exports have deteriorated over the past year as the 
U.S. dollar has appreciated. 
But this focus on the possible economic consequences of an exchange rate movement misses 
the fundamental point. The U.S. dollar has not risen out of the blue, but in the context of a solid 
U.S. economic expansion and a softening of growth elsewhere. Accordingly, the rise in the 
U.S. dollar may be causing a moderation of U.S. GDP growth through higher imports and lower 
exports,  but  it  is  not  causing  a  softening  in  U.S.  demand.  Rather, the stronger  U.S.  dollar 
diverts some of the growth in U.S. demand outward, boosting growth in other countries. In 
other words, the rising U.S. dollar doesn’t stifle global growth, it redistributes it. 
What  we’ve  observed  since  mid-2014  is  that  countries  with  declining  terms  of  trade  have 
generally seen their net exports improve in real terms, while those with rising terms of trade 
have seen their net export positions worsen. This is how floating exchange rates redistribute 
demand – to countries struggling with falling terms of trade from countries that are enjoying 
rising incomes – and this helps the upturn become more synchronized. 
Nonetheless,  the  multi-dimensional  nature  of  this  global  shock  vastly  complicates  the 
adjustment process. To illustrate, consider that while Canada goes through its adjustment, 
some of its competitors are doing the same, and their currencies are depreciating along with 
Canada’s. This  will  make  the  adjustment  process more  challenging  compared  with  a  case 
where Canada was the only country that had to adjust. 
This should serve as a reminder that a flexible exchange rate is not a policy panacea. Other 
complementary  policies  can  be  deployed  to  offer  a  broader  array  of  buffers  while  still 
encouraging the necessary longer-term adjustments, including fiscal policies and policies that 
make labour markets more flexible. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Exchange rates and inflation 
Before I conclude, let me say a few words about how this all relates to our primary mission: 
controlling  inflation.  The  impact  of  a  terms-of-trade  shock  is  incredibly  complex. While  the 
reduced income means less demand and downward pressure on inflation, the depreciating 
currency means higher prices for imported goods and services. We’re seeing this in Canada 
right now. We’ll update our estimates and give a new, full outlook for the Canadian economy 
in our next Monetary Policy Report in a couple of weeks. 
It’s possible to imagine a situation where a sharply weaker currency could drive a country’s 
inflation significantly above target, even with the continued presence of excess capacity in the 
economy. The greater the divergence of inflation from target, the more skeptical people might 
become that the divergence would be temporary. In other words, there could be a risk that 
inflation expectations would become de-anchored. Managing that risk might even require a 
tightening of monetary policy that, in the end, would produce below-target inflation. 
That is not our situation in Canada. The Bank of Canada has almost 25 years of inflation-
targeting  history,  and  inflation  expectations  in  Canada  are  very  well  anchored  as  a  result. 
Certainly, our experience in the post-crisis years has tested those expectations repeatedly, 
and they have remained solid. 
This credibility is a crucial benefit of our inflation-targeting system. It allows us to look through 
inflationary forces that we expect to be temporary, such as those coming from movements in 
the Canadian dollar. We do not take our credibility for granted – in fact, we treasure it, and 
would never put it at risk. 
As we’ve said repeatedly over the past year, we at the Bank are studying a number of issues 
as we prepare to renew our inflation-targeting agreement with the federal government. One of 
these issues is what measure or measures we should use to gauge underlying inflationary 
pressures. The best-known measure, core inflation, is facing upward pressure because of the 
impact of the lower Canadian dollar on the prices of imported goods. As such, core inflation is 
overstating the underlying trend of inflation in the economy. Later this year, we will answer the 
question of whether we should continue to focus on one measure of underlying inflation and, 
if so, whether core inflation will keep that role. 
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude. As the global economy enters a new year, divergence has become the 
dominant theme. Economies are reacting in different ways to a seismic shift in global resource 
prices. These different reactions have divergent implications for monetary policy from country 
to country. Divergence of monetary policy should be expected. 
Financial markets have been focused on policy divergence for some time, and we should be 
prepared  for  this  preoccupation  to  last.  This  will  probably  mean  more  variability  in  global 
financial markets than we have seen in the recent past. Such variability is a natural reaction to 
shocks and a buffer for the real economy – and the variables that count, like employment, 
growth and prices. Movements in exchange rates are helping economies, including ours, make 
the adjustments that must take place. 
We’ve been in this situation before. The Bank of Canada will continue to run an independent 
monetary policy, anchored by our inflation target, and we will use our tools to manage risks 
along the way. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
