   Haruhiko Kuroda: Information technology and financial services – the 
central bank's perspective 
Remarks  by  Mr  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  FinTech  Forum, 
Tokyo, 23 August 2016. 
 Introduction 
It is a great pleasure to welcome all of you to our first meeting of the FinTech Forum. 
for 
the  basic 
infrastructure 
Information technology and financial services 
I.  
Today's  Forum  focuses  on  information  and  financial  services.  Indeed,  financial  activities 
make  full  use  of  wide-ranging  information  technologies  created  throughout  human history, 
and  financial  industries  have  almost  always  developed  parallel  to  advances  in  various 
techniques and infrastructure related to information processing. 
Money,  which  constitutes 
financial  activities,  physically 
symbolizes  information  pertaining  to  value  in  the  form  of  metal  or  paper  by using relevant 
technologies,  thereby  enabling  the  exchange  and  preservation  of  value.  Moreover, money 
attaches  information  on  “price,”  which  is  based  on  a  widely-shared  common  “scale,”  to 
various goods and services. Such price information has worked as a  critical  signal  leading 
to  efficient  resource  allocation  in  the  economy.  Furthermore,  “ledgers”  and  “double-entry 
bookkeeping,”  whose  developments  were  accelerated  by  paper  and  printing  technology, 
enabled  efficient  and  centralized  management  of  information,  including  various  prices. 
Using  double-entry  bookkeeping  ledgers,  firms  and  individuals  became  able  to  share  the 
information  necessary  for  conducting  economic activities. 
Financial  services  have  developed  with  the  support  of  such  information  infrastructure. 
Financial intermediation, such as bank lending, has made full use of borrowers'  information 
shared through ledgers and corporate accounting. Payments and settlements  of  business 
transactions  as  well  as  financial  transactions  in  modern  economies  and  financial markets 
have largely been processed through bank deposit transfers and  securities transfers based 
on centralized ledgers and book-entry systems. 
From the perspective of information processing, payments and settlements relieve  economic 
entities  from  burdensome  information  management,  such  as  credit  risk  management of 
accounts receivables stemming from past transactions. This allows  entities  to  concentrate 
their  resources  in  forward-looking  economic  activities.  Through  financial  intermediation, 
financial  resources  are  allocated  to  investment  in  projects  with  higher  productivity.  The 
bundling  and  integration  of  refined  mechanisms  of  information  processing  into  financial 
services  have  contributed  importantly to  the  development  of  economic society. 
through  various  networks  has  expanded  exponentially. 
Recent innovation in information technology and “FinTech” 
II. 
Today, we are observing very rapid innovation in information technology. Due to the  spread 
of  the  internet,  smartphones  and  social  networks,  the  amount  of  data  and  information 
disseminated 
Innovation  in 
information technology makes it possible to process and analyse such “big  data”  speedily. 
Also, information related to retail transactions of goods and services,  which was left unused 
in  the  past,  is  now  gathered  through  loyalty  cards  and  e-money  cards  and  utilized  for 
business  purposes.  Moreover,  new  forms  of  economic  activities  comprising  the  “sharing 
economy”  have  been  realized  thanks  to  new  information  technology.  In  this  process,  idle 
resources dispersed throughout the economy are identified and organized on the micro-level 
and matched with people's needs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Such  innovation  in  information  technology  has  the  potential  to  generate  innovation, 
especially  in  financial  services,  and  such  financial  innovation  linked  to  information 
technology  is  expressed  in  the  word  “FinTech.”  It  is  not  at  all  surprising  that  information 
technology  has  a  major  influence  on  financial  services,  considering  the close and inherent 
relationship between the two as described above. 
Payments,  settlements,  investment  judgement  and  risk  management,  which  constitute  the 
core of financial activities, can be regarded as information processing. Therefore,  progress 
in information technology and AI can be expected to significantly influence  them. Moreover, 
“blockchain”  and  “distributed  ledger  technologies,”  the  flagship  technologies  in  FinTech, 
challenge  the  conventional  concepts  of  ledgers  kept  by  a  trusted  third  party  in  a 
centralized  manner.  Given  that  the  development  of  financial  services has been supported 
by ledgers  as the  basic infrastructure for  information, the  dramatic changes in how ledgers 
are kept may have the potential of significantly  changing the structure of financial services. 
Importance of information security 
III. 
While  innovation  in  information  technology  and  FinTech  has  the  potential  to  extend  the 
frontiers of financial services, we must bear in mind that information security is becoming all 
the more important due to these innovations. 
When  searching the  internet  to  shop for goods,  various  related  goods and  advertisements 
pop  up  to  recommend  associated  purchases.  As  frequency  of  use  increases,  these 
recommendations and advertisements capture more and more  information on the tastes and 
preferences of customers. This is made possible by  high-speed processing of big data, and 
this innovation in information technology  enables  the  development  of  profiles  on  individual 
customers.  However,  if  such  information  is  abused,  in  the  worst  case,  the  abuse  can  do 
substantial  harm  to  society,  and  can  cause  anxiety  among  users  in  general.  As  such, 
advances in information  processing underscore the importance of information security. 
Moreover, the development of information technology has simultaneously refined the  tactics 
of  hackers  and  cyber-attacks.  Particularly  in  the  financial  industries  with  global  networks, 
once  such  an  attack  occurs  in  one location,  its negative influence  may spread  across  the 
board. The  Bangladesh Bank  heist  in the  beginning of this  year  was  the  case  that above-
mentioned risk was materialized. 
For the  sound  development  of FinTech,  information  security is  a key.  FinTech  has  various 
characteristics,  such  as  advanced  information  processing  utilizing  big  data  and  AI. 
Additionally,  FinTech  is  characterized  by  an  “openness”  of  networks,  with  the  expansion 
of new media and instruments, including internet and smartphones, enabling  ready  access 
to  financial  services.  This  enhanced  accessibility  to  financial  services  benefits  customers 
and adds  to  their convenience.  On the other hand, as financial networks become increasingly 
“open,”  potential  target  points  for  cyber-attacks  also  tend 
to  increase.  Therefore,  how  to 
simultaneously manage “openness of financial networks”  and “information security” is a big 
challenge for FinTech. 
Financial services can be regarded as the processing of information for creating value in  the 
linkages  between  economic  entities  over  time  and  space.  This  is  demonstrated  in  the 
payments  and 
that  connect  various  entities,  such  as 
senders/receivers  and  lenders/borrowers.  In  this  sense,  such  activities  must  always  be 
supported by people's “trust.” Since FinTech is illustrated as a technologically advanced  form 
of financial  services,  the importance of  trust  also  applies  to  FinTech.  For  the  development 
of  FinTech,  it  is  imperative  to  firmly  maintain  people's  trust  in  financial  services  while 
facilitating the  creativity and  innovation  needed  to  meet  the needs  of  people. If information 
security problems were to repeatedly occur in a part of FinTech services,  public  trust toward 
FinTech  in  general  would  be  eroded  even  though  such  problems are caused by a limited 
number of entities. People’s anxiety for new services  would hinder the sound development 
of FinTech overall. 
intermediation 
financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The  information  technology  behind  FinTech,  if  properly  applied,  should  and  can  also 
contribute  to  enhancing  information  security  and  the  safety  of  financial  transactions.  For 
example, seal stamps and PINs, which are traditional measures for verification in  financial 
transactions, are accompanied by certain risks, such as theft and identity theft. In  this  regard, 
biometric  authentication  utilizing  new  technology  may  contribute  to  reducing these risks 
and strengthening the security in financial transactions. Thus, it is  critical for relevant parties 
to  make  utmost  efforts  to  use  technological  innovation  for  enhancing  security  in  financial 
transactions. FinTech will thrive and grow when users  associate it not only with convenience 
but also with safety and trust. 
Initiatives at the Bank of Japan 
IV.  
FinTech  has  various  implications  for  central  banking.  FinTech  has  a  wide  influence  on 
payments,  settlements  and  financial  services,  and  could  stimulate  various  economic 
activities,  including  e-commerce  and  “sharing  economy”  businesses.  Also,  FinTech  can 
encourage mutual feedback between financial activities and high-end technologies,  including 
cryptographic techniques. Moreover, financial literacy and education are  needed to promote 
the  sound  development  of  FinTech.  The  Bank  of  Japan  is  ready  to  lead  research  and 
analysis  on  FinTech,  in  view  of  the  possibility  that  the  Bank  itself  may apply FinTech 
technologies to its operations in the future. 
Given the far-reaching implications of FinTech, the Bank established its “FinTech  Center” on 
April 1 in the Payment and Settlement Systems Department. The Bank has  also built up a 
“FinTech network” comprised of a wide range of staff drawn from the  relevant departments 
of the Bank. This FinTech Network, for which the FinTech Center  functions as the secretariat, 
promotes  the  sharing  of  information  and  expertise  related  to  FinTech  in  a  cross-sectoral 
manner within the Bank. The Bank, as the central bank of  Japan, is ready to make its best 
efforts  to  support  the  sound  development  of  FinTech  in  order  to  enhance  the  welfare  of 
financial service users as well as economic activities. 
In today's Forum, we welcome a rich variety of participants. When we look back at history, 
we  see  that  communication  and  positive  feedbacks  among  various  entities  from  different 
cultures,  such  as  cross-border  trading  between  Europe  and  the  Orient  during  the 
Renaissance, led to the development of banking as well as double-entry bookkeeping.  In a 
similar vein, in order to promote the development of the new  financial services that we have 
come  to  call  FinTech,  it  is  extremely  important  to  realize  positive  and 
interactive 
communication  among  a  broad  spectrum  of  entities  that  go  beyond the traditional financial 
industry to include IT enterprises, retailers, start-ups and  others. I sincerely hope that today's 
Forum will contribute to all the participants in terms  of sharing new insights and perspectives. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
