   Lars Rohde: The importance of credit institutions’ capitalisation, 
financial regulation development 
Speech by Mr Lars Rohde, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the annual meeting 
of the Danish Mortgage Banks’ Federation, Copenhagen, 7 April 2016. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak at your annual meeting.  
Today I will focus on the importance of credit institutions’ capitalisation, financial regulation 
developments and a few significant consequences of the very low interest rates.  
My key messages are: It is in everyone’s interest that credit institutions are well-capitalised. 
The  risk-based  approach  should  be  retained  in  financial  regulation.  And  we  must  have  a 
realistic approach to how much special Danish circumstances will be taken into account in 
future. I will also observe that the credit institutions’ own targeted returns seem to be rather 
high, and that a long period of low interest rates involves considerable inherent risk.  
***  
My first topic is equity capital and financial regulation.  
Robust  equity  is  of  paramount  importance  if  people  are  to  have  confidence  in  a  financial 
enterprise.  The  financial  crisis  showed  that  many  financial  institutions  were  insufficiently 
capitalised. As a result, some of them were not resilient to the losses incurred in the wake of 
the overheating. This inability to absorb losses exacerbated the economic downturn. Since 
then,  much  has  been  done  to  increase  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system,  both 
internationally and in Denmark. For example, capital requirements have been enhanced. The 
financial system has become more robust than it was before the financial crisis.  
The  improved  capitalisation  of  Danish  credit  institutions  is  without  question  an  advantage, 
whether or not it is a result of financial regulation. There is nothing to indicate that the increased 
capital requirements have led to a lack of lending capacity or led to lower growth in Denmark.  
It is also in the interest of the credit institutions themselves to be well-capitalised – and even 
more so after the introduction of the new EU bail-in regime. It is now the owners and creditors 
who must bear the losses of a distressed institution. And it is at least as important to be well-
capitalised in the eyes of the market as in the eyes of the supervisory authorities. 
Important work is underway in relation to resolution planning for credit institutions. As regards 
the  mortgage  banks,  it  is  chiefly  a  question  of  ensuring  that  the  authorities  can  handle  a 
distressed mortgage bank. Without the use of taxpayers’ funds. And in such a way that the 
lending capacity of the institution is retained and there is no knock-on effect on the rest of the 
system.  
***  
The capital adequacy rules are based on the principle that a financial institution’s capitalisation 
should reflect the actual risk on the institution’s balance sheet. This is why e.g. the risk-based 
capital requirements apply. They are aimed at ensuring that the institutions’ capitalisation is 
adequate so that they can resist shocks. At the same time, the risk-based capital requirements 
contribute to improving the institutions’ risk management.  
The internal models used by most large institutions to calculate their risk-weighted assets have 
been criticised internationally. It has given cause for concern that the risk weights calculated 
can  differ  substantially  across  institutions,  even  if  the  exposures  are  similar.  For  many 
institutions, the risk weights have also declined notably over the years.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The Basel Committee, which proposes standards for financial regulation of banks at the global 
level, has recently published a consultative document proposing certain limitations on the use 
of internal models for calculating risk-weighted assets.  
It is yet too early to assess the full consequences of the Basel Committee’s proposal. Nor is it 
possible to say whether it will be possible to take special national circumstances into account 
when the proposal is incorporated into EU regulation.  
Danmarks Nationalbank finds that the risk-based approach should be retained. That is in line 
with  the  position  of the Danish  government  and  with  your  view.  Therefore,  we  support  the 
continued use of internal models for calculating risk-weighted assets. At least to the extent that 
the credit institutions have sufficient data for the use of such models to make sense. In other 
words, there should not be any floor requirements if the documented risk of losses is very low.  
It is also important that both credit institutions and authorities take a thorough and critical view 
of whether the internal models reflect the institutions’ risks.  
***  
Regulation of the financial sector is mostly determined at the international level. There may be 
elements that we in Denmark find inexpedient. And it is possible that EU regulation is gradually 
doing away with national discretions.  
There can be no doubt that it is in the interest of Denmark to have a level playing field for credit 
institutions. If everyone wants special rules, the playing field is no longer level. 
The  Danish  mortgage  credit  system  is  based  on  our  special  statutory  requirements. 
Furthermore,  it  relies  heavily  on  a  well-functioning  land  registration  system  and  a  creditor-
friendly system of enforced sales.  
We have seen that the Danish mortgage credit model does not always fit into the framework 
of new international financial regulation.  
In recent years, we have also seen a clear tendency for mortgage banks to resemble other 
banks more and more.  
Our expectations must be realistic. And we must face the fact that there are limits to the number 
of  special  arrangements  that  the  Danish  mortgage  credit  sector  can  obtain  when  new 
international regulation is introduced. Instead, our ambition should be to fit Danish mortgage 
credit into the framework laid down by the international standards and rules.  
We  can  do  so  by  seeking  to  influence  this  framework.  But  we  should  choose  our  battles 
carefully.  
A  challenge  in  relation  to  Denmark’s  efforts  to  influence  developments  in  international 
regulation is that much of this regulation is initially conceived by the Basel Committee, where 
we do not have a seat. We only have a say from the stage where the rules are transposed into 
EU regulation. So the main channel of influence goes via the EU cooperation. By the way, the 
European Commission should be given credit for generally listening to the Danish views. At 
least if our argumentation is convincing and supported by empirical data. On the other hand, 
we must accept that non-membership of the banking union closes another possible channel of 
influence on international financial regulation – the ECB.  
***  
More changes to financial regulation are likely to be introduced in the coming years in the form 
of new initiatives from the Basel Committee as well as changes to EU regulation resulting from 
the banking union.  
According to the Basel Committee, the forthcoming changes are not aimed at increasing the 
total capital requirements for the financial sector.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   But for the individual institution the new requirements could mean that it should prepare for 
increased  capital  adequacy  requirements.  Therefore,  it  would  be  wise  to  ensure  robust 
capitalisation. This can be done by raising capital in the market or by retaining a larger share 
of profits.  
In this connection I would like to make it clear that an increased share of own funding relative 
to debt funding does not entail any substantial extra costs for a credit institution.  
More equity capital makes the institution more robust and reduces the returns demanded by 
both bond owners and shareholders. And the return on and risks related to the assets are the 
same irrespective of the method of funding. Moreover, right now might be a good time to boost 
the capital buffers as equity investors’ expected returns are currently low.  
***  
Given the very low level of interest rates, the targets set by credit institutions for return on 
equity seem to be rather high. According to these targets, an investment in a Danish bank or 
mortgage  bank  should  yield  a  considerably  higher  return  than  an  investment  in  Danish 
government bonds. The reason for this high risk premium is not obvious to me. And certainly 
not if we take into account that the institutions have increased their capitalisation in recent 
years and are now seen as safer investments.  
The high targeted returns give cause for concern as they may trigger a need to increase the 
risks  taken  by  credit  institutions. This  can  be  done  on  the  assets  side, e.g.  via  more risky 
lending. Or on the liabilities side via higher leverage ratios. I hope that the high targets are not 
based on this type of strategic considerations. The credit institutions should carefully consider 
whether the current targeted returns are consistent with a prudent level of risk.  
***  
The  long  period  of  low  interest  rates  may  have  had  an  impact  on  the  expectations  and 
behaviour of firms and households. The risk that interest rates may rise is disregarded. Most 
people have clearly become accustomed to low interest rates. In relation to financial stability, 
this requires enhanced vigilance. If interest rates rise, this may lead to losses on the credit 
institutions’ assets and the collateral behind their lending.  
For households, the costs of borrowing to purchase a home are historically low at present, 
even if the announced increases in administration margins are taken into account. How the 
administration  margins  are  determined  is  no  concern  of  ours.  However,  I  would  like  to 
emphasise that there is a link between the very low level of interest rates, which also leads to 
a modest return on a credit institution’s equity, and the need for a certain level of earnings from 
other sources so that capital can be accumulated with a view to increasing lending.  
It should also be noted that improved earnings and better capitalisation of a mortgage bank 
benefit its customers by way of lower funding costs. This is reflected in the yield payable by 
the customers on the underlying bonds.  
Combined with migration to the cities, the very low interest rates have led to a period of strong 
growth in house prices in some parts of Denmark. Adjusted for seasonal fluctuations, house 
prices continued to rise at a robust rate in the 2nd half of 2015 and at the beginning of this 
year. But there are signs of a slowdown compared with one year ago. Trading activity has 
generally declined over the last year. This could indicate that price pressures will ease in the 
future. 
Although substantial interest rate hikes are not on the cards for the time being, it is important 
that  borrowers  are  resilient  to  higher  loan  costs  if  interest  rates  do  rise.  Households  can 
achieve this by: increasing the fixed interest period, keeping their loan-to-income and loan-to-
value ratios at a prudent level, and amortising their loans. All these measures protect them 
against higher interest rates.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   I  have  also  noted  that  the  mortgage  banks  comply  with  the  Danish  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority’s new lending guidelines in many respects. These are sound principles that would 
have boosted the robustness of the financial sector, had they been observed in the mid-2000s. 
Even  though  the guidelines  are  observed,  the  leverage  ratio may  still  be  high for first-time 
buyers who borrow right up to the LTV limits. A high leverage ratio makes borrowers vulnerable 
to even small price falls in the housing market.  
Let me conclude by summarising my key messages:  
• 
• 
• 
Well-capitalised credit institutions are in everyone’s interest.  
The risk-based approach should be retained in financial regulation.  
A level playing field is in Denmark’s interest, and we should have a realistic approach 
to how much the Danish mortgage credit system will be taken into account in future 
international financial regulation.  
The credit institutions’ own targeted returns seem to be rather high. And finally:  
A long period of low interest rates involves considerable inherent risk.  
• 
• 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
