   Fritz Zurbrügg: Competitiveness of Swiss companies – the Swiss 
National Bank’s contribution 
Speech by Mr Fritz Zurbrügg, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Swiss CFO Day, Zug, 13 January 2016. 
 The charts can be found at the Swiss National Bank’s website. 
The speaker would like to thank Till Ebner, Rita Fleer and Adriel Jost for their valuable support in the preparation 
of this speech. He also thanks Carlos Lenz for his helpful comments. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is a great pleasure to be here at the Swiss CFO Day 2016. This year’s topic – international 
competitiveness – represents a key challenge for companies and politicians alike. In order for 
companies to create growth and wealth in a globalised market, they are continually having to 
maintain their position against international competitors. Local factors such as the educational 
standard of the population, labour market flexibility and the tax burden clearly play their part. 
The importance of monetary policy may be rather less obvious at first glance. However, as 
was demonstrated on 15 January last year, when the Swiss National Bank discontinued its 
minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 to the euro, monetary policy measures can influence 
competitiveness. 
The discontinuation triggered a sharp appreciation of the Swiss franc. On the one hand, this 
appreciation put Switzerland’s price competitiveness under severe pressure in the short term, 
and  I’m  sure  I  don’t  need  to  go  into  detail  on  the  practical  repercussions  for  individual 
companies in a forum such as this. The impact is still being felt at many of your organisations, 
although Swiss firms have once again proved impressively flexible and resilient. On the other 
hand, the decision last January was absolutely necessary, given that the euro lost considerable 
ground  against  all  major  currencies  as  a  result  of  the  changed  international  environment. 
Waiting any longer would have put the minimum exchange rate under permanent pressure. 
The minimum exchange rate had become unsustainable. The costs associated with continuing 
such a policy would thus no longer have been justified. Moreover, had we discontinued the 
minimum exchange rate at a later date, the impact on the Swiss economy would have been 
even greater. I am therefore convinced that the SNB’s decision came at the right time. Without 
this difficult step, we would have compromised our ability to fulfil our mandate of ensuring price 
stability in the medium and long term. 
It  is  precisely  by  fulfilling  this  mandate  that  the  SNB  contributes  indirectly  to  Swiss 
competitiveness in the long term. In my remarks today, I will first go into more detail about this 
contribution. I will then discuss the difference between the short and long-term effects of a 
strong currency on competitiveness. Finally, I will examine the role of the Swiss franc exchange 
rate in our monetary policy deliberations. 
Competitiveness and macroeconomic stability 
In international comparisons of competitiveness, Switzerland is regularly among the leaders. 
For example, it has headed the World Economic Forum’s (WEF) Global Competitiveness Index 
for  years  (cf.  chart  1).  So  what  are  the  factors  behind  Switzerland’s  high  degree  of 
competitiveness? Let me make something clear right at the outset: competitiveness depends 
first and foremost on companies and their ability to innovate (cf. chart 2). Innovation helps 
companies to increase productivity, thereby lowering costs and prices. In addition, innovation 
leads to higher quality and greater exclusivity of products or services, which in many cases 
bestows price-setting power. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Switzerland  is  a  case  in  point:  its  industries  are  highly  competitive,  precisely  because  our 
country is among the world leaders in innovation, as a number of indicators have shown. If, for 
example, we look at the number of registered patents relative to population size, Switzerland 
is by far the most active of the OECD countries (cf. chart 3, left-hand panel). Innovation indices, 
such as the Global Innovation Index and the Innovation Union Scoreboard, also place it right 
at the top.1 A key factor behind this leading position is the level of investment in research and 
development (cf. chart 3, right-hand panel), which is above average by international standards. 
Firms that are innovative and willing to invest cannot develop and thrive in a vacuum. The 
scope for development is largely dependent on a country’s location-specific factors. The spider 
diagrams used in the WEF Competitiveness Report show the main pillars underpinning the 
competitiveness landscape (cf. chart 4). These include the level of education, the stability of 
political institutions, legal certainty, labour market flexibility and the quality of infrastructure. 
A further prerequisite for companies’ ability to innovate is a stable macroeconomic environment 
– in other words, a stability-oriented monetary policy and a sustainable financial policy. Price 
stability and sound public finances make it easier for companies to plan, especially as regards 
investment. 
This  is  where  the  SNB comes  in.  According  to the  National  Bank  Act,  it  is  responsible for 
ensuring price stability, while taking due account of economic developments. By fulfilling this 
mandate, the SNB makes a major contribution to a stable macroeconomic environment, and 
hence indirectly to the competitiveness of the Swiss economy (cf. chart 5).2 
From a historical perspective, the SNB has successfully fulfilled its monetary policy mandate. 
Long-term  average  inflation  is  lower  and  less  volatile  in  Switzerland  than  in  most  other 
countries (cf. chart 6). As a result, the Swiss franc has lost less purchasing power over time 
compared to other currencies. 
The generally stable economic and political environment in Switzerland is one of the reasons 
why  the  Swiss  franc  is  popular  with  investors  and  has  a  tendency  to  strengthen.  Thus,  a 
financial and monetary policy that successfully contributes to macroeconomic stability is both 
a basis for competitiveness on the part of Swiss companies and a driver of Swiss franc strength 
(cf. chart 7). This is especially the case in times of heightened uncertainty.  
Competitiveness and the strong Swiss franc 
But aren’t these two consequences of a stability-oriented economic policy at odds with each 
other?  Or,  to  put  it  another  way:  does  a  strong  franc  really  lead  to  a  reduction  in 
competitiveness? It is essential to differentiate between the short and long-term impact of a 
strong currency on competitiveness, and it is these differences which I will now examine in the 
second part of my remarks. 
In  the  short  term,  the  answer  is  obvious:  an  appreciation  makes  Swiss  companies  less 
competitive on prices than their foreign rivals (cf. chart 8). It becomes harder for them to sell 
their products and services at a price that covers the costs involved. The increased pressure 
on margins forces many companies to make adjustments. Without a doubt, these adjustments 
are painful and require a high degree of innovative thinking, a willingness to take risks and 
flexibility, from both employers and employees. If need be, companies may have to withdraw 
                                                
1   The Global Innovation Index is published by Cornell University, INSEAD and the World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO), and covers 143 countries. The Innovation Union Scoreboard is a European Commission 
tool for evaluating the innovation performance of EU member states and other European countries such as 
Switzerland. 
2   As part of its mandate, the SNB must also contribute to the stability of the financial system. A well-functioning 
system of bank lending is also an important pillar of macroeconomic stability. However, my remarks today will 
focus on monetary policy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   from markets in which they are no longer competitive, or relocate part of their production – and 
thus some jobs – to lower-cost countries, in order to keep pace with their foreign competitors. 
Individual companies may even have to cease their activities in Switzerland altogether. A study 
by the KOF research institute shows that, following a Swiss franc appreciation, the segment of 
lower-skilled workers in particular sees employment numbers fall.3  
However, the same study also points out that, despite pressure on margins, the remaining 
companies will respond to the franc’s appreciation by stepping up research and development, 
improving product quality and increasing the number of highly skilled workers they employ. 
Over time, these measures should lead the industries concerned to become more productive 
overall. The majority of empirical studies for other countries confirm that, as a general rule, 
strong  competitive  pressure  increases  an  industry’s  productivity.4  Moreover,  a  number  of 
country studies indicate that an appreciation can have a positive impact on productivity.5 Often, 
the relationship is reciprocal, with productivity gains themselves leading to a stronger currency. 
Thus, in contrast to the short term, in the long term one cannot claim a contradiction between 
an economy’s competitiveness and a strong currency (cf. chart 9). The fact that Switzerland is 
among  the  world  leaders  in  competitiveness,  despite  the  strong  Swiss  franc,  confirms  this 
finding. 
I’d like to illustrate the difference between the short and long-term consequences of a stability-
oriented  economic  policy  with  a  classroom  metaphor.  In  most  school  classes,  there  is  a 
particularly enthusiastic pupil, the “swot”. For swots, the immediate effect of good academic 
achievement is negative, as they become excluded by the other pupils. Should they perform 
less  well,  simply  to  avoid  this  unpleasant  situation?  In  the  short  term,  the  result  would  be 
positive, but in the long term they would probably regret it. 
Switzerland  as  an  economic  centre  faces  a  similar  dilemma.  The  result  of  the  successful 
economic  policy,  and  the  associated  stability,  is  that  the  Swiss  franc  has  a  tendency  to 
strengthen, demanding constant adjustment from companies and their workforces. So should 
Switzerland throw its principles overboard and pursue an irresponsible financial and monetary 
policy? This would automatically reduce the pressure to appreciate and to adjust. And in the 
short term, that probably would bring some relief. However, in the medium and long term, such 
a policy would certainly come at the huge cost of endangering the hitherto successful “Swiss 
model”. 
The Swiss franc’s role in SNB monetary policy strategy 
What does this mean for monetary policy in practical terms? As a rule, monetary policy should 
not focus on the short-term impact of a strong franc on price competitiveness. Therefore, a 
monetary policy geared towards long-term macroeconomic stability does not normally involve 
any fine-tuning of the exchange rate. Accordingly, the SNB’s monetary policy strategy since 
the  1970s  has  been  based  around  a  freely  floating  Swiss  franc  exchange  rate  that  is  not 
actively managed by the National Bank. 
This is not to say, however, that the SNB does not take the exchange rate into account in its 
monetary policy deliberations – on the contrary: because Switzerland is so closely integrated 
                                                
3   Cf. Kaiser, B. and M. Siegenthaler (2015), The skill-biased effect of exchange rate fluctuations, KOF Working 
Papers, KOF Swiss Economic Institute, ETH Zurich, 385. 
4   Cf. Holmes, T. J. and J. A. Schmitz Jr. (2010), Competition and Productivity: A Review of Evidence, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research department staff report, 439. The authors conclude that “nearly all the 
studies found that increases in competition lead to increases in industry productivity”. 
5   Cf., for example, Ekholm, K., A. Moxnes and K. Ulltveit-Moe (2012), Manufacturing restructuring and the role of 
real exchange rate shocks, Journal of International Economics, 86 (1), pp. 101–117 or Fung, L. (2008), Large 
Real Exchange Rate Movements, Firm Dynamics, and Productivity Growth, Canadian Journal of Economics, 
41 (2), pp. 391–424. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   into  the  global  economy,  both  appreciation  and  depreciation  phases  have  far-reaching 
consequences for economic and price developments in our country. As a result, exchange rate 
movements have a major influence on our inflation forecasts. Thus, they also play an important 
role in monetary policymaking. 
The  SNB  thus  takes  the  macroeconomic  repercussions  of  exchange  rate  movements  into 
consideration.  Under  normal  circumstances,  we  can  respond  by  adjusting  interest  rates, 
without intervening directly in the foreign exchange market. This approach has proved to be 
useful and, in terms of our mandate, suited to the purpose. It allows the SNB to conduct a 
monetary policy that is optimally tailored to the country’s needs. 
Despite the positive experience with flexible exchange rates, in certain situations it may be 
necessary  for  the  SNB  to  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  in  order  to  influence 
exchange rate movements directly. This is the case when the interest rate as a tool proves 
insufficient to ward off a threat to macroeconomic stability in Switzerland (cf. chart 10). 
The difficult but crucial task of the SNB is to identify under which circumstances a Swiss franc 
appreciation may lead to a destabilisation. A key element in this evaluation is the speed and 
magnitude of the appreciation. A rapid and sharp appreciation can result in a substantial fall in 
the  price  level  in  Switzerland.  Such  a  price  decline  can  also  cause  longer-term  inflation 
expectations to turn negative. Expectations of longer-term price declines can, in turn, lead to 
inflation being persistently negative or – in the worst case – to a downward price spiral. This is 
particularly a risk when the speed of an appreciation leaves companies virtually no time to 
adjust, and the appreciation is thus combined with widespread upheaval in the real economy. 
These  destabilisation  risks  are  all  the  more  severe  if  the  global  economy  is  in  crisis.  An 
international  economic  crisis  often  heralds  an  inflow  of  domestic  and foreign  capital  to the 
Swiss  franc,  which  has  acquired  a  reputation  as  a  safe  haven  on  account  of  its  historical 
behaviour. In other words, in uncertain times, the franc is seen as an anchor of stability, and is 
therefore much in demand. The currency can thus experience a strong short-term appreciation 
as a result. At the same time, a weak global economy can put pressure on sales volumes for 
the Swiss export industry. This increases the risk that production capacities cannot be fully 
utilised, that unemployment will rise sharply, and that the Swiss economy as a whole will slide 
into crisis. 
If an appreciation threatens macroeconomic stability in Switzerland through these channels, 
this has consequences for monetary policy. When conventional instruments reach their limits, 
the SNB has to resort to other tools in order to fulfil its mandate (cf. chart 11). First and foremost 
among these are foreign exchange market interventions. Since 2009, the SNB has, as you 
know, used this tool in a number of ways, purchasing foreign currency amounting to nearly 
CHF 500 billion. Between September 2011 and January 2015, for example, the SNB used this 
tool to enforce a minimum exchange rate against the euro. 
In  this  regard,  I  feel  it  is  important  to  stress  that  considerable  risks  accompany  on  such 
interventions.  First,  market  interventions  aimed  at  preventing  an  appreciation  expand  the 
SNB’s balance sheet. When there is a fixed exchange rate target, one might even have to 
expect  an  uncontrolled  expansion  of  the  balance  sheet.  This  is  attached  to  a  number  of 
imponderables.6 In addition to major financial risks, it should be noted that, as the balance 
sheet grows, it will become increasingly difficult to reduce excess liquidity during a subsequent 
normalisation of monetary policy, and to fulfil the monetary policy mandate – of ensuring price 
stability – sustainably. 
Second,  it  is  important  to  bear  the  following  in  mind:  pegging  the  franc  partially  or  fully  to 
another currency would mean that the SNB would have to adopt the monetary policy of the 
                                                
6   Cf. also Danthine, J.-P. (2015): Swiss monetary policy facts ... and fiction, speech at the Swiss Finance Institute 
Evening Seminar, Geneva, 19 May 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   currency area concerned. However, it could no longer be guaranteed that this monetary policy 
would always be optimally tailored to the needs of the Swiss economy. 
Thus, the benefits of an active exchange rate policy need to be properly weighed against the 
costs for the economy as a whole. But there is no one-size-fits-all method of determining the 
need to intervene in the foreign exchange market, or the best way to do so. The points to 
consider will differ depending on the situation. 
Current SNB monetary policy 
In that regard, I would like to briefly describe the SNB’s current thinking. At its most recent 
monetary policy assessment about a month ago, the SNB published its new inflation forecast. 
The  forecast  shows  that,  assuming  an  unchanged  interest  rate  policy,  inflation  will  rise 
gradually over the coming quarters, and will exceed 1.0% in 2018 (cf. chart 12). So the forecast 
suggests that current monetary policy is appropriate. For this reason, in December the SNB 
decided to continue its expansionary policy. This is based on two elements: first, an interest 
rate of –0.75% on sight deposits at the SNB combined with a target range for the three-month 
Libor of between –1.25% and –0.25%; second, the SNB’s willingness to influence exchange 
rate developments if necessary. 
The negative interest rate and the willingness to intervene on the foreign exchange market 
serve to make investments in Swiss francs less attractive, and thereby reduce the pressure on 
our currency. These measures demonstrate that business as usual is still a long way off. During 
the crises of the last few years, recurring safe-haven flows of both domestic and foreign capital 
have led to severe upward pressure on the Swiss franc. Despite weakening somewhat over 
recent months, the franc is still considerably overvalued, as chart 13 illustrates. The blue curve 
shows changes in the inflation-adjusted, trade-weighted Swiss franc exchange rate. The yellow 
bars mark deviations from the long-term average, which is currently around 15%. At the same 
time, the global economic recovery is still not firmly bedded in. Our current monetary policy is 
tailored to these circumstances. It counters the risk of an undesirable appreciation and, in turn, 
the associated risks to price and economic developments. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  following  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate  of 
CHF 1.20 to the euro almost a year ago, Swiss competitiveness came under pressure in the 
short term. Yet Switzerland’s position among the leaders in major international rankings clearly 
shows  that,  over  the  long  term,  exchange  rate  developments  are  only  one  factor  shaping 
competitiveness.  A  more  decisive  role  is  played  by  the  existence  of  a  strong  network  of 
location-specific  factors  which  have  been  established,  nurtured  and  honed  over  several 
decades.  By  fulfilling  its  price  stability  mandate,  the  SNB  contributes  substantially  to 
perpetuating one of these factors – macroeconomic stability. 
In this regard, a monetary policy geared towards flexible exchange rates has, in principle, stood 
Switzerland in good stead over the last 40 years. Under certain conditions, however, the SNB 
is prepared to intervene directly in the foreign exchange market. This applies especially in the 
prevailing environment. Whether, and to what extent, foreign exchange market intervention is 
called  for  requires  careful  deliberation,  and  consideration  of  the  international  environment. 
Prior to the discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate, international developments had 
caused the euro to lose considerable ground against all major currencies; the minimum rate 
had thus become unsustainable. We appreciate that the exchange rate situation since then 
has  presented  you  all  with  a  huge  challenge.  Our  decision  was  inevitable,  however,  to 
guarantee the SNB’s continuing ability to conduct an effective monetary policy. Ultimately, the 
resulting increase in flexibility means that the SNB can better contribute to keeping Switzerland 
on the road to competitive success. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
