  Andrew Hauser: Building the market infrastructure of tomorrow – 
CREST, RTGS and the Bank of England, 20 years on 
Speech  by  Mr  Andrew  Hauser,  Executive  Director  for  Banking,  Payments  and  Financial 
Resilience  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  CREST  Twentieth  Anniversary  Conference, 
London, 20 September 2016. 
 I  am  grateful  to  Sana  Siddique  for  her  help  in  preparing  this  speech,  and  to  David  Bailey,  Jo  Clennell,  Toby 
Davies,  Rachel  Greener,  Chris  Redmond,  Iain  Saville,  Hugh  Simpson  and  Paul  Symons  for  their  input  and 
guidance. 
Introduction 
July 1996 was an eventful month. Dolly the world’s first cloned sheep was born. Boris Yeltsin 
was re-elected as President of Russia. The Spice Girls’ first single, “Wannabe”, was riding 
high  in  the  charts.  And  the  summer  Olympics  opened  in  Atlanta.  By  the  time  the  Games 
closed in early August, Great Britain had won only 15 medals in total, finishing 36th in the 
rankings  –  three  places  behind  North  Korea,  twelve  behind  Kazakhstan  and  32  behind 
China. As that song of 1997 had it, “things could only get better”. 
But there was one rather more upbeat event that month back in the summer of 1996. On 
15 July, in a crowded room high up in Trinity Tower, Wapping, Chancellor Ken Clarke picked 
up a computer mouse – then still a relative novelty – and, waving it towards a large computer 
screen  like  a  wand,  declared  the  CREST  settlement  system  open  for  business.  Frantic 
Treasury  officials  tried  to  correct  the  Chancellor’s  mouse-handling  technique  –  but  they 
needn’t have bothered because the equipment had wisely been disconnected from anything 
that mattered. Indeed, CREST had already been running for some hours… 
Figure 1: The official launch of crest (15 July 1996) 
CREST  itself  was  far  from  a  publicity  stunt,  however.  Its  introduction  finally  enabled  the 
much-needed dematerialisation of equity settlement into electronic form, sweeping away the 
antiquated paper-based Talisman system, bringing some of the UK’s most important financial 
market plumbing into line with its front office systems, and catapulting it towards best-in-class 
internationally.  Today,  CREST  accounts  for  half  of  the  payments  processed  through  the 
Bank’s RTGS system – around a quarter of a trillion pounds every day. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The launch of CREST was a particularly important moment for the Bank of England, because 
the  team  that  designed  and  built  CREST  was  drawn  predominantly  from  the  Bank’s  own 
staff, hurriedly called into service after the disastrous collapse of the Stock Exchange’s own 
project to dematerialise equity settlement, “TAURUS”. Indeed that time also has an important 
place in my memories. My first job at the Bank was in its Financial Markets and Institutions 
Division, one of the areas from which the CREST team was taken. I vividly remember the 
gaping  hole  left  in  the  office,  complete  with  empty  coffee  cups  and  discarded  paper  files, 
when the team left for their new premises. 
Building such systems, with all their attendant costs and risks, is not something any central 
bank undertakes lightly. For much of the twenty years since the launch of CREST, the Bank 
of England has focused on building up its capacity to analyse and set monetary and macro-
prudential  policy,  and  carry  out  prudential  supervision.  But  the  financial  crisis  and  its 
aftermath have once again reminded us all of the role central banks globally must also play 
in ensuring that the “soft” and “hard” infrastructure of the financial system1 is fit for purpose, 
delivering both systemic stability and efficiency. 
The  Bank  of  England  of  today  takes  that  role  seriously.  And  that  is  why,  last  week,  we 
launched  a  consultation  paper  on  our  vision  for  a  new  generation  of  Real  Time  Gross 
Settlement here in the United Kingdom2. “RTGS”, as it is known, is the system that manages 
the Bank’s electronic liabilities – or “central bank reserves” – and hence lies at the heart of 
everything we do, from setting monetary policy through official interest rates and quantitative 
easing, to the settlement of the most important interbank payments in central bank money for 
seven  payment  systems,  including  that  embedded  in  CREST. This  is  an  exciting,  but  also 
challenging, time of change, in payments and settlements more broadly, reflecting dramatic 
developments  in  technology,  demand  and  regulation,  coupled  with  a  relentless  push  to 
reduce costs. 
Against  that  backdrop,  I  want  to  do three things  in  this  speech  today.  First,  I  want to  look 
back to some of the lessons the Bank drew from the building of CREST twenty years ago. 
Second, I want to explain how we have applied those lessons to our current strategic review 
of  RTGS.  And,  third,  I  want  to  ask  what  lies  ahead  for  securities  market  post-trade 
infrastructure over the next twenty years. 
Why was the building of CREST such a success? 
Ironically  for  a  project  designed  to  do  away  with  paper,  the  Bank’s  work  on  CREST  left 
behind  great  slabs  of  dusty  paper  files!  Reading  those  files  is  a  fascinating  reminder  of  a 
remarkably bygone age – but it also throws clear light on the steps the Bank took to ensure 
CREST  succeeded  where TAURUS  had  not. Those  steps remain  hugely  valuable  lessons 
today,  and  can  be  summarised  under  three  key  headings:  first,  establish  early  strategic 
direction and momentum for change; second, secure close industry engagement; and third, 
keep it simple, focused and open – both in your project team and in your system design. 
In the interests of time, and because they relate most closely to our current work on RTGS, I 
am going to concentrate on the first of these themes in my remarks today – but Table 1 sets 
out the full set of lessons from our own analysis, and I look forward to hearing more from the 
                                                
1 
“Soft”  infrastructure  refers  to  the  rules,  principles  and  standards  by  which  markets  operate.  “Hard” 
infrastructure refers to the physical equipment, software and networks supporting those markets. See “Open 
the  people”,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
Forum:  Building 
real  markets 
markets/Documents/openforum.pdf. 
the  good  of 
for 
2  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/news/2016/071.aspx. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  independent  CREST  research  project  later  in  the  day,  which  has  reached  very  similar 
conclusions3. 
Table 1  
Key lessons for success from the crest project 
All successful projects need a clear platform for change – and CREST had a burning one! 
The collapse of TAURUS on 11 March 1993, followed by the resignation of Peter Rawlings, 
the  Chief  Executive  of  the  Stock  Exchange,  was  front  page  news.  The  huge  rancour, 
reputational damage and cost (estimated by the FT at £400mn all-in, in mid-1990s money) 
cast a pall over the UK financial system, already reeling from the failed attempts to defend 
                                                 
3 
“From  Paper  to  Automation  –  Streamlining  UK  Securities  Settlement”,  at  http://www.globalservices.bt.com/ 
static/assets/pdf/products/financial_markets_settlenet/CREST-BISS-Industry-Report-final-for-publication.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  sterling on “Black Wednesday” and the publication of the BCCI Report in 1992, and facing 
renewed competition from financial centres in continental Europe and elsewhere. 
Without TAURUS, the UK was left with what one leading fund manager gloomily described 
as a “Third World settlement system in a first-rank financial centre”. Equity settlement relied 
entirely  on  paper  certificates,  passing  through  an  average  of  25  pairs  of  hands  for  each 
trade, each time running the risk of getting lost, misfiled or stolen. Settlement occurred only 
once a fortnight, and on a fixed rather than a rolling timetable. Unsurprisingly, a fifth of all 
trades failed to settle on time. 
If the case for change was clear, so too was the common purpose shown by the public 
authorities.  As  Pen  Kent,  the  Bank’s  Executive  Director  in  charge  of  CREST  said  at  the 
time, “TAURUS gave the Bank the legitimacy to step in and get on with the job: it needed a 
market  failure  to  get  everyone  pointed  in  the  right  direction.”  The  Bank  of  England,  called 
upon privately to act by the Chairman of the Stock Exchange, had two main goals: first, to 
reduce  the  material  risks  to  financial  stability  posed  by  such  an  extended  and  uncertain 
settlement  process;  and,  second,  to  ensure  the  UK  had  an  efficient  and  internationally 
competitive market infrastructure. 
There is no doubt that the second of these goals weighed particularly heavily with the Bank’s 
Governors of the day. Not everyone agreed that the Bank should become closely involved, 
worrying  that  it  could  be  a  costly  and  reputationally  risky  distraction  from  the  post-ERM 
project  of  repositioning  the  Bank  as  an  organisation  capable  of  taking  on  independent 
responsibility  for  setting  monetary  policy  for  the  country  as  a  whole.  But  the  majority  view 
won out, bolstered by the active support of the UK Government, notably HM Treasury, which 
took responsibility for ensuring that the complex and extensive legislative changes required 
were delivered in a timely and effective way. 
A Securities Settlement Task Force, led by the Bank, met for the first time on the morning 
after the collapse of TAURUS to begin the task of translating these broad objectives into a 
clear  set  of  policy-based  principles  for  change.  Three  months  later,  after  extensive 
consultation with market participants and users, it set out its recommendations4 – in many 
ways  a  classical  statement  of  the  full  range  of  ways  in  which  a  central  bank  can  become 
involved in infrastructure design: 
1. 
Settlement processes should be streamlined and automated, moving from paper to 
electronic media (hard infrastructure); 
Settlement  times  should  be  reduced  dramatically  over  time,  moving  from  fixed  to 
rolling  T+10  in    mid-1994,  to  rolling  T+5  in  1995,  and  to  T+3  over  a  longer  time 
horizon (soft infrastructure)5; 
Sterling settlement should be against central bank money at the Bank of England, 
through so-called “Delivery Versus Payment (DVP)” (use of central bank balance 
sheet); and 
The Bank should prepare a detailed design for a new system, to be called “CREST”, 
within  9  months,  and  the  system  should  become  operational  2–3  years  after 
completion of that design (central bank as co-ordinator of market interests). 
2. 
3. 
4. 
It is remarkable how prescient this simple, but challenging, set of policy goals turned out to 
be. But there was still much to do to make this a reality. 
First,  the  project  needed  to  secure  and  maintain  close  buy-in  from  the  industry  that 
would  use  the  new  system.  The  Bank  did  this  by:  setting  up  a  senior  level  Steering 
                                                
4  Summarised in http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/qb/1995/qb950107.pdf. 
5  Today, the standard settlement times in CREST are T+2 for equities and T+1 for gilts. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Committee to oversee the development of the design; forming many working-level working 
groups and consulting on all major design decisions; and ensuring that the industry bore the 
cost of the overall project. The Steering Committee was for making decisions and knocking 
heads together. According to a “senior banker” quoted by the Independent newspaper, Pen 
Kent (as Chair) and Iain Saville (as Chief Executive) were a “Mr Nice and Mr Nasty’ duo … 
bludgeoning the vested interests which sank TAURUS into submission”6. The consultations 
were  voluminous,  had  short  turn-rounds  (some  as  little  as  two  weeks),  and  respondents 
received personalised replies (much to their initial surprise): a strategy christened “choking 
the  cat  with  cream”.  And  the  financial  commitment  sought  by  the  Bank  was  broad-based: 
when CRESTCo was first established, 69 institutions were asked to subscribe £12m in share 
capital, giving them skin in the game from the start. 
Second, the project team committed to an approach to building CREST that was simple, 
focused  and  open:  in  the  design  of  the  system  itself,  and  in  the  composition  and  work 
practices  of  the  project  team.  From  the  start,  the  November  1993  “Green  Book”  set  out  a 
deliberately  minimal  blueprint,  excluding  non-critical  functions  required  only  by  a  few,  or 
which could be performed by users in their own systems. This approach was consciously at 
odds with that adopted for TAURUS, which had tried to be all things to all people7. But it also 
focused minds in the industry, forcing them to make difficult tradeoffs, and creating a clear 
incentive to market providers to produce “add ons” for extra user functions. The project team 
itself projected a similarly minimalist, open approach in its work – building on their own past 
experience of having developed the Bank’s system for dematerialised settlement of gilts (the 
“Central Gilts Office”), involving a full range of disciplines (including policy, IT and legal) in all 
outreach and design meetings, and embracing a robust attitude to analysis and self-criticism, 
perhaps best summed up in their T-shirt logo “Purist and Bloody-Minded”. 
Not everything went to plan. Some early project management structures were found wanting. 
PWC’s audit of the project in Spring 1994 identified what might be euphemistically termed “a 
range of unfinished business”, but allowed the project to go forward. And the early months of 
operation  after  that  launch  day  in  July  1996  faced  technological  challenges  and  setbacks. 
But  it  is  remarkable  to  think  that  this  basic  approach  delivered  a  system  that,  at  its  core, 
remains with us twenty years later. 
How has the Bank applied the lessons from the building of CREST to the strategic 
renewal of RTGS? 
It  is  striking,  too,  to  find  how  many  of  the  lessons  of  the  CREST  project  remain  relevant 
today, as the Bank begins its consultation on a new RTGS service: 
• 
We set out the strategic drivers for change in a speech by the Deputy Governor for 
Markets and Banking in January this year: a combination of aging core technology 
and an unprecedented pace of change in the external payments environment. We 
secured the broad support of others in the public sector, including HM Treasury and 
the  Payments  Services  Regulator.  And  we  set  out  a  clear  set  of  policy  goals:  to 
maintain or enhance stability and resilience,  whilst also delivering a system better 
able to enable change, innovation and competition. 
                                                
6  The “nasty” description of Iain Saville owes more than a little to journalistic licence: a somewhat later interview 
with him at the time of CREST’s launch paints a rather sweeter picture – his car, a Vauxhall Carlton Estate; his 
passion, singing with the Dulwich Choral Society; and his reason for shaving off his bushy moustache in 1994 
not the pressures of the project but his wife’s (firmly stated) wishes! 
7  According to the FT, a computer manager at one of the big four banks described TAURUS as “like building a 
car that had air conditioning, a fancy stereo and electric windows … we should have built a straightforward 
production car first, then added the bits on later.” Expectations of automotive technology have clearly moved 
on since the 1990s. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    We have remained close to the stakeholders in RTGS throughout the first phase of 
the  project,  holding  meetings  with  over  100  users  (old  and  new),  infrastructure 
providers, policymakers, academics and technologists, consulting on a vision for the 
next generation of the service, and confirming that the new system will be paid for 
by the users of the system through the future RTGS tariff (through which we also 
gather current running costs). 
And we have stayed true to the principles of “simple, focused and open”, conducting 
the review using a small, dedicated, multi-disciplinary team of policy and technology 
experts. 
The consultation paper sets out our proposals in detail, which affect everyone with a stake in 
sterling  payments  and settlement. With that  in mind, I  hope  that  as many  of  your firms  as 
possible will respond to the questions in that document by the deadline of 7 November. 
What next for securities infrastructure? 
Impressive  though  the  achievement  of  building  CREST  was,  it  is  a  sad  fact  that  the 
persistent delays that pre-dated the project meant the UK came late to the party. Today, as 
the industry again faces enormous pressures for change, it is important that it responds more 
proactively than it did in those pre-CREST days, avoiding the twin perils of complacency or 
over-ambition, embracing innovation to deliver a service to users that is both more efficient 
and more resilient than ever before. 
The  case  for  reform  is  easy  to  state.  Although  most  countries  now  have  well-functioning 
modern Central Securities Depositories, the structures below this top layer for providing post-
trade  services  in  securities  markets  remain  in  many  cases  extraordinarily  complex  and 
balkanised.  Multiple  tiers  of  custodians  and  sub-custodians,  issuing  agents,  correspondent 
banks, clearing members, registrars and brokers – many operating on a solely national basis 
–  provide  an  overlapping  web  of  services  to  separate  pools  of  market  participants,  using 
different  operating  procedures,  systems  and  databases.  That  siloised  model  delivers 
settlement and collateral movements which, though much smoother than they were twenty 
years  ago,  are  still  typically  measured  in  days  rather  than  minutes  or  hours,  and  require 
multiple reconciliations – posing fixed costs, raising settlement and operational risks, tying up 
collateral, reducing transparency and posing barriers to entry. 
These  segmented  structures  have  not  arisen  by  chance  –  in  many  cases  they  reflect  the 
differing needs of market participants, variations in national practice and regulatory rules, and 
legacy systems. But they stand in the way of establishing a genuinely efficient international 
capital  market.  And  they  are  now  under  unprecedented  pressure  from  three  sources: 
demand, technology and regulation. 
The strongest demand pressures come from the largest users of capital markets, who need 
to find further sharp cost savings if they are to deliver improved return on equity to investors. 
Amongst  other  things  that  means:  they  want  settlement  that  occurs  closer  to  real  time  
(ie T+0) to minimise settlement and operational risk exposures and economise on collateral 
usage; they want to deal with fewer separate intermediaries, systems and data protocols – 
getting  closer  to  a  single  seamless  experience  across  sectors,  border,  currencies  and 
timezones; and they want to be able to control a single global pool of collateral and assets, 
with access to a single comprehensive view of their data in real time. An important question 
is  how  far  this  demand  for  convergence  is  met  through  further  industry  consolidation,  and 
how far it is met through improving the ability of still-separate systems to operate seamlessly 
with one another (so-called “interoperability”). 
A key enabler of this change will be new technology. This may take many forms, including 
real-time  computing,  the  cloud  and  messaging  standards.  But  of  course  discussion  at  the 
moment is dominated by the potential of Distributed Ledger Technology, or “DLT”. At its most 
extreme, DLT is quite revolutionary. The “utopia” described in Euroclear and Oliver Wyman’s 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  recent  paper8  would  replace  the  current  cat’s  cradle  of  systems  with  a  single,  distributed 
network in which single pools of stock moved seamlessly in real time against central bank 
money, between and across borders, with only one set of reconciliations to perform, a single 
global data set available to each user, with integrated reporting and regulatory oversight and 
spectacular  resilience  characteristics.  The  paper  envisages 
that  whole  classes  of 
intermediary,  such  as  custodians  and  CCPs,  could  become  redundant,  replaced  by  smart 
contracts. 
There  is  no  likelihood  of  such  an  extreme  revolution  occurring  any  time  soon:  much more 
work  is  needed  across  a  whole  range  of  issues,  including:  speed  and  scaleability; 
confidentiality  protections;  developing  common  protocols;  integrating  cash  and  securities 
movements;  and  establishing  regulatory  and  legal  norms.  In  many  cases,  reform  to 
outmoded business processes will need to precede any application of the technology itself. 
But there is clearly scope for less ambitious but still potentially transformational applications 
in specific markets, not least those where current infrastructure is less well developed. A key 
challenge for incumbent firms is whether to take on competition with challenger firms head-
on, or partner with them to develop and implement the most promising forms of technology 
internally. But doing neither is a risky approach. 
The  final  driver  for  change  is  regulation,  which  since  the  financial  crisis  has  greatly 
increased  the  focus  on  centralised  post-trade  infrastructure  as  a  means  of  promoting 
transparency and reducing system-wide risk. Amongst other things, banks and other financial 
intermediaries  have  been  required  to  hold  more  high-quality  collateral  and  be  ready  to 
mobilise rapidly across a wide range of businesses in response to margin calls. They have 
faced much  stronger  incentives  to  use  centralised  clearing  and  avoid  settlement fails.  And 
they  have  faced  the  need  to  support  an  increasing  range  of  account  types  and  reporting 
requirements. In turn, supervisors have increasingly expected infrastructure operators to act 
as systemic risk managers. Taken together, these requirements are designed to bring about 
a material increase in the stability of the system as a whole – but in terms of their influence 
on the structure of the market, they also amplify the impact of the demand and technology 
drivers, further intensifying the pressures towards rationalisation and convergence. 
What is the Bank of England’s role in all of this? Our primary objective is, as it has always 
been,  to  maintain  monetary  and  financial  stability.  But  that  does  not  mean  holding  back 
innovation or competition. Far from it: our role should be to help enable these things, where 
that can be done in ways that do not compromise stability. That could include: modernising 
risky, out-of-date systems; reducing single points of failure by increasing interoperability and 
reducing  concentration;  strengthening  protections  against  cyber  attack;  improving  risk 
management; and reducing operational and settlement risk by reducing settlement periods. 
We pursue our objectives in three ways: 
– 
First,  through  the  use  of  our  balance  sheet.  Ensuring  that  settlement  occurs  in 
central bank money has been a major achievement of the past twenty years, and it 
is important that this should continue, however the structure of the market develops 
in  future  years.  That  is  a  central  design  principle  of  the  proposals  we  recently 
announced for the new generation of RTGS, and will be delivered though broader 
access for infrastructures, adoption of ISO 20022 as the new messaging standard, 
maintenance of the existing DVP link for CREST and regular FX settlement for CLS, 
                                                
8  http://www.oliverwyman.com/content/dam/oliver-wyman/global/en/2016/feb/BlockChain-In-Capital-Markets.pdf. 
Two  other  excellent  papers  on  this  topic  are  the  ECB’s  “Distributed  ledger  technologies  in  securities  post-
trading”  at  https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecbop172.en.pdf;  and  ESMA’s  “The  distributed  ledger 
technology  applied  to  securities  markets”  at  https://www.esma.europa.eu/sites/default/files/library/2016–
773_dp_dlt.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
    and  consultation  on  new  functionality  to  deliver  synchronisation  with  innovative 
technologies. 
Second,  as  regulator  and  supervisor,  we  will  ensure  that  financial  market 
infrastructures are subject to high standards of resilience and soundness, whatever 
technological  form  those  infrastructures  take  in  the  future.  That  in  turn  means 
developing a supervisory net that is sufficiently flexible to cover the risks posed by 
new technologies, in a proportionate manner, as they develop. 
Third, we will continue to act as a catalyst for change – through our research work 
on  the  policy  and  technical  questions  raised  by  the  distributed  ledger  and  central 
bank  digital  currencies9;  and  working  with  innovative  firms  on  applications  of  new 
and  existing  technology  to  central  banking  topics  through  our  new  Fintech 
Accelerator10. It is not our job to second guess the market where innovation is rife. 
But where direction is required on standards, consistency with regulatory needs or 
policy requirements, we will play our full part, alongside other national central banks 
through the FSB, G20 and Basel processes. 
Conclusions 
We have come a long way from those mouse-jabbing days in Wapping. But the themes of 
that time are remarkably topical – embracing new technology to improve risk mitigation and 
innovation  in  financial  market  infrastructures  and  working  together  between  public  and 
private sectors to achieve common goals. 
Fairly  or  otherwise,  the  post-trade  sector  does  not  always  have  a  reputation  as  being  the 
most forward-thinking when it comes to reform. In a speech in November 1996, the Bank’s 
then-Governor said the following: 
“For many years, payments and settlements risk was largely disregarded as an 
administrative  matter  for  the  “back  office”.  Perhaps  not  surprisingly,  as  the 
numbers  have  grown  there  has  …  been  a  growing  awareness  –  among  both 
commercial and central bankers – of its crucial importance, so that it has moved 
up the agenda, from the back office to the board room.” 
I am not sure those issues have been neglected quite as badly in recent years as they were 
then – but, given the changes afoot, we are I believe entering another period where central 
banks  and  market  participants  will  again  need  to  show  real  ambition,  and  work  closely 
together to harness the potential benefits of another wave of innovation in ways that maintain 
stability for all. 
Thank you. 
                                                
9  See  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/banknotes/Pages/digitalcurrencies/default.aspx  and  http://www.bankof 
england.co.uk/research/Pages/onebank/cbdc.aspx. 
10  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/Pages/fintech/default.aspx. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
