  Grant Spencer: Housing risks require a broad policy response 
Speech by Mr Grant Spencer, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the 
New Zealand Institute of Valuers, Wellington, 7 July 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
New  Zealand  is  experiencing  a  housing  market  boom.  House  prices  are  increasing  at 
13 percent  per  annum  nationally,  and  at  15–20  percent  in  Auckland  and  close-by  regions. 
Evidence from housing cycles in several advanced economies suggests that the longer this 
continues, the more likely there will be a severe correction. 
The  Reserve  Bank  is  mandated  to  promote  the  soundness  and  efficiency  of  the  financial 
system. Our concern is that a severe housing correction would pose real risks for financial 
system stability and the broader economy. The banks are heavily exposed to housing with 
mortgages making up around 55 percent of total assets. Household debt, at 163 percent of 
household income, is at a record level. 
Many domestic and international factors are contributing to the strength of the market. The 
current record low interest rates are a world-wide phenomenon linked to post-GFC caution 
and very low inflation in the global economy. Also driving local housing demand has been an 
unprecedented  net  migration  inflow  over  recent  years  reflecting  New  Zealand’s  stronger 
economic performance relative to many other advanced economies. 
While strong demand has been underpinned by low interest rates, rising credit growth and 
population  increases,  the  housing  supply  response  has  been  constrained  by  planning  and 
consenting processes, community preferences in respect of housing density, inefficiencies in 
the  building  industry,  and  infrastructure  development  constraints.  The  resulting  housing 
market  imbalance  has  been  exacerbated  by  New  Zealanders’  on-going  preference  for 
investment  in  bricks  and  mortar  over  financial  investments,  due  in  part  to  the  ready 
availability of credit and a tax system that favours debt funded capital gains. 
Given  the  complexity  of  factors  underlying  the  housing  situation,  there  is  no  simple  policy 
solution. We need to tackle housing on many fronts. The key challenge in the long run is to 
expand  housing  supply  to  meet  the  growing  demand.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  no  direct 
influence  over  supply,  but  can  influence  housing  demand  through  the  credit  channel.  The 
Bank’s  interest  rate  policy  is  targeted  primarily  at  keeping  future  CPI  inflation  between  
1-and-3 percent on average over the medium term, although it must also have regard to the 
soundness  and  efficiency  of  the  financial  system.  The  Bank’s  other  relevant  instrument  is 
macro-prudential  policy.  This  can  improve  the  resilience  of  banks’  balance  sheets  on  a 
lasting basis and help restrain credit and housing demand, at least for a period. 
Today  I  will  describe  recent  developments  in  the  housing  market  and  the  imbalances  that 
appear to be widening across the country. I will touch on the range of policies that could help 
to  address  these  imbalances  and  focus  on  Reserve  Bank  policies  that  might  assist. 
Specifically,  I  will  review  the  macro-prudential  policy  options  that  the  Bank  is  considering, 
with a view to possible implementation over the months ahead. 
Initial loan-to-value (LVR) restrictions 
2. 
The  Reserve  Bank first introduced  a  broad  80  percent  LVR restriction  in  October  2013,  in 
response  to  growing  housing  market  pressures  and  an  increasing  proportion  of  high  LVR 
lending from 2011. Then, in November 2015, a resurgence of pressures in Auckland led the 
Reserve Bank to tighten the LVR restriction to 70 percent for Auckland investors. The LVR 
restriction was eased somewhat outside of Auckland as housing risks in the regions had not 
increased significantly since the implementation of the initial LVR policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  Reserve  Bank  also  established  a  new  residential  property  investor  class  for  banks. 
Loans  in  that  class  now  attract  a  higher  risk  weight  than  for  owner-occupier  mortgages, 
requiring banks to fund such loans with a higher proportion of equity. 
The  LVR  restrictions  have  strengthened  bank  balance  sheets  against  housing  market 
shocks. The  share of  banks’  exposures to riskier  mortgages  has fallen  across  a  variety  of 
borrower  types.  Nationally,  new  investor  lending  at  LVRs  above  70  percent  has  fallen  by 
around one third following the 2015 policy changes. It is now  largely impossible to borrow 
more than 70 percent against an Auckland rental property. More broadly, the share of high 
LVR (+80 percent) mortgages on bank balance sheets has continued to trend downwards. 
High  LVR  loans  now  account  for  12  percent  of  banks’  residential  mortgage  exposures, 
compared to around 21 percent just prior to the initial introduction of LVR restrictions in 2013 
(Figure 2.1). This amounts to a reduction in high LVR (+80 percent) lending of around $20bn. 
Over time, these balance sheet trends will help to reduce banks’ losses on riskier loans in the 
event  of  a  downturn  in  the  New  Zealand  housing  market.  In  so  doing,  it  would  facilitate  a 
continued flow of credit through a downturn. 
Figure 2.1 
Stock of high-LVR mortgages  
(% of total bank mortgage lending) 
 The LVR restrictions were expected to have a temporary impact on house price inflation, house 
sales  and  housing  credit.  Auckland  house  price  inflation  and  house  sales  fell  more  than 
expected  in  the  months  immediately  following  the  introduction  of  the  new  restrictions  in 
November 2015. However, the housing-related government tax changes, together with reduced 
offshore interest due to new requirements for IRD numbers, probably also restrained housing 
demand over this period. Our assessment is that the 2015 LVR policy changes brought about a 
2–4 percentage point reduction in Auckland house price inflation over a six month period. This 
price impact is similar to that assessed for the initial LVR restrictions in 2013. 
Recent worsening of housing imbalances 
3. 
New  Zealand  house  price  inflation  began  to  accelerate  again  from  around  March  2016  as 
demand pressures intensified in Auckland. In the meantime, other regions were contributing 
to  higher  national  house  price  inflation from mid-2015,  particularly  those  areas  adjacent  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Auckland. Most regional centres are now experiencing annual house price inflation in excess 
of 8 percent (Figures 3.1, 3.2). Similarly, sales activity increased across the country in the 
first half of 2016. Reflecting the underlying housing shortage, new listings have remained flat. 
Listings  as  a  proportion  of  sales  are  now  40  percent  below  the  previous  low  seen  at  the 
height of the pre-GFC boom in 2007. 
Figure 3.1 
Annual house price inflation  
(3 month moving average, s.a.) 
 Auckland house price inflation in excess of income growth has seen the median house price 
to income ratio grow to 9.7 times in the most recent Demographia survey1, making Auckland 
the fourth most expensive city relative to income out of 367 cities worldwide. This ratio is at 
an historical peak, having doubled since the early 2000s. Outside Auckland, house price to 
income ratios in most centres are around 4 to 6 (Figure 3.2). However, if house prices in the 
regions  continue  to  grow  at  current  rates,  those  ratios  will  worsen.  Overall,  New  Zealand 
house  prices  relative  to  incomes  are  32  percent  above  their  long  run  average,  and  the 
second highest in the OECD2. The IMF estimates that New Zealand house prices are around 
20–40 percent overvalued based on long run affordability metrics3. 
                                                
1  Cox and Pavletich (2016). 
2  http://www.oecd.org/eco/outlook/focusonhouseprices.htm. 
3  Mohommad, Nyberg, and Pitt (2016). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Figure 3.2 
House price inflation and price-to  
income ratios by urban area 
 Increased housing demand has been driven by record net immigration, low mortgage interest 
rates and increasing investor participation. Net migration flows continue to hit new records, 
with  annual  net  PLT  migration  now  approaching  70,000  persons.  Migration  flows  are  also 
becoming  more  dispersed,  with  non-Auckland  numbers  recently  rivalling  the  flow  into 
Auckland. Mortgage rates declined over 2015 as the Reserve Bank eased interest rates in 
light  of  on-going  low  CPI  inflation.  One  and  two  year  rates  are  now  in  the  low  4  percent 
range, which New Zealand has not seen since the 1950s. 
A dominant feature of the housing market resurgence has been an increase in investor activity 
(Figure  3.3).  In  recent  months,  investors  have  accounted  for  around  43  percent  of  sales  in 
Auckland  and  38  percent  in  other  regions.  Investor  borrowing  has  maintained  much  of  its 
momentum even though it is taking place at somewhat lower average LVRs. The prospect of 
capital gains appears to remain a key driver for investors in the face of declining rental yields. 
Figure 3.3 
New Zealand house sales by buyer type  
(number of dwellings, s.a.) 
4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The declining affordability of New Zealand housing and increasing investor presence have 
seen a downward trend in the share of households owning their own home. This ratio has 
fallen steadily since the early 1990s, reaching 64.8 percent at the 2013 Census. The recent 
increase  in  investor  housing  activity  suggests  that  the  home-ownership  rate  may  have 
declined further since 2013. 
The Reserve Bank considers that rising investor participation tends to increase the financial 
stability risks relating to the household sector in severe downturn conditions. Evidence from 
the  UK  and  Ireland  shows  mortgage  default  rates  significantly  higher  for  investors  (at  any 
given LVR). There are likely to be a variety of reasons for this, but an important one is that 
owner-occupier  households  need  to  move  out  of  their  own  home  if  they  default,  giving  a 
powerful  incentive  to  continue  servicing  their  mortgages  if  at  all  possible.  Investors  do  not 
face the same incentive for their rental properties and are also more likely to face income 
shocks (like rental vacancy) at the same time that house prices fall. 
Our view on the riskiness of investor lending is shared by other banking regulators. In recent 
years concern about investor lending has led the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority 
to  limit  growth  in  Australian  bank  lending  to  residential  investors,  the  Basel  Committee  on 
banking supervision has recently recommended significant increases in the amount of capital 
held  against  investor  mortgage  lending,  and  the  Bank  of  England  has  proposed  rules  that 
effectively tighten lending criteria for investor mortgages. 
Despite high rates of debt repayment, housing credit increased by 8 percent in the year to 
March  2016,  its  highest  growth  rate  since  2008.  New  mortgage  commitments  are  also 
elevated,  running  at  an  annual  rate  of  35  percent  of  outstanding  housing  debt.  With  high 
rates of churn in mortgage books, recent increases in interest-only lending and high debt-to-
income lending could rapidly affect the quality of banks’ overall mortgage portfolios, tending 
to dilute the improvement generated by the LVR restrictions. Interest-only and high debt-to-
income (DTI) lending to housing investors has increased considerably more than for owner 
occupiers. 
Persistent housing credit growth in excess of income growth has caused the household debt-
to-income  ratio  to  grow  steadily  since  2012.  At  163  percent  this  ratio  now  exceeds  the 
previous peak reached during the GFC. There is a clear risk that on-going high house price 
inflation could lead to a further deterioration in the household debt-to-income ratio. While low 
interest  rates  have  helped  to  contain  debt-servicing  ratios  (DSRs)  for  New  Zealand  as  a 
whole, high and rising debt levels leave households very vulnerable to any future increases 
in interest rates or deterioration in economic conditions. While a large increase in mortgage 
rates  is  unlikely  in  the  current global  environment,  at  today’s  high  debt-to-income  ratios,  a 
relatively small increase in interest rates could put significant pressure on some borrowers. 
This is particularly the case in Auckland, where DSRs for new buyers are close to 50 percent 
(Figure 3.4). A 1 percentage point rise in interest rates for these new buyers would boost the 
proportion of income devoted to mortgage servicing by around 5 percentage points. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Figure 3.4 
Representative Buyer DSRs  
(annual, % of average gross household income) 
 On the other side of the housing market is the inability of new supply to meet the growing 
demand,  particularly  in  Auckland.  Although  Auckland  annual  housing  consents  recently 
reached an 11 year high and are some 20 percent above last year in value, the number of 
residential  building  consents  per  capita  in  Auckland  is  currently  around  40  percent  of  the 
peak level achieved in the mid-2000s. We estimate the shortage of houses in Auckland has 
increased  over  the  past  year  and  may  now  be  in  the  order  of  20,000–30,000  houses. 
Furthermore, the overall housing shortfall is expected to increase further as supply is growing 
more  slowly  than  demand.  More  encouraging  is  the  higher-intensity  building  development 
that is now contributing a greater share of new dwelling consents. Apartments, townhouses 
and  other  attached  dwelling  types  accounted  for  42  percent  of  new  residential  building 
consents in Auckland over the past two years, compared to 28 percent nationally. 
Figure 3.5 
New Zealand housing demand and supply (annual) 
Note:  this  is  based  on  an  assumed  average  of  2.6  persons  per 
household across New Zealand. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Outside Auckland, housing supply has been more responsive to population growth. Consent 
issuance  has  been  relatively  strong  in  regions  that  have  experienced  the  fastest  rates  of 
population  growth.  Supply  in  the  Bay  of  Plenty  has  been  particularly  responsive,  with  an 
elasticity of consents to population growth that is twice the size of Auckland’s (Figure 3.6). 
International  evidence  from  the  GFC  suggests  that  elastic  housing  supply  responses  can 
dampen house price cycles by reducing the degree of housing scarcity, and price growth, in 
the up phase of a housing cycle. 
Figure 3.6 
Regional building consent elasticities4 
 A broad policy response is needed 
4. 
On-going  supply-side  constraints  combined  with  rapid  growth  in  the  demand  for  housing 
continue to create significant imbalances in the housing market, particularly in Auckland. In 
order to relieve those imbalances, a range of initiatives is needed to increase the long-term 
housing supply response and moderate housing demand. The relevant policy areas extend 
well beyond financial policy and the responsibilities of the Reserve Bank. In this regard, we 
see the Reserve Bank as part of a team effort. 
The  Productivity  Commission’s  Report,  Using  land  for  housing,  released  in  October  2015, 
notes that an insufficient supply of land ready for new housing remains at the heart of the rise 
in  house  prices  seen  in  Auckland  and  other  high  growth  areas  of  the  country.  Costly  and 
restrictive  planning  rules  and  regulations,  insufficient  provision  of  infrastructure  required  to 
make land ready for development, and a planning system unable to respond adequately to 
changing demand patterns were among the factors the Commission cited as contributing to 
the shortfall in housing-ready land. 
The Commission proposed a range of measures for the Government and local councils. The 
proposals  include  setting  expectations  for  councils  about  the  availability  of  land  for 
                                                
4  For clarity, the estimate of Christchurch’s elasticity (ratio = 2) has been omitted from the chart as the estimate 
is affected by the post-earthquake spike in building activity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  development,  creating  a  system  to  measure  development  capacity,  providing  options  to 
intervene  when  development  capacity  falls  short  of  what  is  required  and  improvements 
around  the  financing  and  provision  of  infrastructure.  In  respect  of  the  latter,  the  recent 
Government  initiative  to  establish  a  Housing  infrastructure  Fund  will  help  to  relieve  an 
important constraint. 
The Government has also recently released its proposed National Policy Statement (NPS) 
on  urban  development capacity  which  requires  councils  to  ensure  sufficient  land  supply  to 
meet  projected  housing  and  business  development  needs.  Councils  will  be  required  to 
monitor developments around housing affordability, building and resource consents and the 
value  of  land  on  urban  boundaries.  They  will  be  required  to  ensure  price  competition, 
coordinate  infrastructure  development  and  streamline  consenting  processes.  The  NPS 
appears consistent with recommendations made by the Productivity Commission and should 
facilitate a greater supply of housing-ready land over time. 
A  major  supply-side  milestone  will  be  the  outcome  of  the  Auckland  Unitary  Plan  (AUP) 
Independent  Hearings  Panel,  which  is  expected  to  make  final  recommendations  to  the 
Auckland  Council  by  22  July.  The  Panel’s  recommendations  and  the  Auckland  Council’s 
response  to  those  recommendations  will  be  crucial  in  setting  the  future  path  towards 
reducing the housing market imbalance. 
As  a  means  of gaining further  traction  on the  supply  side,  the  Reserve Bank supports the 
idea of a framework for establishing Urban Development Authorities (UDAs). These would be 
Crown or local body entities, with powers to assemble and acquire land, accelerate planning 
and  consent  processes  and  oversee  coordination  of  all  the  parties  involved  in  housing 
development. Such entities could also potentially undertake the funding and development of 
infrastructure.  UDAs  have  been  used  in  various  forms  in  a  number  of  countries  including 
Australia, the UK and the US to facilitate major housing developments in designated areas. 
However,  by  their  nature,  the  role  and  powers  of  UDAs  would  be  contentious  and  their 
creation would have to be carefully managed. 
While  boosting  the  capacity  for  development  and  housing  supply  is  paramount,  it  is  also 
important to explore policies that will keep the demand for housing more in line with supply 
capacity. Two areas for on-going consideration include tax and migration policy. On the tax 
front, the implementation of the bright line test for housing investors introduced in October 
last year has helped curb short-term speculative activity in the housing market. Consideration 
might be given to further reducing the tax advantage of investing in residential housing. 
Like  taxation  of  investor-owned  housing,  migration  policy  is  a  complex  and  controversial 
issue. However, we cannot ignore that the 160,000 net inflow of permanent and long-term 
migrants over the last 3 years has generated an unprecedented increase in the population 
and  a  significant  boost  to  housing  demand.  Given  the  strong  influence  of  departing  and 
returning  New  Zealanders  in  the  total  numbers,  it  will  never  be  possible  to  fine-tune  the 
overall level of migration or smooth out the migration cycle. However, there may be merit in 
reviewing whether migration policy is securing the number and composition of skills intended. 
While any adjustments would operate at the margin, they could over time help to moderate 
the housing market imbalance. 
What role can the Reserve Bank play? 
5. 
Low domestic interest rates have contributed to the increasing housing demand. Under the 
Policy Targets Agreement (PTA), the 1–3 percent inflation target range is the central focus of 
the  monetary  policy  framework.  However,  the  Bank  must  consider  whether  its  monetary 
policy choices could undermine the efficiency and stability of the domestic financial system. 
In current circumstances, the PTA rules out actively leaning against the housing cycle using 
monetary  policy.  Doing  so  would  risk  driving  CPI  inflation  below  the  target  range  over  the 
medium  term.  Conversely,  further  reductions  in  the  OCR  could  pose  a  risk  to  financial 
stability  through  their  effect  on  credit  growth  and  house  prices.  While  the  outlook  for  CPI 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  inflation  will  ultimately  determine  the  future  path  of  monetary  policy,  the  trade-off  against 
financial stability risk needs to be carefully considered. 
The Reserve Bank’s primary policy instrument for promoting financial stability is prudential 
policy.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  baseline  prudential  policies  require  banks  to  hold  permanent 
capital  and  liquidity  buffers  against  adverse  shocks  that  might  occur  in  a  severe  business 
cycle  downturn.  We  also  have  macro-prudential  policies  that  impose  additional  safety 
requirements  in  periods  when  there  is  heightened  risk  of  an  extreme  housing  cycle.  Such 
policies are relevant for the New Zealand banking system where residential mortgages make 
up  around  55  percent  of  banking  system  assets  and  where  a  large  share  of  total  housing 
credit is to residential investors who have a relatively high risk profile. 
The main macro-prudential tools include loan to value ratios (LVRs); debt-to-income ratios 
(DTIs)  and  higher  capital  requirements  for  housing  loans  (capital  overlays).  These  three 
instruments  tackle  housing  cycle  risk  from  different  perspectives  and  can  be  seen  as 
complements. The LVRs, which are already in place, help to reduce the impact of mortgage 
defaults on bank earnings by increasing the security coverage on housing loans. LVRs also 
tighten up banks’ lending conditions, potentially leading to a slow-down in credit growth and 
house price inflation for a period. 
Debt-to-income ratios have been used internationally but not yet in New Zealand. DTIs aim 
to  improve  the  safety  of  borrowers’  balance  sheets,  thereby  reducing  the  likelihood  of 
mortgage  defaults  in  a downturn.  In  particular, debt-to-income  limits  are  intended  to  better 
equip  borrowers  to  continue  servicing  mortgages  in  the  face  of  income  losses  and/or 
increases in interest rates. DTIs, like LVRs, tighten credit conditions, resulting in some brake 
on credit and house price inflation. 
Capital overlays, like LVRs, improve the capacity of banks to absorb losses from mortgage 
defaults  in  a  downturn.  Additional  capital  requirements  might  also  slow  credit  growth  as 
banks adjust to higher equity funding. 
How might these macro-prudential instruments assist in the context of the current housing 
market imbalances? 
The original 2013 LVR restrictions (requiring a maximum 80 percent LVR for most mortgage 
borrowers) and the Auckland investor LVRs brought in last year (reducing Auckland investor 
LVRs to a maximum of 70 percent), have had the intended effect of making bank balance 
sheets  more  resilient  to  a  potential  housing  downturn.  Together  with  the  Government’s 
October  2015  tax  measures,  the  Auckland  investor  LVRs  also  helped  to  reduce  Auckland 
house  price  inflation  from  its  peak  of  27  percent  pa  in  September  2015  to  12  percent  in 
May 2016. 
As  discussed  earlier,  we  have  recently  seen  spill-over  effects  in  the  regions  close  to 
Auckland and a more general resurgence in housing market pressures across the country. 
The  proportion  of  sales  to  investors  nationally  has  grown  from  34  percent  in  January,  to 
39 percent  in  May  this  year.  LVRs  on  new  investor  lending  have  reduced  significantly,  but 
new credit commitments to investors have recently been growing about twice as fast as for 
the overall market. Investors have effectively used equity generated by increased valuations 
on their existing portfolios to raise the larger deposits needed for new acquisitions. 
The Reserve Bank has a range of policy options available. One is tighter LVRs to counter the 
growing influence of investor demand in Auckland and other regions, and to further bolster 
bank balance sheets against a housing market downturn. Given the growing housing market 
pressures across the country, one approach would be to adopt a single national LVR limit for 
investors. Given that the banks have much of the relevant systems work in place, we expect 
that such a measure could potentially be introduced by the end of the year. 
Another  option  is  a  new  debt-to-income  (DTI)  speed  limit  to  complement  the  LVR 
requirements by improving the resilience of household balance sheets to income or interest 
rate shocks. A DTI limit would make defaults less likely in a downturn. Furthermore, a DTI 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  and LVR in combination would constrain credit growth and house price pressures on a more 
sustainable basis than would LVRs alone. A DTI would be a new instrument that would need 
to  be  agreed  with  the  Minister  of  Finance  under  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  on 
Macro-prudential Policy. Adoption would require more analysis and systems preparation than 
an extended LVR. We intend to consult with the banks on the viability of a DTI policy and 
data issues before making a decision on implementation. 
A third option is a housing capital overlay. The Reserve Bank has already indicated that it will 
be  conducting  a  full  review  of  bank  capital  requirements  over  the  coming  year.  We  will 
consider whether macro-prudential overlays have a role to play as part of that process. 
Conclusion 
6. 
In  conclusion,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  concerned  about  the  risks  to  financial  and  economic 
stability  inherent  in  the  growing  housing  market  imbalances.  Auckland  pressures  are  re-
emerging  following  an  easing  in  the  market  from  late  2015,  and  house  price  inflation  has 
accelerated in a number of regions. 
The causes of the imbalances are complex with a number of important drivers on both the 
demand and supply side. Addressing these imbalances will require policy action by a variety 
of  agencies  on  a  number  of fronts. The  underlying  housing  shortage needs  to  be  urgently 
addressed,  particularly  in  Auckland  where  population  growth  continues  to  outstrip  housing 
construction. A step up in supply is required and finalisation of the Auckland Unitary Plan will 
be a key opportunity to facilitate such a step. 
On the demand side, the key drivers are population growth and easy credit. The low cost of 
credit  is  making  higher  debt  levels  affordable,  particularly  for  investors  who  can  deduct 
interest  costs  from  taxable  income.  Residential  investors  are  accounting  for  an  increasing 
share of house sales and new mortgage credit. 
The Bank’s interest rate policy must have regard to financial stability concerns, but the global 
environment is likely to keep interest rates low for some time yet. Macro-prudential policy can 
assist  in  containing  the  growing  risk  to  financial  stability  as  the  current  housing  market 
reaches new extremes. In light of the growing risk, the Reserve Bank is closely considering 
measures that could be progressed in the coming months. 
References 
Cox,  W  and  Pavletich,  H.  ‘12th  Annual  Demographia  International  Housing  Affordability 
Survey.  Rating  Middle-Income  Housing  Affordability’  Demographia  International  Housing 
Affordability Survey (2016 Edition: Data from 3rd Quarter 2015). 
Mohommad, A., Nyberg, D., and Pitt, A. ‘New Zealand: selected issues’. IMF Country Report 
16/40, February 2016. 
Andrews, D., Sanchez, A.C. and Johansson, A. ‘Housing Markets and Structural Policies in 
OECD Countries’. OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 836 January 2011. 
Spencer,  G.  ‘Action  needed  to  reduce  housing  imbalances’.  Speech  delivered  to  the 
Chamber of Commerce in Rotorua, 15 April 2015. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
