  William C Dudley: “Remarks at the New York Fed’s Economic Press 
Briefing on the Regional Economy” 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Economic  Press  Briefing  on  the  Regional 
Economy, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 18 August 2016. 
 Jaison Abel, Jason Bram, Hunter Clark, Giacomo De Giorgi, Richard Deitz, Jack Gutt, Andrew Haughwout and 
Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
Good morning and welcome to the New York Fed’s Economic Press Briefing. I am pleased to 
have this opportunity to speak with the journalists covering our region. You are an important 
communication  channel  to  the  people  in  our  District.  This  morning  I  want  to  focus  on 
economic  conditions  in  our  region,  giving  particular  attention  to  job  growth.  I  also  want  to 
discuss  our  ongoing  work  on  Puerto  Rico.  As  always,  what  I  have  to  say  reflects my  own 
views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  the  Federal 
Reserve System.  
The New York Fed is deeply committed to serving our region. This commitment manifests 
itself in several ways. We produce business surveys and local economic indexes to help our 
constituents  track  regional  economic  conditions.  My  staff  writes  papers  and  blog  posts  on 
economic  issues  important  to  our  region.  We  meet  with  a  number  of  advisory  boards 
comprised  of  community  and  business  leaders.  And,  I  regularly  visit  different  parts  of  our 
District so that I can meet with local businesses, community development professionals, and 
the  people  who  live  and  work  here.  This  on-the-ground  intelligence  is  valuable  to  me  and 
helps inform my view of the region and the economy, which, in turn, plays an important role 
in shaping my outlook on policy. 
Let me now talk a bit about job growth in our region. 
Job growth in the region 
Nationally, the labor market has added 2.4 million jobs over the past year. And, the strong 
jobs reports released over the past two months have helped allay concerns that arose earlier 
this year that job growth was beginning to stall. Indeed, these reports reinforce my view that 
labor market conditions continue to improve. 
Turning to conditions closer to home; job growth in our region has generally been somewhat 
below the national pace. One important exception is New York City, where job growth has 
been strong, despite the relatively sluggish performance of the financial services industry. In 
the past, the City has counted on job growth from Wall Street to fuel economic growth during 
recoveries and expansions. This time around, however, job gains in the securities industry 
have  been  meager.  Instead,  the  City’s  job  growth  has  been  quite  widespread  in  sectors 
outside  of  finance.  One  that  is  especially  noteworthy  is  the  City’s  burgeoning  technology 
sector,  which  has  been  creating  jobs  in  industries  such  as  internet  publishing,  online 
shopping,  and  scientific  research  and  development.  Growth  in  these  high-paying  jobs  is 
picking up much of the slack created by the softness of the securities industry. 
In  fact,  strong  growth  in  New  York  City  has  been  helping  many  of  its  surrounding  areas, 
including northern New Jersey, Long Island and Fairfield County. Many workers residing in 
these  areas  commute  to  New  York  City  and  have  access  to  the  City’s  vast,  diverse  and 
expanding  job  market.  For  example,  Long  Island’s  unemployment  rate  is  now  below  4 
percent, its lowest level  in nearly a decade. In Connecticut, Bridgeport has also benefited. 
When I visited a few months ago, I saw firsthand some of this resurgence. Bridgeport is both 
the largest and poorest city in Fairfield County, and for decades had seen its population and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  job base steadily decline. But, since 2000, its population has started to grow again for the 
first time since the 1940s. Even as other parts of Fairfield County struggle with a number of 
high-profile corporate relocations, jobs have begun growing and Bridgeport is showing signs 
of revival. 
In upstate New York, economic growth has generally been modest, with job growth running 
well below the national pace. This isn’t new, as upstate New York has historically tended to 
grow much more slowly than the nation. Though growth has been slow for the region as a 
whole,  some  places  are  doing  relatively  better  than  others.  In  particular,  job  growth  has 
picked  up  in  Buffalo,  and  the  Capital  Region  continues  to  see  sturdy  growth  coupled  with 
significant manufacturing job gains. 
However,  not  all  parts  of  upstate  New  York  are  seeing  the  same  degree  of  economic 
progress.  There  has  been  little  to  no  growth  in  the  center  of  the  state,  and  Utica  and 
Binghamton  continue  to  see  employment  declines.  Binghamton  stands  out  as  being 
particularly  challenged,  as  its  economy  has  yet  to  see  any  meaningful  recovery  from  the 
Great Recession. Steep manufacturing job losses have weighed heavily on the area, though 
these losses appear to be nearing an end. I had the opportunity to visit Binghamton earlier 
this summer, and I was encouraged by what I saw. The region is making serious efforts to 
boost  economic  growth,  with  Binghamton  University  playing  a  key  role  in  fostering  local 
business activity. And, like many places dealing with steep manufacturing job losses, there is 
a large swath of displaced workers that need assistance returning to the labor market. This 
has proved challenging and remains a priority. 
Update on Puerto Rico 
On balance, I think it’s fair to say that the economic news from much of the Second District 
has been quite positive. An important exception, though, has been the fiscal crisis faced by 
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, home to 3.5 million U.S. citizens. Unfortunately, Puerto 
Rico  continues  to  struggle  under  the  weight  of  economic  stagnation,  employment  declines 
and outmigration. This year, the government has been unable to make its debt payments on 
schedule and has lost access to the public debt markets. The pressures that culminated in 
these  missed  payments  have  been  building  for  some  time.  This  is  an  issue  that  we  have 
been focused on for several years. We have published a number of reports in order to help 
highlight challenges and opportunities, to inform the discussion around solutions. 
I have visited Puerto Rico on several occasions, and had the opportunity to talk to residents 
and hear about the challenges they face. As an outgrowth of one of these trips – taken in 
2011 – I commissioned my staff to produce a report on the competitiveness of the Island’s 
economy.  We  released  this  report  in  2012,  and  it  served,  I  believe,  a  useful  purpose  in 
providing  technical  analysis  and  identifying  some  important  issues  deserving  of  policy 
attention. Over the following two years, the Island’s fiscal problems worsened. Consequently, 
in 2014 we published an update to the initial report – this time focusing on the Island’s public 
finances – and again offering suggestions for consideration. 
In June, Congress and the Obama Administration took action providing a framework to help 
address  the  Commonwealth’s  fiscal  crisis.  Part  of  that  agreement  re-emphasized  that  the 
Commonwealth’s  fiscal  sustainability  depends  crucially  on  an  expanding  economy.  In  an 
effort to continue to shed light on the important issues, last week we published in our Liberty 
Street  Economics  blog  a  five-part  series  entitled  “Restoring  Economic  Growth  in  Puerto 
Rico.”  Some  important  conclusions  emerged  from  our  analysis,  and  I  want  to  emphasize 
those today. 
First  and  foremost,  Puerto  Rico’s  current  level  of  public  debt  is  unsustainable.  Achieving 
fiscal sustainability requires real reforms and a significant adjustment to the Commonwealth’s 
debt  burden,  as  Congress  and  the  Administration  have  recognized. To  illustrate  this  point, 
our analysis demonstrates that even if growth were to return to between 2 and 2.5 percent 
per year – an optimistic scenario – debt as a share of GDP would continue to rise under the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  current  fiscal  balance  and  debt  structure.  This  underscores  that  the  current  regime  is  not 
sustainable.  Second,  while  fiscal  reform  is  definitely  needed,  restoring  economic  growth 
remains a crucial ingredient to achieving a sustainable fiscal regime. Puerto Rico slipped into 
recession in 2006, and a decade later a recovery has yet to materialize. Any fixed level of 
debt will grow even more burdensome if the economy is shrinking. Consequently, this long 
deep recession has exacerbated the Island’s fiscal woes. 
Much of last week’s analysis focused on a key contributor to economic growth – the labor 
force  –  so  let  me  point  out  a  few  conclusions  that  I  drew  from  that  work.  Puerto  Rico’s 
outmigration  remains  an  important  concern,  and  is  both  a  cause  and  an  effect  of  the 
economic decline. Although the skills of those who have migrated to the Mainland look much 
like those who remain, the departure of tens of thousands of residents each year represents 
a huge drain on Puerto Rico’s potential growth. Among those who remain on the Island, low 
labor force participation, an aging population and relatively poor preparation for skilled jobs 
represent significant headwinds to growth. 
While our analysis seems to paint a somewhat dark picture of economic conditions on the 
Island, it’s important to remember that there are significant opportunities for action that can 
leverage the Island’s strengths to foster economic growth. These include its bilingual adult 
population, an open economy occupying a central position in the Caribbean, wide experience 
as host to international corporations, and close economic ties to the U.S. mainland. It is in 
exactly  this  spirit  that  we  present  this  analysis  –  in  the  hope  that  it  will  help  policymakers 
focus on actions that can help to restore growth and prosperity to the Commonwealth. Going 
forward, we will stay engaged in this effort. 
Middle-wage jobs returning 
Let me conclude by returning to the theme of the labor market. Job growth is essential to the 
vitality  of  an  expansion,  but  the  types  of  jobs  being  created  are  also  important. While  the 
labor market has continued to add jobs at a solid pace, many remain concerned about a lack 
of  job  opportunities  for  the  middle  class.  Indeed,  growth  of  middle-wage  jobs  has  been 
lackluster for the past few decades, with gains occurring disproportionately in higher-wage 
and  lower-wage  sectors.  This  long-term  hollowing  out  of  jobs  in  the  middle  of  the  wage 
distribution has helped fuel rising wage inequality, and has contributed to a growing sense for 
some that they are being left behind in the current economic expansion. At a previous press 
briefing, we showed that many middle-wage jobs disappeared during the Great Recession 
with very few of these jobs returning during the early stages of the recovery. This made it 
especially difficult for many workers who lost their jobs to rejoin the economy. 
Today, our economists will show that the tide has begun to turn. For the first time in quite a 
while,  gains  in middle-wage jobs  actually  outnumber gains  in  higher-  and  lower-wage  jobs 
nationwide.  These  middle-wage  jobs  include  teachers,  construction  workers,  mechanics, 
administrative support personnel and truck drivers, just to name a few. I believe this  is an 
important development in the economy, because, if it were to continue, it would create more 
opportunities  for  workers  and  their  families  who  have  been  struggling  up  to  now.  Middle-
wage jobs are also being created in our region, though such gains have been more evident 
in some places than others. 
I will now ask Jaison Abel to provide more details about job growth in our region. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
