  Raghuram Rajan: The fight against inflation – a measure of our 
institutional development 
Text of the Foundation Day Lecture by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank 
of India, at Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, 20 June 2016. 
 I  thank  the Tata Institute  of  Fundamental  Research for  inviting me  to give  this  Foundation 
Day lecture. I have always seen TIFR with awe from afar. Some explanation is in order. My 
roommate  in  my  first  year  at  MIT  was  Dr.  Renganathan  Iyer,  who  is  one  of  the  smartest 
mathematicians I know – he used to help me understand my tutorials in real analysis. And he 
never missed an occasion to tell me how much smarter everyone else at TIFR was. Perhaps 
Renga was being modest, but I half expected on coming here today to see everyone  with 
gigantic  heads  housing  enormous  brains.  It  is  a  relief  to  find  that,  outwardly,  you  all  look 
normal. Seriously, however, I think the continuing success of TIFR suggests to us that when 
India wants to set up world class institutions, it can. While the Institute was fortunate to have 
a visionary like Dr. Homi Bhabha as its founding director, the institution has been built by the 
collective efforts of dedicated researchers like you all. Congratulations on a job well done! 
In  my  speech  today,  I  thought  I  would  describe  our  efforts  to  build  a  different  kind  of 
institution,  not  one  that  delves  into  the  deepest  realms  of  outer  space  or  into  the  tiniest 
constituents of an atom, but one that attempts to control something that affects your daily life; 
inflation. There are parallels between the institution building you have done, and what we are 
setting up to control inflation, though clearly our efforts are much less tied to investigating the 
very fabric of the universe and more towards influencing human behavior. Ultimately, both 
require a fundamental change in mindset. 
The costs of inflation 
High  inflation  has  been  with  us  in  India  for  the  last  four  decades.  Most  recently,  we  have 
experienced an average of more than 9 percent inflation between 2006 and 2013. 
What  are  the  costs  of  having  high  inflation?  Clearly,  everyone  understands  the  costs  of 
hyper-inflation, when prices are rising every minute. Money is then a hot potato that no one 
wants to hold, with people rushing straight from the bank to the shops to buy goods in case 
their money loses value along the way. As people lose faith in money, barter of goods for 
goods  or  services  becomes  the  norm,  making  transacting  significantly  more  difficult;  How 
much  of  a  physics  lecture  would  you  have  to  pay  a  taxi  driver  to  drive  you  to  Bandra; 
moreover would the taxi driver accept a physics lecture in payment; perhaps you would have 
to  lecture  a  student,  and  get  the  student  to  sing  to  the  taxi  driver…you  get  the  point, 
transacting becomes difficult as hyperinflation renders money worthless. 
Hyperinflation  also  has  redistributive  effects,  destroying  the  middle  class’  savings  held  in 
bonds and deposits. The horrors of hyperinflation in Austria and Germany in the 1920s still 
make scary reading. 
So clearly, no one wants hyperinflation. But what if inflation were only 15 percent per year? 
Haven’t countries grown fast over a period of time despite high inflation? The answer is yes, 
but  perhaps  they  could  have  grown  faster  with  low  inflation.1  After  all,  the  variability  of 
inflation  increases  with  its  level,  as  does  the  dispersion  of  prices  from  their  fundamental 
value in the economy. This makes price signals more confusing – is the price of my widget 
                                                
1  
In fact, in a seminal paper, Fischer (1993) presents cross-country evidence to show that growth is negatively 
associated with inflation, and the causality runs from inflation to growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  going  up  because  of  high  demand  or  because of  high  generalized  inflation?  In  the  former 
case, I can sell more if I produce more, in the latter case I will be left with unsold inventory. 
Production and investment therefore become more risky. 
Moreover, high and variable inflation causes lenders to demand a higher fixed interest rate to 
compensate for the risk that inflation will move around (the so-called inflation risk premium), 
thus  raising  the  cost  of  finance.  The  long  term  nominal  (and  real)  interest  rates  savers 
require rises, thus making some long-duration projects prohibitively costly. 
These effects kick in only when inflation is noticeably high. So it is legitimate to ask, “At what 
threshold level of inflation does it start hurting growth?” Unfortunately, this question is hard to 
answer – developing countries typically have higher inflation, and developing countries also 
have  higher  growth.  So  one  might  well  find  a  positive  correlation  between  inflation  and 
growth, though this does not mean more inflation causes more growth. For this reason, the 
literature on estimating threshold effects beyond which inflation hurts growth is both vast as 
well as inconclusive. Most studies find that double digit inflation is harmful for growth but are 
fuzzier about where in the single digits the precise threshold lies.2  
The inflation target 
Nevertheless, given the limited evidence, why do most countries set their inflation goal in the 
low single digits – 2 to 5 percent rather than 7 to 10 percent? Three reasons come to mind. 
First,  even  if  inflation  is  at  a  moderate  level  that  does  not  hurt  overall  growth,  the 
consequences of inflation are not evenly distributed. While higher inflation might help a rich, 
highly indebted, industrialist because his debt comes down relative to sales revenues, it hurts 
the poor daily wage worker, whose wage is not indexed to inflation.3 Second, higher inflation 
is more variable. This raises the chance of breaching any given range around the target if it 
is set at a higher level. To the extent that a higher target is closer to the threshold, this makes 
it  more  likely  the  country  will  exceed  the  threshold  and  experience  lower  growth.  Third, 
inflation  could  feed  on  itself  at  higher  levels  –  the  higher  the  target,  the  more  chances  of 
entering regions where inflation spirals upwards. 
The received wisdom in monetary economics today is therefore that a central bank serves 
the economy and the cause of growth best by keeping inflation low and stable around the 
target  it  is  given  by  the  government.  This  contrasts  with  the  earlier  prevailing  view  in 
economics that by pumping up demand through dramatic interest rate cuts, the central bank 
could  generate  sustained  growth,  albeit  with  some  inflation.  That  view  proved  hopelessly 
optimistic about the powers of the central bank. 
There is indeed a short run trade-off between inflation and growth. In layman’s terms, if the 
central  bank  cuts  the  interest  rate  by  100  basis  points  today,  and  banks  pass  it  on,  then 
demand  will  pick  up  and  we  could  get  stronger  growth  for  a  while,  especially  if  economic 
players are surprised. The stock market may shoot up for a few days. But you can fool all of 
the people only some of the time. If the economy is producing at potential, we would quickly 
see shortages and a sharp rise in inflation. People will also start expecting the central bank 
to  disregard  inflation  (that  is,  be  hopelessly  dovish  according  to  the  bird  analogies  that 
abound)  and  embed  high  inflationary  expectations  into  their  decisions,  including  their 
demand  for  higher  wages.  If  contrary  to  expectations,  the  central  bank  is  committed  to 
keeping inflation under control, it may then be forced to raise interest rates substantially to 
                                                
2   For example, Bruno and Easterly (1995) suggest 40 percent as a danger point, beyond which increases in 
inflation  are  very  likely  to  lead  to  a  growth  crisis.  In  contrast,  Khan  and  Senhadji  (2000)  estimate  that  the 
threshold  above  which  inflation  significantly  slows  growth  is  1–3  percent  for  industrial  countries  and  7–11 
percent for developing countries. 
3   According to Easterly and Fischer (2001), “a growing body of literature on balance-but not unanimously-tends 
to support the view that inflation is a cruel tax”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  offset  that  temporary  growth.  The  boom  and  bust  will  not  be  good  for  the  economy,  and 
average  growth  may  be  lower  than  if  the  cut  had  not  taken  place.  This  is  why  modern 
economics also says there is no long run trade-off between growth and inflation – the best 
way  for  a  central  bank  to  ensure  sustainable  growth  is  to  keep  demand  close  to  potential 
supply so that inflation remains moderate, and the other factors that drive growth, such as 
good governance, can take center stage.4  
Put  differently,  when  people  say  “Inflation  is  low,  you  can  now  turn  to  stimulating growth”, 
they really do not understand that these are two sides of the same coin. The RBI always sets 
the policy rate as low as it can, consistent with meeting its inflation objective. Indeed, the fact 
that inflation is fairly close to the upper bound of our target zone today suggests we have not 
been overly hawkish, and were wise to disregard advice in the past to cut more deeply. If a 
critic believes interest rates are excessively high, he either has to argue the government-set 
inflation target  should  be  higher  than  it  is today,  or  that the  RBI  is  excessively  pessimistic 
about the path of future inflation. He cannot have it both ways, want lower inflation as well as 
lower policy rates. 
At the same time, the RBI does not focus on inflation to the exclusion of growth. If inflation 
rises sharply, for instance, because of a sharp rise in the price of oil, it would not be sensible 
for a central bank to bring inflation within its target band immediately by raising interest rates 
so high as to kill all economic activity. Instead, it makes sense to bring inflation back under 
control over the medium term, that is, the next two years or so, by raising rates steadily to the 
point where the bank thinks it would be enough to bring inflation back within the target range. 
Let me emphasize that this is not a prediction of either the path of oil prices or a forecast of 
our monetary actions, lest I read in the paper tomorrow “RBI to raise rates”. More generally, 
the extended glide path over which we are bringing inflation in check appropriately balances 
inflation and the need for reasonable growth. 
Arguments against what we are doing 
There are many who believe we are totally misguided in our actions. Let me focus on four 
criticisms.  First,  we  focus  on  the  wrong  index  of  inflation.  Second,  we  have  killed  private 
investment  by  keeping  rates  too  high.  Somewhat  contradictorily,  we  are  also  hurting  the 
pensioner  by  cutting  rates  too  sharply.  Third,  monetary  policy  has  no  effects  on  inflation 
when  the  economy  is  supply  constrained,  so  we  should  abandon  our  attempt to  control  it. 
Fourth, the central bank has little control over inflation when government spending dominates 
(what in the jargon is called “fiscal dominance”). 
The wrong index 
Historically, the RBI targeted a variety of indicators, putting a lot of weight on the Wholesale 
Price  Inflation  (WPI).  Theoretically,  reliance  on  WPI  has  two  problems.  First,  what  the 
common citizen experiences is retail inflation, that is, Consumer Price Inflation (CPI). Since 
monetary  policy  “works”  by  containing  the  public’s  inflation  expectations  and  thus  wage 
demands,  Consumer  Price  Inflation  is  what  matters.  Second, WPI  contains  a  lot  of  traded 
manufactured  goods  and  commodity  inputs  in  the  basket,  whose  price  is  determined 
internationally.  A  low  WPI  could  result  from  low  international  inflation,  while  domestic 
components of inflation such as education and healthcare services as well as retail margins 
                                                
4  
I  am  being  a  bit  loose  here.  The  short  run  tradeoff  works  because  economic  actors  can  be  surprised  by 
unexpected  loosening,  and  the  surprise  can  have  positive  growth  effects.  In  the  long  run,  the  central  bank 
loses its power to surprise, and the public embeds its correct forecast of how much inflation the central bank 
will  create  into  all  nominal  variables  such  as  interest  rates.  To  the  extent  that  high  inflation  is  harmful  for 
growth and welfare, a central bank that continuously tries to give short run positive surprises will entrench long 
run high inflation, which will be bad for growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  and non-traded food are inflating merrily to push up CPI. By focusing on WPI, we could be 
deluded into thinking we control inflation, even though it stems largely from actions of central 
banks elsewhere. In doing so we neglect CPI which is what matters to our common man, and 
is more the consequence of domestic monetary policy. 
The effective real interest rate, investments, and savings 
Of course, one reason critics may advocate a focus on WPI is because it is low today, and 
thus would mean low policy rates. This is short-sighted reasoning for when commodity prices 
and global inflation picks up, WPI could well exceed CPI. There is, however, a more subtle 
argument; the real interest rate is the difference between the interest rate a borrower pays 
and inflation – it is the true cost of borrowing in terms of goods like widgets or dosas. If policy 
interest rates are set to control CPI, they may be too high for manufacturers who see their 
product prices appreciating only at the WPI rate. I am sympathetic to the argument, but I also 
think  the  concern  is  overblown.  Even  if  manufacturers  do  not  have  much  pricing  power 
because  of  global  competition,  their  commodity  suppliers  have  even  less.  So  a  metal 
producer benefits from the fall in coal and ore prices, even though they may not get as high a 
realization on metal sales as in the past. The true measure of inflation for them is the inflation 
in their profits, which is likely significantly greater than suggested by WPI. 
A  second  error  that  is  made  is  to  attribute  all  components  of  the  interest  rate  paid  by  the 
borrower to monetary policy. For heavily indebted borrowers, however, a large component of 
the interest rate they pay is the credit risk premium banks charge for the risk they may not 
get repaid. This credit risk premium is largely independent of where the RBI sets its policy 
rate. 
So when someone berates us because heavily indebted industrialists borrow at 14% interest 
with WPI at 0.5%, they make two important errors in saying the real interest rate is 13.5%. 
First, 7.5% is the credit spread, and would not be significantly lower if we cut the policy rate 
(at  6.5%  today)  by  another  100  basis  points.  Second,  the  inflation  that  matters  to  the 
industrialist is not the 0.5% at which their output prices are inflating, but the 4% at which their 
profits are inflating (because costs are falling at 5% annually). The real risk free interest rate 
they  experience  is  2.5%,  a  little  higher  than  elsewhere  in  the  world,  but  not  the  most 
significant factor standing in the way of investment. Far more useful in lowering borrowing 
rates is to improve lending institutions and borrower behavior to bring down the credit risk 
premium, than to try and push the RBI to lower rates unduly. 
The policy rate in effect plays a balancing act. As important as real borrowing rates for the 
manufacturer  are  real  deposit  rates  for  the  saver.  In  the  last  decade,  savers  have 
experienced negative real rates over extended periods as CPI has exceeded deposit interest 
rates.  This  means  that  whatever  interest  they  get  has  been  more  than  wiped  out  by  the 
erosion  in  their  principal’s  purchasing  power  due  to  inflation.  Savers  intuitively  understand 
this, and had been shifting to investing in real assets like gold and real estate, and away from 
financial assets like deposits. This meant that India needed to borrow from abroad to fund 
investment, which led to a growing unsustainable current account deficit. 
In recent years, our fight against inflation also meant the policy rate came down only when 
we  thought  depositors  could  expect  a  reasonable  positive  real  return  on  their  financial 
savings. This has helped increase household financial savings relative to their savings in real 
assets, and helped bring down the current account deficit. At the same time, I do get a lot of 
heart-rending letters from pensioners complaining about the cut in deposit rates. The truth is 
they are better off now than in the past, as I tried to explain in a previous lecture, but I can 
understand why they are upset when they see their interest income diminishing. 
The  bottom  line  is  that  in  controlling  inflation,  monetary  policy  makers  effectively  end  up 
balancing the interests of both investors and savers over the business cycle. At one of my 
talks, an industrialist clamored for a 4% rate on his borrowing. When I asked him if he would 
deposit at that rate in a safe bank, leave alone invest in one of his risky friends, he said “No!” 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Nevertheless, he insisted on our cutting rates significantly. Unfortunately, policy makers do 
not have the luxury of inconsistency. 
Supply constraints 
Food inflation has contributed significantly to CPI inflation, but so has inflation in services like 
education and healthcare. Some argue, rightly, that it is hard for RBI to directly control food 
demand  through  monetary  policy.  Then  they  proceed,  incorrectly,  to  say  we  should  not 
bother about controlling CPI inflation. The reality is that while it is hard for us to control food 
demand, especially of essential foods, and only the government can influence food supply 
through effective management, we can control demand for other, more discretionary, items in 
the consumption basket through tighter monetary policy. To prevent sustained food inflation 
from  becoming  generalized  inflation  through  higher  wage  increases,  we  have  to  reduce 
inflation in other items. Indeed, overall headline inflation may have stayed below 6 percent 
recently  even  in  periods  of  high food  inflation,  precisely  because  other  components  of  the 
CPI basket such as “clothing and footwear” are inflating more slowly. 
Fiscal dominance 
Finally,  one  reason  the RBI  was  historically  reluctant  to  lock  itself  into  an  inflation-focused 
framework is because it feared government over-spending would make its task impossible. 
The possibility of fiscal dominance, however, only means that given the inflation objective set 
by the government, both the government and the RBI have a role to play. If the government 
overspends, the central bank has to compensate with tighter policy to achieve the inflation 
objective.  So  long  as  this  is  commonly  understood,  an  inflation-focused  framework  means 
better  coordination  between  the  government  and  the  central  bank  as  they  go  towards  the 
common  goal  of  macro  stability.  I  certainly  believe  that  the  responsible  recent  budget  did 
create room for the RBI to ease in April. 
Pragmatic inflation focus 
As you will understand from all that I have been saying, monetary policy under an inflation 
focused framework tries to balance various interests as we bring inflation under control. In 
doing  so,  we  have  to  have  a  pragmatic  rather  than  doctrinaire  mindset.  For  example, 
emerging  markets  can  experience  significant  capital  inflows  that  can  affect  exchange  rate 
volatility  as  well  as  financial  stability.  A  doctrinaire  mindset  would  adopt  a  hands-off 
approach,  while  the  pragmatic  mindset  would  permit  intervention  to  reduce  volatility  and 
instability. Nevertheless, the pragmatic mind would also recognize that the best way to obtain 
exchange rate stability is to bring inflation down to a level commensurate with global inflation. 
Similarly, while financial stability considerations are not explicitly in the RBI’s objectives, they 
make their way in because the RBI has to keep growth in mind while controlling inflation. So 
if the RBI’s monetary policies are contributing to a credit or asset price bubble that could lead 
to  a  systemic  meltdown  and  growth  collapse,  the  RBI  will  have  to  resort  to  corrective 
monetary policy if macro-prudential policy alternatives are likely to prove ineffective. 
The transition to low inflation 
The period when a high inflation economy moves to low inflation is never an easy one. After 
years  of  high  inflation,  the  public’s  expectations  of  inflation  have  been  slow  to  adjust 
downwards.  As  a  result,  they  have  been  less  willing  to  adjust  their  interest  expectations 
downwards.  Household  financial  savings  are  increasing  rapidly  as  a  fraction  of  overall 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  household  savings,  but  not  yet  significantly  as  a  fraction  of  GDP.5  Some  frictions  in  the 
interest rate setting market do not also help. Even while policy rates are down, the rates paid 
by the government on small savings are significantly higher than bank deposit rates, as are 
the effective rates on tax free bonds. I am glad the government has decided to link the rates 
on  small  savings  to  government  bond  rates,  but  these  rates  will  continuously  have  to  be 
examined  to  ensure  they  do  not  form  a  high  floor  below  which  banks  cannot  cut  deposit 
rates. All in all, bank lending rates have moved down, but not commensurate with policy rate 
cuts. 
The  wrong  thing  to  do  at  such  times  is  to  change  course.  As  soon  as  economic  policy 
becomes  painful,  clever  economists  always  suggest  new  unorthodox  painless  pathways. 
This  is  not  a  problem  specific  to  emerging  markets,  but  becomes  especially  acute  since 
every  emerging  market  thinks  it  is  unique,  and  the  laws  of  economics  operate  differently 
here. In India, at least we have been consistent. Flipping through a book of cartoons by that 
great  economist,  RK  Laxman,  I  found  one  that  indicated  the  solution  for  every  ill  in  1997 
when the cartoon was published, as now, is for the RBI to cut interest rates by a hundred 
basis points. Arguments change, but clever solutions do not. 
Decades of studying macroeconomic policy tells me to be very wary of economists who say 
you can have it all if only you try something out of the box. Argentina, Brazil, and Venezuela 
tried unorthodox policies with depressingly orthodox consequences. Rather than experiment 
with macro-policy, which brings macro risks that our unprotected poor can ill afford, better to 
be unorthodox on microeconomic policy such as those that define the business and banking 
environment.  Not  only  do  we  have  less  chance  of  doing  damage  if  we  go  wrong,  but 
innovative  policy  may  open  new  paths  around  old  bottlenecks.  Specifically,  on  its  part  the 
RBI  has  been  adopting  more  liberal  attitudes  towards  bank  licensing,  towards  financial 
inclusion, and towards payment technologies and institutions in order to foster growth. 
Institution building 
Let  me  return  to  institution  building.  We  had  gotten  used  to  decades  of  moderate  to  high 
inflation,  with  industrialists  and  governments  paying  negative  real  interest  rates  and  the 
burden  of  the  hidden  inflation  tax  falling  on  the  middle  class  saver  and  the  poor. What  is 
happening  today  is  truly  revolutionary  –  we  are  abandoning  the  ways  of  the  past  that 
benefited the few at the expense of the many. As we move towards embedding institutions 
that  result  in  sustained  low  inflation  and  positive  real  interest  rates,  this  requires  all 
constituencies  to  make  adjustments.  For  example,  if  industrialists  want  significantly  lower 
rates, they have to support efforts to improve loan recovery so that banks and bond markets 
feel comfortable with low credit spreads. The central and state governments have to continue 
on the path of fiscal consolidation so that they borrow less and thus spend less on interest 
payments.  Households  will  have  to  adjust  to  lower  nominal  rates,  but  must  recognize  that 
higher  real  rates  make  their  savings  more  productive.  They  will  find  it  worthwhile  to  save 
more to finance the enormous investment needs of the country. 
Adjustment is difficult and painful in the short run. We must not get diverted as we build the 
institutions  necessary  to  secure  a  low  inflation  future,  especially  because  we  seem  to  be 
making  headway.  The  Government  has  taken  the  momentous  step  of  both  setting  a  CPI 
based inflation objective for the RBI as well as a framework for setting up an independent 
                                                
5   Data from household surveys also suggest that household financial savings are moving up. For example, two 
recent financial inclusion surveys for selected states in India – Financial Inclusion Insights survey conducted 
by  InterMedia  and  the  FinScope  survey  implemented  by  the  Small  Industries  Development  Bank  of  India 
(SIDBI) – suggest that among individuals “who have a bank account”, the fraction who saved through bank 
deposits increased from 60% in 2013 to 98% in 2015. Of those who “save money”, the fraction saving through 
a bank increased from 67% in 2013 to 93% in 2015. Of those who “save money”, the fraction “saving at home” 
has declined dramatically from 90% in 2014 to 6% in 2015. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  monetary policy committee. In the days ahead, a new governor, as well as the members of 
the committee will be picked. I am sure they will internalize the frameworks and institutions 
that have been set up, and should produce a low inflation future for India. 
The  rewards  will  be  many.  Our  currency  has  been  stable  as  investors  have  gained 
confidence in our monetary policy goals, and this stability will only improve as we meet our 
inflation  goals.  Foreign  capital  inflows  will  be  more  reliable  and  increase  in  the  longer 
maturity  buckets,  including  in  rupee  investments.  This  will  expand  the  pool  of  capital 
available for our banks and corporations. The government will be able to borrow at low rates, 
and will be able to extend the maturity of its debt. The poor will not suffer disproportionately 
due to bouts of sharp inflation, and the middle class will not see its savings eroded. All this 
awaits us as we stay the course. Thank you very much for your patience in listening to me. 
References 
Bruno Michael and William Easterly. 1995. “Inflation Crises and Long-Run Growth,” NBER 
Working  Paper  No.  5209  (Cambridge,  Massachusetts:  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research). 
Easterly William and Stanley Fischer. 2001. “Inflation and the Poor.” Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking. Volume 33, Issue 2. May. 160–178 
Fischer Stanley 1993. “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth”. Journal of Monetary 
Economics. Volume 32, Issue 3, December 1993, Pages 485–512 
Khan,  Mohsin  S.,  and  Abdelhak  S.  Senhadji.  2000.  “Threshold  Effects  in  the  Relationship 
Between  Inflation  and  Growth,”  IMF  Working  Paper  00/110  (Washington:  International 
Monetary Fund). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
