  Peter Praet: Financial cycles and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in 
the context of a panel on “International Monetary Policy”, Beijing, 31 August 2016. 
 I would like to thank Fédéric Holm-Hadulla for his contributions to this speech. 
Financial  asset  prices  and  credit  creation  in  the  global  economy  are  characterised  by 
pronounced  and  recurrent  ebbs  and  flows  –  a  pattern  we  have  come  to  refer  to  as  the 
financial cycle.1 
In my remarks today, I will discuss the role of monetary policy and other policy domains in 
steering this cycle. 
Financial  cycles  derive  from  two  closely  related  factors.  The  first  is  a  natural  tendency 
towards occasional bouts of “irrational exuberance” – for instance in response to promising 
scientific  discoveries  or  technological  advances  –  that  lead  investors  to  radically  upgrade 
their future income expectations. The second factor is the capacity of financial intermediaries 
to transfer this expected increase in future income into the present through credit creation, 
thus  establishing  a  financial  upswing  that  constitutes  the  real-world  counterpart  to  the 
upswing in economic optimism. 
But when some of the expected benefits that investors ascribed to the new discoveries or 
technologies  do  not  come  to  pass,  this  process  goes  in  reverse.  A  period  of  collective 
retrenchment ensues and the financial cycle enters into a downswing. 
Such  cycles,  while  certainly  painful  for  individual  investors,  are  not  necessarily  harmful for 
the economy as a whole: productivity growth and technological progress rely on investments 
in promising but risky ventures, which are driven by entrepreneurial zeal and often financed 
by credit. As such, financial exuberance often acts as a by-product of economic progress.2 
But this is not always the case: some asset price bubbles, for example in housing markets, 
may  go  along  with  a  misallocation  of  resources  and  lower  productivity  growth.  And  in  all 
instances the flip-side of financial exuberance is an increased risk of regular, and potentially 
violent, reversals3 – a pattern we have seen repeatedly in history, going back at least to the 
Dutch Tulip Mania in 1636.4 
Hence,  for  policymakers  concerned  with  financial  stability,  financial  cycles  present  two 
related questions. First, how should they identify when it is justified to intervene in the cycle? 
And second, if intervention is justified, which policy domain should act? 
Criteria for policy intervention 
A  key  criterion  to  identify  the  case  for  pre-emptive  policy  intervention  is  the  presence  of 
systemic negative externalities. In the most general terms, such externalities arise whenever 
                                                
1  See Claessens, S., M. Ayhan Kose and M. E. Terrones, “Financial cycles: What? How? When?”, IMF Working 
Paper, April 2011. 
2  See  Ranciere,  R.,  A.  Tornell  and  F.  Westermann,  “Systemic  Crisis  and  Growth”,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, Volume 123, Issue 1, 2008, pp. 359–406. 
3  See Akerlof, G. A. and R. J. Shiller, “Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the Economy, and Why It 
Matters for Global Capitalism”, 2009. 
4  See Kindleberger C. P., and R. Z. Aliber, “Manias, Panics, and Crashes – A History of Financial Crises”, New 
York: Basic Books, 1978. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  costs  of  failed  endeavours  are  not  only  borne  by  those  who  stood  to  benefit  from  the 
initial  risk-taking  activity,  but  also  spill  over  to  the  wider  financial  sector  and  economy. 
Though they have macroeconomic consequences, these externalities typically originate from 
misaligned incentives at a microeconomic level  – for instance pervasive moral hazard that 
induces agents into excessive risk-taking in their contractual relations. Not all such market 
failures are relevant for financial stability, but insofar as they aggregate up to a systemic level 
they may become relevant. 
There  is  one  specific  embodiment  of  such  externalities  that  has  proven  in  the  past  to  be 
particularly  deleterious.  This  relates  to  the  tendency  for  financial  intermediaries  to  adopt 
unstable and run-prone funding patterns – a tendency that was particularly pronounced in the 
run-up to the last financial crisis when financial intermediaries, including depository but also 
non-depository institutions that operate in non-bank forms of intermediation such as the repo 
market, increasingly funded their exposures in the wholesale market. 
These  intermediaries  had  an  incentive  to  reap  liquidity  premia  that  other  investors  were 
willing to pay for short-term assets that could be readily converted into currency and thus to 
finance  long-term  asset  exposures  with  very  short-term  funding.  This  pattern  of  funding, 
however,  exposes  the  system  to  fire-sale  damage  in  case  of  a  run  on  such  short-term 
funding instruments. The externality, in turn, resides in the failure of financial intermediaries 
to  internalise  this  fire  sale  damage,  which  affects  the  broader  economy  and  not  just  the 
institutions engaging in such funding patterns. 
Accordingly, when assessing the implications of swings in the financial cycle, the key issue 
for policymakers is not so much to diagnose irrational exuberance as to identify its funding 
patterns – namely, whether rising asset prices are being fuelled by excessive leverage and 
maturity transformation which will have systemic consequences when the cycle turns. 
When such risks to financial stability are identified, however, the second question becomes 
salient: which policy domain should act to quell financial exuberance? 
Responsibilities for managing the financial cycle 
To my mind the first line of defence must be a strong institutional and legal framework that 
directly targets the sources of market failure. 
Such a framework would include sound financial regulation and macroprudential policy tools 
that limit excessive risk-taking in the boom and make banks more resilient to losses in the 
bust,  for  instance  through  higher,  and  potentially  counter-cyclical,  capital  requirements, 
leverage  limits  and  stable  funding  ratios. It  would  include  strong resolution  frameworks for 
banks and insolvency regimes to accelerate deleveraging and balance sheets repair after a 
crash.  And  it  would  include  effective  regulatory  frameworks  in  other  non-financial  policy 
domains  –  especially  in  the  housing  market  which  has  often  acted  as  a  key  amplifier  of 
financial boom and bust cycles. Housing bubbles, for example, can be fuelled by rigid zoning 
and  land  use  regulations  which  cap  housing  supply,  coupled  with  permissive  underwriting 
standards for mortgages which stoke housing demand.5 
In other words, ensuring financial stability requires the commitment of many policy actors – 
supervisors,  regulators,  governments  –  all  of  whom  have  to  act  in  their  own  areas  of 
responsibility. 
But it is clear to me that central banks also have a role to play. Monetary policy inevitably 
interacts with the financial cycle – a view that has been borne out by a large and growing 
                                                
5  Bernanke,  B.  S.  (2010),  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  Housing  Bubble”,  Speech  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the 
American Economic Association. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  body of empirical evidence.6 This interaction derives from the powerful impact that monetary 
policy  can  exert  on  risk-taking  incentives,  especially  of  financial  intermediaries.  Insofar  as 
financial and business cycles are in sync, this may either magnify or moderate the ups and 
downs of financial markets.7 And the interactions extend well-beyond country borders, since 
monetary policy affects yields and asset prices both in its domestic economy and, through 
portfolio balance effects, in foreign economies. Through these channels, monetary policy in 
large  advanced  economies  can  have  a  significant  impact  on  financial  stability  elsewhere, 
especially in emerging markets.8 
Importantly, this interaction does not weaken the case for a strong first line of defence. The 
alternative  would  be  to  rely  on  monetary  policy  to  compensate  for  failures  in  other  policy 
domains. But this would overburden monetary policy and lead to sub-optimal outcomes with 
regard to both – financial stability and broader macroeconomic stabilisation objectives; and 
this  holds  not  only  at  the  domestic  level  but  also  internationally.  In  fact,  a  large  body  of 
empirical  work  in  recent  years  has  shown  that  fiscal,  macro-prudential,  regulatory  and 
supervisory  policies  can  help  mitigate  the  adverse  effects  of  foreign  monetary  policy  on 
domestic financial stability.9 
Meanwhile, the experience with the taper tantrum in 2013 showed how differences in policy 
frameworks shaped how severely different economies were affected by financial spillovers.10 
Still,  even  with  an  improved  first  line  of  defence,  the  question  how  central  banks  should 
incorporate financial stability in their reaction functions would remain relevant.11 
One prominent view in the debate surrounding this issue is that, since price stability typically 
focuses on a shorter time horizon than is appropriate for interpreting financial cycles, there is 
                                                
6  See Rey, H., “Dilemma not Trilemma: The global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence”, NBER 
Working  Paper,  No.  21162,  May  2015;  Adrian,  T.,  A.  Estrella  and  H.  S.  Shin,  “Monetary  Cycles,  Financial 
Cycles, and the Business Cycle”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 421, January 2010; 
Juselius, M., C. Borio, P. Disyatat and M. Drehmann “Monetary policy, the financial cycle and ultra-low interest 
rates”, BIS Working Papers, No. 569, July 2016; Schularick, M. and A. M. Taylor, ”Credit Booms Gone Bust: 
Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870–2008.”, American Economic Review, Volume 
102, No. 2, April 2012, pp.1029–61; Bruno, V. and H. S. Shin, “Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of 
monetary policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 71, 2015, pp. 119–132; Hiebert, P., “Characterising 
the financial cycle: A multivariate and time-varying approach”, ECB-IMF 1st annual macroprudential policy and 
research conference, 26 April 2016. 
7  See  Black,  l.  K.  and  R.  J.  Rosen,  “Monetary  Policy,  Loan  Maturity,  and  Credit  Availability”,  International 
Journal  of  Central  Banking,  Volume  12,  No.  1,  March  2016,  pp.  199–230;  Borio,  C.,  L.  Gambacorta  and 
B. Hofmann, “The influence of monetary policy on bank profitability”, BIS Working Papers, No. 514, October 
2015; De Groot, O., “The Risk Channel of Monetary Policy”, International Journal of Central Banking, Volume 
10, No. 2, June 2014, pp. 115–159. 
8  See for example Koepke, R., “Determinants of of Emerging Market Crises: The Role of U.S. Monetary Policy”, 
IIF Working Paper. 
9  See,  for  example,  Blanchard  et  al.  (2015),  “Can  Foreign  Exchange  Intervention  Stem  Exchange  Rate 
Pressures  from  Global  Capital  Flow  Shocks?”,  NBER  Working  Papers,  no.  21427;  Forbes  et  al.  (2015), 
“Capital  flow  management  measures:  What  are  they  good  for?,”  Journal  of  International  Economics, 
vol. 96(S1), pp. S76-S97; Afanasieff et al. (2015), “Implementing loan-to-value ratios: the case of auto loans in 
Brazil (2010–11),” Central Bank of Brazil Working Paper Series, no. 380; Wong et al. (2015), “Using macro-
prudential  tools  to  address  systemic  risks  in  the  property  sector  in  Singapore”,  SEACEN  Financial  Stability 
Journal, vol 4, pp. 27–41; Ostry et al. (2012), “Tools for managing financial-stability risks from capital inflows”, 
Journal of International Economics, vol. 88(2), pp. 407–421; Habermeier et al. (2011), “The effectiveness of 
capital controls and prudential policies in managing large inflows”, IMF Staff Discussion Note, SDN/11/14 ;Lim 
et  al.  (2011),  “Macro-prudential  policy:  What  instruments  and  how  to  use  them?  Lessons  from  country 
experiences”, IMF Working Paper WP/11/238. 
10  See Eichengreen and Gupta (2013), “Fed tapering and emerging markets”, VoxEU.org. 
11  For a review see Smets, F., “Financial Stability and Monetary Policy: How Closely Interlinked?”, International 
Journal of Central Banking, June 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  an  inherent  conflict  between  those  different  objectives.  Only  by  opting  for  a  “financial 
stability-oriented monetary policy”, the thinking goes, can such tensions be resolved – which 
would, in turn, support the achievement of both goals over a longer-term horizon.12 
I would agree that such conflicts between objectives are possible. As an example, consider a 
“rigid”  inflation-targeting  central  bank  that  interprets  any  deviation  from  its  price  stability 
target  as  an  immediate  call  to  action,  independently  of  the  nature  and  persistence  of  the 
underlying shock. And suppose this central bank is faced with a sequence of positive cost-
push shocks that curb domestic price pressures for a prolonged period of time – for instance 
due to the gradual penetration of new technologies that boost productivity, or the emergence 
of new and cheaper sources of global production. The accelerating diffusion of the internet 
and  related  digital  technologies  in  recent  decades  may  provide  an  example  of  the  former, 
while the emergence of China as a global manufacturing hub exemplifies the latter.13 
If  the  central  bank  is  too  narrowly  focused  on  achieving  a  specific  inflation  target  over  a 
specific period of time, it will aim to reinvigorate price dynamics by running a looser monetary 
policy than would otherwise have been the case. But with that response, it may reinforce the 
exuberance that is already mushrooming with rising economic optimism. In these conditions, 
an overly loose monetary policy would fuel the financial cycle, which in turn may encourage a 
build-up of imbalances in the financial industry characterised by excessive dependence on 
unstable short-term funding, high levels of leverage, weak underwriting standards, and poor 
risk measurement and risk management.14 
This is more than just a hypothetical scenario: empirical evidence suggests that it has been 
the rule – rather than an exception – for stock market booms to coincide with atypically low 
inflation.  The  run-up  to  the  dotcom  bubble  in  the  late  1990s,  which  dovetailed  with  the 
positive  cost-push  shocks  described  above,  provides  one  particularly  vivid  example  of  this 
pattern.15 
In such cases, a misguided monetary policy reaction amplifies the impact of the initial supply 
shock and turns it into a demand shock with long run implications for price stability when the 
cycle eventually turns. 
The flexibility of existing monetary policy frameworks 
But these insights do not automatically lead to the conclusion that central banks must adjust 
their monetary policy frameworks. 
This is because the representation of monetary policy as focusing on a short policy horizon 
and  with  little  regard  for  broader  financial  cycles  does  not  do  justice  to  the  strategies  that 
many  central  banks follow  today,  and  certainly  not to the  strategy  of the  ECB. In fact,  our 
monetary  policy  framework  is  more  flexible  than  the  aforementioned  scenario  of  a  rigid 
inflation-targeter suggests. Our strategy includes important safeguards to prevent an overly 
narrow  and  zealous  interpretation  of  price  stability  from  becoming  a  source  of  financial 
                                                
12  See for instance the 2015/16 BIS Annual Report. 
13  See Fahr, S., R. Motto, M. Rostagno, F. Smets and O. Tristani, “A monetary policy strategy in good and bad 
times: lessons from the recent past”, Economic Policy, Volume 28, Issue 74, 1 April 2013, pp. 243–288. 
14  De Groot, O., “The Risk Channel of Monetary Policy”, International Journal of Central Banking, Volume 10, 
No. 2, June 2014, pp. 115–159. 
15  L. Christiano, C. Ilut, R. Motto and M. Rostagno, “Monetary Policy and Stock Market Booms”, paper prepared 
for Macroeconomic Challenges: the Decade Ahead, A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City Jackson Hole, Wyoming August 26 – 28, 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  instability.  Indeed,  it  incorporated  a  “leaning-against-the-wind”  approach  even  when  the 
academic consensus pointed in a different direction.16 
There  are  two  elements  to  our  monetary  policy  strategy  that  institutionalise  this  approach. 
The  first  is  the  flexible  and  shock-dependent  medium-term  horizon,  which  ensures  that 
supply shocks do not automatically elicit a monetary policy response unless there is a danger 
that  they  become  embedded  in  inflation  expectations.  The  second  is  the  monetary  pillar, 
which  alerts  the  Governing  Council  when  trends  in  credit  markets  may  presage  emerging 
risks to financial stability – even when inflation is quiescent.17 
Together,  these  elements  coalesce  into  a  leaning-against-the-wind  orientation  which  helps 
us evaluate the impact of economic shocks over sufficiently long horizons and account for 
their implications for lower-frequency asset price cycles. Monetary analysis, in turn, informs 
us  about  the  funding  patterns  that  underlie  these  asset  price  cycles  and  alerts  us,  for 
instance, to  situations  in  which  a  generalised  upswing  in  asset  prices  is fuelled  by  excess 
creation of liquidity and over-extension of credit. Detecting and understanding this link helps 
the ECB form an opinion on whether observed financial market developments are morphing 
into an unsustainable bubble.18 
As  a  consequence,  if  price  and  volume  indicators  of  prevailing  financing  conditions  were 
inappropriate  to  guarantee  sustained  macroeconomic  and  price  stability,  the  ECB  would 
change its policy stance whether or not current or projected inflation already signalled those 
risks. 
This approach guided our monetary policy already prior to the crisis. In fact, buoyant money 
and credit growth were key factors that motivated the policy tightening cycle that began in 
2005.  Today  our 
leaning-against-the-wind  orientation  clearly  backs  our  prevailing 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  The  liquidity  and  demand  support  provided  by 
monetary  policy  has  countered  the  downturn  and  aided  the  reversal  of  the  financial  cycle, 
thus preventing it from morphing into a chronic credit crunch with persistent dangers for price 
stability. 
Taken  together,  the  ECB’s  two  pillar  strategy  thus  features  key  elements  that  facilitate  a 
leaning-against-the-wind approach. 
Challenges and lessons from the crisis 
Nonetheless, the global financial crisis – which has hit also the euro area with full force and 
was followed by an exceptionally prolonged economic slump – illustrates that this approach 
was not sufficient to pre-empt major imbalances. Accordingly, we need to ask ourselves how 
we can further strengthen the resilience of the macroeconomic policy framework. 
Also here, the “first line of defence” lies in the broader institutional and legal framework. In 
fact,  the  ease  with  which  a  central  bank  can  operationalise  a  leaning-against-the-wind 
strategy  is  inevitably  affected  by  the  broader  policy  framework.  In  a  weak  macroeconomic 
framework, the central bank will not just have to “lean against the wind” – it will be forced to 
“lean against a storm” that will inevitably put strains on – and ultimately overburden – any 
type of monetary policy strategy. The euro area crisis, characterised by mutually reinforcing 
vulnerabilities  in  the  sovereign  space  and  the  banking  system  –  both  of  which  were 
precipitated by a weak institutional framework – provides a vivid example of such scenario. 
                                                
16  See  Beyer,  A.  and L.  Reichlin  (Eds.)  (2006),  “The  role of money – money and  monetary  policy  in  the  21st 
century”, Fourth ECB Central Banking Conference. 
17  See Issing, O., “Monetary and financial stability – is there a trade-off?”, Speech at Conference on “Monetary 
Stability and the Business Cycle”, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 28–29 March 2003. 
18  See ECB Monthly Bulletin Article, April 2005, “Asset price bubbles and monetary policy”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  By  contrast,  a  more  effective  first  line  of  defence  will  support  a  leaning-against-the-wind 
approach, both: because other policy domains reinforce the thrust of monetary policy, and 
because any trade-offs that result are likely to be more favourable. In this context, it may be 
noted,  for  instance,  that  the  notion  that  accommodative  monetary  policy  sustains  “zombie 
banks”  is  rarely  heard  in  the  US  context,  in  view  of  the  stronger  institutions  for  resolving 
banks and resolving non-performing loans. 
Overall, we are now seeing progress being made in the euro area and internationally that will 
improve the first line of defence going forward. The Basel III agenda has tackled several of 
the  weaknesses  of  pre-crisis  banking  landscape,  while  countries  have  made  important 
strides in terms of operationalising new macro-prudential instruments. Meanwhile, the euro 
area has moved ahead in its efforts to establish a banking union and the tools available to 
policymakers  to  clean  up  after  crises  are  being  progressively  strengthened,  although 
difficulties persist in reducing legacy non-performing loans on bank balance sheets. There is 
thus still work to be done, but the institutional environment has become more conducive to a 
leaning-against-the-win strategy than before the crisis. The early indications already suggest 
it has increased the resilience of the financial sector to shocks. 
Despite  this  improved  first  line  of  defence,  implementing  a  leaning-against-the-wind 
approach  will  remain  challenging  though.  It  will  require  us  to  identify  and  model  latent 
financial  stability  risks,  as  well  as  the  potential  future  cost  of  letting  such  risks  fester  at  a 
systemic level. As noted in the past, this task was hampered by crucial knowledge gaps as 
the  common  macroeconometric  frameworks  were  not  well  designed  to  capture  the 
interactions between financial and real variables.19 
These knowledge gaps, in turn, led the economics profession to underestimate the potential 
cost that systemic financial crises may impose on broader macroeconomic prospects. 
Also  on  this  front,  we  have  seen  some  progress  in  economic  research,  especially  in 
integrating real-financial feedback loops into the standard toolkit for macroeconomic analysis, 
which has enhanced the operational feasibility of leaning-against-the-wind. This toolkit may 
help distinguish more clearly between benign and malign episodes of financial exuberance 
and  divine  better  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  response.  At  the  same  time,  the 
experience of the financial crisis and ensuing recession has shown that the costs generated 
by malign episodes are more substantial than we thought. 
Our  challenge  going  forward  is  therefore,  in  my  view,  to  build  on  our  improved  monetary 
policy and regulatory frameworks and focus on their steadfast implementation, rather than to 
establish  a  lasting  trade-off  between  financial  stability  and  price  stability  in  central  banks’ 
objective functions. 
Such a trade-off would not solve the implementation challenges of leaning-against-the-wind, 
while it may rekindle the deeper policy challenges that central banks encountered in the past 
when  they  sacrificed  price  stability  for  other  policy  concerns.  Indeed,  the  lesson  from  the 
1970s is that, if a central bank downgrades its inflation mandate to a point where inflation 
expectations become seriously de-anchored, sooner or later it will be called upon to assume 
full responsibility for bringing inflation back under control. At that point, inflation stabilisation 
and a re-anchoring of expectations may have to come at a very high cost in terms of output 
losses and financial stability risks. 
Conclusion 
Let me summarise. 
                                                
19  See ECB Monthly Bulletin Article, April 2005, “Asset price bubbles and monetary policy”. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Monetary policy has a powerful impact on the incentive structure of market participants and, 
via this channel, on the cycle in asset prices and monetary aggregates. Since this cycle is 
propagated  via  global  financial  markets,  domestic  monetary  policy  inevitably  entails 
international spillovers. 
Monetary policy geared towards domestic price stability generally supports financial stability. 
In the current situation, for instance, the ECB’s continued monetary accommodation not only 
supports a return of inflation to levels closer to 2% but also aids balance sheet repair in the 
euro  area  and  mitigates  the  risk  of  adverse  spillovers  to  the  financial  systems  in  other 
economies. 
An overly rigid interpretation of the price stability objective, however, may at times give rise to 
conflicts between price stability and financial stability. And a failure of major central banks to 
appropriately  account  for  this  risk  in  their  monetary  policy  strategies  can  create  new,  or 
reinforce existing, financial vulnerabilities at global level. 
Against this background, the ECB follows a flexible medium-term horizon and, as part of its 
two-pillar  strategy,  closely  monitors  the  dynamics  in  money  and  credit  which  may  act  as 
signals  for  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances.  But  in  confronting  such  imbalances,  other 
policy domains – including on the macroprudential and regulatory side – have to play their 
part to ensure stability in a context of sound macroeconomic performance. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
