  Philip R Lane: A better understanding of the geography of risk will help 
us assess the financial stability implications of market-based financing 
Address by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the International 
Capital Market Association Conference, Dublin, 19 May 2016. 
 Introduction 
I welcome the opportunity to speak at the 48th ICMA conference. A focus on capital markets 
is  timely,  given  the  widespread  consensus  that  Europe  would  be  better  served  by  a  more 
balanced  financial  system,  in  which  financial  markets  play  a  larger  role  and  provide 
alternative  channels  to  banks  in  a  range  of  financial  intermediation  activities  (European 
Systemic  Risk  Board  2014).  This  basic  message  drives  the  agenda  for  Capital  Markets 
Union (CMU) in Europe, which is supported by the central banking community (Central Bank 
of Ireland 2015, European Central Bank 2015). An enhanced role for market-based finance 
has the potential to foster greater risk diversification, while also enhancing financial stability 
by limiting the fallout from banking crises. 
As  a  mechanism  for  individuals  and  institutions  to  obtain  access  to  a  diversified  pool  of 
financial  assets  and  a  key  investor  base  for  corporates  seeking  to  obtain  market-based 
funding,  the  investment  funds  sector  plays  an  especially  important  role.  In  what  follows,  I 
focus on the role of investment funds in the intermediation of international financial flows. 
Of course, the investment funds sector is extremely diverse. Among the key differences in 
the design and operation of funds are: equity versus debt; leveraged versus long-only; level 
of liquidity; ease of redemption; actively-managed versus passive index-based; geographic 
scope;  maturity  horizon  (with  money  market  funds  focusing  on  the  short  end  and 
infrastructure funds  orientated  at the  long  end);  use  of  derivative  products for funding  and 
asset  allocation;  type  of  funding  (retail;  asset-backed  securitisations);  and  ownership 
structure  (hedge  funds,  mutual  funds,  special  purpose  vehicles).  The  facilitation  of  equity-
type  investments  is  critically  important  in  view  of  the  risks  associated  with  an  excessive 
reliance on debt funding. At the same time, market-based debt funding provides an important 
alternative to bank-based debt funding, with multiple funding channels a key element in the 
design of a resilient financial system. 
It  is  also  important  to  recognise  the  inter-connections  between  market-based  and  bank-
based  funding  channels,  with  the  banking  sector  itself  dependent  on  financial  markets  to 
raise  equity  and  different  grades  of  bond  funding,  while  also  relying  on  securitisations  to 
release tranches of performing and non-performing loans from its balance sheet. In addition, 
a banking group may include various financial entities that play central roles in the operation 
of securities markets. 
Historically,  the  investment  funds  sector  has  been  more  lightly  regulated  than  the  banking 
sector.  A  basic  reason  for  the  enhanced  regulation  faced  by  banks  is  the  importance  of 
protecting retail depositors, in view of the deposit-based funding structure of banks and the 
inherent maturity mismatch between short-term deposit liabilities and long-term illiquid assets 
such as loans to corporates and households. 
However, the scale of the non-bank financial sector and the scope for bank-like maturity and 
liquidity mismatches between the liabilities and assets of some types of investment funds has 
given rise to increased regulatory scrutiny in recent years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Non-bank financing  amounts  to  $80  trillion  globally.1  Given  the  importance  of  non-banking 
funding  channels,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  has  been  working  for  a  number  of 
years  to  understand  this  sector  and  frame  policies  to  address  the  financial  stability  risks 
related  to  non-bank  funding.  In  addition,  an  annual  monitoring  exercise  examines  many 
jurisdictions that host significant non-bank debt funding activity, including Ireland.2  
Potential risks to financial stability from non-bank funding can arise in many forms. The risk 
categories  receiving  the  greatest  attention  in  the  international  debate  are:  (i)  the  fragility 
caused by leverage; (ii) a range of liquidity risks related to the possibility that redemptions 
of more liquid or shorter-maturity liabilities may lead to defaults or forced assets sales that 
dislocate  secondary  markets  (see,  amongst  others,  Haldane  2009,  Caruana  2010, 
International  Monetary  Fund  2015);  and  (iii)  the  inter-linkages  with  other  sectors  (banks, 
insurance  companies  and  pension  funds,  non-financial  corporates),  typically  arising  from 
credit exposures. 
It should be no surprise that these are key areas of focus. Indeed, during the global financial 
crisis, we witnessed a perfect storm whereby these elements combined to amplify shocks to 
the international financial system. 
The international policy debate 
The  FSB  has  led  the  way  in  developing  a  policy  framework  that  groups  different  market 
finance  activities  according  to  their  economic  functions  (Financial  Stability  Board  2012). 
However discussions around the choice of regulatory tools to mitigate financial stability risks 
have been challenging. 
It is sometimes argued that the policy objective should be to ensure that all lending activity is 
subject  to  similar  regulations.  Rather,  the  purpose  of  regulation  should  be  to  mitigate  the 
risks associated with these activities. In effect, regulation should be proportional to: (a) the 
impact  of  failure;  and  (b)  the  probability  that  such  a  failure  would  crystallise.  In  principle, 
regulation should be based on a solid understanding of the business models and an analysis 
of  the  detailed  data  on  the  assets  and  liabilities  of  the  financial  vehicles  supporting  these 
activities.  For  example,  a  closed-ended  investment  vehicle  has  a  very  different  risk  profile 
compared to a retail bank. Equally, an open-ended investment vehicle holding highly rated 
sovereign  debt  has  a  substantially  different  risk  profile  to  a  retail  bank.  A  failure  to  meet 
redemption requests may have damaging consequences for an asset manager but it is quite 
unlike  the  type  of  default  event  that  arises  when  a  retail  bank  closes  its  doors  to  deposit 
withdrawals. 
Let  me  highlight  one  other  difference  between  market-based  and  bank-based  funding  that 
poses novel challenges to policy makers. Typically, bank loans are originated and held until 
maturity on the balance sheet. In contrast, the assets of market-based financing vehicles are 
                                                
1  As measured by the activities of the Other Financial Institutions (OFI) sector. The OFI sector is the national 
accounts  grouping  of  financial  services  providers  that  are  not  monetary  financial  institutions  (MFIs)  or 
insurance corporations and pensions funds (ICPFs). 
2  FSB (2015). This monitoring report focuses on so-called shadow banking, using a range of definitions. The 
narrow  measure  of  shadow  banking  is  defined  as  the  classification  of  non-bank  financial  entities  into  five 
economic  functions  through  which  non-bank  credit  intermediation  may  pose  bank-like  systemic  risks  to  the 
financial system. The OFI measure of shadow banking is defined as all financial intermediaries that are not 
classified  as  banks,  insurance  companies,  pension  funds,  public  financial  institutions,  central  banks,  or 
financial  auxiliaries.  The  broad  measure  of  shadow  banking  is  defined  as  the  Monitoring  Universe  of  Non-
Bank  Financial  Intermediation  (MUNFI),  which  includes  Other  Financial  Intermediaries,  Pension  Funds  and 
Insurance Companies. According to the narrow measure, shadow banking activity amounts to $36 trillion (26 
jurisdictions), while the OFI measure aggregates to $80 trillion (20 jurisdictions and euro area) and the broad 
measure to $137 trillion (20 jurisdictions and the euro area). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  often tradable on secondary markets. The greater the liquidity of these assets, the less there 
is a mismatch – in terms of liquidity – between the assets and liabilities of these vehicles. 
When loans are recalled or redemption requests made, assets may need to be sold on these 
secondary  markets  to  meet  these  liabilities.  So  the  question  arises  as  to  the  liquidity  of 
secondary markets in times of stress. Clearly, the answer depends on the assets in question 
and the performance of individual secondary markets under stress. For instance, there is a 
world  of  difference  between  the  liquidity  of  markets  for  highly-rated  sovereign  debt  and 
emerging market equities during periods of heightened financial stress. Equally, many of the 
assets held by certain financial vehicle corporations and special purpose vehicles may not 
benefit from active secondary markets. 
It  follows  that  the  judgements  about  the  liquidity  of  assets  should  determine  the  liquidity 
management and redemption policies operated by these vehicles. Bearing this in mind, the 
challenge for international policy makers is to develop a proportionate regulatory framework 
that differentiates between investment vehicles based on the performance of the associated 
secondary markets. 
It is also important to take into account the potential for indirect contagion by which adverse 
shocks can adversely affect a broad range of financial firms and markets through a variety of 
externality-generating  mechanisms  such  as  fire  sales,  liquidity  spirals  and  information 
spillovers  (Clerc  et  al  2016).  The  potential  for  indirect  contagion  may  warrant  a 
macroprudential policy framework for non-bank funding activities that varies regulations for 
liquidity,  margins  and  haircuts  over  the  financial  cycle  and  provides  a  role  for  regulatory 
authorities in disclosing aggregated information during stressed episodes. 
Beyond  the  policy  discussions,  much  supervisory  work  needs  to  be  done  by  financial 
authorities. There are national and international dimensions to this  work. The cross-border 
nature of these activities means that national supervisors will struggle to gain a full picture of 
the risks without support from peers elsewhere. In Europe, the Alternative Investment Fund 
Managers  Directive  (AIFMD)  already  empowers  financial  authorities  to  limit  leverage 
employed  by  alternative  investment  fund  managers,  although  work  is  still  ongoing  to 
determine  how  that  power  should  be  used  and  in  what  circumstances.  And  of  course, 
international  bodies  such  as  the  FSB,  IMF  and  ESRB  rely  on  the  input  and  insight  from 
national  authorities  so  as  to  be  able  to  piece  the  jigsaw  of  activities  together.  All  of  this 
requires extensive dialogue, cooperation and data. The Central Bank of Ireland is active on 
all these fronts and is pressing for greater supervisory convergence in the measurement of 
risks associated with market-based financial intermediation. 
The Irish non-bank financial sector 
Figure 1 shows the sectoral composition of the Irish non-bank financial sector. In addition to 
significant  insurance  and  pension  fund  sectors,  Ireland  hosts  entities  (mainly  investment 
funds  and  securitisation  vehicles)  that  support  a  large  amount  of  non-bank  financial 
intermediation (Moloney and Murphy 2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Figure 2 shows that Irish-resident entities account for a sizeable proportion of funds activity 
in the euro area, such that Ireland plays an important role as an international financial centre 
for the investment funds industry. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   From a domestic perspective, it is important to understand the linkages between the activities 
of  these  sectors  and  the  domestic  economy  and  any  potential  risks  to  the  domestic 
jurisdiction. In fact, Figure 3 shows that Irish-resident collective investment vehicles: (i) have 
a proportionately low exposure to Irish-resident assets; and (ii) are owned by relatively few 
Irish-resident  investors.  Furthermore,  these  data  overstate  the  ultimate  exposure  of  Irish 
residents, since these include Irish-resident entities that are owned by foreign investors. Put 
another  way,  Irish-resident  collective  investment  vehicles  are  largely  invested  in  offshore 
assets and are mostly owned by foreign investors. 
Ireland’s  role  in  global  financial  intermediation  means  that  traditional  interpretations  of 
balance  of  payments  flows  are  not  too  helpful  and  the  patterns  of  ultimate  ownership  are 
quite different to those suggested by the residence of investment vehicles. Put differently, the 
geography  of  risk  also  matters.  Contagion  can  travel  across  borders  because  of  the 
international  nature  of  their  assets  and  liabilities.  Stress  arising  elsewhere  can  affect Irish-
resident investment vehicles, and vice versa. It follows that the Central Bank of Ireland has a 
role  not  only  to  understand  linkages  to  the  domestic  economy  but  also  to  work  with 
international peers in the oversight and supervision of non-bank financial intermediaries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  In  related  manner,  Figure  4  shows  the  currency  composition  of  the  money  market  funds 
sector. This sector is dominated by sterling- and dollar-denominated funds, with only a minor 
share  for  euro-denominated  funds.  This  pattern  further  underlines  the  international,  cross-
border nature of the Irish-resident funds sector. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Effective  monitoring  is  a  key  pillar  of  good  regulatory  engagement  (Moloney  and  Murphy 
2013). The Central Bank of Ireland has led the way in collecting detailed data on collective 
investment  vehicles  and  continues  to  prioritise  initiatives  that  make  data  collection  more 
efficient  and  effective  (Godfrey  et  al  2015).  This  serves  to  inform  international  policy 
discussions and, more importantly, to support various Central Bank teams for risk analysis 
and supervisory purposes (Moloney and Murphy 2016). 
Recent work includes extending the reporting requirements for financial vehicle corporates to 
all Irish special purpose vehicles, providing a more detailed picture of the international links 
based on the domicile of the consolidating entity (if any) and the country of the sponsoring 
entity. Figures 5 and 6 show the geographical composition. 
I should also mention the Central Bank of Ireland’s work programme to develop methods to 
analyse the risks of investment funds under stressed scenarios. The aim of this work is to 
empirically  inform  supervisory  and  policy  priorities  by  providing  various  measures  of  the 
leverage,  liquidity  and  interconnectedness  risk  factors  discussed  earlier.  It  will  also  set  a 
standard for some of the risk analyses that we expect from asset managers. 
Conclusions 
Vibrant  capital  markets  are  essential  for  a  well-developed  and  stable  financial  system, 
offering  important  benefits  for  both  savers  and  firms  and  governments  that  seek  market-
based funding. 
At  the  same  time,  risks  to  financial  stability  require  appropriate  management,  including  by 
central  banks.  To  this  end,  there  needs  to  be  a  better  understanding  of  the  cross-border 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  nature of the assets and liabilities of non-banks to give us a better indication about how and 
where shocks might be transmitted the system. 
In  this  regard,  understanding  the  financial  network  requires  effective  engagement  of 
regulatory authorities and this starts with good data collection. It is also the basis for better 
policy discussion and supervisory co-ordination. 
It  is  why  exercises  such  as  the  annual  FSB  Shadow  Banking  Monitoring  Exercises  are 
important. And why I support the further expansion by the FSB of the scope of coverage of 
this exercise to include all notable centres of market and non-bank financial activity. 
Ultimately, a better understanding of the geography of risk will help us to assess properly the 
nature of the risks posed by market-based financing. 
Continued progress needs to be made to forge closer cooperation among central banks and 
financial regulators. Such enhanced cooperation needs to be underpinned by an improved 
framework for collecting, managing and sharing data (Lane 2014). Ultimately, better data and 
closer cooperation will support more coordinated and decisive supervisory action, especially 
in times of market stress. 
the 
Paper 
Green 
[online] 
European 
Commission’s 
References 
Caruana, Jaime (2010), Systemic risk: how to deal with it. Bank for International Settlements. 
Central  Bank  of  Ireland  (2015)  Response  to  European  Commission  consultation  on  the 
Green Paper on Capital Markets Union. 
Clerc,  Laurent,  Alberto  Giovannini,  Sam  Langfield,  Tuomas  Peltonen,  Richard  Portes  and 
Martin Scheicher (2016), “Indirect Contagion: The Policy Problem,” European Systemic Risk 
Board Occasional Paper No. 9. 
European Central Bank (2015) Building a Capital Markets Union – Eurosystem contribution 
available: 
to 
ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/150521_eurosystem_contribution_to_green_paper_-
_building_a_cmuen. 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (2014),  “Is  Europe  Overbanked?,”  Advisory  Scientific 
Committee Report No. 4. 
Financial Stability Board (2012) Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking: 
A Policy Framework for Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking Entities. 
Financial Stability Board (2015) Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2015. 
Godfrey  Brian,  Neil  Killeen  and  Kitty  Moloney  (2015),  “Data  Gaps  and  Shadow  Banking: 
Profiling  Special  Purpose  Vehicles’  Activities  in  Ireland,”  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  Quarterly 
Bulletin, Q3 (2015). 
Haldane,  Andrew  (2009)  Rethinking  the  Financial  Network  [speech],  28  April  2009, 
Amsterdam. 
Lane,  Philip  R.  (2014),  “Cross-Border  Financial  Linkages:  Identifying  and  Measuring 
Vulnerabilities,” CEPR Policy Insight No. 77. 
Moloney, Kitty and Gareth Murphy (2013), “The Spectrum of Regulatory Engagement,” Law 
and Financial Markets Review 7(3), 138–143. 
G20 (2009) Declaration on Strengthening the Financial System, London Summit April 2009, 
The  Larosiere  Group  (2009)  The  High  Level  Group  on  Financial  Supervision  in  the  EU 
Report. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
