  
 
Harun R Khan: Global economic turmoil – impact on Indian economy and 
the way forward 
Address  by  Mr  Harun  R  Khan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Programme  on  Global  Economic  Turmoil,  Impact  on  Indian  Economy,  organized  by  PHD 
Chamber of Commerce, New Delhi, 12 March 2016. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contribution of Shri T. Rabi Sankar, Shri Rakesh Tripathy and Shri D. K. Loharia 
of the Reserve Bank of India. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  amongst  the  captains  of  Indian  Industries  who  drive 
1. 
India’s growth amidst global uncertainty and economic slowdown. I thank the organisers for 
allowing me to share my thoughts on a topic which is quite relevant in the current context. 
2. 
While  preparing  myself  for  today’s  discussion,  I  was  not  very  sure  whether  the 
current  global  economic  situation  warrants  the  characterisation  as  “turmoil”.  Turmoil  is 
defined  as  “a  state  of  great  disturbance,  confusion,  or  uncertainty.”  While  there  is  a  high 
degree  of  disturbance,  confusion  and  uncertainty  and  some  would  like  to  characterise  the 
current  situation  as  a  newer  version  of  VUCA  (volatility,  uncertainty,  complexity  and 
ambiguity), I would still be hesitant to use the word “turmoil” to describe the prevailing market 
conditions.  I  intend  to  highlight  some  features  of  the  evolving  global  economic  scenario.  I 
would then touch upon its impact on the Indian economy and what could be the way forward. 
Global scenario 
3. 
More  than  eight  years  have  passed  since  the  onset  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis 
(GFC) in 2007. Yet the world economy is not out of the woods yet. Central banks of Europe, 
UK and Japan continue to remain in an accommodative mode, a clear indication that growth 
and inflation have not recovered to a sustainable level (Charts 1 & 2). The US economy has 
been  doing  well  enough  in  growth  terms  for  the  Federal  Reserve  to  begin,  in  December 
2015, the process of normalising policy rates that had been hugging the zero lower bound 
since late 2008. The fragility of their economic outlook was, however, clearly revealed in the 
reversal  of  the  impact  of  lift-off  in  less  than  a  month  as  China  started  showing  signs  of 
weakening.  Inflation  outlook  in  all  these  countries  continue  to  be  soft  which  has  been 
dampening  hopes  of  a  sustained  recovery.  In  the  US  in  particular,  the  softness  in  wages 
despite  the  unemployment  rate  edging  below  five  per  cent  does  not  auger  well  for  the 
inflation  outlook.  This  together  with  fragility  of  the  global  economic  conditions  and  the 
strengthening of the US dollar are the reasons the market seems to be sceptical of pace of 
rate hikes by the Federal Reserve in the near future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   4. 
Fears of further weakening of the Chinese economy, its falling equity market and the 
depreciation of its currency loom large over global economic prospects. In January, capital 
outflows  from  China  triggered  sell-offs  across  both  Advanced  Economies  (AEs)  and 
Emerging  Market  &  Developing  Economies  (EMDEs),  exacerbating  currency  declines  and 
heightening  volatilities.  Crude  oil  prices fell  to multi-year  lows  to  below  US$  30  per  barrel. 
The  risk-off  sentiment  was  reflected  in  the  sharp  surge  in  the  prices  of  gold  and  the  US 
treasuries and in the unwinding of carry trades undertaken with Euro and Japanese Yen as 
funding  currencies,  leading  to  their  unexpected  strengthening.  Markets  have  somewhat 
settled down since then but the threat of renewed volatility is ever present. 
5. 
Apart from uncertain recovery prospects in the AEs, the major reason behind such 
turbulence  is  the  real  prospect  of  a  China  slowdown.  Global  economic  performance  post 
GFC  has  been  largely  supported  by  Chinese  growth  and  demand,  particularly  for 
commodities (oil, industrial metals, etc.), needed to support the huge infrastructure build-up. 
During the period 2005–2014, China’s share in world GDP has increased from two per cent 
to  around  12  per  cent.  The  massive  liquidity  pumped  into  the  global  system  as  the 
consequence  of  the  easy  monetary  policies  pursued  by  the  AEs  (viz.  US,  Europe,  Japan, 
UK), managed to find assets in which it could be invested, be it emerging market assets or 
commodities. In fact, commodity prices managed to stay well supported after their post-2008 
crash, until they started to unwind from mid-2014. (Chart 3) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   6. 
There are now indications that China’s efforts at rebalancing its economy are facing 
serious challenges, at least in the near term. Prolonged slowdown in developed economies is 
increasingly making it improbable that even a big economy like China will be able to create 
the  level  of  demand  lost  by  the  advanced  economies  for  much  longer.  China  generated 
demand as it went on a colossal spree to build infrastructure. In the process, the economy 
might have created large overcapacity not just in infrastructure but also in the manufacturing 
sector. In fact, China is said to be now taking steps to cut down excess capacities in sectors 
like steel and coal mining over the next few years. The scope for further activity in this sector, 
therefore, looks diminished at this juncture. Simultaneously, the financial health of banks and 
local bodies, which had funded this huge expenditure, is being called into question. 
7. 
These factors  have  led  to  an  outflow  of  capital from  China,  particularly  in  the  last 
one year. China’s forex reserves have come down from US$ 3.9 trillion to US$ 3.2 trillion. 
The Chinese currency has been under increasing pressure. The stock markets have sold off 
and  lost  nearly  50  per  cent  of  their  value  since  mid-2015.  The  prospect  of  effectively 
containing the pressures of a more open capital account also looks uncertain. The slowdown 
in China has also led to a sharp correction in commodity prices, which, in turn, had major 
consequences as under: 
a. 
Economic  performance  of  commodity  exporting  economies  (Australia,  Canada, 
Brazil, Russia, etc.) has taken a beating and this has added to the weakening global 
growth outlook; 
Money  has  started  to  move  out  of  risky  assets  (equity,  commodity,  etc.)  to  safe 
haven assets (e.g., Government bonds in US, UK, Euro-core and Japan) and safe 
haven currencies (e.g., US dollar, Euro and Japanese Yen). The high risk segment 
of  the  financial  sector  (viz.  hedge  funds,  private  equity,  etc.)  has  already  been 
suffering over 2015. But lately, the health of banks, especially the ones who have 
had  large  exposure  to  commodities  including  energy  sector,  has  also  been  called 
into question. Top banks in Europe have seen their stock prices falling sharply and 
their CDS premia go to near crisis-levels. Banks in UK, US, Australia, Japan are all, 
to  a  lesser  extent,  similarly  affected.  The  financial  sector  is  thus  again  under 
pressure. The emerging market currencies (Chart 4) and equities have come under 
pressure. Some of the EMDE commodity exporting countries have, however, seen 
their currencies recouping a part of the losses during last few days on the back of 
recovery in international crude and commodity prices. 
b. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   To sum up, global economic growth has slowed down but has not really reversed 
8. 
the direction. The International  Monetary Fund (IMF), in its January 2016 World Economic 
outlook, has projected global growth at 3.4 per cent in 2016, marginally going up to 3.6 per 
cent in 2017, helped largely by EMDEs, projected to grow at 4.3 per cent and 4.7 per cent 
respectively.  Fears  of  a 2008  like  crisis may  still  be  a  long  way  off  unless  things get  a  lot 
worse in China. Being an optimist, I would, be hesitant in using the word ‘turmoil’ to describe 
the  current  global  economic  situation.  There  are  certain  concerns  though.  The  risk  of  a 
deflationary spiral looks more immediate and has the potential to cause damage. With some 
sovereign and corporate balance sheets sitting highly leveraged, a deflationary period and 
the  increase  in  the real value  of  debt  could  weaken the  debt repayment  capacity  of many 
economies  and  corporations.  Persistent  low  interest  rates,  which  cast  a  shadow  on  the 
capabilities  of  central  banks  to  stimulate  growth  and  stability,  make  the  outlook  on  global 
financial  markets  highly  uncertain.  Critical 
to  global  geo-political 
developments  and  idiosyncratic  socio-political  challenges  being  faced  by  many  advanced 
economies would have a spill-over impact on the economic outlook and have to be kept in 
view. Of course, this would require separate discussions. 
relating 
issues 
Impact on India 
9. 
Let me now briefly discuss about India’s positioning vis-à-vis its peers in the EMDE 
space at the current juncture. While I share with you some facts and figures which are quite 
impressive, I would also flag certain issues which, if not addressed properly, could be a drag 
on the economy. India has been variously hailed as “beacon of stability”, “haven of stability” 
and “bright spot” amidst a slowing global economy”. This flows from the fact that India is the 
best performing large economy (GDP close to US$ two trillion) with a 7.6 per cent estimated 
growth  rate for  FY16.  Both  IMF  and  the World Bank  in  their January  2016  outlook  project 
India to grow at the highest rate among major economies in 2016 and 2017. Notwithstanding 
the volatility seen in some of the vital data points (e.g., falling exports, low IIP numbers, etc.) 
the growth trajectory remains on track. Importantly, such growth has been accompanied by 
macro-economic  stability.  Inflation  has  been  under  control  and  the  balance  of  payment 
position looks healthy. Current Account Deficit (CAD) has narrowed to 1.4 per cent of GDP 
(Q2, FY16) from the high of 4.8 per cent in FY13. Capital flows have remained strong during 
the last few years as can be seen from the data given in table 1: 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   India’s foreign exchange reserves stand at a robust level of about US$ 350 billion. The ratio 
of short-term debt to foreign exchange reserves remains around 25.0 per cent. As illustrated 
in the Economic Survey 20161, India has made significant progress in reducing its macro-
vulnerability, as gauged by an overall index of macro-economic vulnerability based on fiscal 
deficit, current account deficit and inflation. According to the Survey, India, which was most 
vulnerable among the major EMDEs in 2012, has sharply reduced its vulnerabilities. Since 
2013,  India’s  index  has  gone  up  to  5.3  per  cent  compared  to  say,  that  of  0.7  per  cent  of 
China and 0.4 per cent for many other EMDEs which are in the “BBB” category of rating. In 
Global  Competitiveness  Index,  India  has  also moved  up  16  places from  71  to  55  in  2015. 
This  index  is  based  on  12  pillars,  such  as,  macroeconomic  environment,  institutions, 
infrastructure, innovations, market size, health, education, etc. The Survey also suggests that 
India compares favourably to its peers in its credit rating universe when it comes to India’s 
attractiveness  to  investors  based  on  macro-economic  stability  and  growth  rate.  This  is 
captured in the Rational Investor Rating Index (RIRI). 
10. 
On  the  flip  side,  like  most  other  EM  currencies,  Rupee  did  come  under  pressure, 
and so was the stock market. Over a longer time horizon, say the last five quarters, Rupee 
has,  however,  shown  more  resilience  as  compared  to  its  peers  reflecting  the  improving 
macro-economic fundamentals of the country. 
11. 
Another  area  that  has  been  affected  by  global  weakness  is  the  exports  sector. 
India’s exports have been in contraction mode for fourteen successive months although there 
are  indications  of  a  sequential  bottoming  out.  While  the  CAD  has  improved,  the  external 
sector has been contracting. Though India’s foreign exchange reserves are at almost record 
high  levels,  the  external  sector  vulnerabilities  have  not  completely  disappeared.  India’s 
external  debt  has  increased  from  US$  446.0  billion  as  at  end-March  2014  to  US$  483.2 
billion as at September-end 2015. Foreign exchange reserves provide 72.5 per cent cover to 
external debt though vis-à-vis some of its EM peers, India is better placed as can be seen in 
Table 2 below: 
                                                
1  Economic Survey 2016 -p 9–10, chapter 1: http://indiabudget.nic.in/es2015–16/echapvol1-01.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Way forward 
12. 
The inter-linkage of Indian economy with the rest of the world has been growing at a 
rapid pace, and therefore, global developments influence the domestic economy in a much 
bigger  way  than  before.  Though  the  spill  over  effect  can  take  place  through  multiple 
channels,  it  mostly  gets  transmitted  through  the  commerce  or  trade  channel,  through  the 
capital flows channel and through the confidence channel. 
13. 
As stated earlier, the falling exports for a prolonged period is an issue that needs 
serious attention. What is worrying is the fact that our market shares have fallen from 1.7 in 
2011 per cent to 1.6 per cent in 2015. The falling crude prices may have helped the country 
to bring down the current account deficit but once oil prices start recovering, the challenge 
before  the  country  would  be  to  increase  exports  if  the  CAD  has  to  be  contained  on  a 
sustainable  basis.  A  recent  IMF  working  paper2  on  Price  and  Income  Elasticity  of  Indian 
Exports  has  concluded  that  Indian  goods  exports  are  sensitive  to  external  demand  and  to 
international relative price-competitiveness. Manufacturing sector exports are estimated to be 
more price elastic and sensitive to global demand developments in the short-term. Services 
exports are also not exhibiting buoyant trends with the market share falling from 3.2 per cent 
in  2011–12  to  3.1  per  cent  in  2013–14.  The  prospects  of  a  sluggish  global  economic 
recovery may pose challenges for India to achieve significant export growth acceleration in 
the coming years whereas supply-side constraints could dampen the price responsiveness in 
the  short-term.  In  the  backdrop  of  uncertain  global  demand,  the  challenge  for  the  country 
would  be  to  search  for  new  markets  and  new  products  for  existing  markets  besides 
addressing the issues relating to competitiveness of Indian exports. 
14. 
As we have seen in the past, capital flows are usually susceptible to periodic phases 
of  sudden  stops  and/or  reversals  which  can  put  downward  pressure  on  Rupee.  Despite 
India’s relatively stronger fundamentals, the confidence or contagion effect of a global safe 
haven move could have its impact on the Rupee. Here the importance of attracting stable 
flows  like  FDI  needs  to  be  highlighted.  As  shown  in  Table  1,  the  policy  adjustments  and 
improved macro-economic environment have helped us to attract more FDI flows this year 
than the last year. As hitherto, Government and Reserve Bank would, of course, continue to 
be  on  constant  vigil  and  be  ready  to  take  proactive  measures  in  respect  of  the  evolving 
situation in the external sector. 
15. 
Macroeconomic stability is important to contain contagion effects arising out of the 
confidence channel. Government has shown its firm commitment for fiscal consolidation. The 
Economic  Survey  2016  has  brought  out  that  India  taxes  and  spends  less  than  OECD 
countries  and  even  its  emerging  market  peers.  After  adjusting  for  the  level  of  economic 
development  and  democracy,  India’s  tax/GDP  ratio  is  5.4  per  cent  less  than  that  of 
                                                
2  https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2015/wp15161.pdf. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  comparable  countries,  while  its  expenditure/GDP  ratio  lags  by  6.4  per  cent.  Nearly  85  per 
cent of the economy is outside the tax net. While these developments may be explained by 
historical  differences, the  need  to  catch  up  with  EM  peers  and  the OECD  countries  in  the 
next  few  decades  would  be  important  in  determining  the  extent  and  pace  of  India’s 
infrastructure  development  and,  by  extension,  future  economic  development.  Therefore, 
even as fiscal consolidation is on track in terms of GFD/GDP target ratios, there may well be 
a need to broaden the reach of fiscal reform by setting a targeted path to increase both tax 
revenue and fiscal expenditure. 
16. 
Retail  inflation  in  India  as  measured  by  CPI  rose  for  the  sixth  straight  month  in 
January 2016. The CPI for January at 5.69 per cent was the highest figure recorded since 
August of 2014. Similarly, food inflation at 6.85 per cent in January was also the highest in 
17 months. Despite these numbers, we are on track as far as meeting the inflation targets is 
concerned  in  near  term3.  There  are,  however,  risks  to  meeting  our  projections.  Besides 
structural factors like persistent high level of food prices due to rising income level not being 
matched  by  increase  in productivity,  production and  distribution  of food  items,  in  particular 
protein/pulses  food,  the  implementation  of  the  seventh  Central  Pay  Commission  award, 
monsoon and the path of commodity prices including crude prices have to be factored in the 
near term inflation outlook. 
17. 
There  have  been  discussions  in  recent  times  about  the  stress  in  banking  and 
corporate balance sheets. In respect of health of Indian banks, the Reserve Bank has taken 
various steps to address the issue of stressed assets of the banks. After a comprehensive 
asset  quality  review,  banks  have  initiated  the  process  of  cleaning  up  balance  sheets  by 
March 2017. While this may lead to a short-term impact on profitability of some of the PSU 
banks, it would enable a healthy flow of credit to the system in the long run. Further, efforts at 
improving the capital buffers of banks will be helpful as they prepare to lend more now, after 
cleaning  up  their  balance  sheets.  Also,  the  steps  being  taken  to  improve  governance  in 
banks,  such  as  the  setting  up  of  a  Banks’  Board  Bureau  (BBB),  would  complement  these 
efforts to develop and strengthen the banking sector. In respect of corporate sector stress, as 
evident  from  profitability  and  lower  interest  coverage  ratio,  the  efforts  at  deleveraging, 
including by way of exit from non-core business, enhanced productivity and additional equity 
infusion  and  better  governance  practices  supported  by  policies  aimed  at  containing  the 
global headwinds have to be fast-tracked. 
18. 
A deep, vibrant and well-developed financial market is needed to facilitate efficient 
resource  allocation,  risk  dispersion  and  credit  intermediation.  Government,  Reserve  Bank, 
and other regulators have been constantly engaged in taking measures that would help in 
developing markets. During the last few years, Reserve Bank has taken various measures 
including introduction of currency futures and options, interest rate futures which would add 
to the menu of already existing over the counter instruments for managing the currency and 
interest rate risks. Further, in order to give a fillip to the development of term repo market, 
Reserve Bank allowed re-repoing of securities acquired under market repo. These products, 
if used judiciously would facilitate corporates to manage their risk exposure efficiently. 
19. 
Underscoring the importance of a vibrant corporate bond market that could help the 
country in meeting the large scale infrastructure financing, Reserve Bank has allowed repo in 
corporate bonds as well as selling and buying of single name Credit Default Swaps. There is 
also a proposal to introduce electronic trading platform for corporate bonds in India. I would, 
however,  like  to  add  here  that  we  have  not  seen  a  wide  range  of  players  participating  in 
recently  launched  products-be  it  in  the  area  of  currency  derivatives  or  interest  rate 
                                                
3  Consumer prices in India decreased to 5.18 percent year-on-year in February 2016, lower than 5.69 percent in 
January.  Consumer  inflation  eased  for  the  first  time  in  seven  months,  reaching  the  lowest  since  October. 
Inflation averaged 7.85 percent from 2012 until 2016, reaching an all time high of 11.16 percent in November 
of 2013 and a record low of 3.69 percent in July of 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  derivatives. Government is initiating the process of legislation for lender protection that would 
incentivise  flow  of  debt  funds  to  corporates.  The  Government  has  announced  a  slew  of 
proposals  in  the  Union  Budget  for  2016–17  that  would  give  a  fillip  to  the  corporate  bond 
market in India. These include expanding the investment basket for foreign portfolio investors 
to include unlisted debt securities and pass through securities issued by securitisation and 
introduction of electronic auction platform for primary debt. Early passage of the Bankruptcy 
Code  will  greatly  facilitate  the  development  of  corporate  debt  market.  Reserve  Bank  in 
collaboration  with  the  Government  and  other  regulators  will  continue  with  its  efforts  in 
bringing about reforms in the financial sector. 
20. 
While domestic policies that reinforce the macro-economic fundamentals help us to 
cope  with  external  vulnerabilities,  given  our  increasing  level  of  international  linkages  we 
cannot  be  immune  to  spill-back  effects  of  action  or  inaction  of  other  countries,  particularly 
arising from surges in inflows or sudden & substantial outflows. This calls for regional and 
global safety nets in terms of multilateral institutional mechanisms for funding support. It is 
also imperative that institutional mechanisms (e.g., the International Monetary Fund) should 
exist  at  the  global  level  to  assess  the  policies  of  large  economies  from  the  point  of  their 
contagion  impact  on  other  countries,  particularly  EMDEs  and  advise  them  to  factor  such 
consequences in their policy framework. India will have to work vigorously to build-up global 
consensus in this area. 
In conclusion 
21. 
As I said in the beginning, I do not take a very pessimistic view of the current global 
situation and would prefer not to call it “turmoil”. I would rather consider the current situation 
as  a  great  opportunity  for  India  to  position  itself  as  a  leader  who  would  shape  the  world 
economic  order  in  years  to  come.  There  would  be  challenges,  nevertheless.  The  real 
challenge would be to sustain the improved fundamentals over a longer period and contain 
the spill over effect from other parts of the world. While other countries may take measures 
best  suited  to  them,  our  focus  should  continue  to  remain  on  improving  domestic 
macroeconomic fundamentals, including addressing the infrastructure bottlenecks, ensuring 
price  stability,  narrowing  current  account  deficit,  continuing  fiscal  reforms,  increasing  the 
competitiveness  of  our  products  and  services  for  the  global  market  and  improved 
governance. I have no doubt that the steps taken by the Government, including those aimed 
at ease of doing business in India and regulatory measures initiated by the Reserve Bank 
and other regulators, would give enormous confidence to local & foreign investors, our trade 
partners, rating agencies and the large community of non-resident Indians. Simultaneously, 
we  have  to  work  to  build  international  consensus  on  policy  coordination  among  advanced 
and emerging economies for minimising the spill-over and spill-back impacts of the policies 
of the former on the latter. 
22. 
Thank you all for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
