  Patrick Njoroge: Launch of the Foreign Investment Survey 2016 
Remarks by Dr Patrick Njoroge, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of the 
Foreign Investment Survey 2016, Nairobi, 4 August 2016. 
 It 
to. 
fact 
turn 
is  a 
I  will  shortly 
Good morning! 
It is a great honor to welcome you this morning to the launch of Foreign Investment Survey 
(FIS) 2016, the fourth since the launch of the project in 2010. I am grateful to each one of 
you  for  your  attendance.  I  also  thank  the  Cabinet  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Devolution  and 
Planning, for finding time to be with us. I acknowledge the support from the Government, and 
the strong partnership between the key collaborating institutions in funding and organizing 
the FIS. 
This year’s FIS theme improving the quality of cross-border financial flows for better decision 
making  is  quite  relevant  to  our  circumstance  and  in  the  context  of  the  current  global 
developments,  which 
that  globalization  and 
interconnectedness  of  the  world  economy  has  become  an  integral  part  of  policymaking 
today.  The  challenges  we  face  in  the  current  economic  climate,  call  for  data-driven 
policymaking, requiring accurate and timely data for effective policy action. 
Financial  integration  is  bringing  about  steadily  rising  cross-border  financial  flows  and  the 
accumulation  of  such  inward  and  outward  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI),  portfolio 
investment and financial derivatives. Today, we seek to raise awareness among the private 
enterprises that will be covered during the FIS 2016, on the importance of quality data and 
information, and also on achieving broader coverage. 
This  exercise  is  significant  as  it  will  enable  us  collect  the  relevant  disaggregated  data  for 
analysis, and also to understand the dynamics of cross border financial flows. Examining the 
details  behind 
the  aggregate  statistics  enriches  our  understanding  of  economic 
developments,  and  at  the  same  time  increases  our  flexibility  in  responding  to  unforeseen 
challenges in an appropriate manner. 
According  to  UNCTAD’s  2016  World  Investment  Report,  global  FDI  flows  increased  by 
38 percent to US$ 1.76 trillion in 2015, though still 10 percent below the peak in 2007. This 
improvement mostly reflects increased cross-border mergers and acquisitions. In 2016, FDI 
flows are expected to decline by between 10 and 15 percent against the backdrop of weak 
global growth which has had a direct impact on the profitability of enterprises. 
Kenya  continues  to  be  a  top  destination  for  FDI  flows  and  is  now  ranked  third  by  project 
numbers among countries in the Middle East and Africa in the 2016 FDI Intelligence Report 
published  by  the  Financial  Times.  FDI  into  Kenya  by  project  numbers  increased  by 
47 percent,  reaching  84  announced  projects,  compared  with 
in  Ghana 
(21 percent), Nigeria (19 percent), Egypt (14 percent) and South Africa (3 percent). Likewise 
Kenya  ranks  high  as  a  home  country  for  FDI.  In  particular,  FDI  out  of  Kenya  by  capital 
investment reached US$1 billion in 2015 placing it tenth in the Middle East and Africa region 
compared  with  U.A.E. 
(US$2.5  billion),  Mauritius 
(US$2.1 billion), and Egypt (US$1.7 billion). 
Key trends on foreign inflows in 2015, reported in the Economic Survey, include: 
• 
• 
FDI into Kenya increased by 8.4 percent to US$1.5 billion in 2015 
Portfolio investments declined from US$3.4 billion to US$34 million in 2015 on the 
backdrop of the sovereign bond issuance in 2014 
Other investment flows more than doubled from US$2.2 billion to US$4.6 billion in 
2015 
(US$21.8  billion),  South  Africa 
increases 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Analysis  by  sector  indicates  that  the  top  five  recipient  sectors  of  FDI  inflows  include: 
wholesale  and  retail  trade,  financial  and  insurance,  manufacturing,  construction,  and 
electricity and gas supply. 
Allow me now to touch on three global developments that are likely to have implications for 
foreign investment flows to our country. 
• 
First,  the  subdued  global  economic  growth  that  has  been  worsened  by  the 
prolonged  period  of  uncertainty  relating  to  the  slowdown  and  rebalancing  of  the 
Chinese  economy,  lower  commodity  prices,  and  geopolitical  developments  and 
concerns  surrounding  “Brexit”.  Consequently,  global  growth  is  now  projected  at  a 
worrisome 3.1 percent in 2016.The fact that central banks in advanced economies 
are  maintaining  an  accommodative  stance  is  a  clear  indication  that  the  global 
economy  has  not  yet  recovered  to  sustainable  levels.  In  addition,  most  of  the 
emerging  economies  have  faced  volatile  capital  flows  and  exchange  rates 
attributable  to  the  accommodative  policies,  and  the  prospects  of  unwinding  the 
unconventional monetary policies. 
Second, the ongoing divestiture of major international companies around Africa, as 
reflected  in  a  number  of  multinational  enterprises  downsizing  their  assets  through 
outright  sale  and  transfer  to  domestic  companies,  otherwise  referred  to  as  de-
risking. The main problem we observe with this process is the ambiguity and poor 
information  flow  on  the  measures  by  these  enterprises  to  facilitate  proper 
supervision and regulation, especially in the financial sector. 
Third, the implication of “Brexit” on trade and investment. Whereas the first round 
effects  have  had  minimal  impact  on  our  financial  market,  we  expect  longer-term 
implications on economic growth and development, given that Kenya has significant 
trade  links  with  Europe,  as  our  main  foreign  exchange  earners  notably  tea, 
horticulture and tourism exports, are to the EU region. In addition, there are several 
European  companies  that  have  invested  in  Kenya.  Available  data  shows  that  the 
stock of inward foreign direct investment from Europe to Kenya stands at 45 percent 
of total FDI. The UK alone accounts for 23 percent. A reduction though unlikely in 
the  short  term  in  both  trade  and  investment  from  Europe  may  have  negative 
implications on the Kenyan economy. 
  In  light  of  these  concerns,  regulators,  particularly  of  the  financial  sector  around  the  world 
have embarked on regulatory reform programs to minimize the envisaged spill-over effects of 
these crises on financial and real sector of the economy. Policy measures being undertaken 
by the Central Bank of Kenya and the other financial sector regulators are intended to build 
confidence in investors and the general public. The intended outcome of the policy measures 
is  to  improve  the  domestic  macroeconomic  environment;  in  particular,  overall  price  and 
financial  sector  stability,  narrowing  the  current  account  balance  as  well  as  maintaining 
adequate reserve buffers. 
Finally, the survey embodies inputs from many teams – designing the survey, respondents 
and analysts. I want to pay tribute to these unsung heroes, without who we would have no 
hope for quality data. 
With these remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me once again welcome you to this breakfast 
launch event. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
