   Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Rural banks – making a difference in financial 
inclusion 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  63rd  Annual  National  Convention  and  General 
Membership  Meeting  of  the  Rural  Bankers  Association  of  the  Philippines  (RBAP),  Manila, 
23 May 2016. 
 Thank you for inviting me to this annual gational gathering of RBAP. The theme you have 
chosen for this year: “Rural Banks: Making a Difference in Financial Inclusion” speaks well of 
your  important  role  in  increasing  access  to financial  services,  a  role  which  you  have  been 
performing even before the term financial inclusion itself gained attention. 
Rural banks and the changing environment 
Let us briefly go back in history. The very reason for the creation of rural banks in 1952 when 
Republic Act 720 was enacted – was for them to be the key local financial institutions providing 
credit to farmers and people of rural communities, thereby promoting and expanding the rural 
economy  in  an  orderly  and  effective  manner.  This  was  the  original  raison  d’etre  for  the 
establishment of rural banks. 
After six decades, there have been significant shifts in the financial system landscape. There 
are now many other financial service providers – banks and non-banks, formal and informal – 
that are already in or are planning to enter your space. The demands of your market and the 
conditions in which you operate have also evolved. Simply put, the operating environment now 
is very much different from before. 
Change is inevitable. What matters is how we respond to change. Charles Darwin, who is best 
known for his theory of evolution, said and I quote “It is not the strongest or the most intelligent 
who will survive but those who can best manage change.” Indeed, adaptability or the ability to 
change to fit new circumstances is crucial to survival. Without the ability and agility to adapt, 
we will stagnate or lose our relevance. 
In other countries, community banks are also struggling to find their rightful spot in a rapidly 
evolving environment, especially because of tough competition with other market players. But 
I believe that small banks can still thrive in this changing environment and remain relevant. 
Today, let me highlight two key existing factors that you can capitalize on to adapt to change: 
one is your current reach and immersion in the countryside, and the other one is the current 
enabling regulatory environment. 
Reach and immersion in the countryside 
BSP  data  as  of  December  2015  show  that  there  are  524  rural  banks  with  a  network  of 
2,086 branches and other offices. Rural banks are present in 59% of the country’s 1,634 cities 
and municipalities, which is more than double the reach of universal and commercial banks 
(23%) and thrift banks (28%). While bigger banks are concentrating in highly urbanized and 
densely populated regions such as NCR, CALABARZON and Central Luzon, rural banks are 
thriving in regions where there is less access to financial services. For instance, Cordillera, 
Cagayan Valley, MIMAROPA, and Caraga are among the regions where there are more rural 
banks than other bank types. 
Noteworthy to mention is that rural banks are the frontrunners in the establishment of micro-
banking  offices  (MBOs),  which  enable  banks  to  set  up  presence  in  areas  where  it  is  not 
economically feasible to establish a full blown branch. Out of 540 operating MBOs, 78% are 
owned  by  rural  banks.  These  MBOs  are  present  in  338  municipalities,  of  which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   66 municipalities are served by MBOs alone. Looking at previously unbanked municipalities 
which gained banking presence, most of them are now enjoying banking services because of 
MBOs. 
The numbers that I have presented just show that rural banks are truly more accessible in the 
countryside. You are still in areas where other players are not. Take advantage of this position 
to strengthen your foothold so that you will be more resilient when competitors come. 
While you already have a wide presence, there are also still untapped opportunities in terms 
of  unbanked  municipalities  whose  level  of  economic  activity  is  not  necessarily  low.  For 
instance, 15% of unbanked areas are 1st to 2nd class municipalities. These areas will surely 
benefit from financial intermediation to sustain local economic growth and boost consumption 
and productivity. 
Admittedly though, some of you may be already satisfied with the current market that you are 
serving. If geographical expansion is not part of your game plan, you can always improve your 
products and services in terms of design and delivery. 
As rural banks, what sets you apart from bigger banks is that you are more relationships driven. 
You have an intimate knowledge of the local economy and close ties with the community. Use 
this to be more responsive to the needs of customers as well as to market trends. 
You can also introduce improvements in your operations. According to our National Baseline 
Survey on Financial Inclusion, more than 50% of adults who have transacted with banks are 
just “somewhat satisfied” with their transactions. The average waiting time before being served 
in a bank is 33 minutes which is twice the waiting time in pawnshops and e-money agents. 
There is certainly room for you to improve the quality of your services in order to enhance 
customer experience and satisfaction. 
They say that technology is changing the way banks do their business. Some do not have to 
ever set foot in a bank branch if they have a fully enabled smart phone. Emergence of financial 
technology companies or “Fintechs” are also dramatically changing the delivery of financial 
services  in  payments  and  even  in  the  underwriting  of  credit.  While  you  can  use  these 
technologies to your advantage – to improve your efficiencies and value proposition – I believe 
that the value of person-to-person contact will never fully go away. For instance, if you call a 
customer service hotline, isn’t it that you still prefer to talk to someone rather than hear default 
call answers from the other end of the line? 
The point is, even in the face of technology, you can still build on your strength – which is the 
relationship that you have established with your community. It is possible for technology to 
enhance  relationships  rather  than  replace  them.  If  you  are  able  to  effectively  nurture  the 
confluence  between  the  two,  you  will  be  able  to  not  only  increase  but  also  cement  your 
customer base. 
Finally, to be better positioned to serve your clients, always keep in mind that only sound and 
well-managed institutions can take advantage of new opportunities and have scope for more 
innovations.  Promoting  financial  inclusion  should  not  be  at  the  expense  of  safety  and 
soundness of operations. This is the reason why the BSP always emphasizes the importance 
of strengthening your bank’s governance structure and institutional capacity, and continuously 
upholding best practices and performance standards. 
Enabling regulatory environment 
On the part of the BSP, not only as your regulator but also your partner, we remain committed 
in providing an enabling regulatory environment that will support rural banks in overcoming 
emerging challenges and provide you with various opportunities to be more responsive to the 
markets that you would like to serve. 
Our  regulations  allow  you  to  partner  with  non-banks  to  offer  new  products  and  adopt  new 
channels and technology. Many of you have already benefitted from establishing partnerships 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   with institutions that can assist you in the delivery of services which before were not offered by 
rural  banks.  For  example,  39  rural  banks  have  been  given  the  authority  to  cross-sell 
microinsurance and 50 additional rural banks have already obtained a “no objection notice” 
from  the  BSP  and  are  in  the  process  of  getting  approval  from  the  Insurance  Commission. 
Based on RBAP data, there are almost 2 million insured clients of microinsurance, some of 
whom are purely microinsurance clients. They can naturally develop into loyal customers of 
your other products. 
There  are  52  rural  banks  with  electronic  banking  facilities  and  e-money  money  services.  I 
understand that there is still room for improvement in terms of maximizing the use of these 
platforms in your operations, but your openness is encouraging. Our hope is that our efforts 
on the establishment of a National Retail Payment System (NRPS) will be able to address 
some  of  the  limitations  that  have  impeded  the  scaled  uptake  of  e-money  and  electronic 
payments in general. 
Our regulatory environment also encourages rural banks to look for new markets, or serve old 
markets in new ways. A good example is the agricultural sector and the recent BSP circular 
on agri-value chain financing. This regulation provides you with more opportunities to finance 
the agriculture and fisheries sector. By encouraging the linking of various actors or players in 
an agricultural value chain, the credit risk of participating farmers or fishermen can be reduced, 
thereby facilitating increased access to credit. This unlocks the potential for financing at all 
levels  from  production  to  marketing.  Rural  banks  can  be  ideal  channels  for  such  type  of 
financing. 
The  BSP  also  looks  forward  to  continue  working  with  you  in  addressing  the  gaps  in  SME 
access to finance. Our guidelines on sound credit risk management (Circular 855) support 
lending to SMEs, wherein start-ups during the first three years of their operation or banking 
relationship  are  exempted  from  the  submission  of  Income  Tax  Return  (ITR)  and  other 
supporting financial statements. The objective here is to encourage SMEs to build banking 
relationships that will help them grow. However, available data shows that only 31% of our 
SMEs  borrow  from  banks.  Our  experience  in  microfinance  has  proven  that  serving  a  low 
income segment can still be a viable and profitable undertaking, and we hope that we can 
apply the learnings in microfinance in serving the SME market. 
In summary, our regulatory environment already offers many opportunities. This is the reason 
why the Philippines is ranked by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) as the first in Asia and 
third in the world with the most conducive environment for financial inclusion. The challenge to 
rural banks is how to maximize these opportunities within the framework of the regulations that 
we have so far put together. 
Closing 
Ladies and gentlemen of the rural banking sector, in an environment that is rapidly evolving, 
adaptability is key. But adapting to change does not necessarily mean changing your core and 
losing your relevance. In fact, as the push for financial inclusion continues to intensify, the role 
of rural banks today is even greater than it was then. You remain to be a key channel to deliver 
financial  services  to  the  countryside  especially  the  unserved  and  underserved  markets. 
Embrace  this mission  and  role  which  you  have  been given  more than  6  decades  ago  and 
nurture it by evolving and adapting to the demands of the times. 
On our part, we will remain your partner in this important task. This partnership is integral as 
we work on our shared goal of a stronger, more competitive and more inclusive rural banking 
sector that can make a positive difference on the lives of the Filipino people. 
I wish everyone a fruitful convention. Thank you and good day. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
