   Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Looking back to move ahead in 2016 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Joint Meeting between Rotary Club of Manila and Rotary 
Club of Forbes Park, Makati City, 7 January 2016. 
 Distinguished  officers  and  members  of  the  Rotary  Club  of  Manila  under  the  leadership  of 
President Eusebio Tan and the Rotary Club of Forbes Park represented today by Immediate 
Past President John Toing, special guests, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  this  joint  membership  meeting  of  the  RCM  and  its  younger 
counterpart  RCFP.  As  the  oldest  Rotary  Club  in  Asia,  dating  back  to  1919,  RCM  will  turn 
97 years old this year. Few organizations last for nearly a century, much less remain dynamic, 
relevant  and  influential,  like  RCM.  For  this,  the  men  and  women  of  the  RCM  deserve  our 
congratulations! 
In this connection, I am delighted that you have made me a part of your history by inviting me 
every  year  since  I  became  Governor  of  the  Bangkok  Sentra  ng  Filipinas  to  share  my 
assessment of our economy – its past, present and future. In addition, since I have always 
accepted  your  invitation  every  year,  I  am  marking  today  my  11th  year  as  RCM’s  January 
speaker. Thank you RCM. 
Now, what can I tell you about the Philippine economy? 
Well, I can say that if the first seven days of this year is any indication, 2016 will be far from 
boring – it will be riveting and challenging. 
Last Monday, in the first trading day of the year, stock markets across the globe did not simply 
drop; they plunged – in the US, in Europe and in Asia. In particular, China shut down trading 
for the day under its new circuit breaker rule when stocks tumbled beyond seven 7%. This has 
been described as the worst opening day for a new year in China, the world’s second largest 
economy. This rattled currency markets as well. Today, Chinese stock market was shut down 
again. 
Meanwhile, geopolitical concerns in the Middle East add to fears of volatility. Analysts warn of 
more wild price swings as the global economy slows down. 
On the other hand, these are early days – just the first week in the year. It is way too early to 
tell if this trend will last. As the Greek philosopher Aristotle once said “one swallow does not a 
summer make.” 
From the Philippine perspective, we move forward in 2016 with cautious optimism. We are 
cautious – because we are mindful of the challenges ahead and of the possibility that our 
operating environment can change so swiftly at a scale we may not have anticipated. Yet we 
are  optimistic  because  we  start  from  a  position  of  strength,  having  managed  to  address 
obstacles we encountered in 2015 and the great financial crisis in 2007–2008. 
At this point, it will be helpful if I give an assessment of 2015 and then move on to 2016. After 
I complete my narrative, you can make your own judgment on the state of our economy. 
Recalling 2015 
2015 brought with it, its own challenges and opportunities. Global growth remained uneven, 
resulting in a divergence in policy responses from major central banks– the US Fed finally went 
ahead with its much-awaited “lift-off” and raised interest rates; China devalued its currency; 
while the European Central Bank provided further stimulus to its economy with interest rate 
cuts and an expanded bond purchase program. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
These external headwinds made for some rough sailing for the Philippines in 2015 due to 
higher risk aversion among investors. Some capital flowed out particularly in the second half 
of the year, the Philippine stock market took a hit and the peso depreciated. There were similar 
shifts in financial markets across emerging Asia. 
Nevertheless, domestic sources of resilience kept the Philippine economy on a steady non-
inflationary growth. Low and stable inflation – 1.4% in 2015, the lowest since the BSP adopted 
the inflation targeting framework in 2002 – continued to encourage investments and business 
expansion.  In  the  third  quarter  of  2015,  our  economy  grew  at  an  accelerated  pace  of 
6.0 percent. This made the Philippines one of the fastest-growing economies in Asia in the first 
nine months last year. 
At the same time, the country’s sound, stable and liquid banking system provided solid support 
to our economy in 2015, with bank lending continuing to grow in double-digit rates, with credit 
flowing particularly to the productive sectors. And as a result of the continuing cooperation 
between  the  BSP  and  the  banking  sector  to  continue  to  enhance  governance  and  risk 
management practices of banks, industry profitability improved further with return on equity 
rising from 9.67% in September 2014 to 10.04% in September 2015; asset quality got even 
better with gross NPL ratio improving to 2.32% in September 2015 from 2.56% in September 
2014; while deposits reached record-high levels, increasing by over 9% year-on-year to nearly 
P 8.8 trillion as of September 2015. 
Meanwhile,  the  country’s  strong  external  position  continued  to  inspire  confidence  among 
investors and creditors, with the current account remaining in surplus, given the steady inflow 
of remittances from overseas Filipinos and receipts from BPOs, and a healthy level of gross 
international reserves that can support a robust economy. 
I  am  pleased  to  inform  you  that  preliminary  GIR  at  end-December  2015  was  reported  at 
US$80.6B, over US$1B more than the level at end-December 2014. At $80.6B, the reserves 
can cover 10.3 months’ worth of imports and payment for goods and services. 
Third-party  sentiment  on  the  domestic  economy’s  prospects  also  remained  bullish.  The 
international  credit  rating  agency  Fitch  upgraded  its  outlook  on  the  Philippine  economy  to 
“positive” from “stable” in September 2015. This is an indication of possibly yet another credit 
rating upgrade within 18 months. 
In other words, ladies and gentlemen, the Philippines remained stable in 2015 and went on to 
post 67 quarters of uninterrupted economic growth against a harsh external environment. 
Looking ahead to 2016 
Looking ahead to 2016, there are at least three challenges that the BSP should focus on. We 
can summarize them into three key words – stability, liquidity, and opportunity. 
Let us start with stability. In 2016, the BSP’s primary concern will be to continue to provide a 
stable environment where inflation is low, stable and within target. Our latest forecasts show 
that the path of inflation will be consistent with the National Government’s target range of 2 to 
4 percent in 2016–2017. 
However, there are potential upside pressures to inflation. Food prices are likely to be affected 
by  El  Niño,  other  weather  disturbances,  and  increases  in  utility  rates.  On  the  other  hand, 
downside risks could come from slower-than-expected global economic activities that could 
further lower oil and commodity prices. The BSP will continue to monitor national and global 
developments to ensure that our monetary policy stance remains appropriate. 
In  addition, the  BSP  will  continue  to find  ways  to further  enhance the  effectiveness  of  our 
monetary policy. Among others, we will adopt by the second quarter this year, what we call the 
interest rate corridor or IRC system. This is calibrated to keep interest rates within a reasonable 
range around the BSP’s benchmark policy rates. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
The second challenge we see in 2016 is liquidity and financial stability. Discussions on financial 
stability often revolve around liquidity. Where it comes from and where it goes, will determine 
its impact on the financial system and, ultimately, on the real sector. 
As we have learned from recent episodes of financial crises, too much liquidity can cause 
potentially dangerous asset price bubbles; too little and the economy could contract. The ideal 
is when liquidity is adequate and it is channeled toward productive uses and opportunities. 
Indeed, we need to ensure that the liquidity that is already in the financial system is channeled 
effectively toward productive uses. 
Another  concern  is  how  domestic  liquidity  conditions  could  be  affected  by  the  US  Fed’s 
decision  to  raise  interest  rates,  by  the  weakening  Chinese  growth  prospects  and  by  the 
heightened volatility in their financial markets. 
Nevertheless, we have reasons to believe that the overall impact on our economy would be 
manageable due in large part to the “pull factor” of the Philippines’ strong macroeconomic 
fundamentals. 
At the end of the day, the move by the US Fed to raise rates also signals a relatively more 
vibrant  outlook  for  the  US  economy  which  could  have  positive  spillover  effects  through 
revitalized trade flows. Meanwhile, a more market-oriented Chinese market could also have 
positive long-term effects on the global economy by ushering in a more sustainable growth 
path. 
It  is  also  important  to  note  that  the  BSP  has  policies  and  measures  to  help  cushion  the 
economy from external shocks. These include (1) upholding a market-determined exchange 
rate  with  an  option  to  maintain  its  presence  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  to  minimize 
volatility;  (2)  keeping  a  comfortable  level  of  reserves  and  managing  them  prudently;  and 
(3) providing access to domestic and foreign exchange liquidity through various facilities. 
We will also align our supervisory policies with international standards, to provide a more level 
playing field for our local banks. This is crucial as we prepare for the entry of more regional 
and international banks under the ASEAN economic and financial integration program. 
Indeed, we need to do much more to be competitive in the region. – we need be able to handle 
more complex financial transactions and instruments; and we need to strengthen our pricing 
conventions  and  price  discovery  mechanisms,  so  that  reference  rates  and  benchmarks 
accurately reflect market valuation. 
The  BSP  has  been  consulting  with  industry  stakeholders,  other  government  regulatory 
agencies and our counterparts overseas, to help nurture the country’s growing money and 
capital markets. 
These efforts tie in closely with our third challenge: opportunity and financial inclusion. Given 
the healthy growth of our economy, there are many opportunities in the Philippines today. Our 
challenge is to bring these opportunities to the people who stand to benefit the most from them. 
The  National  Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion  provides  us  the  platform  to  reach  out  to  the 
unbanked and the underbanked by delivering suitable financial products to different market 
segments through responsible and innovative business models, while providing the citizens 
with adequate education and protection as clients of the financial system. 
To  be  implemented  by  the  BSP  with  12  other  government  agencies,  NSFI  serves  as  the 
country’s road map for catalyzing inclusive growth through the development of a more inclusive 
financial system. 
To give you an idea of the challenges we face in our financial inclusion program, I will share 
some highlights of our maiden National Baseline Survey on Financial Inclusion. The survey, 
completed in 2015, showed the following results: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
      25% of Filipino adults (those aged 15 years and above) have never saved, 32% used 
to save, and only 43 % presently have savings. 
Of those who save, only 33% keep it in banks; the rest keep their savings at home. 
About  47  %  of  adults  have  outstanding  loans.  The  main  source  of  borrowing  is 
informal – from family, relatives, friends and informal lenders. The share of bank loans 
is only 4.4% of the total. 
Only 3.2 percent of adults have microinsurance coverage. 
Clients rated themselves as only “somewhat satisfied” with how issues were resolved 
in most financial service access points. 
Ladies and gentlemen. The survey results tell us that we have a long way to go to achieve 
financial inclusion and that there are plenty of opportunities for those looking to expand their 
business or to introduce meaningful game-changing innovations to help improve the lives of 
Filipinos. 
Clearly, we need broad-based cooperation from local and international institutions to address 
these gaps. With more institutions as partners, we can make substantial gains on our financial 
inclusion targets. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  RCM  and  the  RCFP.  In  2016,  both  external  and  domestic 
developments will compel us to remain watchful in guarding against threats to growth and 
stability. These challenges will revolve around promoting price stability through prudent and 
responsive  monetary  policy;  channeling  liquidity  toward  productive  uses  while  maintaining 
financial  stability;  and  delivering  opportunities  for  growth  and  investment  through  financial 
inclusion and literacy. 
We see continued economic challenges for the Philippines moving forward. Nevertheless, our 
success in keeping our economy on the growth path in the midst of global volatility gives us 
confidence that we have what it takes to deal with the challenges that will come our way. 
Among others, our economy’s non-inflationary growth momentum, sound banking system, and 
favorable external liquidity position provide your policymakers, including the Bangko Sentral 
ng  Pilipinas,  enough  flexibility  to  respond  appropriately  to  evolving  domestic  and  global 
conditions. 
We can look forward therefore to 2016 with cautious optimism. Let us also take heart from third 
party assessments that continue to give us high marks. In the past, the Philippines was called 
the sick man of Asia. In recent months, we have been described as a star among emerging 
economies. More recently, we were described by analysts as the region’s economic strongman 
due, among others, to our resilient growth. This is well and good. 
But we can make it better. Let us work together on spreading the benefits from sustained 
economic  growth  with  those  who  need  it the most.  RCM  and  RCFP  lead  the  way  in  such 
programs. Hopefully, we can get more advocates to work on financial inclusion that supports 
sustained inclusive growth. 
If you are interested, we can provide a briefing on the National Strategy for Financial Inclusion 
so that you can assess how to support it as private sector partners. 
With the collective wisdom, expertise and influence of the members of the RCM and RCFP, I 
have no doubt, you can increase your sphere of influence to benefit more areas and more 
people. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Finally, on behalf of the Bangkok Sentra ng Filipinas, I wish all the officers and members of the 
Rotary Club of Manila and the Rotary Club of Forbes Park, a happy, healthy, and prosperous 
2016! 
Mabuhay nag RCM and RCFP! Mabuhay nag Pilipinas! 
Mabuhay pop toying lama! Maralinga salaam as into. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
