  Yannis Stournaras: Financial stability and growth – the role of central 
banks and the pre-requisites for sustainable growth in Europe 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the 
33rd International  Financial  Law  Conference  “Financial  stability  and  growth:  the  role  of 
central banks and the pre-requisites for sustainable growth in Europe”, co-presented by the 
IBA Banking Law Committee and IBA Securities Law Committee and supported by the IBA 
European Regional Forum, Athens, 20 May 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be with you today and to have the opportunity to share with you some 
thoughts on financial stability in Europe. 
Systemic financial stability is a critical condition for achieving our common goals of prosperity 
and sustainable growth. At the outbreak of the international financial crisis in 2008, central 
banks  and  regulatory  mechanisms  lacked  a  well-tried  toolbox  for  containing  systemic 
instability  and  for  preventing  its  build-up.  With  the  measures  taken  and  mechanisms 
established  in  subsequent  years,  that  picture  has  changed  substantially,  as  market 
participants,  regulators,  supervisors,  macroprudential  authorities  and  others  quickly  dealt 
with  the  challenges.  Not  only  have  we  seen  the  transformation  of  banking  supervision 
through  the  creation  of  the  European  Banking  Union  with  its  three  pillars,  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism,  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  and  the  still-to-be-implemented 
common  deposit  guarantee  scheme,  but  we  have  also  seen  increased  recognition  of  the 
importance  of  systemic  stability  and  the  role  that  macro-prudential  policies  can  play  in 
fostering it. Traditional banking supervision is more focused on individual institutions and the 
prevention  or  management  of  isolated  instances  of  bank  failures.  Macro-prudential 
regulation,  by  contrast,  focuses  on  the  system  as  a  whole  and  largely  seeks  to  prevent 
systemic instability and to limit the consequence of systemic distress for the macro economy. 
But if financial stability is crucial for growth, the crisis has also taught us that growth is crucial 
for financial stability. Sluggish growth in the euro area, in spite of unprecedented monetary 
policy  loosening, has weakened European banks, not least through the rise in NPLs, thus 
hampering their ability to finance the real economy. 
In  order to  explore  these  ideas,  I  initially  examine  this  new  role  for  central  banks  and  the 
tools that have been – indeed, are still being – developed in an attempt to strengthen the 
resilience of the financial system. Developments in the EU regulatory framework in this area 
are  discussed.  I  then  outline  some  of  the  challenges  ahead  and,  finally,  provide  some 
thoughts on euro area growth. 
Central banks and macro-prudential policy 
A. 
The challenges facing EU financial sectors in recent years have significantly increased the 
responsibilities  of  central  banks  in  the  area  of  crisis  prevention.  Mandates  have  been 
amended  to  explicitly  refer  to  financial  stability  as  a  core  central  bank  task.  Thus  central 
banks  are  charged  with  limiting  system-wide  distress  and,  ultimately,  avoiding  its  negative 
consequences for the real economy. 
In  the  past,  it  was  not  thought  necessary  to  separate  monetary  policy  from  the  task  of 
providing  financial  stability.  It  was  thought  that  price  stability  in  the  market  for  goods  and 
services  would  be  sufficient  to  ensure  financial  stability  in  asset  markets.  Experience  has 
dispelled such beliefs and has shown that the business cycle and the financial cycle are not 
necessarily  synchronized;  long  periods  of  disconnect  between  the  two  cycles  can 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
materialize.  In  particular,  the  financial  cycle  tends  to  have  larger  amplitude  and  lower 
frequency than the normal business cycle. 
Macro-prudential policy bridges the gap between the traditional micro-prudential supervision 
of individual banks and monetary policy. Its objectives are, first, to enhance the resilience of 
financial  institutions  and  the  entire  financial  system,  and,  second,  to  smooth  the  financial 
cycle. In this regard, macro-prudential policy allows monetary policy to focus on maintaining 
price  stability,  while  micro-prudential  supervision  focuses  on  individual  institutions.  In  this 
way,  macro-prudential  policy  enhances  the  institutional  separation  that  is  one  of  the 
principles of the architecture of the euro area. 
Whilst separation is important, the usefulness of coordinating policies should not be forgotten 
– whether that be coordination of specific policies across different countries (as happened in 
the  wake  of  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  with  the  simultaneous  cuts  in  policy  rates)  or 
coordination of policies within one jurisdiction. Respect for the independence of the various 
authorities involved in securing financial stability should not imply separation and a lack of 
coordination. 
B. 
The macro-prudential toolbox and developments in the EU financial regulatory 
framework 
If macro-prudential policy is to effectively curb the financial cycle, it is essential to have tools 
that  deal  with  the  credit-real  estate  (or  whatever  other  asset)  relationship.  There  are  two 
ways to deal with this relationship. The first is by imposing restrictions on credit institutions – 
for example, through capital-based measures. The second is by limiting the degree to which 
households and non-financial corporations take on leverage. 
With regard to credit institutions, the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) and Directive 
(CRD IV) play a prominent role in setting the prudential standards in the EU. Implementation 
is ongoing and expected to be completed by 2019. From January 2016, the countercyclical 
capital  buffer  (CCB),  the  systemic  risk  buffer  (SRB)  and  the  other  systemically  important 
institutions  (OSII)  buffer,  three  important  macro-prudential  tools,  have  been  operational. 
However, given the need to diversify the available tools beyond regulations based on capital, 
tools based on liquidity, leverage and funding sources are also being introduced. 
With  regard  to  the  borrower’s  side,  instruments  such  as  the  loan-to-value  (LTV),  loan-to-
income (LTI) and debt-service-to-income (DSTI) limits are considered to be among the most 
effective macro-prudential instruments in curtailing excessive credit growth and the build-up 
of unsustainable debt positions. In order to effectively moderate the financial cycle, a time-
varying  dimension  is  crucial  in  the  design  of  the  various  ratios.  For  example,  the  loan-to-
value ratio should be lowered during the expansionary phase of a financial cycle and raised 
during  the  contractionary  phase,  while  respecting  the  mandate  of  financial  stability  and 
avoiding  the  build-up  of  systemic  risk.  Otherwise,  there  is  a  risk  of  pro-cyclicality  since 
leverage constraints decline as asset prices rise. 
It  is  imperative,  however,  that  the  macro-prudential  toolbox  be  further  enhanced  with 
innovative tools beyond those outlined above. Cyclical systemic risk can arise not only as a 
result of excessive credit expansion (an issue that can be addressed with the countercyclical 
capital buffer along with limits on borrowing) but also because of inadequate channeling of 
credit  that  keeps  the  real  economy  under-financed  for  extended  periods.  A  lesson  drawn 
from  the  crisis  is  that  we  have  focused  on  rather  narrow  areas  of  financial  activity. 
Nowadays, it is important that we focus on the risks that might have been missed such as the 
interlinkages between sectors, and thus explore how the financial system can influence, and 
be influenced, by the wider economy. In the euro area, there is evidence of limited financing 
of the real economy, with the consequence that euro-area investment has not recovered to 
pre-2008 levels despite ECB policies directly aimed at increasing the lending of the banking 
sector. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Challenges ahead and the way forward 
C. 
Challenges,  of  course,  remain.  Let  me  point  to  some  that  are  more  relevant  for  macro-
prudential supervision and systemic stability. 
1. 
A first challenge relates to the issue of the increased burden of complying with the 
new  regulatory  framework  and  assessing  its  cumulative  impact.  I  am  not  referring  to 
additional capital adequacy requirements but rather to the plethora of new measures being 
applied  by  more  than  one  institution.  In  the  pursuit  of  making  banks  more  robust,  liquid, 
responsible  and  transparent,  huge  progress  in  regulating  and  supervision  their  operations 
has been achieved. However, there has been no estimate of the cumulative impact of these 
regulations. I welcome and look forward to the report on the impact of capital requirements 
on the economy; however, the impact of other regulations should also be examined. 
We need to keep in mind the principle of proportionality, a general principle of EU law. As 
new regulations accumulate, they can come with costs as well as with benefits. Policymakers 
need to be watchful that, in attempting to limit externalities, they do not inadvertently create 
new externalities. The financial sector ultimately exists to serve the real economy. It is very 
likely  that  there  are  trade-offs  between  ensuring  financial  stability  and  imposing  such  a 
burden on the financial sector that it ceases to be able to do its job, namely to intermediate 
between surplus and deficit units in any economy in order to encourage long-term investment 
and  growth. Thus  we  have  to  develop  methods  to judge the  appropriateness  of  indicators 
and tools. Since many of the regulations have been applied over the last few years, that is, in 
a period of acute financial stress, I expect that in the coming years there will be a need to 
reassess those regulations and perhaps conduct some fine-tuning. Similar arguments apply 
to the national options and discretion in the new regulatory framework. 
2. 
Closely  related  to  the  previous  challenge  is  the  degree  to  which  regulatory 
developments should be front-loaded. The regulations themselves often have long phase-in 
periods such that new versions of the regulations are developed before the previous versions 
have been fully implemented. Supervisors have tended to compensate for the long phase-in 
periods  by  front-loading  all  prudential  requirements,  a  situation  that  sometimes  can  be 
considered excessively harsh. Of course the long phase-in periods are often a reaction to the 
expected impact of the regulation on bank behaviour and, in particular, on the lending to the 
real economy. Some middle road has to be found. 
3. 
A  third  challenge  is  the  need  to  reduce  reliance  on  models.  Recently  conducted 
stress-tests,  a  core  macro-prudential  tool,  followed  a  “single-model-fits-all”  methodology, 
which  left  very  little  room  for  idiosyncratic  and  specific  national  characteristics.  Moreover, 
according to some analysts, there is a risk that stress tests are becoming less effective as a 
tool.  Instead,  they  may  increasingly  be  seen  as  being  conducted  simply  to  calm  financial 
markets. Ideally, stress tests should be implemented in benign times in accordance with an 
old wisdom attributed to John F. Kennedy, that “the time to repair the roof is when the sun is 
shining”. In crisis times, there is the risk that crucial inputs such as macroeconomic variables 
are  under  or  over-estimated  and  that  adverse  scenarios  become  unrealistic  –  either  too 
benign  or  too  severe.  In  consequence,  outcomes  become  ambiguous  and  difficult  to 
interpret.  Additionally,  the  potential  pro-cyclical  effects  of  stress  tests  should  be  explored. 
Stress tests should not only place emphasis on solvency, but they should explore the impact 
of the assumed shock on bank liquidity, the implications of applying the bail-in tool, the funds 
needed  to  meet  any  demand  on  deposit  guarantee  funds,  etc.  We  should  focus  on 
harmonizing processes, while models should be enriched with constrained judgement as is 
standard practice in macroeconomic forecasting. 
4. 
Fourth, there is a need to widen the scope of regulation. Systemic fragility may arise 
from sources other than the traditional banking sector. A crucial challenge ahead is related to 
recent disintermediation and the development of “shadow” banking as an alternative means 
of  financial  intermediation.  The  need  for  macro-prudential  regulation  of  certain  financial 
activities becomes clear if we consider that banks and non-banks are closely tied through 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
market-based  intermediation  activities.  These  include  a  broad  array  of  services  related  to 
securitization  transactions,  securities  financing  transactions,  repos,  collateral  management 
and derivatives. The consequences of poorly-monitored risks in this area are unknown and 
the  risk  of  a  new  crisis  could  be  lurking,  while  spill-over  effects  are  difficult  to  assess. 
Moreover, the more policymakers are effective in using macro-prudential tools to constrain 
excessive credit growth in the banking sector, the more likely it becomes that there will be 
excessive  adjustments  in  the  non-bank  sector  through  leakages.  Fortunately,  “shadow 
banking” is high on the agenda of the relevant fora and there is a clear need to extend the 
regulatory toolkit. 
5. 
A fifth challenge, the role of the central bank as a lender of last resort to the banking 
system, needs to be addressed in the light of the mandate to preserve financial stability. The 
lender of last resort function is a crucial macro-prudential tool for managing financial distress. 
The principle developed by Thornton and Bagehot is well-known. Central banks should lend 
freely to solvent but illiquid banks against good collateral at a high rate of interest. How is this 
tried  and  tested  principle  to  be  made  operational  in  today’s  environment  with  much  larger 
bank  balance  sheets  and  fewer  liquid  assets?  In  the  past,  government  bonds  were 
automatically  considered  good  collateral.  Today,  central  banks  accept  a  wider  pool  of 
collateral. By what criteria should collateral be judged? We know that liquidity problems can 
become solvency problems if liquidity is denied or not provided generously enough. Thus the 
seemingly  simple  principle  developed  by  Thornton  and  Bagehot  can  be  open  to  various 
interpretations. There is a need, I think, to revisit the question. Mervyn King’s pawnbroker 
concept (2016) provides some new ideas on the issue. 
The ultimate aim in meeting these challenges is to make finance in Europe more resilient and 
to enhance and safeguard financial stability. The role of supervisors of the financial system is 
to  enhance  harmonization  while  respecting  proportionality.  They  should  safeguard  a  level-
playing  field  among  all  participants  and  protect  depositors  while  striking  the  right  balance 
between  “strictness”  and  “fairness”. Their  mandate  is  to  set  clear  boundaries  within  which 
financial intermediation can prosper while financial stability is maintained. 
Beyond policies towards the financial sector 
D. 
As I stated at the outset of my presentation, financial stability is not only crucial for growth; 
growth is also crucial for financial stability. So let me close with a few remarks on growth in 
the euro area and the completeness of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). 
Despite  the  progress  made  in  the  past  few  years,  EMU  remains  incomplete.  Divergence 
across the euro area is significant and the crisis has further highlighted existing shortcomings 
and important differences that need to be bridged. To this end, Europe should build upon 
other proposals outlined in the Five Presidents’ Report (2015). As argued in that report, EMU 
will  not  be  complete  until  the  appropriate  mechanisms  to  share  fiscal  sovereignty  are  in 
place. Monetary unions have to develop mechanisms for risk sharing. Mark Carney (2015) 
recently highlighted the stylized fact that, whatever happens to asset prices, debt endures. 
Reducing debt levels is difficult and he notes that it is unlikely that high debt in one sector or 
region can be reduced without at least temporarily increasing it in another. Fiscal integration 
can help in this respect. Allow me to remind you of Keynes’s view about the Bretton Woods 
System – it needed, he believed, to provide mechanisms to promote symmetric adjustment 
within  the  fixed  exchange  rate  area  so  that  there  would  not  be  a  bias  towards  deficient 
demand across the system. A more-fiscally-integrated monetary union would help address 
the problems of asymmetric adjustment and the deflationary bias of our monetary union. 
Sustainable  economic  growth  can  contribute  to  financial  stability.  Failure  to  maintain 
sustainable growth has been the biggest threat to the long-term stability of the EU since the 
onset  of  the  2007  crisis.  An  appropriate  balance  between  managing  risk  and  enabling 
investment needs to be struck. In this connection, it is crucial that the regulatory framework 
does not impede, but provides a suitable environment, for sustainable growth. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  ultimately,  a  sustainable  recovery  will  need  to  be  underpinned  by 
higher investment. Yet, in the euro area we presently face a significant investment gap. The 
financial  system  and  its  stability  have  a  crucial  role  to  play  in  closing  this  gap.  Central 
bankers  and  supervisory  authorities  bear  an  enormous  responsibility  in  shaping  a  system 
that can deliver prosperity to the citizens of Europe. We have made important progress in 
securing  the  financial  stability  needed  to  deliver  such  prosperity,  but  we  have  not  yet 
completed the job. As the ancient Greek mathematician, Archimedes, once said, “Give me a 
place to stand and I will move the earth, but first I need a place to stand, a foundation.” The 
completion  of  our  financial-stability  edifice  will  provide  the  necessary  foundation  for  the 
citizens of Europe. 
The 
P.C., 
Iveagh 
House, 
J.  M. 
Flaherty, 
Honourable 
Cœuré, B. (2016) “Time for a new Lamfalussy moment”, Speech at the Professor 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2015), Finalising post-crisis reforms: an 
Carney, M. (2015) “Fortune favours the bold”, Speech given to honour the memory 
Dublin, 
Sources: 
1. 
Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2015)  “Making  supervisory  stress  tests  more 
macroprudential:  Considering  liquidity  and  solvency  interactions  and  systemic  risk”,  BCBS 
Working Papers No 29, https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/wp29.htm, November. 
2. 
Banque de France and Bank for International Settlements (2016) “Ultra-low interest 
rates  &  challenges  for  central  banks”,  Farewell  Symposium  for  Christian  Noyer,  Paris, 
https://www.banque-france.fr/en/economics-statistics/research/seminars-and-
symposiums/symposium-a-loccasion-du-depart-de-christian-noyer-banque-de-france-et-
banque-des-reglements-internationaux.html, January. 
3. 
update, A report to G20 Leaders, http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d344.pdf, November. 
4. 
of 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2015/speech794.pdf, 
January. 
5. 
Lamfalussy Commemorative Conference, Budapest, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160201.en.html, February. 
6. 
Financial Sector”, Süddeutsche Zeitung, Finance Day, Frankfurt, 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160302.en.html, March. 
7. 
Europe”, 
December. 
8. 
Prometeia40, Bologna, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp151214.en.html, December. 
9. 
Parliament’s Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, Brussels, 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160215.en.html, February. 
10. 
Monetary  Union 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15–5240_en.htm, June. 
11. 
Hill,  J.  (2015)  “For  a  financial  sector  that  promotes 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–5380_en.htm, July. 
12. Hill, J. (2015) Keynote speech at European Banking Federation, “A Brave New World for 
Banks”,  2015  Annual  High  Level  Conference,  Brussels,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_SPEECH-15–5624_en.htm, September. 
Five  Presidents’  Report  sets  out  plan  for  strengthening  Europe’s  Economic  and 
release,  Brussels, 
Constâncio, V. (2015) Interview with Börsen-Zeitung, “We need more integration in 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2015/html/sp151230.en.html, 
Draghi,  M.  (2015)  Monetary  policy  and  structural  reforms  in  the  euro  area, 
Draghi,  M.  (2016)  Introductory  statement  during  the  Hearing  at  the  European 
Cœuré,  B.  (2016)  “From  Challenges  to  Opportunities:  Rebooting  the  European 
investment”,  London, 
(2015),  Press 
2015 
July 
as 
of 
1 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
13. 
Hill, J. (2015) Speech at the European Central Bank Forum on Banking Supervision, 
“Bank  Supervision:  Europe  in  global  context”,  Frankfurt,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_SPEECH-15–5985_en.htm, November. 
14. 
Hill,  J.  (2015) Opening statement  on  Structured  Dialogue  –  European  Parliament: 
Economic  &  Monetary  Affairs  Committee,  Brussels,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_SPEECH-15–6206_en.htm, November. 
15. 
the  CRR  and  CRD 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6310_en.htm, December. 
16. 
Conference, 
February. 
17. 
Economy” Little, Brown. 
18. 
prosperity”, 
December. 
Hill, J. (2015) Speech at the CRR Review Conference, DG FISMA, “The Impact of 
the  Economy”,  Brussels, 
Praet, P. (2015) Interview with La Libre Belgique, “Europe must show it can bring 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2015/html/sp151221.en.html, 
Hill, J. (2016) Keynote speech at the European Banking Authority’s 5th Anniversary 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-16–250_en.htm, 
King, M. (2016) “The End of Alchemy: Money, Banking and the Future of the Global 
IV  on  Bank  Financing  of 
London, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
