  Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 20 January 
2016. 
 Good morning, and thank you for coming today. Let me begin as usual with a few remarks 
around the issues that were most important to the Governing Council’s deliberations. 
At the global level, 2015 was a little disappointing as the world dealt with diverging economic 
prospects  and  shifting  terms  of  trade,  but  we  expect  gradual  strengthening  to  resume  in 
2016. There has been considerable attention paid to recent developments in China, and this 
has added to volatility in global financial and commodity markets. However, it was Governing 
Council’s  judgment  that  China  will  remain  on  its  transition  to  a  more  balanced  and 
sustainable growth path, from around 7 per cent annual growth to around 6 per cent. 
Volatility  in  equity  markets  is,  of  course,  not  always  a  reflection  of  weak  economic 
fundamentals.  Nevertheless,  the  global  equity-market  correction  may  inject  a  further 
measure of caution into business decision making. Our global outlook remains positive, albeit 
cautiously so. Governing Council believes that the U.S. economy remains solid – the fourth 
quarter of 2015 was soft, but we believe this to be largely temporary for reasons we discuss 
in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR).  Solid  fundamentals,  including  strong  employment 
gains,  high  consumer  confidence  and  very  strong  investment  outside  the  energy  sector 
should see U.S. growth return to close to 2 1/2 per cent this year. 
Not  coincidentally,  the  Canadian  economy  appears  to  have  stalled  in  the  fourth  quarter. 
There  were  some  temporary  factors  at  work  for  us,  too,  but  the  main  issue  was  slower 
exports to the U.S. We expect growth to pick up to 1 per cent in the first quarter, along with 
the U.S., and then to move back above 2 per cent for the remainder of the year. Our new 
annual growth forecast for 2016 is 1.4 per cent; however, much of the downward revision in 
that figure is because of the weakness we saw in the final quarter of last year. On a fourth-
quarter-over-fourth-quarter  basis,  growth  for  2016  is  projected  to  be  a  more  solid  1.9  per 
cent. 
In its deliberations, Governing Council focused mainly on the implications of lower prices for 
oil  and  other  commodities  for  Canada  and  for  monetary  policy.  This  shock  is  complex 
because  it  sets  in  motion  several  forces:  Canada  earns  less  income  from  the  rest  of  the 
world, our resource sector begins to shrink, the Canadian dollar depreciates, and the non-
resource sector expands. 
That  is  a  lot  of  structural  change. We  are  publishing  a  discussion  paper  today  that  offers 
additional analysis of this process. One implication is that it may take up to three years for 
the full economic impact to be felt, and even longer for all of the structural adjustments to 
take place. 
Since our last MPR in October, the magnitude of this shock has clearly grown. Firms are still 
cutting investment spending, but we had already built most of the downside into our October 
MPR. The bigger change in our projection comes from the impact of even lower oil prices on 
Canadian income. As one measure of this change, our base case forecast suggests that it 
will  now  take  longer  to  absorb  the  economy’s  excess  capacity  –  probably  until  late  2017, 
perhaps  later.  This  is  a  significant  setback  compared  with  our  October  projection. 
Nevertheless, we expect growth to exceed potential through most of 2016 and 2017, so the 
gap should be substantially closed by late 2017. 
When  considering  our  policy  options,  Governing  Council  needed  to  bear  in  mind  that  our 
base  case  forecast  omits  a  key  consideration;  namely,  the  government’s  intention  to 
introduce fiscal measures to stimulate the economy. Our convention is not to guess about 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  these  things,  but  to  incorporate  actual  announcements.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  were  we  to 
incorporate  a  degree  of  new  fiscal  stimulus  in  this  projection  today  the  output  gap  would 
close sooner than in our base case, but how much sooner would depend on the scale and 
nature of the fiscal measures. 
It is fair to say, therefore, that our deliberations began with a bias toward further monetary 
easing.  The  likelihood  of  new  fiscal  stimulus  was  an  important  consideration  –  others 
included: 
First,  the  Canadian  dollar  has  declined  significantly  since  October,  which  means  that  the 
non-resource  sectors  of  our  economy  are  receiving  considerably  more  stimulus  than  we 
projected then. Let’s remember that it typically takes up to two years for the full effect of a 
lower dollar to be felt. 
Second, past exchange rate depreciation is already adding around 1 percentage point to our 
inflation rate. This is a temporary effect, and is currently being offset by lower fuel prices – 
another  temporary  effect.  However,  we  must  be  mindful  of  the  risk  that  a  further  rapid 
depreciation could push overall inflation higher relatively quickly. Even if this is temporary, it 
might influence inflation expectations. 
Governing Council continues to see the underlying trend in inflation as somewhat below 2 
per  cent,  given  the  persistent,  and  recently  widening,  slack  in  the  economy.  Inflation 
expectations  remain  well  anchored  at  about  2  per  cent.  With  the  economy  expected  to 
resume above-potential growth in the near term, our expectation is that inflation will converge 
on 2 per cent as the output gap closes and the temporary effects of low oil prices and past 
exchange rate depreciation dissipate. 
To summarize, the drop in oil and other commodity prices constitutes a significant setback 
for the Canadian economy, and has set in motion a protracted adjustment process. That will 
mean the continuation of a two-track economy, with the resource sector shrinking and other 
sectors  picking  up  speed,  all facilitated  by  a  lower  Canadian  dollar  and  supported  by  very 
stimulative monetary policy. 
While that adjustment process sounds mechanical, in fact, it is personal. It is disrupting the 
lives of many Canadians, whether through job losses or through higher prices for imported 
goods. Monetary and fiscal policies can help to buffer some of these effects, and help speed 
up the process by fostering growth in other sectors of the economy, but the adjustment must 
ultimately  take  place.  Although  the  economy  may  grow  more  slowly  than  we  would  like 
during  that  transition,  it  can  still  achieve  above-potential  growth  and  absorb  its  excess 
capacity. We are  encouraged  by  the  resilience and flexibility  of  the  Canadian  economy  as 
signs of adjustment are already evident. 
Meanwhile, the world economy is expected to strengthen on the back of stimulative policies 
and low energy costs, the U.S. economy is on a solid track and our past monetary actions 
continue  to  produce  results.  These  are  all  positives  that  should  be  recognized.  In  this 
context,  as  complex  and  uncertain  as  our  situation  is,  Governing  Council  decided  that  the 
current stance of monetary policy remains appropriate. 
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  publicly  “au  revoir”  to  our  good  friend  and  colleague,  Deputy 
Governor Agathe Côté, who served the Bank with distinction for over 32 years. Her official 
end-date is January 31st. We will miss having her in Governing Council, and wish her well. 
With that, I’ll now be happy to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
