   Yves Mersch: Banks adapting to the new normal – striking a balance 
between prudence and pragmatism 
Dinner speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Mandarine Gestion Investment Conference, Munich, 19 September 2016. 
 Introduction 
Eight years ago, almost to the day, US investment bank Lehman Brothers went bankrupt. Its 
default unleashed a global financial crisis we still haven’t fully recovered from.  
Regulators worldwide responded to the crisis by imposing stricter rules to make the financial 
system more resilient. 
Addressing financial sector weaknesses is an important step. When addressing these we need 
to keep in mind the challenges banks are facing as they adapt to a new operating environment. 
They face challenges to their business models and to their profitability, they face increasing 
competition  from  the  non-bank  sector  and  have  to  contend  with  new  technologies  in  the 
payments field as well as new regulations.1 
Today I want to focus on two of these in greater detail. First, I will consider how the economic 
environment has made it more difficult for banks in some countries to lend. I will then take a 
look at the financial regulation and the changes that are still being implemented.  
Adapting to the new operating environment has not been easy. Banks have been very vocal 
critics of tighter regulation and low interest rates, particularly here in Germany. 
The  ECB  is  aware  of  this  criticism,  and  of  the  crucial  role  banks  play  in  transmitting  our 
accommodative monetary policy stance to the real economy. At the same time, the financial 
crisis has taught us that banks’ capital and risk buffers were too low and regulation of certain 
markets needed to be tightened.  
Striking the right balance between prudence and pragmatism  
We need to learn from the past, which saw the biggest bailout in history, costing European 
taxpayers almost €2 trillion.2 Germany’s government, by the way, was one of those in Europe 
that spent the most to support the country’s financial institutions.  
This experience has led to a paradigm shift: from “bailout” to “bail-in”. In other words, banks’ 
shareholders and creditors, rather than taxpayers, will be called on first to bear any losses 
arising from a bank’s failure. Stronger and more harmonised regulation is necessary, no doubt, 
but  we  should  not  go  too  far  and  keep  in  mind  that  banks  need  some  leeway  to  operate 
effectively.  
Implications of the low growth and low interest rate environment  
Let’s take a closer look at the economic environment banks are operating in today. 
                                                
1   Y. Mersch, Grasping the new normal of the banking industry – a view from a European Central Banker, June 
2016. 
2   Around €5 trillion of aid (including State guarantees) were approved by the Commission between 2008 and 
2014, of which €1.9 trillion were used at the height of the crisis. EU Commission, State Aid Scoreboard 2015, 
Aid in the context of the financial and economic crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Low growth and low inflation are not only European phenomena, but are prevalent in many 
mature  economies  around  the  globe.  They  are  driven  by  factors  such  ageing  populations, 
shrinking  workforces,  rapid  technological  progress  and  the  aftermath  of  severe  economic 
downturns.  
In  the  euro  area,  a  mood  of  uncertainty  and  a  weak  economic  recovery  are  holding  back 
investment and bank lending. This mood is informed by geopolitical uncertainties, subdued 
growth prospects in emerging markets, necessary balance sheet adjustments in a number of 
sectors, the slow implementation of structural reforms in general,3 as well as Brexit and the 
refugee crisis.  
Economic  downturns  following  the  financial  crisis  have,  in  some  euro  area  countries, 
exacerbated the problem of non-performing loans (NPLs) for banks. This legacy issue has 
seriously handicapped their lending to companies and households. The 2014 comprehensive 
assessment, which for the first time evaluated euro area banks’ assets according to the same 
standards, identified an upward revision of the estimated non-performing exposures amounting 
to €136 billion, or 18%. Banks stepped up their provisions accordingly, but the NPL problem 
cannot be solved with capital alone. The ECB is fully aware of this and is developing guidelines 
for banks, asking them for example to create operational structures and draw up strategies to 
manage and ultimately reduce their NPL stock in a timely manner. National authorities need 
to play their part as well and take the necessary steps to resolve the issue, for instance by 
making changes to the judicial system.4 
We cannot afford to waste too much time. High levels of NPLs are paralysing banks, preventing 
them  from  passing  on  the  ECB’s  monetary  stimulus  to  companies  and  households,  and 
effectively holding back the recovery in the euro area.  
The comprehensive assessment was a starting point and a milestone: it gave us a better idea 
of  the  size  and  the  nature  of  the  problem  we  are  facing.  We  have  to  be  realistic  though; 
improvements  will  not  happen  overnight.  It  will  take  years.  We  have  to  be  patient  –  and 
determined. The economic environment plays a key role in overcoming the issue. Recessions 
tend  to  increase  the  dimension  of  NPLs.  It  is  not  surprising  that  the  problem  is  most 
pronounced in countries with the weakest growth dynamics. Therefore, structural reforms that 
aim  to  spur  growth  are  an  indispensable  precondition  to  remove  the  millstone  that  weighs 
heavily on the banking sector.  
Consistent implementation of bail-in tools 
Another challenge banks face today is tougher financial regulation. A number of new rules are 
already in place, while some, for example on bank resolution, have yet to be fully implemented. 
The global framework for an orderly resolution of failing banks that includes a new standard 
on total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) will come into force from 2019 for global systemically 
important banks. 
On a European level, the resolution authorities still need to set the minimum requirement for 
own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL) as part of the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive 
(BRRD) for individual banks.  
The transposition of the BRRD into national law has also triggered some changes to national 
insolvency regimes,5 which will lead to the reclassifications of some assets in some countries 
and to the creation of new asset classes in others.  
Introductory statement to the press conference, 21 July 2016. 
                                                
3  
4   Guidance to banks on non-performing loans. 
5   Bundesbank Monthly Report July 2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   These changes, which generally aim to protect taxpayers from bank failures in future, may 
have  further  implications  for  banks  as  they  may  affect  the  eligibility  of  certain  assets  as 
collateral  for  central  bank  refinancing  operations.  This  in  turn  could  impact  on  liquidity 
conditions and the spreads of the respective assets, affecting banks’ refinancing costs.  
The statutory subordination of certain senior unsecured bank bonds to other senior debt, as 
proposed  in  the  adaptation  of  the German  national  banking  resolution  law,  for  instance,  is 
expected to facilitate resolution and the implementation of the TLAC standards. But it also 
means that these kinds of bond would no longer be eligible as collateral for Eurosystem credit 
operations, according to ECB guidelines.6 Clearly, any implementation of the BRRD in different 
ways combined with other upcoming requirements may lead to a re-fragmentation. 
We are closely monitoring the ongoing regulatory changes in this field. It remains to be seen 
how they correspond to our rules and, as a result, how they may affect our pool of eligible 
collateral and ultimately our monetary policy stance. 
Although  we  will  have  to  make  sure  that  our  operating  framework  helps  to  strike  the  right 
balance – allowing the banking system to breathe and at the same time avoiding an excessive 
reliance on the central bank7 – any coordination of our decisions with regulators would hardly 
be compatible with central bank independence.  
A European perspective will be crucial when working out the final steps in the implementation 
process. The Commission will need? to define a harmonised European approach to reforming 
national insolvency laws so as to avoid creating new problems while trying to solve old ones.  
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  Eight  years  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  sparked  the  global 
financial crisis, banks are still adapting to the “new normal” – an environment defined by low 
growth, low interest rates and stricter financial regulation worldwide.  
While it is important to be prudent and learn from past experience, we must apply the lessons 
we learn in a measured way.8 The regulatory requirements need to be properly calibrated. 
Amid  all  the  regulatory  changes  that  seek  to  strengthen  our  financial  system  we  must 
remember  to  leave  banks  room  for  manoeuvre.  Banks  are  crucial:  they  ensure  that  our 
accommodative monetary policy reaches the real economy as they translate lower refinancing 
costs into more favourable lending conditions for euro area households and companies.  
As much as possible, we should aim for European standards rather than national solutions. 
That way, we can avoid returning to a fragmented set-up prone to arbitrage that provided fertile 
ground for the financial crisis.  
We need to be prudent when learning from the past yet pragmatic when applying such lessons 
if we are to shape the future in a judicious way.  
                                                
6   Opinion of the European Central Bank on bank resolution (CON/2015/31). 
7   U. Bindseil, Evaluating monetary policy operational frameworks August 2016 (p. 15). 
8   Y. Mersch, Grasping the new normal of the banking industry – a view from a European Central Banker, June 
2016 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
