 Glenn Stevens: An accounting 
  Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Anika 
Foundation Luncheon, Sydney, 10 August 2016. 
The Footnotes can be found at the end of the document. 
I thank Emily Perry for very capable assistance in compiling this and other recent speeches. 
 Summary  
The speech examines Australia's economic performance over the past decade, as compared 
with the global economy and Australia's earlier history. It notes that global growth was lower 
and much more variable in the past ten years than in the preceding decade. Although this 
meant that the international shocks hitting the Australian economy were larger than previously, 
Australia's  economic  outcomes  were  no  more  volatile  than  they  had  been  previously.  The 
inflation target was achieved, the average rate of unemployment was low and the variability of 
both real GDP and unemployment were if anything slightly lower than in the past. The speech 
attributes these outcomes to both the economy's improved capacity to adjust and to effective 
policy frameworks. In particular the speech concludes that the monetary policy framework has 
helped the Bank to deliver on its mandate through difficult times.  
The speech goes on to note that, although the economy performed well overall, the average 
growth rate of real GDP has been lower in the past decade than the one before. Some slowing 
was inevitable given the earlier decade included a recovery from recession, but even allowing 
for that real growth has been lower. The speech then examines the reasons for this, both on 
the demand and supply sides of the economy.  
Looking  ahead,  the  speech  notes  the  challenges  for  Australia  in  securing  stronger  future 
growth in the face of adverse demographics. It notes the need for fiscal consolidation but also 
the limitations faced by monetary policy in generating growth in demand when households 
already  carry  considerable  debt.  On  the  question  of  whether  inflation  targeting  remains  a 
suitable  framework, the speech  argues  that the flexibility  in  Australia's  arrangements  allow 
policy makers to make sensible choices in managing deviations of inflation from target, even 
for reasonably lengthy periods.  
 Thank you for coming out once more to support the Anika Foundation.  
The  Australian  Business  Economists  and  Macquarie  Securities  Australia  have  been 
outstanding in their help over the past 10 years. Through their generosity and yours, as well 
as  some  remarkably  generous  individual  donations,  the  Foundation  is  in  a  good  financial 
position.  
The only problem is that while the Foundation is required to donate at least 4 per cent of the 
fund each year to activities consistent with its charter, it is hard to find assets that earn 4 per 
cent with acceptably low risk.  
That, of course, is a sign of the times in which we live. Very, very low interest rates for “safe” 
assets, and even many “not quite so safe” ones, have persisted for quite a long time now, and 
may well continue for some time yet. When I gave the first of these addresses 10 years ago, 
about the conduct of monetary policy, I certainly did not imagine that the world would look like 
this in 2016.  
Since this is the last of these addresses I shall deliver, and since in fact it is the last public 
address I expect to give as Governor, I intend to use it to look back at those 10 years. This will 
be my account of the Bank's stewardship over that time.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Rather than a chronology of events, I will take the approach of looking at average outcomes 
over decade-long periods, which I think is more useful.  
I shall conclude with some observations about the future, though these should not be seen in 
any way as constraining the actions of the Bank under the guidance of my successor.[1]  
The world economy 
The  times  have  certainly  been  anything  but  boring,  mainly  because  of  events  beyond  our 
shores. Ten years ago, the “Great Stability”, as Lord Mervyn King[2] labels it, was about to 
come to an end in the advanced economies. That period of reduced economic volatility dating 
from  the  mid  1980s  was  associated  with  macroeconomic  outcomes  that  were  remarkably 
good. But it wasn't a permanent state of the world.  
In fact, in some ways, that period of stability and confidence could be said to have sown the 
seeds of its own demise. Low volatility in economic outcomes encouraged under-pricing of risk 
and  a  sense  that  higher  leverage  was  safer  for  the  individual  household  or  firm  (or 
government). But as leverage increased, this left the world financial system and economy more 
vulnerable  when  an  adverse  shock  eventually  came  along.  As  we  know,  the  international 
financial crisis was very serious and had major deleterious effects on economic activity in the 
advanced countries.  
At  the  same  time,  the  “China  boom”  really  started  to  find  its  legs  in  the  mid  2000s.  The 
associated  rise  in  Australia's  terms  of  trade  was  something  my  predecessor  had  already 
remarked upon.[3] It ultimately went much further than even the optimists a decade ago would 
have expected. Some of this was due to the financial crisis. As the crisis unfolded in the period 
from 2007 to 2009, the Chinese economy, which was approaching the time it would experience 
a structural slowing anyway, decelerated abruptly, as did many other economies. The Chinese 
authorities responded with a very large stimulus that brought the boom back bigger than ever.  
This helped global growth recover in 2010 after its 2009 performance, which was the weakest 
since World War II. This in turn saw Australia's terms of trade rise to the highest sustained 
level for more than a century. At the peak they were more than 80 per cent above the average 
level for the preceding hundred years. Of course, nothing is forever and the terms of trade 
have been falling for about five years now, and are down from the peak by about a third (though 
they are still about 20 per cent above that very long-run average).  
Overall, then, the past decade has been a much more volatile time, from the external point of 
view, than either of the two preceding decades. This is easily demonstrated with some simple 
metrics for the growth and variability of the world economy, and Australia's terms of trade. The 
tables show data for four decade-long periods.  
Global growth has been lower than it was in the “great stability” period, led by much weaker 
outcomes for the major advanced countries. Those outcomes were in substantial part a legacy 
of the financial crisis, of course, though other longer-run factors may also have been at work. 
Global  growth  would  have  been  weaker  still  were  it  not  for  two  factors:  emerging  market 
economies  as  a group did  not  slow  on  average;  and  in  addition, their weight  in the global 
economy  increased  significantly.  This  change  in  weights  alone  added  about  one-third  of  a 
percentage point to the IMF's measure of global growth in GDP in the latest period.[4]  
The world economy has also been much more variable – even more variable than in the late 
1970s/early  1980s,  a  period  not  fondly  remembered  by  economic  policymakers.  Inflation 
among the advanced economies was lower on average, but noticeably more variable.[5]  
As noted above, Australia's terms of trade rose quite a bit in the period of the great stability, 
then rose even further, and became much more variable, over the past decade.  
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   1976–1986 
1986–1996 
1996–2006 
2006–2016 
  Table 1: Selected Indicators(a)  
World GDP 
growth 
G7 GDP growth 
Advanced 
Economies 
Inflation 
 
Annual 
average 
3.1 
3.6 
3.9 
3.3 
Per cent 
Standard 
deviation 
Annual 
average 
Standard 
deviation 
Annual 
average 
1.4 
0.5 
1.1 
1.8 
3.1 
2.8 
2.5 
0.9 
1.7 
1.1 
0.8 
2.0 
7.6 
3.6 
2.0 
1.7 
Australia's Terms 
of Trade 
Index; 
 
1976–1986 = 100 
Standard 
deviation Average Standard 
deviation 
3.7 
0.9 
0.4 
1.1 
100.0 
97.6 
108.2 
164.2 
4.9 
6.4 
13.3 
19.0 
(a) The most recent data for the annual GDP and inflation series are for 2015, and the first time period 
for the inflation series covers 1979–1986. Time periods used for quarterly terms of trade data are for 
the decades to: Q3 1986; Q3 1996; Q3 2006; and the 38 quarters to Q1 2016. Standard deviations are 
calculated from annual growth rates for the GDP and price series and from the quarterly level of the 
terms of trade. 
Sources: ABS; IMF; OECD; RBA; Thomson Reuters 
The Australian economy 
If  the  global  environment  became  more  complicated  and  more  variable,  and  if  the  shocks 
hitting the economy became larger, it would not be entirely surprising if this resulted in more 
variability of the Australian economy.  
But that is not, in fact, what we find. Table 2 presents the relevant data.[6]  
 
Table 2: Selected Australian Indicators(a)  
Per cent 
Real GDP growth  Unemployment 
Annual 
deviation Average Standard 
Standard 
average 
deviation 
rate 
Headline CPI 
Inflation 
Underlying 
Inflation 
Annual 
average 
Standard 
deviation 
Annual 
average 
Standard 
deviation 
2.7 
3.4 
3.6 
2.8 
1.1 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
7.2 
8.6 
6.4 
5.3 
1.5 
1.6 
1.1 
0.6 
9.1 
4.6 
2.5 
2.3 
1.0 
0.7 
0.3 
0.5 
8.4 
4.5 
2.6 
2.7 
0.5 
0.6 
0.2 
0.2 
  1976–1986 
1986–1996 
1996–2006 
2006–2016 
(a) Quarterly data in the table are for the decades to: Q3 1986; Q3 1996; Q3 2006; and the 38 or 39 
quarters to the latest available data for 2016. Both price measures exclude tax changes in 1999–2000 
and interest charges before the September quarter 1998. Underlying inflation is calculated using the 
Treasury Underlying Rate of Inflation in the 1976–1986 decade and trimmed mean CPI inflation for 
subsequent decades. Standard deviations are calculated from quarterly growth rates for the GDP and 
price series, and from the quarter-average unemployment rate. 
Sources: ABS; RBA 
 
The  first  feature  I  want  to  point  out  is  that  the  variability  of  growth,  measured  here  as  the 
standard deviation of the quarterly growth rate of GDP, was, if anything, slightly lower over the 
past decade than that in the period 1996–2006 and much lower than in preceding decades. 
Another way of putting this is that Australia has continued to avoid major downturns.[7]  
Second, we have achieved the inflation target. As of late 2007 and for the first half of 2008, it 
looked like inflation was going to be a material problem. It reached 5 per cent. The Bank's 
analysis at the time was that the economy was overheating and inflation was rising mainly for 
that reason. That judgement stands the test of time. The marked change in the path of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   global  economy  in  2008  had  a  big  effect  on  sentiment  in  Australia  and  the  course  of  the 
economy and prices. Absent that, I suspect we may have had a fair bit more trouble containing 
inflation.  But  events  being  as  they  were,  inflation  came  down  pretty  quickly  and  we  have 
achieved something pretty close to 2½ per cent on average.  
In fact, we have been achieving the inflation target for over two decades. From 1993 to 2016, 
a period of 23 years, the average rate of inflation has been 2.5 per cent – as measured by the 
CPI (and adjusting for the introduction of the GST in 2000). When we began to articulate the 
target in the early 1990s and talked about achieving “2–3 per cent, on average, over the cycle”, 
this is the sort of thing we meant. I recall very well how much scepticism we encountered at 
the time. But the objective has been delivered.  
The variability of inflation has been a bit higher over the past 10 years than in the preceding 
decade. This reflects partly the brief period of high inflation in 2007–08, and some big swings 
in oil and utilities prices over the decade. Still, in the recent period inflation variability has been 
much reduced from the days prior to the inflation target.  
Third, the rate of unemployment, on the standard definition, has been lower and less variable 
over the past 10 years than in the preceding three decades. This is to be expected given that 
two of the preceding periods included a major recession and the other included a recovery 
from  one.  But  that  is  the  point.  Managing  to  avoid  deep  downturns  has  been  a  major 
advantage. It has given us an average unemployment rate “in the fives” and a low variation 
around that mean.  
In summary then, we faced a more volatile world than the one of the “great stability” of the 
previous period. It was a world characterised by massive swings in our terms of trade, and a 
very serious international financial crisis followed by a deep global recession, not to mention 
the effects of the adoption of “non-conventional” policies in the major jurisdictions. And yet the 
Australian  economy  avoided  a  major  downturn  and  turned  in  a  performance  on  economic 
activity  characterised  by  no  more,  and  on  some  metrics  slightly  less,  volatility.  We  have 
achieved the inflation target and with an average unemployment rate of between 5 and 6 per 
cent.  
Had anyone, a decade ago, accurately forecast all the international events and simultaneously 
predicted  that  things  would  turn  out  in  Australia  as  they  have,  they  would  not  have  been 
believed. But here we are.  
No doubt many factors were at work in achieving this. The economy's inherent ability to adapt 
has been considerably better than in past episodes of large shocks. I think that is a tribute to 
various reforms over earlier years and the better management of many individual enterprises.  
Policy frameworks functioned effectively. The exchange rate responded to the external shocks 
in the way it is supposed to. Prudential supervision was effective. The managements of the 
most important financial institutions managed to avoid being caught up in a major way in the 
things that brought so much grief to their counterparts elsewhere in the world. Fiscal policy 
played  a  major  countercyclical  role  in  the  most  acute  phase  of  the  international  downturn 
(though how much latitude it would have to do that again, if needed, is less clear).  
And as you would expect, I think that the monetary policy framework has functioned very well. 
The operation of that framework has involved:  
• 
an  independent  central  bank  focusing  on  the  medium-term  inflation  target,  taking 
account of the state of the real economy and the shocks affecting it;  
neither neglecting financial stability considerations nor letting them completely dictate 
monetary policy;  
allowing the floating exchange rate to adjust; and, importantly,  
realism and a degree of modesty, about what monetary policy can achieve.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  4 
    I think it can be said that, operating this framework and under the guidance of the Board, the 
Bank has delivered on its mandate through difficult times.  
Before  leaving  indicators  of  overall  performance, though,  a fourth  observation  needs to  be 
made, which will frame the forward-looking part of my remarks. The observation is obvious 
from the numbers in the first column of Table 2: the average rate of economic growth over the 
past decade has been lower than it was previously. This requires some explanation.  
To the extent that the economy was growing above its potential rate in the preceding decade, 
as the spare capacity created by the serious recession in the early 1990s was wound back, 
some  slowing  in  actual  growth  was  always  likely.  This  could  probably  account  for  growth 
slowing from 3.6 per cent to about the 3 to 3¼ per cent growth that most people assumed, up 
until recently at least, to be trend or “potential” growth. If one further thinks that, by about 2006–
07, the level of output was probably above the trend level, then one could expect a further 
slight reduction in average growth over the ensuing period as the level of output came back 
towards the trend level. But it's unlikely this would account for much more than another tenth 
of a percentage point of slowing, measured over a 10-year average.  
That still leaves something – maybe up to a quarter percentage point or so – of slower GDP 
growth on average to be explained. If we measure it on a per capita basis, the extent of slowing 
is considerably larger.  
So what is the explanation?  
There are likely to be both demand-side and supply-side factors at work.  
On the demand side, it seems more difficult to generate growth in spending in an economy 
where households are already carrying significant debt. The real cash rate has been about 140 
basis points lower, on average, than in the preceding decade.[8] So on that metric monetary 
policy has been easier. Even achieving the present trajectory of domestic demand that we 
have, which has left the economy with a bit of spare capacity, has involved some net rise in 
the ratio of household debt to GDP.  
On the supply side, overall population growth increased and was its highest in many decades. 
But growth in the population of people aged 15 to 64 years was slower than overall population 
growth (see Table 3). This was in contrast to previous decades, when the “15–64” population 
typically grew as fast as or faster than total population – a “demographic dividend”. The rise in 
labour force participation that had been seen in the 1980s to the mid 2000s has not, in net 
terms,  continued  in  recent  years.  Even  if  we  accept  that  some  of  this  may  have  reflected 
demand-side factors, it is likely that the increasing proportion of “baby boomers” moving into 
the 65-plus age group has started to dampen the trend in overall participation.[9] On top of that, 
growth in productivity per hour appears to have slowed a little in the 2006–16 period. All this 
suggests some moderation in potential output growth probably occurred.[10]  
These factors individually are not especially large, but together they can explain why overall 
GDP  growth  has  been  lower  in  the  past  decade.  And  they  largely  explain,  I  submit,  the 
considerably more marked slowing in growth of real GDP per head of total population. Total 
population  grew  faster  than  the  population  of  people  realistically  available  for  work;  those 
working continued the existing trend of working slightly fewer average hours; the growth of 
their productivity per hour was a bit slower; and the limits of our ability to generate demand in 
a private sector already carrying a good deal of debt meant we have been a little short of full 
employment in the most recent few years. The effect of much slower per capita GDP growth 
was obscured for a period by income effects of the terms of trade boom, but as we know that 
force has been in reversal for some years now.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Table 3: Additional Australian Indicators(a)  
Annual average growth, per cent 
 Real GDP per 
capita 
Total 
population 
1976–1986 
1986–1996 
1996–2006 
2006–2016 
1.4 
2.0 
2.4 
1.1 
1.3 
1.3 
1.2 
1.7 
Working-age 
population  
(15–64 years) 
1.7 
1.3 
1.3 
1.4 
Real GDP per hour 
worked 
Average hours 
worked 
1.3 
1.7 
1.8 
1.5 
−0.2 
−0.1 
−0.3 
−0.5 
(a) Quarterly data in the table are for the decades to: Q3 1986; Q3 1996; Q3 2006; and 37–39 
quarters to the latest available data. 
Source: ABS 
Looking ahead 
With that assessment of the past, let me turn then, very tentatively, to the future.  
I  have  already  noted  that  Australia's  trend  growth  rate  has  probably  slowed  a  little.  The 
demographic effects that are working to slow it are likely to continue over the coming decades.  
All  of  this  points  to  the  need  not  only  to  calibrate  our  assumptions  about  future  growth 
prudently, but also to maximise our efforts in those areas that can lift potential growth. This is 
not just an academic debate about “reform” among “elite” opinion. It's not just about what a 
response might be to some theoretical future slowing of growth in living standards. Slower 
growth is here now and has been for a while.  
It's surely no coincidence that the path back to budget balance is turning out to be a very long 
one.  At  present,  very  low  nominal  GDP  growth  looms  large  in  subduing  revenue  growth, 
because of the terms of trade decline. But when the terms of trade stabilise, weaker potential 
real growth per head of population will still be a problem.  
Many difficult choices will need to be made along the path of budgetary adjustment. At present, 
general public debate starts with commitment to the need for reform and for putting public 
finances on a sustainable medium-term track. But when specific ideas are proposed that will 
actually make a difference over the medium to long term, the conversation quickly shifts to 
rather narrow notions of “fairness”, people look to their own positions, the interest groups all 
come out and the specific proposals often run into the sand. If we think this rather other-worldly 
discussion  will  not  have  to  give  way  to  a  more  hard-nosed  conversation,  we  are  kidding 
ourselves. That will occur should there be a moment of crisis, but it would be better if it occurred 
before then.  
In addition, and this may complicate the fiscal discussion, we can't just assume that monetary 
policy can simply dial up the growth we need. We need some realism here.  
Through a combination of extraordinary circumstances, the central banking community globally 
has found itself doing unprecedented things. We in Australia have done fewer such things, but 
we are connected to the world, and the effects of policies adopted elsewhere condition the 
policy choices available to us. Although we have not implemented “unconventional policies”, 
we nonetheless have interest rates at levels lower than any of us have seen before in our 
lifetimes. Moreover, the “return to normal” at the global level looks like being a very, very slow 
process. And normal is a different place now.  
As  would  be  clear  from  my  utterances  over  the  past  couple  of  years,  I  have  serious 
reservations about the extent of reliance on monetary policy around the world. It isn't that the 
central banks were wrong to do what they could, it is that what they could do was not enough, 
and never could be enough, fully to restore demand after a period of recession associated with 
a very substantial debt build-up.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Certainly  easy  monetary  policy  can  reduce  the  burden  on  debtors  through  the  cash  flow 
channel, at the expense of savers. This is probably still expansionary in net terms, though 
possibly less so than it used to be. But in the end, the most powerful domestic expansionary 
impetus that comes from low interest rates surely comes when someone, somewhere, has 
both the balance sheet capacity and the willingness to take on more debt and spend. The 
problem now is that there is a limit to how much we can expect to achieve by relying on already 
indebted entities taking on more debt. So for policymakers looking to use low interest rates to 
boost growth, the question is: which entities, if any, in the economy can accept higher leverage 
safely?  
In some countries there may be no safe way of borrowing and spending because debt, both 
public and private, is just too high. In Australia, gross public debt, for all levels of government, 
adds up to about 40 per cent of GDP. We are rightly concerned about the future trajectory of 
this ratio. But gross household debt is three times larger – about 125 per cent of GDP. That is 
not unmanageable – but nor is it a low number. It's an interesting question which sector would 
have the greater capacity to take on more debt, in the event that we were to need a big demand 
stimulus.  
Let  me  be  clear  that  I  am  not  advocating  an  increase  in  deficit  financing  of  day-to-day 
government  spending.  The  case  for  governments  being  prepared  to  borrow  for  the  right 
investment  assets  –  long-lived  assets  that  yield  an  economic  return  –  does  not  extend  to 
borrowing to pay pensions, welfare and routine government expenses, other than under the 
most exceptional circumstances. It remains the case that, over time, the gap in the recurrent 
budget has to be closed, because rising public debt that is not held against assets will start to 
be a material problem.  
The point I am trying to inject here is simply that popular debate in Australia about government 
debt and how we limit or reduce it seems so often to be conducted while largely ignoring the 
size of private debt. To outside observers this seems odd. Foreign visitors to the Reserve Bank 
over the years have tended to raise questions about household debt much more frequently 
than they have raised questions about government debt. So the way ahead is going to have 
to involve a rather more nuanced consideration of all these issues.  
What about the future of inflation targeting? For more than 20 years this framework as we have 
practised it has delivered the desired degree of price stability and has greatly contributed to 
overall macroeconomic performance. But some people have asked: is it a framework whose 
usefulness has now come to an end?  
All  frameworks  come  under  stress  sooner  or  later.  Circumstances  occur  that  were  not 
envisaged  when  the  system  was  put  in  place.  When  that  happens,  frameworks  that  are 
inflexible tend to break. The gold standard and countless exchange rate pegs in history are 
examples. Various fiscal rules in Europe have been “honoured in the breach”. And so on.  
On  the  other  hand,  frameworks  that  have  a  degree  of  flexibility,  that  can  bend  with  the 
circumstances but retain their essential integrity, like an aircraft wing in turbulence, stand a 
reasonable chance of coming through. I think the inflation target as we have operated it has 
the requisite degree of flexibility.  
The irony is that when we first started talking about inflation targeting, it was our insistence on 
that very flexibility that made people think we weren't serious. The 2–3 per cent was not a hard-
edged band. We were not promising that the Governor would be sacked, or have their salary 
reduced, if the target was missed. Many critics preferred the hard-edged, electric-fence style 
targets in vogue elsewhere at the time.[11]  
Now, it seems some people are concerned we are too committed. They worry that, in a period 
of very low inflation, the Bank may do things with monetary policy, in an effort to increase 
inflation back to the target in short order, that might create more problems than they solve.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   I can assure you that the Board has been very conscious of that possibility and, accordingly, 
has proceeded very carefully. Of course we have run some risks from pushing interest rates 
so low, but then there are always risks in any course of action, including inaction. Our job is 
not to avoid all risk; it is to balance the various risks. To date, I think we have done that, aided 
by supervisory and regulatory actions by APRA and ASIC. Moreover, with the whole developed 
world in such a prolonged period of ultra-low rates, it would have been fanciful to think we were 
not going to be affected.  
But in the end, we are living in a world in which the ability of monetary policy alone to boost 
growth sustainably is very likely to be a good deal more limited than we might wish. I think 
most people can sense this. So we need realism about how much we can expect monetary 
policy to do, including pushing inflation up quickly. If it were the case that undershooting the 
target for a period while achieving reasonable growth was the “least bad” option available, the 
inflation targeting framework has the requisite degree of flexibility to allow such a course.  
Conclusion 
That is all for the future and for others to judge. My time is up.  
To conclude, over the past decade and in a very volatile world, Australia has achieved the 
inflation target, avoided a major economic downturn, seen remarkably little variability in real 
economic activity in the face of enormous shocks, experienced a fairly low average rate of 
unemployment, and had a stable financial system as well.  
Looking ahead, challenges remain for Australia, not least sustaining a stronger growth outlook 
over the longer term. More than adjustments to interest rates will be needed to secure that.  
The Reserve Bank will, I am confident, go from strength to strength under the leadership of its 
new Governor. We will be in very good hands.  
It remains to thank all of you very much for coming to this event, and this series of events, in 
support  of  the  Anika  Foundation.  Thank  you  again  to  the  ABE  and  Macquarie  Securities 
Australia for their support.  
I also want to say thank you to many of you here who have been supporters of the Reserve 
Bank, and of me personally, over the years. There are always critics, but I've found there are 
many, many more who carry enormous goodwill towards the Bank and want us to succeed for 
the  sake  of  the  country.  Quite  a  number  of  you  here  today  are  among  that  group.  I  have 
appreciated that support more than you can know.  
Endnotes 
1  
It  is also  important  to  note that  these  remarks  are confined  to macroeconomic  policies and  outcomes.  The 
Reserve Bank does much more than monetary policy and has been active across many fronts over the years. 
Payments  policies,  management  of  the  balance  sheet,  note  issue  and  other  areas  have  all  seen  major 
innovation. The interested reader is referred to the succession of Annual Reports for these matters.  
2   King M (2016) “The End of Alchemy: Money, Banking and the Future of the Global Economy”, page 6.  
3   Macfarlane I.J (2005) “Global Influences on the Australian Economy“, Talk to the Australian Institute of Company 
Directors, Sydney, 14 June. It says something about the magnitude of the event that it played out during the 
tenure of two central bank Governors, each of whom were in the role for a decade, and will likely still be an 
important issue, in the early stages at least, for the next Governor.  
5  
4 This exercise uses IMF data to compare average annual growth in world GDP between 2006 and 2015 with what 
world GDP growth would have been over this period if the weights of “advanced economies” and “emerging and 
developing economies” had remained unchanged from their averages over the 1996–2006 period.  
I use inflation for the advanced countries because global inflation data are always affected by a small number 
of countries that from time to time have very high inflation or hyperinflation. That results in a distorted picture.  
6   The data used are the most recent vintages of the data, so that for some of the historical periods they differ from 
what may have been originally published. Likewise, some of the data for the past two or three years, particularly 
the GDP data, may further be revised over time. But these are the most up to date figures we have as of today. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   For the GDP data, the figures are up to the March quarter of 2016 while those for inflation and the unemployment 
rate are up to the June quarter, so the annual averages are computed by expressing 38 or 39 quarters at an 
annual rate.  
7   There have been some small downturns of course. One had occurred in 2000 and another happened in 2008. 
Had downturns of the same size occurred with a slightly different quarterly pattern in the statistics, they would 
have been labelled “recessions” in common discussion. While we like to keep retelling the story about how we 
didn't have recessions, I fear this risks us making the complacent assumption that we won't have them in future. 
It would be better to be asking how it was that these downturns were so temporary – and doing what we can to 
make future downturns like that. To say that does not diminish, however, the fact that this has been a very good 
run for Australia.  
8   Even with the shift in margins between the cash rate and lending rates, real lending rates have been lower by 
between 70 and 90 basis points on average in the latter period.  
9   Had participation rates within age groups moved in the way we have seen but the population age structure been 
unchanged from where it was in September 2006, simple calculations suggest that the participation rate would 
have been 1.8 percentage points higher in the June quarter 2016.  
10   While  over  the  next  few  years  the  ramp  up  in  LNG  production  will  temporarily  raise  potential  GDP  growth, 
demographic factors are likely to hold down potential growth for some years beyond that.  
11   I can recall being asked by an IMF official during the mid 1990s whether, if inflation rose above the target, we 
were prepared to create a recession to get it down again. The implication was that we should be. We insisted 
on not being obliged to have a recession to shave a few tenths of a percentage point off inflation in a short 
period. We were not believers in the idea of destroying the world to save it.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
