  Guy Debelle: Developments in global FX markets and challenges in 
currency internationalisation from an Australian perspective 
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the RMB FX Forum (appearance via video link), Beijing, 18 May 2016. 
 Thanks to David Halperin and Eden Hatzvi for their help in compiling these remarks.  
I am very pleased to have the opportunity to speak at this event today. Australia takes a keen 
interest  in  the  ongoing  process  of  internationalisation  and  liberalisation  of  the  renminbi 
(RMB). I am sure you will hear many interesting perspectives on that subject today. 
I  would  like  to talk  about  three things.  First, I  will  talk  a  little  about  the use  of the  RMB  in 
Australia.  Second,  I  will  talk  about  the  RMB’s  increasing  role  in  the  global  economy  and 
relate that to the work I am leading on the Global Code of Conduct for the Foreign Exchange 
Market. Finally, I will provide an Australian perspective on currency internationalisation and 
capital  account  liberalisation,  reflecting  on  the  challenges  that  emerged  as  Australia  went 
through this process in the late 1970s/early1980s.1  
Turning to the use of the RMB in Australia. First, from the RBA’s own point of view, we have 
invested a portion of our foreign exchange reserves in RMB since 2013. This has allowed us 
to get direct insight into the way the FX and bond markets function in China, and has also 
allowed  us  to  experience  first-hand  the  benefits  of  the  ongoing  liberalisation  that  has 
occurred  in  recent  years.  In  June  2015,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC)  reported  that 
foreign  central  banks  and  monetary  authorities  held  over  RMB650 billion 
in  RMB 
denominated  assets  and  that  has  almost  certainly  grown  larger  today. The  RBA  and  PBC 
also established a bilateral currency swap in 2012 for RMB200 billion that was renewed last 
year. The swap line highlights and supports the growing financial linkages between the two 
economies as well as trade and investment. 
To help further remove possible impediments to the use of RMB in Australia, an official RMB 
clearing  bank  began  operation  in  Sydney  in  February 2015.  In  addition,  Australia  was 
granted  an  RMB50 billion  RQFII  quota  for  portfolio  investments.  Finally,  for  a  number  of 
years now, the Australian dollar has been directly traded against the RMB in the onshore FX 
market. 
This has allowed for the growing use of RMB in Australia. That said, the use of RMB remains 
noticeably  less  than  the  value  of  trade  between  China  and  Australia.  In  the  RBA’s 
conversations with Australian businesses that trade with China, one repeated concern raised 
that inhibits greater use of the RMB is the limited scope to hedge. In that regard, it is pleasing 
to see that RMB hedging instruments and markets are growing rapidly. 
The  ability  to  hedge  was  a  very  important  development  in  the  internationalisation  of  the 
Australian dollar. I will come back to this later on in my talk. 
I  will  now  talk  about  the  increasing  growth  of  RMB  turnover  in  the  foreign  exchange  (FX) 
market and relate to that the work on the Global Code of Conduct. 
                                                
1  A fuller discussion of this can be found in Debelle G and M Plumb (2006), ‘The Evolution of Exchange Rate 
Policy  and  Capital  Controls 
in  Australia’,  Asian  Economic  Papers,  5(2),  pp  7–29.  Available  at 
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/asep.2006.5.2.7. Bob McCaulay has also written extensively 
on  currency  internationalisation.  See  for  example  McCauley  R  (2015),  ‘Does  the  US  dollar  confer  an 
exorbitant  privilege?’  Journal  of  International  Money  and  Finance,  Elsevier,  57(C),  pp  1–14.  Available  at 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0261560615001059. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  One  of  the  most  noteworthy  developments  in  the  2013  Triennial  survey  of  FX  turnover, 
compiled  by  the  Markets  Committee  that  I  chair  at  the  BIS,  was  the  rapid  growth  of  RMB 
turnover since the 2010 survey. In particular, RMB turnover increased from US$34 billion per 
day in 2010 to US$120 billion per day in 2013.2 The data for the 2016 Triennial FX turnover 
survey is in the process of being compiled now, based on a comprehensive survey of the FX 
market in April. I would presume that the 2016 survey is likely to show similarly rapid growth 
in RMB turnover over the past three years. In particular, turnover is likely to be bolstered by 
measures taken by the PBC to increase trade settlement and investment in RMB, as well as 
the  various  exchange  rate  initiatives  that  the  PBC  has  taken  since  2013.  This  includes 
increasing  the  flexibility  of  the  RMB  against  the  US  dollar,  with  the  trading  band  being 
widened to ±2 per cent from early 2014 and, more recently, the adjustment last August to the 
methodology for calculating the daily RMB fixing rate to make it more market-determined. 
The 2016 Triennial FX turnover survey will likely confirm that the RMB is solidly in the top 
10 currencies  in  terms  of  turnover,  and  may  indeed  be  closing  in  on  the  Australian  dollar, 
which is in fifth place in terms of turnover. Along with the RMB’s recent inclusion in the SDR, 
this  confirms  the  RMB’s  status  as  a  global  currency.  With  that  prominence,  comes  an 
expectation that the functioning of the market will evolve towards the standards of behaviour 
and operation of the global FX market. 
In that regard, some of you may be aware that a Global Code of Conduct for the FX market 
is being developed. I will now summarise that work for you and its potential relevance for the 
FX market in China. 
Why is the Global Code being developed? As you are probably aware, the various scandals 
and evidence of inappropriate behaviour in the global FX market that have come to light over 
recent  years  have  seen  an  erosion  of  trust  in  the  FX  industry,  which  is  impeding  its 
functioning. This lack of trust is evident both between participants in the market, but at least 
as  importantly,  between  the  public  and  the  market.  The  global  FX  market  needs  to  move 
toward  a  more  favourable  and  desirable  location,  and  allow  participants  to  have  much 
greater confidence that the market is functioning appropriately. 
A  well-functioning  foreign  exchange  market  is  very  much  in  the  interest  of  all  market 
participants. This clearly includes central banks, both in their own role as market participants 
but also as the exchange rate is an important channel of monetary policy transmission. In a 
globalised world, the foreign exchange market is one of the most vital parts of the financial 
plumbing. 
The Global Code aims to set out global principles of good practice in the foreign exchange 
market to provide a common set of guidance to the market, including in areas where there is 
a degree of uncertainty about what sort of practices are acceptable, and what are not. This 
should help to address the lack of trust as well  as promote the effective functioning of the 
wholesale FX market. 
To that end, one of the guiding principles underpinning the work on the Code is that it should 
promote  a  robust,  fair,  liquid,  open,  and  transparent  market.  A  diverse  set  of  buyers  and 
sellers,  supported  by  resilient  infrastructure,  should  be  able  to  confidently  and  effectively 
transact at competitive prices that reflect available market information and in a manner that 
conforms to acceptable standards of behaviour. I am confident that a similar set of principles 
are guiding the reforms to the FX market in China. 
                                                
2  See BIS (Bank for International Settlements) (2013), ‘BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange 
and  Derivatives  Market  Activity  in  2013’,  available  at  http://www.bis.org/publ/rpfx13.htm;  Rime  D  and  A 
Schrimpf (2013), ‘The Anatomy of the Global FX Market Through the Lens of the 2013 Triennial Survey’, BIS 
Quarterly Review, December. Available at http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1312e.htm. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  work  to  develop  the  Global  Code  commenced  in  May  last  year,  when  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements  (BIS)  Governors  commissioned  a  working  group  of  the  Markets 
Committee of the BIS to facilitate the establishment of a single Global Code of Conduct for 
the wholesale FX market and to come up with mechanisms to promote greater adherence to 
the Code3. 
I am chairing this work, with Simon Potter of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York leading 
the  work  on  developing  the  Code  and  Chris  Salmon  of  the  Bank  of  England  leading  the 
adherence work. Our working group comprises representatives of the central banks of all the 
major  FX  centres,  including  China,  drawing  on the  membership  of the Markets  Committee 
which is comprised of heads of the market operations areas of the 15 major currency areas.4 
Given our roles, we are all very much interested in the effective functioning of the FX market. 
Again,  it  is  very  much  a  global  effort  reflecting  the  global  nature  of  the  foreign  exchange 
market. 
This work is also very much a public sector-private sector partnership. In that regard, we are 
being ably and vigorously supported in this work by a group of market participants, chaired 
by David Puth, CEO of our conference host CLS. The group contains people from all around 
the world, including China, on both the buy side, including corporates and asset managers, 
and the sell side, along with trading platforms, ECNs and non-bank participants. Hence all 
parts of the market are involved in the drafting of the Code to make sure all perspectives are 
heard and appropriately reflected. 
At the outset we decided to split the topics we intend to cover in the Code into two parts. The 
first phase covers areas such as ethics, information sharing, execution (including mark-up) 
and confirmation and settlement. The second phase will cover topics such as governance, 
risk management and compliance, as well as further aspects of execution including e-trading 
and  platforms  (including  last  look),  prime  brokerage,  and  the  unique  features  of  FX  swap, 
forward, and option transactions. 
The  first  phase  of  the  Code  has  been  completed  and  is  set  to  be  released  next  week  on 
26 May  in  New  York following  the  meeting  of the  Global  Foreign  Exchange  Committees. I 
would  hope  that  you,  as  participants  in  the  FX  market  in  China,  find  the  Code  useful, 
readable and relevant to the functioning of the market here. 
Work  on  the  second  phase  of  the  Code  is  already  underway.  Our  intention  is  that  the 
complete Code will be released following the Global Foreign Exchange Committees meeting 
in London in May 2017. At the end of that process, for the Code to be effective and for it to 
achieve  what  we  want  it  to  achieve,  it  will  need  to  be  accepted  and  endorsed  by  market 
participants. While the Code is a voluntary code, to ensure greater adherence to the Code, 
we will also be outlining some steps we are taking in that regard next week in New York and 
will have a fuller suite of adherence mechanisms in London next year. 
Finally,  let  me  turn  to  discussing  some  of  the  challenges  that  Australia  faced  as  the 
Australian dollar became an internationalised currency. 
The Australian dollar was floated in 1983, as large net capital inflows (in part resulting from 
the relaxation of capital controls in the 1970s) made it difficult to control both the exchange 
rate  and  domestic  monetary  conditions.  At  the  same  time,  most  of  the  remaining  capital 
controls were removed as these were only seen as a tool for maintaining the fixed exchange 
rate, and hence were no longer necessary. 
                                                
3  BIS (Bank for International Settlements) (2015), ‘Economic Consultative Committee statement on FX market 
best practices’, Media Release, 11 May. Available at http://www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm.  
4  BIS  (Bank  for  International  Settlements)  (2016),  ‘Foreign  Exchange  Working  Group’,  Media  Release, 
10 February. Available at http://www.bis.org/about/factmktc/fxwg.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In  the  decade  prior  to  moving  to  a  freely  floating  currency  in  1983,  Australia  had  been 
through almost all other forms of exchange rate regimes: a peg to the US dollar (as part of 
the  Bretton  Woods  exchange  rate  regime);  a  peg  to  a  trade-weighted  basket;  and  an 
adjustable peg, where the frequency of adjustment increased substantially up until the time 
of the float. 
Both  capital  inflows  and  outflows  increased  substantially  following  the  float  in  1983 
(Graph 1). The benefits of the floating exchange rate in assisting the Australian economy to 
respond  to  shocks  are  documented  extensively  elsewhere,  as  are  the  benefits  in  allowing 
greater independence of domestic monetary policy settings.5 One clear demonstration of this 
is  in  the  reduced  volatility  of  domestic  interest  rates  and  the  increased  volatility  of  the 
Australian  dollar  (Graph 2).  But  the  increased  volatility  of  the  Australian  dollar  is  generally 
regarded  as  a  positive  development  (as  a  mechanism  of  adjusting  to  shocks)  and  not  a 
threat. 
Graph 1 
                                                 
5  G  Stevens  (2013),  ‘The  Australian  Dollar:  Thirty  Years  of  Floating’,  Speech  at  the  Australian  Business 
Economists’ Annual Dinner, Sydney, 21 November; Ballantyne A, J Hambur, I Roberts and M Wright (2014), 
‘Financial Reform in Australia and China’, RBA Research Discussion Paper 2014–10. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 2 
  The  increase  in  gross  capital  flows  encouraged  the  development  of  domestic  FX  and 
hedging markets, to the point where, as I mentioned earlier, the Australian dollar is now one 
of the world’s most traded currencies, including a large swaps market. Australian corporates 
(particularly  financial  institutions)  regularly  issue  debt  in  foreign  currency,  which  is  then 
swapped into Australian dollars. An active ‘kangaroo’ market (Australian dollar-denominated 
bonds issued by non-residents) provides natural counterparties to these swaps. 
Deep  hedging  markets  allow  Australian  firms  to  hedge  foreign  currency  risk  relatively 
cheaply. This is important because Australia’s history of current account deficits means that it 
has accumulated a fairly large net foreign liability position. In the absence of hedging, this 
could  be  problematic  were  the  Australian  dollar  to  depreciate  significantly.  But  after  taking 
hedging  into  account,  Australia  has  a  positive  net  foreign  currency  asset  position.6  The 
existence of deep hedging markets further ensures that the benefits of a flexible exchange 
rate policy outweigh the costs. 
However, this process was not smooth. In the 1980s and early 1990s Australia experienced 
two  painful  episodes,  one  relating  to  residents  undertaking  unhedged  foreign  currency 
                                                
6  Rush  A,  D  Sadeghian  and  M  Wright  (2013)  ‘Foreign  Currency  Exposure  and  Hedging  in  Australia’  RBA 
Bulletin, December, pp 49–57. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  borrowing  and  the  other  to  lax  lending  standards  that,  following  the  opening  up  of  the 
banking  sector  to  foreign  entrants,  led  to  a  boom  and  bust  in  commercial  property  prices. 
Both  these  episodes  contributed  to  better  risk  management  practices  for  banks  and 
regulators, including greater demand for hedging products, contributing to their development 
and a deeper financial market. 
Australia’s  experience  with  the  internationalisation  of  its  currency  is  not  the  only  possible 
path.  But  the  path  of  Australia  and  other  countries  that  have  pursued financial  reform  and 
capital account liberalisation at the same time, nearly all of whom then experienced episodes 
of  financial  instability,  suggests  that  it  can  be  beneficial  to  establish  a  strong  prudential 
supervision  framework  before  the  financial  sector  and  capital  account  are  fully  liberalised. 
This  mitigates  subsequent  risks  to  financial  stability.  In  light  of  this  history,  and  given  the 
importance  of  China  to  the  global  economy,  China’s  authorities  have  good  reason  to 
continue pursuing a cautious and gradual program of financial reform. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  Australia  has  a  deep  interest  in  following  the  ongoing  liberalisation  of 
China’s  financial  markets  and  internationalisation  of  the  RMB,  given  the  strong  linkages 
between the two economies. We welcome the steps that have been taken that have already 
significantly increased the role of the RMB in global financial markets. As the FX market in 
China  becomes  increasingly  integrated  into  the  global  FX  market,  I  would  hope  that  the 
Global  Code  of  Conduct  for  the  FX  market  that  is  to  be  released  (in  part)  next  week  can 
serve as a useful benchmark for the functioning of the FX market in China as much as we 
intend it to be for the global FX market. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
