  Haruhiko Kuroda: The battle against deflation – the evolution of 
monetary policy and Japan’s experience 
Speech  by  Mr  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  Columbia  University, 
New York City, 13 April 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of Japan’s website. 
Introduction 
It is a great privilege to be invited to speak at Columbia Business School today. I was told 
that  the  Center  on  Japanese  Economy  and  Business  (CJEB),  which  is  kindly  hosting  this 
conference, is celebrating its 30th anniversary this year. The CJEB has long played a pivotal 
role  in  promoting  a  better  understanding  of  the  Japanese  economy  and  U.S.-Japan 
economic  relations.  I  would  like  to  express  my  sincere  appreciation  to  Professor  Hugh 
Patrick,  the  founder  and  long-time  director  of  the  CJEB  and  a  leading  expert  on  Japan’s 
economy, and all those related to the CJEB. 
As you all know, Japan has long been mired in deflation. Deflation was once perceived to be 
a phenomenon unique to Japan. Looking back to the late 1990s and 2000s, while Japan was 
suffering from deflation, other economies were performing quite well. With Alan Greenspan, 
sometimes  called  the  “maestro,”  at  the  helm  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  United  States 
enjoyed  a  prolonged  period  of  stable  prices  and  high  economic  growth,  and  overcame 
several economic shocks such as the collapse of IT Bubble in the early 2000s. At the time, 
there  was  talk  of  the  so-called  New  Economy  in  which  business  cycles  had  allegedly 
disappeared due to IT innovation and economic globalization, resulting in strong and lasting 
economic  growth  under  low  and  stable  inflation.  In  Europe,  regional  economic  integration 
made substantial progress with introduction of a common currency, the euro, in 1999, and 
the economy grew in a stable manner. Meanwhile, emerging economies including China and 
commodity-exporting  countries  continued  to  enjoy  rapid  growth. Only  Japan  seemed to  be 
left behind in this tide of global growth. 
But  then  the  global  financial  crisis  struck  in  2008.  Major  advanced  economies  suffered  a 
sharp deceleration in economic activity, but thanks to prompt and bold policy actions taken 
by  the  authorities  including  central  banks,  the  global  economy  was  able  to  avoid  another 
Great  Depression.  However,  even  though  eight  years  have  passed  since  the  start  of  the 
crisis,  the  global  economy  has  yet  to  regain  its  full  strength.  Many  countries  –  particularly 
advanced  economies  –  continue  to  be  plagued  by  low  economic  growth  and  low  inflation, 
and there is concern that they might fall into Japanese-style deflation. 
Fortunately, the end of deflation in Japan is in sight as a result of the bold monetary policy 
measures  called  “quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing,”  or  QQE  for  short,  we 
launched three years ago. Today, I will discuss how Japan, as the “front runner” of deflation, 
has  fought  against  deflation  and  is  overcoming  it.  While  doing  so,  I  will  also  explain  the 
theoretical background to the evolution of what is called unconventional monetary policy. 
What is deflation? The harm of moderate yet persistent deflation 
I. 
What is deflation? For those living in the United States, which has enjoyed moderate inflation 
for an extended period of time, this might not be immediately obvious, so let me start with 
this point. 
Deflation refers to a situation where prices decline persistently. If prices of individual goods 
and  services  fall  thanks  to  innovation  and  improved  productivity,  this  is  of  course  a  good 
thing. A good example is the gradual price decline in PCs and smartphones. However, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  deflation I am talking about refers to a situation in which the prices of a broad range of goods 
and services decline, and consequently, prices as a whole drop. In most countries, including 
the  United  States, general  prices  are measured  in  terms  of  consumer  price  indices,  which 
are the weighted averages of baskets of goods and services purchased by consumers. Put 
very simply, deflation can be understood as a continuous decline in consumer prices. 
What happens to the economy if prices as a whole decline continuously (Chart 1)? Looking 
at  the  overall  economy,  suppliers  of  goods  and  services  will  see  a  decrease  in  sales  and 
profits,  and  firms  with  declining  profits  typically  start  to  lay  off  employees  or  restrain  their 
wages. Employees that have been laid off or whose wages have declined experience a fall in 
their income and restrain their spending due to uncertainty about their future. Such restraint 
in spending leads to a further decline in the sale of goods and services, resulting in harsher 
competition  among  firms.  Firms  therefore  lower  prices  in  order  to  compete,  leading  to  a 
further decline in their sales and profits. This simple outline shows that once deflation starts, 
it  perpetuates  itself,  so  that  the  economy  falls  into  a  bad  “equilibrium,  in  which  economic 
activity is shrinking.” 
Japan has been struggling with deflation for a decade and a half, triggered by the collapse of 
the asset bubble of the late 1980s/early 1990s and the destabilization of the financial system 
reflecting this collapse. A key characteristic of Japan’s deflation is that it has been moderate 
but persistent. During the Great Depression in the United States, which is often cited as a 
typical example of deflation, prices plunged by nearly 30 percent in total. Moreover, they fell 
precipitously, dropping at an annual rate of almost 10 percent in 1931 and 1932. However, 
deflation  persisted  only  for  four  years.  In  contrast,  Japan’s  consumer  prices  only  fell  by 
4.1 percent in total in the 15 years from fiscal 1998 to fiscal 2012, which is equivalent to an 
annual average rate of only 0.3 percent. Thus, while deflation was much milder, it lasted for a 
decade and a half. Such prolonged deflation gave rise to the entrenched belief that prices 
and wages will not rise in the future. 
If we use disease as an analogy, the substantial deflation of the 1930s can be regarded as 
an  “acute  disease,”  while  Japan’s  deflation  since  the  late  1990s  is  a  “chronic  disease.” 
Chronic diseases tend to cause relatively little pain to patients, but for that reason they can 
be “silent killers” that quietly ruin the entire body. Let me explain why moderate yet persistent 
deflation is harmful to the entire economy. 
The biggest problem is that, under deflation, the value of cash gradually increases with the 
passage  of  time,  discouraging  firms  and  households  from  spending.  The  nominal  value  of 
cash  remains  unchanged  and  interest  rates  on  deposits  at  banks  are  very  unlikely  to  be 
negative. (I will come back to this point later when I talk about negative interest rate policy.) 
At the same time, prices of goods and services gradually decline, so that for consumers it is 
better to wait now and buy later when prices are lower. For firms, instead of exploring new 
business opportunities and investing in facilities or research and development, an easier way 
to  shore  up  corporate  value  is  to  cut  costs  such  as  wages,  increase  cash  flow,  and 
accumulate  cash  in  bank  deposits.  In  Japan,  all  these  phenomena  have  been  widely 
observed since the 1990s. 
Let  us  take  a  look  at  sectoral  saving-investment  balances  under  deflation.  Normally,  the 
corporate  sector  has  a  financial  deficit,  that  is,  it  is  a  net  borrower.  Firms  conduct  their 
business and produce added value in the economy by raising funds from banks and capital 
markets.  However,  in  the  late  1990s,  the  corporate  sector  started  to  register  a  financial 
surplus, or become a net saver. To make up for the shortage in aggregate demand brought 
about by the changes in the corporate sector, the government raised funds by issuing large 
amounts  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  and  increased  fiscal  spending  such  as 
public  works.  Meanwhile,  in  the  banking  sector,  deposits  increased  substantially  while 
lending decreased as a result of the financial surplus in the corporate sector. The banking 
sector,  in  turn,  invested  these  surplus  funds  in  JGBs.  Thus,  under  Japan’s  deflationary 
environment, a peculiar flow of funds established itself, in which the corporate sector has a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial  surplus,  the  government  sector  has  a  financial  deficit,  and  the  banking  sector 
expands its investment in JGBs (Chart 2). 
Another  problem  of  moderate  yet  persistent  deflation  is  that,  as  the  belief  becomes 
entrenched that prices will not rise but continue to steadily decline, real interest rates remain 
high, hampering the effectiveness of monetary policy. Let me elaborate a bit on this point. 
In terms of both lending and deposit interest rates, what matters for economic activity is not 
the nominal interest rate, but the real interest rate, or the interest rate adjusted by the outlook 
for inflation. For instance, if the nominal interest rate is 3 percent per annum and prices are 
expected to rise by 2 percent, the real interest rate is 1 percent. On the other hand, if the 
nominal interest rate is again 3 percent, but prices are expected to fall by 1 percent, the real 
interest  rate  is  4  percent.  Obviously,  financial  conditions  are  more  accommodative  in  the 
former than the latter case. If people start to think that prices will steadily decline – in the 
economics jargon, “inflation expectations” fall into negative territory – real interest rates will 
remain high compared to nominal interest rates. 
These considerations illustrate how moderate yet persistent deflation is like a harmful chronic 
disease.  It  not  only  stymies  the  dynamism  of  the  economy  but  also  weakens  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy. 
II. 
The evolution of monetary policy: What is “Unconventional Monetary Policy”? 
Given the insidious effects of such deflation, you may be wondering how the Bank of Japan 
responded. Naturally, the Bank did not merely stand by. Although the Bank’s monetary policy 
measures were often criticized – especially abroad – as being “too little, too late,” the Bank 
did in fact adopt a variety of unconventional monetary policy measures from the late 1990s 
onward (Chart 3). 
To start with, in 1999, the Bank adopted a “zero interest rate policy,” in which the overnight 
money  market  rate  was  guided  close  to  0  percent.  In  2001,  the  Bank  switched  its  main 
operating target from the overnight money market rate to current account balances held by 
financial institutions at the Bank of Japan, which are equivalent to what in the United States 
are usually called “reserve balances.” Under the policy, which lasted from 2001 to 2006, the 
Bank  provided  large  amounts  of  liquidity,  so  that  reserve  balances  eventually  reached 
several multiples of required reserves. To the best of my knowledge, this was the world’s first 
quantitative easing. At the same time, the Bank committed itself to continuing with the policy 
until  the  annual  rate  of change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  would  register  “stably  a 
zero percent or an increase.” This means that the Bank also pioneered what in recent years 
has come to be called “forward guidance.” 
After the global financial crisis in 2008, Japan’s economy decelerated significantly as a result 
of the global recession, even though the direct impact of the global financial crisis on Japan’s 
financial system was relatively small. CPI inflation, which had been positive since 2006, fell 
back  into  negative  territory.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  Bank  introduced  another  policy 
initiative in 2010  which we called “comprehensive monetary easing.” Under this policy, the 
Bank purchased large amounts of JGBs, focusing in particular on those with maturities of up 
to three years, pushing down interest rates on such JGBs to close to 0 percent. In addition, 
to  reduce  risk  premiums,  the  Bank  also  –  though  to  a  lesser  extent  –  purchased  private-
sector debt such as corporate bonds and commercial paper (CP), as well as equity financial 
products such as exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and real estate investment trusts (REITs). 
Moreover, in order to encourage lending by financial institutions, the Bank introduced special 
long-term  lending  facilities  with  a  low  interest  rate,  which  are  similar  to  the  Funding  for 
Lending  Scheme  by  the  Bank  of  England  (BOE)  and  the  targeted  longer-term  refinancing 
operations  (TLTROs)  by  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB).  This  means  that  the 
unconventional monetary policy measures taken by the Bank of Japan can stand comparison 
with those taken by other central banks at least in terms of their breadth and variety. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The series of unconventional monetary policy measures implemented by the Bank prevented 
Japan’s  economy from falling  into  a  1930s-style  deflationary  spiral  of  sharply  falling  prices 
and  economic  contraction.  However,  none  of  these  monetary  policy  measures  were 
sufficiently strong to overcome deflation. Why was this the case? 
To understand the reasons, we should start with the mechanisms through which monetary 
easing  affects the  economy.  A  key  concept  in  this  context  is  the  so-called  “natural  rate  of 
interest,”  which  is  the  real  interest  rate  at  which  the  economy  neither  accelerates  nor 
decelerates. Monetary easing aims to push real interest rates in financial markets below the 
natural rate of interest through a lowering of the policy rate and/or increase in the supply of 
funds  in  order  to  stimulate  economic  activities  such  as  business  fixed  investment  and 
housing investment. This is the main channel through which monetary easing seeks to boost 
economic activity. Although the determinants of the natural rate of interest are the subject of 
considerable debate, it is widely thought that the potential growth rate of the economy plays 
a major role. 
The  conceptual  framework  I  just  outlined  allows  you  to  easily  see  that  Japan’s  monetary 
policy  under  deflation  faced  two  major  challenges.  The  first  was  that  real  interest  rates 
remained  high.  Nominal  short-term  interest  rates  –  the  policy  tool  of  traditional  monetary 
policy – already were close to 0 percent after the introduction of the zero interest rate policy 
in  1999.  This  means  that  short-term  interest  rates  already  faced  the  so-called  “zero  lower 
bound” in the sense that nominal interest rates cannot be lowered below 0 percent. At the 
same  time,  with  the  economy  stuck  in  a  deflationary  equilibrium,  inflation  expectations 
remained low. As a result, real interest rates – that is, nominal interest rates minus inflation 
expectations – remained high. 
The second major challenge that made it more difficult to overcome deflation is the decline in 
the  natural  rate  of  interest  reflecting  a  deceleration  in  Japan’s  growth  potential.  With  the 
benefit  of  hindsight,  we  know  that  deflation  has  coincided  with  a  decline  in  the  productive 
population as a result of rapid population aging, reducing Japan’s growth potential. Another 
factor contributing to the deceleration in growth potential was sluggish capital accumulation 
reflecting the prolonged deflation. Specifically, while Japan’s potential growth rate in the early 
1990s was around 3–4 percent, it subsequently followed a declining trend and recently has 
been under 1 percent (Chart 4). Given that, as mentioned, the potential growth rate likely is a 
key  determinant  of  the  natural  rate  of  interest,  it  is  likely  that  the  latter  also  followed  a 
declining trend. 
As  a  result,  Japan  was  trapped  in  a  situation  in  which  the  zero  lower  bound  on  nominal 
interest rates and the decline in inflation expectations made it difficult to reduce real interest 
rates just at a time when lower real interest rates were warranted due to the decline in the 
natural rate of interest. This situation can be easily grasped by comparing Japan’s estimated 
potential growth rate and real interest rates as approximated by the yields on 10-year JGBs 
minus  actual  inflation  (Chart  5).  Given  these  challenges,  Japan  was  unable  to  find  an 
appropriate  cure  for  the  chronic  disease  of  prolonged  deflation.  This  is  how  a  deflationary 
equilibrium took hold. 
I  hope  that,  based  on  this  outline,  you  can  clearly  see  the  challenges  that  Japan’s  policy 
authorities have been facing in order to overcome deflation. The first challenge has been to 
raise the potential growth rate and thereby increase the natural rate of interest. The second 
challenge  has  been  to  simultaneously  devise  monetary  policy  measures  to  substantially 
lower real interest rates. It has been widely argued that monetary policy is no longer effective 
and that economic policy should center on strategies to promote growth. However, as I hope 
my explanation so far has made clear, tackling deflation is not a choice between monetary 
policy or a growth strategy: both are necessary. In this context, the government’s initiative to 
enhance  Japan’s  economic growth  as  well  as  growth-oriented  efforts  by  the  private  sector 
are of vital importance. At the same time, the Bank of Japan has to accomplish its mission as 
the central bank. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The 2 percent price stability target and the introduction of QQE 
III. 
In the course of Japan’s prolonged battle against deflation, it became increasingly clear that 
more  powerful  monetary  easing  was  needed.  Against  this  background,  the  newly  elected 
Abe  administration  in  December  2012  launched  “Abenomics,”  consisting  of “three  arrows,” 
namely, bold monetary policy, flexible fiscal policy, and a growth strategy to promote private 
investment.  In  January  2013,  the  Bank  of  Japan  then  introduced  a  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent CPI inflation, which was reiterated in the joint statement of the government and the 
Bank of Japan. This followed the Federal  Reserve’s announcement of a similar longer-run 
inflation goal a year earlier in January 2012. 
I was installed as the governor of the Bank of Japan just after the introduction of the price 
stability  target,  in  March  2013.  The  following  month,  in  April,  we  introduced  a  new  policy 
initiative,  QQE.  We  designed  QQE  to  overcome  the  limitations  of  previous  policies.  QQE 
consists of two major elements (Chart 6). First, QQE seeks to raise inflation expectations and 
hence  drastically  change  the  deflationary  mindset  that  has  taken  hold  among  the  public 
through the Bank’s strong commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at 
the  earliest  possible  time.  Second,  through  massive  JGB  purchases  by  the  Bank,  QQE 
exerts  downward  pressure  not  only  on  short-term  nominal  interest  rates  but  on  the  entire 
yield curve. By combining these two elements, QQE allows the Bank to significantly lower not 
only short-term but also long-term real interest rates. 
As  for  the  massive  JGB  purchases,  the  Bank  is  purchasing  JGBs  with  maturities  of  up  to 
40 years,  the  longest  maturity  in  Japan,  exploiting  to  the  greatest  extent  possible  any 
remaining  room  for  further  declines  in  nominal  interest  rates.  When  QQE  was  initially 
introduced,  the  Bank’s  operational  guideline  was  to  purchase  JGBs  so  that  the  Bank’s 
holdings of JGBs would increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen. The pace was 
accelerated in October 2014 to about 80 trillion yen a year and this guideline continues to 
this day. Given that Japan’s nominal GDP is about 500 trillion yen, JGB purchases of about 
80  trillion  yen  correspond  to  about  16  percent  of  Japan’s  GDP.  As  a  result  of  such 
purchases, the ratio of the Bank’s balance sheet to nominal GDP has risen from 35 percent 
at the end of March 2013 to 77 percent at the end of December last year and will continue 
expanding.  The  equivalent  ratio  in  the  case  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  after  three  rounds  of 
large-scale  asset  purchases  (LSAPs),  is  25  percent  as  of  end-December  last  year.  This 
comparison  should  give  you  a  good  sense  of  how  massive  monetary  easing  in  Japan  is. 
Turning  to  the  qualitative  aspect  of  the  Bank’s  JGB  purchases,  the  average  remaining 
maturity of JGBs purchased by the Bank was extended from slightly less than three years to 
about  seven  years  when  QQE  was  introduced.  The  Bank  later  extended  the  targeted 
average remaining maturity further and the target range now is about seven to twelve years. 
Moreover, the Bank is continuing with the purchase of ETFs and REITs, which started under 
“comprehensive  monetary  easing”  in  2010,  but  expanded  the  scale  of  such  purchases  as 
well. 
Effects of QQE: Japan’s economy is overcoming deflation 
IV. 
QQE,  which  differs  drastically  from  previous  measures,  has  been  exerting  its  intended 
effects. I would now like to show how Japan’s economy has changed since the introduction 
of QQE by referring to major financial and economic indicators. 
Let me start with financial indicators. Nominal long-term interest rates as measured by the 
yields  on  10-year  JGBs  declined  by  0.4  percentage  points  from  0.7  percent  before  the 
introduction of QQE in 2013 to 0.3 percent around the end of 2015. Next, turning to inflation 
expectations,  while  it  should  be  noted  that  measures  of  inflation  expectations  tend  to  vary 
considerably  and  therefore  should  be  treated  with  a  degree  of  caution,  a  widely  watched 
survey of economists indicates that medium- to long-term inflation expectations have risen by 
about 0.4 percentage points in the same period. Using these figures to calculate real long-
term interest rates suggests that these have declined by 0.8 percentage points. Research by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  the Bank’s staff indicates that the effects of QQE on the entire yield curve are equivalent to a 
reduction  in  the  short-term  policy  rate  of  about  2  percent.  Under  these  accommodative 
financial conditions, the amount outstanding of bank lending, including lending to small firms, 
has continued to increase at a moderate pace of 2.0–3.0 percent on a year-on-year basis. 
The stimulative effects of the substantial decline in real interest rates on the economy have 
become  increasingly  apparent  (Chart  7).  Japanese  firms’  profits  have  been  increasing, 
reaching  record  levels.  This  is  not  only  the  case  for  large  firms,  but  also  for  small  firms. 
Against this background, business fixed investment has been increasing moderately. Turning 
to  the  labor  market,  the  unemployment  rate  has  declined  to  a  range  of  3.0–3.5  percent, 
which can be regarded as full employment. Moreover, in the 2014 Shunto – the annual wage 
negotiations  between  workers  and  management  in  spring  –  an  increase  in  base  pay  was 
seen for the first time in two decades, and an increase for the third year in a row will follow 
this year. Moreover, there are signs that wages of non-regular employees including part-time 
employees are also being raised as a result of labor shortages. Reflecting the improvement 
in the employment and income situation, private consumption has been resilient, albeit with 
some fluctuations  due to factors  such  as  the  weather.  Japan’s  economy  has  continued  its 
moderate recovery with a virtuous cycle from income to spending being maintained in both 
the corporate and household sectors. 
On the back of the improvement of the real economy, the underlying trend in inflation has 
been steadily improving (Chart 8). The output gap, which shows the utilization of production 
factors such as labor and capital, has been improving and recently returned to the average of 
the  past  of  0  percent.  As  I  noted  earlier,  compared  to  the  time  before  the  introduction  of 
QQE, inflation expectations have increased on the whole. The year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI recently has been around 0 percent, largely reflecting the substantial decline in crude 
oil prices since summer 2014. However, the year-on-year rate of change in the all-item CPI 
excluding energy and fresh food shows a completely different picture. Before the introduction 
of QQE in April 2013, the rate of change was slightly negative, registering about minus 0.5 
percent. Following the introduction of QQE, it turned positive in October 2013 and since then 
has  remained  positive  for  29  consecutive  months.  It  recently  increased  to  a  level  above  1 
percent. This is the first time that Japan has registered such sustained inflation since it fell 
into  deflation.  Thus,  although  Japan’s  economy  still  has  some  way  to  go  until  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent is achieved, there is no doubt that there has been a clear change 
in the inflation trend under the Bank’s QQE. 
Objectives of the negative interest rate policy 
V. 
Against the background just described, the Bank of Japan introduced “QQE with a Negative 
Interest Rate” in January 2016. 
As  indicated,  QQE  has  been  exerting  its  intended  effects.  However,  since  the  turn  of  the 
year, global financial markets have been unstable against the backdrop of the further decline 
in  crude  oil  prices  and  uncertainty  over  future  developments  in  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting economies, particularly the Chinese economy. Moreover, although Japanese firms’ 
behavior  has  become  increasingly  proactive  based  on  the  prospects  of a  post-deflationary 
economy, they have nevertheless remained somewhat cautious despite their high levels of 
profits,  probably  reflecting  that  the  prolonged  period  of  deflation  is  still  fresh  in  their 
memories.  Therefore,  the  risk  that  market  volatility  could  lead  to  a  deterioration  in  firms’ 
sentiment  and  bring  about  a  setback  in  the  conversion  of  people’s  deflationary  mindset, 
which  had  been  underway,  should  not  be  underestimated.  It  was  in  order  to  preempt  the 
manifestation of such risk and to maintain the momentum toward achieving the price stability 
target  that  the  Bank  decided  on  further  monetary  easing  through  “QQE  with  a  Negative 
Interest Rate.” 
Let  us  return  to the  mechanism  of  monetary  easing  considered  earlier  (Chart  3).  Through 
“QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” the Bank’s aim is to lower the short end of the yield 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  curve by applying a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to part of financial institutions’ 
current account balances at the Bank of Japan. In combination with large-scale purchases of 
JGBs,  the  Bank  can  exert  even  stronger  downward  pressure  on  interest  rates  across  the 
entire yield curve, resulting in lower real interest rates. Some argue that the negative interest 
rate  policy  has  shifted  the  Bank’s  policy  focus  from  the  quantitative  to  the  interest  rate 
aspect. This is not the case. Rather, “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” further boosts the 
effects of existing policy measures by directly pushing down the short-end of the yield curve. 
In this sense, it can be called “enhanced QQE.” 
As I mentioned earlier, in the debate on monetary policy, the zero lower bound on nominal 
interest rates  has traditionally  been  regarded  as  insurmountable.  Since a  negative  interest 
rate  implies  that  the  borrower  receives  interest  while  the  lender  has  to  pay  interest,  it  is 
something that under normal circumstances is highly unlikely. 
However, the experience of some central banks in Europe in recent years has shown that it 
is possible to have negative interest rates between institutional players in financial markets 
by  applying  a  negative  interest  rate  on  financial  institutions’  current  accounts  held  at  the 
central bank. The policy framework adopted by the Bank of Japan follows the example of the 
frameworks adopted by European central banks but includes some modifications reflecting 
the specifics of Japan’s financial system. 
In designing a policy framework to overcome the zero lower bound, a key challenge is that a 
negative interest rate potentially has adverse effects on the profitability of the banking sector. 
The reason is that private banks will end up holding assets, including current accounts at the 
Bank of Japan, that have a negative yield. Given that income from yield spreads – such as 
the difference between yields on loans and deposits – represents financial institutions’ main 
source of earnings, the negative interest rate policy potentially reduces their profitability. Yet, 
the banking sector plays a key role in the transmission of monetary policy in that it acts as an 
intermediary between those that have surplus funds and those that have a deficit of funds; 
therefore, if the negative interest rate policy were to excessively reduce financial institutions’ 
earnings  and  undermine  the  stability  of  the  financial  sector,  it  would  make  them  more 
reluctant  to  lend  or  lead  them  to  demand  higher  lending  rates,  which  would  potentially 
weaken their functioning as financial intermediaries and thus impair the effects of monetary 
easing. 
That being said, there is no danger of this happening in Japan. One reason is that Japan’s 
financial  institutions  have  a  sufficient  capital  buffer,  since they  were  barely  affected  by  the 
global  financial  crisis.  In  addition,  credit  costs  have  declined  significantly,  since  amid  the 
continued economic recovery the number of bankruptcies has declined to a very low level. In 
fact,  not  only  major  banks  but  also  regional  banks  have  registered  profits  close  to  record 
levels despite the low interest rate environment. 
Moreover, the Bank of Japan carefully calibrated the framework in order to ensure that the 
negative  interest  rate  policy  does  not  excessively  reduce  financial  institutions’  profits  and 
hence  undermine  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  Specifically,  it  adopted  a  three-tier 
system in which current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank are divided into 
tiers  with  different  interest  rates,  namely,  plus  0.1  percent,  0  percent,  and  minus  0.1. 
Moreover,  the  Bank  caps  the  amount  to  which  the  negative  interest  rate  is  applied  by 
adjusting the tier to which an interest rate of 0 percent is applied (Chart 9). This is a practical 
application of the basic principle taught in introductory economics (Econ 101) that prices are 
determined  by  marginal  costs,  not  average  costs.  Put  differently,  what  matters  in  the 
formation of interest rates is the cost of a one unit increase in a financial institution’s current 
account  balance.  Roughly  speaking,  the  total  of  financial  institutions’  current  account 
balances  at  the  Bank  is  somewhat  less  than  300  trillion  yen,  and  the  tier  to  which  the 
negative interest rate is applied is about 10 to 30 trillion yen – that is, no more than one tenth 
of the present entire balance. The Bank continues to apply an interest rate of 0.1 percent to a 
portion  of  current  account  balances  roughly  corresponding  the  average  balances  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  institutions held in 2015, which amount to about 200 trillion yen. Under this framework, the 
direct impact on financial institutions’ profits of the negative interest rate is minimized, while 
the policy still produces its intended effects on interest rates in financial markets. 
In  fact,  the  impact  of  the  policy  is  already  clearly  visible  in  developments  in  JGB  yields. 
Interest rates across the entire yield curve have declined further, with rates up to a maturity 
of about 10-years having become negative (Chart 10). Benchmark rates for business lending 
as well as interest rates on housing loans have also declined. Moreover, recently CP with a 
negative yield has been issued. Going forward, the effects of the negative interest rate policy 
are likely to steadily spread to the real economy and inflation. 
In sum, “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” is a very powerful framework enabling the Bank 
to  pursue  monetary  easing  by  combining  a  negative  interest  rate  with  quantitative  and 
qualitative easing. The Bank will continue with “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” aiming 
to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that 
target in a stable manner. It will examine risks to economic activity and prices, and will not 
hesitate to take additional easing measures in terms of three dimensions – quantity, quality, 
and the interest rate – if it is judged necessary for achieving the price stability target. It is 
probably  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate”  represents  the 
most  powerful  monetary  easing  in  modern central  banking  history. The Bank  of Japan  will 
achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  for  sure  by  making  full  use  of  “QQE  with  a 
Negative Interest Rate.” 
Conclusion 
Central  banks  around the  world  currently  are facing  an  unprecedented challenge: to firmly 
anchor inflation expectations amid strong downward pressure on prices while almost having 
exhausted  the  traditional  monetary  policy  tool  of  lowering  short-term  interest  rates.  In  the 
United  States,  thanks  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  decisive  and  timely  conduct  of  monetary 
policy, the economy has been recovering steadily and inflation expectations have remained 
anchored; yet, with wage growth and inflation not as strong as the tightening of labor market 
conditions  might  suggest,  the  process  of  normalizing  interest  rates  is  attracting  close 
attention  globally.  Meanwhile,  in  Europe,  the  ECB  in  March  this  year  decided  to  take 
additional easing measures in order to deal with increasing risks to the price stability target, 
pointing to the importance of avoiding second-round effects of low inflation rates on inflation 
expectations. Under these circumstances, Japan’s experience of fighting prolonged deflation 
should provide a valuable case study for the central banks of other advanced economies in 
finding appropriate monetary policy responses. 
Throughout  their  long  history,  central  banks  around  the  world  have  overcome  various 
difficulties by learning from each other’s experience and coming up with innovative solutions. 
I am convinced that, through their wisdom and will, central banks will continue to fulfill their 
mission of ensuring price stability in this changing and challenging world. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
