Gent Sejko: Prospects and challenges facing Albania 
Statement  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  conclusion  of 
discussions on the eighth review of the arrangement with the International Monetary Fund, 
Tirana, 28 June 2016. 
 In  the  last  two  weeks  we  have  been  engaged  in  intensive  discussions  with  IMF  Mission 
representatives,  in  the  framework  of  the  review  of  the  IMF  arrangement.  The  discussions 
focused  on:  the  analysis  of  the  current  situation  of  the  Albanian  economy  and  financial 
system;  identification  of  development  prospects  and  challenges  facing  Albania;  and  the 
policies to be implemented with a view to supporting the country's development.  
The conclusions of our discussions may be summarised in three main points: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Economic activity appears upward and the development outlook remains positive. 
Yet, the external environment is unfavourable and the Albanian economy continues 
to face structural weaknesses, which decelerate the pace of growth.  
Therefore, the monetary and fiscal policies should continue to generate a prudent 
economic stimulus, whereas structural reforms should accelerate their pace. 
(iii) 
In  this  context,  the  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  the  arrangement  with  the  IMF  and  the 
measures envisaged as part of the Eighth Review provide a consistent framework for drafting 
and implementing a programme for the country’s development. 
Let me now present in greater detail the opinion of the Bank of Albania. 
The  growth  pace  of  the  Albanian  economy  continues  to  show  progressive 
improvement.  The  improvement  reflects  the  expansion  of  domestic  demand  -  that  is 
increase in consumption and private investments - whereas foreign demand appears weak 
and fiscal policy continues the consolidating trend. The new information obtained in the first 
half of the year is in line with this judgement. 
The intensity of supply shocks, which led to the rapid decline in inflation over the first 
half of the year, seems to decrease. Inflation recorded a slight increase in May, reaching at 
0.7%.  This  performance  confirms  our  judgement  about  the  transitory  nature  of  the  above-
mentioned shocks. However, our analyses confirm that the balance of inflationary pressures 
is still weak. Economic activity remains below potential, suggesting that the return of inflation 
to target will be a gradual and medium-term phenomenon. 
Our monetary policy has assumed a stronger stimulating stance over 2016. After two 
consecutive  cuts  in  April  and  May,  the  key  interest  rate  currently  stands  at  1.25%.  The 
strengthening  of  the  monetary  stimulus  has  led  to  lowering  the  interest  rates  across  all 
segments of the financial market, thus stimulating the increase in consumption and private 
investments.  The  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  the  financial  setting  -  characterised  by  low 
interest  rates  and  ample  liquidity  -  should  encourage  banks  for  a  more  positive  approach 
towards lending.  
Banking  sector’s  soundness  indicators  have  been  improving,  in  response  to 
economic  activity  recovery  and  other  measures  undertaken  by  Albanian  authorities. 
Liquidity and capitalisation indicators maintain good parameters, whereas the stock of non-
performing loans - albeit fluctuating - has been put under control. 
Our projections have not changed: the Bank of Albania expects economic activity to 
improve progressively over the medium-term horizon. This performance will continue to 
be sustained by stimulating financial conditions and growth of private domestic demand. It 
will contribute to the improvement of economic and financial equilibriums in Albania and to 
the return of inflation to target within 2018. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  realisation  of  these  objectives  requires  maintaining  the  actual  mix  of  economic 
policies.  The  monetary  policy  will  maintain  the  stimulating  trend  over  the  medium-term 
horizon,  while  the  intensity  of  the  monetary  stimulus  will  not  decrease  for  some  quarters 
ahead. On the other hand, the fiscal policy should maintain its consolidating trend. 
The balance of risks related to expected developments remains on the down side. The 
expansion  of  economic activity  continues  to  be  decelerated  by  the  unfavourable  economic 
performance in the euro area, which is further complicated by the Brexit, as well as by the 
behaviour of economic and financial agents, who continue to show reluctance in undertaking 
long-term business projects. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  economic  policies  and  structural 
reforms should focus on: 
– 
– 
Maintaining and further strengthening the economic and financial stability.  
Accelerating structural reforms, especially with regard to: improving the legal setting 
and  business  climate;  encouraging  domestic  and  foreign  investments,  completing 
the infrastructure; enhancing productivity; and, improving the labour market. 
Expanding  crediting,  to  support  the  country's  medium-term  development.  Issues 
related to credit growth were addressed at length in the Albania Financial Forum IV. 
The Forum's conclusions will serve as a road map in our joint efforts for lending to 
return to the desired levels. 
 Concluding, I would like to underline that the Bank of Albania will remain committed to 
maintaining price stability and strengthening financial stability in  Albania. In parallel, 
and in accordance with the engagements in the framework of this arrangement, the Bank of 
Albania  will  continue  to  work  to  further  improve  the  regulatory  framework  and  to  further 
develop the financial infrastructure in Albania. 
Thank you for your attention!  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
