Jorgovanka Tabaković: Annual Financial Stability Report for 2015 
Speech given by Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia at the 
presentation of the Annual Financial Stability Report for 2015, Belgrade, 27 July 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed members of the press and fellow economists, 
Welcome to the presentation of the Annual Financial Stability Report for 2015. If we call last 
year’s presentation of this Report history or our firstborn, then today’s press conference can 
be  regarded  as  the  start  of  tradition  and  continuation  of  good  international  practice. 
Macroprudential policy or the policy of safeguarding financial stability has been the focus of 
almost all economic discussions since the outbreak of the global financial crisis. The National 
Bank of Serbia does not lag behind other central banks in this respect. Quite to the contrary, 
we are keeping up with them. The depth of our analyses and the expert approach place us 
among the most efficient central banks in terms of achieving the financial stability mandate. 
We have been witnesses to turbulences in the international environment for quite some time 
already. The ripple effects of these turbulences did not by-pass Serbia as an open and small 
economy. However, we did not stand by and wring our hands, waiting to be hit by the waves 
of uncertainty from different continents. In coordination with the Government of the Republic 
of Serbia, we responded with timely action, carefully assessing the intensity of all influences. 
Through  synchronisation  of  monetary  easing  and  consistent  fiscal  consolidation,  we  have 
maintained  price  stability,  reduced  external  and  internal  imbalances  significantly  and 
improved further the conditions for sustainable economic growth. As a result, the key policy 
rate is at its historical low since the introduction of the inflation targeting regime and the fiscal 
deficit is at its lowest level since 2008. 
I will take the liberty of saying that the monetary policy easing of the National Bank of Serbia 
has paved the way for a sharp drop in interest rates on dinar loans in the last three years. To 
put this into numbers – from May 2013 until today, the key policy rate was cut 17 times by a 
total of 7.75 pp to 4%. That the interest rate channel is working in the dinar segment of the 
market is confirmed by the concurrent decline in interest rates on dinar loans to households 
and corporates by almost 10 pp to the lowest levels on record. Interest rates on government 
dinar securities also declined. Since November 2014 we have also reduced the FX required 
reserve ratios by a total of 9 pp, with a view to unlocking the credit potential of banks. Lower 
costs  of  borrowing  and  the  funds  released  as  a  result  of  reduced  FX  required  reserves, 
together with a pick-up in economic activity, supported the recovery in lending activity in the 
second half of 2015, and we all know that lending is an important prerequisite for a sound 
financial system. 
There  is  no  particular  need  to  underscore  that  in  euroised  economies  such  as  ours  the 
relative  stability  of  the  exchange  rate  and  increased  use  of  the  national  currency  are  the 
cornerstone  of financial  stability.  The  implementation  of the  Dinarisation  Strategy  therefore 
remains  one  of  our  priorities.  It  is  exactly  in  the  area  of  macroeconomic  stability,  which 
represents  the  first  and  most  important  pillar  of  the  Strategy,  that  we  have  achieved 
significant results. Household dinar savings are now around 3 times higher than at end-2012. 
More than two-thirds of new household loans in 2015 were in dinars, while the figure is even 
higher this year (over 70%). We are pleased to see that the results of the National Bank of 
Serbia – low inflation, relative stability of the exchange rate and the sharp fall in interest rates 
in the dinar market – have kickstarted the process of dinarisation. 
The committment and effectiveness of the National Bank of Serbia in maintaining financial 
stability  is  reflected  also  in  easing the  pressures from  strong  international  turbulences  and 
averting them from our financial market. You will allow me once again to step out of the time 
frame covered by the Report presented today and to touch upon the present. This is a way to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
  in 
the  market 
improved,  our 
show that time has not stopped and that we are discussing and monitoring stability all the 
time, without limiting ourselves to the span of one year. 
After persistent pressures in the foreign exchange market late last year and in the first half of 
2016,  it  took  another  huge  shock,  such  as  Brexit,  to  clearly  demonstrate  to  everyone  the 
importance of the National Bank of Serbia, its commitment, role and contribution to stability. 
The National Bank of Serbia, with the huge support of the President of the Government of 
the Republic of Serbia, took a proactive, efficient and impartial approach. The quality of our 
presence 
interventions  became  more  efficient,  our 
communication  with  all  market  participants  enhanced,  as  did  our  coordination  with  the 
Government.  International  portfolio  investors  confident  in  the  central  bank  and  the 
Government,  that  is  confident  in  financial  and  political  stability,  show  they  are  prepared  to 
make long-term investments in dinar government securities. 
And just what amount of FX reserves was spent in 2015 and 2016 to preserve this stability? 
In those 19 months, the dinar weakened by 2%, while in cumulative terms, foreign exchange 
interventions drove up the level of FX reserves by EUR 25 million. We managed to do this by 
intervening in the foreign exchange market proactively, cost-efficiently and effectively (I dare 
say, with filigree precision). 
You  will  hear  from  my  colleagues  today  that  our  banking  sector  has  remained  stable  and 
resilient  to  shocks  from  the  international  and  domestic  environment  despite  the  numerous 
challenges it faced. The results of macroprudential stress tests we carry out on a quarterly 
basis confirm that the banking sector remains well-capitalised and highly liquid even in the 
case of extremely pessimistic assumptions which did not materialise even at the height of the 
global financial crisis. 
High  capital  adequacy  of  the  Serbian  banking  sector  was  re-affirmed  by  the  special 
diagnostic studies of the quality of bank assets in Serbia. It gives me great pleasure to repeat 
once  again  that  no  capital  shortfall  was  identified  in  any  of  the  14  in-scope  banks  which 
account for 88% of banking sector assets. 
Still, like in most regional peers, resolving the high level of NPLs remains a priority. For this 
reason,  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  took  an  active  part  in  developing  a  comprehensive 
Strategy  for  NPL  Resolution  and  adopted  an  Action  Plan  for  the  implementation  of  that 
Strategy. The first results are already visible as the share of NPLs in total loans decreased 
during the first five months of the year by 1.3 pp to 20.3%. Let me remind you that during this 
year’s  ministerial  dialogue  the  European  Commission  and  the  ECB  commended  the 
systematic and comprehensive approach of the NBS and the Serbian Government to NPL 
resolution,  and  recommended  the  implementation  of  our  NPL  resolution  process  to  other 
candidate countries. 
Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed members of the press and fellow economists, 
The policies pursued by central banks nowadays and ten years ago are not the same. They 
change and adjust to market conditions, specificities of local economies, capital flows...but 
almost invariably they have the same goal – to maintain stability, both price and financial. 
Confucius said, “The superior man is modest in his speech, but exceeds in his actions.” We 
will therefore let others speak about us, those others being unbiased appraisers such as the 
ECB, the European Commission, the IMF… 
And yet, we will not let their praises lull us into a false sense of security, but will as so far 
remain vigilant and ready to take proactive measures and preserve the stability achieved. 
Thank you for your attention. I now give the floor to Vice Governor Diana Dragutinović. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
