  François Groepe: The South African situation – opportunities and 
challenges 
Address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
ICBC Standard Bank Africa Investor Conference, London, 30 June 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
It is an honour and a pleasure to address this year’s Africa Investor Conference, and I would 
like to thank my hosts, ICBC and Standard Bank, for the invitation. 
The timing of this conference is highly appropriate, as were the discussions that have already 
taken  place  regarding  the  challenges  facing  African  economies  amid  pedestrian  global 
growth,  low  commodity  prices,  increased  geopolitical  risks,  and  a  high  degree  of  market 
uncertainty, particularly following the decision of the United Kingdom to leave the European 
Union (“Brexit”). 
The  African  continent,  however,  continues  to  offer  attractive  opportunities  for  growth  and 
development, provided appropriate policies are pursued to address these challenges. South 
Africa is no exception. 
This morning, I shall examine the current economic conjuncture in South Africa and highlight 
those developments which make us hopeful that improvement lies ahead. I will also consider 
how this may affect the outlook for monetary policy, before concluding with some remarks on 
our country’s sovereign rating outlook. 
International and local challenges to the South African economy 
2. 
The African continent in general, and South Africa in particular, have not been immune to the 
challenges faced by the global economy. These include a gradual but sustained slowdown, 
since the start of the decade, in real global demand for South African exports, in particular 
from China, as well as a major downward adjustment in the prices of our major commodity 
exports. These developments have eroded real export growth, incomes, and to some extent 
also corporate profitability in some sectors of the economy. 
Internal challenges have in recent years unfortunately compounded South Africa’s economic 
problems.  These  include  electricity  supply  constraints,  a  slow  expansion  of  rail  and  port 
capacity, skilled labour shortages, and the high incidence of labour conflicts. This situation 
has been exacerbated by the recent drought as well as various socio-economic and political 
factors that have eroded consumer and business confidence. In 2015, agricultural production 
contracted by an average of 5,9 per cent, and it was still falling in the first quarter of this year. 
This  conjunction  of  unfavourable  international  and  internal  factors  has,  unsurprisingly, 
weighed on domestic economic activity. Real GDP contracted by 1,2 per cent (quarter-on-
quarter, annualised) in the first quarter of 2016, and by 0,2 per cent on a year-on-year basis. 
This  was  the  first  negative  reading  since  the  2009  recession.  It  continued  a  decelerating 
trend which has seen real GDP growth slow from 3,2 per cent in 2011 to 1,3 per cent last 
year.  In  May,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank revised  its  2016  growth forecast to  0,6 per 
cent from 2,2 per cent a year earlier. This growth slowdown is partially structural, reflecting, 
among other things, the subdued pace of private-sector fixed-capital accumulation since the 
most  recent  global  financial  crisis.  The  Bank  estimates  that  potential  GDP  growth  will  be 
1,5 per cent this year, down from 2,1 per cent in 2013.  
The first-quarter GDP data has also highlighted the weakness of both internal and external 
demand  for  South  African  goods.  In  addition  to  a  marked  decline  in  fixed  investment  by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  private corporations, household consumption expenditure contracted by 1,3 per cent in the 
first  quarter  of  2016  (quarter-on-quarter,  annualised),  the  biggest  drop  since  the  2009 
recession,  as  the  mix  of  rising  inflation,  higher  debt  service  costs,  and  a  lack  of  net  job 
creation weighed on both purchasing power and sentiment. On the external side, real exports 
of  goods  and  services  fell  by  7,1  per  cent  in  the  same  quarter,  after  a  relatively  subdued 
4,0 per cent average gain in 2015. This weakness in real exports is of particular concern as it 
exceeds,  on  balance,  the  pace  of  moderation  in  international  demand  for  goods  and 
services.  Thus,  despite  the  marked  depreciation  of  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  of  the 
rand since 2011, South African exporters have struggled to stabilise their market share. 
Some reasons for cautious optimism 
3. 
So, where do we go from here? 
There is no denying that the economic environment facing South Africa will remain difficult, at 
least  in  the  short  term.  Most  international  forecasters  agree  that  global  growth  will  remain 
tepid  this  year.  In  its  latest  Global  Economic  Perspectives,  for  example,  the  World  Bank 
projects world GDP to expand by only 2,4 per cent this year, the same as in 2015, and by 
only 2,8 per cent next year. At the same time, many commodity markets – including some of 
South Africa’s key export commodities – continue to suffer from excess supply, limiting the 
potential  for  a  price  recovery  even  as  global  demand  shows  signs  of  a  moderate  pickup. 
Geopolitical and financial uncertainties remain a major risk. Just last week, we saw how, in 
response to Brexit, many emerging-market currencies, including the rand, suffered a burst of 
volatility, which could add a risk premium in South African and other emerging-market asset 
markets. 
Furthermore,  the  oft-debated  concern  about  the  slowing  trend  in  productivity  growth  in 
advanced economies will probably not fade in the near term. This concern has found an echo 
in South Africa, where annual average labour productivity growth has slowed from 2,7 per 
cent in the 2000s to 1,4 per cent in the last five years – mostly a consequence of a poorer 
performance in total factor productivity. It may seem paradoxical to observe such a parallel in 
South Africa, considering that, as an emerging economy, the country still has plenty of room 
to  “catch  up”  with  more  advanced  economies.  Nonetheless,  a  slower  pace  of  global 
innovation and efficiency gains may affect those South African industries operating close to 
the “technological frontier”, via more subdued transfers of technology. 
Finally,  we  should  acknowledge  that  South  Africa  has  to  contend  with  more  limited 
macroeconomic policy space. I shall return to monetary policy later. Nonetheless, it should 
suffice to say that, with policy rates 200 basis points higher now than they were at the start of 
2014,  funding  conditions  are  not  as  accommodative  for  private  borrowers  as  they  were 
before we embarked on our gradual tightening cycle. We have observed, for instance, that 
interest costs on household debt amounted to 9,7 per cent of disposable income in the first 
quarter of 2016, up from a low of 8,5 per cent in the third quarter of 2012. As for fiscal policy 
– which will be discussed in more detail later this morning – the need to stabilise public debt 
amid weak growth has led to net tax increases both in last year’s budget and in the current 
one, while the pace of public spending growth has also been tightened. 
Nonetheless,  while  we  guard  against  undue  optimism,  the  proverbial  “green  shoots”  of  a 
recovery may be starting to appear. Although still well below par, the average prices of South 
Africa’s major commodity price exports are off their early-2016 lows. At the same time, the 
recent  fading  of  El  Niño  conditions  in  the  South  Pacific  raises  hopes  of  a  more  normal 
agricultural season in 2016/17. If that does turn out to be the case, we could be looking at 
both a rebound in farm production and lower agricultural prices. 
Such a reduced drag from drought conditions and falling resource prices should significantly 
ease the downward pressure on corporate profits, which may have troughed already. In the 
first quarter  of  2016,  the  gross  operating  surplus  in  the  economy  as  a  whole  picked  up to 
3,8 per cent year on year from 1,5 per cent in the previous period, the second successive 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  increase  after  six  consecutive  quarters  of  deceleration.  At  the  same  time,  high-frequency 
indicators such as the Barclays PMI and the manufacturing production data for April suggest 
that the second quarter has started on a more solid footing. 
Admittedly,  many  of  these  developments  relate  to  the  so-called  “base  effects”  and  are  no 
guarantee that, once these effects have worn through, we will witness a sustained, stronger 
momentum  in  the  South  African  economy.  However,  several  –  and  more  fundamental  – 
patterns do suggest that the country should be relatively well placed to take advantage of a 
gradually  improving  global  economic  environment,  notwithstanding  the  possible  negative 
implications  of  the  Brexit.  For  example,  continued  growth  in  the  bank  deposits  of  the 
corporate sector – 8,6 per cent year on year as of April – suggests that, despite its eroded 
profitability, the South African corporate sector is not facing the kind of liquidity pressure that 
typically  preceded  past recessions.  In fact,  bank  lending  to  corporations  is  also  rising  at a 
fairly dynamic pace, pointing to some expansion in niche sectors such as renewable energy 
and commercial property. 
Households, for their part, have managed to achieve some deleveraging over the prolonged 
period  of  low  interest  rates.  Thus,  while  the  rate  of  home  and  vehicle  repossessions  has 
risen  in  recent  quarters,  it  is  still  relatively  low  by  historical  standards.  Banks  themselves 
continue  to  display  solid  capital  adequacy,  liquidity  coverage  and  profitability  ratios, 
suggesting that the risk of a sudden “pull-back” in lending to the private sector is quite limited 
at this stage. The lack of obvious imbalances in property markets, as residential house prices 
appear to be largely in line with underlying fundamentals, equally reduces the risk of “home-
grown” financial or banking stress. 
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  last  month  released  the  results  of  its  common  scenario 
stress test which was designed to assess the soundness and resilience of the South African 
domestic banking sector. The test included all the domestic systemically important banks. A 
formal approach to risk identification and scenario design was followed, and the banks were 
exposed  to  four  adverse  scenarios,  including  a  protracted  recession  and  a  period  of 
excessive financial market volatility. The results of the exercise confirmed that South African 
banks were adequately capitalised to withstand significant credit losses throughout the stress 
scenarios, even before taking into account any mitigating action by their management teams. 
After the Brexit referendum, financial markets in emerging-market economies were exposed 
to significant levels of volatility. The South African Reserve Bank and National Treasury have 
been  monitoring  these  developments  and  their  possible  implications  for  South  Africa.  In  a 
subsequent statement, the Minister of Finance, Mr Pravin Gordhan, reassured the public that 
the banking and financial institutions in South Africa were well placed to withstand any Brexit-
related  financial  shocks.  The  South  African  financial  system,  including  the  banks  and  the 
regulatory framework which governs them, is resilient and robust and this had been clearly 
demonstrated during the global financial crisis. 
Furthermore,  we  are  starting  to  see  tentative  signs  that  export-orientated  and  import-
competing  sectors  may  be  starting  to  benefit  from  exchange  rate  depreciation.  The  most 
encouraging  sign  has  been  observed  in  the  vehicle  industry,  where  shipments  abroad 
increased by 20,5 per cent (in volume terms) in 2015 while the first few months of 2016 have 
shown  a  continuation  of  this  upward  momentum.  The  merchandise  trade  balance  has 
improved,  with  a  cumulative  deficit  of  R18,7  billion  in  January  to  April  compared  with 
R32,0 billion in the same period a year earlier. 
How monetary policy adjusted to the situation 
4. 
Some may ask: “Isn’t there a risk that the consecutive interest rate increases implemented by 
the South African Reserve Bank over the past year may nip this recovery in the bud?” As I’ve 
mentioned  earlier,  we  must  appreciate  that  “policy  space”  in  South  Africa  has  narrowed.  I 
would, however, like to expand on the Bank’s monetary policy stance  and how it  interacts 
with the business cycle. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Clearly,  the  situation  that  we  have  faced  in  the  past  couple  of  years  –  a  combination  of 
slowing  real  economic  growth  and  accelerating  price  pressures  –  is  not  one  that  central 
banks particularly enjoy dealing with. Demand fell short of potential and our estimates show 
that the output gap remained negative in 2015 and is likely to widen somewhat this year. Yet 
inflation  accelerated,  driven  by  exchange  rate  depreciation  and  a  number  of  supply  side 
factors,  including  drought  and  electricity  supply  constraints.  Despite  a  slightly  improved 
forecast in May, inflation is still expected to remain above the upper end of the target range 
until  the third quarter  of  2017  –  and  the  risks  to  this forecast  were  assessed  to  be  on  the 
upside.  In  light  of  our  flexible  inflation-targeting  mandate,  we  needed  to  ask  ourselves  a 
number of questions, including: 
• 
• 
• 
How strong and durable would the drivers of inflation prove to be? 
To what extent should we take the weak state of the economy into consideration? 
To what extent would the persistence of the output gap limit the pass-through from 
exchange rate depreciation to domestic prices? 
How big was the risk that this unusually large depreciation (51 per cent in nominal 
effective terms since the end of 2010) would unanchor inflation expectations? 
 Indications of a lower exchange rate pass-through to inflation have been encouraging. If we 
look at the core rate of inflation (i.e. headline inflation excluding food, petrol and energy), it 
has  accelerated  by  2,6  percentage  points  since  it  bottomed  in  early  2011.  By  contrast,  in 
response  to  the  previous  cycle  of  significant  exchange  rate  depreciation  (58  per  cent 
between 2006 and 2008), core inflation increased by 7,9 percentage points. This suggests 
that the lack of dynamism in consumer demand as well as the absence of a credit boom or of 
significant wealth effects seem to have limited the ability of producers and retailers to pass 
through cost increases to the end consumer. Yet, because this reduced pass-through, which 
incidentally  is  not  unique  to  South  Africa,  is  not  yet  fully  understood,  we  cannot  become 
complacent and assume that it has become a permanent feature of our economic landscape. 
The pass-through has not been constant over time; just as it fell, it could rise again.  
The  role  of  inflation  expectations  therefore  becomes  paramount.  Historically  –  in  part 
because of the major structural changes the economy went through in the last 50 years and 
in part because of a long period of high and volatile inflation (from the 1970s to the 1990s) – 
price expectations in South Africa appeared to be adaptive, as reflected in the behaviour of 
price and wage setters, be they businesses or organised labour. The introduction of inflation 
targeting in 2000 helped, over time, to reduce the volatility and adaptive nature of inflation 
expectations. Expectations have, in recent years, been relatively stable, although around the 
upper  end  of  the  3–6  per  cent  target  range.  This  “upward  bias”  in  expectations  limits  the 
margin  of  manoeuvre  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  insofar  as  any  sizable  shock  to 
prices  can  easily  create  a  situation  where  inflation  settles  above  the  target  range  for  an 
extended period of time. 
This  was  indeed  the  risk  that  emerged  over  the  past  few  years  –  and  which  forced  the 
Monetary Policy Committee (or MPC) of the Bank to act. As our projections have shown, in 
particular  from  January  2016  onwards,  in  the  absence  of  further  action,  inflation  would 
exceed its targeted range for lengthy periods of time over the forecast horizon. Accordingly, 
the MPC felt the need to move to a less accommodative stance. Thus, the repurchase rate 
was increased from a low of 5 per cent in January 2014 to 7 per cent as of May, including a 
cumulative  increase  of  75  basis  points  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  I  would  like  to 
emphasise, however, that this pace of increase was more gradual than in previous tightening 
cycles. Furthermore, when expressed relative to both actual and expected inflation, the real 
policy  rate  is  still  relatively  low  by  long-term  historical  standards.  Thus,  monetary 
accommodation  has  been  partly  removed,  but  without  moving  to  an  outright  restrictive 
stance. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Inflation and policy outlook 
5. 
As  I’ve  mentioned  before,  the  combined  effects  of  the  drought  and  exchange  rate 
depreciation have pushed up the rates of both headline and core inflation over the past six 
months – and this despite the dampening effect from lower international oil prices. Headline 
inflation rose from a low of 3,9 per cent in February 2015 to as high as 7,0 per cent a year 
later  before  retreating  to  6,1  per  cent  in  May.  Core  inflation,  which  had  trended  modestly 
downwards for most of 2015, rose from 5,1 per cent last November to 5,5 per cent as of May. 
Some  of  this  acceleration  reflects  a  pass-through  of  foreign-exchange  depreciation  to  the 
prices of goods. However, the evidence varies according to specific categories, suggesting 
that this pass-through is far from homogeneous. 
In light of these relatively encouraging developments, and taking into account the moderate 
rebound  in  the  rand  from  its  early-2016  levels,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  has  been 
able  to  lower  its  projection  for  core  inflation,  albeit  only  somewhat:  whereas  it  expected  a 
peak of 6,5 per cent in the third and fourth quarters of 2016 at the MPC meeting in March, 
the  Bank  expects  core  inflation  to  peak  at  6,2  per  cent  around  the  same  period  before 
retreating to 5,1 per cent by the end of 2017. Any sign that underlying price pressures remain 
contained  would  facilitate  the  task  of  the  Bank  in  dealing  with  the  current  conflicting  risks 
facing real economic growth and inflation. 
Of course, vigilance will be needed in the coming quarters, as the secondary effects of earlier 
shocks (in particular on the exchange rate) are still being felt – and there is no guarantee that 
inflation  expectations  will  remain  stable.  So  far,  evidence  on  these  fronts  is  mixed. 
Expectations for CPI inflation one year ahead – as measured by the Bureau for Economic 
Research among analysts, businesses and unions – drifted marginally higher over the past 
year but, at 6,2 per cent, they are still very close to the 6,0 per cent average of the past five 
years. Break-even inflation expectations, derived from inflation-linked government bonds, are 
significantly  higher  (around  7,0  per  cent  as  of  21  June  for  the  five-year  rate),  but  this 
measure is highly volatile and sensitive to exchange rate fluctuations. 
As  for  wage  developments,  it  is  encouraging  to  note  that  the  Andrew  Levy  measure  of 
average annual wage settlements, at 7,8 per cent in the first quarter of 2016, is little changed 
from  the  7,7  per  cent  gain  observed  on  average  in  2015.  However,  several  key  wage 
negotiations  lie  ahead,  with  a  possibility  that  wage  demands  may  take  cognisance  of  the 
recent acceleration in inflation. With respect to both inflation expectations and labour costs, 
the next few months could be crucial. 
Investment-grade ratings, the rand, and inflation 
6. 
One important element in securing the stability of inflation expectations, in part because of 
the  influence  it  is  likely  to  have  on  the  level  and  volatility  of the  rand, will  be  the  ability  of 
South Africa to maintain its investment-grade rating – and this leads me to my concluding 
points. 
I do not need to stress how thoroughly the South African Reserve Bank has been monitoring 
the evolution of South Africa’s sovereign debt ratings. A sovereign rating can have an impact 
on  monetary  policy  because  of  how  it  influences  the  availability  and  cost  of  external 
financing,  the  yields  on  domestic  debt  and,  in  turn,  the  performance  of  the  rand  –  both  in 
absolute terms and relative to its emerging-market peers. South Africa, being a structural net 
capital  importer,  needs  to  secure  the  best  possible  “terms  and  conditions”  under  which  it 
accesses global sources of funding. Any adverse developments on this front would probably 
further  complicate  the  challenges  of  weak  growth  and  rising  inflation  that  the  Bank  has  to 
deal with currently. 
This said, while investor and media attention will probably be on South Africa again come the 
time  of  the  next  rating  reviews,  there  are  several  reasons  which  make  us  confident  that, 
provided the right policies continue to be put in place, our country can retain its investment-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  grade rating. As I’ve highlighted earlier, economic growth, which has been a key concern of 
the rating agencies, is showing signs of bottoming. At the same time, while public debt as a 
share  of  GDP  is  only  expected  to  stabilise  in  2017/18,  the  2016  budget  has  put  in  place 
genuine elements of fiscal consolidation and the discipline shown by central government in 
recent  years  to  stick  to  its  expenditure  targets  should  facilitate  the  achievement  of  these 
fiscal goals. 
Furthermore,  as  far  as  the  country’s  external  liabilities  are  concerned,  it  is  encouraging  to 
see that they have declined, in absolute dollar terms, over the past four quarters, breaking a 
lengthy upward trend. This improvement is partly due to the exchange rate-induced decline 
in the dollar value of rand liabilities held by non-residents. External debt has also declined 
relative  to  GDP  and  to  the  exports  of  goods  and  services.  For  example,  as  a  share  of 
exports, external debt stood at 118,9 per cent at the end of December 2015, down from a 
peak  of  124,6  per  cent  three  quarters  earlier.  A  further  positive  side-effect  of  rand 
depreciation  has  been  the  improvement  in  South  Africa’s  net  international  investment 
position:  as  most  investments  by  non-residents  in  South  Africa  are  rand-denominated,  in 
contrast  to  investments  by  South  African  residents  abroad,  the  currency  effect  more  than 
offset  the  net  incurrence  of  new  liabilities  required  to  finance  the  current-account  deficit. 
Thus, as at the end of 2015, the net investment position stood at a positive 17,8 per cent of 
GDP, compared to the 2,8 per cent in the previous quarter. 
Conclusion 
7. 
To conclude, I would just like to emphasise once again that notwithstanding the challenges 
that  the  South  African  economy  currently  faces,  we  should  equally  not  fall  into  excessive 
pessimism. The underlying corporate and financial structures of our economy remain solid; 
there are no major impediments to a proper allocation of resources. And provided that the 
right policies continue to be put in place, there is no reason to doubt the country’s ability to 
gradually  return  to  a  stronger  economic  growth  path.  The  National  Development  Plan 
provides  the  right  framework  for  addressing  the  structural  challenges  that  have  so  far 
precluded  a  stronger  and  more  inclusive  pace  of  development;  it  is  important  that  it  gets 
implemented. By ensuring that inflation remains under control and that the financial sector 
remains healthy, the South African Reserve Bank intends to fully contribute towards these 
development goals. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
