  Vítor Constâncio: Principles of macroprudential policy 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB-
IMF Conference on Macroprudential Policy, Frankfurt am Main, 26 April 2016. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  host  this  dinner  today,  in  the  first  edition  of  our  annual 
Macroprudential Conference, this time jointly organised with the IMF. The Single Supervisory 
Mechanism  Regulation1  confers  upon  the  ECB  and  National  Competent  Authorities  or 
National  Designated  Authorities  specific  powers  and  responsibilities  in  the  field  of 
macroprudential policy. This calls for substantive conceptual and analytical work in this new 
policy area which is very ambitious, requiring considerable research efforts that we want to 
stimulate by launching this series of annual conferences. 
The financial crisis and its aftermath confirmed the need for system-wide surveillance and led 
to  the  establishment  of  macroprudential  policy  as  a  new  policy  area  with  the  objective  of 
addressing systemic risk. 
At  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  systemic  risk  is  defined  “as  the  risk  that  financial 
instability significantly impairs the provision of necessary financial products and services by 
the  financial  system  to  a  point  where  economic  growth  and  welfare  may  be  materially 
affected”.2 Important in this concept is the fact that the materialisation of systemic risk brings 
along significant costs to the real economy – implying the destruction of economic value and 
leading to losses in terms of economic growth. 
The literature has identified three broad sources of systemic risk: (i) macroeconomic shocks 
that  are  significant  enough  to  cause  distress  in  the  financial  system,  (ii)  the  unwinding  of 
imbalances in the financial system generated by excessive leverage, and (iii) contagion risk, 
created by increasing interconnectedness and herd behaviour. 
Whatever the origin, the primary role of macroprudential authorities is to identify, measure 
and reduce systemic risk. Identification of risks clearly needs to be probabilistic, attempting to 
predict the level of overall risk of the system in different scenarios. 
Many indicators to measure systemic risk have been proposed since 2008. Many of them 
though, have a “micro-level” dimension dedicated to calculate the contribution of significant 
institutions  to  systemic  risk.  The  Marginal  Expected  Shortfall  (MES),  CoVar,  CoRisk  or 
Conditional Tail Risk (CRT), for example, fall under this category.3 Taken in isolation, they 
are not useful to predict future levels of systemic risk, as they tend to use contemporaneous 
market  prices  and  do  not  consider  the  system  as  a  whole.  The  ECB  has  developed  a 
Composite  Indicator  of  Systemic  Stress  (CISS)4  that  comprises  five  aggregate  market 
segments accounted for by a range of variables and time-varying rank correlations between 
them. More recently, the CISS indicator has been used by Hartmann et al. (2015), jointly with 
credit  to  the  private  sector  and  cycle  variables  (industrial  production,  inflation  and  a 
                                                
1   Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 of 15 October 2013 conferring specific tasks on the European Central 
Bank concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions. 
2   See ECB (2009), Financial Stability Review, Special Feature B for a discussion on the concept of systemic 
risk. 
3   For an overview, see Bisias, D.,  M. Flood, A. W. Lo and S. Valavanis (2012),  “A  Survey  of  Systemic  Risk 
Analytics”, Office of Financial Research Working Paper No. 0001, January. 
4   Hollo,  D.,  M.  Kremer  and  M.  Lo  Duca  (2012)  “A  Composite  Indicator  of  Systemic  Stress  in  the  financial 
system”, ECB Working Paper No. 1426, March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
short-term  interest  rate)  in  a  MS-VAR,  to  illustrate  the  dynamic  interaction  of  systemic 
financial instability and the macroeconomy in the euro area.5 CATFIN, a VAR and Expected 
Shortfall measure at system-wide level calculated with non-normal distributions with fat tails, 
showing the predictive capacity of financial volatility regarding real economic downturns was 
proposed by Allen et al.6 Similarly, Giglio et al. examine 19 measures of systemic risk for the 
US and 10 measures for the UK and the EU from the perspective of how well they forecast 
macroeconomic downturns.7 They also build dimension-reduced risk indexes using principal 
components and partial quantile regression to demonstrate the robust performance of some 
indexes in anticipating future macroeconomic downturns. 
These efforts in developing composite indexes are complementary to the on-going research 
on the concept of a financial cycle as a sort of a generalisation of the old concept of credit 
cycle, distinct from the concept of the economic or business cycle. The ECB paper presented 
this morning by Hiebert et al.8 builds and extends on work done at the BIS.9 It shows how 
credit and asset prices share cyclical similarities, captured in a synthetic financial cycle index 
that  outperforms  credit-to-GDP  gap  measures  in  predicting  systemic  banking  crises,  on  a 
horizon of up to three years. They also demonstrate how the financial cycle is different from 
the business cycle. 
Based  on  this  research,  we  conclude  that  financial  variables  (credit  volumes  and  asset 
prices)  in  EU  countries  have  historically  exhibited  higher  average  volatility  than  economic 
variables  (volume  of  activity  in  goods  and  labour  markets,  as  well  as  consumer  prices). 
Financial  cycles  have  also  exhibited  a  higher  duration  than  business  cycles  on  average. 
Lastly,  asymmetries  appear  to  exist,  whereby  financial  cycles  tend  to  build  up  slowly  and 
correct more abruptly. 
Taken together, these findings have at least two policy implications. First, they establish a 
rationale 
thereby 
fundamental to the newly established macroprudential policy area. Policies targeting financial 
cycles, such as countercyclical macroprudential policies, can act as a powerful complement 
to  policies  targeting  the  business  cycle,  such  as  monetary  policy.  Policy  trade-offs  may 
emerge in the short-run, as the propensity for such cyclical divergence seems to be greatest 
at short frequencies. Second, the results present a strong case for a differentiated national 
application  of  macroprudential  policies,  amid  a  far  from  complete  convergence  of  country 
financial cycles. This latter aspect is particularly compelling in a currency union with shared 
monetary  policy,  where  macroprudential  policies  represent  an  additional  and  potentially 
powerful  element  to  cushion  conditions  specific  to  member  states.  This  underpins  several 
principles  that  should  guide  macroprudential  policy  that  I  would  like  to  address  in  the 
remaining of my remarks. 
financial  and  macroeconomic  policies,  and  are 
for  differentiated 
                                                
5   Hartmann, P., K. Hubrich, M. Kremer and R.J. Tetlow (2015) “Melting down: systemic financial instability and 
the macroeconomy” mimeo, February. 
6   Allen,  L.,  T.G.  Bali  and  Y.  Tang  (2012)  “Does  systemic  risk  in  the  financial  sector  predict  future  economic 
development?“ The Review of Financial Studies, vol. 25, No. 10, October, pp. 3000–3036. 
7   Giglio,  S.,  B.T.  Kelly  and  S.  Pruit  (2015)  “Systemic  risk  and  the  macroeconomy:  an  empirical  evaluation”, 
NBER Working Paper No. 20963, February. 
8   Hiebert, P., I. Jaccard, T.A. Peltonen and Y. Schüler (2016) “Characterising the financial cycle: a multivariate 
and time-varying approach”, ECB-IMF Conference on Macroprudential Policy Frankfurt, 26–27 April 2016. 
9   Borio, C., M. Drehmann and K. Tsatsaronis (2012) “Charaterising the financial cycle: don’t lose sight of the 
medium term!”, BIS Working Paper No. 380, June. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Principles of Macroprudential Policy 
The  ultimate  objective  of  macroprudential  policy  is  to  prevent  and  mitigate  systemic  risk, 
which  includes  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  and  smoothening  the 
financial  cycle,  in  order  to  preserve  the  effective  provision  of  financial  services  to  the  real 
economy. In shaping the macroprudential policy framework, six aspects can be identified as 
guiding principles: 
First,  macroprudential  policy  should  be  pre-emptive  and  strongly  counter-cyclical. 
Early identification of risks is an essential first step in the policy-setting process supported by 
early  warning  indicators  and  models  to  predict  potential  sources  of  systemic  risk. 
Macroprudential  policy  should  then  act  forcefully  to  smoothen  the  financial  cycle  avoiding 
that it reaches a dangerous peak. 
Second, and relating to the first, macroprudential policy should rely on the concept of 
the financial cycle in order to assess the position of the economy, predict its development 
and  appropriately  calibrate  the  use  of  macroprudential  instruments.  The  concept  of  a 
financial  cycle  is  therefore  crucial  for  the  rationale  of  macroprudential  policy,  justifying  the 
need for dedicated policy instruments. To effectively tame the financial cycle, a time-varying 
dimension  is  crucial  in  the  design  of  policy  instruments  – that  is, the  instruments  must  be 
adjustable  over  the  cycle.  Counter-cyclical  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  are  thus 
important tools. 
Third,  the  real  estate  component  in  the  financial  cycle  is  of  paramount  importance. 
This implies that instruments in the macroprudential policy toolkit should contain borrower-
side  tools  to  influence  the  demand  for  credit,  in  addition  to  capital-related  measures 
conditioning  bank  credit  supply.  Financial  asset  prices  are  admittedly  difficult to  tame  with 
targeted policy intervention. However, regarding loans for housing, policy tools such as Loan-
to-Value  or  Debt-Service-to-Income  (LTV  or  DSTI)  ratios,  need  to  be  part  of  the 
macroprudential toolkit in order to effectively reign on or, at least, influence real estate asset 
prices, as these are among the most important drivers of the financial cycle. The announced 
revision of the CRDIV/CRR should provide an opportunity for the extension of the available 
instruments,  as  LTVs  and  DSTIs  are  not  included  in  the  current  EU  regulation.  Clearly, 
measures  addressing  the  credit  supply  side  by  banks  –  such  as  increased  capital 
requirements,  counter-cyclical  capital  buffers  or  dynamic  provisioning  –  can  be  easy  to 
activate but have proven to be of modest effectiveness. Furthermore, as non-banks play an 
increasingly important role in the provision of credit, measures targeting only the banks could 
just result in shadow-banks taking a considerable size of the mortgage business and fuelling 
a boom in house-prices. 
Fourth, stress tests of the banking and financial system must have a macroprudential 
dimension. Such comprehensive assessments need to be embedded in a macro-financial 
environment. They entail an assessment of the position of a specific economy in the financial 
cycle since, for example, the adequate level of capital requirements cannot be dissociated 
from a country’s position on the cycle. 
Fifth, macroprudential policy is complementary to monetary policy and should share 
the same status as a policy area. Central banks must have responsibilities in both policy 
areas even if they are not involved in microprudential supervision. Several reasons justify this 
set-up. Both areas need to work in close co-operation; central banks are more sensitive to 
macro-financial  stabilisation  goals;  they  possess  more  information  about  financial  markets 
and  the  economy.  Finally,  the  alternative  model  of  joining  macroprudential  policy  with 
microprudential supervision faces the problem that their supervisory objectives are focused 
on avoiding individual banks’ distress, for which they are accountable. In this perspective the 
UK  institutional  framework  is,  in  my  view,  the  most  adequate.  In  the  European  monetary 
union, while monetary policy is designed for the euro area as a whole, macroprudential policy 
should  be  country-specific,  even  if  co-ordinated,  since  financial  cycles  are  not  fully 
synchronised across countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Sixth, macroprudential policy should go beyond the banking sector and encompass 
market-based finance institutions and products. As this sector continues to expand and 
increase its role in lending to the real economy, as its interlinkages with the wider financial 
sector deepen, and as the footprint of large institutions grows, non-banks are clearly gaining 
in  systemic 
in  using 
macroprudential  tools  to  constrain  excessive  leverage  and  credit  growth  in  the  banking 
sector, the more likely it becomes that there will be excessive adjustments in the non-bank 
sector through leakages. For these reasons, the coverage of the macroprudential framework 
needs to be extended to the shadow banking sector. 
Let me elaborate  on one principle: macroprudential stress tests of the banking sector and 
their extension to non-banks. 
the  more  policy-makers  are  effective 
importance.  Moreover, 
Macroprudential Stress Tests 
This  year,  the  ECB  is  taking  part  in  the  EBA  EU-wide  Stress  Testing  in  a  fully-fledged 
capacity  as  microprudential  and  macroprudential  supervisor.  This  capacity  is  collectively 
shared  with  the  national  competent  institutions  of  the  countries  in  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism. 
The  macroprudential  policy  responsibilities  have  added  a  new  dimension  to  stress  testing 
that  goes  beyond  the  assessment  of  solvency  of  individual  banks  under  a  baseline  and 
adverse  scenarios.  Macroprudential  stress  tests  should  provide,  in  association  with  the 
projected scenarios, indicators to measure and predict the overall level of systemic risk, the 
position  of  the  economy  in  the  financial  cycle  and  consequently  the  adequate  stance  of 
macroprudential policies. 
Differently  from  supervisory  exercises  where  results  are  expressed  in  terms  of  capital 
shortfalls or no additional capital requirements by bank, macroprudential stress tests might 
show that capital positions are either insufficient to preserve financial stability of the system 
or, in different circumstances, are excessive for the system as a whole requiring easing or 
release of macroprudential measures. Only with this type of macro stress tests can we reach 
conclusions about the stance of macroprudential policy. 
This concept of macroprudential stress tests, which have to be top-down exercises, requires 
that  we  go  beyond  the  traditional  approach  of  microprudential  capital  exercises.10  These 
further  requirements  consist  of  an  integrated  approach  between  micro  and  macro 
components  which  encompass  primarily  four  main  aspects:  (i)  a  dynamic  approach  that 
includes consideration of the bank’s reaction to the scenarios; (ii) a comprehensive two-way 
interaction between banks and the real economy; (iii) the assessment of contagion effects 
stemming from interconnectedness among financial institutions, including non-banks in the 
shadow  banking  sector;  (iv)  finally,  the  analysis  of  the  interaction  with  other  non-financial 
sectors that are relevant for banks’ risk management. 
Let me dwell upon these four points, which are being addressed at the ECB. 
Dynamic  approach  including  the  bank’s  reaction  to  the  scenario:  Going  beyond  the 
static  assessment  of  solvency  of  individual  banks,  macroprudential  stress  tests  should 
account  for  more  realistic  features,  in  particular  banks’  behavioural  reaction  to  the  stress 
which could come in the form of deleveraging, straight capital increases or work-out of non-
performing  loans. To take  that  into  account,  the  dynamic  balance-sheet  is  implemented  in 
                                                
10   See  also  keynote  address  by  V.  Constâncio  (2015),  “The  role  of  stress  testing  in  supervision  and 
macroprudential  policy”,  London  School  of  Economics  Conference  on  Stress  Testing  and  Macroprudential 
Regulation:  a  Trans-Atlantic  Assessment,  29  October:  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/ 
html/sp151029.en.html. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
our  framework  by  allowing  banks  to  re-optimise  their  portfolio  according  to  the  risk-return 
optimisation criterion.11 
To account for two-way interactions of banks with the real economy we have developed 
Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models which are being calibrated at the 
individual country level to assess these effects.12 
Adequate  levels  of  capital  requirements,  beyond  regulatory  minima,  should  depend  on 
structural and cyclical factors, notably the overall position of a country in the cycle. A general 
equilibrium framework is thus needed to account for the overall impact of higher capital ratios 
that can constrain banks’ capacity to provide credit to the economy while, at the same time, 
can bring down the cost of credit by reducing banks’ default probability. The optimal level of 
capital  requirements  is  thus  one  that  balances  the  costs  linked  to  more  expensive  equity 
funding  with  the  benefits  of  a  lower  rate  of  bank  defaults.  Results  from  this  model-based 
approach can quantitatively assess the impact on overall GDP indicating that, as the capital 
ratio  increases,  household  consumption  and  borrowers’  welfare  first  increase  and  then 
decrease, thus highlighting the importance of correctly taking into account the starting point – 
and the position in the cycle – when assessing the effects of a policy measure. 
We  have  also  assessed  banks’  response  to  capital  shortfalls,  using  a  GVAR  model,  also 
used  to  examine  the  cross-border  effects  of  deleveraging.  This  empirical  work  confirms 
common wisdom that, in response to a negative shock to the leverage, banks tend to shed 
assets instead of raising capital while keeping the leverage constant.13 
The macro-feedback nexus is however not the only reason why an initial shock to an entity 
can be amplified at the system-wide level. What I mean here, and this is my third point, are 
the  effects  related  to  financial  contagion  emerging  from  interconnectedness  and 
resulting from dynamic interactions between the financial economic agents that can embed 
non-linear features that could lead to fire-sales. Direct financial contagion via the interbank 
channel  has  been  one  of  the  features  of  the  ECB  top-down  stress  tests  for  some  years 
already  and  we  have  been  regularly  publishing  the  results  of  the  second  round  effects 
(related  to  possible  domino  effects  in  the  interbank  market)  in  the  ECB  Financial  Stability 
Review.  Yet,  macroprudential  stress  tests  should  also  consider  the  second  round  effects 
from indirect contagion, most prominently due to possible fire-sales, which could also emerge 
as an outcome of interactions between banks and shadow banks. We are developing agent 
based models that could take account of these interactions and allow for endogenous asset 
price  determination.14  This  implies  that  the  macroprudential  stress  test  framework  should 
encompass the direct stress test of shadow bank balance sheets. 
Recent ECB research suggests that the shadow banking sector has a natural tendency to 
grow until it becomes systemically important for the entire financial system and endangers 
the  stability  of  the  banking  sector.15  Stress  testing  shadow  banks  could  unveil  the 
                                                
11   G.  Hałaj,  (2013),  “Optimal  asset  structure  of  a  bank  –  bank  reactions  to  stressful  market  conditions”,  ECB 
Working Paper Series No. 1533. 
12   Darracq  Paries,  M.,  C.  Kok,  and  D.  Rodriguez  Palenzuela  (2011),  “Macroeconomic  propagation  under 
different regulatory regimes: evidence from an estimated DSGE model for the euro area”, International Journal 
of Central Banking, December. See also, Clerc, L., A. Derviz, C. Mendicino, S. Moyen, K. Nikolov, L. Stracca, 
J. Suarez and A. P. Vardoulakis, (2015), “Capital regulation in a macroeconomic model with three layers of 
default”, International Journal of Central Banking, June. 
13   Gross, M., C. Kok and D. Żochowski, (2016), ”The impact of bank capital on economic activity: Evidence from 
a Mixed-Cross-Section GVAR model”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1888, March. 
14   Calimani, S., G. Hałaj, D. Żochowski, “Fire-sales in an ABM of banks and shadow banks”, mimeo. 
15   Ari, A., C. Kok, M. Darracq Paries and D. Żochowski, (2015), “Shadow banking in general equilibrium”, mimeo, 
European Central Bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
vulnerabilities in this sector and help assessing the potential for spillover of the stress in that 
sector to the rest of the financial sector. 
This  brings  me  to  my  fourth  point.  Interaction  between  banks  and  the  non-financial 
sectors: a macroprudential stress test framework should integrate, to the extent possible, all 
sectors of the economy to properly account for vulnerabilities that may emerge from any of 
them. Chiefly important are the household and corporate sectors. At the ECB, work is well 
underway  with  the  view  to  extend  the  stress  testing  framework  to  the  household  sector16, 
using data from the ECB Household Finance and Consumption Survey.17 
The  model  combines  a  macro  part  –  capturing  macro  variables  that  shape  household 
balance sheets over time – and a micro part – built around a household member level logistic 
model for its employment status – in a fully integrated manner. The framework allows us to 
compute probability of default (PDs) and loss given default (LGDs) for mortgage exposures 
directly at the household sector level and link them to macroeconomic stress scenarios. The 
model-framework offers, for example, insights into how borrower-based instruments – such 
as  LTV  and  DSTI  ratio  caps  –  influence  the  economy  Intuitively,  the  effect  of  LTV  caps 
derives  primarily  from  reducing  loss  given  default  (LGD)  parameters,  as  the  LTV  ratio  is 
directly related to the value of the underlying collateral in a mortgage loan. The effect of DSTI 
caps, on the other hand, stems mainly from the reduction in household capacity to serve the 
debt, thus their probability of default (PD). These results are confirmed by the model. 
This module is being integrated in the ECB top-down stress testing framework to account for 
a consistent stress scenario and for dynamic adjustments of individual households’ balance 
sheets in response to shocks and related second round effects. 
Finally,  as  just  illustrated,  enhancements  to  the  ECB  macroprudential  toolkit  go  beyond 
stress testing as the complete set of models also provide a tool for impact assessment of 
macroprudential policy instruments. As policy instruments are targeted to address systemic 
risk,  assessing  macroprudential  measures  in  a  consistent  manner  requires  accounting  for 
spillovers,  including  to  the  real  economy,  also  taking  account  of  their  impact  on  various 
sectors as well as layers of interaction between those sectors. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  The  ECB  has  been  working  hard  on  developing  analytical  tools  for  the 
effective  implementation  of  macroprudential  policy.  The  ECB’s  new  legal  competences  in 
macroprudential policy relate primarily to the power to top-up measures adopted by national 
authorities and the assessment of possible spillovers to other countries in connection with 
the reciprocity principle laid down in the legislation. In this vein, the ECB has been analysing 
the numerous macroprudential measures adopted by member states that, so far, we have 
decided not to aggravate. 
Concerning  the  governance  framework,  we  have  created  an  internal  Macroprudential 
Coordination Group and established the Macroprudential Forum – integrating the Governing 
Council and the Supervisory Board – to discuss all matters related to financial stability and 
macroprudential  policy.  We  are  taking  our  new  responsibilities  very  seriously.  The 
robustness of our assessments is key and, for this reason, analytical and research work in 
the macroprudential policy area has been stimulated and has been fruitful, as evident in my 
                                                
16   Gross, M. and J. Poblacion, (2015), “Assessing the efficacy of borrower-based macroprudential policy using 
an  integrated  micro-macro  model  for  European  households”,  ECB  Working  Paper  No.  1881.  See  also 
Ampudia,  M.,  H.  van  Vlokhoven  and  D.  Żochowski,  (2016),  “Financial  fragility  of  euro  area  households”, 
Journal of Financial Stability, forthcoming; see also: ECB Working Paper Series No. 1737. 
17   For 
details, 
see 
the 
Household 
Finance 
and 
Consumption 
Network 
webpage, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/research-networks/html/researcher_hfcn.en.html. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
remarks. Since March this year, the ECB started publishing a Macroprudential Bulletin18 that 
will inform about the analytical work being done, the policy decisions adopted and assessed, 
as  well  as  analysis  of  relevant  regulatory  developments.  This  will  further  contribute  to 
enhance transparency in our assessments. We look forward to maintaining a lively dialogue 
with the community of people in official institutions, in the financial sector and in academia 
who are interested in the new important field of macroprudential policy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
This is the full text of a speech delivered in abridged form at the ECB on 26 April. 
 
                                                
18   ECB Macroprudential Bulletin, (2016), Issue 1: 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ecbmpbu201603.en.pdf?f584ec27e20fd378bdca2d6f68d5d7b9. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
