  William C Dudley: Remarks at the New York Fed’s Economic Press 
Briefing on the Household Debt and Credit Report 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  New  York  Fed’s  Economic  Press  Briefing  on  the 
Household Debt and Credit Report, New York City, 12 February 2016. 
 Domenico Giannone, Andrew Haughwout, Joseph Tracy and Wilbert van der Klaauw assisted in preparing these 
remarks. 
Good  morning  and  welcome  to the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York’s  Economic  Press 
Briefing. I am pleased to have this opportunity to speak with you today about the economic 
outlook, with a focus on the household sector. As always, what I have to say reflects my own 
views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  or  the 
Federal Reserve System.  
According  to  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  the  current  expansion  began  in 
July 2009, making it nearly seven years old. If we gathered this expansion and the 11 prior 
post-WWII  expansions  together  for  a  family  photograph,  arranging  them  by  age  from 
youngest in front to oldest in back, this expansion would be standing third from the rear. The 
only two that lasted longer were the expansion that began in February of 1961, which lasted 
for nearly nine years, and the one that began in March of 1991, which lasted for ten years. 
Thus,  the  current  expansion  is  already  an  elder  statesman  in  the  family  of  post-war  U.S. 
expansions.  This  raises  the  question  of  whether  this  expansion  has  already  entered  its 
twilight years, with the risk of recession edging higher with each passing month. 
As  I  have  said  before,  expansions  do  not  simply  die  of  old  age.1  Rather,  expansions  end 
either  because  a  significant  inflation  risk  emerges  that  requires  a  sharp  tightening  of 
monetary  policy,  or  the  economy  is  adversely  impacted  by  a  large  shock  that  cannot  be 
offset by monetary policy in a timely manner. While the sample of post-war U.S. expansions 
is  still  too  small  for  reliable  statistical  analysis,  the  evidence  suggests  that  after  an 
expansion’s first few years its likelihood of ending is mostly independent of age, and depends 
mainly instead on the level of inflation. Since the possibility is low that a significant inflation 
risk would emerge over the near term, this means that the main danger facing the current 
expansion is the risk of large, adverse shocks. 
Given that the labor market still appears to have some excess slack and inflation is below the 
Federal  Reserve’s  objective,  monetary  policy  is  appropriately  still  quite  accommodative 
despite  the  advancing  age  of  the  expansion.  While  this  limits  to  an  extent  the  degree  to 
which monetary policy can aggressively respond to any adverse events, the good news is 
that the economy is more resilient to any shocks. Key sectors of the U.S. economy, such as 
the household sector, seem to be in good shape. The financial system is also clearly much 
stronger,  with  the  banking  system  much  better  capitalized  and  with  much  larger  liquidity 
buffers than in the years preceding the financial crisis. 
In  today’s  briefing,  we  will  be  focusing  on  the  household  sector.  Given  the  importance  of 
consumption to U.S. economic growth, the health of the household sector is critical for an 
assessment of risks to the outlook. Over the last several years we have devoted significant 
resources to better understanding the state of the household sector, and one outcome of this 
attention is our now well-known Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit. This report, 
and the data that underlie it, give us direct insight into the health of the household balance 
                                                
1  See William C. Dudley, The U.S. Economic Outlook and Implications for Monetary Policy, Remarks at the 
Economic Leadership Forum, Somerset, New Jersey. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  sheet. The assets and liabilities that families hold is a crucial determinant of the household 
sector’s  ability  to  help  immunize  the  economy  from  shocks.  We  learned  during  the  Great 
Recession the importance of household liabilities – in particular, mortgages, which make up 
more than two-thirds of the sector’s total liabilities. 
As you know, the early part of the 2000s witnessed a very substantial expansion in borrowing 
by households. This borrowing took many forms, but was particularly notable in mortgages 
and home equity lines of credit, and reflected the very high and unsustainable expectations 
of  house  price  appreciation.  Household  debts  peaked  in  2008,  at  which  point  the  sector’s 
balance sheet was weak. Households were highly-leveraged, with many underwater on their 
mortgages.  This  was  particularly  the  case  for  younger  and  lower-  and  middle-income 
households who, besides being more leveraged, were disproportionally affected by job loss 
and other income shocks, and had little experience managing debts – especially in times of 
stress.  Consequently,  delinquency,  foreclosure  and  bankruptcy  rates  reached  very  high 
levels. 
Beginning in 2008, households began a new phase to repair their balance sheets by paying 
down  outstanding  debt.  During  this  “Great  Deleveraging,”  which  lasted  five  years, 
households reduced their overall liabilities by 12 percent or $1.5 trillion. House prices began 
to rise again in earnest in 2012, and by mid-2013 household deleveraging appeared to have 
come  to  an  end.  Net  household  borrowing  resumed,  and  household  debt  has  risen  over 
8 percent  during the  last  couple  of  years.  But,  this  recent  period  of  credit  expansion  looks 
very different from the early 2000s, and I believe that the household sector today is in much 
better health. There are several reasons for my confidence. 
Let  me  begin  with  the  situation  in  the  residential  mortgage  market,  which  plays  such  a 
dominant role in household finance and was such a problem the last time around. Currently, 
house  price  growth  is  running  nationally  at  around  5  percent  per  year.  But  this  time, 
households appear to be much more cautious in how they are responding to the rise in home 
values. Rather than borrowing against the rising equity in their homes, mortgage balances 
have  instead  essentially  stabilized  and  remain  well  below  their  previous  levels.  As  my 
colleagues will describe in more detail shortly, this stabilization reflects an increase in debt 
paydown  due  to  a  combination  of  lower  interest  rates,  shorter  loan  terms  and  aging  of 
mortgages. This trend is reflected in increased household saving and growing home equity, 
and we expect these trends to continue to help households rebuild their balance sheets over 
the near term, thereby further increasing the household sector’s resiliency to shocks. 
Low interest rates have also been important in driving the household debt service ratio to the 
lowest  levels  observed  in  our  data.  This  means  that  households  have  more  capacity  with 
which  to  absorb  any  temporary  adverse  income  shocks.  One  clear  reflection  of  these 
improvements  is  the  very  significant  decline  in  delinquency  rates.  At  this  point,  the  great 
majority of the bad debt from the boom years has been charged off and new foreclosures are 
at the lowest level we’ve seen in our data. The combination of charge-offs and tight mortgage 
underwriting  standards  over  the  last  several  years  has  shifted  the  stock  of  outstanding 
mortgage  balances  toward  lower-risk  borrowers,  who  are  typically  older  with  more  stable 
incomes. 
For all these reasons, the household sector looks much better positioned today than in 2008 
to absorb shocks and continue to contribute to the economic expansion. 
Now,  before  asking  my  colleagues  to  discuss  some  of  these  trends  in  more  detail,  let  me 
note  that  my  positive  overview  of  the  household  sector  comes  with  some  caveats.  First, 
these  aggregate  statistics  can  mask  some  important  variations,  and  there  are  some  local 
markets  where,  as  in  the  prior  boom,  both  house  prices  and  mortgage  growth  are  quite 
strong.  Similarly,  there  exist  substantial  differences  across  households  in  their  financial 
situation  and  their  ability  to  improve  their  balance  sheets.  Borrowers  with  little  equity,  low 
credit scores and slow income growth face difficulties refinancing into low rate mortgages. As 
a  result,  this  subset  of  the  population  has  been  less  able  to  deleverage  and  still  faces 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  relatively high debt service costs, which constrains their consumption, investment and saving 
behavior. So, even within what looks to be a stable overall mortgage market, there are some 
things  that  we  must  continue  to  monitor.  Second,  there  are  other  difficult  challenges  that 
many  households  face,  particularly  with  respect  to  a  subject  we’ve  discussed  on  previous 
occasions  –  student  loans.  On  balance,  though,  households  are  in  a  much  better  position 
today than they were in 2008. Now, I’d like to turn things over to our economists, beginning 
with  Andrew  Haughwout,  who  will  provide  a  more  detailed  discussion  of  household  sector 
finances. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
