   Patrick Njoroge: Central Bank of Kenya 50th Anniversary Celebrations 
Speech by Dr Patrick Njoroge, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Central Bank of 
Kenya 50th Anniversary Celebrations, Nairobi, 14 September 2016. 
 I am greatly honoured to welcome you this morning to celebrate 50 years of the Central Bank 
of Kenya’s existence. I am grateful to all guests for honouring our invitation and joining us to 
celebrate this milestone. I am particularly grateful to Your Excellency, for graciously accepting 
to attend this important event despite your extremely busy schedule. I want to pay special 
tribute  to  fellow  Governors  and  Deputy  Governors  from  the  region,  and  especially  my 
colleagues from the EAC, who have been with us over the last two days, and over the last 
50 years.  
These  celebrations  accord  us  an  excellent  occasion  to  reflect  on  the  achievements  of  the 
Central Bank, the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead. The history of the Central Bank 
is very much intertwined with the history of the country, and most of us here today are a part 
of that history. It is a rich history, and like any other, it is marked by peaks and troughs, shadows 
and lights, but it is a history that we are proud of.  
Soon after its establishment, the new Central Bank had to deal with an economic slowdown in 
the early 70s and the effects of the oil crisis, which put increased pressure on domestic prices 
and the balance of payments. Kenya’s respite came in the form of a “coffee boom,” following 
a devastating frost in Brazil and the resulting increase in coffee prices. The 1980s witnessed 
an  increase  in  the  number  of  indigenous  Kenyans  investing  in  the  banking  sector.  But 
inadequate  capacity,  weak  internal  controls  and  poor  funds  management  led  to  market 
indiscipline.  The  result  was  significant  distress  in  the  banking  sector,  with  the  attendant 
ramifications on the Kenyan population, problems that persisted into the early part of the 90s. 
Highly  accommodative  policies  in  the  early  90s  also  lead  to  runaway  inflation,  forcing  the 
Central Bank to undertake massive liquidity mop-up operations to reign-in inflation and restore 
confidence in the financial system. 
Nevertheless, these challenges presented opportunities for legislative and institutional reforms 
to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  the  Central  Bank.  To  this  end,  a  number  of  reforms  were 
effected, including amending the Central Bank Act to enable the Central Bank exercise greater 
operational autonomy in the conduct of monetary policy, while maintaining price stability as 
one of its primary objectives.  
In this sketch of our history, I would also want to flag the following important achievements.  
1.  
The conduct of monetary policy has been improved in line with global practices, 
developments  in  the  financial  sector,  and  the  changing  economic  environment.  The 
establishment of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) in 2008 has enhanced the legitimacy 
and  transparency  of  monetary  policy  decisions,  as  well  as  guiding  expectations  about  the 
policy direction.  
2.  
The prudential regulation and supervision of banks has been strengthened over 
the years. For instance, risk management guidelines were issued in 2005. In response to the 
need to strengthen the powers to resolve banks and thereby enhance the sector’s stability, the 
Kenya Deposit Insurance Act was enacted in 2012. Consolidated supervision and regulation 
of  banks  with  cross-border  operations  has  also  been  enhanced.  We  are  grateful  to  our 
development partners that have and are helping us in this area.  
3.  
Financial  inclusion  has  increased  substantially.  Access  to  formal  financial 
services has increased from 26 percent in 2006 to over 75 percent currently. Conversely, the 
proportion of the population that are financially excluded has been reduced by half since 2006. 
Additionally, Kenya’s ranking of access to credit by customers advanced 88 places to 28th 
among 189 countries in the World Bank’s Doing Business Survey 2016.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
4.  
Innovations  in  the  payment  systems  and  the  integration  of  IT  systems  have 
increased  efficiency  in  the  payments,  clearing, and  settlement  systems.  These  innovations 
include: the Real Time Gross Settlements (RTGS) Systems that allow settlements in real time; 
full automation of the Clearing House and other improvements – cheques that took 21 days to 
clear some 10 years ago can now be cleared in just two days. Mobile payments have ballooned 
and account for over 80 percent of the number of payment transactions. The introduction of 
internet banking has enabled the Central Government, Ministries and Counties to reduce their 
paperwork and make payments in an efficient manner from far-flung locations.  
5.  
The CBK continues to support the National Treasury manage its accounts. In 
conjunction with the National Treasury, the government bond programme has been revitalised 
and the debt portfolio skewed to the current ratio of 78 percent bonds and 22 percent bills.  
It is against the background of appreciation of these achievements that we started our journey 
in September 2015, toward our Golden Jubilee celebrations. The events over the last year 
have been anchored on the youth, in recognition of their key role in our nation’s growth and 
great  expectations.  Subsequently,  the  CBK  launched  and  supported  initiatives  targeted  at 
empowering and inspiring the youth. These included:  
• 
The Mathare Youth Empowerment Programme that focused on enhancing financial 
literacy amongst youth groups in Mathare;  
The  CBK  internship  programme  that  offers  deserving  college  graduates  an 
opportunity to be inspired to serve in the financial sector.  
Sponsorship of the Kenya Music Festival, which entailed about six million students 
across the country translating the CBK mandate into poems and choral verses as well 
as performing the CBK theme song Miaka Hamsini.  
A Children’s Art competition in collaboration with the National Museums of Kenya 
and the Kenya Bankers Association, where children translated their understanding of 
the CBK’s mandate into creative pieces. The best of these are on display here at the 
Museum and I trust that everyone will get an opportunity to view them.  
   Ladies and Gentlemen, I would be remiss if I did not mention the Central Bank’s greatest 
assets—the people of the CBK. Most of them are unsung heroes in the backrooms, banking 
halls,  security  posts,  branches,  cleaning  crews,  etc.  All  dedicate 
themselves  with 
professionalism, integrity, and a spirit of service. The staff of the Bank are not only immensely 
talented  but  have  also  shown  exceptional  dependability  and  dedication  to  the  institution.  I 
salute you! Today, we will be presenting long service awards to 14 current and retired staff, 
who have the longest length of service.  
As I conclude, Ladies and Gentlemen, the CBK is repositioning itself for the next 50 years, 
and our aspiration is to be a World-Class Modern Central Bank, reflected in our processes, 
systems, and our staff. CBK will continue to strengthen prudential regulation and supervision, 
with a view to supporting the continued safety, soundness and growth of the banking sector. 
This  is  in  line  with  Kenya’s  aspirations  under  Vision  2030  of  promoting  a  sound,  safe  and 
inclusive financial system to progress towards a regional financial services hub. With these 
remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me once again thank all Kenyans and our guests for 
joining us in these celebrations. Hongera kwa mafanikio hadi sasa, tunaomba mema kwa 
siku za mbele!  
It is now my pleasure to invite the Cabinet Secretary, National Treasury, Mr. Henry Rotich, to 
make his remarks.  
Karibu Waziri! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
