  Andrew Bailey: Defining the objectives and goals of supervision 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer of the Prudential Regulation Authority at the Bank of England, at the New York Fed 
conference “Defining the objectives and goals of supervision”, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, New York City, 18 March 2016. 
 First of all, many thanks to the New York Fed for organising a conference on supervision of 
banks.  This  sounds  a  strange  thing  to  say  in  one  sense  –  not  in  another  because  the 
gratitude is genuine – but strange in the sense that surely supervision is such an important 
part  of  what  we  do  that  we  shouldn’t  be  particularly  surprised  at  the  idea  of  having  a 
conference on it. But in my experience, it is surprising how little time we spend being more 
reflective about supervision.  
I want to start with some important definitions. Frequently, and mistakenly, “supervision” and 
“regulation” as terms are used interchangeably. That’s wrong. Regulation is to do with the 
framework  of  rules  and  guidance  that  put  the  structure  around  the  objectives  that  as 
authorities  we  are  usually  given  in  statute. In the  UK,  the  PRA  has  a  primary  objective  in 
terms  of  the  safety  and  soundness  of  firms  we  authorise  to  do  business,  and  safety  and 
soundness are expressed in terms of the stability of the financial system.  
There  is  then  a  rulebook  that  tells  us  what  safety  and  soundness  means.  That’s  the 
framework of regulations. Supervision is about how we use it in practice. For me, two critical 
elements of supervision are that it is forward-looking, and it requires the use of judgement. 
Sounds  obvious,  but  sadly  hasn’t  been  consistently  done  well  in  the  past,  with  bad 
consequences.  
Supervision is therefore a skill – in fact it’s quite a few skills. The essence of the job is to 
understand risks in firms, and where necessary to step in and do a number of things: point 
out risks, or their significance when the firm seems to have failed to notice – through either 
lack of awareness or intent; or point out that while the firm may have identified the risk, it has 
failed to understand or calibrate its significance.  
This leads me to a couple of important points.  
First,  our  assessment  of  risks  can  differ  from  firms  because  our  objective  represents  the 
public  interest,  and  there  is  an  externality  in  the  risk  in  question  which  affects  the  public 
interest in ways that do not register with a definition of private interest. The causes of the 
financial crisis sadly remind us of this.  
It means that we have to be very clear and forthright on what is the public interest, and thus 
why we supervise.  
Second, risk is our business. This conference is about supervising large, complex financial 
institutions. I read too often the criticism of supervision that we cannot understand the risks of 
these  institutions,  and  so  we  should  give  up  all  hope  of  doing  so.  It’s  an  argument  which 
seems  to  say,  we  can’t  value  the  firm,  we  can’t  supervise  it,  and  we  can’t  resolve  it,  so 
therefore  let’s  ensure  it  has  a  very  large  amount  of  equity  financing,  what  I  call  the  “Big 
Equity” argument. Honestly, it’s a nonsense. Large amounts of equity financing will not be 
available for such firms, so the best we can say is that this is a route to a radically different 
financial  system,  but  in  that  world  the  risk  goes  somewhere  else,  and  we  shall  still  be 
worried.  But this  is  not an  argument  against  having  non-risk  based tools  like  the  leverage 
ratio in the supervisors’ toolbox. They are very important, because to understand risks well, 
we need more than one view of the firm. And the leverage ratio is an important other view. 
But I want to emphasise that understanding risk is at the heart of supervision.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
But  this,  of  course,  begs  a  very  important  question. Why  did  supervision  go  wrong  in  the 
period before the financial crisis, and what do we learn from that bad experience? Let me 
offer a number of thoughts on that.  
First, supervision was never given sufficient prominence and attention. It’s a very real skill. In 
my experience it demands not just high levels of technical skill but also interpersonal skills – 
to get very strong egos to change their thinking and actions – do things that they had not 
intended – to recognise the public interest.  
Second,  I  think  we  saw  pre-crisis  a  tendency  for  what  I,  probably  too  loosely,  call  the 
political-economy  to  be pro-cyclical  and  thus  approve  of  excessive  light-touch  supervision. 
This  was  a  problem  I  think  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  The  public  interest  in  financial 
stability  was  lost  amidst  an  enthusiasm  for  the  persistence  of  growth  and  easy  credit.  In 
1979,  the  former  chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  Arthur  Burns,  gave  a  lecture 
entitled “The Anguish of Central Banking”. It was about monetary policy, and how there had 
been a build-up of ideas which had accommodated inflation.  
Historians have suggested that Burns himself was not innocent in this respect, but the point 
is  that  there  was  a  role  for  broad  ideas  which  enabled  the  accommodation  of  pernicious 
inflation.  It  was  dressed  up  as  enthusiasm  for  growth  and  societal  change  which  was 
ultimately  unsustainable.  We  saw  similar  traits  before  the  financial  crisis,  with  the 
consequence that supervision was supressed. The whole thrust of the post-crisis changes in 
my view is to make supervision less pro-cyclical – not to aim off in the good times, but also 
not over-compensate the other way in the bad times.  
A third thought in this respect is that we underestimated the importance of system-wide risks 
and  
macro-prudential  policy.  Supervision  –  and  particularly  large  complex  firm  supervision  - 
cannot be remote from macro-prudential policy. To be honest, while I think we have made 
some progress breaking down the barriers, we still have a long way to go to integrate micro 
and macro prudential approaches. Douglas Elliott has made the point that we entered the 
crisis at a point in the history of economic policymaking where we had abandoned all macro 
tools other than the use of interest rates, the price of money. This was fairly unprecedented. 
We  had  lost  confidence  in  quantitative  tools  in  monetary  policy,  and  the  role  of  reserve 
money had been diminished.  
We had very little in the way of bank liquidity policy, of which holdings of reserve money are 
an important part. The experience of the crisis tells us that we have to keep working hard to 
re-develop these tools and to knit large firm supervision into the picture. In my experience, it 
doesn’t happen naturally.  
This brings me to the fourth and final thought on supervision. It was absolutely essential and 
natural that the immediate reaction to the crisis was to re-build regulation and supervision in 
respect of the core prudential All speeches are available online at building blocks, which are 
solvency (capital) and liquidity (funding). And, we had work to do, and still have, to get these 
core elements into better shape. And the work of interpreting these standards will never stop 
because  the  precise  forms  of  risk  taking  will  evolve.  But,  when  I  have  stepped  back  and 
looked at the causes of the crisis in firms, another thing stands out. In the UK, I don’t think 
we saw a major prudential failure of capital and liquidity which did not have a governance 
and management story at is root, and we had a system which was very poor at creating the 
right  incentives for  good  outcomes.  Here I  want  to  put the  emphasis  on  creating  the right 
incentives.  
In my experience supervision is in part about creating and overseeing those incentives. The 
critical  distinction  here  is  that  supervision  is  not  just  about  doing  things  to  firms,  it  is  also 
about  creating  the  conditions for firms to  do  this  right  thing  in  the first  place.  Let  me  give 
three examples of what we are doing.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
First, we have been much more active in remuneration policy and practice. I have no interest 
in regulating the level of pay, but we are interested to ensure that remuneration is compatible 
with  meeting  capital  requirements  (so  it  can  be  varied  to  do  so)  and  that  variable 
remuneration is deferred and can be withdrawn, and is thus compatible with creating the right 
incentives by putting that remuneration at risk if the firm fails to conform with the objectives of 
safety, soundness and good conduct of business. I am not in favour of limiting variable pay in 
the way European legislation has done through the so-called bonus cap because it reduces 
the  opportunity  to  create  the  right  incentives.  We  then  supervise  firms  to  ensure  those 
incentives remain in place.  
The second example relates to senior individuals in firms. Earlier this month we introduced 
the new Senior Managers Regime.  
The  aim  of  this  regime  is  to  establish  clear  responsibilities  for  senior  managers,  including 
chairs of Board Committees. This is not to create new responsibilities, but rather to be clear 
on  what  those  responsibilities  are,  and  then  to  supervise  to  hold  individuals  to  those 
responsibilities.  In  the  previous  regime,  we  had  too many  examples  of individuals  shirking 
their responsibilities. My strong view is that senior figures cannot delegate responsibilities. 
We will then direct our supervision to support this new regime operating effectively.  
The third example concerns the supervision of governance, executive and Board level. We 
are in the process of revamping our approach here, recognising that too many problems of 
the  past  have  had  their  roots  in  ineffective  governance.  This  is  probably  the  prime  area 
where supervision is distinct from regulation, because there is very little regulation, rightly so. 
Supervising governance is inherently a matter of judgement based on evidence.  
So, to conclude, we should devote more time to discussing the skill of supervision. It has at 
its  heart 
to 
developing  supervisors and value then for the skill that they need to do the job well. Thank 
you. 
risk.  And,  we  should  devote  more 
the  understanding  of 
time 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3 
