Guy Debelle: Liquidity in Australian fixed income markets 
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the 4th Australian Regulatory Summit, Sydney, 21 June 2016. 
Thanks to Jon Cheshire for his work locally and globally on this topic. 
 Fixed  income  markets  in  many  jurisdictions  have  been  going  through  a  period  of  change, 
resulting  in  a  debate  as  to  whether  they  are  continuing  to  function  effectively  and,  in 
particular,  function  effectively  in  times  of  stress.  Changes  in  dealer  business  models  and 
increased  use  of  electronic  trading  platforms  are  influencing  the  nature of  liquidity  in  bond 
markets.  However,  these  changes  are  not  as  prevalent  in  Australia  as  they  are  in  some 
markets overseas, and that is what I am going to talk about today. 
Globally  the  debate  on  bond  market  liquidity  has  been  ebbing  and  flowing  over  the  past 
couple  of  years.  You  can  hear  that  it  is  simultaneously  the  best  of  times  and  the  worst  of 
times for liquidity in the bond market. Or to stick with the water analogy that is so prevalent in 
such discussions, the market is awash with liquidity at the same time as the tide is going out. 
As  an  aside,  the  water  references  in  liquidity  discussions  are  as  pervasive  as  they  are  in 
Pixies’ songs. 
I  discussed  some  of  these  issues  in  a  speech  last  year1  and  there  have  been  two  recent 
publications from two BIS Committees that I am a member of that provide a comprehensive 
account of recent developments in bond market liquidity globally.2 Rather than recount the 
global discussion, instead I will try and make it more directly relevant to this audience and 
run through some of the factors affecting Australian fixed income markets, drawing on work 
done  by  my  colleague  Jon  Cheshire  published  in  the  RBA  Bulletin  last  week.3  The 
assessment that Jon makes, which I share, is that liquidity in most segments of the physical 
bond market in Australia is lower than it has been in the past. That is, it is generally a little 
more costly to transact in the same volumes, with immediacy, in the Australian bond markets 
than  it  used  to  be.  These  changes  are  partly  a  response  to  regulation  and  partly  a 
reassessment of business models by banks. But, given that liquidity was oversupplied and 
underpriced  in  the  years  prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis,  these  changes  in  liquidity  are 
broadly  desirable  and,  to  date,  have  not  presented  any  significant  issues  in  the  Australian 
market. 
Measuring liquidity 
What do we actually mean by bond market liquidity? Often participants in this debate talk at 
cross purposes using different metrics of liquidity, so let me explain how we are assessing 
bond  market  liquidity.  Market  liquidity  is  the  ability  to  execute  transactions  in  size, 
immediately,  at  low  cost  and  with  limited  price  impact.  As  you  can  see,  there  is  both  a 
quantity and time element to liquidity which is often conflated in discussions about it. 
1  Debelle  G  (2015),  ‘Bond  Market  Liquidity,  Long-term  Rates  and  China’,  Speech  at  the  Actuaries  Institute 
‘Banking on Change’ Seminar, Sydney, 16 September. 
2  Markets Committee (2016), ‘Electronic Trading in Fixed Income Markets’, Markets Committee Publications No 
7  Available  at  <http://www.bis.org/publ/mktc07.htm>,  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Basel.  CGFS 
(Committee on the Global Financial System) (2016), ‘Fixed Income Market Liquidity’, CGFS Papers No 55, 
Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Basel  Available  at  <http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs55.htm>.  Jon  Cheshire 
made a significant contribution to both of these papers. 
3  Cheshire J (2016), ‘Liquidity in Fixed Income Markets’, RBA Bulletin, June, pp 49–58. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
  Given these different dimensions to liquidity, measuring it precisely is not a straightforward 
exercise.  This  is  particularly  the  case  in  Australia,  where  much  of  the  secondary  market 
activity  is  not  conducted  on  electronic  platforms  and  so  the  trade  data  is  less  readily 
available. It would be good to see more trade data on transactions in the market, although, in 
saying that, it is possible to have too much transparency in this regard. This is particularly so 
in a relatively small fixed income market like that in Australia, where the revelation of market 
participants’ positions in close to real time can be problematic. 
The first metric I will use to illustrate developments in liquidity is turnover; that is, the quantity 
dimension. I will discuss the price aspect below. A smaller share of the stock of outstanding 
bonds is being transacted relative to the past (Graph 1). The turnover ratio (the ratio of the 
value of transactions undertaken in bond markets over the course of a year relative to the 
average  outstanding  stock  of  bonds  on  issue  over  the  year)  for  government  bonds  has 
declined from an average of around five in the decade prior to 2012, to a little above three 
over the past four years. However, over the same time, the supply has grown significantly, so 
that  the  absolute  amount  of  turnover  hasn’t  changed  all  that  much.  The  turnover  ratio  of 
corporate  securities  has  declined  to  a  little  above  one  in  the  decade  prior  to  2012  to  its 
current level of about a half. 
Graph 1 
 Looking at this another way, the share of the government bond market that used to turnover 
in  an  average  month  now  takes  a  bit  over  six  weeks,  while  the  average  share  of  the 
corporate  securities  market  that  used  to  turnover  in  one  month  now  takes  closer  to  two 
months. We  also  hear  from  market  participants  that  it  is,  in  general,  a  bit  more  difficult  to 
transact in size. 
Should we be concerned about this? Not necessarily. The corporate bond market in Australia 
has never had a highly liquid secondary market. It has always been predominantly a buy and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  hold  market,  and  most  participants  are  well  aware  of  this.  More  generally,  bond  market 
activity in Australia has been structurally declining over a long period. In the mid 1990s, the 
turnover  ratio for government  bonds  was  around  10,  by  the  late  nineties  this  had fallen  to 
around 7. A decade later in the mid 2000s, it had fallen to around 5 and now it is 3. There are 
number of explanations for this decline in turnover which I will now turn to. 
Derivatives 
Market participants have been increasingly transacting in derivative instruments rather than 
the  cash  bonds.  Since  the  mid  1990s,  activity  in  bond  futures  and  interest  rate  swaps, 
relative to bonds outstanding, has increased sharply (Graph 2). In 2015, the value of turnover 
in  bond  markets  was  around  $A2½  trillion  whereas  the  value  of  turnover  in  both  the 
Australian dollar interest rate swaps and bond futures markets was each around $A9 trillion.4 
Growth  in  activity  in  these  markets  in  recent  years  has  significantly  outpaced  growth  in 
issuance of Australian dollar bonds. Overall, the increase in derivative activity has more than 
offset the decline in bond market activity. 
Graph 2 
                                                 
4  These figures are sourced from the AFMA. I’m only referring to interest rate and tenor basis swaps turnover 
here. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  There is a clear preference for bond issuers and investors in Australia to manage the risk 
associated  with  their  bond  issuance  or  bond  holdings  by  transacting  in  the  derivative 
instruments  rather  than  in  the  physical  instruments.5  This  has  resulted  in  a  further 
concentration  of  liquidity  in  the  derivative  instruments  and  a  decline  in  liquidity  of  cash 
instruments.  This  development  is  likely  to  continue  to  occur,  particularly  for  less  liquid 
segments of the bond market. 
This  is  occurring  because  these  standardised  derivative  instruments  can  be  significantly 
cheaper to transact than the physical instruments. One of the reasons for this is simply that a 
physical  transaction  has  a  larger  cash  component  than  a  derivative  transaction. This  cash 
component has to be funded. If the cost of funding is relatively high, market participants are 
likely to shift activity into other instruments. That said, fixed income derivative markets cannot 
act as a perfect substitute for bond markets because they are not a funding source for the 
seller nor do they represent an investment for the buyer. The underlying bonds still have to 
be issued! 
Electronic trading 
The share of derivative market transactions relative to cash transactions is larger in Australia 
than in European and North American fixed income markets. This presents a challenge for 
local bond markets to compete for business with the derivative markets. How could this come 
about?  One  way  is  to  look  to  lower  the  cost  of  transacting  in  bond  markets.  This  could 
happen  if  a  greater  share  of  transactions  were  conducted  via  electronic  trading  platforms. 
Electronic platforms typically offer a lower cost structure than traditional phone dealing. 
The share of electronic trading in government bond markets in Australia is around a third. But 
in European and US bond markets the share of electronic trading is considerably greater at 
over fifty per cent. In the bond futures markets most trades are conducted via an electronic 
platform  while  around  25 per cent  of  interest  rate  swap  transactions  occur  via  electronic 
platforms. There appears to be scope for a greater share of trading in Australia’s government 
bond market, at least, to take place on electronic platforms. 
The price of liquidity 
Having talked so far about the stock of liquidity, I will now turn to developments in the price of 
liquidity. While turnover appears to be lower in bond markets, the price of transacting doesn’t 
appear to be much different from where it has been in the past. This is apparent from bid-ask 
spreads, which is a measure of the difference between the price that a buyer is willing to pay 
for a typical amount of an asset and for which a seller is willing to sell. Bid-ask spreads have 
been narrowing or are around their narrowest in domestic government bond markets. Part of 
the explanation is that there has been a decrease in the volume that can be transacted at 
these  spreads,  as  a  consequence  of  both  increased  electronic  trading  and  decreased 
principal-based market-making. So spreads are narrower but how much you can make use 
of these narrower spreads when trading larger volumes is not so clear, and this is often at 
the root of the divergence in opinion about the current health of markets. 
Other measures of the price of liquidity also paint a positive picture. For instance, spreads on 
risky bonds over government bonds are above levels that prevailed in the years leading up to 
the financial crisis, but significantly lower than the average or extreme levels seen during the 
crisis years. Volatility too has been a bit higher in the past six to twelve months, but has not 
reached levels seen in the crisis. 
                                                
5  For instance, bond dealers and issuers use exchange for physical transactions to manage interest rate risk. 
See  Cheung  B  (2014),  ‘Trading  in  Treasury  Bond  futures  Contracts  and  Bonds  in  Australia’,  RBA  Bulletin, 
September, pp 47−52. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  One reason why Australian fixed income markets continue to function smoothly is that the 
derivative markets have been operating effectively. For instance, the market depth (the size 
of a trade that can be executed for a given trade size) in the futures market appears to be 
similar to levels that prevailed prior to the financial crisis (Graph 3). As I mentioned, these 
markets account for the bulk of activity in Australian markets. As such, they play a key role in 
price discovery and in facilitating a transfer of risk among market participants. While part of 
the  concern  in  global  markets  is  over  a  withdrawal  of  market-making  activity  from  bond 
markets, it is apparent that this issue has not been as important in Australia for some time. 
Graph 3 
 The role of market makers 
The Australian bond markets still rely relatively significantly on market makers who have a 
dominant presence in the markets. For instance, according to AFMA data, banks account for 
around 45 per cent of all trades in the Australian Government Securities (AGS) market, down 
from around 60 per cent in the decade to 2011. At 45 per cent, banks account for a slightly 
larger  share  of  transactions  in  the  semis  market  than  they  did  in  the  past.  Their  share  of 
transactions in non-government bond markets has declined slightly from 50 to 45 per cent. 
While in aggregate, banks are still significantly involved, there have been some shifts in the 
composition of this activity. Australian bond markets have traditionally had a mix of both local 
and  foreign  banks,  although  the  number  of  institutions  involved  in  the  bond  markets  has 
ebbed and flowed with the size of markets. There was an increase in participation by foreign 
banks in 2010 and 2011, partly in response to increased demand from their offshore clients, 
who sought to capitalise on the strength of fixed income markets in Australia relative to those 
in  other  jurisdictions.  This  led  the  domestic  market  to  be  oversupplied  for  a  while  in  my 
opinion.  More  recently,  we  have  seen  some  foreign  participants  leave  again  as  it  has 
become  uneconomic  for  them  to  continue  to  provide  market-making  services.  As  a  result, 
while bond markets are currently larger, relative to GDP, than in the past, the foreign bank 
presence is a little smaller than it has been at some times in the past. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The decline in the presence of foreign banks reflects both a change in business strategy and, 
in some cases, the effect of regulations. For many banks operating in Australia, the effect of 
regulations  such  as  increased  capital  requirements  and  the  leverage  ratio  have  not  been 
binding  on  their  business  models.  Nevertheless,  just  as  has  happened  in  the  larger  fixed 
income  markets  offshore,  banks  operating  in  Australian  bond  markets  have  changed  their 
business models. This has seen a lower level or greater rationing of principal-based market-
making as a result of a decrease in appetite to warehouse risk, particularly bonds that are not 
very liquid. 
This  is  evident  in  the  bond  inventories  that  banks  hold  in  their  trading  books.  Banks  have 
decreased the stock of non-government bonds they hold in their trading books and increased 
the share of government bond holdings. This is partly driven by a decrease in willingness to 
warehouse  bonds  that  do  not  trade  actively  in  the  secondary  market.  It  also  reflects  the 
incentives for banks to hold government bonds to satisfy the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR). 
Banks’ holdings of government bonds have increased to around 30 per cent of the market. 
The RBA’s judgement is that a greater holding than 30 per cent may impair the functioning of 
the government bond markets. In coming to that assessment, one of the considerations is 
the sizeable share of government securities held by offshore investors. In the case of AGS, 
this  currently  amounts  to  more  than  60 per cent  of  the  stock.  Many  of  these  investors  are 
buy-and-hold  investors.  They  generally  do  not  undertake  securities  lending.  As  a  result, 
these  bond  holdings  are  not  contributing  to  the  liquidity  of  the  market.  Hence,  a  more 
relevant metric in considering the share of the government bond market that banks can hold 
to meet the LCR is the stock of bonds held by domestic investors. 
Last week, the RBA published its latest assessment of the amount of AGS and semis that 
could  be  reasonably  held  by  the  domestic  banks  without  impairing  market  functioning.6 
(APRA  then  sets  the  aggregate  size  of  the  Committed  Liquidity  Facility  as  the  difference 
between the LCR requirements of the banks and the amount of AGS and semis that can be 
reasonably  held.)  We  have  maintained  the  assumption  that  the  domestic  banks  can 
reasonably hold a quarter of the stock of AGS and semis in 2017. Foreign banks operating in 
the local market hold around another 5 per cent of the stock to meet their LCR requirement. 
So, in total, this remains at 30 per cent. Based on budget projections of the Commonwealth 
and  State  governments,  we  expect  that  the  domestic  banks  could  reasonably  hold 
$220 billion  without  impairing  the  market,  which  would  be  an  increase  of  $25  billion 
compared to the holdings in 2016. 
High frequency trading 
High-frequency  trading  is  not  as  prevalent  in  the  domestic  bond  markets  as  it  is  in  some 
markets  There  are  mixed  views  on  the  contribution  of  high-frequency  trading  to  market 
functioning, particularly in terms of its contribution to flash events in the bond market such as 
occurred in the US Treasury market on 15 October 2014 and the German “bund tantrum”.7  
                                                
6  See RBA (Reserve Bank of Australia) (2016), ‘The Committed Liquidity Facility’, rba.gov.au site, 16 June. 
7  Joint  Staff  (US  Department  of  the  Treasury,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  US  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  US  Commodity  Futures  Trading 
Commission)  (2015):  ‘The  U.S.  Treasury  Market  on  October  15,  2014’,  Joint  Staff  Report,  July.  Markets 
Committee  (2016).  Available  at  <https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Documents/Joint_ 
Staff_Report_Treasury_10–15–2015.pdf>, ‘Electronic Trading in Fixed Income Markets’, Markets Committee 
Publications  No 
at 
<http://www.bis.org/publ/mktc07.htm>.  See  also  ASIC  (Australian  Securities  and  Investments  Commission) 
(2015),  ‘Review  of  High-Frequency  Trading  and  Dark  Liquidity’,  Report  452,  October.  Available  at 
<http://asic.gov.au/regulatory-resources/markets/market-structure/dark-liquidity-and-high-frequency-trading/ 
review-of-high-frequency-trading-and-dark-liquidity-2015/>. 
International  Settlements,  Basel, 
January.  Available 
7,  Bank 
for 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  High-frequency trading does not have a presence in the physical bond market while it has a 
modest presence in the bond futures market, growing to around 15 per cent over the past 
few  years.  That  said,  high-frequency  trading  activity  in  the  domestic  market  is  often 
concentrated  around  particular  events,  most  notably  the  bond  futures  rolls.  The  share  of 
high-frequency trading around the futures roll can be considerably higher. 
The  presence  of  high-frequency  traders  can  reduce  the  costs,  in  terms  of  spread,  of 
transacting small parcel sizes. There is evidence of that occurring in the domestic market. 
But,  high-frequency  trading  firms  do  not  hold  trading  positions  for  a  long  period  of  time. 
During  periods  when  market  prices  are  adjusting,  the  presence  of market  participants  that 
have longer holding periods can be beneficial because these participants absorb some of the 
order  imbalance.  One  possible  concern  for  the  future  evolution  of  the  bond  market  is  that 
high-frequency firms reduce the return to market-making activities in normal (benign) times 
causing  market  makers  to  exit  as  such  activity  becomes  uneconomic.  This  reduction  in 
market-making  then  becomes  problematic  in  more  turbulent  times  exacerbating  market 
disruption.  This  is  a  potential  development  we  will  be  monitoring,  although  there  is  no 
evidence that this has been an issue to date in the local market. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, Australian fixed income markets have continued to function satisfactorily, even 
while  in  some  overseas  markets  there  has  been  increased  concern  about  the  capacity  of 
such markets to function effectively. As I’ve noted, part of the explanation for the difference is 
that the withdrawal of dealers from the bond market in Australia has not been as sizeable as 
it  has  been  elsewhere.  Regulatory  change  has  contributed  to  the  reduced  capacity  in  the 
domestic  market,  but  not  to  the  detriment  of  market  functioning.  Indeed,  the  fact  that  the 
price  of  liquidity  now  more  accurately  reflects  the  cost  of  providing  liquidity  is  a  positive 
outcome. 
Another  development  that  has  contributed  to  the  satisfactory  outcomes  in  the  domestic 
market is that a large share of market activity is undertaken in derivative markets that don’t 
rely as much on market-making capacity and are relatively low cost and efficient. 
It  is  likely  that  fixed  income  markets  in  Australia  will  continue  to  evolve  in  coming  years, 
which  will  require  market  participants  to  keep  adapting.  On  our  side,  we  will  continue  to 
monitor this evolution and its impact on the efficient functioning of the market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
