   Jorgovanka Tabaković: Overview of recent monetary and 
macroeconomic trends in Serbia 
Introductory speech by Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at 
the presentation of the Inflation Report – February 2016, Belgrade, 19 February 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear guests,  
Welcome to the presentation of the Inflation Report, where we will give an overview of recent 
monetary and macroeconomic trends and set out our expectations for the period ahead.  
I believe that in the coming period too we all want to see Serbia as a competitive and fast-
growing economy, economy driven by investment and exports. We have no doubt whatsoever 
that investment, exports and economic activity will continue to grow in the years to come. What 
gives  us  reason  for  optimism  is  Serbia’s  potential  for  development,  our  reform-minded 
government and the National Bank of Serbia’s commitment to maintaining price and financial 
stability. Our optimism is also based on the results achieved thus far, including monetary and 
macroeconomic  stability,  robust  fiscal  adjustment,  reduced  external  imbalances,  improved 
business and investment environment… These results were also recognized by international 
institutions – the International Monetary Fund, World Bank, European Commission, European 
Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development,  rating  agencies  and  other  globally  renowned 
institutions.  
In  contrast  to  them,  some  local  critics  ascribe  the  good  results  to  a  „fortunate“  set  of 
circumstances and measures taken by other central banks. Because of this I want to underline 
today that we have achieved the said results relying solely on our own capacities, even though 
we were faced with numerous challenges coming from the international environment.  
No one can refute the fact that inflation in Serbia has been low and stable for more than two 
years. Inflation in Serbia is around 2% and hence comparable to inflation in other European 
countries. That this is not due to a „fortunate“ set of circumstances or to globally low inflation 
is shown by the experience of countries where inflation is still significantly above the target. 
High  inflation  in  those  countries  is  due  to  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  depreciation  of 
national currencies in conditions of volatile capital flows. Despite challenges, we managed to 
deliver both price stability and relative stability of the exchange rate. We managed to deliver 
and to maintain them owing to our well-timed and carefully thought out measures that were 
coordinated with fiscal policy. As a result we have had a significant reduction in internal and 
external imbalances, and you will hear the figures from my colleagues later on. In a nutshell, 
amounting to 3.7% of GDP the budget deficit was almost halved last year, while the current 
account deficit was cut by one fifth and was fully covered by foreign direct investment.  
In addition, the public often debates whether the noticeable fall in bank lending rates and the 
cost of government borrowing is attributable more to the monetary easing of the National Bank 
of  Serbia  or  the  European  Central  Bank.  I  will  give  you  nothing  but facts. The fall  in  dinar 
lending rates began in September 2013, after the National Bank of Serbia initiated a cycle of 
key policy rate cuts in May that is also their lowest level on record. And these are the facts. 
Lower interest rates also reflect competition among banks which increased, inter alia, as the 
National Bank of Serbia made sure that citizens have access to transparent information on 
lending terms offered by different banks. During the same period, though lesser than that for 
dinar loans, a decline was recorded for interest rates on euro loans (by 2.8 pp, to 4.4% in 
December),  which  is  by  all  means  due  to  the  European  Central  Bank’s  monetary 
accommodation and the consequent fall in EURIBOR. There is no doubt however that this is 
also a result of Serbia’s better macroeconomic performances and lower risk premium, and 
hence lower cost of borrowing for both government and private sector.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   After  cutting  the  key  policy  rate  in  its  February  meeting,  the  Executive  Board  particularly 
underlined the expectation that further monetary policy easing will be followed by a further 
recovery of lending activity, which will contribute to investment. The 1.8% credit growth in 2015, 
in the face of maturing of RSD 110 bln worth of subsidized loans, was beyond our expectations. 
New investment loans were 2.5 times higher than in 2014, while a significant rise was recorded 
also for loans that were refinanced under much more favourable terms. We expect positive 
tendencies in the credit market to continue in 2016.  
Ladies and gentlemen, dear guests,  
What is certain, despite numerous uncertainties in the international environment, is that we will 
maintain  monetary  and  financial  stability  and  thus,  give  a  full  contribution  to  sustainable 
economic recovery and prosperity of our country.  
I now give the floor to Ana Ivkovid to present the key messages from the February Inflation 
Report. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
