  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Future of Islamic finance - delivering actions 
today for a sustainable tomorrow 
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia 
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Global Islamic Finance Forum 5.0 "Future of Islamic Finance: 
Delivering actions today for a sustainable tomorrow", Sasana Kijang, Kuala Lumpur, 11 May 
2016. 
 It is my pleasure to be here today to speak at the Global Islamic Finance Forum 2016. The 
forum  which  was  conceived  in  2007  has  now  become  a  hallmark  event  for  the  Islamic 
finance  industry  –  where  the  best  minds  and  leaders  of  the  industry  come  together  to 
address  the  issues,  opportunities  and  imperatives  that  are  shaping  the  current  and  future 
path  of  Islamic  finance.  The  fact  that  this  event  has  attracted  more  than  a  thousand 
participants  from  all  over  the  world  is  a  testament  to  the  growing  global  significance  of 
Islamic finance. 
Today,  Islamic  finance  is  one  of  the  fastest  growing  segments  of  the  financial  industry  in 
many parts of the world. It registered double-digit growth rates in the past decade despite 
challenging  circumstances  globally.  Its  reach  and  influence  has  expanded  beyond  the 
traditional  Islamic  markets,  with  increasingly  strong  footholds  in  banking,  takaful  and  the 
capital market. Global sukuk issuances, for instance, increased by 13% in the first quarter 
this  year  despite  less  favourable  market  conditions.  This  positive  growth  continues  to  be 
supported by the progressive development of market infrastructures, strengthened regulatory 
and  supervisory  frameworks  and  active  industry  participants.  In  at  least  10  jurisdictions, 
Islamic  banking  now  represents  more  than  20%  of  total  banking  assets  –  a  feat  that  has 
been achieved in under a decade. 
And  in  many  more  countries,  Islamic  financial  services  are  now  available  alongside 
conventional financial services. These developments underscore a clear and sustained trend 
in  which Shariah-compliant financial products and services have continued to gain traction 
among businesses and individuals from all walks of life. 
In fact, the value propositions of Islamic finance has extended beyond faith and origins that 
appeal  to  the  global  community.  It  is  the  intrinsic  qualities  of  Islamic  finance  that  are 
multifaceted  that  have  pulled  interest  from  diverse  backgrounds.  At  the  core  of  Islamic 
finance lies virtues that encompass both moral and commercial aspect in deriving potential 
solutions for economic and financial stability. The values and principles that Islamic finance 
carry have opened new pathways towards achieving economic prosperity while safeguarding 
the  interest  of  the public. What  used  to  be  a  novel  idea  has  become mainstream. Indeed, 
Islamic finance is for all. 
In  Malaysia,  efforts  led  by  the  Central  Bank  to  develop  Islamic  finance  spans  over  three 
decades.  The  invaluable  contributions  by  earlier  Governors  of  the  Central  Bank  laid  the 
foundations  for  the  development  of  an  international  Islamic  financial  centre  in  Malaysia, 
serving both global and domestic demand. Their visionary leadership in this journey not only 
ensured that our fundamentals were strong, they had significantly raised the global profile of 
Islamic finance with Malaysia setting an example that would encourage development in other 
countries. In the early 1980s, Governor Abdul Aziz Taha has laid down the foundations for 
the establishment of the first Islamic bank and the issuance of the first government sukuk. 
The dual financial system that we see in Malaysia today is the realisation of the vision framed 
by Governor Jaffar Hussein way back in 1990. From there on, we continued to advance on 
many  fronts,  including  the  establishment  of  the  Shariah  Advisory  Council  under  the 
leadership of Governor Ahmad Don. Significant milestones were achieved with Governor Zeti 
at the helm of the Central Bank. During this period, Islamic finance morphed from a niche 
segment into the financial mainstream, and from a largely domestic-centric focus to one of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  global relevance. In particular, her immense contributions have enabled us to achieve much 
more to expand the frontiers of Islamic finance as a global community. 
I  wanted  to  take  the  opportunity  today  to  acknowledge  their  tremendous  contributions. 
Moving  forward,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  build  upon  these  foundations  in  making 
advancement that will further strengthen Islamic finance’s growth trajectory. 
In the same way that past efforts have delivered solid growth in the industry and significantly 
enhanced  Islamic  finance  potential  for  future  growth,  our  present  actions  will  largely 
determine  the  future  prospects  of  Islamic  finance.  As  was  the  case  in  the  past,  we  will 
continue to require innovative solutions and collaborative strategies to take Islamic finance to 
the next level of development. Positive transformations taking place around us will continue 
to  pave  the  way  for  new  growth  opportunities  for  the  industry.  Collectively,  we  need  to 
understand  these  developments  and  leverage  on  them  to  advance  economic  and  social 
goals, and manage the attendant risks. 
Today, I would like to touch on three key issues, the rise of fintech and its impact on Islamic 
finance,  the  growing  importance  of  responsible,  inclusive  and  sustainable  finance  and  the 
preconditions necessary to sustain a value-based financial system. 
One  of  the  most  significant  transformational  developments  of  our  era  is  the  technological 
revolution.  More  specifically,  the  fintech  revolution  was  made  possible  by  maturing  social, 
mobile  and  cloud  technologies.  The  digital  revolution  and  widespread  penetration  of 
technology-driven applications in nearly every segment of the financial sector is already upon 
us.  Fintech  innovations  are  fundamentally  altering  the  way  we  experience  and  deliver 
financial products and services. According to a recent McKinsey report, the number of fintech 
start-ups  globally  has  now  exceeded  2,000,  more  than  twice  the  number  less  than  a  year 
ago. Such growth is expected to continue as innovators tap into the preferences of millions of 
technology  savvy  millennials  who  are  more  receptive  to  new  ways  of  consuming  financial 
services. 
Fintech  is  challenging  the  status  quo  of  the  financial  industry.  New  business  models  will 
emerge. Delivery channels will challenge existing norms. Transaction costs will be reduced. 
Rather than looking at the fintech revolution as unwelcoming, financial institutions ought to 
embrace it as an opportunity. 
In  the  area  of  payment  services  for  example,  e-payment  has  revolutionised  payment 
mechanisms  through  convenient  and  accessible  channels.  In  Islamic  finance,  a  recent 
initiative in Malaysia has been the Investment Account Platform (IAP) that was launched in 
February this year. It is an important example of a collaborative strategy by the industry to 
bring  game-changing  innovations  to  the  market.  The  IAP  is  the  first  Islamic  banking-
intermediated  internet-based  platform  that  combines  the  expertise  of  Islamic  banks  and 
efficiency  of  technology  to  channel  funds  from  investors  to  viable  economic  ventures.  It 
promotes  risk-sharing  financial  transactions  by  providing  the  platform  for  Musharakah  and 
Mudharabah-based  equity  financing.  The  platform  has  strong  prospects  to  support  cross-
border  investments  and  increase  global  connectivity  through  the  participation  of  banks 
worldwide. 
The  potential  impact  of  such  technological  disruptions  is  significant.  An  estimated  10%  to 
40% of overall banking revenues could be at risk by 2025 due to fintech innovations outside 
banking  institutions  that  are  able  to  achieve  a  significant  pricing  advantage.  In  Islamic 
finance, like the Investment Account Platform in Malaysia, fintech has immense potential to 
be the next game changer. It offers opportunities for industry players to radically transform 
operational models by adopting digitisation strategies that will be able to deliver much greater 
scale or alternatively, a high degree of specialisation. It also opens up new possibilities for 
improving efficiencies, reducing wastage and enhancing the customer experience. All of this 
adds up to stronger market positioning and financial performance. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  To  further  explore  and  leverage  or  these  opportunities,  plans  are  currently  underway  to 
organise an inaugural Islamic Finance Symposium on Innovation that will provide a platform 
for the academia and industry to come together to develop and test breakthrough ideas and 
innovative solutions in Islamic finance. 
On  its  part,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  been  actively  engaging  with  fintech firms to  better 
understand their activities and provide guidance on the regulations that may apply to them. 
The  adoption  of  fintech  is  clearly  not  without  risks,  particularly  in  the  wake  of  rising 
cybersecurity  threats  that  could  compromise  safeguards  that  protect  financial  assets  and 
customer data. The Bank has commenced a review of the changes and additional guidance 
needed  to  ensure  that  the  regulatory  framework  remains  appropriate  to  manage  the  risks, 
while encouraging productive innovation that will drive costs down and improve the quality of 
service to consumers. 
We are looking at this from several perspectives: first, the impact of fintech strategies on the 
management  of  risks  by  financial  institutions;  second,  the  potential  for  fintech  start-ups  to 
introduce new risks to the broader financial system as a result of regulatory arbitrage; and 
third, the impact to consumers. We will be providing more information to the market on our 
approach  to  the  regulation  of  fintech  developments  as  our  review  progresses.  In  the 
meantime,  our  engagements  with  individual  firms  will  continue,  supported  by  dedicated 
resources within the Bank to lead the review. 
Another  important  development  in  this  recent  decade  has  been  the  growing  emphasis  on 
responsible, inclusive and sustainable finance. The global financial crisis provided a dramatic 
reminder of the basic purpose of financial intermediation – as a means to create sustainable 
value in the real economy. Without this anchor, finance will always be inherently unstable. 
The central role of finance in any economy also places a critical responsibility on financial 
actors  to  promote  and  embrace  responsible  behavior,  consistent  with  the  long  term 
preservation and development of the economy, society and environment. 
In a number of developed markets, Sustainable, Responsible and Impact Investing (SRI) and 
Environment,  Social  and  Governance  (ESG)  considerations  are  gaining  significant 
momentum. 
Similar  trends  are  also  starting  to  gain  traction  in  emerging  markets.  Islamic  finance  is 
uniquely  positioned  to  champion  this  cause,  guided  by  the  overarching  Shariah  principle 
which emphasises the protection and preservation of the benefits and interests of society at 
large. More than 750 verses in the Quran relate to the importance of achieving balance and 
moderation  in  one’s  life,  whilst  being  responsible  and  accountable  in  the  use  of  natural 
resources.  The  Islamic  finance  agenda  must  therefore  embrace  this  cause  as  its  core 
mission – a mission that has become more urgent in light of growing economic and social 
inequalities and environmental concerns. 
The first Socially Responsible Investment Sukuk that was issued last year is an example of 
impact investing that generates positive social outcomes. It pioneered an innovative sukuk 
structure where the returns are dependent on the performance of the selected schools which 
are supported by proceeds from the sukuk investments. The issuance of more SRI sukuk in 
the  future  would  further  reinforce  the  value  proposition  of  Islamic  finance  that  combines 
financial returns and social welfare enhancement. Another key innovation with far reaching 
potential is the creation of a new financial asset class that is backed by carbon credit-based 
solutions  structured  using  Islamic  finance  principles.  This  idea  has  enormous  potential  to 
incentivise concrete actions by businesses to reduce carbon emissions. The industry should 
endeavour to capitalise on the commitment of the government, as announced by the Prime 
Minister of Malaysia on 12 April 2016, to consider providing incentives to buyers of Malaysian 
rainforest carbon credits to spur the development of this new asset class. 
Over the longer term, the first precondition to sustain a value-based financial ecosystem is to 
direct serious efforts at aligning performance measures to take into account both economic 
and social outcomes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In  Malaysia,  Islamic  financial  activities  are  governed  by  a  comprehensive  contract  based 
regulatory framework designed to achieve end-to-end Shariah compliance. Consistent with 
this framework, Islamic financial institutions are expected to evaluate and manage the impact 
of their activities, beyond that which is solely concerned with financial gains. 
To further entrench this shift, a proposal is being developed for Islamic financial institutions to 
disclose  their  Corporate  Value-Intent  (CVI)  as  a  measure  of  their  performance  and 
commitment  towards  value  creation.  This  proposal  is  an  important  step  to  encourage  a 
strong corporate and market focus on how Islamic financial institutions are generating value, 
not  just  for  shareholders,  but  for  the  communities  which  they  are  a  part  of.  On-going 
collaboration and active engagement with the industry are currently being undertaken under 
this initiative to ensure proactive behaviours and sustained momentum towards the creation 
of a sustainable development. 
Another precondition for long term sustainable value creations is the availability of top-notch 
talent to drive and execute innovative business strategies that will realise the full potential of 
Islamic finance. Based on market assessments, a greater pool of quality professionals are 
required to sustain the growth of global Islamic finance that is estimated to surpass $3 trillion 
total assets size by 2020. The challenge in meeting this demand however goes beyond the 
numbers.  The  next  phase  of  growth  and  development  of  Islamic  finance  calls  for  a  deep 
talent  pool  that  not  only  has  a  strong  foundation  in  the  application  of  Islamic  finance 
principles, but also the much broader set of competencies required to use those applications 
effectively to provide and implement solutions to real world problems. And such talent must 
be developed not only within Islamic financial institutions, but also the professional ancillary 
service providers that are part of the Islamic finance ecosystem. 
In  Malaysia,  there  are  close  to  40  professional  ancillary  services  entities  under  the  MIFC 
Community  which  play  an  important  role  in  the  development  of  Islamic  finance.  These 
entities provide a range of key services that include Shariah advisory, accounting, tax, rating, 
research, accreditation and legal services, many of them serving global demand and setting 
benchmarks for international best practices. 
To  increase  the  impact  and  influence  of  Islamic  finance,  whether  in  a  domestic  or  global 
context,  all  its  key  components  must  move  forward  together  to  provide  complete  and 
comprehensive  solutions.  This  is  also  critically  important  to  reduce  risks  inherent  in  any 
innovative  venture  where  progress  on  one  front  without  the  other  is  more  likely  to  invite 
problems. 
Conclusion 
There has never been a better time where a confluence of developments have called for us 
to propagate the value of Islamic finance in addressing the challenges confronting us today; 
issues relating to inequality, financial excesses and environmental damage and degradation. 
To elevate the Islamic finance industry to the next level, the formulation of game-changing 
strategies  must  bring  in  elements  that  leverage  on  technology,  accelerate  innovation  and 
develop well-rounded talent to meet future needs of Islamic finance. These strategies offer 
an important opportunity to reinforce the foundations of a strong and resilient Islamic financial 
system,  and  advance  its  development  and  contribute  towards  a  more  inclusive  and  stable 
global  financial  system.  It  is  incumbent  upon  us  all  to  make  the  most  of  it  to  support 
sustainable  economic  growth  and  help  to  improve  the  lives  of  many.  And  it  is  on  us  to 
continuously reinvent and re-anchor our industry so that we can forge stronger links with our 
stakeholders. Our future will be secured if we remain relevant. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
