R Gandhi: Challenges in developing the bond market in BRICS 
Special  address  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
seminar on “Challenges in Developing the Bond Market in BRICS”, conducted jointly by CII 
and MoF, Government of India, Mumbai, 27 September 2016. 
 Assistance provided by S/Shri T. Rabishankar, CGM, Manoj Kumar, DGM, Siddhartha Mishra, DGM and Vivek 
Singh, AGM is gratefully acknowledged. 
Introduction 
I. 
I  notice that  the  Seminar  is  on  developing  bond  markets  in  BRICS. Though  bond  markets 
include both the government securities market and the corporate bonds market, I would dwell 
upon only on corporate debt market. The reason is simple. The government securities market 
in the BRICS countries have attained a definite positions, whereas the corporate bonds market 
are at nascent stage. 
2. For example, India’s Government securities market – by whatever criterion – is as developed
as any other emerging market. It compares favourably with many AE markets as well; despite 
its thin investor base (on which we need to work more), in terms of instruments, transparency, 
trading and settlement systems and liquidity, the government securities market has grown in a 
big way. So, I am clear in my mind that at this stage of our development, our focus should be 
on corporate bond markets. 
3. We do not have a well developed corporate bond market, and this fact is widely recognized.
Not as well recognized is the fact that even in developed economies, corporate bond markets 
are  not  as  developed  and  as  liquid  as  Government  bond  markets.  It  is  not  uncommon  in 
advanced  economies  that  the  corporates’  primary  source  of  funds  is  not  corporate  bond 
market, but the credit market. Many European countries including Germany, Japan and China 
have achieved economic success based largely on a bank financed model. So when we talk 
of developing corporate bond markets we must be realistic about our goals. More importantly, 
we must not be blinkered in squeezing bank finance to force-feed the corporate bond market. 
We would do well and act wisely if we keep our efforts in this perspective. 
4. With the caveats out of the way, let us get back to the issue at hand. What is happening in
the global space? In an era of negative interest rates and unconventional monetary policies, 
with a substantial amount of global debt offering sub-zero yields, the focus is back on emerging 
markets (including BRICS) as investors are in search of yields. 
5. Emerging economies produce 39% of global output, yet they account for only 14% of the
global corporate bond market value. This suggests that emerging economies may be able to 
better utilize corporate bonds to finance their private sector and, consequently, their growth. 
Furthermore, as the landscape for bank-intermediated financing transforms under regulatory 
reforms and technological advances, the need and opportunities for domestic corporate bond 
markets development are apparent. 
6. An IMF study on increasing corporate leverage indicates that over the period 2004–2014,
non-financial corporate debt of emerging markets had grown from $4 tn to over $18 tn. Over 
this period the share of bonds in corporate debt has grown from 9% to 17%. The shift from 
bank finance to bond finance is slow but steady. 
7. Is this trend likely to sustain? More generally, would this rise in corporate borrowing survive
a reversal of the decade-and-a-half long accommodative liquidity in advanced economies? Of 
the $3 tn of corporate bonds in EMs, about $0.8 tn is foreign currency borrowing. If we take 
this  as  an  indicator  of  international  capital  flows  into  EM  bonds  over  the  last  decade,  the 
indicative answer to our question is that EM corporate bond market could still continue to grow, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
   albeit slower. The outflow of international capital from EM bond markets, if AEs tighten policy, 
would not be trend reversing. 
8. Now, to the all important question. What ails the corporate bond market? I will try to answer 
this in the context of India. Broadly speaking, high Government borrowing crowding out private 
debt,  excessive  regulatory  restrictions  on  the  investment mandates  of financial  institutions, 
corporate  preference for  bank financing for  historically  idiosyncratic  reasons  (e.g.  the  cash 
credit system), tepid investor interest for whatever reasons in all but the best rated instruments, 
the absence of a well-functioning bankruptcy code, etc. are some of the key factors. However, 
most of these issues are not a deal breaker as far as market development is concerned and 
are being tackled by the Government and other regulators. 
9.  Let  me  now  touch  upon  the  current  scenario  of  bond  markets  in  BRICS  and  India  in 
particular, major challenges and the way forward. 
Overview of the bond market 
II.  
10. In terms of Govt debt to GDP ratio, an indicator of maturity of debt market, barring Russia, 
other BRICS nations have a relatively deep Sovereign debt market. It ranges from 66% in 
Brazil to 18% in Russia. India has a Govt. debt to GDP ratio of 66%. 
11. China’s bond market has seen a rapid growth in recent times making it the third largest 
bond market of the world after US and Japan. China’s bond market size is about $ 6.2 trillion. 
India’s bond market is estimated to be about $ 1.1 trillion (Dec 2015: source ADB). Unlike US, 
where the corporate debt market is bigger than the Govt debt market, India and China have 
bigger  sovereign  debt  segment  with  Sovereign  debt  to  corporate  debt  ratio  at  2.7  and  2.1 
respectively. 
 
 2 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 12. A snapshot of India’s debt market is given in the Table below: 
   FPI investment in debt 
13.  India  has  taken  a  calibrated  approach  to  letting  in  foreign  portfolio  flows  into  her  debt 
market. Over time, the FPI debt portfolio has been getting more stable with a steady inflow of 
long-term investors. Obviously, it would be preferable from the point of view of financial stability 
that the FPI investor base consists largely of this category of investors rather than speculative 
capital or arbitrage funds. We would need to work towards that outcome. 
 Corporate Bond market 
III.  
14. Indian Corporate Bond market has seen some growth in recent years, both in terms of 
number of issues and amount. The outstanding issues which were at 12,155 as at end March 
2011 increased to 22,374 by end March 2016. During the same period, the amount outstanding 
increased from ₹ 8,895 billion to ₹ 20,193 billion. While the types issued included fixed rate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   bonds,  floating  rate  bonds,  structured  notes  and  other  types,  the  fixed  rate  bonds  were 
predominant both in number and value. Another characteristic of the issuances was that almost 
all issuances were by financial sector entities. Yet another peculiar feature of our Corporate 
Bond market is that private placements are the norm. The public issuances which were ₹ 94.51 
billion in 2010–11 increased to ₹ 338 billion in 2015–16. The private placements which were ₹ 
2187.85 billion in 2010–11, were ₹ 4580.73 billion in the year 2015–16. The secondary market 
trading which was at ₹ 6053 billion in 2010–11, was at ₹ 10224 billion in 2015–16. 
15. I will elaborate what I consider the major tendencies of this market, if only to give us an 
idea of where reform efforts need to be directed. 
16. The primary issuance of corporate bonds is dominated by private placements. More than 
95% of total issues are privately placed. This is not, per se, a shortcoming as long as there is 
transparency regarding such issues. As long as information about such issues and their life-
cycle performance (particularly default history) is publicly available, investors should be able 
to take informed decisions. What is required here is a public database that is freely accessible. 
Effort of authorities has been towards building a trade repository of both primary and secondary 
activities. 
17. Another significant character of India’s corporate debt market is the dominance of financial 
institutions. Bulk of the issuance is in the so-called BFSI Sector (Banking, Financial Services 
and Insurance). Banking and financial services account for 74% of all primary issues in FY 
2015  (NSE, ISMR  2015).  Non-financial  corporates  account  only  for  19%  of  all  outstanding 
issuance. Clearly, access of non-financial corporates is limited and needs to be encouraged. 
It is in this context that RBI’s recent announcement to push large borrowers to the bond market 
assumes significance. 
18. But this in itself would not be enough. Most of the corporate issuance in India is of top 
credit quality, with AA– or better accounting for about 80% of all issuance while BBB or worse 
accounted for only 14% in FY 2016 (CRISIL IDM 2015). What this shows is that the corporate 
bond market is largely accessible to the top rated borrowers. Efforts in this respect should be 
focused on facilitating access of low credit (high yield sounds better) borrowers to this market. 
For this to happen, loosening investment guidelines of insurance and pension funds would not 
be enough, what is required is to create an investor category to distribute risk widely. Risk 
taking culture assumes importance if we were to achieve this objective. 
19. Thin secondary market activity not only affects transparency of the market, it also makes 
the process of price discovery suspect. Trading volumes have been increasing, from about ₹ 5 
bn (average daily) in FY 2009 to about ₹ 45 bn in FY 2015 (CRISIL IDM 2015). But this is less 
than a tenth of the volumes in the G-sec market. It is unrealistic to expect that corporate bonds 
will trade as much as G-secs. Yet we must continue efforts to achieve a reasonable degree of 
transparency into the market. 
20. Several measures have been taken by GoI, RBI and SEBI to aid the growth of corporate 
debt  market  in  India. The  impact  of such  development measures  is  evident  in the growing 
primary issuances and also the growth in the secondary market volumes. Measures such as 
rationalising  the  listing  norms,  simplification  in  issuance  procedures  and  processes, 
standardisation of market conventions, setting up of reporting platform, implementation of DvP 
settlement  of  corporate  bond  trades,  allowing  banks  to  hold  corporate  bonds  from  the 
infrastructure sector on their balance sheet as HTM assets and issuing long term bonds without 
the requirement for maintaining reserves have had an encouraging impact on the market. 
21. Some of the other major bottlenecks can thus be listed as below: 
i. 
Indian market has traditionally been a bank dominated system with corporates relying 
more on loan financing compared to bond financing. Weaning corporates away from 
banks has proved to be a difficult task. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Internationally  insurance  companies  are  among  the  largest  participants  in  the 
corporate  bond  market.  However,  in  India,  institutional  investors  like  Insurance 
companies, PFs, EPFO who have large assets under their management still have 
several  constraints  in  the  nature  of  investment  mandates  resulting  in  limited 
participation  of  such  entities.  Pension  Funds  and  Insurance  companies  prefer 
Government securities as they have to provide safe and guaranteed returns. 
Unavailability  of  credit  risk  transfer  mechanism  in  the  corporate  bond  market  also 
works as a deterrent. Though CDS has been introduced in India, there is no activity 
in the market. One of the major constraints is restriction on netting of MTM position 
against the same counterparty for capital adequacy and exposure norms. 
The absence of robust bankruptcy laws is also reckoned as one of the major reasons 
for lack of investor interest in corporate bonds. 
Lack  of  centralised  database  which  enable  investors  to  get  complete  information 
about corporate debt market at one place. 
Lack of functional trading platform with CCP facility. 
vi. 
22. To address these issues, recently Khan Committee has made various recommendations 
which  are  being  examined  and  implemented  by  the  regulators  and  the  GoI.  Some  of  the 
recommendations which have been implemented are: 
i. 
Enhancing  Credit  Supply  for  Large  Borrowers  through  Market  Mechanism  –  for 
exposure beyond a threshold. 
Allowing banks to provide partial credit enhancement (PCE) of 50% of the bond issue 
size subject to the PCE provided by any single bank not exceeding 20% of the bond 
issue size. 
Issuance of rupee denominated bonds overseas (Masala Bonds) by banks as AT1 
and T2 capital. 
Permitting brokers in repo in corporate bonds. 
Allowing FPIs to trade directly in corporate bonds. 
Initiating the process of accepting corporate bonds under Liquidity Adjustment Facility 
(LAF) of RBI. 
Setting up of electronic book platform for issuance of privately placed bonds for size 
of ₹ 500 cr and above. 
Setting up of centralized database of corporate bonds. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
Challenges and way forward for development of bond market 
IV.  
23. I would not be able to tell you anything new about the way we need to proceed that has 
not been told by many of the learned committees that have studied this market in depth, most 
recently  the  Khan  Committee  under  the  aegis  of  the  FSDC. What  I  would  try  to  do  is  just 
highlight what I feel are a few of the more important actions we need to take. 
Tackling the problem of “Original Sin” hypothesis 
a.  
24. One of the challenges for improving the depth of the debt market will be the ability to tackle 
the  “original  sin”  hypothesis  –  which  in  its  strongest  form  alludes  to  inconsequential  bond 
markets in EME due to their inability to raise money in its own currency outside its border. India 
has started the “masala bonds” which is picking up but the process still has some way to go. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Managing and transferring risk – Credit Default Swaps 
b.  
25. Another important challenge that all emerging economies face in the development of a 
vibrant and robust bond market is the issue of managing risk. Take for example, the Chinese 
treasury yields which are generally low signifying investor confidence. In corporate debt, the 
defaults have been low so far. However, as more and more borrowers enter the market, the 
default rate is going to be higher. While the borrowing cost for highly rated companies has 
been  low,  bond  market  for  the  risky  borrower  is  becoming  expensive.  From  the  investor’s 
perspective, credit derivative markets like CDS should be available so as to give confidence 
to investor to fund risky borrowers. Experience with CDS in India has been poor with few deals 
reported. It is of paramount importance to have an active credit derivative market to accurately 
price risk to take the bond market to the next stage. 
 Market infrastructure 
c.  
26. One of the prerequisite for a prospering bond market in any economy is an efficient and 
safe market infrastructure in place to make it easy for investors to buy or sell bonds. With DvP 
already  in  place,  the  concern  of  safety  is  by  and  large  addressed.  Efforts  to  go  for  CCP 
guaranteed  settlement  needs  to  weigh  its  advantages  with  the  likely  high  cost  of  such 
guarantee. Similarly, electronic platforms for trading need to be developed, but one must keep 
in mind that the large number of bonds, compared to G-secs, would be a hindrance to order 
matching systems. Would quote-driven systems be preferable? 
Issuer diversity 
d.  
27. In India, currently more than 85% of the corporate bond issuance is undertaken by high 
rated (A and above) issuer. Our attention to credit enhancement mechanisms would go some 
way in channelling demand from entities like insurance and pension funds who need to protect 
their credit exposure. But what is also required is to create conditions to attract new investors 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   into the market. Retail investors could absorb the credit risk through wider dissipation. We 
might also have to look at less risk averse external investors. 
Municipal bonds 
e.  
28. Unlike India, some of the BRICS nations especially South Africa has a well developed 
Municipal bond market. 
  
29. With a stellar rise in urban population, India’s infrastructure has failed to keep pace with 
urbanization and the situation is ripe for Municipal corporations to look beyond conventional 
sources of funding (like grants, tax, etc). Munis can be explored as an option for infrastructure 
financing by addressing the various supply and demand side constraints. 
30. To end this talk, I would like to emphasize that for a market to evolve a lot of things need 
to  fall  in  place  –  investor  interest,  issuer  preference,  developments  in  the  economy,  legal 
conditions, etc. What Government and regulators can do is to create the enabling conditions, 
so that when issuer and investor enthusiasm coincides they are not discouraged by impeding 
regulation or poor infrastructure. 
31. Thank you for your attention. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
