  Mario Draghi: Interview in The Guardian 
Interview with Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, in The Guardian, 
conducted by Mr Shiv Malik on 18 February 2016 and published on 11 March 2016. 
 What does the ECB’s own research on incomes and younger generations say? 
During the great recession, the young (16 to 34) lost about 5 percent of household income in 
real  terms. That  was  of course  substantial  and  had  a  big  impact  on  the  personal  plans  of 
many young people. But the magnitude was not so different from the losses suffered by other 
generations, although of course the young do not have the same assets and savings to fall 
back  on  in  tough  economic  times.  Even  more  worrying  was  the  sharp  increase  in  youth 
unemployment in Europe. 
Are  you  worried  about  the  position  of  young  adults  in  Europe  and  is  this  an 
increasingly urgent issue? 
Youth  unemployment  is a  tragedy  and  prevents people  from playing  a full  and  meaningful 
part  in  society. If  every  second  young  person  is  out  of  work  –  as  is  still  the  case  in  some 
countries in Europe – it seriously harms the economy, because people willing to work cannot 
work and skills are not developed. And it threatens social harmony. Unemployment can lead 
in the long run to increased social problems and ill-health. 
Are you worried about future consumption levels of young adults, as this group – who 
have been especially “scarred” by the global recession – move into middle life? 
Consumption  within  a  society  is  determined  partly  by  wealth  distribution,  but  even  more 
important is that the young generation can participate in the labour market in a fair way. In 
many  countries  the  labour  market  is  set  up  to  protect  older  “insiders”  –  people  with 
permanent, high paid contracts and shielded by  strong labour laws. The side effect is that 
young people are stuck with lower-paid, temporary contracts and get fired first in crisis times. 
That also means that employers are reluctant to invest in young people, so the incomes of 
this generation stay lower over their lifetime. 
What might be the forces at work here – demographics / changing workplaces / fiscal-
monetary  policy  –  that  mean  that  young  adults  appear  to  be  receiving  little  of  the 
rewards of two and half decades of average economic growth? 
Nobody stays young forever. The crucial question is whether a person can participate fully in 
the economy over his or her life-time – get a good education, find a job, buy a home for the 
family. Income and wealth follow. What makes me worry is that increasing inequality might 
prevent people from doing that. This is an issue all our societies need to look at carefully. 
The ECB’s role in that is to maintain price stability, which prevents unfair redistribution. For 
example, our research shows that in the euro area too low inflation results in redistribution 
from younger, more indebted households to older households that are typically net creditors. 
Current  retirees  are  wealthier  than  ever.  What  opportunities  does  this  bring  to 
Europe? 
In an ageing society, the fact that retirees are getting wealthier isn’t necessarily abnormal – 
older people need to accumulate more wealth to finance living longer. As they spend their 
wealth during retirement, it passes back to the younger generations. So wealth creation isn’t 
a zero sum game. What matters is that young people, as they move through life, have the 
opportunities to build up wealth, too. 
Do  you  think  younger  adults  today  will  have  as  good  a  standard  of  living  as 
pensioners today when they come to retire? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  That’s our common choice. Our standard of living depends on the strength of our economy. 
We need a more open, flexible, innovative and business-friendly society. Much focus is put 
on the central bank to raise growth, and it can contribute through price stability and a stable 
financial system. But in the long run real growth is driven by what the economy can produce. 
That is much more about ideas, technology, flexibility, motivation, skills. It is up to elected 
governments to set a growth-friendly environment. 
You  often  talk  about  the  need  for  “structural  reform”  in  employment.  What  do  you 
mean by this? 
There are lots of forms this can take. Just to give one example, the Kurzarbeit scheme in 
Germany allowed employers to adjust working time during the crisis without firing people. But 
there’s no one-size-fits-all model. Every society has its challenges and preferences. The idea 
generally is to create a fair and flexible labour market where companies do not fear taking on 
staff when they need them and specific groups of people are not structurally disadvantaged 
at times when employers need to cut wage bills. 
What can central banks/governments do to ease/resolve these issues? 
Everyone has a vital interest in a prospering economy. So bringing down high levels of youth 
unemployment is a priority for everyone. As I said, the best contribution central banks can 
make here is to live up to their mandates. We can only encourage elected governments to 
take the necessary steps to create jobs and make their societies fairer. Over the longer-term, 
by far the most important thing for young people is investing in education and skills. Skills are 
a person’s passport through life, and in a fast-changing digital economy, the premium paid 
for skills is only likely to rise. Equipping people for tomorrow’s world is the best way to raise 
incomes and reduce inequality. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
