 Peter Praet: Interview in Knack 
  Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in Knack, conducted by Mr Ewald Pironet and published on 6 January 2016. 
 For  over  a  year  now,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  has  been  printing  heaps  of 
money, pumping it into the economy and pushing interest rates down to almost 0%. 
When may this policy be deemed a success?  
You may label that ECB policy a success if inflation, the rise in the cost of living, stays below, 
but close to, 2% over the medium term. That is our mandate. I admit that our policy has not 
yet been successful enough: inflation rates in Europe have been at the very low level of almost 
0% for quite some time now. That is why we are continuing to take the necessary measures 
to drive inflation up to 2% over the medium term. However, the point at which we think we will 
reach  2%  is  constantly  postponed,  because  all  kinds  of  things  are  happening  that  are 
dampening inflation, such as the decline in oil prices or lower economic performances in the 
emerging countries. We have decided to maintain our policy until March 2017. But we need to 
be careful not to jeopardise the ECB’s credibility by shifting that horizon.  
It is up to the ECB to keep inflation at just below 2%, but it is failing to do so. We don’t 
see many positive effects from the ECB’s policy in other ways either: economic growth 
is fragile at 1.5%, unemployment stands at 10%, with youth unemployment as high as 
over 20%. You can’t really give the ECB good marks for that?  
If the ECB had not taken the measures that it did, we would be in a depression; I’m convinced 
of that. And a depression would be much worse than what we are experiencing today and 
worse than what we went through over the past decade. Let me recall: after the banking crisis, 
we had a severe recession in 2009 and the economy then recovered in 2010 and 2011. This 
was followed by the debt crisis – centring on the sovereign debt of several European countries 
– which plunged the European economy into another recession. This recession was not as 
deep as the one in 2009 but it did last longer, because it took us two years to get over it. 
Economic growth picked up again somewhat at the end of 2013 and in 2014, but as of the 
spring of 2014 we saw another slowdown in growth and were at risk of running into a third 
recession.  In  January  2015,  ECB  President  Mario  Draghi  announced  that  the  ECB  would 
pursue a policy of quantitative easing: we now print money and pump it into the economy in 
order to help ease credit conditions. Were it not for the monetary policy of recent years, we 
would certainly have landed in a deep recession. The euro area might have fallen apart and 
that would have been a catastrophe. The ECB therefore did what it had to do, but monetary 
policy cannot resolve all problems. We have always said that politicians have to do their job. 
They must carry out structural reforms, reduce government debt and create a more flexible 
labour market. That would contribute to a smoothly functioning economy.  
Owing to ECB policy, interest rates are extremely low, there’s no longer any return on 
savings. So people are tempted to take more risks with their money, by buying shares 
or real estate for example. This pushes up prices and may give rise to bubbles that 
suddenly burst, resulting in serious financial disasters. Is that a real danger? 
Absolutely,  that  is  an  important  point.  The  ECB’s  policy  undoubtedly  has  unintended 
consequences. In some countries, there is a risk that real estate prices or some equity and 
other financial markets are increasing in a way that is too rapid or artificial. We are keeping a 
close watch on that and interventions to avoid bubbles are possible if need be. The emergence 
of bubbles is a justified concern. But if the ECB were not pursuing its current policy, the financial 
concerns would be even more serious because the economy would be in poorer shape.  
When and how are we going to move back towards normal interest rate levels? What 
needs to happen before the ECB will start to discontinue its exceptional policy? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The ECB will continue pursuing its policy for as long as necessary. What needs to change 
before we adjust the policy? To put it simply: the rate of inflation needs to move sustainably 
towards  2%.  Looking  at  the  current  economic  situation,  I  think  that  the  present  policy  will 
continue until at least 2017 and for longer if necessary.  
What if ECB policy ultimately doesn’t work as in Japan? Will you propose “more of the 
same”? Or is there a plan B? 
There is no plan B, there is only one plan. The ECB stands ready to take all measures that are 
necessary to bring inflation to 2%. If you print enough money, you will always get inflation. 
Always. But if oil and commodities prices tumble, it is more difficult to allow inflation to rise. If 
a whole series of such factors occur, you can’t do anything other than somewhat postpone the 
date on which you seek to reach the higher rate of inflation.  
Do you think that the ECB’s policy is working for all euro area countries, both for Spain 
and  Portugal,  for  example,  as  well  as  Germany?  Aren’t  the  financial  economic 
differences in Europe too large for the ECB’s “one-size-fits-all” policy? 
One size doesn’t necessarily fit all. It remains extremely difficult for the ECB to follow a strategy 
that is optimal for all European countries. But you have to look at where we came from. Prior 
to the introduction of the euro, the internal market came under pressure from exchange rate 
crises: national currencies sometimes fluctuated sharply in value. After the launch of the euro, 
the euro area enjoyed a number of calm years but, unfortunately, the member countries did 
not make use of this time to carry out the necessary reforms at national and European level 
nor, in particular, to put efficient crisis management arrangements in place. And the countries 
that experienced serious difficulties three or four years ago, such as Ireland, Portugal, Spain 
and Italy, are nonetheless beginning to recover, thanks in part to ECB policy. We also see that 
Germany, the strongest economy in Europe, is not experiencing any major disadvantage from 
that same ECB policy. Admittedly, it’s a continuous search for a policy that is as favourable as 
possible for everyone. What does one do with Greece, say, which has fundamental problems 
with its competitiveness? The Greek crisis would not have become so large if the European 
institutions had not been so weak and if more decisive action had been taken, with better crisis 
management.  
Are you surrounded by enough people who dare to contradict you? Do you speak to 
people who dare to question ECB policy? 
Oh yes, definitely. I listen to people who say that the ECB should take a different approach. I 
respect those opinions. We ourselves naturally reflect on whether our policy is correct. For 
example, we explore what the consequences would be if we were to raise interest rates rather 
than  lower  them.  But  our  analyses  convince  us  that  we  are  following  the  correct  strategy. 
Besides, that strategy has not been determined by Mr Draghi and a handful of ECB Executive 
Board  members;  it  came  about  with  the  agreement  of  the  large  majority  of  the  Governing 
Council, on which all national central banks governors in the euro area have a seat. I would 
never have imagined that the euro area could break up, as almost happened in 2012. Nor did 
I think it possible that the ECB would have to print more than an additional €1.5 trillion (i.e. 
€1,500,000,000,000), and pump it into the economy in order to respect its mandate. The ECB 
has acted resolutely but the story is not over yet. In order to emerge from the crisis, it is crucial 
that the  other  authorities  also  do  their  homework.  It  is  not  up to  monetary  policymakers to 
resolve structural problems.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
