  Guy Debelle: Interest rate benchmarks 
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the KangaNews Debt Capital Markets Summit 2016, Sydney, 22 February 2016. 
 I would like to thank Ellis Connolly for assistance in the preparation of these remarks. 
Today I am going to talk again about interest rate benchmarks, as there have been some 
important  recent  developments.1  These  benchmarks  are  very  much  at  the  heart  of  the 
plumbing  of  the  financial  system.  They  are  widely  referenced  in  financial  contracts.  For 
example,  the  interest  rate  on  a  corporate  loan  is  often  a  spread  to  an  interest  rate 
benchmark. Many classes of derivative contracts generally are based on them, as are most 
asset-backed  securities.  In  light  of  the  issues  around  London  Inter-Bank  Offered  Rate 
(LIBOR) and other interest rate benchmarks, there has been a global reform effort under the 
aegis of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the International Organization of Securities 
Commissions (IOSCO) to improve the functioning of interest rate benchmarks.2 
I will focus on domestic reforms around the principal interest rate benchmark in Australia, the 
bank  bill  swap  rate  (BBSW).  I  will  also  mention  plans  underway  to  introduce  a  “risk-free” 
interest  rate  for  the  domestic  market,  as  a  complement  to  BBSW.  I  will  not  talk  about  the 
investigations that ASIC is currently undertaking into conduct around BBSW. 
Reforms to the BBSW methodology 
As you may be aware, in recent months, the Council of Financial Regulators (CFR) has been 
conducting a consultation on possible reforms to the BBSW methodology.3 I will run through 
the motivation for doing so, outline the key issues that have been raised in the consultation, 
and put forward some proposed reforms for market participants to consider. 
Given  its  wide  usage,  BBSW  has  been  identified  by  ASIC  as  a  financial  benchmark  of 
systemic importance in our market.4 It is important there is ongoing confidence in it. Without 
that,  we  have  a  serious  problem,  given  its  integral  role  in  the  infrastructure  of  domestic 
financial markets. 
As you may know, BBSW was calculated for a number of years by, each day, asking a panel 
of banks to submit their assessment of where the market was trading in Prime Bank paper at 
a particular time of the day. While it was a calculation based on submissions, it differed from 
LIBOR in that BBSW submitters were asked about where the market for generic Prime Bank 
paper  was  trading  that  day.  In  contrast,  LIBOR  submitters  were  asked  about  where  they 
thought their own bank’s cost of funds was that day. 
                                                
1  Debelle G (2015), ‘Benchmarks’, Address to Bloomberg Summit, Sydney, 18 November. 
2  See  Financial  Stability  Board  (2014),  ‘Reforming  Major  Interest  Rate  Benchmarks’,  July,  available  at 
<http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/r_140722.pdf>;  and  Financial  Stability  Board 
(2015),  ‘Progress  in  Reforming  Major  Interest  Rate  Benchmarks’,  Interim  Report on  Implementation  of  July 
<http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-
2014 
content/uploads/OSSG-interest-rate-benchmarks-progress-report-July-2015.pdf>. 
Recommendations, 
Available 
July. 
FSB 
at 
3  See Council of Financial Regulators (2015), ‘The Evolution of the BBSW Methodology’, Consultation Paper, 
October. Available at <http://www.cfr.gov.au/publications/consultations/evolution-of-the-bbsw-methodology/>. 
4  See  Australian  Securities  &  Investments  Commission  (2015),  ‘Report  440  Financial  benchmarks’,  July. 
Available at <http://download.asic.gov.au/media/3285136/rep440-published-8-july-2015.pdf>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In response to the prospect of a large number of the participants on the submission panel no 
longer being willing to provide submissions, the calculation of BBSW was reformed in 2013 in 
line with the IOSCO Principles for Financial Benchmarks, which were issued in July 2013.5  
Since  2013,  the  Australian  Financial  Markets  Association  (AFMA)  has  calculated  BBSW 
benchmark rates as the midpoint of the (nationally) observed best bid and best offer (NBBO) 
for Prime Bank Eligible Securities, which are bank accepted bills and negotiable certificates 
of deposit (NCDs). Currently, the Prime Banks are the four major Australian banks. The rate 
set  process  uses  live  and  executable  bid  and  offer  prices  sourced  from  interbank  trading 
platforms  approved  by  AFMA,  These  platforms  are  currently  ICAP,  Tullett  Prebon  and 
Yieldbroker. The bids and offers are sourced at three points in time around 10.00 am each 
day. 
While  the  outstanding  stock  of  bills  and  NCDs  issued  by  the  Prime  Banks  has  increased 
since 2013 to around $140 billion (Graph 1), trading activity during the daily BBSW rate set 
has declined over recent years to very low levels (Graphs 2 and 3). There are quite a number 
of days where there is no turnover at all at the rate set. The low turnover in the interbank 
market  raises  the  risk  that  market  participants  may  at  some  point  be  less  willing  to  use 
BBSW  as  a  benchmark.  This  is  the  motivation  for  the  CFR’s  consultation  to  ensure  that 
BBSW remains a trusted, reliable and robust financial benchmark. 
Graph 1 
                                                 
5  See International Organization of Securities Commissions (2013), ‘Principles for Financial Benchmarks’, Final 
Report, July. Available at <https://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD415.pdf>. AFMA’s assessment 
of its processes against these principles can be found at <http://www.afma.com.au/data/iosco-principles>. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 2 
 Graph 3 
  There is considerably more activity in the NCD  market than is being measured at the rate 
set,  with  the  activity  mainly  occurring  outside  the  interbank  market.  Given  the  size  of  the 
market and the short maturity of the securities, on average over $1 billion in NCDs are issued 
each day. Some preliminary data collected from the four major Australian banks indicate that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  this  issuance  is  regular,  with  at  least  $100 million  in  NCDs  bought  or  sold  on  almost  all 
business days at the one, three and six-month tenors. However, the non-bank participants 
that buy and sell NCDs tend to transact bilaterally with the issuing bank, with the price struck 
at the (yet to be determined) BBSW rate, rather than at a directly negotiated rate. If these 
participants  could  be  encouraged  to  buy  and  sell  NCDs  at  outright  yields,  then  these 
transactions would have the potential to make the BBSW benchmark more robust. 
Consistent with there being a shift in NCD trading activity to outside the interbank market, 
banks’  holdings  of  NCDs  as  a  share  of  total  issuance  has  declined  over  recent  years  to 
below  20  per  cent  (Graph  4).  Over  the  same  period,  there  has  been  a  steady  increase  in 
holdings  by  super  and  other  investment  funds,  with  their  share  of  NCD  issuance  rising  to 
almost half recently. 
Graph 4 
 As part of the consultation, the CFR received 15 written submissions from a wide range of 
market  participants,  including  the  Prime  Banks,  NCD  investors,  and  users  of  BBSW  as  a 
benchmark. We have also spoken directly with market participants to better understand what 
has  caused  the  decline  in  trading  activity  during  the  rate  set  and  to  discuss  potential 
solutions. To bring all this together, the CFR recently released a discussion paper for AFMA 
and market participants to consider, which summarises the views of market participants and 
proposes some improvements to the BBSW methodology.6  
Most market participants share our concern about the low trading volumes during the rate set 
and  acknowledge  that  changes  to  the  BBSW  methodology  will  be  necessary.  But  before 
making  any  changes,  it  is  crucial  to  understand  why  so  little  trading  has  been  occurring 
during the rate set. Four key reasons were put forward by market participants: 
                                                
6  See  Council  of  Financial  Regulators  (2016),  ‘The  Evolution  of  the  BBSW  Methodology’,  Discussion  
Paper,  9  February.  Available  at  <http://www.cfr.gov.au/publications/consultations/evolution-of-the-bbsw-
methodology/discussion-paper.pdf>. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      First,  institutions  face  a  potential  conflict  of  interest  when  they  participate  in  the 
market underpinning a benchmark as well as the derivatives market that references 
the  benchmark.  Many  institutions  state  they  are  uncertain  about  how  regulators 
expect these conflicts to be managed. As a result, they are reluctant to trade during 
the rate set. 
Second, managers of money market funds are reluctant to trade at outright yields 
during the rate set. They prefer to agree the volume of their bill transactions with a 
Prime Bank before 10.00 am and set the rate after 10.00 am at BBSW, since this 
minimises their tracking error against their benchmark. 
Third,  investors  subject  to  credit  limits  are  reluctant  to  trade  during  the  rate  set 
where bills are traded as a homogeneous asset class, as they could be delivered 
the bills of a Prime Bank for which they have already used up their credit limit. 
Finally,  foreign  bank  branches  have  less  demand  for  bank  paper than  in  the  past 
since  it  is  not  considered  a  high-quality  liquid  asset  under  the  Liquidity  Coverage 
Ratio either in Australia or in their home jurisdictions. 
Despite  these  challenges,  it  is  crucial  that  BBSW  remain  a  trusted,  reliable  and  robust 
financial  benchmark  given  its  importance  to  the  financial  system. To  ensure  this,  the  CFR 
has put together a proposal for the evolution of the BBSW methodology, taking into account 
the feedback provided through the consultation process. In putting forward this proposal, the 
key objectives are to ensure that: 
• 
BBSW is anchored to observable arm’s length transactions in an active underlying 
market; 
the BBSW calculation mechanism is robust to changing market conditions; 
the fundamental properties of BBSW are maintained to ensure a seamless transition 
for financial contracts as the methodology evolves. 
 While most participants are in favour of some changes to the methodology, there are many 
features of the existing methodology where there is consensus that they should be retained. 
In particular, there was broad support that the securities underlying BBSW continue to be the 
NCDs and bank bills of the Prime Banks, as they are relatively homogeneous and liquid. As 
a result, we don’t need to go down the path of calculating BBSW as a broader measure of 
banks’ short-term wholesale funding, as is being considered for LIBOR and Euro Interbank 
Offered  Rate  (EURIBOR).  This  avoids  the  risk  of  there  being  a  significant  change  in  the 
characteristics of BBSW which could lead to contract frustration. 
To boost activity during the rate set, most submissions supported broadening the definition of 
the underlying market beyond the interbank market to include transactions with a wider range 
of  counterparties,  such  as  investment  funds  and  the  treasury  corporations.  These 
submissions highlighted that there is much more activity in the market prior to the rate set 
than during the rate set. This activity prior to the rate set has the potential to underpin BBSW, 
assuming  market  participants  agree  to  transact  at  directly  negotiated  rates  rather  than  at 
BBSW. Given the much larger role that non-banks play in the market, we agree that it is time 
to widen the underlying market beyond the interbank market to include such counterparties. 
There is a risk that activity in the interbank market alone will not be sufficient to support the 
calculation  of  BBSW,  and  the  credibility  of  the  benchmark  would  be  enhanced  by  the 
participation of counterparties that come from outside the banking sector. 
The  key  change  to  the  methodology  proposed  by  many  of  these  submissions  was  to 
calculate BBSW directly from market transactions, rather than using the NBBO method. That 
is, calculating BBSW as the volume-weighted average price (VWAP) of market transactions 
during the rate set window. Given the objective is to better anchor BBSW to transactions in 
the underlying market, we support moving the calculation methodology to the VWAP. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Calculating  the  VWAP  should  be  feasible  for  the  one,  three  and  six-month  BBSW  tenors, 
since these are the most liquid. The Prime Banks issue three and six-month NCDs on almost 
a daily basis, and there is an active market in buying back one month NCDs. If there were to 
be  insufficient  transactions  to  calculate  the  VWAP  at  these  tenors,  NBBO  was  widely 
supported by market participants as an appropriate fall-back methodology. 
However, there is unlikely to be sufficient liquidity in the underlying market at the two, four 
and five-month tenors to reliably calculate the VWAP, so we propose that these tenors be 
calculated by interpolation from the more liquid tenors. 
While there was solid support for the VWAP methodology, there was a wide range of views 
as to how the transactions during the rate set should be executed. Three methods proposed 
were: 
1.  Direct  negotiation  between  Prime  Banks  and  investors,  with  issuance  and  secondary 
market  transactions  being  negotiated  and  executed  in  terms  of  outright  yields,  most  likely 
over the phone. A rate set window of around 60–90 minutes (for instance, from 8.30 am to 
10.00 am) should provide sufficient time for such transactions to take place. 
2. An electronic trading market, with transactions being executed on the trading platforms 
where the Prime Banks and investors post bids and offers in terms of outright yields for a 
particular  Prime  Bank’s  NCDs.  A  rate  set  window  of  around  30–45  minutes  (for  instance, 
from 9.15 am to 10.00 am) should be sufficient. 
3. A tender process, with the issuance and secondary trading of each Prime Bank’s NCDs 
taking  place  in  terms  of  outright  yields  through  an  auction.  Given  that  all  the  transactions 
would be executed at the same time, the rate set window could be quite short (for instance, 
bids  and  offers  could  be  submitted  over  a  15-minute  period,  with  the  tender  closing  at 
10.00 am). 
Each of these methods has its advantages and disadvantages. Conducting the transactions 
over  the  phone  is  flexible  and  is  most  similar  to  current  market  practice,  so  it  would  be 
unlikely to require extensive changes to systems and procedures. However, it would be the 
least transparent, which may discourage participation from investors and necessitate more 
oversight of the conduct of market participants. An electronic trading market would also be 
able  to  facilitate  a  wide  range  of  transactions  while  significantly  improving  market 
transparency.  However,  the  platforms  currently  only  serve  the  inter-bank  market,  so  other 
participants  would  need  to  change  their  systems  and  procedures.  Finally,  a  tender  would 
probably have the shortest rate set window, reducing basis risk for investors and minimising 
the length of time that the Prime Banks are required to make prices. However, the design of 
the tender would be quite complex to support a wide range of transactions such as switch 
trades (where, for instance, an investor simultaneously sells NCDs with a one-month tenor 
and purchases those with a six-month tenor). This may lead some market participants to be 
reluctant to participate. 
While none of these execution methods is clearly superior to the others in all dimensions, the 
market  will  need  to  eventually  coalesce  around  one  of  them  to  maximise  the  amount  of 
activity during the rate set. To me, the methods involving trading on electronic platforms are 
the most attractive, given the associated visibility and transparency that comes with trading 
across a platform. However, to ensure that BBSW remains robust in the near term, it may be 
necessary  for  market  participants  to  continue  transacting  over  the  phone  but  at  outright 
yields, and for the benchmark administrator to use these transactions to calculate the VWAP. 
Regardless of which method for executing the transactions is chosen, the key challenge is 
going to  be to get  investors  to  be  more  comfortable  with  transacting  a significant  share  of 
their  NCD  transactions  at  directly  negotiated  rates.  Maintaining  BBSW  as  a  robust 
benchmark is clearly in everyone’s best interest, including the Prime Banks, since many of 
their  loan  contracts  reference  BBSW,  and  the  investment  funds,  since  BBSW  is  their 
performance  benchmark.  So  to  some  extent,  we  should  be  able  to  rely  on  the  survival 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  instincts of all participants in the market to encourage more activity during the rate set. This 
is  why  we  are  proposing  that  the  market  convention  should  be  for  the  Prime  Banks  to 
conduct  their  primary  issuance  and  secondary  market  trading  in  terms  of  outright  yields 
during the rate set window. 
Nevertheless, the current lack of trading activity during the rate set suggests that there may 
need to be more explicit incentives to encourage participation in the rate set, particularly from 
a broader range of NCD investors. Assuming the market shifts to trading on the electronic 
platforms,  the  improvement  in  market  transparency  that  would  result  may  be  enough  to 
encourage more buy-side participation. 
We  note  that  some  submissions  suggested  more  onerous  alternatives.  For  instance,  one 
way to ‘encourage’ investors to transact at outright yields would be for the Prime Banks to 
charge a fee for Eligible Securities transactions negotiated at the BBSW rate. Alternatively, if 
the  bulk  of  market  activity  continues  to  take  place  outside  the  rate  set  window,  the 
Administrator  could  keep  widening  the  window,  which  at  the  extreme  could  be  a  24-hour 
period to ensure that all market activity is within scope. We do not support these alternatives 
at  this  stage,  as  they  would  not  be  in  the  best  interests  of  investors.  However,  if  activity 
during the rate set continues to be too low to sustain BBSW in the medium term, then these 
alternatives may need to be reconsidered. 
So the key questions that we are left with are: 
• 
First, how should the transactions be executed during the rate set window for BBSW 
to be calculated as the VWAP? 
Second,  will  market  participants  be  willing  to  transact  at  directly  negotiated  rates 
rather than at BBSW? 
 These  questions  are  the  focus  of  our  continuing  discussions  with  AFMA  and  market 
participants. 
While  the  CFR  has  an  ongoing  interest  in  BBSW  as  a  systemically  important  financial 
benchmark, the ultimate responsibility for the BBSW methodology, and the implementation of 
any  changes,  resides  with  the  administrator  of  the  benchmark.  The  CFR  appreciates  that 
AFMA and market participants will need to give the proposal in the discussion paper further 
consideration,  and  that  any  associated  changes  to  market  practice  and  infrastructure  will 
take time to implement. As a result, it will be necessary for the current BBSW methodology to 
be maintained for a period. 
To support this process, we have put forward a timeline for consideration of the proposal by 
AFMA  and  market  participants  as  well  as  the  implementation  of  changes  by  the 
administrator. We would like to see AFMA complete any further consultation and finalise a 
set  of  amendments  to  the  BBSW  methodology  by  the  middle  of  this  year,  and  for  the 
changes  to  be  implemented  by  the  end  of  this  year  –  although  we  acknowledge  that  the 
feasibility of this timeline will depend on the scope of the amendments to the methodology 
that are eventually implemented. 
Risk-free rates 
Next I would like to briefly raise some issues around whether the use of BBSW needs to be 
quite  as  widespread  as  it  is.  In  a  number  of  instances,  BBSW  has  become  the  default 
reference  rate  without  much  thought  being  given  as  to  whether  it  is  the  most  appropriate 
reference rate. BBSW is a credit-based reference rate. It is based on the borrowing costs of 
the major banks, with the credit risk that entails embodied in the rate. 
For a number of purposes, a credit-based rate is completely appropriate. However, for other 
purposes, a rate that is closer to risk-free may be more appropriate. For instance, in recent 
years,  market  participants  have  moved  to  use  overnight-indexed  swap  (OIS)  rates  more 
often  when  discounting  the  cash  flows  in  their  swaps.  The  FSB,  through  its  official  sector 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  steering  group  (OSSG)  on  benchmark  reform,  is  encouraging  market  participants  to 
contemplate switching from credit-based benchmark rates like BBSW or LIBOR to risk-free 
rates, where appropriate. 
In  the  local  market,  there  appears  to  be  growing  interest  in  using  risk-free  rates  as 
benchmarks. Such a rate could be backward looking, like the cash rate, or forward looking, 
like  OIS  rates.  As  a  first  step,  some  market  participants  have  indicated  that  a  total  return 
index  of  the  cash  rate  would  be  a  useful  backward-looking  benchmark.  Implementing  this 
would  be  straightforward,  since  the  RBA  already  calculates  and  publishes  the  cash  rate. 
Some  market  participants  are  also  interested  in  referencing  a  forward-looking  rate  with 
equivalent tenors to BBSW, and we will continue to work with AFMA on the development of 
such a benchmark. 
One  example  where  a  change  in  reference  rate  could  be  contemplated  is  for  floating  rate 
notes (FRNs) issued by governments. FRN coupon payments are typically priced at a spread 
to BBSW. While referencing BBSW makes sense for FRNs issued by banks, it is less clear 
why governments should tie their coupon payments to a measure of bank funding costs. 
That is one example worthy of consideration. There are a number of others. I know this is not 
necessarily an issue you may have thought that much about until now. At the very least, I 
would  encourage  you  to  at  least  ask  the  question  whether  the  product  you  are  issuing  or 
holding is using the most appropriate reference rate. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  Interest  rate  benchmarks  such  as  BBSW  are  a  very  critical  part  of  the 
plumbing  of  the  financial  system.  Market  participants  need  to  have  confidence  in  their 
robustness  and  integrity.  To  help  ensure  that  is  the  case,  the  CFR  has  undertaken  a 
consultation process on the BBSW methodology. The industry, working through AFMA and 
with the CFR, will need to act on these proposals to ensure that BBSW remains a trusted, 
reliable and robust financial benchmark. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
