  Thomas Jordan: Kenneth S Rogoff – monetary policy research 
Text  of  the  inaugural  Karl  Brunner  Distinguished  Lecture  Series  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan, 
Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, Zurich, 22 September 2016. 
 For further information on the Karl Brunner Distinguished Lecture Series, see www.snb.ch. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to welcome you to the inaugural lecture in the Karl Brunner Distinguished 
Lecture Series. The Swiss National Bank has established this annual lecture series to honour 
academics whose research is of particular relevance for central banking. Our aim is to give 
prominent  academics  a  platform  to  share  their  monetary  policy  research  with  a  wider 
audience. 
In  this  way,  we  contribute  to  the  public  debate  on  monetary  policy  and  central  bank 
mandates.  For  our  monetary  policy  to  be  effective,  it  is  important  that  the  general  public 
understands the SNB’s mandate, our thinking and our concrete policy measures. The quality 
of monetary policy depends crucially on the quality of the underlying analysis. We hope that 
the presentation of new research findings from leading academics in this lecture series will 
also have a positive impact on research at central banks. 
The  lecture  series  is  dedicated  to  the  renowned  Swiss  economist  Karl  Brunner,  who  was 
born  in  Zurich  100  years  ago.  Karl  Brunner  shaped  Swiss  monetary  policy  following  the 
collapse of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates, when the Swiss franc was 
floated. Brunner advocated monetarism, in particular the idea of ensuring price stability by 
controlling  the  money  supply.  The  SNB  took  up  this  idea  and  used  money  growth  as  an 
intermediate target, combined with clear communication of its monetary policy strategy. 
Karl  Brunner  was  not  only  a  keen  proponent  of  incorporating  economic  theory  into  central 
banking  practice.  He  also  encouraged  central  banks to  conduct their  own  research  and  to 
build up their capacity regarding economic analysis. We are deeply indebted to Karl Brunner 
for the positive impact he has had on our understanding of monetary policy issues. 
The  first  academic  being  honoured  by  the  SNB  in  the  Karl  Brunner  Distinguished  Lecture 
Series  is  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff.  It  falls  to  him  to  give  the  inaugural  lecture.  Ken  Rogoff  has 
made a name for himself through groundbreaking academic publications relevant for central 
banking. He also has an impressive track record as regards practical application. This he has 
demonstrated to great effect, for instance, during his time as chief economist at the IMF and 
in  his  commentaries  on  current  economic  policy  questions.  The  qualities  that  mark  out  a 
good practitioner are not necessarily the same as those that make a good academic. Finding 
them  in  combination  is  very  rare.  But  it  is  something  that  Ken  Rogoff  shares  with  Karl 
Brunner – neither of them having lived in an ivory tower. 
Like  Karl  Brunner,  Ken Rogoff  began  his  career  as  an  economist  at  a  central  bank,  in  his 
case the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. He then followed an academic 
path, just as Karl Brunner did. The early experience gained at a central bank is probably one 
reason why Ken Rogoff’s research is always relevant for economic policy. After leaving the 
Fed, he held academic tenures at universities such as Wisconsin, Berkeley, Princeton and 
Harvard. Between 2001 and 2003, he was, as I’ve already mentioned, chief economist at the 
IMF, before returning to Harvard. 
Students  of  economics  know  Ken  Rogoff  because  of  his  textbook  Foundations  of 
International Macroeconomics, which he wrote together with Maurice Obstfeld. At the heart 
of the book is a micro-based macro model for open economies. This model lends itself, for 
instance,  to  the  analysis  of  international  capital  markets,  exchange  rates  and  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  international  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  Most  of  the  SNB’s  economists  are  well 
acquainted with this book from their studies. 
But  it  is  not  only  through  teaching  that  Ken  Rogoff  has  influenced  monetary  policy:  his 
research is often also directly relevant for central banks. One of his first papers examined the 
short-term  forecastability  of  exchange  rates.  Much  time  and  energy  has  gone  into  such 
forecasts.  Ken  Rogoff  and  Richard  Meese  were  the  first  to  show  that,  in  the  short  term, 
exchange rates appear to follow random walks: they stagger about like a drunkard. Over the 
long  term,  however,  fundamentals  dictate  the  level  of  exchange  rates.  Today,  this  is  an 
accepted result in economics. 
Another important subject of Ken Rogoff’s research is monetary policy credibility and central 
bank independence. In a seminal paper, he showed that welfare gains are realised if central 
bankers are more inflation-averse than the rest of society. Central bankers should attach less 
weight to business cycle conditions than politicians, who, with one eye on the next election, 
are tempted to push unemployment down below its natural level. One conclusion is that, for 
the good of society, central banks need to be independent from politics; and indeed, central 
bank independence is nowadays the norm around the globe. 
Ken Rogoff has also addressed the topic of sovereign debt on a number of occasions. One 
question on which he has focused is the influence of political election cycles on a country’s 
budget  deficit.  Together  with  Anne  Sibert,  he  has  investigated  the  incentives  that  lead 
politicians to expand government budgets in the run-up to an election. 
Finally, let me mention Ken Rogoff’s book This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial 
Folly, which he wrote with Carmen Reinhart. The book analyses data from financial crises in 
70 countries over an 800-year time span. With perfect timing, it was published in 2009. The 
authors  show  that financial  crises  often follow  the  same  pattern.  First,  there  is  a  phase  of 
exaggerated faith in the future, followed by macroeconomic disruptions after the onset of the 
crisis. This book is already now a classic of economic literature. 
As you can see, the areas Ken Rogoff focuses on are exciting, relevant and topical. This is 
why  the  Swiss  National  Bank  has  chosen  Ken  Rogoff  to  give  the  inaugural  Karl  Brunner 
Distinguished Lecture, and – on behalf of the Governing Board – I would like to congratulate 
him warmly. The subject of his lecture is “Rethinking central bank design” – a topic that fits 
perfectly  with  the  basic  aim  of  this  event,  which  is  to  bring  monetary  policy  to  a  wider 
audience. And so, ladies and gentlemen, it only remains for me to wish you an insightful and 
enjoyable lecture. Please join me in welcoming Ken Rogoff with a round of applause. 
Ken, the floor is yours. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
