  Simon M Potter: The role of best practices in supporting market integrity 
and effectiveness 
Remarks  by  Mr  Simon  M  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Markets  Group  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the 2016 Primary Dealers Meeting, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, New York City, 7 September 2016. 
 I would like to thank Radhika Mithal and Michelle Ezer for their excellent assistance in the preparation of these 
remarks,  as  well  as  colleagues  in  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and central  bank community  for their  insightful 
comments and suggestions. 
Welcome to this year’s primary dealer meeting, and thank you for joining us today. Primary 
dealers  play  several  important  roles  as  trading  counterparties  of  the  New  York  Fed  in  its 
implementation of monetary policy, as participants in Treasury auctions, and as providers of 
information  on  market  conditions  to  support  the  Desk’s  monitoring  of  financial  markets.1 
These  annual  meetings  provide  us  an  opportunity  to  strengthen  this  relationship  and 
communicate our expectations for you. 
The official sector and market participants have a shared interest in ensuring that markets 
function  efficiently,  effectively,  and  fairly  in  the  provision  of  financial  services  to  all 
stakeholders,  particularly  firms  and  households.  To  help  achieve  these  goals,  the  official 
sector employs a variety of channels, including legal, regulatory, and supervisory. In addition, 
officials  work  with  market  participants  to  create  best  practice  guidance  that  complements 
official-sector initiatives. 
Today, I will focus my remarks on how best practice efforts can help support the integrity and 
effectiveness of financial markets. I will draw upon the New York Fed’s experience with the 
Treasury Market Practices Group (TMPG), the Foreign Exchange Committee (FXC), and the 
Bank for International Settlements (BIS) Foreign Exchange Working Group (BIS FXWG) in 
developing and refining best practices for financial markets. The markets covered by these 
groups  are  those  for  U.S.  Treasuries,  agency  debt,  agency  mortgage-backed  securities 
(MBS),  and  foreign  exchange  (FX).  Segments  of  these  markets  have  historically  operated 
under an over-the-counter (OTC) trading model and, as a result, lack a formal central trading 
venue like an exchange with established rules.2 These markets are of particular interest for 
central  banks  globally,  because  of  their  important  role  in  the  implementation  of  monetary 
policy. In light of these considerations, central banks have made extensive efforts to convene 
market participants to develop best practices that help cultivate fair and effective markets.3  
As  a  participant  in  these  markets,  the  Desk  has  a  direct  interest  in  their  integrity  and 
effectiveness. I hope my remarks will reinforce why the New York Fed and primary dealers 
as a group should be interested in continuing to support best practices. Your engagement in 
                                                
1  The “Desk” refers to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s trading desk, which implements monetary policy 
on behalf of the Federal Reserve System, as directed by the Federal Open Market Committee. 
2  Exchanges, such as those in the U.S. securities and commodities markets, develop standards that promote 
efficient  and  fair  trading  for  activity  conducted  on  the  exchange,  govern  the  products  traded  through  the 
exchange, and set minimum fitness standards applicable to members of the exchange; exchanges thus are 
able  to  set  rules  for  their  participants  that  touch  on  many  of  the  concerns  that  may  be  addressed  by  best 
practices.  That  said,  even  markets  that  feature  a  great  degree  of  exchange  trading  may  benefit  from  a 
consideration of best practices. 
3  The  U.K.’s  Fair  and  Effective  Markets  Review  was  a  critical  effort  to  reinforce  confidence  in  the  wholesale 
fixed income, currency and commodities markets in the wake of serious misconduct seen in recent years. This 
effort  was  led  by  the  Bank  of  England  in  collaboration  with  the  HM  Treasury  and  the  Financial  Conduct 
Authority. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the process is essential and your commitment to abide by best practice recommendations is 
vital  to  well-functioning  markets.  I  will  begin  by  describing  what  I  mean  by  best  practices, 
follow  with  a  discussion  on  central  banks’  interest  in  supporting  them,  and  conclude  by 
pointing to some of the challenges in promoting widespread adoption. 
Before continuing, I would like to note that the views I share with you about best practices 
today  are  mine  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New 
York  or  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  However,  remarks  on  the  expectations  for  primary 
dealers reflect the policies of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
What are best practices? 
Best  practices  are  recommendations  intended  to  encourage  market  participants  to  adopt 
principles,  processes,  or  procedures  that  affirm  or  raise  standards  in  their  sectors  or 
industries.  Many  sectors, 
including  manufacturing,  agriculture,  and  education,  have 
successfully employed best practices to bring about positive change.4 In the financial sector, 
the aim is to design best practices that enhance behaviors or practices that support market 
integrity  and  effectiveness.  While  best  practices  do  not  constitute  legal  or  regulatory 
obligations for market participants – or serve as a substitute for regulatory standards – they 
can serve as useful guideposts in establishing expectations for responsible market conduct 
and conventions. Effective best practices – those that are well-designed, consistently applied 
and upheld by market participants – can produce positive externalities that benefit all industry 
stakeholders, thereby serving as a public good. If used well, best practices can be adapted 
quickly  as  market  structures,  practices,  and  participation  evolve  and  thus  offer  timely 
guidance to market participants. On occasion, they may also help inform regulation. 
Best  practices  can  be  broadly  categorized  into  those  that  are  quite  narrow,  targeting  very 
specific conduct or processes, and those that involve broad principles. Those that are narrow 
in  scope  are  usually  more  straightforward  to  implement,  and  relate  to  outcomes  that  are 
easier  to  measure.  For example,  it  is  fairly  easy  to  assess  adherence  to  the  best  practice 
recommendation  to  implement  a  fails  charge  when  a  seller  fails  to  deliver  a  Treasury 
security, or to use a payment-versus-payment settlement mechanism for FX transactions. 
In  contrast,  best  practices  that  propose  broad  principles  can  be  implemented  differently 
across  institutions  and  have  outcomes that  do  not  lend  themselves  to  easy  measurement. 
For  instance,  it  is  difficult  to  gauge  the  extent  to  which  an  individual  market  participant 
behaves in a manner that supports market liquidity or whether market participants as a group 
apply  this  recommendation  consistently.  Nonetheless,  such  principle-based  best  practices 
can be quite powerful in motivating market participants to think carefully about their internal 
policies  and  procedures  and  consider  whether  they  are  consistent  with  broader  principles. 
Both types of best practices are important. 
Successful best practices are almost always developed using a collaborative and inclusive 
approach. Ideally, with respect to financial markets, the process should include a wide range 
of market participants, including dealers, banks, buy-side firms, and market infrastructures, 
representing different areas of expertise, including the core business lines, legal, compliance, 
operations, technology, and custody. A public consultation process may be helpful in further 
enhancing the development process.5 These types of approaches can bring a wide array of 
                                                
4  Some  examples  of  best  practices  in  these  sectors  include:  the  National  Education  Association,  which 
develops  pedagogical  standards  based  on  its  research;  the  Best  Manufacturing  Practices  Center  of 
Excellence,  which  helps  businesses  identify,  research,  and  promote  exceptional  manufacturing  practices, 
methods, and procedures; and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, which develops 
and shares “good agriculture practices” for a range of commodities. 
5  During the development of the first phase of the BIS FX Global Code, a large number of detailed comments 
and useful suggestions were received from market participants that were integral to the drafting process. In 
April 2015, the TMPG solicited comments on its proposed best practice updates related to automated trading 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  diverse  perspectives  to  bear  on  the  design  of  best  practices,  helping  to  ensure  the  best 
practices developed are more effective. 
Central banks’ role in supporting best practices 
Central banks have an interest in ensuring well-functioning markets – as market participants 
and  for  efficient  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  We  also  have  a  stake  in  enhancing  the 
strength and stability of the financial system as a whole. Moreover, central banks can play an 
important role in the creation of effective best practices by serving as a convening body for 
market participants, by signaling the importance of best practice efforts to the market, and by 
encouraging the inclusion of a diverse set of market segments in the development process. 
First, particularly where OTC markets predominate, a central bank can bring together market 
participants to discuss and address issues collectively. There is a rich history of collaboration 
between  the  official  sector,  the  academic  community,  and  industry  participants  to  analyze 
existing  issues,  identify  emerging  risks,  and  develop  guidance  for  financial  markets.  Over 
time, the New York Fed has led a number of such efforts. For example, the OTC Derivatives 
Supervisors  Group  addressed  emerging  risks  of  inadequate  infrastructure  for  the  growing 
credit  derivatives  markets.  The  New  York  Fed  and  the  Board  of  Governors  convened  the 
Alternative  Reference  Rates  Committee,  which  is  currently  working  to  identify  a  set  of 
alternate  reference  interest  rates  for  financial  products  and  contracts  that  are  more  firmly 
based  on  transactions  from  a  robust  underlying  market  and  that  comply  with  international 
standards.6,
7 Similarly, the U.K. official sector worked with a panel of market participants in 
developing the recommendations in the Fair and Effective Markets Review. 
The New York Fed also sponsors two industry groups that have long-term missions focused 
on best practices. The TMPG is, as you know, a group of market professionals committed to 
supporting the integrity and efficiency of the U.S. Treasury, agency debt, and agency MBS 
markets.  To  that  end,  the  Group  develops  guidance  to  promote  market  liquidity  and 
transparency,  robust  control  environments,  efficient  market  clearing,  and  managing  large 
positions with care.8 The New York FXC examines similar issues in the FX market. It has a 
long  history  –  more  than  three  decades  –  of  publishing  documentation  to  facilitate  FX 
transactions and market functioning and to articulate best practices.9 The New York Fed is 
also involved in the BIS FXWG to help establish and promote adherence to an FX Global 
Code,  a  single  set  of  guiding  principles  for  the  FX  market.  These  groups  have  confronted 
collective  action  problems  where  an  individual  firm  may  want  to  raise  concerns,  but  be 
unable to drive market-wide improvements. 
Second,  when  central  banks  partner  with  private-sector  participants  to  develop  best 
practices,  it  can  send  a  powerful  signal  to  the  market.  For  their  part,  private-sector 
                                                                                                                                                    
in  TMPG-covered  markets  and  received  feedback  from  firms  active  in  electronic  trading  and  an  industry 
association of proprietary trading firms. This feedback helped refine the proposed best practice updates. 
6  The  OTC  Derivatives  Supervisors  Group  originated  in  2005  when  the  New  York  Fed  hosted  a  meeting  of 
major  OTC  derivatives  dealers  and  their domestic  and  international supervisors.  The  Alternative  Reference 
Rates Committee was convened by the Federal Reserve in 2014 in a meeting with representatives of major 
OTC derivatives market participants, their supervisors, and central banks. 
7  Outside of New York Fed-sponsored groups is the Group of Thirty (G30). The G30 was established in 1978 
and  is  an  international  body  composed  of  senior  representatives  in  the  private  and  public  sectors  and 
academia.  It  has  a  broad  mandate  and  works  on  various  issues  relating  to  international  economic  and 
monetary affairs. 
8  The  current  version  of  TMPG’s  Best  Practices  for  Treasury,  Agency  Debt,  and  Agency  Mortgage-Backed 
Securities Markets is available here. 
9  Such  documentation  includes,  but  is  not  limited  to,  FX  master  agreements,  FX  non-deliverable  transaction 
documents, and FX master give-up agreements. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  participants  contribute  their  expertise  and  have  a  sense  of  ownership  in  the  process.  By 
integrating  best  practices  within  their  own  institutions,  private-sector  participants  support 
market adoption.10 Central banks – with their public orientation and interest in the integrity 
and effectiveness of markets – can further encourage broad adoption of best practices.11  
Third,  central  bank  support  can  also  help  broaden  the  composition  of  those  engaged  in 
designing best practices. The New York Fed strives to have all important segments of the 
market represented in the membership composition of the groups it sponsors. For example, 
the TMPG recently added individuals who have experience at a regional broker dealer and a 
high-frequency trading firm to broaden the views and perspectives on the committee. FXC 
membership  has  also  evolved  significantly  since  the  group’s  inception.  Both  committees 
include institutions from the sell-side, buy-side, as well as infrastructure providers, such as 
trading venues. 
Central  banks,  and  their  counterparts,  also  encourage  international  collaboration.  Such 
collaboration has increased over time and has reached a significant milestone through the 
work  to  develop  an  FX  Global  Code.  This  work  spans  sixteen  different  central  banks, 
covering  major  financial  centers  in  advanced  and  emerging  market  economies,  and  it 
includes  a  set  of  private-sector  market  participants.  The  BIS  FXWG  formed  a  Market 
Participants Group (MPG) which includes representatives across the globe and includes the 
sell-side, buy-side, and market infrastructure communities. The regional FX committees are 
also integrally involved in the work. 
Issues addressed by best practices 
Let  me  now  highlight  how,  in  my  experience  working  with  New  York  Fed-sponsored 
committees, best practices can play an important role in addressing a range of issues. For 
example, best practices can identify emerging risks, solve “first-mover” problems, challenge 
long-established practices, improve market function, and assist control functions. 
Collaboration between market participants and central banks in groups like the TMPG or the 
FXC can promote identification of evolving or emerging risks and resulting best practices can 
publicize those risks, and suggest mitigants for them, to the broader market. For example, 
the  FXC,  recognizing  the  risks  associated  with  the  increased  use  of  automated  trading, 
published  a  set  of  recommendations  in  2006  around  “auto-dealing”  in  FX  markets.  The 
TMPG provided similar guidance in 2015.12  
Importantly,  best  practices  can  be  a  way  to  resolve  first-mover  problems.  For  instance,  a 
sizeable portion of the non-centrally cleared forward-settling agency MBS transactions prior 
to 2013 remained unmargined, posing counterparty risk in the event one trading party were 
to  default,  and  potentially  systemic  risk  to  the  overall  financial  system.  Margining  such 
transactions is a common and sensible way to reduce counterparty exposures and systemic 
risk. However, no market participant wanted to be the first to begin charging margin out of 
                                                
10  Several examples in the FX and fixed income markets illustrate that best practices would not be successful 
without  the  undeniable  support  of  market  participants.  For  instance,  reduction  is  settlement  risk  due  to  the 
adoption of payment-versus-payment mechanisms, drop in settlement fails in U.S. Treasury markets after the 
implementation of the fails charge, and improvements in the derivatives markets infrastructure are just a few 
examples. 
11  The BIS effort to develop an FX Global Code and the Bank of England’s leadership of the Fair and Effective 
Markets Review are two examples of this public-private partnership. 
12  Automated  trading  has  also  been  the  focus  of  significant  regulatory  attention  in  the  United  States  and 
elsewhere  over  the  last  several  years.  See,  for  example,  the  Commodities  Futures  Trading  Commission’s 
proposed  rules  on  “Regulation  Automated  Trading,”  the  recent  Financial  Industry  Regulatory  Authority 
(FINRA)  amendment  to  the  National  Association  of  Securities  Dealers  Rule  1032,  and  the  proposed 
amendments to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission’s Rule 15b9-1. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  fear  that  their  counterparties  would  stop  trading  with  them  and  move  their  business  to  a 
counterparty  that  did  not  require  margin.  The  TMPG  addressed  this  problem  with  a 
recommended practice that all market participants exchange two-way variation margin on a 
regular basis.13, 14 
Best practices can also encourage market participants to question long-established trading 
practices and advocate for change. As an example, in the FX market, concerns were raised 
about the integrity of FX rate benchmarks, particularly around incentives for potential market 
malpractice  linked  to  the  structure  of  trading  around  the  benchmark  fixings,  such  as  the 
WM/Reuters 4pm London fix. The WM/Reuters fix is one of the long-standing and dominant 
benchmarks  used  in  the  market.  It  was  structured  in  a  way  that  created  an  incentive  for 
dealers  to  “trade  ahead”  of  clients  at  the fix  and  also  an  opportunity  for them  to  influence 
exchange rates. The FSB’s FX benchmark working group produced recommendations that 
called  for  a  change  in  methodology  around  the  structure  of  the  fix  and  changes  in  firms’ 
trading  behavior  at  the  fix.  Guidance  suggested  that  firms  establish  and  enforce  internal 
guidelines  and  procedures  for  collecting  and  executing  fixing  orders,  such  as  separate 
processes for handling such orders. In addition, the group recommended that transactions 
conducted at to-be-determined levels be priced in a manner consistent with the risk borne in 
accepting such transactions through such methods as applying a bid-offer spread or a direct 
fee. The Global Preamble, published by the FXC in coordination with other FX committees, 
supported and reinforced the FSB’s FX benchmark recommendations.15, 16 Since the release 
of  the  recommendations,  a  number  of  changes  have  been  made. For  example,  there  is  a 
new structure for certain FX benchmark rates, including the WM/Reuters fix. Many dealers 
have changed how they provide FX benchmark execution, with a growing emphasis on the 
use  of  algorithmic  execution  and  a  more  transparent  pricing  structure.  Such  work  is,  and 
should be, continuing. 
Best practices have been especially effective in improving financial market functioning. In the 
period prior to 2006, episodes of persistent failures to deliver securities on settlement days 
were  impacting  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  U.S.  Treasury  market,  posing  counterparty 
credit  and  systemic  risk.17  The  introduction  of the  Treasury fails  charge  trading  practice  in 
May  2009  incentivized  sellers  of  securities  to  resolve  fails  promptly  and  promote  efficient 
market  clearing.  During  the  first  four  months  of  2009,  Treasury  fails  averaged  a  bit  over 
                                                
13  The  TMPG  issued  a  recommendation  to  introduce  margin  requirements  for  agency  MBS  transactions  in 
November  2012.  It  collected  data  from  its  members  on  the  progress  made  towards  implementing  the 
recommendation and  reported  summary  statistics  to  the  public,  which may  have supported  wider  adoption. 
The TMPG’s elevation of this important issue informed FINRA’s amendment of its Margin Requirement rule to 
establish margin requirements for forward-settling To Be Announced (TBA) transactions. 
14  In the FX market, similar concerns around credit risk came to the fore during the global financial crisis, and the 
FXC adapted its best practices to encourage widespread adoption of credit support annexes in 2010. 
15  Significant  work  has  also  taken  place  in  regards  to  FX  benchmarks  with  various  regional  FX  committees 
working  together  to  produce  the  Global  Preamble  to  support  implementation  of  the  FSB’s  FX  benchmark 
recommendations. See here. 
16  Another  example  is  the  market’s  long-standing  use  of  ICAP’s  Fed  Funds  Open  (FFO)  as  a  benchmark  for 
various  financial  transactions.  However,  ICAP,  the  FFO  publisher,  did  not  consider  it  to  be  a  financial 
benchmark and did not calculate it as such, which raised questions about the FFO’s suitability to be used in 
such  a  manner.  The  TMPG  identified  this  issue  during  its  work  on  financial  benchmarks  and  encouraged 
industry  groups  to examine possible  alternatives  to the FFO.  This  led  the  Securities  Industry  and  Financial 
Markets Association (SIFMA) and the Risk Management Association (RMA) to jointly recommend that market 
participants  use  the  overnight  bank  funding  rate,  a  rate  more  consistent  with  international  best  practice 
recommendations. See SIFMA’s and RMA’s joint announcement here and the TMPG’s statement of support 
here. 
17  The  following  year  the  TMPG  was  established  and  issued  its  first  set  of  best  practices,  with  several 
recommendations to improve the clearing and settlement processes to alleviate fails. See here. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  $14.4 billion per day. About a year following implementation of the fails charge, fails declined 
to only $4.2 billion per day.18  
Best practices can serve as a tool by which control functions, such as compliance, audit, and 
legal,  can  test  their  firms’  procedures  and  activities  against  affirmed  standards  of  best 
practice.  The  standards  can  act  as  a  measuring  stick  that,  along  with  applicable  law, 
regulations,  and  supervisory  expectations,  encourages  continuous  improvement  of  front, 
middle,  and  back  offices.  For  example,  the  TMPG  has  a  series  of  practices  directed  at 
managing large positions with care. Implementing them requires compliance functions to be 
thoughtful in determining how to identify large long or short positions, given the uncertainty of 
tradable float. It also challenges staff to consider which trading strategies may have adverse 
implications for market liquidity and whether they warrant policies around them. Further, the 
TMPG’s  best  practices  note  that  responsibility  for  establishing  and  maintaining  a  rigorous 
internal control environment within an organization rests with its senior management. 
Neither best practices nor laws nor regulations can guarantee a lack of bad behavior. Recent 
failures illustrate the adverse consequences that behavioral weaknesses can have for those 
who rely on financial services. It also underscores the importance of adopting a culture that 
creates an environment in which laws, regulations, and best practices are valued and upheld. 
To that end, regulators and supervisors in various jurisdictions have heightened their focus 
on firms’ corporate governance programs and emphasized the need for instilling values that 
promote proper behavior and sound decision-making throughout the firms. For example, the 
New York Fed has been working to advance industry driven culture reform in the financial 
services industry over the past few years.19 We are joined by other official institutions and 
groups across the globe, such as the Group of 30 and the Basel Committee, in pushing for 
heightened standards of market practice and behavior.20  
Promoting adoption of best practices 
Ideally,  best  practice  standards  should  become  an  integral  part  of  the  market,  observed 
consistently  and  transparently  by  participants  across  various  segments.  However,  unlike 
regulations or supervisory standards, compliance with the best practice standards developed 
by  our  committees  is  not  mandatory  for  the  broader  market.  Furthermore,  there  may  be 
instances where implementation may vary given the diversity of entities in the market and the 
different profiles of market engagement. This is particularly relevant for the global FX market, 
with  its  range  of  market  participants.21  Central  banks  play  an  important  role  in  convening 
industry  stakeholders  to  develop  high  standards  of  behavior  that  promote  fairness  and 
integrity,  and  in  pushing  the  industry  to  affirm  them.  Nonetheless,  central  banks  are  not 
acting  as  regulators  when  they  sponsor  these  committees,  even  when  they  have  relevant 
regulatory powers. 
Since best practice standards that are articulated by the committees that we work with are 
not,  in  and  of  themselves,  binding,  promoting  their  adoption  is  both  challenging  and 
important. We work on a number of fronts in this effort. We strive to engage a wide diversity 
                                                
18  See “The Introduction of the TMPG Fails Charge for U.S. Treasury Securities” for more information. 
19  The New York Fed has organized workshops and conferences on reforming culture in the financial services 
industry. Additionally, several executives have spoken publicly on the topic. See here for more detail. 
20  The  G30,  the  Basel  Committee,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board,  and  the  FSB  have  issued  papers  on 
culture, governance, and misconduct risk. The Bank of England’s Fair and Effective Markets Review called for 
higher  conduct  standards  for  the  fixed  income  markets.  The  central  bank  of  the  Netherlands  –  De 
Nederlandsche Bank – has developed new approaches for the supervision of corporate culture and decision-
making. 
21  The MPG is working with the BIS FXWG to develop market-based adherence mechanisms for the FX Global 
Code. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of  market  participants  as  we  develop  best  practices.  This  is  to  ensure  that  the  practices 
reflect  all  relevant  segments  of  the  market  and  to  promote  buy-in  and  thus  foster  their 
adoption.  As  I  mentioned  before,  both  the  TMPG  and  the  FXC  are  expanding  their 
membership  such  that  a  range  of  market  participants  feels  vested  in  their  missions.  In 
addition, we engage with other sectors of the marketplace, such as trade associations and 
infrastructure providers, to educate them about best practices that have been developed and 
facilitate their potential adoption of aspects of them. 
When central banks operate in the markets ourselves, we expect the best practices to apply. 
This has two aspects. First, we align our own practices to the best practices, except where it 
would inhibit our policy functions. As a corollary, we expect those institutions that choose to 
become  our  counterparties  to  comply  with  the  best  practices  as  well,  so  that  when  we 
transact,  we  do  so  with  the  confidence  that  our  counterparties  are  adhering  to  these 
standards of behavior. 
Finally, we keep supervisors, regulators and other official sector bodies, inside and outside 
our four walls, abreast of the work of our committees. In some cases, they may choose to 
adopt standards first articulated by our committees as part of their frameworks.22  
Conclusion 
Market  participants  have  a  responsibility  to  themselves,  their  clients,  and  the  financial 
markets in which they transact to implement best practices within their own institutions and to 
encourage  their  clients  and  other  counterparties  to  do  the  same.  Broad  adoption  of  best 
practices  can  strengthen  each  market  participant’s  existing  controls,  help  reduce  market 
disruptions, and ultimately foster greater confidence in the broader financial system. 
Raising standards of behavior begins with creating a culture in which people are motivated to 
follow  good  market  practices.  The  primary  responsibility  for  improving  the  culture  in  the 
financial  services  industry  rests  with  you,  your  firms,  and  every  other  financial  institution 
participating in global financial markets. Best practices can play a role in building a strong 
ethical culture that improves the behavior of market participants and strengthens the public’s 
trust in the industry. 
Central  banks  have  an  interest  in  ensuring  that  financial  markets  sustain  a  healthy  and 
robust economy. As active market participants and for the transmission of monetary policy, 
we  support  best  practices  that  promote  the  integrity  and  effectiveness  of  the  financial 
markets. We recognize the usefulness of establishing a collaborative process for identifying 
and affirming standards of good market practice. We also recognize that the success of best 
practices  relies  on  the  contributions  and  undeniable  support  of  market  participants  and 
primary dealers in particular. 
As primary dealers, you play an important role in implementing best practices internally and 
supporting the integrity and efficiency of markets. The TMPG’s and the FXC’s best practices 
are  intended  not  only  for  dealers  or  market  makers,  but  for  all  participants  active  in  the 
relevant market. Your firms are important first adopters of best practices given your positions 
as  central  nodes.  We  also  expect  you  to  be  engaged  in  a  process  to  proactively  identify 
emerging risks and vulnerabilities, and to suggest improvements to best practices as market 
structure  evolves.  We  highly  value  your  role  as  responsible  counterparties  and  market 
participants,  and  expect  your  continued  engagement  and  support  in  maintaining  fair  and 
effective markets. 
Thank you. 
                                                
22  For  instance,  FINRA  recently  amended  its  Margin  Requirement  rule  to  establish  margin  requirements  for 
forward-settling  TBA  transactions  and  noted  that  its  proposal  was  “informed  by  the  set  of  best  practices 
adopted by the Treasury Market Practices Group.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
