  Haruhiko Kuroda: “Comprehensive Assessment” of the monetary easing 
and “QQE with Yield Curve Control” 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business 
leaders, Osaka, 26 September 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of Japan’s website. 
Introduction 
It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity today to exchange views with a distinguished 
gathering  of  business  leaders  in  the  Kansai  region.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to 
express  my  sincerest  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  branches  in 
Osaka, Kobe, and Kyoto. 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held last week, the Bank conducted a comprehensive 
assessment  of  the  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices  as  well  as  policy  effects 
since the introduction of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE). In light of the 
findings of the assessment, with a view to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at 
the earliest possible time, it decided to introduce “QQE with Yield Curve Control” as a means 
of strengthening the existing framework for monetary easing. Today, I would like to talk about 
the main points of and thinking behind these initiatives and how the Bank aims to achieve the 
price stability target under this new framework. 
Comprehensive assessment and directions for new policy framework 
I. 
In  the  “Comprehensive  Assessment,”  the  Bank  examined  the  developments  in  economic 
activity  and  prices,  as  well  as  the  policy  effects,  over  the  past  three  years  since  the 
introduction of QQE in an objective manner, based on facts and theories. This is detailed in a 
nearly 60-page report, including the main text, appendixes, and charts, but its essence can 
be summarized broadly by the following four main points. 
The first point is that, during the three years since the introduction of QQE, Japan’s economic 
activity and prices, as well as financial conditions, have improved substantially, and Japan’s 
economy is no longer in deflation. Corporate profits, measured by the ratio of current profits 
to sales, have been at a record-high level (Chart 1). Excessive appreciation of the yen has 
been  corrected  and  stock  prices  have  surged.  The  employment  situation  has  significantly 
improved and the unemployment rate has declined to 3 percent. Base pay rises, seen for the 
first time in two decades, have continued for three consecutive years. On the price front, the 
year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food 
and  energy  had  been  negative  before  the  introduction  of  QQE,  but  it  turned  positive  in 
autumn 2013 and has remained in positive territory for two years and ten months (Chart 2). 
This is the first time since the late 1990s, when Japan’s economy fell into deflation, that the 
annual  change  in  the  CPI  has  been  in  positive  territory  for  such  a  long  period.  Japan’s 
economy  is  no  longer  in  deflation,  which  is  commonly  defined  as  a  sustained  decline  in 
prices. 
QQE has brought about a positive turnaround in economic activity and prices, and lowered 
real  interest  rates  are  considered  to  be  the  main  transmission  mechanism  in  exerting  its 
policy  effects.  This  mechanism  can  be  explained  as  follows:  (1)  people’s  inflation 
expectations – that is, their outlook for prices – would be raised through the Bank’s strong 
commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent and its large-scale monetary 
easing;  (2)  nominal  interest  rates  across  the  entire  yield  curve  would  be  pushed  down 
through the large-scale purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs); and (3) together, 
real interest rates would be lowered, which would stimulate the economy and push up prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In the “Comprehensive Assessment,” the Bank ran counterfactual simulations in which actual 
developments  in  Japan’s  economy  were  compared  with  simulated  developments  obtained 
assuming  QQE  had  not  been  introduced  (Chart  3).  The  simulations  using  the  Bank’s 
macroeconomic model are conducted under several different assumptions regarding (i) when 
QQE started having an impact and (ii) to what extent changes in stock prices and exchange 
rates are regarded as part of the effects of QQE. In many cases, the simulations suggest that 
Japan  still  would  have  been  in  deflation  if  QQE  had  not  been  introduced.  The  results  of 
various analyses, including these simulations, clearly show that QQE has had the intended 
effects through the mechanism associated with lowered real interest rates. 
The  second  point  is  that,  despite  such  a  positive  turnaround,  the  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent  has  not  been  achieved.  The  key  reason  lies  in  developments  in  inflation 
expectations.  In  Japan,  the  view  that  prices  will  not  increase  –  the  so-called  deflationary 
mindset – has been entrenched among people under prolonged deflation. In this situation, it 
has been rational for individual economic entities to maintain the status quo by hoarding cash 
rather than taking risks. As a result, Japan’s economy lost its vibrancy. In order to break out 
of  such  a  situation,  it  is  necessary  to  dramatically  change  people’s  outlook  for  prices. 
Specifically, it is essential that people will share the view that annual inflation will be around 
2 percent, and that price-setting of a variety of goods and services and labor-management 
wage negotiations should be based on such view on prices. For that purpose, the Bank set 
the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the CPI inflation and launched QQE with a 
view to achieving the target at the earliest possible time. 
Initially,  QQE  exerted  its  intended  effects  or  even  more  effects  than  anticipated  (Chart  4). 
The  annual  CPI  growth  rose  to  1.5  percent  in  April  2014  and  inflation  expectations  also 
improved clearly. Thereafter, however, against the background of the substantial decline in 
crude oil prices since summer 2014 and weak demand after the consumption tax hike, the 
observed  inflation  rate  decreased.  Inflation  expectations  also  started  to  stall,  following  the 
course of the observed inflation rate. In order to maintain the momentum of converting the 
deflationary  mindset,  the  Bank  expanded  QQE  in  October  2014.  Thanks  in  part  to  this 
response, inflation expectations managed to stay around the same level despite the strong 
headwinds.  But  global  financial  markets  became  volatile  amid  the  slowdown  in  emerging 
economies, particularly in China, since summer 2015, and, since the turn of this year, stock 
prices  declined  globally  and  the  yen  appreciated.  Under  this  environment,  inflation 
expectations have weakened. 
These  experiences  suggest  that  the  mechanism  of  formation  of  inflation  expectations  in 
Japan tends to be heavily influenced by the course of the past inflation rate. It is phrased as 
an  adaptive  mechanism  weighing  in  the  formation  of  inflation  expectations.  The  adaptive 
mechanism plays a considerably larger role in Japan than in other countries (Chart 5). This is 
considered to be attributable to the fact that the price stability target has been missed in the 
prolonged  deflation,  as  well  as  to  the  practice  of  wage  negotiations,  including  the  annual 
labor-management  wage  negotiations  in  spring  (shunto),  with  the  previous  fiscal  year’s 
inflation rate serving as a reference. Against this background, inflation expectations in Japan 
started  to  weaken  as  the  observed  inflation  rate  declined.  This  is  the  main  factor  that 
hampers achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. 
In  order  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target,  the  view  should  be  firmly  entrenched  among 
people that the observed inflation will, in due course, converge to the price stability target set 
by the central bank, which is 2 percent, even if it fluctuates due to a variety of factors. This is 
referred to as the “forward-looking mechanism” in the formation of inflation expectations, in 
contrast to the “adaptive mechanism” explained earlier. Taking into account that the forces to 
push  up  inflation  expectations  through  the  “adaptive  mechanism”  have  weakened,  it  is 
imperative  to  further  strengthen  the  “forward-looking  mechanism,”  in  order  to  push  up 
inflation expectations. This is one of the main points taken into account in designing the new 
policy framework. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The third point is that the Bank was able to push down the entire yield curve in combination 
with  large-scale  purchases  of  JGBs  under  QQE  and  the  negative  interest  rate  policy 
introduced  in  January  2016.  Nominal  interest  rates  have  been  declining  since  the 
introduction of QQE, and the pace of decline accelerated after adopting the negative interest 
rate  policy,  particularly  for  those  with  longer  maturities  (Chart  6).  In  light  of  these 
developments, the Bank has come to the conclusion that it can facilitate the formation of a 
yield  curve,  which  is  deemed  most  appropriate  for  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2 
percent, through the appropriate combination of a negative interest rate and JGB purchases. 
With these factors in mind, the Bank has placed “yield curve control” as the core element of 
the new policy framework. 
The  fourth  point  is  the  impact  of  monetary  easing  on  the  functioning  of  financial 
intermediation. In the “Comprehensive Assessment,” the Bank examined how “QQE with a 
Negative  Interest  Rate”  has  translated  into  lending  rates  and  has  affected  the  profits  of 
financial institutions. When the negative interest rate was introduced, some raised concerns 
that,  as  interest  rates  were  already  extremely  low,  lower  JGB  yields  would  not  lead  to  a 
decline in banks’ lending rates as well as interest rates on corporate bonds and CP, but to 
date, the extent of the pass-through of the decline in JGB yields to these funding rates has 
been roughly similar to changes in previous episodes of interest rate cuts. At the same time, 
deposit rates also declined, but to a smaller extent compared to the decline in lending rates. 
This  means  that  the  fall  in  lending  rates  has  been  achieved  at  the  expense  of  financial 
institutions’ profits. Thus, looking ahead, the policy effects of the decline in interest rates will 
depend  on  the  impact  on  the  profits  of  financial  institutions  and  their  lending  attitudes 
reflecting  such  impact.  In  fact,  lending  rates  have  been  on  a  declining  trend  in  a  severely 
competitive environment, and the pace of decline has accelerated since the introduction of 
the  negative  interest  rate  policy  (Chart  7).  The  excessive  decline  in  long-term  and  super-
long-term rates lowers the rate of return on insurance and pension products and leads to the 
increase  in  firms’  pension  benefit  obligations.  Although  the  direct  impact  of  these 
developments on economic activity as a whole is unlikely to be substantial, it is possible that 
such  developments  can  cause  uncertainty  regarding  the  sustainability  of  the  financial 
functioning in a broad sense, in that they could have a negative impact on economic activity 
through a deterioration in people’s confidence. In facilitating the formation of an appropriate 
yield curve, the Bank should take account of these points. 
Main points of “QQE with yield curve control” 
II. 
Based on these findings of the “Comprehensive Assessment,” the Bank decided to introduce 
“QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control,”  which  is  a  new  framework  for  monetary  easing,  by 
strengthening the two previous policy frameworks: “QQE” and “QQE with a Negative Interest 
Rate.” The new policy framework consists of two major components. The first is “yield curve 
control” in which the Bank sets short-term and long-term interest rates as an operating target, 
and the second is an “inflation-overshooting commitment” in which the Bank commits itself to 
maintaining  an  increase  in  the  monetary  base  until  the  annual  rate  of  increase  in  the 
observed CPI exceeds the price stability target of 2 percent and stays above the target in a 
stable manner. Now, I will explain each of these components. 
Yield curve control 
As mentioned earlier, the experience so far with the negative interest rate policy shows that a 
combination  of  the  negative  interest  rate  and  JGB  purchases  is  effective  in  exerting  an 
influence on the entire yield curve. Against this background, the Bank has introduced “yield 
curve control.” To facilitate the new framework, new market tools have been introduced. 
Under the new framework, the Bank sets two key interest rates – the short-term policy rates 
and an operating target for the long-term interest rate – as a guideline for market operations. 
Specifically,  for  the  short-term  policy  rate,  the  Bank  uses  the  interest  rate  applied  to  the 
Policy-Rate Balances in current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank, which is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  minus 0.1 percent, unchanged this time (Chart 8). For the long-term interest rate, the Bank 
sets a level of 10-year JGB yields as an operating target. The Bank conducts purchases of 
JGBs to achieve the target level. This time, the operating target for 10-year JGBs is set at 
“more  or  less  at  the  current  level  (around  zero  percent)”.  For  other  maturities,  yields  are 
expected to be formed in the markets consistent with the guideline for market operations. In 
other words, the shape and the locations of the yield curve will broadly remain as they are at 
present.  In  addition,  in  order  to  control  the  yield  curve  smoothly,  the  Bank  decided  to 
introduce  new  market  operations  such  as  fixed-rate  JGB  purchase  operations;  that  is,  the 
Bank  purchases  JGBs  at  a  price  it  designates.  The  fixed-rate  purchase  operations  are 
intended to serve to cap long-term rates when necessary. 
Let  me  elaborate  on  the  difference  from  the  existing  policy  framework.  The  guideline  for 
purchases  of  JGBs  has  been  specified  so  far  by  the  amount  of  increase  in  the  amount 
outstanding of JGBs held by the Bank. This approach has been widely adopted not only by 
the Bank but other central banks in advanced economies, including the Federal Reserve in 
the United States, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of England, in part because it is 
clear how the purchases are conducted. Under this approach, however, the impact of a unit 
amount  of  JGBs  purchases  on  long-term  yields  varies  depending  on  developments  in 
economic activity and prices as well as financial market conditions. Therefore, the purchases 
could push down yields either insufficiently or excessively, in comparison with an appropriate 
yield curve. 
Under “yield curve control,” purchases of JGBs are conducted to achieve the target level of 
interest  rates  specified  by  the  guideline  for  market  operations  at  the  time.  As  the  latest 
guideline  specifies  the  target  interest  rates  broadly  corresponding  to  the  current  level,  the 
Bank will conduct purchases more or less in line with the current pace – an annual pace of 
increase  in  the  amount  outstanding  of  its  JGB  holdings  at  about  80  trillion  yen  –  but  it  is 
anticipated that the pace may fluctuate to some extent, either upward or downward, in order 
to achieve yield curve control. Therefore, a possible change in the amount of purchases has 
no policy implication. 
As I have explained, under “yield curve control,” the Bank will be able to conduct purchases 
of JGBs in a more flexible and effective manner than before. Thus, it will be better prepared 
to address various changes in circumstances, and the sustainability of its policy will also be 
enhanced. 
Inflation-overshooting commitment 
Next, I will explain the inflation-overshooting commitment. Since the introduction of QQE, the 
Bank  has  committed  itself  to  continue  with  monetary  easing,  aiming  to  achieve  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable 
manner. 
This  time,  in  addition  to  this  existing  commitment,  the  Bank  decided  to  commit  itself  to 
expanding the monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all 
items  less  fresh  food)  exceeds  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  and  stays  above  the 
target in a stable manner. 
To  be  clear,  this  is  not  meant  to  raise  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  It  has  been 
actively  debated  within  academia  and  in  central  banking  circles  whether  the  price  stability 
target should be higher than 2 percent in order to address the downtrend in growth potential, 
sometimes referred to as secular stagnation. At present, this topic is being discussed as a 
medium- to long-term issue, rather than an immediate policy response. I am fully aware of 
this discussion. That said, let me make it clear that our inflation-overshooting commitment is 
designed based on the price stability target of 2 percent. 
So, one might ask why the observed CPI needs to “exceed 2 percent.” Achieving the price 
stability target of 2 percent means attaining a situation in which the observed CPI is around 2 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to  raise 
In  order 
percent on average over the business cycle. Thus, it naturally is assumed from the outset 
that there would be phases when the observed CPI stays above 2 percent. 
Even  so,  this  is  an  extremely  strong  commitment,  in  that  it  is  linked  to  the  observed  CPI 
rather  than  the  outlook  for  CPI.  It  is  widely  accepted  that  monetary  policy  should  be 
conducted in a forward-looking manner as it takes some time for monetary policy to have an 
impact  on  economic  activity  and  prices.  In  light  of  this,  a  backward-looking  commitment 
based on the observed CPI is truly exceptional for the central bank. In fact, the Bank was the 
first  in  the  world  to  adopt  this  backward-looking  commitment  based  on  the  observed  CPI 
under quantitative easing (QE) that had lasted five years since 2001. Back then, however, 
the commitment was that the Bank would continue with QE “until the CPI (all items less fresh 
food) registers  stably  a  zero  percent  or  an  increase  year  on  year.”  By  comparing  the  new 
commitment with our previous one, you can understand how powerful the new commitment 
will be, in that it needs to “exceed 2 percent.” As explained earlier, an adaptive mechanism in 
the  formation  of  inflation  expectations  still  plays  a  large  role  in  Japan,  as  the  legacy  of 
prolonged  deflation  prevails. 
inflation  expectations  under  such 
circumstances, the Bank judged it necessary to dare to make a strong commitment based on 
the observed CPI and to demonstrate the Bank’s unwavering determination to achieve the 
price stability target of 2 percent. 
The commitment is to expand the monetary base. Its amount outstanding is currently about 
400 trillion yen, which is already around 80 percent of nominal GDP (Chart 9). Corresponding 
ratios are about 20 percent in both the United States and the euro area. Looking ahead, the 
ratio is calculated to exceed 100 percent in slightly over one year, assuming that the Bank 
will continue with the current pace of increase in the monetary base. 
You  might  be  concerned  about  the  risk  that  such  a  “bold”  commitment  would  create  a 
tightening of monetary policy behind the curve, leading to an acceleration in inflation. Let me 
point  out  a  couple  of  things.  First,  it  is  hardly  effective  just  to  make  a  commitment  that 
everyone  considers  as  “modest.”  QQE  led  to  the  conversion  of  people’s  mindset  and  a 
positive  turnaround  of  economic  activity  and  prices,  because  everyone  thought  it  was 
“unprecedentedly  bold.”  Second,  based  on  our  latest  current  outlook,  the  annual  rate  of 
increase in the CPI is likely to accelerate gradually toward 2 percent. In this scenario, even if 
monetary easing with expansion of the monetary base and low interest rates across the yield 
curve  continues,  it  is  very  unlikely  that  the  inflation  rate  will  significantly  deviate  from  2 
percent  and  never  revert  to  that  level.  Third,  and  lastly,  even  if  inflation  were  to  rapidly 
accelerate for some reason, the Bank can achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in a 
stable  manner  by  influencing  short-term  and  long-term  interest  rates;  that  is,  yield  curve 
control. Of course, this represents a just-in-case scenario, and you can reasonably assume 
that  large-scale  monetary  easing  will  be  in  place  until  the  observed  CPI  stays  above  2 
percent in a stable manner. 
Formation of yield curve and options for additional easing 
These are the main points of the new framework for monetary policy: “QQE with Yield Curve 
Control.” The  Bank  will  pursue monetary  easing  in  a  more forceful manner  under the  new 
framework to achieve the price stability target at the earliest possible time. 
Specifically, in placing yield curve control as the core element of the framework, the Bank will 
facilitate  the  formation  of  the  yield  curve  that  is  deemed  most  appropriate  with  a  view  to 
maintaining  the  momentum  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent, 
responding to developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions. 
As explained earlier, factors such as the impact on the functioning of financial intermediation 
are also taken into consideration. At the same time, however, let me emphasize that policy 
judgment should be based on its impact on Japan’s economy as a whole. The impact on the 
functioning of financial intermediation should be considered to the extent that it would affect 
the entire economy through changes in financial conditions. To put it another way, the Bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  will make policy adjustments, without hesitation, if judged necessary for Japan’s economy as 
a whole. 
With regard to possible options for additional easing, the main policy tool will be further cuts 
in the negative short-term policy interest rate and lowering the target level of the long-term 
interest rate. Expanding asset purchases – the “quality” dimension – also continues to be an 
option. Moreover, if the situation warrants it, acceleration in the expansion of the monetary 
base – the “quantity” dimension – could be an option. In that case, interest rates are likely to 
decline  significantly,  regardless  of  yield  curve  control.  There  can  be  cases  where  such 
powerful monetary easing is needed, depending on developments in economic activity and 
prices as well as financial market conditions. The Bank stands ready to use every possible 
policy tool, if it judges necessary to achieve its objectives. 
Conclusion 
I  have  explained  the  findings  of “Comprehensive  Assessment”  and  the new  framework for 
monetary policy based on the assessment. 
I must say that it took more time than expected to overcome deflation. Now, I am even more 
strongly  convinced  that  we  should  make  sure  that  Japan’s  economy  will  never  return  to 
deflation.  For  these  three  years  since  the  introduction  of  QQE,  the  economy  has  made 
substantial  progress  toward  overcoming  deflation  that  had  lasted  more  than  fifteen  years. 
There is no better opportunity than now to completely get out of deflation. Talking about a 
limit to monetary policy does not help at all. What is important is to confront the issue and 
continue to pursue the best possible solutions. Two major items in our new framework, “yield 
curve  control”  and  the  “inflation-overshooting  commitment,”  have  been  discussed  within 
academia  and  in  other fora. The  Bank  is the first  in  the  world  to  introduce  them  as  actual 
policy tools. 
As I have mentioned on various occasions, there is no limit to monetary policy. “The costs of 
monetary  policy  should  be  minimized  and  the  benefits  be  maximized.”  “In  designing  the 
monetary  policy,  the  Bank  will  relentlessly  pursue  innovations  and  never  hesitate  to 
challenge.” With these in mind, the Bank will continue to make its utmost efforts to achieve 
the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
