  William C Dudley: The national and local economic outlook – an update 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the University of Bridgeport, Bridgeport, Connecticut, 8 April 
2016. 
 Jaison Abel, Jason Bram, Tony Davis, Richard Deitz, Jonathan McCarthy and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing 
these remarks. 
Good morning. I am very pleased to be in Bridgeport and to speak with you today. I would 
like to give a special thanks to the University of Bridgeport for their part in making this event 
possible. 
My  visit  today  is  part  of  our  ongoing  efforts  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  to 
better understand the regional economy. We plan trips like this so that we can meet with a 
diverse  array  of  stakeholders  in  the  region  to  gain  insights  and  perspectives  on  the  local 
economy.  These  trips  also  allow  us  to  hear  from  Main  Street  about  the  major  issues  and 
concerns affecting people and businesses in the area. Fairfield County is our first destination 
in 2016, and this is the second time we have visited the area in the past three years. 
I am looking forward to meeting with a number of different groups today. After starting our 
day  here  at  the  University  of  Bridgeport,  we  will  meet  with  an  organization  called  The 
WorkPlace to hear about some of the nationally-recognized programs they have successfully 
developed  to  help  the  long-term  unemployed  find  jobs.  Long-term  unemployment  is  a 
significant problem in the broader economy, and something that I will discuss in more detail 
later in my remarks. Next, we will take a tour of the American Job Center, an organization 
that provides workforce assistance to job seekers in conjunction with local businesses. Later 
we  will  attend,  a  roundtable  lunch  with  members  of  the  Bridgeport  Regional  Business 
Community. And, finally, we will meet with leadership from the Housing Development Fund, 
New Horizons and NeighborWorks America to hear about the state of affordable housing and 
community development in Fairfield County. 
These trips are valuable to us, and represent one of the many ways in which the New York 
Fed engages with people and businesses in our region. Another one of our efforts in this vein 
is our Small Business Credit Survey – the latest version of which was released last month. 
This  survey  –  which  includes  responses  from  across  26  states  –  helps  us  understand  the 
challenges  facing  small  businesses  in  the  region,  focusing  on  financing  needs  and 
impediments  to  obtaining  credit.  We  partnered  with  multiple  organizations  throughout 
Connecticut  to  produce  this  survey  –  some  of  which  are  right  here  in  Bridgeport  –  and 
received responses from nearly 200 small business owners from around the state. I’d like to 
personally thank those who participated in the survey. 
The  remainder  of  my  remarks  will  focus  on  recent  developments  in  the  national  and  local 
economy. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own  views and not necessarily 
those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.  
U.S. economic outlook 
Despite  the  swings  we  have  seen  in  financial  markets  over  the  past  few  months  and  the 
recent  divergences  across  different  economic  and  financial  market  indicators,  recent 
developments  have  not  led  me  to  make  a fundamental  change  in  my  outlook for  the  U.S. 
economy. I continue to expect that the economy will expand over the course of this year at a 
pace slightly above its long-term trend – sufficient to push the unemployment rate down a bit 
further  and  to  more  fully  utilize  the  nation’s  labor  resources.  On  inflation,  although  recent 
data have been somewhat firmer, it still appears that inflation for this year will fall short of our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  2  percent  objective  for  the  personal  consumption  expenditure  (PCE)  deflator.  However,  I 
anticipate an eventual return to our objective as the transitory factors that have held down 
inflation dissipate over time. 
In  assessing  the  current  state  of  the  U.S.  economy,  recent  news  has  generated  divergent 
signals.  Several  sectors  have  been  showing  signs  of  softness.  Real  consumer  spending 
growth appears to have moderated somewhat from the relatively robust pace of the second 
half of 2015. Both new and existing home sales have flattened since the middle of last year. 
Finally,  indicators  of  real  business  investment  spending  point  to  continued  softness.  In 
contrast,  manufacturing  production  –  which  had  been  a  particular  weak  spot  of  the  U.S. 
economy in 2015 – rose in the first two months of this year. Recent survey data, including 
our own Empire State Manufacturing Survey, indicate further improvement in conditions for 
the manufacturing sector in March. 
Through it all, the U.S. labor market has remained healthy. Payroll employment increased an 
average  of  about  229,000  per  month  over  the  course  of  2015,  and  the  gains  in  the  first 
quarter of this year were nearly as high. Even though the unemployment rate ticked up in 
March to 5 percent, the amount of slack in the labor market still appears to be diminishing. 
Both the share of the population that is employed and the labor force participation rate have 
risen a bit over the past several months, with the employment-to-population ratio now at its 
highest level since the end of the recession. However, measures of aggregate wage growth 
have remained quite subdued, which suggests there is still some slack in the labor market. 
An important question is how to reconcile these cross-currents. I continue to anticipate that 
consumption and housing activity  will expand at a moderate pace this year. Continued job 
and  wage  gains,  combined  with  still-low  energy  prices,  should  sustain  real  disposable 
income  growth  and  support  consumer  spending.  The  housing  market  should  remain  on  a 
solid  trajectory,  supported  by  rising  employment  and  low  mortgage  rates.  In  contrast  to 
previous years, fiscal policy should also provide a moderate stimulus this year. I believe that 
these positive factors will be sufficient to offset weakness in other areas, such as net exports 
and fixed business investment that will continue to be adversely impacted by the still-strong 
dollar, weak foreign growth, and low energy and commodity prices. 
Putting this all together, I expect real GDP growth of about 2 percent in 2016, slightly below 
the average pace of growth in this expansion, but a bit above my estimate of the potential 
growth of the U.S. economy. If this materializes, then we should see some further reduction 
in  the  unemployment  rate  to  around  4¾  percent  –  my  estimate  of  the  rate  that  I  view  as 
consistent with stable inflation over the long term. 
Turning to the outlook for inflation, on a year-over-year basis, both headline and core inflation 
have recently risen above the low levels that prevailed through most of 2015. Nevertheless, 
inflation still remains below the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent objective. As the FOMC noted in 
its March statement, this continued low inflation is partly due to declines in energy prices and 
non-energy  import  prices.  Although  energy  prices  have  stopped  falling  and  the  dollar  has 
stopped  appreciating,  earlier  movements  in  these  factors  still  appear  to  be  weighing  on 
inflation. 
A concern with this long period of low inflation is that it has the potential to reduce inflation 
expectations,  which,  in  turn,  would  tend  to  continue  to  hold  down  inflation.  As  past 
experience  shows,  it  is  difficult  to  push  inflation  back  up  to  the  central  bank’s  objective  if 
inflation expectations fall meaningfully below that objective. Japan’s experience is cautionary 
in this regard. 
Recent evidence on inflation expectations suggests some firming, but there is still cause for 
concern.  Although  both measures  of  longer-term  inflation  compensation  based  on  nominal 
and  inflation-indexed  Treasury  securities  as  well  as  some  survey  measures  of  inflation 
expectations have risen modestly since mid-February, the levels of many of these measures 
remain quite low. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Now, as I have noted, the low level of market-based inflation compensation probably reflects 
factors  besides  inflation  expectations,  in  particular  lower  term  premiums.  Still,  it  would  be 
prudent  to  consider  the  possibility  that  longer-term  inflation  expectations  of  market 
participants may have declined somewhat. Even after a rise in its most recent reading, the 
median of the three-year inflation expectations from the New York Fed’s Survey of Consumer 
Expectations  remains  near  its  lowest  reading  over  its  short  history.  Renewed  declines  in 
survey measures would be worrisome. However, at this point, my conclusion is that inflation 
expectations have not become unanchored. 
In sum, I anticipate that the combination of decreasing resource slack and anchored longer-
term  inflation  expectations  will  help  push  inflation  up  to  our  2  percent  objective  over  the 
medium  term.  The  recent  rise  in  inflation  and  in  measures  of  inflation  expectations  have 
increased  my  confidence  around  this  outlook  compared  to  earlier  in  the  year,  but  it  is  still 
possible that the return of inflation to our objective could take longer than I anticipate. 
The forecast that I have just described is my best assessment of how the U.S. economy will 
evolve this year. As always, there is uncertainty and risk relative to this forecast, which also 
needs to be taken into consideration in assessing the implications of the outlook for monetary 
policy. I see the uncertainties around my forecast to be somewhat greater than usual. This 
assessment  reflects  the  divergent  economic  signals  I  highlighted  earlier.  In  addition,  the 
factors  behind  the  financial  turbulence  we  saw  earlier  this  year  do  not  yet  appear  to  be 
resolved fully. 
Although  the  downside  risks  have  diminished  since  earlier  in  the  year,  I  still  judge  the 
balance of risks to my inflation and growth outlooks to be tilted slightly to the downside. The 
low  levels  of  energy  and  commodity  prices  may  signal  more  persistent  disinflationary 
pressures than I currently anticipate, while renewed tightening of financial market conditions 
could  have  a  greater  negative  impact  on  the  U.S.  economy.  Also,  there  is  significant 
uncertainty  about  economic  growth  prospects  abroad  and  how  this  will  affect  the  U.S. 
economic outlook. I continue to monitor global economic and financial market developments 
closely to assess their implications for the outlook. 
Given  my  outlook  and  risk  assessment,  I  judge  that  a  cautious  and  gradual  approach  to 
policy normalization is appropriate. Moreover, caution is also called for because of our limited 
ability  to  reduce  the  policy  rate  to  respond  to  adverse  developments,  recognizing  that  we 
could  also  use  forward  guidance  and  balance  sheet  policies  to  provide  additional 
accommodation if that proved warranted. Of course, the trajectory of short-term interest rates 
and  the  timing  of  future  monetary  policy  adjustments  will  continue  to  be  informed  by  the 
incoming data – both economic and financial – and how that data influences the outlook. 
The problem of long-term unemployment 
Before  turning  to  the  outlook  for  the  local  economy,  I  would  like  to  spend  a  few  minutes 
talking  about  the  problem  of  long-term  unemployment.  The  Great  Recession  was  very 
severe, resulting in a large decline in output and damage to the labor market. From peak to 
trough, non-farm payroll employment declined by 8.7 million. The unemployment rate peaked 
at  10  percent.  At  the  same  time,  the  average  duration  of  unemployment  increased 
significantly. The number of individuals classified as long-term unemployed – that is, those 
who were unemployed for at least 27 weeks – peaked in December 2010 at 6.4 million, an 
increase  of  5.3  million  from  the  cyclical  low  in  May  2007.  Long-term  unemployment  as  a 
fraction of total unemployment increased from 16.7 percent to 44.8 percent. The hardships of 
prolonged unemployment touched many families around the country and this is tragic. 
The  very  accommodative  monetary  policy  that  we  implemented  in  response  was  aimed  at 
helping to heal the labor market and promote price stability. Slowly, the economy began to 
respond and to recover. In October 2014, the FOMC announced the end of its latest asset 
purchase program citing that “there has been substantial improvement in the outlook for the 
labor market since the inception of its current asset purchase program.” In March 2015, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  FOMC set out conditions for the decision to begin to normalize monetary policy, stating “The 
Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds 
rate when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident 
that  inflation  will  move  back  to  its  2  percent  objective  over  the  medium  term.”  The  FOMC 
judged at its December 2015 meeting that those conditions had been met. 
The improvement that we have seen in the labor market is very welcome. It took until May 
2014  for  the  labor  market  to  recover  the  jobs  lost  in  the  recession,  but  now  there  are 
5.3 million  jobs  beyond  the  prior  cyclical  peak.  The  unemployment  rate  has  declined  to 
5.0 percent. With this improvement, the number of long-term unemployed has been reduced 
to 2.2 million. Despite these gains, it is important to emphasize that more needs to be done 
to improve the labor market. The current number of long-term unemployed is still higher than 
the prior cyclical peak in June 2003, and is more than a million above the prior cyclical low in 
October 2006. 
Further  progress  on  transitioning  these  unemployed  workers  back  into  jobs  requires 
sustained effort on many fronts. Essential to this effort are programs such as the Platform to 
Employment developed by The WorkPlace. I am looking forward to my visit there later today 
to hear more about this program. The Platform to Employment program has been replicated 
in nearly 20 communities across the country from Newark to San Diego. Helping the long-
term unemployed regain employment needs to be a priority for all of us. 
The ongoing challenge in reducing the number of long-term unemployed is also a reminder 
of  the  importance  of  financial  stability  and  sustainable  economic  growth.  Recessions  can 
quickly undo years’ worth of hard-earned progress in the labor market. Making the financial 
system and the economy more resilient so we can avoid such deep downturns in the future is 
a responsibility that I take very seriously. 
Local economic outlook 
Turning now to the region, while Fairfield County’s economy has recovered from the Great 
Recession,  its  job  growth  has  lagged  behind  both  New  York  City  and  the  nation.  Only 
recently has employment approached its pre-recession levels, and it is still well shy of where 
it  was  back  in  2000.  Other  barometers  of  the  Fairfield  County  economy,  such  as  home 
prices, also indicate a slow recovery from the recession. There are still a sizable number of 
properties that are either in foreclosure or up for foreclosure sale, which has weighed down 
the  local  housing  market.  Yet,  Fairfield  County  has  not  been  the  only  place  in  the  metro 
region to see a sluggish recovery – notably, both northern New Jersey and the Mid-Hudson 
Valley have yet to see employment return to their pre-recession peaks. 
This  picture  is  in  contrast  with  New  York  City’s  economic  performance,  which  has  been 
exceptionally strong throughout this expansion, and has been a driver of growth for the whole 
tri-state  region.  Why  is  New  York  City  seeing  so  much  stronger  job  growth  than  Fairfield 
County? After all, it wasn’t so long ago that Stamford was attracting finance-sector jobs away 
from Manhattan. The answer lies in a mix of cyclical and secular trends. On the cyclical side, 
while  finance  employment  has  been  sluggish  in  both  New  York  City  and  Fairfield  County, 
New  York  City  is  benefiting  from  strong  employment  gains  in  technology,  construction, 
retailing and advertising – sectors that are not contributing to the same degree in Fairfield 
County. In addition, Stamford has had to deal with the relocations of UBS and RBS, while 
Fairfield faces the prospective relocation of GE. 
One potential long-term trend that is likely affecting the region is a renewed urbanization: that 
is,  a  gradual  but  broad-based  shift  of  preferences  to  urban  living,  especially  for  younger 
generations.  Throughout  the  second  half  of  the  20th  century,  we  saw  a  steady  and 
widespread migration from cities to suburbs. More recently, this suburbanization trend seems 
to  have  halted;  and  there  are  signs  that  cities,  especially  major  cities,  have  been  gaining 
relative  to  their suburbs.  It’s too  early  to  say  if this  is  the  start  of  a  secular  trend,  and the 
implications  for  Fairfield  County  are  unclear.  However,  Stamford  and  Bridgeport  stand  to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  benefit  from  a  shift  in  preferences  toward  more  urban  living,  given  their  high  population 
densities and strong transit links to New York City. 
Even  now,  while  Fairfield  County  may  have  lagged  in  job  growth,  population  growth  has 
remained quite sturdy – not only across the county, but here in Bridgeport as well. In fact, 
Bridgeport’s  population  has  grown  by  about  6  percent  since  2000  –  its  first  sustained 
increase since the 1940s  – while Stamford’s has grown by almost 10 percent. 
Fairfield  County  can  leverage  its  proximity  to  the  New  York  City  job  market.  While  most 
residents  of  Fairfield  County  rely  on  job  opportunities  locally,  many  residents  commute  to 
jobs in Manhattan. So the strength in New York City’s economy should be of significant help 
to Fairfield County. Over the past year, New York City’s economy has, on average, added 
more  than  twice  as  many  jobs  each  month  as  the  total  expected  job  losses  from  the 
relocations of GE, UBS and RBS. While a majority of these jobs may not have been in high-
paying-industry sectors, some of them were – especially in technology-related industries. So, 
as  long  as  New  York  City  keeps  adding  jobs  at  such  a  brisk  pace,  Fairfield  County  will 
benefit. In addition, research indicates that a strong central city is critical for the well-being of 
its  suburbs,  meaning  that  a  healthy  and  growing  New  York  City  economy  is  critically 
important to Fairfield County. 
What else can the region do to foster economic growth going forward? It certainly helps for 
cities  like  Bridgeport  and  Stamford  to  be  attractive  locations  for  businesses  to  locate  and 
grow. It is also important to focus on quality of life issues that make people want to live here 
–  like  good  schools  and  low  crime,  and  also  amenities  ranging  from  nice  parks  to  good 
restaurants.  Bridgeport  has  clearly  been  making  progress  in  this  regard,  both  along  the 
waterfront  at  Steelpointe  Harbor  and  along  Main  Street.  With  New  York  City’s  large  and 
booming  economy  nearby,  and  Metro  North  providing  a  convenient  mass  transit  link, 
anything that makes people more inclined to live here – and perhaps even set up shop here 
– is bound to boost the local economy. And finally, one of the most important ingredients for 
a healthy urban economy is a well-trained and motivated work force. It cannot be overstated 
how  important  it  is  to  help  provide  residents  with  the  skills  and  tools  they  need  to  be 
productive and successful, so that they can realize their full potential. 
College graduates finding good jobs 
I would like to close with a message for the students in attendance today, especially those of 
you who will be graduating soon. If you started college four or five years ago, you may have 
heard  about  the  difficult  time  that  graduates  have  had  finding  good  jobs,  perhaps  even 
making  you  wonder  about  the  value  of  obtaining  a  college  degree.  Indeed,  in  the  years 
following the Great Recession, unemployment and underemployment among recent college 
graduates reached highs not seen in decades. So, it wouldn’t be surprising if many of you 
are concerned about your ability to find a good job after graduation. 
I  want  to  make  two  points  that  should  temper  these  concerns.  First,  it  is  not  unusual  for 
college graduates to take some time to find the right job when they transition from school to 
the  working  world.  In  good  economic  times,  as  well  as  in  bad  times,  there  is  often  an 
adjustment period as newly-minted graduates search for a job that best fits their skills and 
interests. Second, as the job market has continued to strengthen through the expansion, it 
has gotten easier for those graduating from college to find a good job.1  
While  job  opportunities  for  those  with  a  college  degree  were  flat  between  2011  and  early 
2014,  demand  for  college  graduates  has  been  on  the  rise  for  about  two  years  now.  As  a 
                                                
1  We  have  been  tracking  these  developments  using  data  our  economists  have  developed  to  help  us  better 
understand the job prospects facing recent college graduates. These data are available on our website and 
are updated regularly. See The Labor Market for Recent College Graduates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  result,  for  the  first  time  during  this  recovery,  both  unemployment  and  underemployment 
among recent college graduates has generally been falling. This means that, not only has it 
become easier to find a job upon graduation, but more college graduates are taking jobs that 
better  utilize  their  degrees.  In  addition,  starting  salaries  for  recent  college  graduates  have 
been increasing for the past couple of years, reflecting the growing demand for their skills in 
a tighter job market. 
To conclude, while there are economic challenges facing both the nation and the region, I am 
optimistic  that  we  will  continue  to  make  progress  on  both  fronts  over  the  next  few  years. 
Achieving our dual mandate of maximum sustainable employment and price stability will help 
those who will graduate soon to achieve their own aspirations. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take some questions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
