   Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Audit as a partner of change 
Remarks  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara Malaysia), at the 5th PETRONAS Board Audit Committee (BAC) Forum “Audit as a 
partner of change”, Kuala Lumpur, 16 August 2016. 
 The theme of today’s forum “Audit as a Partner of Change” is highly relevant and timely, as 
the  events  in  the  global  market  today,  involving  failures  of  large  firms,  frauds  and  market 
manipulation  activities,  underscores  the  criticality  of  the  three  lines  of  defenses  in 
organizations. For confidence and trust to be restored in the marketplace, the role of the BAC 
and internal auditors as the third line of defense will be even more critical than ever. 
Our role as members of audit committees is much broader than what we may perceive it to be. 
Organisations such as PETRONAS are widely regarded as amongst the few key flag bearers 
for the country. Hence, it is incumbent upon the Board and the BAC members to be strong and 
energetic  in  upholding  the  highest  standards  of  professionalism,  ethics  and  integrity  in 
discharging their roles and responsibilities. The people of Malaysia must have confidence and 
pride that an institution entrusted with much strategic natural resources are run with utmost 
integrity and professionalism. 
Before I proceed further on the topic for today, allow me to touch briefly on the current outlook 
on the global and domestic economy. The global economy has experienced multiple shocks 
in recent years, with its effects reverberating across the globe. Global growth has continuously 
underperformed expectations and is expected to remain moderate going forward. 
The  divergence  in  monetary  policy  in  advanced  and  emerging  economies  as  well  as  the 
unexpected  policy  adjustments  in  several  economies  have  also  culminated  in  a  global 
environment  of  heightened  volatility  and  uncertainties.  One  of  the  most  significant 
developments we have experienced thus far is the sharp volatility in commodity prices which 
has created destabilising implications on commodity-driven countries. Amid a confluence of 
shocks, ranging from weaker-than-expected growth prospects to geopolitical uncertainty and 
moderation in China’s economic growth, oil prices declined by more than 50% in a span of 
6 months  in  2014.  The  volatility  in  oil  prices  has  also  been  heightened  by  unanticipated 
economic and geo-political developments. The events unfolding in the United Kingdom and 
consequent effect to the European region have also contributed to the increased volatility in 
oil prices. Oil prices rallied to above USD50 per barrel from an average of USD33 per barrel in 
the first quarter of the year, and today, oil prices have settled back to around USD48 per barrel. 
The oil price is likely to remain volatile over the next few years due to oversupply and record-
high oil inventories against slow demand especially in China. LNG prices are also expected to 
remain  low  for  a  protracted  period  of  time.  LNG  capacity  start-ups  in  Australia  and  North 
America which will boost new LNG supplies amidst stagnating demand will put more pressure 
on LNG prices, hence further disrupting the LNG market. Due to low oil and LNG prices, the 
profitability of oil majors and National Oil Companies (NOCs) has been severely eroded. The 
impact  has  been  pronounced.  More  than  300,000  oil  and  gas  workers  have  been  laid  off 
globally  since  mid-2014;  some  USD  380  billion  of  global  oil  and  gas  projects  have  been 
deferred or cancelled; and more than USD 150 billion worth of assets have been planned for 
disposal or divestment. 
Given Malaysia’s openness and high financial and trade integration with the rest of the world, 
the Malaysian economy is not isolated from these developments. On the external front, lower 
global demand continues to weigh down on Malaysia’s export performance. 
Investment activities especially in the upstream oil and gas sector, contracted for the first time 
since the global financial crisis in 2015, after expanding by an average of 16% from 2010 to 
2014.  However,  investment  activity  in  the  manufacturing  and  services  sectors  remained 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   resilient, and is expected to underpin investment growth moving forward. Private consumption 
remained relatively resilient and anchored domestic growth, especially during the first half of 
the  year,  driven  by  sustained  income  and  employment  levels.  Going  forward,  domestic 
demand is expected to remain a key driver of economic growth in Malaysia. We should expect 
Malaysian economic growth to range between 4.0 to 4.5 % for 2016. 
Amid the changes in the financial landscape, there have been equally significant developments 
in  the  auditing  standards  both  globally  and  locally.  The  standards  and  regulations  are 
becoming increasingly tighter and more stringent. The Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) for 
example, has proposed several changes to the Internal Audit Standards, which are expected 
to take effect in January 2017. The changes to the Standards are aimed at reinforcing the 
fundamental principles of internal auditing practices, promoting a broad range of value-added 
internal  auditing  and  fostering  improved  organisational  processes  and  operations.  The 
direction of changes in the financial reporting standards also places more accountability on the 
Audit  Committees  to  provide  strong  oversight  on  the  organisation’s  financial  reporting  and 
internal controls. The new Companies Bill 2015 (the Bill) was passed by the Dewan Rakyat 
and is anticipated to come into force by end-2016. The new law is expected to bring major 
reforms to our corporate landscape and will place greater pressures on the audit function to 
understand the emerging regulatory requirements and their impact on business operations. 
In  the  wake  of  uncertainties  due  to  the  global  developments,  the  change  in  regulatory 
standards and technological advancement require businesses and regulators to think beyond 
conventional norms in order to navigate through these unchartered waters. 
Turning  to  the  theme  today,  the  importance  of  an  independent  and  effective  internal  audit 
function  as  a  core  line  of  defense  with  a  strong  Audit  Committee  in  business  cannot  be 
overemphasized. 
The fundamentals of an internal audit function involve identifying risks that could threaten the 
viability  of  the  company  and  keep  it  from  achieving  its  goals,  ensuring  management  fully 
understands  these  risks,  and  proactively  recommending  improvements  to  minimise  these 
risks. Internal auditors are essentially the eyes and ears of the Audit Committee and the overall 
Board. The failure of audit functions can result in devastating consequences as seen in recent 
times. 
The  case  of  the  British  Petroleum  (BP)  oil  rig  explosion  in  2010  is  one  that  reinforces  the 
important role of the internal audit function. Occupational safety is widely regarded as a critical 
success factor for a company that undertakes oil exploration. The BP oil rig was awarded as 
the industry model for safety in 2009. However, in 2010, the oil rig exploded in the Gulf of 
Mexico,  causing  one  of  the  worst  man-made  disasters  in  history.  The  U.S  investigation 
commission attributed the disaster to the “failure of individuals involved to identify risks they 
faced and to properly evaluate, communicate and address them”. This indirectly highlighted 
the shortcomings of the internal audit function as a contributory source of failure in the lines of 
defence in the company. Some level of scepticism to consider the remote possibility that the 
safety measures in place may not work in the event of disaster, could have avoided the risk 
event from occurring. 
Another example is the LIBOR manipulation scandal involving several banks which culminated 
in substantial fines imposed by the UK Financial Services Authority (FSA). In its internal audit 
report  published  in  March  2013,  the  FSA  highlighted  several  issues  pertaining  to  the 
breakdown of the internal audit function, which led to the manipulation of the rates. Despite the 
Group internal audit functions carrying out their routine audits in this area, deficiencies in the 
banks’ systems, controls and policies were not adequately highlighted. 
The lessons learnt from the above cases and others clearly reinforce the key roles played by 
both the  internal  audit function  and  the  Audit  Committee.  My  view  is  that the  strength  and 
effectiveness of the internal audit function will influence the risk and compliance culture in an 
organisation.  The  function  has  to  continually  be  refreshed  such  that  it  remains  robust  and 
effective. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Clearly,  the  job  is  now  more  difficult  and  challenging  than  ever,  given  the  increased 
expectations  by  stakeholders  and  heightened  scrutiny  when  things  go  wrong,  as  well  as 
increasing obligations under the statute that place additional fiduciary responsibilities on audit 
committee  members.  I  would  like  to  share  my  thoughts  on  four  matters  where  efforts  are 
necessary to raise the bar on audit standards and audit quality. 
Firstly,  the  audit  coverage  and  scope  should  not  be  confined  to  compliance  or  risk-based 
parameters. The audit scope should be holistic, encompassing new risk areas and tail risk 
events that originate from the evolving operating environment and financial landscape. The 
process of ascertaining the audit scope must be robust, such that audits focus on higher risk 
areas  as  the  company  grows  and  evolves  in  its  products  and  processes.  Internal  auditors 
should be constantly challenged to think beyond the scope of the audit framework and focus 
on the broader picture. The so-called ability to ‘connect the dots’ about the implications of the 
audit  findings  across  the  organisation  is  an  important  starting  point  to  identify  new  and 
emerging risks. 
Secondly, internal audit should move beyond compliance to strategic auditing and to provide 
value-added recommendations for the betterment of the organisation. My view is that before 
an organisation seeks to venture into new or higher risk areas of growth, it is imperative for the 
board and senior management to seek assurance from the internal audit function so that the 
risk  and  control  frameworks  are  rigorous  in  identifying  gaps  in  the  system.  The  Audit 
Committee should identify opportunities where the internal audit function is able to add value, 
through  consultation  and  advice  on  business  process  improvements.  The  input  from  the 
internal  audit  function  would  also  be  helpful  to  craft  initiatives  to  embed  good  behavioural 
norms, ethical and responsible culture within the organisation. 
Thirdly, the internal audit function must be supported by a strong quality assurance process. 
This requires internal auditors to be equipped with the requisite skills such that they are able 
to leverage on their expertise and experience to make sound judgement and challenge the 
norm. This becomes even more important as companies grow in scale, venture into new lines 
of business and become more complex. Further, the internal audit function should leverage on 
technology as a key enabler to improve audit quality and audit effectiveness. Innovation in 
audit techniques should be promoted with greater usage of data analytic tools for better risk 
profiling and sampling. 
There ought to be close engagement between the internal audit function and external auditors 
on key risks and systemic issues, and in strengthening the overall assurance process. 
Fourth, the role of the Audit Committee is integral in these efforts. The Audit Committee at the 
apex needs to exercise strong oversight through setting the “tone from the top” and embedding 
the  right  culture  to  ensure  that  the  internal  audit  function  is  independent  and  objective  in 
delivering  its mandates.  One  message  of  ‘tone from the top’  is  a  reminder  to  all  Heads of 
Internal Audit that any findings that might indicate unethical or fraudulent activities or have 
reputational impact to PETRONAS should be communicated to the BAC immediately without 
waiting for the BAC to meet. There should be ‘zero tolerance’ for any cases that involve abuses 
and corrupt practices. 
Another important imperative is the Committee’s responsibility to design governance structures 
that avoid placing the internal audit function in conflicted positions, and ensure that the function 
has sufficient standing and authority within the organisation. This will help to strengthen the 
ability of the internal audit function to independently audit and raise red flags where risks are 
observed. Direct accessibility to the Audit Committee is key in this respect. 
Concluding remarks 
As  the  world  becomes more  interconnected,  an  effective  organisation  will  see  its  business 
managers and control functions partnering with the auditors, leveraging on their skills to build 
more effective operations, and strengthen business prospects. Audit as a partner of change 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   lies  on  the  ability  of  the  organisation  to  adapt  and  collaborate  with  the  auditors  towards 
securing the organisation’s long term success. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
