  Daniel Mminele: International financial market developments – some 
implications for South Africa 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
International  Mbali  Conference,  hosted  by  the  University  of  Zululand,  Richards  Bay, 
KwaZulu-Natal, 6 July 2016. 
 Introduction 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
I  would  like  to  start  by  thanking  our  host,  the  University  of  Zululand,  for  affording  me  the 
opportunity  to  address  you  today.  It  is  an  honour  to  speak  at  this  inaugural  international 
conference of the University of Zululand. 
It has been a rather tumultuous year in international financial markets thus far, so I thought it 
appropriate to focus my remarks today on a few key global financial market developments 
and their impact on the domestic markets and monetary policy. 
International financial market developments 
According  to  the  American  novelist  Phillip  Roth,  ‘fear  tends  to  manifest  itself  much  more 
quickly than greed, so volatile markets tend to be on the downside’.1 Now while this comment 
falls  into  the  broader  theme  of  the  influence  of  human  nature  on  market  behaviour,  it 
nevertheless is an interesting thought. Few will disagree that excessive volatility in financial 
markets  is  undesirable  since  it  is  synonymous  with  unpredictability  and  uncertainty,  which 
normally leads to increased speculative activity and/or a flight towards safety. This, in turn, 
through a higher risk premium, can increase the costs of access to capital, stifling growth and 
development,  particularly  in  emerging-market  economies.  Furthermore,  history  reminds  us 
that bear markets are generally more disorderly than bull markets. 
Unfortunately,  increased  financial  market  volatility  appears  to  have  become  entrenched  in 
the  post-global  financial  crisis  era,  with  little  sign  of  it  dissipating  in  the  immediate  future. 
Even in the present context of elevated financial market volatility, there are a few episodes 
that  stand  out:  the  2010–11  European  sovereign  debt  crisis;  the  mid-2015  ‘Grexit’ 
negotiations and Greek referendum; the rapid fall in the Chinese stock market in 2015–16; 
and now, more recently, the British in/out referendum, commonly referred to as the ‘Brexit’. 
Given  how  momentous  the  outcome  of  this  referendum  was,  I  would  like  to  spend  a  few 
minutes on this particular topic. The vote in favour of a Brexit, essentially the British people 
electing that the UK no longer be a member of the European Union, led to a great deal of 
financial  market  volatility,  both  in  the run-up to the  referendum  and  indeed  right  up  to this 
point  in  time.  The  UK  voted  to  leave  the  EU  by  52  per  cent,  with  a  voter  turnout  of 
approximately 72 per cent, in what was an unexpected result for many. On the day of the 
announcement, the Chicago Board’s measure of market volatility (known as the VIX) jumped 
by 49 per cent from the previous day, the fear of the unknown aptly accounting for the spike 
in volatility. 
The UK’s present and future are now riddled  with uncertainty, naturally accompanied by a 
flight  to  safety.  As  risk  aversion  soared,  safe-haven  assets  were  in  high  demand,  and  as 
such  the  price  of  gold  breached  the  US$1300  mark  for  the  first  time  since  January  2015 
while the US 10-year Treasury yield fell 19 basis points and the German 10-year bond yield 
                                                
1   www.thefinancialphilosopher.com. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  fell  to  a  record  low  of  –0,05  per  cent.  The  relative  safety  of  the  Japanese  yen  saw  the 
currency gain 11 per cent against the sterling, which in turn fell to a 30-year low the following 
day  against  the  dollar.  The  market  reaction  was  significant,  described  by  some  market 
participants as ‘panic buying and selling’, given the widespread expectations that the British 
would  vote  in  favour  of  remaining  within  the  EU.  As  markets  slowly  digested  the  news, 
however,  some  of  these  market  movements  were  pared  back,  with  no  sustained  market 
disruptions  being  reported.  The  decline  in  bond  yields  and  demand  for  safe-haven  assets 
also points to fears of the potential impact that the Brexit may have on an already weak and 
fragile global economy. Some of the main concerns relate to the potential ripple effects on 
the rest of Europe and global trade flows. 
The consequences of this vote will only become clear over time, and it is anticipated that it 
will take about two years for the UK to finalise arrangements to leave the EU, during which 
period  various  decisions  and  negotiations  on  the  way  forward  will  take  place,  raising  the 
possibility of yet another prolonged period of global volatility. In the meantime, market fears 
are being fuelled by concerns of contagion in the EU, the probability of Scotland and perhaps 
also  Northern  Ireland  leaving  the  UK  as  well,  and  the  uncertainty  surrounding  trade 
agreements that would follow from the negotiations. 
For  South  Africa,  the  implications  through  direct  trade  links  are  expected  to  be  relatively 
minimal.  In  2015,  the  UK  accounted  for  only  4  per  cent  of  our  total  merchandise  exports. 
Indirectly, South Africa is likely to be negatively affected by heightened market volatility and 
the impact of the Brexit on the EU and the global economy. The financial linkages between 
South Africa and the UK are somewhat large, if one considers that, at the end of 2014, South 
Africa’s  liabilities  to  the  UK  amounted  to  46,5  per  cent  of  domestic  GDP  while  assets 
amounted  to  33,2  per  cent  of  GDP.  In  addition,  both  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  and 
portfolio flows are also significant.2 This means that South Africa could very well be affected 
by  the  realization  of  tail  risks  emanating  from  asset  liquidation  by  UK  corporates  and 
investment funds. However, as time progresses and the respective parties provide clarity on 
the process, the storm is likely to calm. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  importance  of  other  international  financial  market  developments. 
Given  globalisation  and  increased  financial  integration,  global  financial  markets  have  a 
significant  impact  on  South  Africa.  This  integration  means  that  when  one  major  market 
sneezes,  the  rest  of  the  globe’s  markets  catch  a  cold.  Thirty  years  ago,  the  threat  of  an 
incident  like  the  Greek  government  default  was  unlikely  to  have  a  substantial  impact  on 
global markets, but today this conjecture is vastly different. 
Thus  far,  it  has  been  a  mixed  year  for  equity  markets,  with  region-specific  idiosyncrasies 
having a dominant effect on outcomes. That being said, the Brexit result has introduced such 
short-term  volatility  that  the  facts  I  am  about  to  mention  may  already  be  outdated. 
Nevertheless,  US  equity  indices  are  up  around  3  per  cent  for  the  year  to  date  as  the 
economy shook off growth concerns in the beginning of the year and continues its gradual 
recovery.  In  Europe  and  Asia,  however,  outcomes  have  been  less  positive.  The  large 
correction that took place in Chinese markets has dragged down other indices in the region, 
including those of Japan. Meanwhile in Europe, broad-based weakness has seen equities fall 
by as much as 10 per cent in Germany and 12 per cent across the region on average, even 
with the European Central Bank (or ECB) continuing to provide record liquidity to markets. 
At home, the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (or JSE) has shaken off a very poor start to the 
year and is currently almost 3 per cent in the black for the year thus far. After a poor showing 
by the mining and resource stocks in 2015, these have turned around in 2016 as commodity 
prices have started to come off their lows. Government bond markets have continued to rally, 
                                                
2   Would  ‘Brexit’  matter  for  South  Africa?,  South  African  Reserve  Bank  Economic  Note,  20  June  2016,  Jean 
Francois Mercier and Guy Russell. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  as  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies  remains  largely  accommodative,  with  likely 
further easing in a number of key economies. 
Moving to the policy sphere, it has been an eventful 12 months for monetary policy. Late last 
year, the Federal Reserve raised its policy rate for the first time in almost 10 years. On the 
other hand, the ECB, in an attempt to avert deflation, has expanded its quantitative easing 
programme and, more recently, has even included corporate debt while delving deeper into 
negative  interest  rate  territory.  On  account  of  this,  the  amount  of  government  debt  having 
rates of return below zero has increased to over US$10 trillion – and is still rising. The Bank 
of Japan also introduced negative policy rates for the first time in its history. However, it is 
the  Federal  Reserve  –  which  has  not  moved  its  rate  since  December  –  that  continues  to 
have the greatest impact on global financial markets. 
Many analysts have suggested that the broad recovery in international markets over recent 
months had been driven by a shift in the market assessment of risk. This is premised on the 
view  that  the  likelihood  of  much  higher  US  policy  rates  has  been  pared  back  following 
concerns that the US recovery is perhaps not as robust as initially envisaged and on account 
of  international  developments.  More  recently,  in  light  of  the financial  market  developments 
emanating from the UK referendum, market indicators suggest that the Federal Reserve is 
likely to keep rates constant for at least the next 12 months. 
Commodity market developments during 2016 have been mixed. After reaching a record low 
of  around  US$28  per  barrel  in  January,  Brent  crude  has  undergone  a  remarkable  rally, 
gaining over 80 per cent to just over US$51 since the beginning of the year – this despite 
OPEC  (the  Organization  of  the  Petroleum  Exporting  Countries)  not  agreeing  to  an  output 
cap.  This  rally  comes  notwithstanding  major  producers,  such  as  Nigeria  and  Canada 
suffering production outages. It is notable that when oil prices were falling and were in the 
range  of  US$50–60  per  barrel,  oil  rigs  in  the  US  were  rapidly  taken  offline.  It  will  be 
interesting to see if the oil price will then face resistance as shale production becomes more 
profitable  again  when  oil  prices  reach  these  levels.  The  domestic  price  of  petrol  has 
increased by R1,49 in the past four months as a direct consequence of the rally in the oil 
price alone. 
Meanwhile, after a rapid decrease during 2015, the prices of our major commodity exports 
have recovered somewhat since then. After declining by over 26 per cent last year, platinum 
prices have since recovered by around 15 per cent. The prices of other major exports, such 
as iron ore and coal, have also recovered to a certain extent this year but are by no means 
anywhere  near  the  record  levels  we  witnessed  at the  height  of  the  commodity  supercycle. 
Demand for commodities from China is still expected to gradually decrease over the medium 
term, so the current rally should be considered with that in mind. The rapid decline of capital 
flows into emerging markets, which began in the second half of 2015, was an unwelcome 
development.  It  is  a  natural  consequence  of,  inter  alia,  an  environment  where  emerging 
markets are no longer growing as rapidly as before while their external and fiscal metrics are 
less favourable than a few  years ago – coupled with the uncertainties related to monetary 
policy outcomes in advanced economies. However, the scope and speed of this capital flight 
surprised many, with the Institute for International Finance (IIF) estimating that approximately 
US$21 billion left emerging markets in the past 12 months.3 This represents a rapid reversal 
from the US$175 billion of inflows during the preceding 12-month period. Furthermore, while 
the  extent  of  the  relationship  is  not  easy  to  determine,  inflows  such  as  these  certainly 
contribute  to  the  depreciation  of  emerging-market  currencies.  Fortunately,  the  most  recent 
data illustrate a scenario where inflows to emerging markets have started to pick up again 
over the past few months. However, it remains to be seen how the situation evolves in light 
of Brexit-induced market uncertainty. 
                                                
3  
Institute for International Finance Emerging Market Portfolio Flows Tracker 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Capital  flows  are  particularly  vital  for  South  Africa,  which  has  experienced  a  structurally 
stubborn  current-account  deficit  that  stood  at  5,0  per  cent  of  GDP  at  the  end  of  the  first 
quarter of 2016. While South Africa has been in the fortunate position of attracting sufficient 
capital to finance this deficit, this has mainly entailed portfolio inflows. According to data from 
the  JSE,  non-resident  inflows  to  South  Africa  for  the  year  to  30  June  2016  amounted  to 
R35,7 billion, consisting of R20,4 billion in bond inflows and R15,3 billion in equity inflows. 
Part  of  the  reason  for  the  volatility  in  capital  flows  has  been  linked  to  monetary  policy 
developments in advanced economies which in the main impacts on risk perception. In times 
of heightened risk aversion, money generally flows to reserve currencies such as the dollar 
or euro, causing emerging-market currencies to depreciate. The rand of course has been no 
exception.  Over  the  past  12  months,  the  rand  has  lost  roughly  21  per  cent  against  the 
greenback, 20 per cent against the euro, and a staggering 44 per cent against the Japanese 
yen.  However,  we  cannot  restrict  ourselves  to  comparisons  with  movements  against 
advanced-economy  currencies.  Take,  for  example,  the  JP  Morgan  Emerging  Market 
Currency  Index  (or  EMCI),  which  comprises  most  major  emerging-market  currencies, 
including those of all the BRICS member countries. Between January and October last year, 
the  rand  moved  very  much  in  line  with  this  basket  of  currencies.  During  that  period,  the 
EMCI,  when  removing  the  impact  of the  rand  –  which  has  a  weight  of  8,3  per  cent  in  the 
basket – lost approximately 13 per cent against the US dollar, a loss that was almost exactly 
mirrored by the rand. 
However, since October, the EMCI has lost only 0,5 per cent against the US dollar, whereas 
the rand has shed a further 5 per cent. While all such calculations have their limitations, the 
fact  of  the  matter  is  that  the  rand  has  been  one  of  the  worst-performing  emerging-market 
currencies over the past nine months, despite emerging markets in general facing the same 
external conditions. This illustrates that factors unique to South Africa have had a bearing on 
the  performance  of  the  local  currency.  One  such  factor,  which  has  recently  drawn  much 
attention in media and policy circles, has been South Africa’s credit ratings. 
South Africa’s sovereign credit rating 
South Africa’s sovereign credit rating has been a source of market uncertainty for some time. 
National Treasury, government in general, and the South African Reserve Bank (or SARB) 
have indicated that economic policy will be targeted at addressing the relevant concerns in 
an  effort  to  prevent  a  ratings  downgrade  and  put  South  Africa’s  rating  on  an  upward 
trajectory. 
Without  delving  into  too  much  detail,  in  simple  terms  a  country  whose  debt  is  considered 
non-investment grade has to pay higher interest rates on newly issued debt. The reason is 
simple:  markets  demand  higher  compensation  for  a  perceived  higher  level  of  risk. 
Furthermore, while there are higher yields on non-investment grade debt, some institutional 
investors are constrained by client mandates and are only allowed to have investment-grade 
assets in their portfolios. Hence, a downgrade to sub-investment status would in effect mean 
that  certain  institutional  investors  holding  these  investments  would  have  to  divest  their 
holdings of the affected debt instruments, which is likely to lower their value, further increase 
the  country’s  risk  profile,  and  by  implication  raise  external  financing  costs.  This  can 
eventually adversely impact on the country’s economic fundamentals and growth prospects. 
While the issue of South Africa’s sovereign credit rating has been covered extensively in the 
media, one aspect that has scarcely been discussed is the distinction between foreign and 
local currency ratings. This distinction is important. Put simply, the foreign currency rating is 
an  indication  of  a  country’s  credit  worthiness  when  issuing  foreign  currency-denominated 
debt. So, in addition to measuring the vulnerability of the balance sheet in rand terms, South 
Africa’s foreign currency rating also accounts for our exposure to exchange-rate risk. Bonds 
issued in US dollars, for example, must be repaid using the same currency, which following 
historical trends would imply a higher rand cost at maturity. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  While  foreign  currency  ratings  commonly  make  the  headlines,  in  many  ways  the  local 
currency  rating  is  of  greater  significance  for  South  Africa.  South  Africa  does  not  have  a 
significant foreign currency-denominated debt burden. At the time of the last budget review, 
National Treasury estimated that foreign currency public debt as a percentage of gross debt 
was only 11,3 per cent for the previous fiscal year.4 Furthermore, this figure is expected to 
stabilise at around 10 per cent over the next few years. So while a downgrade in our foreign 
currency rating would increase the cost of our access to foreign currency debt markets and 
would be seen as a serious setback, the impact of losing the local currency investment grade 
would  be  far  worse.  This,  in  effect,  would  make  our  domestic  currency-denominated  debt 
less attractive and hence more expensive. Fortunately, South Africa’s local currency rating is 
at least two notches above investment grade by each of the major ratings agencies. 
During May and June, South Africa received confirmations of unchanged credit ratings from 
all three major credit rating agencies. These confirmations, however, came with a very clear 
message: 
fundamentals  are  required, 
suggesting that, in the absence of demonstrable progress being made as part of a concerted 
effort involving all social partners, the risk of downgrades during the next reviews towards the 
end of this year should not be underestimated. 
the  macroeconomic 
improvements 
further 
in 
Recent economic growth developments 
As I move towards the end of my remarks, let me make a few comments on domestic growth 
developments and touch on monetary policy issues before I conclude. 
After achieving pedestrian growth of only 1,3 per cent during 2015, the economy contracted 
by an annualised 1,2 per cent in the first quarter of 2016. This contraction more than erased 
the gains of the previous two quarters. In fact, the size of the economy is now smaller than it 
was in the final quarter of 2014. Much of this decline has originated in the primary sector, 
which  has  contracted  by  almost  10  per  cent  over  the  past  year,  with  mining  in  particular 
pulling the sector down. Given the linkage effects, it is not surprising that developments in 
the primary sector have had spillover effects into other sectors of the economy, most notably 
into the manufacturing sector, which has contracted by 1 per cent over the past year. 
Unfortunately, the growth outlook for the rest of the year will remain challenging, as short-
term indicators suggest a difficult picture for the second quarter and most forecasters predict 
that the economy will grow by well below 1 per cent this year. Fortunately, two of the factors 
that had severely constrained the primary sector lately – the drought and electricity supply 
issues – are expected to fade over the coming year. This may imply that growth will reach a 
lower  turning  point  during  this  year.  The  most  recent  forecast  by  the  SARB  suggests  a 
modest recovery over the next two years, but the assumptions underlying this forecast had 
not factored in any possible spillover effects stemming from Brexit.5 
Employment  numbers  also  make  for  rather  disappointing  reading.  More  than  1  in  4 
economically active South Africans are still without employment. Even though the economy 
has added approximately 200 000 jobs over the past year, the labour force has increased by 
almost  twice  that  figure.6  Employment  creation  remains  the  single  most  important  policy 
challenge for South Africa. In this regard, policymakers have recognised the need to increase 
potential output growth, which the SARB estimates at 1,5 per cent during 2016 – insufficient 
in  light  of  South  Africa’s  developmental  needs.  This  requires  the  effective  and  efficient 
implementation of growth-enhancing structural reforms. 
                                                
4   Budget Review, February 2016 (www.treasury.gov.za) 
5   Monetary Policy Committee statement, 19 May 2016 (www.resbank.co.za) 
6   Quarterly Labour Force Survey, Statistics South Africa, Pretoria, May 2016 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Monetary policy 
Allow me to now turn to monetary policy. 
Currently,  the  policy  dilemma  is  one  of  trying  to  address  the  deterioration  in  the  inflation 
outlook against the background of a weakening growth outlook. Inflation is currently outside 
the inflation target range, and the most recent forecasts indicate that it will not return to within 
the  target  band  until  the  second  half  of  2017.  Inflationary  pressures  are  currently 
underpinned  by  supply-side  shocks,  mainly  related  to  exchange  rate  and  food  price 
movements. 
Exchange rate depreciation, or rand weakness, is an issue that most of us are innately aware 
of.  It  affects  every  South  African  through  a  number  of  direct  and  indirect  channels. 
Consumers  immediately  feel  the  effects  of  depreciation  at  the  petrol  pumps  and,  later, 
through ‘first-round’ impacts on imported goods. However, as the SARB’s  Monetary Policy 
Committee  (MPC)  has  stated  on  numerous  occasions,  flexible  inflation  targeting  allows 
monetary policy to see through these so-called ‘first-round’ inflationary effects. The greater 
danger is a self-enforcing inflationary process that is jump-started by these initial effects: the 
so-called ‘second-round’ inflationary impacts. 11 
The SARB is concerned about the rising inflation expectations, and for good reason: these 
can  become  a  self-fulfilling  prophecy.  Essentially,  this  implies  that  rational  agents  will 
demand  compensation  in  line  with  their  inflation  expectations  to  protect  their  purchasing 
power, resulting in rises in input costs and eventually in the general price level. 
This  inflationary  process  is  in  some  respects  similar  to  Newton’s  First  Law  of  Motion:  an 
object in motion tends to remain in motion unless an external force is applied to it. Monetary 
policy  is  this  external  force  that  is  required  to  bring  down  inflationary  expectations  from 
elevated levels. In order to prevent such a cycle from beginning, it is important for monetary 
authorities to display a commitment to keeping inflation within the target band and for agents 
to  believe  that  this  commitment  is  credible.  In  so  doing,  inflation  expectations  can  be  well 
anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  the  inflation  target  range,  even  as  actual  inflation 
temporarily exceeds it. 
Under these circumstances, monetary policy should strive to ensure that these shocks do not 
result in second-round impacts and a generalised increase in prices. This was the primary 
motivation for the increase in the repurchase rate by a cumulative 100 basis points since July 
2015.  As  has  been  stated  before,  the  MPC  is  sensitive  to  the  possible  negative  effects of 
policy tightening on cyclical growth, but will remain focused on the mandate of maintaining 
price stability in the interest of ensuring sustainable growth over the medium term. 
Conclusion 
The  global  economy  remains  entrenched  in  a  period  of  sub-par  growth  and  elevated 
uncertainty, which makes the path ahead a very unclear one. Just as it seems that the global 
economy is starting to progress and is gaining traction, we are buffeted by harsh new winds 
which  we  cannot  hope  to  escape  as  a  small  open  economy.  Unfortunately,  in  addition  to 
being  bombarded  with  a  confluence  of  negative  external  events,  the  deterioration  in  the 
domestic situation has further compounded matters. It is now almost a foregone conclusion 
that the path ahead will be extremely challenging; it is therefore important that we take the 
tough decisions that are vital to securing our long-term prosperity. 12 
The SARB remains ready and fully committed to making a constructive contribution in line 
with its mandate, which is the maintenance of price and financial stability in the interest of 
balanced and sustainable growth. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
