  Kikuo Iwata: Japan’s economy and monetary policy – growing 
uncertainties surrounding overseas economies and enhancement of 
monetary easing 
Speech  by  Mr  Kikuo  Iwata,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Kanagawa, 4 August 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of Japan’s website. 
Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative, 
financial,  and  business  leaders  in  Kanagawa  Prefecture.  I  would  also  like  to  take  this 
opportunity  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with  the  activities  of  the 
Bank of Japan’s Yokohama Branch. 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held at the end of last week, the Bank released the 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report) and published its projections for 
Japan’s economic activity and prices through fiscal 2018. At the same time, taking account of 
heightened uncertainties surrounding overseas economies, including those associated with 
the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the European Union (EU), the Bank decided to further 
enhance  monetary  easing  in  order  to  prevent  these  uncertainties  from  leading  to  a 
deterioration in business confidence and consumer sentiment as well as to ensure smooth 
funding in foreign currencies by Japanese firms and financial institutions, thereby supporting 
their  proactive  economic  activities.  Today,  I  would  like  to  first  explain  the  Bank’s  view  on 
Japan’s  economic  and  financial  developments,  followed  by  the  Bank’s  thinking  on  the 
monetary policy management, including the policy measures taken this time. 
Developments in overseas economies 
I. 
More than half this year has already passed: since the turn of the year, Japan’s economy has 
been significantly affected by the developments in overseas economies. 
In  early  2016,  global  financial  markets  were  volatile  against  the  backdrop  of  the  further 
decline  in  crude  oil  prices  and  uncertainties  over  future  developments  in  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting economies, particularly the Chinese economy. In order to preempt the 
manifestation  of  the  risk  that  conversion  of  the  deflationary  mindset  might  be  delayed, 
resulting from such uncertainties about overseas economies and financial markets, the Bank 
decided to introduce “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with a Negative 
Interest Rate” at the MPM in January. 
Thereafter, global financial markets gradually regained some calmness and a situation where 
market  turbulence  would  lead  to  the  substantial  slowdown  in  the  global  economy  was 
avoided,  partly  reflecting  additional  monetary  easing  by  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB) 
and  others  and  also  strong  determination  shown  by  the  G20  to  use  all  policy  tools  – 
monetary, fiscal, and structural – to achieve sustainable growth under price stability. 
The  referendum  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  late  June,  however,  brought  the  result  that  a 
majority  of  voters  supported  leaving  the  EU  –  the  so-called  Brexit  –  which  led  to  global 
financial  markets  destabilizing  again,  manifested  in  such  developments  as  the  rapid 
depreciation of the pound sterling. In foreign exchange markets, the yen rapidly appreciated; 
stock prices globally declined considerably, including in Japan. In addressing the situation, 
the relevant authorities, including those in the G7 countries, swiftly took actions: they issued 
a  statement  that  they  would  consult  closely  on  financial  stability  and  cooperate  as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  appropriate, and central banks in major economies also showed their readiness to take steps 
to ensure adequate liquidity, including U.S. dollar funding. 
The  market  developments  following  the  referendum  suggest  that  markets  have  been 
regaining their calmness, partly reflecting (1) an improved perception of the outlook for the 
U.S. economy after the better-than-expected employment data released in early July, and (2) 
the early start of the new Cabinet of the United Kingdom. However, the impact of Brexit on 
the  global  economy  still  entails  uncertainties,  which  should  be  carefully  monitored  going 
forward. It seems the negotiations between the United Kingdom and the EU for building their 
new relationship will last a long period of some years. We should be prepared for heightened 
uncertainties politically and economically for a prolonged period of time. The World Economic 
Outlook  (WEO)  Update  released  earlier  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  revised 
down  the  global  growth  forecast  by  0.1  percentage  point  for  2016  and  2017,  respectively, 
based on the relatively benign assumption that arrangements between the United Kingdom 
and  the  EU  will  avoid  a  large  increase  in  economic  barriers,  but  it  also  presented  an 
estimation  that  the  global  economy  would  experience  a  more  significant  slowdown  under 
more severe assumptions (Chart 1). 
We will continue to closely monitor the uncertainties surrounding overseas economies, which 
could not only directly affect Japan’s economy through exports and imports, but also exert 
influence  on  firms’  and  households’  sentiment  and  restrain  spending  behavior,  such  as 
business fixed investment and consumption. 
Economic activity in Japan 
II. 
As explained, uncertainties surrounding overseas economies have heightened; nonetheless, 
the  baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  in  Japan  has  instead  improved 
compared to the previous Outlook Report in April (Chart 2). 
In sum, although exports and production have been sluggish, due mainly to the effects of the 
slowdown  in  emerging  economies,  a  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  is  being 
maintained  in  both  the  household  and  corporate  sectors,  and,  looking  ahead,  Japan’s 
economy is likely to be on a moderate expanding trend. 
To start with the corporate sector, despite the headwind from overseas economies explained 
earlier,  corporate  profits  have  remained  at  high  levels,  especially  in  the  nonmanufacturing 
sector, and business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing trend on the back 
of such favorable profits. This also was evidenced in the June Short-Term Economic Survey 
of Enterprises in Japan (Tankan), although most responded to the survey prior to the United 
Kingdom’s referendum (Chart 3). 
In  the  household  sector,  the  employment  and  income  situation  has  continued  to  improve 
steadily. Labor market conditions have continued to tighten and the active job openings-to-
applicants ratio stood at 1.37 in June, which is the highest since 1991. The unemployment 
rate has been at a low level in the range of 3.0–3.5 percent recently (Chart 4). Wages have 
been rising moderately. In the annual spring labor-management wage negotiations, base pay 
was  raised  for  a  third  consecutive  year,  but  to  a  smaller  extent  than  last  year,  and  wage 
increases have been spreading steadily to small firms and non-regular employees. 
Under these circumstances, private consumption has been resilient, although relatively weak 
developments  have  been  seen  in  some  indicators.  This  seems  to  be  due  to  the  negative 
wealth effects brought about by the decline in stock prices since the turn of the year, as well 
as the negative impact on consumer sentiment resulting from the Kumamoto Earthquake and 
the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the EU. Given the continued solid increase in employee 
income,  private  consumption  is  projected  to  pick  up  with  financial  markets  regaining  their 
calmness. 
Moreover,  a  “stimulus  package”  decided  by  the  Cabinet  recently  is  of  a  significantly  large 
scale,  amounting  to  over  28  trillion  yen  in  project  size,  and  is  expected  to  stimulate  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  economy considerably in both fiscal 2016 and 2017. The upward revision to the growth rate 
compared to the April Outlook Report is mainly attributable to the effects of such economic 
measures. 
Price developments in Japan 
III. 
Let me now turn to the price developments in Japan. The year-on-year rate of change in the 
consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food) is slightly negative due to the effects of 
the decline in energy prices, but that in the CPI (all items less fresh food and energy) has 
remained  positive  for  33  consecutive  months  since  October  2013.  The  underlying  trend  in 
inflation has steadily improved since the introduction of QQE (Chart 5). 
However, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food and energy), 
which reached more than 1 percent in the latter half of last year, saw a deceleration in its rate 
of increase recently, and was 0.8 percent in June. This is due to the yen’s appreciation and 
the delay in the timing of improvement in inflation expectations. 
Inflation  expectations  have  weakened  recently,  although  they  appear  to  be  rising  on  the 
whole from a somewhat longer-term perspective. Not only market indicators but also survey 
results regarding  inflation  expectations  have  declined.  The  decline  in  inflation  expectations 
seems to have been brought about – through an “adaptive formation mechanism” of inflation 
expectations – by the observed CPI having been at about 0 percent on a year-on-year basis 
for over a year due in part to the decline in energy prices. In countries such as the United 
States, people’s inflation expectations are anchored at the level around the target set by the 
central bank, and medium- to long-term inflation expectations are little affected by the decline 
in  the  observed  CPI;  on  the  other  hand,  in  Japan,  where  deflation  has  dominated  for  a 
prolonged period of time, formation of inflation expectations tends to be strongly affected by 
the observed CPI. In addition, relatively weak developments in private consumption observed 
recently  seem  to  affect  firms’  price-setting  stance.  Putting  off  of  price  increases  by  some 
firms has been observed since the turn of the year, mainly in goods such as food products 
and durable consumer goods. 
Looking  ahead,  however,  the rate  of  increase  in  the  observed  inflation  rate  is  expected  to 
accelerate  again.  As  explained  earlier,  the  employment  and  income  situation  has  been 
improving  steadily  and  the  unemployment  rate  is  expected  to  decline  further.  Against  this 
background, as employee income increases and private consumption picks up, firms’ price-
setting stance is expected to revert to raising prices. In addition, the “stimulus package” by 
the government is expected to further tighten the already tight labor market conditions, lead 
to  an  increase  in  wages,  and  stimulate  household  spending  through  the  increase  in 
employee income. Many firms want to raise sale prices reflecting the increase in costs such 
as  wage  increases,  as  long  as  demand  such  as  private  consumption  can  maintain  its 
resilience.  Under  such  circumstances,  the  mechanism  in  which  inflation  rises  moderately 
accompanied by wage increases is expected to continue to operate steadily going forward. 
Moreover, as downward pressure of energy prices on the CPI is expected to dissipate, the 
observed  CPI  is  projected  to  rise,  which  will  likely  have  a  positive  impact  on  inflation 
expectations. 
Given these projections, the baseline scenario is that the timing of the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  CPI  reaching  around  2  percent  will  be  during  fiscal  2017.  However,  this  is 
accompanied by considerable uncertainties, taking account of heightened uncertainties over 
the  outlook  for  overseas  economies  and  weakened  inflation  expectations,  as  I  explained 
earlier. 
Heightened uncertainties 
IV. 
Next,  I  will  touch  on  risks  that  warrant  attention  going  forward.  Since  the  Outlook  Report 
discusses these risks in detail, I will explain them briefly and focus on important points. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  For  economic  activity,  uncertainties  regarding  developments  in  overseas  economies  are 
most  important.  At  the  beginning,  I  pointed  out  uncertainties  over  future  developments  in 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies as well as those growing overseas following 
the  United  Kingdom’s  vote  to  leave  the  EU.  In  addition,  the  following  warrant  attention: 
developments  in  the  U.S.  economy  and  the  influences  of  its  monetary  policy  response  to 
them on the global financial markets, and prospects regarding the European debt problem 
including the financial sector. 
For prices, developments in medium- to long-term inflation expectations in particular need to 
be closely monitored. I explained earlier that, in Japan, formation of inflation expectations still 
tends to be strongly affected by the “adaptive formation mechanism.” In a case  where the 
rate  of  increase  in  the  all-item  CPI  will  be  low  for  the  time  being,  the  improvement  in  the 
expected  inflation  rates  can  be  contained  more  than  envisaged.  Uncertainties  surrounding 
the economic outlook, mainly for overseas economies, can also restrain firms’ willingness to 
increase prices and wages. As the developments in inflation expectations act as an important 
factor in defining the underlying trend in inflation, they need to be carefully monitored. 
V. 
Thinking behind current monetary policy 
I would now like to turn to the Bank’s monetary policy. 
In  light  of  heightened  uncertainties  surrounding  overseas  economies,  such  as  those 
stemming from the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the EU, the Bank at the July 2016 MPM 
decided to enhance monetary easing in order to prevent these uncertainties from leading to a 
deterioration in business confidence as well as consumer sentiment, and to ensure smooth 
funding in foreign currencies by Japanese firms and financial institutions, thereby supporting 
their  proactive  economic  activities.  Specifically,  measures  taken  by  the  Bank  are  threefold 
(Chart 6 [1]). 
The first is an increase in Bank’s purchases of exchange-traded funds (ETFs). Specifically, 
the amount of purchases will be almost doubled from an annual pace of about 3.3 trillion yen 
to an annual pace of about 6 trillion yen. This measure aims at preventing the deterioration in 
business confidence and consumer sentiment and promoting their proactive risk-taking. 
The second is an expansion of the size of the Bank’s lending program to support growth in 
U.S.  dollars  (the  Special  Rules  for  the  U.S.  Dollar  Lending  Arrangement  to  Enhance  the 
Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth 
Conducted through the Loan Support Program). Under this lending program, the Bank will 
provide back-to-back financing in U.S. dollars to financial institutions by using its U.S. dollar 
funds  in  cases  where  these  financial  institutions  make  foreign  currency-denominated 
investments and loans to firms, which contributes to the strengthening of the foundations for 
economic growth. The duration of the Bank’s lending can be up to 4 years through rollovers. 
The size of the lending program had been 12 billion U.S. dollars since it was introduced in 
April  2012,  and  at  the  end  of  2014,  the  amount  outstanding  reached  the  upper  limit. 
Thereafter,  the  Bank  provided  new  lending  within  unused  allowances  made  by  financial 
institutions’ prepayment of lending. As the loans under the program enable firms to receive 
stable funding in U.S. dollars over the long term, the potential demand for these loans must 
be substantial. On this basis, with a view to supporting firms’ U.S. dollar funding, the size of 
the program was doubled and raised to 24 billion U.S. dollars. 
The third is an expansion in the amount of collateral that can be pledged under the Bank’s 
U.S.  dollar funds-supplying  operations. The  Bank  has  been  carrying out  U.S.  dollar funds-
supplying operations weekly with U.S. dollar funds raised through a bilateral liquidity swap 
line with the Federal Reserve. With this operation, financial institutions can raise U.S. dollar 
funds on a full allotment basis up to the amount of collateral pledged by each institution. The 
U.S. dollar operations, which were introduced at the time of the global financial crisis, have 
functioned as a backstop for U.S. dollar funding. At the MPM last month, the Bank decided to 
establish  a  new  facility  in  which  it  lends  Japanese  government  securities  (JGSs)  to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  counterparties  of  these  operations  against  their  current  account  balances  with  the  Bank. 
Under the current monetary policy, many financial institutions hold a substantial amount of 
current  account  balances  with  the  Bank.  As  these  financial  institutions  become  able  to 
borrow  JGSs  from  the  Bank  –  that  can  be  pledged  as  collateral  –  against  their  current 
account balances, they will be able to raise U.S. dollar funds when necessary without any 
concern  about  the  amount  of  collateral  they  hold.  By  giving  a  sense  of  security,  this  new 
facility will further enhance effectiveness of the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations as a 
backstop. 
Half  a  year  has  passed  since  the  Bank  introduced  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate.” 
During  this  period,  JGB  yields  substantially  declined  across  the  entire  yield  curve,  and 
lending rates as well as issuance rates for CP and corporate bonds fell to new record lows 
(Chart 7). Meanwhile, new developments in corporate finance have been taking place. For 
example,  the  amount  of  issuance  of  super-long-term  corporate  bonds,  such  as  20-year 
corporate  bonds,  has  been  increasing.  Positive  effects  of  these  highly  accommodative 
financial  conditions  seem  to  have  been  spreading  to  the  real  economy  gradually.  As  I 
mentioned  before,  business  fixed  investment  plans  are  firm  despite  the  heightened 
uncertainties  surrounding  overseas  economies.  This  is  brought  about  by  the  significant 
improvement  in  overall  economic  conditions  under  QQE  over  the  last  three  years,  further 
supported  by  the  unprecedentedly  accommodative  financial  conditions.  Moreover,  with 
regard  to  housing  investment,  demand  for  housing  loans  has  been  increasing.  This  was 
confirmed  by  the  result  of  the  July  2016  Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion  Survey  on  Bank 
Lending  Practices  at  Large  Japanese  Banks  released  recently.  Going  forward,  positive 
effects  of  the  negative  interest  rate  policy  on  the  real  economy  will  become more  evident. 
The Bank will continue with “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” aiming to achieve the price 
stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable 
manner.  It  will  examine  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  take  additional  easing 
measures  in  terms  of  three  dimensions  –  quantity,  quality,  and  the  interest  rate  –  without 
hesitation if it is judged necessary for achieving the price stability target. 
Let  me  also  talk  about  the  relationship  between  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  and  the 
government’s fiscal policy, which has been discussed from various perspectives recently. 
As I have said, the government has been undertaking fiscal and structural policy initiatives, 
including a large-scale “stimulus package” that was announced recently. In order for Japan’s 
economy  to  achieve  sustainable  economic  growth  with  price  stability,  the  Bank  welcomes 
these  initiatives,  which  are  indeed  timely.  In  addition,  the  Bank  believes  that  highly 
accommodative  financial  conditions  under  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate”  and  the 
government’s policies will exert synergy effects on the economy (Chart 6 [2]). 
As  you  may  have  learned  during  an  introductory  course  of  macroeconomics,  when  the 
government  increases  fiscal  expenditures  by  issuing  government  bonds,  interest  rates  on 
government  bonds  will  rise,  discouraging  private-sector  investment.  This  effect  is  called 
“crowding out.” In this context, if the central bank is pursuing monetary easing at the same 
time, the  rise  in  interest  rates  will  be  contained,  thereby  preventing  “crowding  out”  effects. 
This  combination  of  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  is  called  a  “policy  mix,”  which  is  a  widely 
accepted idea in macroeconomic policy management. 
This  idea  can  be  applied  to  the  current  situation  in  Japan.  Market  interest  rates  in  Japan 
have  been  in  negative  territory  across  a  wide  range  of  maturities  due to  the  effects  of the 
Bank’s “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” In this situation, when the government expands 
fiscal  expenditure,  its  effects  of  stimulating  the  economy  will  be  very  powerful  due  to  the 
synergy  effects.  This  “policy  mix”  is  different  from  “helicopter  money,”  which  is  an 
expansionary  fiscal  policy  financed  by  a  permanent  increase  in  the  central  bank’s  money, 
and from “deficit financing,” in which the central bank purchases government debts for the 
sake  of  facilitating  the  government’s  financing.  As  “helicopter  money”  has  been  widely 
debated in the financial market, it is not productive to discuss pros and cons of “helicopter 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  money” without defining it clearly. What is important is the fact that a “policy mix” comprised 
of flexible management of fiscal policy and QQE has been implemented in Japan over the 
last  three  years;  this  “policy  mix”  is  very  powerful  among  the  measures  implemented  in 
modern history, and it will be strengthened further with the new large-scale fiscal “stimulus 
package” in combination with “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” 
At the latest MPM, the Bank acknowledged that there were considerable uncertainties over 
prices  going  forward,  which  could  be  significantly  affected  by  developments  in  overseas 
economies and the global financial market and, reflecting this, developments in medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations. Against this background, with a view to achieving the price 
stability  target  of  2  percent  at  the  earliest  possible  time,  the  Bank  decided  to  conduct  a 
comprehensive assessment at the next MPM of the developments in economic activity and 
prices under “QQE” and “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” as well as these policy effects 
(Chart 6 [3]). The Bank’s staff will prepare for deliberation at the next MPM. Let me share 
with you our thinking and motivation behind this project. 
Since  the  introduction  of  QQE  in  April  2013,  Japan’s  economic  activity  and  inflation  have 
improved substantially, and Japan’s economy is no longer in deflation. There is no doubt that 
a clear commitment to the price stability target of 2 percent and large-scale monetary easing 
that underpinned this commitment under QQE have been very effective for Japan’s economy 
to move toward getting out of deflation. That said, the price stability target of 2 percent has 
not  been  achieved  yet,  despite  unprecedentedly  large-scale  monetary  easing.  With  this  in 
mind, we would like to re-examine the transmission mechanism of policy effects and possible 
factors that may have hampered this mechanism. In addition, “QQE with a Negative Interest 
Rate,”  which  was  introduced  in  January  2016,  has  already  exerted  substantial  downward 
effects  on  interest  rates  through  a  combination  of  the  negative  policy  rate  and  JGB 
purchases.  At  the  same  time,  it  has  had  a  variety  of  impacts  on  financial  institutions  and 
markets. We also would like to assess the mechanism of this policy as well as its effects and 
influences on the real economy and the financial side. 
This  is  our  thinking  and  motivation  behind  the  comprehensive  assessment.  Naturally,  the 
emphasis may vary among Policy Board members depending on his/her view. Let me make 
it clear that we do not have any specific future directions of monetary policy at this moment. 
We would like to work with an open mind so that we can make an assessment from various 
perspectives and have a discussion in a productive manner on what should be done for the 
price stability target of 2 percent to be achieved at the earliest possible time. We intend that 
the comprehensive assessment will contribute to planning monetary policy going forward. 
Let me conclude my speech by touching on the local economy of Kanagawa Prefecture. The 
prefecture is endowed with a variety of tourist attractions such as the Yokohama Minato Mirai 
area, Kamakura, Enoshima-Shonan, and Hakone. In addition, I have heard that it is receiving 
a lot of good news about the prefecture being an international tourism region. This includes 
the news that it succeeded in bids to host global sports events, such as the Rugby World 
Cup  2019,  and  that  one  of  its  cities  is  going  to  host  sailing  competitions  during  the  2020 
Olympic Games. In closing, I wish all the best for the further growth and development of the 
economy of Kanagawa Prefecture, fully taking advantage of its geographic significance – that 
is, being located in the Tokyo metropolitan area – as well as its wide-ranging potential. 
Thank you. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
      8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
