  Sabine Lautenschläger: Monetary policy in uncertain times – the 
European Central Bank and the crisis 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, 
at a Parliamentary evening, Strasbourg, 13 September 2016. 
 All beginnings are difficult. It’s true of monetary policy as well. 
Let’s consider for a moment Europe’s first central bank. In 1656 Johan Palmstruch founded 
Stockholm  Banco,  introduced  paper  money  and  triggered  an  economic  crisis.  What 
happened? 
At the outset Stockholm Banco conducted normal banking operations: it took deposits and 
made  loans.  The  deposits  at  that  time  mainly  consisted  of  copper  coins,  and  the  most 
common denomination weighed almost 20 kg. 
But in 1662 the Swedish state issued new coins which contained less copper. The old coins 
stored at Stockholm Banco thus became more valuable and the depositors asked for them 
back. The bank then found itself with a serious liquidity problem because the desired coins 
had been issued as loans. 
Faced  with  this  situation,  Johan  Palmstruch  had  an  idea  –  an  idea  with  consequences. 
Those who asked for their coins back received paper money instead. This paper money was 
backed by the copper coins, which had not disappeared but had simply been lent out. 
The  people  and  the  state  accepted  the  paper money;  the  crisis  was  averted.  At  the  same 
time, Stockholm Banco could now make loans in the form of paper money. 
It  then  did  that,  but  somewhat  too  generously:  it  produced  more  paper  money  than  were 
backed  by  the  coins.  The  people  lost  trust  in  the  value  of  the  paper  money  and  Sweden 
experienced  inflation.  To  control  it,  Stockholm  Banco  stopped  issuing  loans  and  paper 
money. This in turn led to an economic crisis. 
In 1667 the Swedish state shut down Europe’s first central bank. 
In  the  350  years  since,  we  have  gained  theoretical  knowledge  and  practical  experience. 
Today  any  first-year  economics  undergraduate  could  warn  Stockholm  Banco  about  the 
dangers of its policy. 
While monetary policy was more art than science in the early days, now it is more science 
than  art.  But  all  that  experience  and  all  that  knowledge  cannot  prevent  monetary 
policymakers even now suddenly finding themselves in difficult terrain. 
For it’s not only monetary policy that has a major influence on economic growth and other 
important  factors  for  the  central  bank,  but  also  businesses,  banks  and  other  market 
participants as well as governments; thus, they too influence price stability. 
Uncertain times 
Looking  back  over  the  recent  past,  we  see  a  decade  of  crisis  and  uncertainty;  we  see  a 
whole series of “black swans” – events that could not be foreseen. 
We  see  how  the  insolvency  of  an  American  investment  bank  triggered  a  global  financial 
crisis. We see a global economic crisis, a European sovereign debt crisis and we see how 
the people of the United Kingdom voted to leave the European Union. Brexit was an event 
that  few  people  had  reckoned  with,  surely;  an  event  that  has  heightened  economic 
uncertainty and that may damage the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Although it is still too early to draw any definitive conclusions about the effects of Brexit on 
the  economy,  our  current  forecasts  are  incidentally  offering  an  encouraging  picture.  The 
impact seems to be smaller than many had feared. But it is in everyone’s interest to pass 
through this phase of political uncertainty as soon as possible. 
Crises now seem to have become part of everyday life and the improbable has become the 
norm. In such times of uncertainty monetary policy serves as an important anchor of stability. 
However, the crises of the last few years have also pushed monetary policy into uncharted 
territory. To achieve the goal of stable prices, it has followed new paths. 
Monetary policy in uncertain times – finding new ways to the old goal 
The journey started in a way that is far from new. Following the failure of Lehman Brothers in 
autumn  2008,  banks  found  themselves  to  be  objects  of  deep  mistrust.  They  could  hardly 
assess their own risks, let alone the risks of other banks. As a result, they stopped lending to 
each other and even solvent banks could no longer refinance themselves. 
At this point, the ECB jumped in and became the lender of last resort. 
Basically, this is not a new role for a central bank, but one of its original tasks. It goes back to 
1873  and Walter  Bagehot,  who  wrote  that  “to  stem  a  financial  panic,  [...]  the  central  bank 
should lend freely at a penalty rate to solvent institutions against good collateral”. 
The  ECB  has  done  that.  It  has  offered  the  banks  unlimited  liquidity  and  extended  the 
maturities of the relevant loans. 
At the same time, it has expanded the list of eligible collateral. As a lender of last resort the 
ECB managed to help the banking system get through the first phase of the crisis. 
When the crisis started, the ECB also reduced interest rates. Initially, this wasn’t a new path 
either, but standard practice for monetary policy. 
The lower interest rates are, the more attractive it is for companies to invest and for people to 
consume. Demand goes up and so do prices. 
The ECB entered unfamiliar territory in June 2014 when it reduced the deposit rate for banks 
to below a level previously regarded as a barrier: the “zero lower bound”, as it is called. 
A slow economic recovery and persistently low inflation had made that necessary. Banks are 
therefore now having to pay interest on their deposits at the ECB. 
It may seem strange to many people to have to pay someone you’re lending money to. And 
that’s  exactly  what  it’s  all  about:  the  individual  bank  should  have  an  incentive  to  lend  its 
money elsewhere, for example to companies. This is one effect of negative interest rates. 
The second effect concerns investors’ expectations. They now know that short-term interest 
rates  can  fall  below  zero.  Knowing  this,  they  adjust  downwards  their  interest  rate 
expectations for the future and long-term interest rates fall. This boosts the desired effect on 
investment and consumption. 
However, it is precisely these negative rates that have triggered a lively debate in Germany. 
There  is  much  talk  of  “penalty  rates”  which  are  hurting  savers  and  thus  undermining 
monetary policy. 
I can make four comments on this. 
In the first place, the ECB does not set interest rates in an arbitrary fashion. Interest rates 
always reflect the economic situation – and that is influenced by things other than monetary 
policy, by labour market policy, tax policy and fiscal policy, for example. 
Raising  interest  rates  in  the  current  situation  would  benefit  nobody,  ultimately  not  even 
savers  or  banks:  the  recovery  in  Europe  would  slow  down,  unemployment  would  rise  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  inflation would fall further. This would not only worsen the banks’ situation, but also increase 
the risk of deflation. 
The second point applies to savers: a 3% interest rate with 3% inflation is exactly the same 
as a 0% interest rate with 0% inflation, although for many people it might feel different. 
It’s what remains at the end that matters, and that is the real interest rate. The real interest 
rate is that part of the interest rate which is not absorbed by inflation. And if we look at real 
interest  rates,  the  current  situation  is  not  that  unusual.  Real  interest  rates  in  Germany 
between 1974 and 1981 and between 1989 and 1994 were almost always negative – it just 
felt different because the interest rates on paper were positive. 
Third, savers are naturally not very enthusiastic about the return on their savings – I feel the 
same. 
However, we shouldn’t overlook all those who should be pleased to have very low interest 
rates. Anyone who takes out a loan to build a house or to invest in a business idea benefits. 
With  rising  interest  rates  the  opposite  would  be  true  –  savers  would  gain  and  borrowers 
would bear the burden. 
Currently, the overall effect is neutral: the average net interest income of households in the 
euro area has not changed.1 
Fourth, in fact, not only savers, but also banks are affected by the low interest rates – their 
interest  income  is  coming  under  pressure.  It  is  argued  that  this  effect  could  ultimately 
undermine the effectiveness of monetary policy. When the income accruing to banks falls too 
sharply, they could have no alternative but to issue fewer loans or demand higher interest 
rates on loans. That would be the opposite of what monetary policy is trying to achieve. 
This  brings  us  to  the  absolute  lower  limit  for  interest  rates.  This  limit  is  reached  once  the 
desired  effect  of  the  negative  rates  goes  into  reverse  –  either  because  lending  suffers  or 
because banks and individuals start to hoard cash. 
But we don’t seem to have reached the absolute lower limit yet. Since mid-2014, borrowing 
conditions for businesses and households have improved, and loan growth is recovering. At 
the  same  time,  the  money  supply  is  showing  no  signs  of  cash  hoarding  by  individuals  or 
banks.2 
But should we feel obliged to cut interest rates even more, just because the absolute lower 
limit has not been reached? 
I don’t think so. 
Conditions on the financial markets have significantly improved and economic growth is back 
on  track  –  the  slight  effect  of  Brexit  shows  how  robust  the  recovery  is.  Against  this 
background  I  have  my  doubts  about  the  benefits  of  further  interest  rate  cuts  –  especially 
when we compare the benefits with the costs. 
Negative interest rates have both a desired effect and undesired side effects. These include 
not only the burden on savers, banks and insurance companies but also the risk of reducing 
the pressure to reform on policymakers as well as the risk of creating asset price bubbles. 
Such measures should only be taken as and when it is really necessary and the cost-benefit 
analysis is still positive. 
To sum up, despite these risks and side effects I still consider negative rates to be justified at 
the moment. But going beyond that I’m sceptical about further interest rate reductions. 
                                                
1  ECB Economic Bulletin, issue 4/2016, Box 3. 
2  Monetary  aggregate  M1,  which  also  includes  currency,  grew  more  slowly  in  June  2016  (8.6%)  than  in  the 
preceding month (9.1%). ECB, “Monetary developments in the euro area”, 27 July 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The  ECB  has  been  stepping  into  unfamiliar  territory  with  another  instrument  –  how  have 
things been going in that respect? 
When, in the second half of 2014, the medium-term outlook for the economy worsened and 
inflation expectations fell back, the Governing Council of the ECB decided to purchase bonds 
– initially government bonds and then also corporate bonds. 
This programme is intended to support the other measures by additionally lowering long-term 
interest rates via various channels and at the same time it gives a signal that monetary policy 
is committed to its goal of stable prices. 
What  we  are  already  seeing  is  that  the  bond  purchases  have  helped  to  further  improve 
borrowing  conditions  for  businesses  and  households.  It  is  however  too  early  to  analyse 
statistically the unfolding effects on growth and inflation. But analyses based on theoretical 
models have shown that the programme may have an effect – even though the degree of 
effectiveness is uncertain.3 
But  here  too  it’s  true  that  strong  medicine  has  side  effects.  Particularly  in  Germany  many 
people are understandably worried that the side effects could be greater than the intended 
effects, especially over the long term. 
The critics of the purchase programme are saying that it distorts debt markets, reduces the 
pressure  on  governments  to  reform,  blurs  the  boundary  between  monetary  policy  and 
government financing, and threaten financial stability in the long run. 
As I said, we will therefore need to be patient for a while before being able to make a final 
assessment of the purchase programme. What matters now is to give the measures time to 
work. 
That’s  why  I  see  no  reason  at  the  moment  to  change  the  key  design  elements  of  the 
purchase programme. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  crises  of  the  past  few  years  have  thrust  monetary  policy  into 
unknown territory. 
But  we  are far from the  times  of  Banco  Stockholm,  when  there  was  no  clear  objective  for 
monetary policy, no theoretical basis and no experience of such matters. Yes, the crisis has 
pushed monetary policy into uncharted territory, but we have a clear objective and we know 
where we are thanks to theory and experience. 
However, in recent years we have done a lot for the first time. The key question is whether 
our package of measures works – and it’s only as a package that the effect can be assessed. 
Have we come nearer to our objective of bringing inflation back to a stable level of close to, 
but below, 2%? 
What we are seeing is that conditions on the financial markets are improving – I mentioned 
that earlier with regard to the individual measures. And when the conditions on the financial 
markets improve, the ground is prepared for a return to higher inflation. 
So monetary policy is working. We are approaching our goal, albeit by following new paths. 
But we must not overlook two things. 
First, the individual measures cannot be continued indefinitely – at some point, for example, 
interest rates will hit their absolute lower limit. 
                                                
3  Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Monthly Report, June 2016. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Second,  the  measures  cannot  be  continued  indefinitely  –  at  some  point  the  effect  of  the 
measures will get weaker and the risks will predominate. 
In my view instead of new and always more extreme measures we need a little patience. We 
should not forget that returning inflation to just under 2% is a medium-term goal. Our current 
projections see inflation in 2018 back at 1.6%. 
Ladies and gentlemen, price stability is a necessary condition for growth and prosperity, and 
the ECB is doing everything to ensure it. But monetary policy alone cannot build factories or 
create  jobs  or  balance  national  budgets.  It  can  only  create  the  right  conditions  for  these 
things. 
Ultimately, it’s up to governments. They have to complete the necessary economic reforms, 
strengthen  the  institutional  foundation  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  and  bring  these 
times of uncertainty to an end. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
