  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in The Yomiuri Shimbun 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, in The Yomiuri Shimbun, conducted by Mr Tadashi Isozumi in Japan and published on 
20 May 2016. 
 You are attending the G7 finance ministers’ meeting in Sendai. What do you think the 
most important topic for discussion will be? 
The  Group  of  Seven  (G7)  countries  are  faced  with  a  common  challenge:  how  can  they 
escape  from  this  low  growth,  low  inflation  environment?  What  is  important  is  that  they 
cooperate and act together. To address future challenges, there needs to be a combination 
of multiple policies. 
In order to prevent euro area inflation from being too low for too long, the ECB has brought 
short-term  interest  rates  to  levels  close  to  zero  or  negative,  and  is  providing  forward 
guidance  on  the  future  monetary  policy  stance.  We  are  also  implementing  quantitative 
monetary  easing  of  €80  billion  [about  10  trillion  yen]  per  month  at  least  until  March  2017, 
primarily  by  purchasing  government  bonds  but  also,  starting  next  month,  by  purchasing 
bonds  issued  by  non-financial  companies.  These  actions  are  mutually  reinforcing  and  in 
particular negative rates are reinforcing the impact of QE. 
Negative rates are also hurting the financial industry… 
Negative  interest  rates  impose  direct  costs  on  some  industries:  the  banking  industry,  the 
pension  funds  industry  and  the  insurance  industry.  But  so  far  the  overall  impact  on  bank 
revenue  has  been  positive,  thanks  to  higher  loan  volumes  and  lower  risk  provisions.  In 
addition, the money market in Europe has been functioning at negative rates for almost two 
years without any disruptions. 
The ECB is currently applying a –0.4% interest rate to money deposited by banks on their 
central bank account. It is in principle possible to cut this rate further, but there is currently no 
plan to do so. In March the ECB decided to lend money at a fixed rate over four years to 
banks which increase their loans to households and companies. We have a lending volume 
benchmark,  and  the  rate  will  be  as  low  as  –0.4%  for  those  banks  which  outperform  their 
benchmark by a sufficient margin. We are convinced that these credit easing measures are 
even more important than the negative interest rate, even if they complement each other. 
What is the impact of your monetary policy on the real economy, so far? 
This package of monetary easing policies is supporting short-term growth in a visible way. 
The  European  economy  is  coming  back  and  recovering  from  the  recession.  But  monetary 
policy cannot create long-term growth. Long-term growth will be driven by productivity gains, 
well-functioning  economies  and  a  reformed  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  It  is  the 
responsibility of the democratically elected governments to propose and implement the right 
reforms. 
Mario  Draghi  has  insisted  in  his  press  conferences  that  fiscal  policy  and  structural 
policy  are  also  important,  yet  some  European  countries  still  continue  to  pursue 
austerity. Could you tell us your opinion on that? 
As  regards  fiscal  policy,  the  discussion  in  the  G7  should  not  just  be  about  increasing 
spending, it should also be about improving the quality of the budget. The ECB agrees with 
the idea that “countries that have fiscal space should use it”, but many countries do not have 
this  fiscal  space.  Reducing  unproductive  expenditures  and  cutting  taxes  or  increasing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  investment in productive infrastructure, such as education and research, can lead to growth 
without increasing the deficit. 
What  about  foreign  exchange  policy?  The  UK  pound  and  Japanese  yen  have  been 
increasing and volatility is very high. What will the G7 do to reduce volatility? 
The G20 countries have committed not to use the exchange rate for competitive purposes, 
as confirmed in recent meetings in Shanghai and Washington. All of us should act in a way 
consistent with this commitment and which does not add to global uncertainty. 
Emerging  markets  are  slowing  down  and  advanced  countries  have  very  low  growth 
rates. What should the G7 and advanced countries do for the world economy? 
In a low-growth environment globally, there might be a temptation for some countries to grow 
at the expense of other partner countries. So it is precisely the role of the G7 or the G20 to 
resist such temptation. 
There is no “magic bullet” for increasing growth. For the G7, it is crucial to send the message 
to  support  domestic  demand  and  focus  on  those  structural  policies  that  will  be  most 
conducive to growth. You cannot just rely on other countries. The message that we would 
like to hear is that “growth starts at home”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
