   Mugur Isărescu: Recent developments in central bank governance 
Panel presentation by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the 
"Central Bank and Supervisory Governance" conference, organized by the National Bank of 
the Netherlands, Amsterdam, 12 February 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great honour to address the audience during this high-level conference on a subject of 
special interest to all of us, the recent developments in central bank governance leading to 
heated debates every time they are brought to the fore. 
Mr. He has done a wonderful job in structuring the challenges of nowadays’ central banking 
and in outlining the importance of effective governance arrangements in order to meet these 
challenges – his presentation is a testimony to IMF’s unique ability to draw upon a vast set of 
worldwide institutional experiences. I, in turn, will draw mainly upon a narrower, but hopefully 
no less relevant, set of institutional experiences, gathered during my tenure as Governor of the 
National Bank of Romania. 
In my address today I intend to deal with the issue of recent developments in central bank 
governance by looking at: 
1.  The  central  bank  objectives  as  the  starting  point  in  designing  its  governance 
framework; 
2.  How the NBR dealt with the financial stability as an objective, from an institutional 
point of view; integrating or separating monetary policy and supervision; 
3.  A  short  history  of  institutional  developments  within  the  NBR  for  ensuring  financial 
stability; 
4.  The internal control layers in the NBR; 
5.  Pros  and  cons  of  different  institutional  alternatives:  banking  supervision  and 
macroprudential authority – inside or outside the central bank; 
6.  A  historical  perspective  on  the  experience  of  becoming  a  modern  central  bank,  a 
process undergone not only by the NBR. 
1. Defining the objectives – the starting point in designing central bank governance 
It goes without saying that ground zero in building the central bank governance framework is 
clarifying  the  objectives  it  has  to  pursue.  For  quite  a  long  time,  at  least  in  Europe,  “price 
stability”  enjoyed  the  position  of  overriding  objective,  but  since the  outbreak  of  the crisis  it 
became  obvious  that  the  “inflation  first”  approach  may  turn  counterproductive  in  an 
environment of financial instability. Therefore, financial stability concerns made their way up 
on central bankers’ agenda. 
Is that really a novelty? As the representative of an emerging economy central bank that never 
had the luxury of being concerned exclusively with price stability, I dare say it is not. Actually, 
central banking has always been about the preservation of, to quote Charles Goodhart, “the 
three  aspects  of  stability”,  namely  price  stability,  (external)  currency  stability  and  financial 
stability.  Moreover, the fact  that  these  aspects  of stability  do  condition  each  other  was  not 
discovered in the aftermath of the crisis – central bankers, maybe even more so emerging-
market central bankers, have long been keenly aware that failure to ensure one kind of stability 
is bound to jeopardise the achievement of the others. 
What the crisis has indeed challenged is the widespread conviction that meeting one particular 
stability criterion, while necessary in order to achieve the others, is also a sufficient condition 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   to do so – after all, maintaining price stability, while valuable in itself, has proved insufficient to 
ward  off major financial  or macroeconomic  instability.  As  a  matter  of fact,  Andrew  Crocket 
claimed  ever  since  2003  that  the  “peace  dividend”  yielded  by  the  successful  war  against 
inflation  had  not  lived  up  to  expectations  and  therefore  the  battlefront  against  financial 
instability should not be overlooked. 
Regardless of how this battlefront is approached, it is of the essence to make sure that the 
tasks  entrusted to  the  central  bank  are feasible. Otherwise,  if the monetary  authorities  are 
overburdened with possibly conflicting goals, the major risk is to render them inefficient and 
unable to deliver a single one of their objectives. This is the very reason why the issue of 
central bank governance is so intricate and delicate: one needs to reconcile objectives that, 
under certain circumstances, might even prove incompatible. 
2. Integrating or separating price and financial guardianship 
Given that the conference focuses on central bank and supervisory governance, allow me to 
touch  on  the  issue  of  integrating  price  guardianship  and  financial  guardianship  within  the 
central bank. As you probably remember, the idea that the two tasks should be completely 
separated has gained ground in the 1990s. The rationale behind this view  was to free the 
monetary policy conduct from conflicting objectives and thus render policymakers’ mission and 
life easier. It was advocated that banking sector supervision should no longer be assigned to 
the  central  bank,  but  rather  to  an  independent  agency  (which  might  also  ensure  the 
consolidated supervision of all financial markets). 
I, myself, found the idea rather interesting at the end of the 1990s, when the collapse of several 
Romanian banks influenced the decision-making process at the National Bank of Romania. I 
realised at the moment how costly it was in terms of reputation for a central bank to be in 
charge of supervision and prudential regulation – not to mention that the separation appeared 
quite  fashionable  after  the  newly-established  Financial  Services  Authority  had  become 
operational in the United Kingdom. 
At the same time, I vividly remember the conflict between price stability and financial stability, 
when  I  had to  mediate  the  divergent  positions taken  during  Board  meetings  by  the  deputy 
governors coordinating the two functions, not by virtue of personal affiliations, but due to the 
very nature of the specific tasks they had been entrusted with. I was wondering, in light of 
these Board disputes, whether separating the monetary policy and the supervision functions 
was preferable. 
At hindsight, I believe that Romania has made the right choice preserving banking supervision 
as a prerogative of the central bank, sorting out such disputes under the same roof. 
Coming to the current NBR governance framework, I would like to start by pointing out that it 
ensures a complete separation as regards the coordination of the relevant departments: while 
the Governor is in charge of the monetary policy area, the First Deputy Governor coordinates 
the  Supervision  Department;  one  Deputy  Governor  takes  care  of financial  stability  and  the 
other, of bank resolution. 
The  nine-strong  Board  of  Directors  runs  the  central  bank,  but  the  process  of  preparing  its 
decisions in the areas of monetary policy and prudential supervision takes place in two distinct 
structures:  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  and  the  Supervisory  Committee,  respectively, 
which comprise members of the executive management and experts in the relevant areas. As 
separation is not the same thing as complete isolation, I have to add that both committees are 
chaired by the Governor... 
Pursuant to the NBR Statute, the Board is tasked to act as a first appellate forum for sanctions 
on  credit  institutions.  In  order  to  avoid  conflicts  of  interest  that  may  appear,  the  following 
institutional  arrangements  are  in  place:  separate  Board  meetings,  a  certain  degree  of 
autonomy of the Supervision Department and recusal from the proceedings of the First Deputy 
Governor, in his capacity as coordinator of the Supervision Department. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   I  would  like  to  add  a  special  remark  regarding  the  new  role  of  the  NBR  as  the  resolution 
authority, arising from the provisions of the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive. We have 
configured the activities and reporting lines in order to ensure full operational independence 
and to avoid conflicts of interest between the supervision and resolution functions. Of course, 
this takes place without prejudice to the exchange of information and cooperation obligations. 
To be more specific, supervisory decisions do not pose constrains to resolution-related ones. 
Moreover, the staff involved in performing the resolution function is structurally separated from 
the other NBR functions. 
3. Romania: a short history of institutional changes for ensuring financial stability 
The global crisis has made obvious for all of us that price stability and financial stability are 
much more intertwined than we used to think. I believe this development has farther-reaching 
consequences when it comes to the future of central banking. As I pointed out in November 
last year at the World Policy Conference organised in Montreux, I cannot imagine a future 
where the explicit concern for financial stability and the macroprudential policy are not central 
banking fixtures. 
In Romania, the concern for ensuring and strengthening financial stability was visible in several 
significant changes of the institutional framework, operated already before the outbreak of the 
global economic and financial crisis. Specifically, the NBR’s Financial Stability Department was 
created as early as 2004, with the first edition of the annual Financial Stability Report – a report 
that will be published on a half-yearly basis starting this year – being released in 2006. 
Of course, no matter how much or how responsibly the central bank would get involved in 
safeguarding financial stability, this public good can only be delivered through cooperation and 
coordination with the other institutions tasked with financial market supervision and regulation. 
Relevant in this respect is that in Romania a National Committee for Financial Stability was 
established as early as 2007. The Governor of the National Bank of Romania, the Minister of 
Public Finance, the President of the Financial Supervisory Authority and the Chairman of the 
Bank  Deposit  Guarantee  Fund  are  members  of  this  committee,  whose  key  objective  is  to 
ensure the exchange of relevant information, as well as to prevent, appraise and manage any 
issues with a potentially systemic impact. 
Efforts are currently underway to turn this entity set up based on an agreement among member 
institutions into a National Committee for Macroprudential Oversight, whose composition, tasks 
and areas of competence shall be set forth by law. This inter-institutional structure will act as 
a macroprudential authority, within the meaning of ESRB Recommendation 2011/3. 
4. NBR: the internal control layers 
I imagine we all agree that improving the governance structure is essential for a central bank 
and I strongly believe the sharing of views and experience made possible by reunions such as 
the one we are attending is extremely beneficial for the process. 
As far as the NBR is concerned, enhancing the governance has been a steady concern over 
the course of time, the ultimate goal being the alignment with the best practices, often with IMF 
support. 
Let me just point out that the NBR shifted from an internal auditors’ Commission to the auditing 
of financial statements by external auditors as early as 2001, while the following year saw the 
establishment of the Audit Committee as a substructure of the NBR Board (at a time when not 
even the ECB had such a committee in place!). 
In addition to the Audit Committee, the NBR’s internal control system includes several control 
layers. In fact, there are three lines of defence against any factors that might jeopardise the 
fulfilment of the NBR objectives. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   First of all, the National Bank of Romania takes a functional approach to risk management, 
meaning that each organisational unit has primary responsibility for identifying, assessing and 
managing the risks associated with its own activities and operations. The risk management 
process is an integral part of the NBR’s internal control system and represents the bank’s first 
line of defence. Each organisational unit implements operational control procedures within its 
area of responsibility, in accordance with the levels of risk tolerance set in advance by the 
executive management. Furthermore, the NBR applies the approach known as the “Chinese 
wall”,  which  separates  the  departments  in  charge  of  monetary  policy  formulation  and 
implementation, on one hand, from the departments entrusted with other statutory tasks, on 
the other. 
The second line of defence is functional on certain business segments with high-risk financial 
exposure, e.g. international reserve management. This line of defence monitors compliance 
with the risk limits approved by the bank’s executive management and reports any breach. 
A major role in this line of defence is played by the decision-making/advisory committees within 
the central bank. Apart from the two committees dedicated to monetary policy and supervision 
that I  have  already  mentioned,  particularly  significant  is  the  Foreign  Reserve  Management 
Committee. 
In  addition  to  the  risk  monitoring  by  the  operational  structures,  the  NBR’s  Internal  Audit 
Department – which functions as the third line of defence – examines the overall controls in 
place and determines whether they are properly designed and functional, so as to ensure the 
reliability and integrity of financial and operational information, the effectiveness of the activities 
carried  out,  asset  protection,  as  well  as  compliance  with  applicable  legal  and  contractual 
provisions. 
5. Different institutional arrangements for banking supervision and financial stability 
As  we  all know, the  responsibility for  banking  supervision  rests  in  some  countries  with  the 
central bank, whereas in others it lies with a distinct authority. Both options are valid and a 
one-size-fits-all  solution  will  probably  not  be  reached,  given  the  country-specific  financial 
conditions and institutional arrangements. However, this does not necessarily exclude looking 
into the arguments for or against either alternative. 
As I already said, I believe that it is better to have supervision integrated in the central bank. 
First  of  all,  the  ongoing  complex  challenges  to  financial  and  economic  stability  call  for 
identifying,  using  and  corroborating  tons  of  information  in  order  to  articulate  the  adequate 
policies. The central bank relies on its database and expertise, which are prerequisites for 
managing such a challenging environment. Beyond this major advantage, there are also other 
benefits of such an institutional arrangement. Independence from political influence is essential 
for  effective  supervision.  And  central  banks  are  institutions  enjoying  a  high  level  of 
independence that a newly-established government agency would not be able to gain, at least 
in the short run. 
Besides, clearly acknowledging the links between price stability and financial stability means 
that they need to be taken into account when formulating the monetary policy. Moreover, as 
Benoît  Cœuré  pointed  out,  data  collected  and  analyses  conducted  as  part  of  banking 
supervision  provide  valuable  information  about  the  financial  sector  and  may  feed  into  the 
assessment of the state of the economy, being useful for the monetary policy decision-making 
process. 
Of  course,  literature  identifies  some  disadvantages  of  integrating  supervision  in  the  central 
bank.  The  risk  of  this  arrangement  resulting  in  a  too  loose  monetary  policy,  due  to  the 
conflicting objectives, which I have already referred to, is an important drawback. However, as 
Beck and Gros stressed in an article from 2012, with the rise of macro-prudential regulation as 
an additional tool, it is not clear whether price and financial stability still conflict with each other. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Another disadvantage is that the reputation and/or the independence of the central bank might 
be  undermined:  if  its  decisions  and  actions  in  the  area  of  supervision  and  resolution  are 
perceived as wrong or suboptimal, this may negatively affect the credibility of the monetary 
policy, as it is conducted by the same institution. Moreover, the temptation of politicians to 
capture the central bank may rise, as it has much more power than in the case when its only 
mission is to deliver price stability. 
The various arrangements on assigning banking supervision also have a bearing on the design 
of the national macroprudential authority. Depending mainly on who conducts the supervision 
of banks, different institutional solutions are adequate for this authority: it may be represented 
by a committee or board comprising representatives of the relevant institutions, by the central 
bank or by another authority tasked with financial market supervision. Boards are in place or 
envisaged  in  13  EU  countries,  the  central  bank  is  –  or  is  projected  to  be  –  the  national 
macroprudential authority in 13 other EU countries, whereas two opted for – or are considering 
– entrusting this role to the national supervisory authority. 
Opting for the central bank as a national macroprudential authority can be warranted by the 
experience  accumulated  in  the  field,  especially  in  the  case  of  a  dominant  position  of  the 
banking sector, and by the possibility of a quick implementation of adopted measures (since 
the institution is responsible for identifying systemic risks and, at the same time, has available 
the macroprudential tools to put into practice the measures considered adequate). 
Some disadvantages of having supervision integrated in the central bank are manifest in this 
case  as  well,  such  as  the  backfiring  of  potential  errors  in  the  area  (be they  real  or merely 
perceived as such by the public) on monetary policy credibility or a keener interest in politically 
capturing the institution as a result of the substantial rise in central bank powers. 
As Klaas Knot has showed more than once, the key argument in favour of creating a board is 
that  it  enables  the  pooling  of  the  expertise  of  all  financial  market  supervisors  and  of  the 
government;  the  drawbacks  would  be  more  diffused  accountability  and  the  risk  of  delayed 
implementation of recommendations, given the involvement of several institutions. A prominent 
role of the central bank in the board (either by chairing it or through the number of members 
assigned) might mitigate the risk of inaction. 
In the case of Romania, where the supervision of banks and non-bank financial institutions is 
the  task  of  the  NBR,  while  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  (FSA)  oversees  the  other 
financial markets, the solution that emerges as adequate is the one identified in the draft law 
promoted  by  the  Government:  a  National  Committee  for  Macroprudential  Oversight.  The 
decision-making body of this committee is to be made up of nine members: the Governor, the 
First-Deputy Governor, the two Deputy Governors and the Chief Economist of the National 
Bank  of  Romania;  the  President  and  the  First-Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority, as well as two Government representatives appointed by the Prime Minister. 
Addressees of National Committee recommendations – the NBR and the FSA, as sectoral 
financial supervisory authorities, and the Government – should act on them unless inaction 
can be adequately justified (“act or explain” mechanism). 
6. Reforming central bank governance after the fall of communism 
I  have  always  been  of the  opinion that  one  cannot truly  understand the  present  or  have  a 
glimpse into the future without knowing the past and learning its lessons. These lessons begin 
with the transition from a monetary authority in a command economy to a modern central bank 
operating in a market economy, an experience that is, for sure, familiar to many of us present 
here – I believe half of the central banks in this constituency, including Romania’s, are “new 
kids on the block”. 
Of course, there are different stages of development in terms of institutional framework. Some 
central  banks  are  presently  undergoing  the  process  of  shaping  and  consolidating  their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   from  central  bank  operations,  which  remained 
governance, an endeavor intended to transform them into modern monetary authorities. And, 
believe me, I know from experience how complicated such a process can be! 
In  the  early  nineties,  when  I  took  over  as  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  a 
tremendous effort was needed to put into practice the transition from a monobank-type system 
to a two-tier system. It was by no means a simple task to reform an institution that had operated 
in  the  context  of  centralised  planning  of  the  entire  economic  activity  and  to  separate 
commercial  banking  operations 
the 
responsibility of the NBR. 
The new NBR only counted less than 5 percent of the former central bank employees, most of 
them in the cash management and accounting units! Therefore, we had to build from scratch 
several departments that are key to the functioning of a modern central bank, such as monetary 
policy, economic research, banking supervision and regulation... 
Fortunately, the NBR was given a helping hand in improving its governance structure when it 
needed it the most. Just to give two examples, banking supervision was set up at the NBR with 
the extremely useful support of De Nederlandsche Bank and the forex market was put in place 
with  the  assistance  from  the  central  bank  of  Belgium.  We  are  extremely  grateful  to  both 
institutions for their generous support. 
Like they say, what goes around, comes around – it is now our turn to share our experience. I 
am  glad  to  say  that  the  NBR  –  in  a  consortium  with  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  –  has  been 
involved since June 2015 in a Twinning project dedicated to the National Bank of Moldova, the 
NBR providing expertise in the areas  of regulation and authorisation, supervision, financial 
stability and human resources. 
While speaking about my own experience in reforming the NBR in the early 1990s, after the 
fall  of  communism,  the  words  of  Walter  Bagehot  have  come  to  my  mind.  Referring  to  the 
needed changes in the governance framework of the Bank of England, he wrote in his book 
“Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market”, published as early as 1873, that “putting 
new wine into old bottles is safe only when you watch the condition of the bottle, and adapt its 
structure most carefully”. 
I find this metaphor particularly adequate for guiding us in the demanding task of tailoring the 
structure of central banks to the challenges of today and tomorrow. Let me add only that – as 
I once put it – good wine is as difficult to make as good monetary policy. And proper dosage is 
of the essence in both cases. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
