   Koji Ishida: Japan’s economy, price developments and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Koji Ishida, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with 
business leaders, Fukuoka, 18 February 2016. 
 Developments in economic activity and prices 
I.  
At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on January 28 and 29, 2016, the Bank of Japan produced 
the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report) and published its projections for 
Japan’s economic activity and prices through fiscal 2017. 
I would like to explain the Bank’s view on economic activity and prices by presenting the main 
content of the Outlook Report. 
Overseas economies 
A.  
Overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – have continued to grow at a moderate 
pace,  despite  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies.  Production  and  trade  in  the 
manufacturing  sector  had  been  weak  on  a  global  basis  in  the  first  half  of  2015,  but  have 
generally picked up somewhat, albeit with some weakness still seen in emerging economies. 
In the outlook, the pace of growth in overseas economies is expected to accelerate moderately 
as the positive effects of the recovery in advanced economies gradually spread to emerging 
economies. A similar projection is presented in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update 
released in January by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). However, given the decline in 
expected  growth  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  and  the  protracted  low 
commodity prices, the capital stock that accumulated amid the higher expected growth rates 
and  higher  commodity  prices  in  the  past  is  likely  to  continue to  be  excessive.  Thus, firms’ 
restrained stance toward fixed investment expenditure is likely to be seen globally for some 
time.  Reflecting  such  circumstances,  business  sentiment  within  major  economies’ 
manufacturing sectors has generally deteriorated. 
Looking at developments by major region, the U.S. economy has continued to steadily recover, 
reflecting the firmness in household spending. As for the outlook, the economy is expected to 
continue  its  firm  recovery  centered  on  the  private  sector,  underpinned  by  accommodative 
financial conditions. 
The European economy is projected to continue to see moderate recovery, mainly on the back 
of improvement in the employment and income situation, as well as accommodative financial 
conditions. 
The Chinese economy has continued to be in a state of deceleration due to downward pressure 
from an overhang of production capacities and inventory adjustments in the manufacturing 
sector. However, the economy is likely to broadly follow a stable growth path – albeit at a 
somewhat slower pace, mainly in the manufacturing sector – as authorities proactively carry 
out policy measures to support economic activity. 
Overall,  emerging  economies  other  than  the  Chinese  economy  and  commodity-exporting 
economies also remain in a situation of deceleration, as the effects of the slowdown in the 
Chinese  economy  have  spread  to  them  and  as  the  decline  in  commodity  prices  has  been 
protracted. These economies as a whole are expected to gradually see a rise in their growth 
rates,  due  mainly  to  the  effects  of  the  recovery  in  advanced  economies  and  of  economic 
stimulus measures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Outlook 
Japan’s economy and price developments 
Current situation 
B.  
1.  
Now I would like to discuss developments in economic activity and prices in Japan. 
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately, although exports and production have 
been  affected  by  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies.  On  the  domestic  demand  side, 
business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing trend as corporate profits have 
continued  to  improve  markedly.  According  to  the  December  2015  Tankan  (Short-Term 
Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), firms have generally continued to plan to increase 
fixed investment firmly despite the slowdown in emerging economies. Against the background 
of steady improvement in the employment and income situation, private consumption has been 
resilient and housing investment has been picking up. Industrial production has continued to 
be more or less flat against the background of the prolonged inventory adjustments of small 
cars with engine sizes of 660cc or less and some capital goods. Exports have been picking 
up,  reflecting  the  developments  in  overseas  economies  that  I  mentioned  earlier,  although 
sluggishness remains in some areas. 
With regard to prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for 
all items less fresh food has been about 0 percent due to a substantial fall in energy prices, 
reflecting the decline in crude oil prices. 
2.  
Japan’s economy is likely to be on a moderate expanding trend. The improvement in corporate 
profits is expected to continue as the favorable external environment, owing to the low crude 
oil  prices  and  the  low  yen  rate,  is  likely  to  continue  to  support  the  income-generating 
mechanism, and as overseas economies are expected to see a moderate rise in their growth 
rates. Employee income is also projected to continue to increase moderately on the back of 
an improvement in corporate profits and the tightening of labor market conditions. Domestic 
demand is likely to follow an uptrend against the backdrop of income generated by this virtuous 
mechanism and of the monetary easing effects. Thus, Japan’s economy is likely to continue 
growing at a pace above its potential through fiscal 2016. In fiscal 2017, although demand 
related to hosting the Olympic Games will underpin the economy, the growth rate is expected 
to slow to around a level somewhat below the potential, mainly because of a fall in household 
spending  due  to  the  consumption  tax  hike.  Looking  at  the  medians  of  the  Policy  Board 
members’ forecasts in the January 2016 Outlook Report, the real GDP growth rate is projected 
to be 1.1 percent for fiscal 2015, 1.5 percent for fiscal 2016, and 0.3 percent for fiscal 2017. 
Looking at the outlook in detail by major component, business fixed investment is projected to 
continue to see a moderate increase on the back of a marked improvement in corporate profits 
and accommodative financial conditions. Private consumption is projected to generally remain 
resilient,  reflecting  the  developments  in  real  disposable  income.  Housing  investment  is 
expected to continue picking up, underpinned by the continued steady improvement in the 
employment  and  income  situation  and  the  low  levels  of  housing  loan  rates.  Industrial 
production is likely to start picking up as the inventory adjustments progress, and thereafter is 
likely to follow a moderate increasing trend, supported by an increase in final demand at home 
and abroad. Exports, which have been picking up, are expected to head toward a moderate 
increase for the time being since automobile-related exports are likely to continue increasing 
on the back of firm sales developments in the United States, Europe, and China. However, in 
the longer run, exports are expected to tend to mark a fall rather than a clear increase, given 
the decline in expected growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, protracted 
low commodity prices, and the resulting excess in production capacity related to materials and 
energy. 
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is 
likely to be about 0 percent for the time being, due to the effects of the decline in energy prices. 
Nevertheless, as the underlying trend in prices steadily rises and the effects of the decline in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   crude oil prices dissipate, the rate is likely to accelerate toward 2 percent – the price stability 
target. Looking at the medians of the Policy Board members’ forecasts in the January 2016 
Outlook  Report,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food), 
excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, is projected to be 0.1 percent for fiscal 
2015, 0.8 percent for fiscal 2016, and 1.8 percent for fiscal 2017. 
Upside and downside risks to the Bank’s baseline scenario regarding economic activity are (1) 
developments in overseas economies, (2) the effects of the consumption tax hike, (3) firms’ 
and households’ medium- to long-term growth expectations, and (4) fiscal sustainability in the 
medium  to  long  term.  The  risks  to  the  Bank’s  baseline  scenario  regarding  prices  are  (1) 
developments  in  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  (2) 
developments  in  the  output  gap,  (3)  responsiveness  of  inflation  to  the  output  gap,  and  (4) 
developments in import prices. 
The bank’s monetary policy 
II.  
Next, I would like to talk about the Bank’s monetary policy. 
The Bank decided to introduce “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with a 
Negative Interest Rate” at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on January 28 and 29, 2016. This 
policy framework is designed to enable the Bank to further pursue monetary easing by making 
full use of possible measures in terms of three dimensions – quantity, quality, and an interest 
rate – in which a negative interest rate is added to the existing options of QQE conducted to 
date. 
Specifically, on the interest rate side, the Bank will partially apply a negative interest rate of 
minus 0.1 percent to current accounts that financial institutions hold at the Bank. This will exert 
further downward pressure on interest rates across the entire yield curve, in combination with 
the continuation of large-scale purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) conducted 
in terms of quantity and quality. 
Under the new scheme introduced in January, the Bank adopted a multiple-tier system in which 
it  applies  a  negative  interest  rate  of  minus  0.1  percent  to  a  marginal  increase  in  current 
accounts that financial institutions hold at the Bank, while continuing to apply a positive interest 
rate  of  0.1  percent to the  average  outstanding  current  account  balance  that  each financial 
institution held during the past year. The Bank devised the scheme by taking into account the 
following unique circumstances of Japan: an extremely large outstanding balance of current 
accounts at the Bank and the necessity for the Bank to proceed smoothly  with large-scale 
purchases of assets even under the negative interest rate scheme. 
As described in the January 2016 Outlook Report, Japan’s economy has continued to recover 
moderately and the underlying trend in prices has been rising steadily. Recently, however, 
global financial markets have been volatile against the backdrop of the further decline in crude 
oil  prices  and  uncertainty  such  as  over  future  developments  in  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting economies, particularly the Chinese economy. In this situation, the Bank judged that 
there was an increasing risk that an improvement in the business confidence of Japanese firms 
and conversion of the deflationary mindset might be delayed and that the underlying trend in 
prices might be negatively affected. To preempt the manifestation of this risk and to maintain 
momentum  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  the  Bank  decided  to 
introduce “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” 
I have explained the outline of the Bank’s assessment presented in the January 2016 Outlook 
Report and the new monetary policy scheme introduced in January. Next, I would like to touch 
upon several features of economic and price developments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Several features of economic and price developments 
III.  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  global  stock  markets  and  foreign  exchange  markets  have  been  in 
turmoil  recently,  especially  since  the  turn  of  the  year,  and  such  volatile  movements  have 
started to negatively affect financial markets in Japan. Investors have become increasingly risk 
averse  due  to  several  factors  that  have  been  reinforcing  each  other:  (1)  the  shift  toward 
monetary tightening in the United States, (2) the economic slowdown in China as well as the 
turmoil in Chinese stocks and the yuan rate, (3) a sharp decline in crude oil prices, and (4) the 
sluggishness  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies.  I  believe  that  the  recent 
volatile movements in global financial markets are less likely to induce instability in the global 
financial system, unlike in the past. Nevertheless, attention should be paid to the possibility 
that, if volatile movements are protracted, this may affect confidence among individuals and 
firms and ultimately economic activity. 
A  continuation  of  monetary  tightening  in  the  United  States  would  indicate  that  economic 
conditions there are deemed to be favorable. If the momentum of economic activity is judged 
as weak, the rate rise will be postponed. As for China, there is room for adequate fiscal and 
monetary measures. I do not expect that these developments will intensify negative impacts 
on emerging and commodity-exporting economies or on Japan’s economy. In contrast, the 
substantial decline in crude oil prices has been exerting an extremely large impact on recent 
developments in the global economy and financial conditions worldwide, regardless of whether 
such decline was the cause or the consequence of these developments. 
Decline in crude oil prices 
A.  
The decline in crude oil prices has had a negative influence on a wide  range of corporate 
activities. For example, firms have substantially reduced their fixed investment related to crude 
oil production, which accounts for a large share of global business fixed investment. Firms that 
provide  oil-related  facilities  and  services  have  been  particularly  affected.  Furthermore,  oil-
producing countries, which had been in excess of funds, are now in shortage of funds, and this 
has  caused  a  reversal  in  the  flow  of  funds,  creating  considerable  stress  not  only  on  the 
economic activity of these countries but also on global stock markets and foreign exchange 
markets. 
As I have described, the substantial decline in crude oil prices has had large negative impacts; 
however, when viewed in the somewhat longer term, these will be net positive effects on the 
global economy, because income will be transferred from economies with a low propensity to 
consume to those with a high propensity to consume, and from capital-intensive industries to 
more labor-intensive industries. I consider that the overall positive effects on Japan – for which 
the  self-sufficiency  rate  of  crude  oil  is  extremely  low  –  are  particularly  large,  although  the 
magnitude of the effects, both positive and negative, differs by firm and industry. 
Hikes in crude oil prices have often caused global economic recessions. However, there have 
never  been  recessions  stemming  from  a  decline  in  these  prices.  The  immediate  negative 
effects of the decline in these prices – such as those on financial markets – have been more 
pronounced than the positive effects, which will take time to become apparent, but it is my view 
that we do not need to be overly concerned about the present situation. 
Prices 
B.  
A  substantial  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  leads  to  a  fall  in  energy  prices,  and  consequently 
pushes down the level of overall prices. Some say that developments in individual prices do 
not affect the level of overall prices, because such developments cause prices of other items 
to move inversely to these individual prices. For example, even if energy prices decline, real 
income will increase accordingly, and thus prices other than energy prices will rise through an 
increase in spending. While this may be true in the long run, such an outcome is unlikely to 
occur  within  about  two  years,  the  time  horizon  that  central  banks  typically  consider  as 
appropriate in conducting monetary policy. As noted in the January 2016 Outlook Report, the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   projected  timing  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food) 
reaching the price stability target of 2 percent has been delayed as the overall inflation rate will 
be pushed down due to the substantial decline in crude oil prices. Nevertheless, a decline in 
crude oil prices by nature is a considerable positive factor for Japan’s economy, and its effects 
on overall prices eventually will dissipate. Thus, I consider that the delay itself is acceptable. 
Also, in terms of monetary policy, I believe that it is appropriate to exclude the effects of energy 
prices as temporary factors and grasp the underlying trend in prices. 
The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) for December 2015 was 
0.1 percent but that for all items less fresh food and energy – which indicates the underlying 
trend in prices – was 1.3 percent. The Bank projects that, in a situation where Japan’s economy 
is likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential, the year-on-year rate of increase in 
the CPI (all items less fresh food) will likely rise closer to 2 percent through fiscal 2017 when 
the negative contribution of energy items dissipates. 
Inflation expectations are referred to as a factor that largely affects the price outlook, but it is 
difficult to actually assess them. It can be said that the inflation expectations of both firms and 
consumers have been rising from a somewhat longer-term perspective – as suggested by the 
recent price-setting behavior of firms and the subsequent purchasing behavior of consumers, 
or by rises in base salaries for two consecutive years. In addition, I consider that two indicators 
– the inflation swap rates and break-even inflation (BEI) rates for JGBs, both of which are 
frequently used to assess inflation expectations and are compiled based on financial market 
data – have not sufficiently reflected the actual inflation expectations in Japan, unlike in the 
cases  of  the  United  States  or  Europe,  given  the  size  and  liquidity  of  Japanese  financial 
markets. Therefore, these indicators should be regarded only as a reference. 
Let me note here that prices are normally determined when consumers accept the prices set 
by firms. 
Since spring 2015, manufacturers have been raising the wholesale prices of their standard 
products, due mainly to the rise in costs, and this has led to a rise in sales prices. In addition, 
prices of general services have been rising due to labor shortages. These factors have been 
pushing up the underlying trend in prices. It is the second year of such price increases, which 
raises difficult issues including the following: (1) whether manufacturers can raise the prices of 
their  standard  products  again;  (2)  whether  manufacturers  will  implement  a  de  facto  price 
increase by developing new products with value added or those similar to the previous ones; 
(3)  whether  manufacturers  will  raise  the  prices  of  goods  for  which  they  have  postponed 
increases so far; (4) whether the cost that has been absorbed by the distribution sector will be 
passed on to sales prices; and (5) whether the services sector can continue to pass the rise in 
labor costs on to final prices. 
That being said, many firms are experiencing less room for further cost reductions. In these 
circumstances, they need to increase sales in order to maintain or raise the level of profits in 
the face of upward pressure on labor costs. In the current situation of it being difficult to expect 
an increase in sales volumes as the aging population and declining birthrate have progressed, 
the only solution is to raise the unit prices of goods and services. 
As firms start to increase prices, the focus is on whether consumers will accept such increases. 
In this regard, I consider that the key to a continued steady rise in the underlying trend in prices 
is whether consumers will be optimistic about future developments in income and wages. 
Wages 
C.  
Recently, labor market conditions have been extremely tight, and an increasing number of 
firms  are  experiencing  labor  shortages.  In  textbook  theory,  wages  are  determined  by  the 
supply-demand balance in the labor market, but statistics show that the pace of increase in 
wages as a whole has remained only moderate. This is because regular employees’ wages, 
which account for a major part of total employee income, have been rising only moderately, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   although the hourly pay of non-regular employees has been rising markedly, reflecting tight 
labor market conditions. 
One  major  cause  behind  this  situation  is  the  framework  for  regular  employees  in  Japan, 
although it is gradually changing. It is unique to Japan because of the country’s systems and 
practices. 
Let me elaborate on this point. In Japan, where it is difficult to discharge regular employees, 
excesses and shortages of regular employees are balanced by the number of new graduates 
to be hired. New graduates go through in-house training so that they become well suited to 
their individual firms. The salaries and other benefits available to regular employees throughout 
their careers are significant as long as they are regular employees. These factors lower their 
labor  mobility  to  move  from  one  firm  to  another.  If  regular  employees  do  not  change  jobs 
despite some dissatisfaction with their salary levels, employers will have less incentive to raise 
the levels of salaries to secure suitably qualified employees. Thus, employers take the initiative 
in setting regular employees’ wages. Even if corporate profits are increasing, employers tend 
to be reluctant to increase wages, particularly base salaries, given the uncertainty regarding 
the outlook for profits. They also may be reluctant to allocate profits obtained through overseas 
operations to an increase in wages in Japan. As has been evident so far, regular employees’ 
wages do not rise smoothly because each firm negotiates wages with its own union amid the 
low mobility of regular employees. 
Although it has been pointed out that an increase in labor productivity is necessary for wages 
to rise, it is difficult to expect proper operation of the mechanism in which productivity in the 
economy as a whole increases. This is because, with low labor mobility, wages do not work as 
the intermediary function to smoothly correct the differences in productivity among firms. 
In  order  to  increase  productivity  and  the  economic  growth  rate  in  Japan,  a  change  in  the 
employment  framework  is  necessary  so  that  labor  is  transferred  smoothly  –  through  an 
increase in wages – from firms with low productivity and profits to those with high productivity 
and profits. This will take time, but if the economy continues to grow at a pace exceeding its 
potential,  firms  may  face  more  acute  labor  shortages  and  an  immediate  issue  of  securing 
suitably qualified employees. In addition, the decline in energy prices will underpin corporate 
profits,  including  those  of  small  firms.  Reflecting  such  a  situation,  the  wage  level  can  be 
expected to rise gradually among many firms. 
The Bank, for its part, will maintain the accommodative financial conditions through the conduct 
of monetary policy so that the virtuous cycle from corporate profits to wages, and in turn to 
consumption, operates properly. 
Given that the effects of tighter labor market conditions are not spreading to wages smoothly, 
some may voice various opinions about the government’s recent action to encourage wage 
increases, but I understand that such action is necessary. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
