   Turalay Kenç: Emerging market policies in a volatile global environment 
– the case of Turkey 
Remarks by Mr Turalay Kenç, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, 
at the National Asset-Liability Management Europe Symposium, London, 3 March 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
I would like to thank Central Banking Publications for the honor of being invited to deliver the 
keynote  address  at  this  European  Meeting  of  National  Asset-Liability  Management.  I  am 
delighted to be back. The first time I did this was back in 2011 in Istanbul.  
In my remarks today, I will focus on policies of emerging market central banks in a volatile 
global  environment  with  a  particular  focus  on  Turkey.  I  will  begin  with  an  overview  of  the 
challenges facing emerging market central banks in an increasingly interconnected world. I will 
then discuss resilience of emerging economies (EMEs) to global financial conditions together 
with their macroeconomic and prudential policy responses. I will finish my talk with the Central 
Bank  of  Turkey’s  roadmap  of  policy  actions  before  and  after  global  monetary  policy 
normalization. 
Heightened global financial market volatility 
The  volatile  global  environment  mostly  likely  stems  from  the  gradually  worsening  global 
economic  and  financial  problems  and  the  increasingly  interconnected  world  through 
production,  financing  and  communication  technology  channels.  The  former  is  essentially 
related  to  growth,  stock  balances  and  policy  uncertainty  problems.  The  latter  underscores 
higher degree of external shocks’ transmission across globe.  
After almost a decade since the global financial crisis (GFC) erupted, the long awaited strong 
global economic recovery has not been realized in spite of unprecedented accommodative 
monetary policies in the large part of the world (Figure 1). In fact, growth is slowing in many 
EMEs with a modest recovery in advanced economies (AEs) and recent low prices depressing 
commodity exporters. After their strong performance during the great recession most EMEs 
face  a  synchronous  and  protracted  deceleration  in  growth  rates  owing  to  the  weakened 
external  and  domestic  factors.  Some  commodity  exporting  EMEs  even  suffer  from  an 
economic  recession.  China  grapples  with  the  appropriate  policy  actions  and  uncertainty 
associated with the ongoing transformation of the export – investment led growth model to a 
domestic consumption – services sector driven economy.1  
Furthermore, potential growth across the world has declined due to the global slowdown in 
productivity growth, persistently weak investment, aging population and weakened global trade 
(Figures 2–3).2 Rising inequality, on the other hand, exacerbates both the recovery and long-
term growth problems. To this end, global policy coordination is the way forward. The G20’s 
framework for strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth with strong commitments on 
structural  reforms  as  well  as  aggregate  demand  stimulating  policies  provides  a  good 
mechanism to serve this purpose.  
                                                 
1   T.  Didier,  M.  A.  Kose,  F.  Ohnsorge  and  L.  S.  Ye  (2015),  Slowdown  in  Emerging  Markets:  Rough  patch  or 
prolonged weakness?, Policy Research Note 4, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
2   OECD (2016), Economic Policy Reforms 2016: Going For Growth Interim Report, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   The weak recovery is also very much related to the problem of demand deficiency – a situation 
associated with aggregate demand being less than the aggregate supply corresponding to full 
employment level of output in the economy. And this is probably driven by high indebtedness 
levels in government and private balance sheets across the world including both advanced 
and emerging market economies. As a matter of fact, the impaired private balance sheets 
caused the so-called balance sheet recession of 2008–2009 in AEs as in the USA during the 
great depression and in Japan during the years following the Japanese financial crisis of 1991. 
Now, not only the private sectors – financial, non-financial and households – of AEs but also 
their governments and more importantly EME private sectors suffer from high indebtedness 
levels. For example, some EME households have debt as large as 75 to 95 percent of GDP. 
Moreover,  EME  private  balance  sheets  largely  consist  of  external  liabilities  as  opposed  to 
domestic currency denominated assets, which expose them to increases in the cost of debt-
servicing foreign currency – denominated external obligations in cases of real exchange rate 
depreciation. Recent research suggests that agents tend to cut back their spending when their 
debt reaches certain levels.3,4 Going forward, we are likely to see only a gradual improvement 
in this stock balances problem as they take longer time to heal than flow balances problems. 
Again, the cases of Japan and the great depression testify this observation.5 
Policy  uncertainty  over  the  appropriate  policy  actions  has  recently  heightened.  The  policy 
uncertainty  is  associated  with  the  question  of  appropriate  mix  of  demand  and  supply  side 
policies,  the  extent  and  type  of  suitable  monetary  policy  and  the  effectiveness  of  macro-
prudential policy are the sources of policy uncertainty. Likewise, China has its own acute policy 
uncertainty problem as mentioned above. Reasons behind heightened policy uncertainty are 
policy paralyses and unconventional policies such as monetary quantitative easing policy and 
negative nominal policy rates following financial crises. Elevated policy uncertainty holds back 
investment and growth6 and causes heightened market volatility.  
Over  the  recent  globalization  period  the  world  has  become  an  increasingly  interconnected 
place.  Global  trade  has  increased,  broadened  and  deepened  drastically  because  of  trade 
liberalization, unprecedented capital flows and the international fragmentation of production in 
global value chains. EMEs have contributed to this development significantly as they have 
become  increasingly  more  connected  to  the  global  production,  monetary  and  financial 
systems.  The  unprecedented  capital  flows  have  also  made  global  financial  markets  more 
interconnected than at any time in history. Advances in communication technology have further 
heightened and extended the interconnectedness of global financial markets. The increased 
interconnectedness  together  with  sharply  risen  external  liabilities  has  reinforced  the 
proposition  of  the  Impossible  trinity  (also  known  as  the  Trilemma)  on  monetary  policy 
dependence as monetary conditions have become more correlated than before.  
Resilience of emerging market economies to global financial conditions 
In  the  1980s  and  1990s  EMEs  experienced  financial crises  following  a  sudden  reversal  of 
capital flows. In fact, during this period there were two waves of financial crisis in the EME 
world. The first wave was associated with currency crises as significantly strengthened US 
                                                 
3   Cecchetti, S, M Mohanty and F Zampolli (2011), “Achieving growth amid fiscal imbalances: the real effects of 
debt”, in Achieving maximum long-run growth, a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
4   Lo, S. and K. Rogoff (2015), Secular stagnation, debt overhang and other rationales for sluggish growth, six 
years on, BIS Working Papers No 482. 
5   Koo, R. (2009), The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics: Lessons from Japan s Great Recession, Revised Edition, 
John Wiley & Sons. 
6   Baker,  Bloom  and  Davis  (2013),  “Measuring  economic  policy  uncertainty”,  Chicago  Booth  Research  Paper, 
no 13–02, May. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   dollar led to massive adjustments in the fixed EME exchange rates. This followed sovereign 
debt crises in many emerging markets, i.e., Mexico, Brazil and Argentina. The second wave 
was triggered by sudden stop of capital inflows. The EM banks having intermediated these 
flows, as a result, caused these severe financial crises in several EMEs such as Mexico and 
Turkey  in  1994,  East  Asian  countries  after  mid-1997  and  Russia  in  1998.  The  insufficient 
volume of external safety nets as well as the underdeveloped nature of financial markets in 
EMEs  made  financial  crises  unavoidable.  In  addition,  inability  to  implement  countercyclical 
policies  made  EMEs  suffer  from  larger  damaging  effects  of  financial  crises  on  their  real 
economies than otherwise. 
It is noteworthy that despite the lack of capacities in avoiding financial crises, EMEs mostly 
managed to recover swiftly from their acute past financial crises succeeding severe economic 
recessions. Likewise, most EMEs survived the – a once in a century event – GFC of 2008 in 
spite of its profound impacts on the financial systems of AEs with the subsequent “balance 
sheet recessions”. EMEs again largely escaped the great recession though some of them had 
brief economic recessions. 
With lessons learned from previous episodes and improvements over the years EMEs are, on 
average, better positioned to withstand financial turbulences, both now and in the near future, 
than  in  the  past.  First  of  all,  they  embarked  on  extensive  structural  reforms  aimed  at 
overhauling financial regulatory and supervisory systems, strengthening public finances and 
fiscal discipline, granting central banks independence, and adopting flexible exchange rate 
systems. These reforms enabled them to implement more prudent and countercyclical policies 
as well. EMEs solidified their post crisis reforms by accumulating adequate foreign exchange 
reserves as an alternative to the IMF provided financing, which carries strong conditionality, 
as well as further deepening and broadening their domestic financial markets. As a result, 
stock and flow balances, policy frameworks, and levels of economic confidence and market 
development in EMEs have strengthened substantially and radically.  
Stock ad flow balances 
Since  EMEs  mostly  suffered  from  sovereign  debt  crises,  fiscal  discipline  has  been  the 
cornerstone of the first generation of structural reforms. Prudent fiscal policies have played a 
key role in maintaining low budget deficits and hence lowered debt levels to the extent that 
budgets delivered primary surpluses (Figure 4). Lower interest rates implied by diminished 
financing requirements of the government sector then further reinforced fiscal positions. As a 
consequence, the share of government bonds in emerging debt markets has declined and 
created  room  for  the  private  sector  debt  market  to  grow.  Private  debt  levels  in  emerging 
markets have also stayed at moderate levels on average (Figure 4).  
Declined public debt also implied lower bases for external debt. In addition to this development, 
EM governments have consciously borrowed less in foreign currencies in the wake of their 
earlier  financial  crises.  Combined  effects  have,  on  average,  reduced  government  owned 
external debt to GDP ratio from 28 percent at the beginning of the 2000s to 18 percent in 2014. 
This decline in Eurodollar loans manifests deepened domestic debt markets and hence have 
reduced the so called “original sin” problem of emerging markets to the extent that foreign 
investors willing to lend in domestic currency as opposed to hard currencies. It is argued that 
one  of  the  factors  that  created  economic  instability  in  EMEs  is  the  “original  sin”  problem. 
According to this hypothesis emerging and developing countries are unable to borrow abroad 
in their own currencies reflecting lower degrees of portfolio diversification at the global level to 
emerging currency denominated investments. Needless to say, borrowing in foreign currencies 
creates  currency  mismatch  problem  –  increases  in  the  cost  of  debt-servicing  of  foreign 
currency – denominated external obligations in cases of real exchange rate depreciation. The 
cost is measured in terms of the reduced purchasing power of domestic output over foreign 
claims following the depreciation. The original sin indicator depicted in Figure 5 shows that 
original sin level is much below that of the 1990s despite its rise since the beginning of 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
   In other words, EMEs’ share of obligations in foreign currencies is well below those observed 
in the 1990s.7 
Bailing  out  banks  during  the  above  mentioned  EME  financial  crises  put  heavy  burden  on 
government budgets of EMEs. It was well-understood that banking sector plays a systemic 
role. In order to avoid bailout costs and disturbances to the intermediation of loans to real 
economy EMEs overhauled their banking sector regulatory and supervisory systems. These 
reforms tried to ensure that banks hold adequate capitals to be resilient to shocks and, in 
general, run their businesses in a prudent way. Figure 6 shows that leverage ratios measured 
as (risk unweighted) capital divided by total assets, on average, stayed above the average 
levels of the 1980’s and 1990’s and also the average ratio of advanced economy banks. 
After evaluating the key stock balances, I now move to flows balances to uncover the dynamics 
governing stock balances in the economy. They include economic growth, inflation and current 
account balance. 
The left window of Figure 7 shows that the average GDP growth rates of EMEs are still above 
that  of  AEs  and  EMEs  still  contribute  to  global  growth  significantly  despite  the  latest 
synchronous and protracted slowdown in emerging markets. 
The right window of Figure 7 reveals that the probably biggest post-crises’ success of EMEs 
is in the area of price stability. 
Prudent  macroeconomic  and  financial  policies  and  improved  macroeconomic  policy 
frameworks are the key factors behind this much lower inflation outcome. Among them the 
granting of independence to many EM central banks has been the most significant progress in 
improving the institutional quality of EM institutions. Their successes in lowering inflation over 
the  years  have  resulted  in  desirable  gains  in  monetary  policy  credibility.  The  adoption  of 
inflation targeting frameworks provided beneficial nominal anchors and further enhanced policy 
credibility. To the extent that prudent policies and frameworks succeeded in achieving their 
targets the key dominances, especially in fiscal area, have eased and thereby the effectiveness 
of monetary policy increased significantly. 
One of the chief causes of the GFC is the existence of global external imbalances. The G20 
led policy coordination has reduced the imbalances to a certain degree. In this process, some 
EMEs suffered from declines in their surplus levels but the others succeeded improvements.  
How resilient are EMEs to global financial conditions? 
In this section I assess EMEs’ resilience to external shocks by discussing the ways and extents 
of  external  shocks  are  transmitted  to  domestic  economies  of  emerging  markets.  The  first 
transmission  way  of  external  shocks  is  the  trade  channel.  In  recent  decades  EMEs  have 
increased their share of global exports and recorded strong growth in inter-regional and intra-
regional trade among emerging markets. As a result, EMEs currently make up around one-fifth 
of  the  world’s  total  trade.  In  addition,  they  have  diversified  their  production  and  exports. 
Although increased trade openness of EMEs magnifies the potential impact of external shocks 
on these economies, there are also positive developments such as strengthened product and 
regional diversity providing a degree of mitigation. Similar arguments can be made for the 
second transmission channel, namely funding channel: increased external liabilities but well 
diversified sources together with significantly lengthened maturities. But there is a negative 
development worth mentioning is that capital flows are mostly by driven by the unconventional 
                                                 
7   Hausmann, Ricardo and Ugo Panizza (2013), On the determinants of Original Sin: An empirical investigation, 
Journal of International Money and Finance, Volume 22(7), Pages 957–990. 
Hausmann, Ricardo and Ugo Panizza (2011), Redemption or Abstinence? Original Sin, Currency Mismatches 
and Counter Cyclical Policies in the New Millennium, Journal of Globalization & Development, Volume 2(1), 
Pages 1–35. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   policies of major central banks drive capital flows and they have become highly volatile since 
the GFC. 
Finally, the aforementioned improvements in EMEs are likely to constrain the deterioration in 
business  and  consumer  expectations.  This  is  also  a  crucial  development  as  the  lessons 
learned from the past financial turmoils and crises revealed that the most distinguishing feature 
of an emerging market economy is the significant adverse effects on the real economy through 
the  expectations  channel.  Among  many  advances  in  EMEs,  rich  policy  frameworks  have 
played an important role in improving economic agents’ confidence in EMEs. In addition, EMEs 
ability and policy conduct to accumulate policy spaces have made significant contributions to 
solidifying  gains  in  confidence.  It  is  worth  noting  that  in  addition  to  conventional 
macroeconomic  policies  EMEs  have  also  extensively  used  macro-  and  micro-prudential 
policies, serving as buffers for shocks (Figure 8). Since the EM financial crises EMEs have 
continued to use a number of macro-prudential measures when conventional policies, such as 
rate hikes to manage aggregate demand, were realized to be ineffective and/or insufficient. 
Such  macro-prudential  tools  have  not  only  maintained  low  levels  of  leverage  but  also 
accumulated  buffers  that  can  serve  as  policy  spaces  in  cases  of  economic  downturn. 
Additionally, macro-prudential policy helped monetary authorities implement monetary policy 
exclusively to achieve price stability. Finally, EMEs learned macro-prudential policy is more 
appropriate to limit and repair maturity and currency mismatch problems.  
In  addition  to  the  macro-prudential  policy,  EMEs  implemented  rigorously  micro-prudential 
policies rigorously in order to make their financial firms, especially banks, more resilient and 
safer  against  financial  stresses.  The  macro  and  micro  prudential  policies  of  EMEs  in  the 
previous decades have succeeded in lowering levels of leverage, not only in financial sectors, 
but also in nonfinancial and household sectors. This, in turn, lowered levels of maturity and 
currency mismatches. This gave rise to high capital adequacy ratios and low non-performing 
loan rations in banking sectors of many EMEs. 
Moreover, in relative terms fiscal positions of EMEs have further strengthened while those of 
AEs  have  worsened  in  the  aftermath  of  the  GFC  due  to  sizeable  fiscal  stimulus  policies. 
Keeping  this  systemically  important  sector  free  from  solvency  risk  has  helped  EMEs  gain 
business confidence (Figure 9). Lower deficit and debt levels imply ample policy spaces for 
EMEs in cases of economic downturn. Creditworthiness together with policy spaces on the EM 
fiscal fronts have contained upward pressures on interest rates and have kept the effectiveness 
of other policies intact. It is fair to say that they now look strong enough to render the adverse 
effects of external financial shocks manageable.8 
Policy actions in EMEs 
However,  the  current  unconventional  monetary  policies  of  AEs  in  the  form  of  low  or  even 
negative nominal policy rates as well as quantitative easing and unintended consequences of 
the financial sector reforms across the world pose new challenges to EMEs. Until recently, 
because  of better  growth  prospects  and lower  levels  of leveraging,  EMEs  attracted  capital 
inflows  with  their  nonfinancial  corporates  having  lion  shares.  The  normalization  of  global 
monetary policies has reversed the course of capital flows and led to the sizable depreciation 
of EM currencies against the dollar. This creates inflationary pressures due to the pass-through 
impact and impairs balance sheets due to tightening global financial conditions and worsening 
growth  prospects.  Furthermore,  the  sharp  fall  in  oil  prices  exacerbates  the  deterioration  in 
economic outlook for commodity exporting countries. Going forward, the normalization of US 
monetary policy, diverging monetary policies of AEs, uncertainty in commodity prices and the 
                                                 
8   Kenç, Turalay, Fatma Pınar Erdem and İbrahim Ünalmış (2016), Resilience of Emerging Market Economies to 
Global Financial Conditions, Central Bank Review, forthcoming.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
   risk of China’s economic hard-landing all will be likely to contribute to volatile global financial 
markets and widening spreads for EMEs.  
Large  asset  purchasing  programs  of  the  major  central  banks  have  depressed  global  bond 
markets  with  decreasing  long-term  yields  as  well  as  short-term  yields  and  their  negative 
nominal  policy  rates  further  destabilized  bond  markets  and  in  general  financial  markets. 
Heightened volatility in global financial markets (Figures 10–11) can be associated with the 
presence of very low and even negative rates rather than the underlying macroeconomic and 
external imbalances. In these circumstances, any change in interest rate differential across 
countries will likely create greater impacts than otherwise. If this interest rate change takes 
place in the largest and most significant economy in the world, then the impact will expectedly 
be magnified further. 
The Fed’s normalization of interest rate demonstrated that its impact on the global economy 
and financial markets indeed has been large, giving rise to significant capital outflows from 
EMEs, large adjustments and volatility in exchange rates as well as widened EM spreads and 
interest rates. The adverse effects of the Fed’s interest rate normalization has been on average 
larger than those occurred in previous two financial turmoil episodes namely the Eurozone 
sovereign  debt  crisis  and  the  US  tapering  tantrum.  Moreover,  the  disparity  between  the 
effected  countries  has  been  large  too.  The  plummeted  commodity  prices  as  well  as  other 
factors led to this outcome as commodity importers suffered from both the lower commodity 
revenues and the tightening global financial conditions. Financial markets also differentiated 
EMEs  by  policy  frameworks  and  prudent  policies.  Those  having  rich  and  better  policy 
frameworks and prudent policies have withstood the recent global financial turmoil better than 
others.  
Commodity-exporting and commodity-importing EMEs have different monetary policy options. 
While commodity exporters have limited monetary policy space, commodity importers have 
some  rooms  to  counteract.  In  the  former  group,  inflations  increased  and  balance  sheets 
weakened due to the currency depreciation. In the latter group, in some countries, inflations 
decreased and central banks cut policy rates thanks to the low oil prices. However, in several 
oil importing countries, inflation is near or above the target bands. For central banks in these 
countries, tightening the monetary policy may be a priority for the credibility of central bank. In 
oil exporting countries where growth has weakened and inflation has gone up by currency 
depreciation, banks with high foreign currency vulnerabilities or heavy reliance on short-term 
debt need close monitoring or tighter prudential requirements. 
Moreover, due to the different internal (growth and inflation) and external conditions (balance 
of payments strength), monetary policy positions have also diverged. Economies with current 
account deficits have been facing difficulties to balance internal pressures such as above-
target inflation and slowdown in growth against reduced global capital inflows. These countries 
come to terms with limitations on countercyclical monetary policies to support the adversely 
affected  domestic  demand  from  tightened  global  financial  conditions.  On  the  other  hand 
interest rates in other countries such as emerging Eastern European countries rates are at 
their historically low levels in order to avoid the disinflation imported from the Eurozone. EMEs 
with higher GDP growth, stronger external current account positions, lower inflation, and more 
liquid financial markets have managed to mitigate market volatility. Likewise, countries with 
more  resilient  financial  sectors  limited  the  adverse  effects  of  volatility.  As  a  result,  out  of 
19 EMEs,  9  EM  central  banks  have  decreased  the  policy  rate  since  the  taper  tantrum, 
8 increased and 2 did not change. Overall, policy rate has increased 1070 bps. Along with the 
easing cycles of AEs central banks and ample global liquidity, the capital flows into EMEs have 
been increased which encouraged public and private leveraging and fueled credit growth in 
these countries. In response to the impact of the increased liquidity, EMEs implemented some 
macro-prudential policies. Macro prudential policies in EMEs are even more important than 
before due to the divergent monetary policies in AEs. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   The Central Bank of Turkey’s roadmap of policy actions before and after global 
monetary policy normalization 
The Turkish economy has shown a relatively robust performance in the face of major external 
and internal shocks. GDP growth is estimated at around 4 percent in 2015 with an expected 
gradual strengthening of economic activity in 2016 and in 2017 (Figure 12). The rise in GDP 
growth  rate  observed  in  2015  is  mostly  attributed  to  strong  private  consumption.  Private 
investment  recorded  a  moderate  recovery.  The  challenging  external  conditions  especially 
geopolitical  events  in  the  region  have  adversely  affected  exports.  However,  the  economic 
recovery in most EU member states enabled Turkey to largely compensate its loss in other 
exports markets as Turkey increased exports to the EU countries by more than 10 percent in 
euro terms in 2015. This outcome also highlights Turkish exporters’ resiliency in adopting to 
adverse economic conditions.  
Of course, probably the most significant development of the last year or so has been the sharp 
decline in oil prices. Turkey, being an energy importing country, benefited from lower oil prices 
in many dimensions. The current account deficit fell from $52 billion in June 2014 to below 
$35 billion in November 2015 in 12 month cumulative terms. This sharp improvement in the 
current account balances has also been greatly helped by prudent macro-economic polices 
including monetary, macro-prudential and fiscal policies. Tight monetary policy (Figure 13), 
well-targeted  macro-prudential  measures  (Figure  14)  and  strong  fiscal  balances  have  all 
contributed to lower levels of domestic demand by stabilizing loan growth and reducing risk 
taking behavior. 
Going forward, the current low levels in oil prices and depressed producer prices in most part 
of the world due to weak economic activity are expected to lead to further improvements in 
external balances. Therefore, it is highly likely that Turkey will record a current account deficit 
of below 4 percent of its Gross Domestic Product in 2016, representing a major achievement 
in  satisfying  the  norm  of  the  European  Union’s  Macroeconomic  Imbalances  Procedure 
(Figure 15). 
Unlike  these  positive  developments  in  the  economy,  inflation  increased  and  its  outlook 
worsened in 2015 reflecting the pass-through from the TL depreciation, elevated food inflation, 
and markedly increased minimum wages. These factors together with some deterioration in 
inflation expectations led the MPC to revise its inflation forecasts for 2016 and 2017 up to 
7.5 percent  and  6  percent  respectively  and  postpone  the  projected  realization  year  of  the 
5 percent target to 2018 (Figure 16). 
Going ahead, I see three potential developments, which would improve the inflation outlook a 
great deal. First, the latest improvement in the external balances together with the already 
strong fiscal balances is likely to boost the effectiveness of the monetary policy. The ongoing 
tight monetary policy stance is then likely lead to lower inflation than otherwise. Second, in 
coming years the implementation of the structural reforms identified in the 10th Development 
Plan  aims  to  address  the  structural  causes  of  inflation  and  hence  is  expected  to  support 
disinflation process. Finally, the Food Committee (the Food and Agricultural Products Markets 
Monitoring and Evaluation Committee) was founded in December 2014 with an objective of 
identifying policies to alleviate the contribution of structural and cyclical factors to elevated food 
inflation. 
Of course, the credibility of monetary policy is key to achieve price stability. Therefore, let me 
devote the final part of my talk to explaining our policy strategy to cope with current challenges. 
Like most EMEs Turkey has also been facing tightening external financial conditions since May 
2013 and accordingly introduced several mutually complementary policies and announced a 
“road map” document back in August 2015 outlining monetary policy, foreign currency liquidity 
and financial stability related measures. 
The aim of the CBRT’s road map is to improve the resiliency of the economy to external shocks 
through  (i)  maturity  lengthening  –  encouraging  banks  to  shift  their  non-core  liabilities  from 
short-term to long-term (Figure 17); (ii) providing incentives to banks for borrowing and lending 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
   directly from and to the Central Bank in times when foreign players are reluctant to engage 
with banks in Turkey due to heightened volatility in global markets; (iii) bolstering safety-nets 
– making sure that the banking sector has access to adequate foreign exchange liquidity in 
times  of  market  stress;  (iv)  supporting  financial  stability  –  providing  incentives  to  banks  to 
improve loan to deposit ratios; and (v) simplifying the monetary policy framework to improve 
the communication of the monetary policy stance. All but the interest rate corridor simplification 
step on the roadmap have already been taken and the focus is now firmly on fine-tuning their 
parameters. 
Overall, these measures ease the policy tradeoffs posed by the excessive volatility in cross 
border flows, enabling the interest rate policy to concentrate on the primary objective of price 
stability.  So  far  the  financial  market  performance  of  Turkey  suggests  that  the  measures 
undertaken since August 2015 have helped Turkey outperform many peer EMEs. Of course, 
on the way, Turkey also enjoyed the benefits of lower oil prices relatively more than many 
EMEs and reduced political uncertainty after the general election result in November 2015. 
The  banking  sector  maintains  its  strong  and  sound  position  as  banks  in  Turkey  are  well-
capitalized with high quality and highly liquid assets and continue to offer solid rates of return 
on  capital.  As  a  result  the  banking  sector  still  provides  a  reasonable  loan  growth  for  the 
economy despite heightened uncertainty in global markets.  
To conclude given the ongoing challenging external conditions it will be essential to continue 
to  implement  a  tight  and  flexible  monetary  policy  in  order  to  lower  inflation  in  a  volatile 
environment. Meanwhile, taking liquidity stabilizing measures for the foreign currency market 
and ensuring the stability of the financial system are key to alleviate policy tradeoffs. Last, but 
not the least, maintaining the fiscal discipline; and adhering strictly to the announced structural 
reform agenda in order to lift potential growth in accordance with the country’s needs remains 
the key to stability. 
Thank you. 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Figure 1: Ongoing Weak Recovery 
   Figure 2: Weak Investment and Lower Productivity Growth 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
 Figure 3: Weakened Global Trade Growth 
    Figure 4: Indebtedness Levels of EME Government and Private Sectors 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Figure 5: Declined Original Sin Ratio 
Figure 6: Well Capitalized EME Banking Sector 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
 Figure 7: GDP Growth Rates of EMEs and AEs and Inflation Rate in EMEs 
Figure 8: Accumulated Macro-prudential Policy Space in EMEs 
       12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Figure 9: Improved Economic Confidence in EMEs 
    Figure 10: Volatile Global Financial Markets 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
 Figure 11: Volatility in EME Financial Markets  
    Figure 12: GDP Growth Rates in Turkey 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Figure 13: Monetary Policy and Monetary Policy Conditions in Turkey 
    Figure 14: Differentiated Loan Growth Rates in Turkey 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
 Figure 15: Current Account Balance in Turkey 
    Figure 16: Worsened Inflation Expectations in Turkey 
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Figure 17: Maturity Lengthening in External Liabilities of the Turkish Banking Sector 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
