  François Villeroy de Galhau: Numerous challenges for the international 
monetary system 
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  High 
Level Seminar on International Financial Architecture, Paris, 31 March 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
France, and the Banque de France in particular, has a long tradition of spurring high level 
reflections on the international financial architecture, such that we very much welcome the 
creation of the IFA WG by the Chinese presidency. This new working group echoes the IMS 
(International  monetary  System)  Working  Group  that  was  launched  under  the  French 
presidency  of  the  G20  in  2011.  At  the  time,  the  debates  on  the  IMS  were  already  very 
intense, as witnessed for instance by the profusion of proposals to amend the IMS, such as 
the  Palais  Royal  Initiative,  led  by  one  of my  predecessors  as Governor of  the  Banque  de 
France, Michel Camdessus. Before that, we all remember the work done by another former 
Governor of the Banque de France, Jacques de Larosière, who contributed a very influential 
report  in  2009  on  the  European  Union,  which  also  had  an  international  dimension.  The 
Eurosystem,  on  its  part,  is  committed  to  financial  stability.  We  decided  on  March  10th  a 
comprehensive  and  powerful  package,  aiming  to  provide  favorable  financial  conditions  for 
the economy. We will look closely at these financial conditions in the future and if needed, we 
could act further. 
The international monetary system is still facing numerous challenges. I would like to offer a 
few  thoughts  to  launch  our  discussion  today.  I  will  start  with  the  risks  and  vulnerabilities 
caused by excessive volatility and procyclicality of capital flows; I will then turn to the policy 
responses,  including  means  to  address  the  volatility  of  capital  flows  directly  and  issues 
related to the GFSN (or Global Financial Safety Net). 
I.  
Regarding international capital flows, it is fair to acknowledge that we do not have 
a good benchmark on what would constitute an appropriate level of these flows. There is a 
trade-off between the costs and the benefits that they bring, and this trade-off varies across 
countries and over time. Yet, the fluctuations in gross global capital flows do seem to be very 
procyclical and volatile. If we look at gross inflows in advanced economies for instance, we 
see that they rose considerably in the years preceding the Global Financial Crisis, from less 
than  10%  in  the  early  2000s  to  more  than  20%  in  2007.  Subsequently,  they  plunged  to 
virtually 0% in 2008 and 2009 and have remained low ever since. Not all types of flows show 
the same dynamics over time: FDI and portfolio equity flows have been fairly resilient, while 
bank  flows  and  debt  portfolio  flows  have  been  very  significantly  affected,  resulting  in  a 
marked changed in the composition of gross flows. 
These sharp fluctuations are clearly not optimal. Even bearing in mind the caveat that I have 
outlined earlier on the lack of a clear benchmark, it looks like international capital flows are 
too abundant in good times, potentially fueling domestic bubbles and destabilizing national 
financial systems, and prone to “sudden stops” in bad times. Emerging market economies 
have  experienced  numerous  examples  of  “surge”  episodes  of  capital  inflows  followed  by 
perilous sudden stops. Current (and preliminary) data suggest that some EMEs are currently 
experiencing very large outflows. The potentially destabilizing effects of capital flows may be 
magnified in the current situation, with disappointingly slow economic growth (of a cyclical 
and structural nature), high volatility in commodity and asset prices, the persistence of both 
internal  and  external  imbalances  in  key  countries  and  regions,  substantial  amounts  of 
currency mismatch on balance sheets in emerging market economies, etc. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
II.  
So  what  should  be  done?  I  think  that  we  should  try  to  be  both  pragmatic  and 
ambitious. If we are not pragmatic we will waste time exploring paths that will not lead us 
anywhere, but if we lack ambition we will never make progress. 
We should, first, develop a framework to prevent excessive capital flow volatility. Here I see 
three main avenues to explore: 
(i)  
improving  the  monitoring  of  capital  flows  and  hence  taking  forward  the  work  on 
data gaps on foreign currency exposures and mismatches. 
proactive  macro-prudential  regulation  to  prevent  unsustainable  debt  and  limit 
foreign  currency  borrowing  can  be  useful  to  reduce  the  procyclicality  of  financial 
flows, avoid excessive risk-taking and ensure an orderly external sector adjustment. 
Finally, one could also explore state contingent financing instruments, such as 
GDP  linked  bonds,  which  could  also  offer  innovative  means  to  smooth  external 
financing needs and avoid expanding scarce resources on assistance programs. 
(ii)  
(iii)  
However,  prevention  can  never  cover  all  risks  and  so,  we  need  a  stronger  GFSN.  As 
highlighted by the IMF the global financial safety net, although larger, has also become more 
fragmented and asymmetric. Some of its key building blocks have not been fully tested, and 
some of its key aspects suffer to various degrees from being costly, unreliable, and lacking 
adequate policy incentives. 
This  shared  diagnosis  offers  a  key  opportunity  to  strengthen  the  GFSN.  Reserves,  swap 
lines and Regional Financial Arrangements (RFAs) are not a substitute for having a strong, 
well-resourced IMF at the heart of it, on the back of the recent approval of the 2010 Quota 
and  Governance  reforms,  which  has  strengthened  the  Fund  legitimacy.  From  our 
perspective, three elements stand out: 
First,  identify  potential  ways  to  improve  the  use  of  existing  IMF  facilities,  notably 
precautionary facilities, and/or consider the possible creation of new facilities. The objective 
here is to mitigate stigma, without creating moral hazard. 
Second, ensure that the IMF is adequately equipped to deal with the vulnerabilities of Low 
Income  Countries,  Emerging  Market  Economies  and  commodity  exporters:  GCC  (Gulf 
Cooperation Countries), CEMAC (Central African Economic and Monetary Community) and 
Latin  American  countries  have  all  been  affected  by  the  recent  drop  in  commodity  prices. 
Broad coverage requires making sure that the IMF is adequately resourced, both in terms of 
permanent resources, and through state contingent financing resources in case of common 
shocks or systemic crises. 
Third, there are also ways for the GFSN to operate better without the Fund extending more 
financing.  There  may  be  benefits  in  further  use  of  “signaling”  instruments,  which  share 
most of the features of regular programs but without financing. For example, countries like 
Sénégal or Nigeria have relied on the IMF Policy Support Instrument: this program enables 
low-income countries to benefit from Fund’s advice and support, which sends a clear signal 
to  donors,  creditors  and  markets.  However,  these  instruments  are  only  available  for  low-
income countries; there is to date no equivalent tool for emerging or advanced economies. 
Such instruments could help in certain situations (for instance during systemic crises) where 
it is essential to maintain market access and facilitate rollover of private financing. 
With  this  I  would  like  to  conclude  my  presentation.  I  very  much  look  forward  to  our 
discussions today and to seeing the work of the IFA work stream in the coming months. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
