   Thomas Jordan: Comments on Swiss monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, 
at the 108th Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 
29 April 2016. 
 Mr President of the Bank Council 
Dear Shareholders 
Dear Guests 
Our  last  ordinary  general  meeting  was  dominated  by  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum 
exchange rate. The past year has been a difficult one, with the Swiss economy once again 
demonstrating great flexibility and adaptability. It was also a year during which there has been 
broad discussion in the public arena of the monetary policy of the Swiss National Bank. It is 
essential that the judgements we make and the measures we take are fully understood, if our 
monetary policy is to be effective and trust is to be maintained in the SNB. In my comments 
today I would therefore like to outline once again our current monetary policy and our views on 
key issues. 
I shall divide my speech into two parts. First, I will talk about economic developments and 
briefly recap our reasons for discontinuing the minimum exchange rate. Then I will take a look 
at the current economic situation. In this context, I will discuss our mandate of ensuring price 
stability. I will conclude this part by looking ahead to the challenges that face us in the future. 
In the second half of my speech, I will address two ideas, which are the subject of current 
public debate and which would have a direct impact on the SNB were they to become reality: 
namely the creation of a sovereign wealth fund using the SNB’s foreign exchange reserves, 
and the sovereign money initiative. 
Economic developments 
Discontinuation of minimum exchange rate 
Let’s  start  then  by  casting  our  minds  back  to  last  year.  On  15 January  2015,  the  SNB 
discontinued the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro. This had been introduced as 
a  temporary  measure  in  September  2011  in  exceptional  circumstances. The  Swiss  franc’s 
safe-haven  status  had  caused  it  to  appreciate  rapidly  and  sharply  against  virtually  all 
currencies. The consequent massive overvaluation of the Swiss franc had posed a threat to 
the Swiss economy and carried the risk of deflation. The minimum exchange rate put a stop to 
these developments. 
In the subsequent almost three and a half years until January 2015, the situation changed 
fundamentally. Global uncertainty eased and the Swiss economy gained ground once again. 
By contrast, recovery in the euro area continued to be sluggish. The euro had already steadily 
weakened against major currencies in the second half of 2014. Furthermore, at the start of 
2015,  there  were  signs  of  further  easing  of  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area.  Against  this 
backdrop, the euro was expected to weaken further. In contrast to 2011, the environment at 
the beginning of 2015 was no longer characterised by Swiss franc strength, but by broad-
based euro weakness. 
In these  circumstances,  the minimum  exchange  rate  was  no  longer sustainable. The  SNB 
could only have enforced it through ongoing foreign currency purchases of rapidly increasing 
magnitude. However, there would still have been no prospect of a long-term stabilisation of the 
situation. An uncontrolled expansion of the balance sheet would have compromised the SNB’s 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
ability  to  conduct  monetary  policy  in  the  long  term.  Continuing  to  uphold  the  minimum 
exchange rate was therefore no longer justifiable. 
Delaying any decision to discontinue would also not have helped the situation. On the contrary, 
if we had not faced facts and had delayed abandoning the minimum rate, the turbulence on 
the foreign exchange markets would have been no less severe. The impact on the economy 
would have been just as great, while the losses on the foreign exchange reserves would have 
been considerably heavier. 
The  Swiss  franc  initially  appreciated  sharply  on  15 January  2015.  In  the  meantime,  it  has 
broadly  declined,  although  it  is  still  considerably  stronger  against  the  euro  than  before 
discontinuation.  This  is  attributable  to  the  persistent  weakness  of  the  euro.  Developments 
since January 2015 have confirmed that our assessment at the time was correct. 
Current situation 
The discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate marked a shift in our monetary policy focus. 
It is now based on two key elements. The first is the negative interest rate, which is currently 
–0.75%. This is charged on sight deposits held at the SNB by banks and other financial market 
participants. The second is our willingness to intervene in the foreign exchange market as 
necessary, while taking the overall currency situation into consideration. Our monetary policy 
is thus expansionary and aimed at easing pressure on the Swiss franc, thereby ensuring price 
stability in the medium term. 
Many feared a recession on the back of the discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate and 
the rapid appreciation of the Swiss franc. Yet our economy grew by 0.9% last year. This may 
not be a strong growth rate, but it is still a good sign. On the one hand, it reflects the flexibility 
and adaptability of Swiss companies and employees. On the other, the economy was also 
supported  by  our  expansionary  monetary  policy.  This  contributed  to  the  weakening  of  the 
Swiss franc over the course of the past year. It remains significantly overvalued, however. 
The slight increase in economic output in Switzerland is a positive development, particularly in 
view of the continued tentative recovery of the global economy. This hesitant recovery was 
accompanied by a collapse in commodity prices in 2015, in which both weak demand and 
increased oil production played a role. 
The drop in oil prices and the appreciation of the franc following the discontinuation of the 
minimum exchange rate pushed inflation in Switzerland into negative territory. Both factors 
produce a one-off downward adjustment in prices. The resulting effect on inflation is thus only 
temporary. Over recent months, inflation has been observed to be edging back up towards the 
zero mark. 
Mandate 
The SNB’s statutory mandate is to ensure price stability while taking due account of economic 
developments. We equate price stability with a situation in which the inflation rate is below 2%, 
but still positive. Unlike other central banks, we do not have a percentage inflation target. 
There  are  good  reasons  for  this.  A  small  open  economy  like  Switzerland  is  continuously 
exposed to powerful outside influences. Monetary policy cannot always entirely offset these 
influences. It therefore makes sense for us to stabilise inflation within a range over the medium 
term. In the case of very large or recurrent unfavourable influences from abroad, inflation may 
temporarily turn negative. Often, this is also part of the process of real economic adjustment. 
The global economy has been exposed to a series of powerful shocks over the past ten years 
or so. Central banks worldwide have reacted with interest rate reductions and unconventional 
measures. We too have resorted to unconventional methods and, as in the past, we will not 
shy away from using these methods if it is in the interests of the country as a whole. However, 
any action we take will always be based on careful consideration of the costs and benefits in 
the short and long term. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Outlook 
Let me conclude the first part of my speech with a brief look into the future. The world economy 
is  recovering  at  a  slower  pace  than  anticipated at the  end  of  2015,  but the  global  outlook 
remains positive. We are expecting moderate economic growth in Switzerland for this year of 
1–1.5%.  Inflation  will  rise  slightly,  although  the  annual  average  will  remain  negative  at  an 
expected rate of –0.8%. The inflation rate should re-enter positive territory in 2017. 
As in past years, the economic outlook is fraught with a number of different risks. This applies 
to the euro area, to the US and to emerging economies. The international financial markets 
are  characterised  by  uncertainty,  which  in  turn  can  have  adverse  effects  on  the  global 
economy. And last but not least, there are considerable political risks in Europe and beyond. 
In this difficult environment, we will continue to deploy the instruments available to us to ensure 
price stability in Switzerland in the medium term. Even though we have already gone a long 
way with negative interest and our willingness to intervene in the markets, there is still room 
for manoeuvre in our monetary policy. 
Ideas for Switzerland: sovereign wealth fund and sovereign money initiatives 
I would now like to turn in the second part of my speech to the sovereign wealth fund and 
sovereign money initiatives. The events of recent years have given cause for reflection on the 
financial system and the role of central banks. As the President of the Bank Council has already 
described, we welcome such discussions. They enhance the public’s understanding of what 
central banks do and why they do it. 
Sovereign wealth fund 
The SNB’s balance sheet has expanded sharply since 2008. It is this growth that inspired the 
idea to set up a sovereign wealth fund to manage the SNB’s foreign exchange reserves. A 
number of different options are being proposed for the structure of the sovereign wealth fund. 
Although proponents’ goals differ quite considerably, they all draw parallels with the sovereign 
wealth funds of countries such as Norway. 
However, comparisons with Norway are misleading, since this country supplies its sovereign 
wealth fund with tax revenues, licence fees and dividends from the oil sector. When companies 
in a country discover new natural resources, the country becomes richer as a result of the 
revenue generated and its wealth increases. By contrast, the exceptional growth in the SNB’s 
balance  sheet  since  2008  is  primarily  attributable  to  foreign  currency  purchases  based  on 
monetary policy considerations. We bought foreign currency in order to limit the appreciation 
of our own currency, thereby putting more Swiss francs into circulation. Such an expansion of 
the money supply, however, does not create any real value. 
This  difference  between  oil  revenues  and  foreign  exchange  reserves  is  important  when 
contemplating setting up a sovereign wealth fund. Norway is able to transfer oil-sector tax 
revenue and other receipts into its sovereign wealth fund, because they constitute profit for the 
country as a whole. The SNB’s foreign exchange reserves, however, do not represent profit. 
They are an asset item on our balance sheet and are offset by the increased money supply as 
a liability item. If we were to make an unrequited transfer of our foreign currency to a sovereign 
wealth fund, our equity would reduce or even become negative. 
The  sovereign  wealth  fund  or  the  Confederation  would  therefore  have  to  buy  the  foreign 
currency from us. But where the money would come from for this is not clear. In principle, the 
Confederation could borrow from the capital markets, though this is unlikely to be feasible due 
to the debt brake. Or, we could grant the Confederation a loan, but this would be equivalent to 
state financing via the central bank’s printing press, which is prohibited under the National 
Bank Act. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
A further problem would arise if, in the future, a reduction in the money supply were to become 
necessary for monetary policy reasons. The money supply was originally expanded to satisfy 
the increased demand for francs. However, it is possible that demand may also fall again. If 
there were to be a sharp decline in demand, the SNB would have to reduce the money supply 
again in order to keep monetary policy conditions stable. The simplest way would be to buy 
back Swiss francs, namely by selling foreign exchange reserves. But if the foreign exchange 
had already been transferred to a sovereign wealth fund, this would no longer be possible. 
Another hope expressed in connection with the creation of a sovereign wealth fund is better 
management of foreign exchange reserves. However, the SNB already manages its foreign 
exchange in a professional manner and is considered to be a leading central bank in asset 
management. We have also invested in a broad range of assets for a number of years now. 
Our portfolio is diversified over different currencies and asset classes, and we invest heavily 
in foreign shares and corporate bonds. Equity exposure is 20%, which is high for a central 
bank. 
On a long-term average, higher profits are only possible by taking higher risks. This would also 
apply to a sovereign wealth fund. However, higher risks also mean that profit fluctuations would 
be greater than before. 
Of  course,  a  sovereign  wealth  fund  could  hedge  against  certain  risks.  Exchange  rate  risk 
represents the biggest risk for foreign currency investments. But it is precisely this risk that a 
sovereign wealth fund should not be allowed to hedge, as it would conflict with monetary policy. 
This is because hedging would result in upward pressure on the Swiss franc, which would run 
counter to our monetary policy. Incidentally, this is also the reason why a sovereign wealth 
fund should not be permitted to sell foreign currency. To sum up: a sovereign wealth fund 
would not make monetary policy easier but more difficult. 
Sovereign money 
The  other  initiative  that  I  would  like  to  talk  about  today  is  the  sovereign  money  initiative 
submitted some time ago. This has two main elements. The first one relates to household and 
corporate bank accounts, the second to the mechanism with which new money is put into 
circulation. 
The initiative calls for the creation of payment accounts for households and companies, to be 
held off-balance sheet by banks, just as securities custody accounts are now. These accounts 
would be fully covered by SNB money. The idea is that this would prevent bank runs and 
thereby  improve  the  stability  of  the  banking  system.  A  bank  run  typically  occurs  when 
customers fear that their bank will no longer be able to pay out their deposits. As payment 
accounts in a sovereign money system would be covered by SNB money, there would be no 
more reason to doubt the security of these deposits. 
Yet,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  financial  system  would  become  more  stable  overall.  For 
example, the sovereign money system cannot prevent financial bubbles, as these are based 
primarily on investor misjudgement. Although the sovereign money initiative would somewhat 
complicate the financing of such misinvestments, it would not prevent them. Improved bank 
capitalisation,  which  is  something  we  have  advocated,  contributes  considerably  more  to 
increasing the stability of the financial system than a sovereign money system. 
The second element of the sovereign money initiative is the so-called debt-free creation of new 
central bank money. Money would enter circulation by the SNB gifting it, so to speak, to the 
Confederation,  the  cantons  or  directly  to  citizens.  Such  money  distribution  would  fuel  the 
politicisation of monetary policy. 
The Federal Council has rejected the initiative without a counterproposal. It maintains that a 
sovereign money system would be an experiment for which there are no comparable models 
in other countries, and would carry risks for the Swiss economy. The implementation of the 
sovereign money idea would entail a complete restructuring of today’s monetary system. This 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
would give rise to great uncertainty, could jeopardise the financial centre and thus damage 
Switzerland  as  a  whole.  The  Federal  Council  also fears  that the  sovereign  money  system 
would harm lending and restrict the SNB’s ability to conduct monetary policy. 
We share the Federal Council’s concerns. A feeling of disquiet about the existing financial 
system is not enough reason for a radical overhaul. It is also difficult to predict what impact 
such an experiment would have on Switzerland as a business location. Moreover, the SNB’s 
independence would be undermined if we had to distribute new money directly to the state or 
to private households. The SNB would become a political football and the fulfilment of our 
mandate would be hampered. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude: the discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate did not plunge Switzerland 
into  recession  as  many  had  feared.  The  economy  actually  grew  slightly  in  2015,  despite 
appreciation of the Swiss franc and a hesitant recovery in the international economy. The main 
reason for this growth is that Swiss companies and employees actively exploited optimisation 
potential and showed great flexibility. The SNB’s expansionary monetary policy contributed to 
the depreciation of the Swiss franc over the course of the year and thus also supported the 
economy. 
Inflation  is  currently  negative,  due  to  the  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  following  the 
discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate and to the reduction in commodity prices. We 
expect it to return to positive territory in 2017. We will keep our options open should other 
measures be necessary to fulfil our mandate. But, as always with monetary policy decisions, 
we need to carefully weigh up the pros and cons to serve the interests of the country as a 
whole. 
In the wake of the financial crisis and the use of unconventional measures, central banks have 
become the focus of intense public interest. Various reform proposals are being discussed and 
we welcome these public debates. New ideas need to be seriously considered and evaluated. 
The  intentions  behind  the  sovereign  wealth  fund  and  sovereign  money  projects  are 
commendable. But, on closer examination, the drawbacks outweigh the benefits in both cases. 
Finally, on behalf too of my colleagues in the Governing Board, Fritz Zurbrügg and Andréa 
Maechler, I would like to take this opportunity to thank our employees for their hard work and 
dedication. We would also like to thank our shareholders for their solidarity with the SNB and 
for  their  loyal  support.  Last  but  not  least,  a  thank  you  also  to  our  young  guests  from  the 
Kantonsschule  Olten  and  the  Centro  Professionale  Commerciale  Lugano  for  showing  an 
interest in monetary policy and the SNB. 
Thank you all for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
