  Sabine Lautenschläger: Single Supervisory Mechanism – Single 
Supervisory Law? 
Keynote  speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism,  at  the  workshop  of  the  European  Banking  Institute  (EBI),  hosted  by  the 
European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 27 January 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for being here today to participate in the first conference of the European Banking 
Institute  (EBI).  It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  and  for  me 
personally, to host this conference. We look forward to fruitful discussions and exchanges – 
not only today, but also in the future. 
The EBI is a very new undertaking – it was set up just at the end of 2015 as a counterpart to 
the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) in the academic world. It represents a network of 
universities  that  extends  across  national  borders,  and  we  hope  that  it  will  eventually 
encompass  the  entire  euro  area.  It  should  provide  a  good  opportunity  for  academics  and 
practitioners to meet regularly to exchange views on issues around supervisory and banking 
law. 
Will it be difficult for us to find topics for these in-depth discussions? I don’t think so! After 
one year of “living the SSM”, I can assure you that we have more than enough legal topics to 
discuss and enough difficult questions to answer! 
The advent of banking union has brought with it a myriad of legal questions with a unique 
European perspective. I would therefore like to open the discussion by raising a legal issue in 
my speech today. 
The crisis in the euro area has taught us many lessons. And among these, a fundamental 
one might be this: a single European currency requires a European banking supervisor. In 
the euro area, we cannot have 19 different national banking supervisors; we need a single 
supervisor  that  transcends  national  borders.  Only  then  can  we  avoid  national  bias  in  the 
regulatory and supervisory treatment of banks; only then can we improve risk-sharing in the 
euro area; only then can we ensure a level playing field where the general principle of “same 
business,  same  risks,  same  rules”  applies;  and  only  then  can  we  guarantee  a  proper 
transmission of monetary policy. 
Establishing  European  banking  supervision  has  been  a  significant  step  towards  a  more 
integrated  European  banking  system.  Throughout  the  entire  euro  area,  the  SSM  provides 
tough  and  fair-handed  banking  supervision  by  using  the  entire  range  of  supervisory 
discretion to establish a harmonised, risk-orientated and proportionate supervisory approach. 
At the same time, it contributes to the Single Market by levelling the supervisory playing field 
for all banks, while acknowledging the boundaries of national law. 
Nevertheless,  banking  supervision  is  just  one  side  of  the  coin;  the  other  is  banking 
regulation.  A  truly  single  supervisor  requires  a  truly  unified  regulatory  framework.  Banking 
supervision  can  only  be  as  harmonised  as  the  rules  and  regulations  that  govern  it.  And 
against that backdrop, the regulatory playing field in Europe is not as level as it should be. 
Out of kilter – supervisory and regulatory harmonisation in Europe 
Now you may ask: “hasn’t much been done already to harmonise the regulatory framework?” 
And  the  answer,  most  certainly,  is  “yes”.  Much  has  indeed  been  done  to  harmonise 
regulation,  both  in  Europe  and  worldwide.  Just  think  of  Basel  III  and  the  single  European 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
rulebook.  Particularly  in  Europe,  the  European  Commission  and  the  European  Banking 
Authority  (EBA)  have  also  contributed  to  a  harmonised  regulatory  framework  by  adopting 
Regulatory  Technical  Standards  and  by  issuing  guidelines  and  opinions.  However,  these 
attempts have not been sufficient to fully erase national differences. 
Take  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive  (CRD IV)  for  example.  As  this  is  a  directive, 
Member States are free to choose the form and method of implementation. Consequently, 
not all Member States opted for a word-for-word transposition of the relevant norms. Several 
provisions of CRD IV have been transposed differently across the euro area. This is certainly 
not a problem in itself as long as the differences are rooted in country-specific risks. 
But then there are many unjustified differences. Let me give you an example: as you know, 
members  of  banks’  management  bodies  have  to  fulfil  “fit  and  proper”  requirements.  And 
here,  we  see  very  diverse  rules  across  Europe.  In  some  countries,  for  instance,  the 
supervisor  assesses  not  only  appointments  of  members  of  management  bodies,  but  also 
appointments of “key function holders”. As regards the fit and proper assessment itself, there 
are further differences: some national authorities make use of questionnaires to be answered 
by the candidates, others do not. Some national authorities conduct face-to-face interviews 
with  new  members  of the  board,  others  do  not. In  some  countries,  there  are  timelines for 
conducting the fit and proper assessment with  specific, rather short deadlines, whereas in 
others  there  are  no  such  timelines.  Even  the  criteria  for  assessing  the  suitability  of 
candidates  are  implemented  and  interpreted  differently  across  the  various  euro  area 
countries. 
Another source of regulatory fragmentation is the supervisory powers under national law that 
are not explicitly mentioned in CRD IV. This concerns, for instance, major transactions which 
can be very relevant for the risk profile of a bank: for example, a bank acquiring a non-bank, 
or mergers and de-mergers involving a bank or transfers of assets. In some Member States, 
these transactions need to be approved by the competent authority (and rightly so), in others 
they do not. 
And such regulatory fragmentation is not just a legacy we inherited from former times. Even 
today, there are cases where fragmentation is actually being increased. In some countries, 
national legislators are converting non-binding supervisory practices into binding legal acts, 
thereby making it harder for the ECB to harmonise these practices. A recent example is the 
German law on bank resolution. This law delegates to the Ministry of Finance the power to 
issue regulations in areas such as internal governance and risk management. 
Consequences of an imbalance between supervisory and regulatory harmonisation 
The  regulatory  landscape  in  Europe  is  still  fragmented.  And  from  my  point  of  view,  many 
variations  in  national  legislation  can  no  longer  be  justified  now  that  we  have  European 
banking supervision. 
Imagine being a referee in a football match; your main task is to administer the rules of the 
game. But what if the individual players adhere to different rules? In such a game, you as the 
referee  would  be  forced  to  apply  different  rules  depending  on  the  player  in  question.  You 
would have to judge similar situations in a dissimilar way – a foul by one player might warrant 
a penalty kick; a foul by another player might not. 
In a sense, the SSM  is  that referee. Article 1 of the SSM Regulation requires the ECB to 
carry out prudential supervision “with full regard and duty of care for the unity and integrity of 
the internal market”. The Article also refers to the “equal treatment of credit institutions with a 
view to preventing regulatory arbitrage”. A fragmented regulatory framework makes it difficult 
for the ECB to meet these requirements. 
In extreme cases, we are faced with 19 different legislations. And in many cases, we indeed 
have  to  judge  similar  situations  in  a  dissimilar  way.  Taking  decisions  under  such 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
circumstances is complicated and time-consuming. It requires substantial resources and is at 
odds with the idea of having a single European supervisor and a Single Market in banking. 
In  cases  where  national  legislation  goes  beyond  CRD IV,  regulatory  fragmentation  also 
raises complicated legal questions: what powers does the SSM have in applying national law 
that goes beyond European norms? 
Under  Article  4(3)  of  the  SSM  Regulation,  the  ECB  must  apply  all  relevant  EU  law.  And 
where  EU  law  is  composed  of  directives,  the  ECB  has  to  apply  the  national  legislation 
transposing  those  directives.  The  question  is  therefore:  what  does  “transposition”  mean? 
Does it just cover national provisions that strictly implement CRD IV word for word? Or does 
it cover any national provisions that are rooted in CRD IV? 
In  the  context  of  our  football  match,  these  two  cases  might  be  compared  to  the  following 
situation. The general rule – i.e. “CRD IV” – would be that a foul in the penalty box would 
require a penalty kick. Now there might be some players for whom an additional rule would 
apply:  if  they  were  to  commit  a  foul  in  the  penalty  box,  they  would  also  immediately  be 
handed a red card. That rule would go beyond a strict implementation of CRD IV; but it would 
still be rooted in it, in the sense that a foul in the penalty box requires sanctions. 
So,  depending  on  the  interpretation  of  “transposition”,  two  supervisory  approaches  might 
emerge.  The  first  approach  would  render  the  ECB  directly  competent  to  apply  national 
legislation. The second approach would require  it to apply national legislation indirectly by 
issuing instructions to national authorities – which, of course, then raises the question of who 
would  be  held  responsible  if  such  an  instruction  were  to  lead  to  a  legal  decision  by  the 
national competent authority? 
In  my  view,  the  first  approach  –  the  direct  competence  of  the  ECB  –  might  be  warranted 
when  two  conditions  are  met.  First,  when  the  power  in  question  falls  within  the  tasks 
conferred  on  the  ECB  under  Articles  4  and  5  of  the  SSM  Regulation.  Second,  when  the 
power in question is linked to relevant EU law: that is, the supervisory framework as defined, 
in  particular,  by  relevant  EU  directives  and  regulations,  such  as  CRD IV,  the  Capital 
Requirements Regulation, and the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive. In any case, we 
need a consistent approach towards applying national legislation that goes beyond European 
norms. 
Returning to our football match, fragmented rules clearly pose a problem for the referee. But 
they are also a problem for the players and for the game itself. Banks in the euro area still do 
not  compete  on  an  entirely  level  playing  field.  They  might  have  to  implement  different 
regulatory regimes for group entities in Member States with different national legislation. This 
is certainly at odds with the idea of having a banking union. 
Certainly,  much  has  been  done  to  harmonise  regulation  –  through  the  single  rulebook, 
through the work of the European Commission and the EBA, and through the ECB’s work on 
options and national discretions, for instance. Nevertheless, the Single Market for banking is 
still divided by differences in national legislation. 
And as I mentioned before, in some cases, new differences are being created right now. With 
regard to  newly  minted national  laws,  I  would  therefore  like  to  state this:  national  banking 
legislation adopted after the establishment of the SSM should facilitate the exercise of the 
SSM’s responsibilities – and that includes the ECB’s capacity to enhance the consistency of 
banking  supervision  across  the  SSM.  In  any  case,  Member  States  should  balance  the 
alleged  benefits  resulting  from  converting  non-binding  guidelines  into  binding  legal  acts 
against the objectives of the banking union. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have made the point that the regulatory playing field in Europe is not 
as  level  as  it  should  be.  And  I  have  argued  that  this  state  of  affairs  hampers the  work  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
European banking supervision, that it is at odds with the objectives of banking union, and 
that it inhibits the establishment of the Single Market. 
To me it is obvious that we have to level the regulatory playing field. Nevertheless, this is 
certainly  an  issue  for  legislators  and  not  for  supervisors.  And  national  laws  are  the 
prerogative of national law-makers. 
But  still,  we  have  to  acknowledge  that  circumstances  changed  when  the  SSM  came  into 
play.  There  is  now  an  imbalance  between  the  harmonisation  of  banking  supervision  and 
banking regulation. In order to fully exploit the potential of the banking union, and to reap its 
benefits, we should restore that balance. 
The  De  Larosière  report,  published  in  2009,  provided  a  blueprint  for  harmonised  banking 
regulation and supervision in Europe. On Page 49 of that report, the authors state that “there 
is  no  point  in  converging  supervisory  practices,  if  the  basic  financial  regulations  remain 
fragmented”. I fully share that view and I urge legislators to reassess the necessary degree 
of regulatory harmonisation against the backdrop of the European banking union. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
