  Vítor Constâncio: Risk sharing and macroprudential policy in an 
ambitious capital markets union 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Joint 
conference of the European Commission and European Central Bank on European Financial 
Integration and Stability, Frankfurt am Main, 25 April 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
An  integrated  and  developed  capital  market  is  of  key  relevance  to  the  European  financial 
system  and  the  economy  as  a  whole.  In  my  speech  today,  I  would  like  to  provide  a 
foundation for this statement from two interlinked perspectives. First of all,  well-functioning 
capital markets are particularly beneficial for an area like the euro area if they lead to what 
economists call “financial risk-sharing”. At the same time, however, the process of financial 
integration  and  capital  market  development  that  can  enhance  such  risk-sharing  may  be 
accompanied  by  the  emergence  of  new  financial  stability  risks  that  could  undermine  the 
envisaged benefits. Therefore, in order to reap the benefits of a true Capital Markets Union 
(CMU), we need to provide the conditions under which capital markets can flourish, whilst at 
the same time making sure that regulatory and supervisory measures keep financial stability 
risks in check. 
In order to make progress on how this balance can be struck, I shall first review the case for 
cross-country risk-sharing via capital markets, review the evidence for the euro and consider 
how  it  can  be  enhanced.  Next,  I  shall  discuss  the  threats  to  financial  stability  that  can  be 
associated with complementing a more bank-based financial system, like the European one, 
with  strengthening  capital  markets.  Third,  I  shall  let  you  know  my  views  on  which 
macroprudential policy reforms should be considered. 
The benefits of financial risk-sharing for the euro area 
One  of  the  main  reasons  why  financial  integration  is  beneficial  is  that  integrated  financial 
markets help support constant consumption growth “in good and in bad states” of the world.1 
Consumption  smoothing  between  countries,  also  known  as  risk-sharing,  can  increase 
welfare  by  hedging  consumption  against  country-specific  risks.  In  theory,  in  a  perfectly 
integrated world, full risk-sharing can be achieved where consumption in regions or countries 
grows at a constant pace and is insensitive to local fluctuations in income and wealth. 
Normally,  high  levels  of  risk-sharing  are  achieved  across  jurisdictions  within  a  country,  or 
within a federation that represents a functioning political, economic, and monetary union. For 
example,  evidence  suggests  that  three  quarters  of  shocks  to  per  capita  gross  product  of 
individual  states  in  the  United  States  are  smoothed,  with  about  40  percent  smoothed  by 
insurance  or  cross-ownership  of  assets,  a  quarter  smoothed  by  borrowing  or  lending,  and 
one-eighth smoothed by the federal transfers and grants. In other words, the contribution of 
markets is five times higher than the contribution of fiscal tools.2 Regions within federations 
in  Europe  exhibit  high  levels  of risk-sharing, too.  For  example,  in  pre-unification  Germany, 
                                                
1  See  Obstfeld,  M.  and  K.  Rogoff,  “Foundations  of  International  Macroeconomics”,  Harvard  University  Press, 
1996. 
2  Asdrubali,  P.,  B.  Sorensen  and  O.  Yosha,  “Channels  of  interstate  risk  sharing:  United  States  1963–1990”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, 1996, pp. 1081–1110; Athanasoulis, S. and E. van Wincoop, “Risk 
sharing  within  the  United  States:  What  do  financial  markets  and  fiscal  federalism  accomplish?”,  Review  of 
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 83, 2001, pp. 688–698. See also Del Negro, M., “Asymmetric shocks among 
US States”, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 56(2), March 2002, pp. 273–297. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  virtually all shocks to per capita state gross product were smoothed. However, due to less 
developed capital markets than in the United States, the largest portion – 50 percent – was 
smoothed through the federal tax transfer and grant system, and 36 percent were smoothed 
through financial markets.3 
For countries in a monetary union such as the euro area, risk-sharing is particularly important 
because  the  single monetary  policy  is  unable  to  address  asymmetric  shocks. With  disjoint 
business  cycles  across  countries,  idiosyncratic  shocks  to  EMU  member  states  need  to  be 
insured  through  robust  market  or  fiscal  mechanisms.  Reducing  the  volatility  of  aggregate 
consumption through various risk-sharing mechanisms can provide significant welfare gains 
for  countries  hit  by  specific  shocks.  And,  by  reducing  internal  divergences  and  facilitating 
macroeconomic  adjustment,  risk-sharing  can  be  beneficial  for  the  monetary  union  as  a 
whole. 
At  this  point  it  is  quite  clear  that,  in  the  foreseeable  future,  a  number  of  mechanisms  that 
have  the  potential  to  improve  risk-sharing  across  countries  will  not  progress  quickly  in 
Europe.  For  example,  labour  mobility  will  likely  remain  below  levels  achieved  in  common-
language federations such as the United States or Germany. Similarly, building a European 
supra-national  system  of  taxes  and  transfers  to  mimic  the  United  States  or  the  situation 
within some European countries is, at present, not a realistic prospect. Finally, the rules on 
fiscal deficits imposed by the Stability and Growth Pact will continue to set limits on national 
governments for smoothing large shocks. 
For  these  reasons,  it  is  more  pressing  than  ever  to  boost  Europe’s  risk-sharing  potential 
through financial market mechanisms. First, cross-border holdings of productive or financial 
assets can provide members of a currency union with insurance against idiosyncratic shocks. 
Second,  well-functioning  credit  markets  can  contribute  to  smoothing  consumption  against 
relative income fluctuations, especially if most cross-border lending takes the form of direct 
lending to households and firms rather than of wholesale lending and borrowing in interbank 
markets.4  The  conclusion  is  that  greater  progress  in  risk-sharing  in  the  euro  area  would 
require significantly more developed and integrated capital markets, as well as more banks 
operating at a pan-European level. 
Quantitatively, the risk-sharing benefits of integrated financial markets can be large. By far 
the most important source of risk sharing are cross-regional and cross-border asset holdings, 
that is, various forms of equity holdings and firm ownership claims. Financial integration in 
Europe was expected to be greatly facilitated by the introduction of the common currency. 
However,  in  the  years  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  progress  in  capital  markets  and 
credit  markets  integration  has  been  uneven.  At  present,  the  cross-border  ownership  of 
assets  in  the  EU  is  still  limited,  despite  the  fact  that  the  single  currency  in  the  euro  area 
reduced some of the information barriers and transaction costs. Corporate financing through 
bond  and  equity  markets  is  much  more  limited  in  Europe  too,  with  banks  being  the 
undisputed primary source of funding for firms. 
For  all  these  reasons,  the  overall  contribution  of  markets  to  risk-sharing  has,  on  average, 
been  somewhat  limited.5  Chart  1  demonstrates  the  contribution  of  various  factors  to  risk-
sharing  over  time.  It  shows  that  after  the  adoption  of  the  euro,  smoothing  through  factor 
income flows resulting from cross-border ownership of assets increased substantially, yet it 
remained on average below US levels. The notable exception is a brief period in the early-to-
                                                
3  Hepp, R. and J. von Hagen, “Interstate risk sharing in Germany: 1970–1991”, Oxford Economic Papers 65, 
2013, pp. 1–24. 
4  Fecht, F., H.P. Gruener, and P. Hartmann, “Welfare effects of financial integration”, CEPR Discussion Paper 
6311, 2007. 
5  Balli, F.  and  B.  Sorensen,  “Risk sharing  among  OECD  and  EU  countries:  The  role of  capital gains, capital 
income, transfers, and savings”, MPRA Working Paper No 10223, 2007. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  mid 2000s when capital markets smoothed between 30 and 40 percent of country-specific 
shocks to GDP. The contribution of capital markets declined substantially during the financial 
crisis and especially during the sovereign debt crisis. The contribution of credit markets has 
been  lower,  and  it  became  even  negative  during  the  financial  crisis  when  the  European 
banking sector was particularly heavily hit. At present, almost 80 percent of the idiosyncratic 
shocks  to  a  country’s  economy  remain  unsmoothed,  and  changes  in  relative  prices 
contribute the most to risk-sharing. 
Contributions of various channels to risk sharing in EA, 1991 – present6 
 To  speed  up  the  process  of  capital  markets  and  credit  markets  integration,  two  initiatives 
have  emerged  in  Europe:  the  Banking  Union  and  the  Capital  Markets  Union  (CMU).  The 
Banking Union aims at a sustainable and deep integration in banking markets, through single 
supervision,  joint  resolution  and  common  deposit  insurance.  Risk-sharing  is  particularly 
fostered  through  direct  cross-border  bank  lending,  emphasising  the  importance  of  the 
European Commission’s recent initiative on fostering retail financial services. The CMU, in 
turn, aims at mobilising capital by creating deeper and more integrated capital markets in the 
EU. Ideally, the CMU should achieve the completion of the single market for capital within a 
common-currency  union.  This  completion  is  vital  to  reap  the  full  benefits  of  risk-sharing 
across  borders  and  not  be  limited  by  border  effects  from  past  institutional  legacies. 
Overcoming  these  border  effects  is  to  be  achieved  through  regulatory  and  non-regulatory 
actions, including the harmonisation of key legislation related to financial products. While the 
regulatory and non-regulatory actions will be instrumental in capturing market-provided risk-
sharing,  deeper  capital  markets  have  a  particularly  high  potential  to  smooth  risks  across 
national borders. 
Consequently, we need an ambitious CMU which requires a concrete roadmap in terms of 
goals  and  milestones.  Broad  objectives  such  as  capital  market  development,  deepening 
                                                
6  Cumulative percentage contribution over a five-year period to the smoothing of a 1-standard deviation shock 
to GDP by fiscal tools: relative prices, credit markets and capital markets, as well as the portion that remains 
unsmoothed,  for  a  10-year  rolling  window  between  1991  and  2015.  Underlying  data  are  from  the  annual 
macro-economic  database  of  the  European  Commission  (AMECO)  and  from  the  ECB’s  Harmonized 
Competitiveness Indicators Database. ECB calculations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  financial integration and achieving risk-sharing should be at par with specific proposals such 
as facilitating funding for corporates in general and for SMEs in particular. Key areas such as 
securitisation,  insolvency  regimes,  securities  holders’  rights  and  tax  legislation  need  to  be 
prioritised.  All  these  are  important  to  ensure  equal  treatment  of  users  of  capital  markets 
across Member States, the very essence of a CMU. 
Financial stability implications of enhanced risk-sharing and other aspects of capital 
market development 
This  brings  me  to  the  second  part  of  my  talk,  where  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  financial 
stability  implications  of  enhanced  risk-sharing.  Indeed,  financial  integration  and  the  further 
development of non-bank financing may also create new financial stability risks. 
At  a  general  level,  greater  integration  can  exacerbate  the  size  and  speed  of  cross-border 
contagion.  International  risk-sharing  and  cross-border  contagion  can  be  two  sides  of  the 
same “financial integration coin”.7 This explains why taking a macroprudential perspective on 
the financial system is extremely important for addressing potential new sources of systemic 
risk. 
With  respect  to  the  banking  sector,  the  further  development  of  capital  markets  increases 
competition  and  may  incentivise  banks  to  take  on  more  risk  to  maintain  profitability.8, 9  To 
ensure  that  there  are  no  unintended  financial  stability  risks,  we  need  to  strengthen  the 
European  macroprudential  regulatory  toolkit  for  banks  under  the  Capital  Requirements 
Directive (CRD IV)/Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR). 
The European Commission’s review of the CRR/CRDIV will provide an opportunity to revise 
and  complement  the  current  macroprudential  toolkit  for  banking  at  the  European  level.  It 
should  entail,  firstly,  ensuring  that  instruments  currently  available  are  more  targeted  and 
overlaps are eliminated; secondly, broadening the toolkit with additional instruments such as 
the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio  (NSFR),  Leverage  Ratio  (LR),  Loan-to-Value  (LTV)/Loan-to-
Income (LTI) and Debt-Service-to-Income (DSTI) ratio; and thirdly, streamlining the process 
for notification or information procedures both in the EU and within the SSM, by revising in 
particular  Art  458  CRR.  This  would  simplify  the  co-ordination  mechanism,  ensuring  that 
macroprudential authorities can decide and implement the measures in an effective, efficient 
and timely manner. 
Moreover, the strong growth of non-bank financing creates new risks in a part of the financial 
system  that  is  much  less  regulated.  In  particular,  the  investment  fund  sector  has  grown 
rapidly  over  the  past  few  years.  Between  end-2009  and  the  first  quarter  of  2015,  assets 
managed  by  investment  funds  other  than  money  market  funds  almost  doubled  from 
€5.4 trillion  to  €10.5  trillion.  Excluding  valuation  and  reclassification  effects,  the  sector  has 
grown by 30 percent since 2009.10 
Importantly, this rapid growth comes together with increased risk-taking. Funds have shifted 
their  asset  allocation  from  higher-  to  lower-rated  debt  securities,  increased  the  average 
residual  maturities  of  debt  securities’  holdings  and  continued  to  expand  their  exposure  to 
                                                
7  Fecht,  F.,  H.P.  Grüner  and  P.  Hartmann  (2012),  “Financial  Integration,  Specialization,  and  Systemic  Risk”, 
Journal  of  International  Economics,  Vol.  88(1),  pp.  150–161.  Fecht,  F.,  and  H.P.  Grüner  (2005),  “Financial 
Integration and Systemic Risk”, CEPR discussion paper no. 5253. 
8  Keeley,  M.C.  (1990),  “Deposit  Insurance,  Risk,  and  Market  Power  in  Banking”,  The  American  Economic 
Review, Vol. 80 (5), pp. 1183–1200. 
9  Aoki,  K.  and  K.  Nikolov  (2015),  “Financial  Disintermediation  and  Financial  Fragility”,  CARF  Working  Paper, 
No CARF-F-374, November. 
10  ECB (2015), Report on financial structures, October. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  emerging markets.11 In addition, the interconnectedness of the fund sector with the financial 
system, the wider use of synthetic leverage, and the increasing prevalence of demandable 
equity imply that the potential for a systemic impact would increase, should the investment 
fund industry come under stress. 
Therefore, I want to clearly state that the financial regulatory reform has to be completed and 
extended  through  further  efforts  to  contain  risks  in  the  shadow  banking  sector  and  to 
strengthen macroprudential policies. 
Developing the macroprudential framework beyond banking 
Please allow me to elaborate on three important aspects of this task, namely tools to address 
the  excessive  use  of  leverage  by  investment  funds,  tools  to  address  liquidity  risks,  and  a 
framework for macroprudential margin and haircut requirements. 
As regards leverage in investment funds, we need to ensure that the use of leverage remains 
within acceptable limits. Highly leveraged funds can create and amplify systemic risk. When 
leverage  is  created  through  derivatives’  exposures  or  repo  and  securities  lending 
transactions, margin calls or increasing haircuts on collateral can trigger a deleveraging by 
funds.12  Notably,  such  a  “margin  spiral”13  can  even  occur  when  funds  are  closed  and 
investors  cannot  redeem  their  shares  at  short  notice.  To  the  extent  that  many  funds  are 
forced  to  sell  assets  in  less  liquid  markets  and  at  substantial  discounts,  this  can  reinforce 
price falls in financial markets and become a risk of systemic nature.14 
In order to curb the use of leverage by investment funds in the EU, it is useful to distinguish 
between funds that are subject to the regulatory framework of the Undertakings for Collective 
Investments in Transferable Securities (UCITS) Directive and those subject to the Alternative 
Investment Fund Managers Directive (AIFMD). 
In  principle,  all  UCITS-funds  have  restrictions  on  the  use  of  balance  sheet  and  synthetic 
leverage.  In  practice,  however,  funds  applying  more  complex  investment  strategies  can 
calculate their use of leverage based on the Commitment Method or a Value at Risk (VaR) 
approach, resulting in a less stringent limit for synthetic leverage. Therefore, it is important 
that  we  examine  the  use  of  leverage  by  these  UCITS-funds,  and  address  any  existing 
shortcomings in the UCITS regulations. 
As  for  the  alternative  investment  funds  that  operate  under  the  AIFMD,  there  are  no  hard 
limits for the use of leverage. Importantly, national competent authorities do have the power 
to impose leverage limits under the AIFMD, but no authority has exercised this power so far. 
In order to put this potentially powerful macroprudential tool into practice, we need to develop 
an  operational  framework  at  the  EU  level.  In  this  context,  let  me  highlight  three  important 
issues. 
First, the use of leverage within the banking system and the existing leverage ratio for banks 
may not always be a useful benchmark for all types of funds. Unlike bank capital, investment 
                                                
11  See the November 2015 edition of the ECB’s Financial Stability Review. 
12  Thurner  S.,  J.D.  Farmer  and  J.  Geanakoplos  (2012),  “Leverage  causes  fat  tails  and  clustered  volatility”, 
Quantitative Finance, Vol. 12(5), pp. 695–707. 
13  Brunnermeier,  M.K.  and  L.H.  Pedersen  (2008),  “Market  Liquidity  and  Funding  Liquidity”,  The  Review  of 
Financial Studies Vol. 22(6), pp. 2201–2238. 
14  Brunnermeier,  M.K.  and  L.H.  Pedersen  (2008),  “Market  Liquidity  and  Funding  Liquidity”,  The  Review  of 
Financial Studies Vol. 22(6), pp. 2201–2238. Cifuentes, R., H.S. Shin and G. Ferrucci, (2005), “Liquidity Risk 
and Contagion”, Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 3(2-3), pp. 556–566. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  fund shares of open-ended funds can be an unstable source of funding when investors can 
withdraw their equity at short notice.15 
Second,  an  assessment  of  liquidity  risk  by  funds  should  be  part  of  the  assessment  of 
leverage. Indeed, the risk of redemptions by investors on open-ended funds can be closely 
related to the use of leverage. 
Third, the framework should have a clear macroprudential perspective, providing authorities 
with the guidance and flexibility to set limits for groups of funds, where necessary to address 
a “too many to fail” risk.16 Even if investment funds are small and thus not “too big to fail”, 
they  may  be  “systemic  as  a  herd”,  and  pose  a  risk  to  financial  stability  due  to  common 
exposures to the same type of shock.17 
Next to tools addressing excessive leverage, we need to develop tools targeting liquidity in 
non-bank financial  institutions. With  regard  to  investment funds,  “liquidity  spirals”  remain  a 
risk.18 Such spirals could be triggered if funds were to be confronted with high redemptions19 
or increased margin requirements, as these could result in forced selling on markets with low 
liquidity.  To  address  such  risks,  guided  stress  tests  could  be  developed  jointly  by  ESMA, 
ECB  and  ESRB,  together  with  national  competent  and  macroprudential  authorities,  and 
additional intervention powers for competent authorities to deal with large scale redemptions 
should  be  discussed.  As  regards  the  latter,  the  UCITS  directive  already  provides  member 
states  with  the  option  to  allow  competent  authorities  to  require  the  suspension  of  the 
repurchase  or  redemption  of  units  in  the  interest  of  the  unit-holders  or  of  the  public.  We 
should explore whether this provision can be effectively used for macroprudential purposes. 
Finally,  the  creation  of  leverage  via  derivatives  and  securities financing transactions  (SFT) 
and  the  pro-cyclical  effects  of  margin  and  haircut-setting  practices  in  these  transactions 
would also need to be addressed. Macroprudential authorities should be given the power to 
set  floors  on  haircuts  and  margins  on  derivatives  and  SFT  at  the  transaction  level. 
Furthermore,  they  should  be  able  to  change  these  in  a  time-varying  manner.  The  current 
margin and haircut-setting practices stimulate the build-up of leverage via these transactions 
in good times – when there is a tendency to under-price risk – and amplify deleveraging in 
bad  times. While  a  number  of  policy  measures  aimed  at  limiting the  pro-cyclical  effects of 
margin and haircut-setting have already been adopted or are underway, none of these steps 
envisage their time-varying implementation by macroprudential authorities. 
This new macroprudential framework could build on the current regulatory frameworks and 
policy recommendations as applicable to derivatives and SFTs at EU and global level. These 
frameworks  include  the  FSB  policy  recommendations  for  haircuts  on  non-centrally  cleared 
securities  financing  transactions,  the  BCBS-IOSCO  margin  requirements  for  non-centrally 
cleared derivatives and the European Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR). 
Standardised  margin  and  haircut  schedules  exist  within  these frameworks,  and  could form 
the  basis  for  setting  macroprudential  margins  and  haircuts.  For  example,  macroprudential 
authorities could build on the standardised FSB/BCBS-IOSCO haircut and margin schedules, 
                                                
15  See the May 2015 edition of the ECB’s Financial Stability Review. 
16  Acharya, V.V. and T. Yorulmazer (2007), “Too many to fail – An analysis of time-inconsistency in bank closure 
policies”, Journal of Financial Intermediation, Vo. 16(1), pp. 1–31. 
17  Adrian, T. and M.K. Brunnermeier (forthcoming), “CoVaR”, American Economic Review. 
18  Brunnermeier,  M.K.  and  L.H.  Pedersen  (2008),  “Market  Liquidity  and  Funding  Liquidity”,  The  Review  of 
Financial  Studies  Vol.  22(6),  pp.  2201–2238.  See  also  the  November  2015  edition  of  the  ECB’s  Financial 
Stability Review, and FSB (2015), Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report. 
19  Shek, J., I. Shim and H.S. Shin (2015), “Investor redemptions and fund manager sales of emerging market 
bonds: how are they related?”, BIS Working Papers No 509. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  which  offer  a  transparent  means  of  calculating  initial  margins  as  well  as  explicit  numerical 
haircut values that can be set as floors to haircut and margin calculated with internal models. 
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  conclude.  Europe  needs  to  further  integrate  and  develop  its  capital  markets,  and 
substantially so. In the absence of other cross-country risk-sharing mechanisms for the time 
being, this has a lot of promise for insuring European households and firms against national 
business cycle fluctuations. We need to be determined and ambitious in pursuing a Capital 
Markets  Union  that  will  deliver  these  benefits. This  means  to  provide  the  conditions  under 
which  capital  markets  can  flourish  across the  euro  area  and  EU  and  at  the  same  time, to 
design a regulatory and supervisory framework under which financial stability risks are under 
control. I am now looking forward to the upcoming discussion of the high-level policy panel, 
that it will give us further food for thought on how to create a long-term vision for CMU, thus 
striking the right balance between the two dimensions I have discussed. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
