  Erkki Liikanen: At the interface of research and monetary policy 
Remarks by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the meeting of the Finnish 
Economic Association, Helsinki, 17 May 2016. 
 My  purpose  today  is  to  discuss  the  use  of  economics  for  policy  advice  in  light  of  four 
examples.  Thinking  about  the  relationship  between  theory  and  practice,  there  are  some 
unavoidable  differences,  or  even  tensions,  between  how  economic  scientists  on  the  one 
hand, and decision makers on the other see the policy process. 
Both perspectives are necessary and in fact complement each other. 
Cameron Cobbold, who was the Governor of the Bank of England in the 1950’s, has been 
quoted as saying, “the Central Bank is a bank, not a study group” (Capie 2010, p. 99). It is 
important  for  central  bankers  to  remember  that  they  are  employed  to  deliver  results,  and 
should not be victims of the so-called “paralysis by analysis”. 
At the same time, it is dangerous if policy makers do not realize how dependent they actually 
are  on  economic  thinking.  As  Keynes  wrote,  “practical  men  who  believe  themselves  to  be 
quite  exempt  from  any  intellectual  influences,  are  usually  the  slaves  of  some  defunct 
economist.” (Keynes 1936, p. 383) 
It  is  much  better  if  policy  makers  are  aware  of  where  they  stand  in  relation  to  current 
economic thought. 
How can this awareness be created and maintained in a changing world? 
There is a certain basic, perhaps mechanical view of the use of economics in policy making 
that goes back to Jan Tinbergen. This view considers mainly the kind of economic analysis 
that is done inside policy organizations such as ministries, central banks and the like. 
This kind of policy advice consists of forecasts and quantitative policy analyses. These help, 
for example, monetary policy decision makers to set their given policy instruments to achieve 
the desired results. (Tinbergen 1955). 
The role of this kind of policy planning processes inside central banks and finance ministries 
is  important,  but  it  is  by  no  means  the  only  type  of  interaction  between  professional 
economists and policy makers. 
In  addition  to  these  processes,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  informal  interaction  between 
economists and policy makers which, in the longer scheme of things, might be even more 
important than the internal policy processes within institutions. 
What I am talking about here is the dialog that takes place between professional economists 
and policy makers, in which political doctrines and ways of thinking develop parallel to the 
latest currents in economic science. 
The  research  community,  in  fact,  has  more  influence  on  discussions  within  the  monetary 
policy community than the academics themselves probably believe. 
The central banking community is an international group of well-connected people. They are 
by  no  means  always  in  agreement  on  policy  alternatives.  However,  the  members  of  the 
community  regularly  keep  in  touch  with  each  other,  as  they  like  to  know  what  their  peers 
think. 
The central banking community also pays close attention to the views of leading academic 
economists  on  current  monetary  policy  issues.  The  academics  want  to  be  heard  and  to 
contribute to monetary policy making. At the same time, the central bankers (and I include 
the senior staff of international organizations such as the IMF, BIS and others) are also keen 
to listen to what academics have to say. There is a mutual interest in each other’s views. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  If  anything,  this  interaction  between  policy  and  research  has  increased during  the  last two 
decades.  This  is  partly  a  result  of  globalization,  which  creates  similar  international  peer 
groups also in other areas of life. 
The increase in this research-policy interaction is also due to the fact that central banks have 
become more independent. As independent decision makers, the central banks are now able 
to  use  more,  and  indeed  need  more  insights  from  research  and  cooperation  with  the 
academic world. 
There  are  many  interesting  examples  of  the  influence  of  research  on  monetary  policy 
making,  as  well  as  examples  of  influence  flowing  in  the  opposite  direction:  problems 
encountered  by  monetary  policy  makers  have  in  turn  forced  researchers  to  reconsider  old 
approaches and to alter their assumptions. 
I would now like to describe four such instances, all of which have a fundamental importance 
from today’s perspective. The first three cases are from one of the most important forums 
where there is interaction between research and monetary policy makers: the Jackson Hole 
symposium. 
This event, officially the Annual Economic Policy Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas  City,  takes  place  annually  in  Jackson  Hole  in  Wyoming.  The  symposium  is 
particularly  remarkable  due  to  the  expertise  and  experience  of  the  speakers  and  to  the 
relative isolation in which the discussions take place. 
Central bankers want to be there, as do academics. The symposium has also become an 
important source of information and inspiration as well as a place to network. As an event, it 
is no longer in a league of its own. The ECB has already twice organized a very high quality 
conference in Sintra, Portugal. The third one will be in June. 
 The first discussion that made a particularly strong impression on me took place in 2005. I 
had  just  begun my  second  year  as governor  of the  Bank  of  Finland. That  year’s  theme  at 
Jackson  Hole  was  the  appraisal  of  Alan  Greenspan’s  era  as  the  chairman  of  the  Federal 
Reserve. 
At the symposium, Raghuram Rajan, then director of research at the IMF spoke on the topic, 
“Has financial development made the world riskier?” (Rajan 2005, pp. 313–369). Contrary to 
the accepted wisdom and consensus of the day, Rajan answered three times in the positive. 
Financial development has made the world riskier. The speech was prophetic. 
In his presentation, Rajan noted how securitization, markets for transferring risks, and bad 
incentives were leading to a dangerous accumulation of risks in the global financial system. 
He also worried about the amount of liquidity. Let me quote: 
“If banks also face credit losses and there is uncertainty about where losses are 
located, only the very few unimpeachable banks will receive the supply of liquidity 
fleeing other markets. If these banks also lose confidence in their liquidity-short 
brethren,  the  interbank market  could  freeze  up  and  one  could  well  have  a  full-
blown financial crisis.” 
This is precisely, word for word, what happened three years later, after the failure of Lehman 
Brothers. 
Many in the audience reacted in a very hostile manner to Rajan’s presentation. He was seen 
as a killjoy, and an opponent of innovation and progress. He was even called a “Luddite,” a 
machine breaker. His proposals for reform were thought to be destined for failure. 
The  policy  community  was  not  in  the  mood  to  change  course  just  because  of  a  single 
conference presentation, even if it was a comprehensive and balanced contribution. It took a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  major  international  catastrophe  for  the  policy  community  and  the  majority  of  academic 
opinion to adjust its views. And we have not seen the end of the catastrophe yet. 
Rajan’s speech was an excellent example not only of professional competence but also of 
professional integrity and courage. 
 Another  example  that  all  who  were  present  will  recall,  was  the  issue  of  whether  it  was 
sufficient to adhere to the inflation target alone even if asset prices begin to soar. 
During the period of the Great Moderation, from the 1990s up until about 2007, the academic 
literature on macroeconomics had developed a very streamlined view of what central banks 
should be doing. The literature generally emphasised the view that policy should focus on the 
stabilization  of  a  single  indicator,  the  medium  term  inflation  forecast,  by  using  a  single 
instrument, the short-term money market interest rate. 
Practical  policy  never  became  quite  as  simplified  as  this,  but  the  general  trend  during  the 
high  years  of  the  inflation  targeting  doctrine  was  towards  such  a  regime.  This  meant  a 
departure from the more traditional thinking, when central banks were very interested in the 
behaviour of the money and credit aggregates. 
The  ECB,  which  almost  alone  insisted  that  there  was  a  role  for  monetary  and  credit 
aggregates in its monetary policy strategy, was sometimes thought to be more than a little 
old-fashioned. 
What some practical bankers worried about was what to do if the objective of stabilizing the 
inflation  outlook  came  into  conflict  with  the  stability  of  the  credit  market.  There  was  no 
unanimity  on  this  issue.  It  was  even  debated  whether  such  a  conflict  of  objectives  was  a 
realistic scenario. 
The question can be posed for example in this manner: should monetary policy be tightened 
in response to a credit boom even if there seems to be nothing to worry about on the inflation 
front? What if bubbles are developing in the economy? 
At  the  2007  Jackson  Hole  symposium,  Rick  Mishkin,  then  a  member  of  the  Board  of 
Governors  of  the  Fed,  gave  a  presentation  on  “Housing  and  the  monetary  transmission 
mechanism” (Mishkin 2007, pp. 359–413). Among other things, he dealt with the possibility of 
real estate bubbles and what to do about them. 
Mishkin took a straight inflation-targeting view in his presentation. He said that should central 
banks  respond  to  suspected  bubbles,  they  would  be  forgetting  their  basic  mission  of 
sustaining price stability. This, he said, could prove extremely costly both in terms of what 
monetary policy does and what the general public thinks it is doing. 
Opinion was divided at the symposium. Some, like Lars Svensson, supported Mishkin’s view 
and stated that there were insufficient grounds to deviate from a price stability policy even if it 
was suspected that a bubble was developing. 
Others were not so sure. Some, like Stanley Fischer, asked why should one wait for a bubble 
to burst and then plunge into a major crisis. Some thought that the cost of a financial crisis 
could  be  so  great  that  monetary  policy  should  “lean  against  the  wind”  in  order  to  prevent 
bubbles from growing too big to handle. 
As we all know, the events that have occurred after 2007, in the form of the financial crisis, 
have forced both academics and the policy community to take a broader view than before the 
crisis: 
• 
The  costs  of  financial  crises  are  taken  much  more  seriously  than  in  2007.  Hardly 
anyone  now  says  that  we  should  not  worry  about  possible  bubbles  as  they  are 
developing; that it is enough to concentrate on mopping up the mess afterwards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Also,  a  common  view  now  is  that  price  stability  alone  does  not  ensure  financial 
stability. Markets are not that well behaved. 
It is also recognized as a fact that strengthening prudential regulation of banks, even 
though  it  has  been  necessary,  is  not  alone  sufficient  to  ensure  that  bubbles  and 
crashes do not occur in the asset and credit markets. 
 The  answer  to the  policy  dilemma  between  price  stability  and  controlling credit  cycles  and 
property bubbles is now sought from another direction: macro-prudential policy. 
The  use  of  macro-prudential  policy  instruments  is  not  now  considered  to  be  a  part  of 
monetary policy proper. It is, however, generally accepted that central banks should play a 
key role in the development and use of macro-prudential tools. 
The use of macro-prudential policy instruments can be an essential complement to monetary 
policy.  In  many  instances,  effective  macro-prudential  tools  may  be  even  a  prerequisite  for 
successful monetary policy. 
To summarize: the more the central banks can trust macro-prudential policy to do its part, the 
better can monetary policy support the recovery of economic activity and normalization of the 
inflation rate, in the euro area and elsewhere. 
It  is  clear  that  in  the  years  since  the  symposium  of  2007,  the  mainstream  of  economic 
research has had to adjust its assumptions for monetary policy and the behaviour of financial 
markets in a more pragmatic and realistic direction than before. It is recognized that, on this 
matter, theoretical research still has much to learn from the practical experience of central 
banks’ attempts to preserve both price and financial stability at the same time. 
 My third and final example from the discussions at Jackson Hole has to do with a problem 
that is quite pertinent at present, that is, what kind of monetary policy should be practised in 
a situation of ultra-low interest rates. 
The  present  situation  is  unique  in  history.  In  many  countries,  including  the  euro  area,  the 
short-term  interest  rate  is  close  to  or  even  slightly  below  zero.  According  to the  traditional 
way  of  thinking,  rates  could  not  go  much  lower  without  causing  problems  in  the  form  of 
speculative investments in currency (banknotes). 
Just  how  low  the  nominal  short-term  rate  can  be  in  practice  is  not  certain.  Central  banks 
have been feeling their way ahead in this area. 
Academics, of course, recognized the problem of the “zero lower bound”, and provided some 
answers to the problem. And policy makers have listened. A particularly influential idea was 
put  forward  by  Reifschneider  and  Williams  (2000),  well  before  the  financial  crisis  and  the 
related  decline  in  interest rates. They  recommended  a  solution that  is now  called  “forward 
guidance.”  By  promising  to  postpone  the  interest  rate  hike  beyond  the  expected  time,  the 
central bank can give some monetary stimulus to economic recovery. 
If  this  promise  to  postpone  the  coming  rise  in  the  interest  rate  is  credible,  it  will  affect 
economic  prospects  now.  In  a  world  with  forward-looking  firms  and  markets,  this  will 
stimulate current spending and activity. 
This brings me to my third example from the Jackson Hole symposia. At the symposium in 
2012,  Michael  Woodford  presented  a  policy  paper  which  contained  some  practical 
recommendations  on  how  forward  guidance  should  be  implemented  (Woodford  2012, 
pp. 185–288). 
Woodford  is  one  of  the  most  respected  academic  authorities  on  monetary  policy,  so 
everyone listened closely. In his presentation, Woodford stated that it is better to announce 
very precise and firm commitments about future policy intentions rather than make vaguely 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  worded statements. In particular, he recommended including strict economic conditionality in 
the forward guidance. 
According to Woodford, central banks should not merely commit to keeping the interest rate 
at  its  lower  bound  until  a  given  future  date.  Rather,  they  should  make  a  binding,  but 
conditional,  statement  on  future  monetary  policy.  Woodford  stated  that  there  should  be 
transparent and objective economic criteria for the steering rate lift-off. 
Such  precise  commitments  were  actually  tried  in  practice  soon  after  Woodford  and  some 
other academics had recommended the conditional approach. 
In December 2012, the Fed’s Open Market Committee declared that: “this exceptionally low 
range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate 
remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be 
no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and 
longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.” 
The Bank of England also introduced several declared numerical lift-off criteria – knockouts – 
in 2013. These were related to the inflation forecast, the prevailing inflationary expectations, 
and the stability of the finance sector. 
Experiences with these precise lift-off criteria have been mixed. The quantitative indicators 
are  not  quite  as  precise  and  reliable  as  might  be  hoped,  and  they  do  not  convey  the  full 
picture of the state of the economy. So there may be “false alarms” or at least suspicions of 
“false alarms” related to the selected indicators. If this happens, the forward guidance based 
on numerical indicators may be less clear than was hoped for. 
The ECB has not taken that route. Instead, the forward guidance of the Governing Council of 
the ECB is based on the long-term target of price stability according to which inflation in the 
medium-term is below but close to 2%. 
By  doing  so,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  has  managed  to  avoid  some  of  the  problems 
related to very precise numerical lift-off criteria. The ECB’s forward guidance has worked. At 
the same time, it must be admitted that the prolonged period of lower-than-intended inflation, 
which is still ongoing, remains a cause for concern. 
This is one reason why the ECB reinforced its forward guidance with a comprehensive set of 
policy measures in March. The monthly purchases of €80 billion are intended to run until the 
end  of  March  next  year,  or  beyond  that  if  necessary,  and  in  any  case  until  the  Governing 
Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation rates to below but close to 2 % in 
the medium term. Additionally, the ECB Governing Council has announced that it expects the 
key ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower levels well past the horizon of our net 
asset purchases. 
 The examples I have cited from the Jackson Hole symposium, each in its own  way, show 
that the interaction between researchers and policy makers has been active and very timely 
in recent years. 
More importantly, this interaction has been forward-looking. All three of the examples were 
such that the interaction between researchers and policy makers focused on problems that 
came to a head soon after they were discussed at the conference. 
I would like to raise a fourth issue that resides at the interface between policy and research 
which has arisen in the aftermath of the financial crisis. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  In 2012, I led a high level expert group established by the EU Commission whose task was 
to consider the regulation of banks’ structures in Europe and to make proposals concerning 
it. 
The  issue  of  bank  structures  entered  the  EU  agenda  as  part  of  a  wider  development  of 
regulations concerning the banking industry. As separate but interconnected projects, these 
included  the  reform  of  capital  adequacy  and  liquidity  regulations,  the  strengthening  of  the 
banks’ crisis resolution system and the concentration of banking supervision within the euro 
area under the ECB’s responsibility. 
The  practical  task  for  our  working  group  was  to  consider  which  forms  of  business  and 
securities  trading  should  be  allowed  for  deposit  banks.  The  proponents  of  structural 
regulation think that the safety nets, formal and informal, present in deposit banking might 
encourage  large  deposit  banks  to  take  excessive  risks  and  to  be  overly  active  in  the 
securities markets. The consequence would be the banks’ increased propensity to fall into 
crisis and tax-payers’ increased exposure to banks’ risks. To avoid this, the involvement of 
deposit banks in risky business activities should be restricted. 
At  the  same  time,  there  are  experts  who  argue  that  sufficiently  good  results  could  be 
achieved  by  tightening  the  regulations  on  banks’  capital  requirements  and  dismantling  the 
safety nets that protect them. Thus, the scope for moral hazard would be reduced to such an 
extent that restrictions on deposit banks’ scope of business would not be necessary. 
The banking sector itself has generally been lobbying against both restrictions on activities 
and tightened capital requirements. 
Structural  regulation  has  a  long  history  especially  in  the  United  States  where  the  Glass-
Steagall  Act,  passed  in  the  1930s,  restricted  banks’  securities  trading  up  until  the  1990s, 
when  it  was  repealed.  As  a  consequence  of  the  financial  crisis,  however,  there  has  been 
renewed  interest  in  structural  regulation,  and  the  United  States  has  now  adopted  the  so-
called  Volcker  Rule,  which  prohibits  banks  from  engaging  in  proprietary  securities  and 
derivatives trading. There are, however, some significant exceptions to this rule. 
Britain  took  a  slightly  different  approach  to  structural  regulation.  This  was  guided  by  the 
principle  of  insulating  basic  banking  activities  within  banking  corporations  from  other 
functions (i.e. ring-fencing) so as to prevent the transfer of risk, for instance, from securities 
trading to basic banking. 
One  of  the  recommendations  of  my  work  group  was  that  banking  groups  should  isolate 
proprietary trading within separate companies. The financing of such companies should be 
separated from the deposit bank so as to prevent at least large-scale proprietary trading at 
the risk of the deposit bank, trading that would  occur indirectly under the protection of the 
deposit guarantee scheme (Liikanen et al., 2012). 
What connections did our working group have with academic research? 
Professor  Marco  Pagano,  who  currently  chairs  the  Advisory  Scientific  Committee  of  the 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB),  has  in  one  of  his  papers  wondered  why  it  is  that 
academic research has so little to say about the effects of the structural regulation of banks 
(Pagano  2014a).  Pagano  has  not  used  this  idea  to  argue  against  structural  regulation: for 
example, at the European Parliament hearing in 2014, he strongly defended the proposals of 
our work group (Pagano 2014b). 
We  were  able  in  our  group,  however,  to  make  use  of  earlier  research  concerning  several 
aspects of the problem at hand, and our report includes a survey of the relevant literature. As 
this survey shows, the research on the banking sector has dedicated specific effort in looking 
into  economies  of  scale  in  the  banking  sector,  and  in  asking  whether  there  are  significant 
synergies (economies of scope) between various business areas in the banking industry. 
These are indeed key questions in considering the imposition of restrictions on the size of 
banks and in demanding the separation of banking activities into unrelated institutions. The 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  answers  would  bear  on  the  possible  efficiency  losses  that  this  kind  of  stability-seeking 
regulation might cause. 
Our conclusion based on the evidence was that our regulatory recommendations would not 
cause a loss of efficiency to the extent that would outweigh the increased stability of banks 
gained by structural regulation. 
One  central  problem  whose  consideration  within  our  group  was  affected  by  the  research 
literature was the question of how to treat market making. 
In  his  research  on  the  United  States’  Volcker  Rule,  Stanford  University  Professor  Darrell 
Duffie drew attention to the difficulty in practical monitoring work in separating market making 
activities from proprietary trading. 
Duffie  recommended  the  regulation  of  market  making  primarily  through  prudential  and 
liquidity regulations, or alternatively, by separation of this activity from the core bank through 
“ring-fencing” (Duffie 2012). In our working group, we ended up suggesting the latter solution, 
where  market  making  activities  are  on  a  large  scale.  This  would  have  made  it  possible  to 
handle  proprietary  trading  and market making  in  a  uniform  way  and  therefore reduced  the 
problems of monitoring compliance with the regulations. 
The proposal by the EU Commission on the structural regulation of banks, which is currently 
before the Parliament and the Council, differed on this point from the proposal of our working 
group. 
The  Commission  proposed  the  prohibition  of  proprietary  trading  altogether  (apart  from 
government bonds etc.) – this has been called the Barnier Rule after the commissioner at the 
time, Michel Barnier. 
The proposal of our working group on the obligation to separate securities activities would, in 
the Commission’s proposal, be effected at the discretion of the banking supervisors (in the 
euro area, the ECB). The supervisory authority would determine whether securities trading 
constituted a threat to the stability of the bank, and if the bank could not prove otherwise, the 
authority could demand that the activities be separated (European Commission 2014). 
The  Commission’s  proposal  on  banking  structures  drifted  into  a  peculiar  situation  in  the 
European Parliament when the rapporteur responsible for the proposal lost the vote in the 
committee. The fate of the proposal remains open. 
A lot has been happening in the markets themselves. Many so-called universal banks have 
substantially  limited  their  proprietary  trading  because  it  has  caused  significant  losses  for 
them. Banks are on the look-out for a new business model. 
 What do the cases explored here tell us about the connection between research and policy 
making? 
In  the  real  world,  things  do  not  follow  a  simplistic  model  according  to  which  economic 
scientists first provide objective advice to policy makers, who then choose from the proposed 
alternatives the ones they prefer, and then put these into practice. The internal procedures of 
the official policy planning machinery have this model as its aim, but it is not the complete 
picture. 
Without belittling at all the official mechanisms for policy preparation, it is important for the 
research community and the central banking community to engage in wide ranging and close 
interaction in more informal forums. It is my belief that the bond between the research and 
policy  communities  is  getting  even  stronger  at  present,  as  the  problems  of  the  financial 
markets show little sign of subsiding. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  The  influence  of  the  research  community  is  especially  significant  when  the  discussion  is 
about  strategies  and  policy  doctrines,  the  appropriate  mandates  for  institutions,  and  the 
selection  of  policy  instruments.  But  this  influence  occurs  as  a  dialogue  in  which  policy 
makers and researchers both influence each other’s views. 
It  is  important  also  to  remember  that  monetary  and  economic  policy  interaction  between 
policy makers and researchers happens in real time, in which economic history provides one 
surprise  after  another  to  both  sides  of  the  policy  dialogue.  There  are  always  new  factors 
coming into view, factors which had previously been overlooked but suddenly occupy centre 
stage. 
History will always shake the policy frameworks from some unexpected angle and start yet 
another phase in the on-going dialogue between policy makers and economic theorists. 
Interest,  and  Money. 
References: 
Capie,  F.  (2010):  The  Bank  of  England  1950s  to  1979.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University 
Press. 
Duffie, D. (2012): Market Making Under the Proposed Volcker Rule. Working Paper Series, 
No. 106, Rock Center for Corporate Governance, Stanford University. 
European Commission (2014): Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of 
the Council on structural measures improving the resilience of EU credit institutions (COM 
(2014) 43 final). https://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/celex-52014pc0043-en-txt.pdf. 
Keynes,  J.M.  (1936):  The  General  Theory  of  Employment, 
Camridge:Macmillan (The reference cited is to the 1973 edition). 
Liikanen,  E.,  et  al.  (2012):  High-level  Expert  Group  on  Reforming  the  Structure  of  the  EU 
Banking  Sector.  Final  Report.  http://ec.europa.eu/finance/bank/docs/high-level_expert_ 
group/report_en.pdf. 
Mishkin,  F.S.  (2007):  Housing  and  the  Monetary  Transmission  Mechanism.  Proceedings  – 
Economic Policy Symposium – Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Pagano, M. (2014a): Dealing with Financial Crises: How Much Help from Research? Working 
Paper No. 362. Centre for Studies in Economics and Finance. University of Naples. 
Pagano,  M.  (2014b):  European  Parliament,  ECON  Committee  Public  Hearing  on  Bank 
Structural  Reform,  Statement  of  Prof.  Marco  Pagano,  2  December  2014. 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/committees/en/econ/events.html?id=20141121CHE93808. 
Rajan,  R.  (2005):  Has  financial  development  made  the  world  riskier?  Proceedings  – 
Economic Policy Symposium – Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Reifschneider, D. Williams, J.C. (2000): Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation 
Era. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 32, No. 4. 
Tinbergen, J. (1955): On the Theory of Economic Policy. Amsterdam: North-Holland. 
Woodford,  M.  (2012)  Methods  of  Policy  Accomodation  at  the  Interest-Rate  Lower  Bound. 
Proceedings  –  Economic  Policy  Symposium  –  Jackson  Hole,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
