   
Sabine Lautenschläger: After one year of European banking supervision, 
have expectations been met? 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, 
at the Austrian Bankers’ Business Lunch, Frankfurt am Main, 13 January 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
With Christmas and New Year now behind us, this is a good opportunity for a brief look back 
at the last 12 months – the first full calendar year of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). 
I will also look ahead to the forthcoming year, turning my attention to the issues facing banking 
supervision in 2016. 
After a year or so of operations, it is time for the SSM to ask itself whether European banking 
supervision has succeeded in fulfilling the high expectations that people had of it. 
Our  task  is  to  make  the  SSM  a  truly  European  institution,  combining  the  experience  of 
19 different national supervisory authorities and establishing a common standard that allows 
banks to be supervised without the influence of national interests. It is important in that regard 
that  the  SSM  identifies  risks  in  good  time,  reacts  quickly,  and  acts  both  efficiently  and 
effectively. 
Has the SSM lived up to these expectations? I believe it has. As Vice-Chair of the Supervisory 
Board of the ECB, I am of course biased, so I would like to offer some evidence in support of 
this assertion. 
Last year saw the successful completion of our Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process 
(SREP), which was conducted on the basis of a uniform methodology. That enabled us, for the 
very first time, to measure institution-specific risks in the euro area’s largest banks using a 
common yardstick. What is more, we also plan to make full use of the options and discretions 
that European law makes available to competent supervisory authorities, exercising them in a 
uniform manner across all euro area countries. Thus, we have begun to foster harmonisation 
in this area as well. 
Such efforts over the last year have helped us to lay the foundations for truly European banking 
supervision. Consequently, our focus this year will shift slightly – from the methodology and 
structures of banking supervision to its content. 
Banking supervisors are effectively tasked with worrying. That is what we are paid to do. Our 
work involves looking for risks that could potentially pose a threat to the stability of the banking 
system. Looking ahead to 2016, we have identified a series of risks and, on the basis of those 
risks, chosen to focus our supervisory efforts in five specific areas. 
The first concerns banks’ business models. At the heart of our work lies the question of the 
consequences  that  the  sustained  period  of  low  interest  rates  will  have  for  the  various 
institutions and their business models. If they are forced to adjust their business models, banks 
could potentially move into riskier areas in search of yield. That would increase not only the 
risk of bubbles in financial markets, but also the level of risk within individual banks. We will 
therefore be looking very closely to see whether banks are adjusting their business models, 
what direction they are moving in, and what risks that involves. 
Our  second  priority  concerns  credit  risks.  We  are  continuing  to  see  large  stocks  of  non-
performing loans in certain banks. In order to address this problem at European level from a 
supervisory perspective, we established a dedicated working group last year. That working 
group has been tasked with developing and implementing a consistent supervisory approach 
aimed at supporting a reduction in those large stocks of non-performing loans. However, this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   second  priority  is  not  just  about  non-performing  loans;  it  is  also  about  cluster  risks  –  the 
concentration of exposures in specific sectors, such as the property sector. 
The third priority is banks’ capitalisation. It is clear that banks have significantly increased their 
capital since the crisis; and from our perspective, the capitalisation of the European banking 
system as a whole is satisfactory. Our focus will be on two things. First, we will be looking at 
the new requirements concerning the capital components that absorb losses in the event of a 
bank becoming insolvent. “TLAC” and “MREL” will be the key terms in this respect. Second, 
we will again be looking very closely at what exactly constitutes capital, as well as establishing 
an  overview  of  the  banks’  internal  models  and  processes  used  to  determine  the  capital 
requirements. 
The fourth priority is banks’ internal risk management. Against the background of low interest 
rates, cheap refinancing and low profitability, it is increasingly important that banks manage 
risk in an appropriate manner. To do that properly, managers need sound data on which to 
base their decisions. We will therefore be formulating specific requirements concerning risk 
management and data quality. 
Our  fifth  priority  will  be  banks’  liquidity.  The  2008  financial  crisis  showed  how  dangerous 
liquidity problems can be – not just for individual banks, but for the financial system as a whole. 
Some banks are failing to meet our expectations in terms of the management of liquidity risk. 
We will therefore be paying particular attention to banks’ internal liquidity management – i.e. 
the Internal Liquidity Adequacy Assessment Process (ILAAP). 
Alongside these five substantive priorities, we are continuing to work on supervisory structures 
and  methodology.  That  includes  the  issue  of  national  powers.  In  many  countries,  national 
legislation provides that supervisory authorities are competent to deal with specific issues in 
the area of solvency supervision that are not expressly referred to in European legislation. The 
question,  then,  is  whether  the  ECB,  as  a  European  institution,  can  directly  exercise  such 
competences. Thus far, this question has only ever been answered on a case-by-case basis, 
which is certainly not ideal. We need a consistent approach in this regard. 
We also need to look at the delegation of decisions. At present, all of the Supervisory Board’s 
decisions go to the Governing Council of the ECB in draft form for adoption. In 2015 alone, we 
took a good 1,500 supervisory decisions by means of that process, including many routine 
decisions. In order to allow the ECB’s decision-making bodies to concentrate on important 
cases, we are considering delegating at least routine decisions. 
What we need here is a framework allowing the unobjectionable delegation of less important 
decisions – i.e. decisions that have only minor implications for the bank in question, or routine 
decisions that involve little in the way of discretion. The delegation arrangements will be such 
that ECB staff have a clear framework enabling them to take the routine decisions that are 
delegated to them. 
Ladies and gentlemen, that concludes my brief review of 2015 and my look ahead to 2016. 
Thank you very much for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
