  Mario Draghi: IMFC Statement 
Statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the thirty-third 
meeting  of  the  International  Monetary  and  Financial  Committee,  Washington  DC,  15  April 
2016. 
 The  euro  area  economy  is  continuing  on  a  path  of  gradual  recovery,  notwithstanding  an 
external  environment  characterised  by  some  further  deceleration  in  economic  growth  and 
occasional bouts of financial  volatility. But the outlook for euro area growth remains faced 
with uncertainty, mainly as a result of downside risks to growth prospects in emerging market 
economies,  a  clouded  outlook  for  oil  prices  and  their  economic  implications,  and  also 
geopolitical  risks.  Given  the  new  risks  to  the  outlook  for  inflation,  as  well  as  the 
materialisation of some of the existing ones, the Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank has adopted a comprehensive package of monetary policy measures to further ease 
financing  conditions  in  the  euro  area,  stimulate  bank  lending  and  thereby  reinforce  the 
momentum  of  the  euro  area’s  economic  recovery  and  accelerate  the  return  of  inflation  to 
levels  below,  but  close  to,  2%.  In  order  to  reap  the  full  benefits  of  these  monetary  policy 
measures,  decisive  implementation  of  structural  reforms  and  greater  progress  towards 
sustainable  and  more  growth-friendly  public  finances  is  necessary.  Such  a  combination  of 
policy actions will not only lead to higher sustainable growth but will also make the euro area 
more resilient to global shocks. At the same time, this will be the best contribution the euro 
area can make in terms of promoting strong, sustainable and balanced growth in the world. 
The  cyclical  recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  largely  supported  by  developments  in  private 
consumption,  and  more  recently  also  investment.  Real  GDP  rose  by  0.3%,  quarter  on 
quarter, in the second half of last year. Recent data provide some mixed signals as regards 
the near-term outlook. While hard data show some improvement in January and February, 
survey data for the first quarter are consistent with a somewhat weaker growth momentum. 
Nonetheless, the economic recovery in the euro area is projected to proceed at a moderate 
pace.  Domestic  demand  should  be  further  supported  by  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy 
measures, continued employment gains, the low price of oil and a slightly expansionary fiscal 
stance. The risks to this growth outlook remain on the downside, however, and relate mainly 
to the heightened uncertainties regarding developments in the global economy. 
Headline  inflation  has  remained  low  and  its  profile  continues  to  be  shaped  by  the  path  of 
energy  inflation.  In  addition  the  recent  partial  unwinding  of  the  past  depreciation  in  the 
external value of the euro reduces the upward price pressure from the external side. Looking 
ahead,  inflation  in  the  euro  area  is  likely  to  display  slightly  negative  rates  in  the  coming 
months before picking up later in 2016. Thereafter, supported by our substantial monetary 
stimulus  and  the  projected  evolution  of  energy  prices  and  economic  developments  more 
generally, euro area inflation rates should recover further. In the current context, it is crucial 
for the ECB to ensure that the very low inflation environment does not become entrenched in 
second-round effects on wage and price-setting. 
Our  monetary  policy  continues  to  aim  at  safeguarding  price  stability  in  fulfilment  of  our 
mandate.  While  the  monetary  policy  measures  taken  since  June  2014  have  helped 
supporting the euro area’s economic recovery and fighting too low inflation, new shocks that 
emerged during the course of last year prompted a measurable downgrade of the inflation 
outlook. Hence, in March 2016 the ECB’s Governing Council decided on a comprehensive 
package of measures that complement and reinforce each other and thereby strengthen the 
monetary policy impulse. The package combines a further broad-based easing of financial 
conditions through a further reduction in the ECB’s key policy rates and the expansion of our 
asset  purchase  programme,  with  other  measures,  notably  four  new  targeted  longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTRO II) that will reinforce the transmission of our monetary policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
stance to  the  borrowing  conditions  of firms  and  households. The TLTRO  II  operations  will 
enable banks to borrow liquidity for a period of four years at a rate that can be as low as the 
rate on the deposit facility – currently –0.40% – in case these banks increase their lending 
beyond a certain benchmark. The ECB’s asset purchases are being expanded in terms of 
both  size  and  composition:  the  monthly  purchase  volume  has  been  increased  from 
€60 billion to €80 billion and the universe of eligible assets now includes non-bank corporate 
bonds. Purchases are intended to run until the end of March 2017 – or beyond, if necessary 
– , and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of 
inflation to levels close to 2% over the medium term. Taking into account the current outlook 
for  price  stability,  the  Governing  Council  expects  the  ECB’s  key  policy  rates  to  remain  at 
present or lower levels for an extended period of time, well past the horizon of the net asset 
purchases.  We  are  confident  that  the  very  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  will 
provide further support to the euro area recovery and will accelerate the return of inflation to 
levels that we consider to be consistent with our objective. The Governing Council has done 
and, within its mandate, will continue to do whatever is needed to pursue its price stability 
objective. 
Our very accommodative monetary policy stance has provided considerable support for the 
euro area recovery. By supporting growth prospects, our actions have also been beneficial 
for financial stability. While accommodative monetary policies over an extended horizon may 
have unintended consequences for certain sectors in the form of excessive risk-taking and 
misaligned asset prices, we do not currently see any broad based evidence of excesses in 
the  behaviour  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  and  valuations  of  euro  area  asset 
prices.  Moreover,  euro  area  countries  are  in  a  position  to  use  macroprudential  policies  to 
address imbalances should they arise. 
The  stability  of  the  euro  area  banking  sector  has  improved  significantly  over  the  past  few 
years. Bank capital and provisions have been substantially reinforced and bank profitability 
has  started  to  rise  again.  However,  against  the  background  of  a  moderate  economic 
recovery, this profitability remains low. Structural factors may also be at play. In addition, in 
some  jurisdictions,  a  high  stock  of  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  continues  to  linger  as  a 
legacy of the earlier crisis. As this may constrain banks’ lending capacity and their ability to 
build up further capital buffers, determined action is needed. Cooperation among all major 
stakeholders,  including  governments,  banks,  regulators  and  investors,  at  national  and 
European  level,  is  necessary  in  order  to  make  substantial  progress  in  this  field.  Tailored 
approaches,  based  on  a  thorough  understanding  of  country-specific  aspects  and  in  the 
context of a comprehensive strategy that is led as much as possible by the private sector, 
are  needed.  The  banking  supervision  arm  of  the  ECB  is  working  from  the  supervisory 
perspective, on identifying best practices that can be adopted by individual banks. Certainly, 
a  decline  in  NPL  ratios  will  also  be  facilitated  by  an  environment  of  stronger  economic 
growth. 
In  the  euro  area,  such  conditions  of  strong  and  sustained  growth  will  require  the  ongoing 
cyclical recovery to be supported by effective structural policies. In particular, reform efforts 
need to be stepped up to improve the business environment, which in turn will help increase 
productivity, employment and growth – and also make the euro area more resilient to shocks. 
Fiscal policies should support the economic recovery, while remaining in compliance with the 
European  Union’s  fiscal  rules.  The  full  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact  is  crucial  to  maintaining  confidence  in  the  fiscal  framework  and  ensuring  the 
sustainability of public debt. At the same time, all euro area countries should strive for a more 
growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies, prioritising public investment and reducing the 
tax burden on labour. 
A  clear  policy  focus  on  the  growth  agenda  will  contribute  to  enhancing  confidence  and 
reducing  uncertainty  about  the  future.  In  the  case  of  the  euro  area,  a  stronger  and  more 
complete Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) will also help improve confidence. The so-
called  Five  Presidents’  Report  –  “Completing  Europe’s  Economic  and  Monetary  Union”  – 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
provides a roadmap for how to improve the architecture of EMU. Effectively implementing the 
enhanced  governance  framework,  completing  the  banking  union,  and  building  a  capital 
markets  union  to  reduce  risk  and  to  allow  for  more  private  risk-sharing  while  establishing 
additional  public  risk-  sharing  mechanisms  in  parallel  are  some  of  the  key  near-term 
requirements in this regard. 
In the longer run, a more perfect EMU will form the basis for a stable, flourishing euro area 
economy that will not only enable the euro area to tackle challenges in other policy areas, but 
that will also be to the benefit of global economic and financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
