   Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before 
the Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, 
Brussels, 15 February 2016. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  first  weeks  of  this  year  have  shown  that  the  euro  area  and  the  Union  at  large  face 
significant challenges. A strong effort by all policy makers will be needed in the months ahead 
to overcome them. I am therefore grateful to be back before your committee to discuss these 
challenges and how the ECB can contribute to tackling them. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  address  in  turn  the  global  economic  context,  recent  financial 
developments and the state of the euro area recovery. I will conclude by briefly presenting our 
most recent decision to disclose the Agreement on Net Financial Assets – or ANFA – as I know 
this topic is of concern to some of you. 
The state of the global economy 
Let  me  start  with  the  state  of  the  global  economy.  In  recent  weeks,  we  have  witnessed 
increasing concerns about the prospects for the global economy. Activity and trade data have 
been weaker than expected, turbulence in financial markets has intensified and commodity 
prices have declined further.  
Slowing growth in emerging market economies is a focal point for this uncertainty. In the early 
years of this century, many emerging economies expanded at a rapid pace. They benefited 
from  increasing  integration  with  the  global  economy  and  the  tailwinds  of  buoyant  financial 
markets. As these factors diminish, many countries have to adjust to a new reality. In several 
economies  the  slowdown  has  revealed  and  exacerbated  structural  problems  which  are 
increasingly restraining growth. A continuation of the rebalancing process is needed to secure 
sustainable growth over the medium term. This could imply some headwinds in the short term, 
which will require close monitoring of the related risks.  
One consequence of this adjustment is the divergence of economic cycles. While the recovery 
in advanced economies is gradually proceeding, the growth momentum in emerging market 
economies has weakened.  
Weaker  global  demand  has  also  contributed  to  the  recent  fall  in  the  price  of  oil  and  other 
commodities,  which  in  turn  may  have  aggravated  fiscal  and  financial  fragilities  in  some 
commodity-exporting economies. Countries that have suffered worsening terms of trade have 
seen a sharp decline in activity, while investment in their energy sectors has contracted.  
Recent financial developments 
Since early December, a general deterioration in market sentiment has taken root and has 
gathered pace over the last week. This initially appeared closely linked to concerns regarding 
weakening economic activity around the globe – notably in emerging markets – and to potential 
adverse  signals  from  falling  commodity  prices.  Over  time  however,  market  sentiment  has 
become  more  volatile  and  susceptible  to  rapid  change.  In  this  environment,  stock  prices 
significantly declined and bank equity prices were particularly hit, both globally and in Europe. 
The sharp fall in bank equity prices reflected the sector’s higher sensitivity to a weaker-than-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   expected economic outlook; it also reflected fears that some parts of the banking sector were 
exposed  to  the  higher  risks  in  commodity-producing  sectors.  The  bulk  of  euro  area  listed 
banks, although they have relatively limited exposure to emerging markets and commodity 
producing countries, are currently trading well below their book values.  
The fall in bank equity prices was amplified by perceptions that banks may have to do more to 
adjust their business models to the lower growth/lower interest rate environment and to the 
strengthened international regulatory framework that has been put in place since the crisis. 
However, we have to acknowledge that the regulatory overhaul since the start of the crisis has 
laid the foundations for durably increasing the resilience not only of individual institutions but 
also  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  Banks  have  built  higher  and  better-quality  capital 
buffers,  have  reduced  leverage  and  improved  their  funding  profiles.  Moreover,  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision noted that substantial progress has been made towards 
finalising post-crisis reforms and that the remaining elements of the regulatory reform agenda 
for global banks are being finalised. The clarification of these elements will provide regulatory 
certainty on the stability of the future framework. This will support the banking sector’s ability 
to make long term sustainable business plans into the future. In fact, central bank governors 
and heads of supervision indicated that they are committed to not significantly increase overall 
capital requirements across the banking sector.  
In the euro area, the situation in the banking sector now is very different from what it was in 
2012. Perhaps most importantly, euro area banks have significantly strengthened their capital 
positions  over  the  past  few  years,  notably  as  a  consequence  of  the  Comprehensive 
Assessment conducted in 2014. For significant institutions, the CET1 ratio has increased from 
around 9 to 13%, making them more resilient to adverse shocks. In addition, the quality of the 
banks’ capital has also been substantially improved. 
With the 2015 Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process (SREP), the ECB has outlined the 
steady-state Pillar 2 supervisory capital requirements. This means that, all things equal, capital 
requirements will not be increased further. Hence, the banking sector can now conduct much 
better capital planning. Moreover, in 2015, the banks under ECB supervision further increased 
profits relative to 2014. This allows banks to have appropriate distribution policies while still 
meeting regulatory capital requirements and buffers, and to support lending to the economy. 
In addition, the ECB’s monetary policy actions continue to support banks’ financing conditions 
and, more broadly, economic activity.  
Clearly, some parts of the banking sector in the euro area still face a number of challenges. 
These range from uncertainty about litigation and restructuring costs in a number of banks to 
working through a stock of legacy assets, particularly in the countries most affected by the 
financial crisis. There is a subset of banks with elevated levels of non-performing loans (NPLs). 
However, these NPLs were identified during the Comprehensive Assessment, using for the 
first time a common definition, and have since been adequately provisioned for. Therefore, we 
are in a good position to bring down NPLs in an orderly manner over the next few years. For 
this purpose, the ECB’s supervisory arm is working closely with the relevant national authorities 
to ensure that our NPL policies are complemented by the necessary national measures. 
The state of the euro area recovery and the role of economic policies 
Against  the  background  of  downward  risks  emanating  from  global  economic  and  financial 
developments, let me now turn to the economic situation in the euro area. The recovery is 
progressing at a moderate pace, supported mainly by our monetary policy measures and their 
favourable  impact  on  financial  conditions  as  well  as  the  low  price  of  energy.  Investment 
remains  weak,  as  heightened  uncertainties  regarding  the  global  economy  and  broader 
geopolitical risks are weighing on investor sentiment. Moreover, the construction sector has so 
far not recovered.  
In order to make the euro area more resilient, contributions from all policy areas are needed. 
The  ECB  is  ready  to  do  its  part.  As  we  announced  at the  end  of  our  last  monetary  policy 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   meeting in January, the Governing Council will review and possibly reconsider the monetary 
policy  stance  in  early  March.  The  focus  of  our  deliberations  will  be  twofold.  First,  we  will 
examine the strength of the pass-through of low imported inflation to domestic wage and price 
formation and to inflation expectations. This will depend on the size and the persistence of the 
fall in oil and commodity prices and the incidence of second-round effects on domestic wages 
and  prices.  Second,  in the  light  of the recent financial  turmoil,  we  will  analyse  the  state of 
transmission of our monetary impulses by the financial system and in particular by banks. If 
either of these two factors entail downward risks to price stability, we will not hesitate to act.  
In parallel, other policies should help to put the euro area economy on firmer grounds. It is 
becoming clearer and clearer that fiscal policies should support the economic recovery through 
public  investment  and  lower  taxation.  In  addition,  the  ongoing  cyclical  recovery  should  be 
supported  by  effective  structural  policies.  In  particular,  actions  to  improve  the  business 
environment, including the provision of an adequate public infrastructure, are vital to increase 
productive investment, boost job creations and raise productivity. Compliance with the rules of 
the Stability and Growth Pact remains essential to maintain confidence in the fiscal framework.  
The Agreement on Net Financial Assets 
Let  me  conclude  by  turning  briefly  to  the  recent  decision  to  publish  the  Agreement  of  Net 
Financial Assets, also known as ANFA. This is another step to live up to our commitment to 
be accountable and transparent, both towards you as Parliament and towards the public at 
large. 
The ANFA is an agreement between the ECB and the euro area National Central Banks – the 
NCBs. It ensures that monetary policy is unaffected by NCB operations related to their national, 
non-monetary policy tasks.  
The right to perform such tasks dates back to the start of Economic and Monetary Union. At 
that time, the founding member states decided to centralise only central bank functions and 
tasks that are necessary to conduct a single monetary policy. All other tasks remained with the 
NCBs.  Such  national,  non-monetary  policy  tasks  include  managing  the  NCBs’  remaining 
foreign reserves – including gold – after the transfer of foreign reserves to the ECB, managing 
some  non-monetary  policy  portfolios  including  those  related  to  pension  funds  for  their 
employees, or providing payment services to national governments. 
When the NCBs hold portfolios not related to monetary policy as part of their national tasks, 
these portfolios are financed either by central bank money provided by the NCBs or by non-
monetary liabilities. This does not interfere with monetary policy as long as it is limited to less 
than the amount of banknotes needed by the public. This limit ensures that banks still have to 
borrow from the Eurosystem at the monetary policy rate set by the Governing Council. 
Here is where the ANFA comes in. Its purpose is to limit the size of the NCBs’ non-monetary 
policy  portfolios,  net  of  the  related  liabilities,  and  thus  to  ensure  that  the  Eurosystem  can 
effectively implement the single monetary policy.  
Of course, when performing national tasks, the NCBs must comply with the Treaty including 
the prohibition of monetary financing. Moreover, if these tasks were to interfere with monetary 
policy in any other way, they can be prohibited, limited or have conditions placed on them by 
the Governing Council. 
The publication of the previously confidential ANFA text was a unanimous decision of the ECB 
and  the  NCBs  in  the  Eurosystem  to  live  up  to  our  commitment  to  be  transparent.  This 
publication should resolve misunderstandings about ANFA. In particular, it clarifies that the 
sole purpose of ANFA is to set limits for non-monetary policy operations related to national 
tasks of the NCBs, which they are allowed to conduct according to the Treaty. Nothing more 
and  nothing  less.  These  limits  ensure  that  the  NCBs’  operations  do  not  interfere  with  the 
objectives and tasks of the Eurosystem and, in particular, with the single monetary policy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Finally,  complementing  the  information  on  ANFA,  the  ECB  also  published  data  on  the 
Eurosystem’s  aggregate  net  financial  assets.  The  NCBs  will  follow  suit  and  disclose  their 
respective net financial assets when publishing their annual financial accounts. These data 
provide factual information to the public as to which part of central bank money demand is 
provided by non-monetary policy operations. 
Thank you for your attention, and I look forward to your questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
