   Vítor Constâncio: The challenge of low real interest rates for monetary 
policy 
Lecture  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Macroeconomics Symposium, Utrecht School of Economics, Utrecht,15 June 2016. 
 The charts can be found at the European Central Bank’s website. 
The Footnotes can be found at the end of the speech. 
This is the full text of a speech delivered in abridged form at the Macroeconomics Symposium at Utrecht School of 
Economics on 15 June 2016. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  warmly  thank  the  organisers  for  inviting  me  to  the  Utrecht  University  Macroeconomics 
Symposium, a prestigious event dedicated this year to the low interest rate environment. Low 
interest rates are prevailing in advanced economies where a third of public debt is in negative 
territory and deposit facility policy rates are negative in several of them. Over the past decades, 
across major advanced economies both short- and long-term interest rates have experienced 
a significant decline and are currently at historical lows (see chart below on Long-term interest 
rates). 
In 1980, long-term interest rates stood at 11.4% in the U.S. and 8.5% in Germany. On average, 
over 2016 they have been about 1.9% and 0.3%, respectively and at about 0.3% for the euro 
area as a whole. Short-term interest rates have witnessed an equally dramatic fall: in 1980 the 
interest  rate  on  three-month  Treasury  securities  stood  at  11.4%  in  the  U.S.  and  6.4%  in 
Germany; this year it has averaged about 0.3% in the U.S. and minus 0.5% in Germany. In the 
euro area, the overnight interest rate has been minus 0.3%. A striking feature of the current 
environment is the extent to which interest rates are in negative territory at different maturities 
across so many advanced countries (see chart below on Sovereign debt yields). For example, 
yields in Japan up to ten years are negative, and in the case of Switzerland this extends to 15 
years.  
Why are interest rates so low? Is monetary policy responsible? 
Answering these questions is of crucial importance. Understandingly, low interest rates are 
generating  a  degree  of  apprehension  in  some  quarters  about  the  potential  negative 
implications for savers and for the financial industry, due to the compression of interest income. 
A superficial, impulsive answer is that rates are low because monetary policy keeps them low. 
However, in reality, low rates are the result of real economy developments and global factors, 
some of which are of a secular nature and others relate to the financial crisis.  
The concept of a real equilibrium interest rate 
To fully understand the present situation, it is useful to invoke the concept, controversial as it 
may be, of an equilibrium (or neutral) real interest rate, determined by long-term real economic 
factors and independent from monetary causes. It is based on the idea that there are real 
economic forces that lead the economy to long-term equilibrium at full employment with stable 
inflation. The role of monetary policy should therefore be to steer policy and market rates to 
that  equilibrium  rate.  The  concept  assumes  therefore  that  money,  as  well  as  finance,  are 
neutral  in  the  long  run,  and  only  act  as  devices  that  facilitate  contemporaneous  and 
intertemporal  transactions.  Many  general  equilibrium  models  operate  reflecting  this  vision, 
which  may  be  difficult  to  square  with  economies  at  present,  on the  back  of  the  staggering 
permanent loss of output resulting by the recent financial crisis.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The importance of the concept of a real equilibrium interest rate is that it provides a sort of 
anchor  to  a  monetary  economy.  In  reality,  the  concept  defines  an  optimum  to  which  the 
economy would move spontaneously in the long run if wrong policies would not disturb it. The 
concept  was  introduced  in  1898  by  Knut  Wicksell  as  he  became  aware  that  in  a  credit-
dominated economy, where banks create money, the traditional quantity theory of money could 
not explain inflation. He therefore introduced the theory of a natural real rate of interest, linked 
to the marginal productivity of capital that, in combination with market interest rates, would 
determine price dynamics. Prices would increase if market rates were below the natural rate, 
and  would  decrease  should  the  opposite  be  the  case.  As  market  rates  are  influenced  by 
monetary policy and somehow related to monetary aggregates, he presented his theory as a 
reformulation of the quantity theory of money adapted to a credit/money economy. As he wrote 
in his book “Interest and prices”: “There is a certain rate of interest on loans which is neutral in 
respect to commodity prices, and tends neither to raise or lower them. This is necessarily the 
same as the rate of interest which would be determined by supply and demand if no use were 
made of money and all lending were effected in the form of capital goods. It comes to much 
the same thing to describe it as the current value of the natural rate of interest on capital.”[1] 
The connection with the productivity of capital in production in physical terms was kept in the 
loanable funds theory of the interest rate when it refers the forces of “productivity and thrift”. 
Keynes, in his 1930 Treatise on Money, uses the concept of the natural rate but abandons it 
in  the  “General  Theory”  as  he  introduces  the  concept  of  equilibrium  at  different  levels  of 
employment rejecting the idea of real self-equilibrating forces and underlining the importance 
of monetary factors (the liquidity preference theory) in determining the interest rates even in 
the  long term.  As  a  result,  some  Keynesians  and  especially  all  post-Keynesians  reject  the 
notion of the natural real equilibrium interest rate.[2] The link with the real productivity of capital 
also contributed to that rejection after the famous controversy between the two Cambridge 
Universities (U.K. and U.S.) in the 1960s and 70s about the possibility of aggregating different 
capital goods in a capital variable with prices that need an interest rate to be calculated, when, 
at the same time, the interest rate was supposed to depend on the real productivity of capital.[3] 
The idea of the real equilibrium or natural rate disappeared from monetary theory and policy 
during  the  time  of  the  controversy  between  monetarists  and  Keynesians  as  also  Milton 
Friedman  did  not  believe  in  the  concept.  In  his  1968  paper  Friedman  wrote:  “What  if  the 
monetary authority chose the “natural” rate – either of interest or unemployment – as its target? 
One problem is that it cannot know what the “natural” rate is. Unfortunately, we have as yet 
devised  no  method  to  estimate  accurately  and  readily  the  natural  rate  of  either  interest  or 
unemployment. And the “natural” rate will itself change from time to time. But the basic problem 
is that even if the monetary authority knew the “natural” rate, and attempted to peg the market 
rate at that level, it would not be led to a determinate policy. The “market” rate will vary from 
the natural rate for all sorts of reasons other than monetary policy.”[4] As the empirical instability 
of money demand functions contributed to the demise of Friedman’s monetarism based on 
monetary  aggregates,  the  concept  of  the  real  equilibrium  rate  in  a  Wicksellian  sense  re-
emerged by the hand of Michael Woodford and Lars Svensson, when both created the theory 
of inflation targeting monetary regimes. Woodford even titled his 2003 book as “Interest and 
Prices” to underline the relation to Wicksell.[5] Monetary aggregates were substituted by interest 
rates  as  the  monetary  instrument  of  choice,  with  monetary  policy  subject  to  a  quantitative 
inflation  target.  As  the  real  equilibrium  rate  is  unobservable,  as  in  the  case  of  Wicksell, 
evidence that the policy and market rates were deviating from the natural rate would be given 
by the change in inflation. The policy response was then to increase or decrease policy rates 
accordingly, to address the problem. This Wicksellian approach, at the centre of the inflation 
targeting  theory,  can  also  be  found  in  optimal  rules  extracted  from  new-Keynesian  macro 
models as well as in the Taylor-type monetary policy rule in which the intercept is set at the 
real equilibrium interest rate level.  
The importance of this background is that monetary policy needs to shadow the equilibrium 
rate in order to meet its stability mandate. If the real equilibrium rate is decreasing then failure 
to accompany it would leave the economy with too high borrowing costs with respect to the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   return  on  investment.  This  would  discourage  investment  and  consumption  and  generate 
recessionary and deflationary pressures.  
Monetary policy is therefore part of the solution and not part of the problem. By ensuring low 
interest rates, monetary policy is supporting and accelerating the recovery and with this, the 
return to a normalisation of inflation and subsequent normalisation of interest rates. This starts 
to be visible in the U.S. where interest rates have started to increase.  
To demonstrate that monetary policy did not create per se the environment of low interest rates 
but is rather responding to a declining real rate of equilibrium, we need to have some empirical 
idea about a concept that is unobservable. There exist, however, many different methods to 
try to estimate this unobservable rate. One approach can be based on the existing medium- to 
long-term market interest rates, assuming that the markets are influenced by the concept of a 
long-term equilibrium real rate. Methodologies can then try to extract that wisdom of markets 
by using filters or models to decompose the actual interest rates. Other methods are more 
theoretical  and  model-based,  building  on  the  possible  determinants  of  a  real  equilibrium 
interest rate. I will present some estimates using both types of approaches. 
Determinants behind the decline of market interest rates 
A useful starting point to understand the decline in nominal risk-free long-term interest rates 
over  the  last  thirty  years  is  to  decompose  their  evolution  into  four  components:  expected 
inflation  over  the  lifespan  of  the  asset,  inflation  and  real  term  premia,  which  are  the 
compensation investors require for holding onto a long-term asset and finally, the expected 
path  of  the  short-term  real  interest  rate.[6] Although  data  limitations  make  it  hard  to  derive 
empirical estimates of each element of this decomposition going far back in the past, available 
estimates  suggest  that  all  components  have  contributed  to  the  decline  in  nominal  interest 
rates.[7] 
Taking  a  historical  perspective,  the  first  component,  long-term  inflation  expectations  have 
declined steadily since the beginning of the 1980s to stabilise at levels around 2% in the late 
1990s  (see  chart  above  on  Long-term  inflation  expectations).  The  trend  decline  and 
subsequent stabilisation are a manifestation of the success of central banks’ monetary policy 
in regaining control of inflation and in establishing strong credibility. In the last two years, these 
benign  developments  have  been  overshadowed  by  the  small  decline  in  long-term  inflation 
expectations, with the decline in short- and medium-term inflation expectations reflecting oil 
price  developments  and  the  degree  of  slack  in  the  economy.  From  a  central  bank’s 
perspective, this was very concerning and motivated the ECB’s substantial and comprehensive 
policy response. I will return later to the issue to elaborate on the ECB’s policy measures. 
The second element of the decomposition is the nominal term premium that corresponds to 
the additional return that investors demand to hold a long-term bond as opposed to rolling over 
a short-term bond. It can be decomposed in the inflation premium and the real term premium. 
But it is imperative to first look at the nominal term premium as a whole, as it is available over 
a longer sample. Some caution is needed when interpreting the results, as premia cannot be 
directly observed, and deriving estimates requires a model-based analysis.  
The term premium is found to display a trend decline over the last decades (see chart below 
on the Nominal term premium). This feature is robust across measures derived from alternative 
models, whereas there are noticeable differences about the precise level of the premium in 
specific episodes. 
Breaking down the nominal term premium into its components, the real term premium and the 
inflation risk premium, is subject to data limitations as estimates are based on inflation-linked 
bonds or swaps which have only recently become more widespread. As a result, this prevents 
a  detailed  assessment  of  the  relative  importance  of  the  drivers  behind  the  decline  in  the 
nominal term premium from a long-term perspective. But it has to be expected that the inflation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   premium has significantly declined in the 1980s and 1990s alongside the decline in inflation 
expectations, with investors accepting lower compensation for bearing inflation risk.[8] 
Focusing on more recent years, available estimates suggest that the inflation premium has 
remained rather stable at low levels in the 2000s, and has declined in the last couple of years 
probably reflecting investors’ reduced concern about inflation. This may be worrisome and we 
monitor these developments closely.  
However,  the  main  driving  force  behind  the  large  decline  in  the  nominal  term  premium 
observed in 2003–2004, as well as during the global financial crisis, has been the real term 
premium, as shown by Abrahams and co-authors (2015) for the U.S. and ECB staff estimates 
for the euro area – available since 2005 when inflation swaps have been introduced in the euro 
area (see chart below on the Decomposition of the euro area nominal term premium).[9] 
One  important factor  exerting  downward  pressure  on  the real  term  premium  has  been the 
imbalance between the reduction in the supply of and the increased demand for safe assets 
at  the  global  level,  which  has  been  exacerbated  by  the  global  financial  crisis.  Investors’ 
preference for the moneyness of safe assets – that is a preferred habitat demand for safe 
assets – has in effect bid up the price of those assets and correspondingly compressed the 
yield.  Prior  to  the  crisis,  this  was  explained  by  the  large  appetite  among  certain  emerging 
economies  to  hold  their  rising  savings,  the  so  called  “savings  glut”  (Bernanke,  2005)  – 
reflecting  factors  such  as  demographics  and  the  desire  to  build  international  reserves  for 
precautionary reasons after the Asian crisis of the late 1990s – in U.S. safe assets. This desire 
for  safe  assets  led  also  to  inflows  into  U.S.  securitised  assets  –  as  well  as  increasing  the 
incentives for the financial sector to boost supply – which were perceived to be safe in the 
years  preceding  the  global  financial  crisis.  However,  by  the  start  of  the  crisis  these  asset-
backed securities quickly lost their safe status. The subsequent emergence of the euro area 
sovereign  debt  crisis  also  led  to government  bonds  in  certain jurisdictions  being  no  longer 
characterised  as  safe.  According  to  Caballero  and  Farhi  (2014),  the  global  supply  of  safe 
assets has fallen from about $20trn in 2007 to just over $12trn USD in 2011. Additional factors 
that have boosted the demand for safe assets are the new liquidity regulation for banks and 
the increased need of safe and liquid assets to be posted in collateralised transactions. Central 
banks have, of course, contributed to the compression of premia via their quantitative easing 
programmes, and I will come back to this. 
The final component affecting the long-term nominal interest rate is the expected path of the 
short-term real rate over the life of the asset. Although the real rate has declined at all horizons, 
it is helpful to partition this path in terms of the front and intermediate segment, and the long-
term in order to better understand the drivers of these developments.  
First,  over  the  short  and  medium  run,  the  balance  between  savings  and  investment,  and 
therefore the real interest rate, is also affected by many factors of more cyclical nature. Since 
the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008,  these  factors  have  predominantly  exerted  downward 
pressure on the real interest rate. In the case of the euro area, it has still not emerged from its 
“balance sheet recession”, where a severe debt overhang and tightening of credit standards 
have required a substantial amount of deleveraging of both private and public sector balance 
sheets, thus reducing investment and prolonging the downturn. Furthermore, it takes time to 
reabsorb the over accumulation of capital and capacity that occurred prior to the crisis. Overall, 
that growth remains weak in the years after a banking crisis is certainly not atypical and has 
been well documented (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009).  
Second, in the long-term, market expectations about future monetary policy rates are being 
very much influenced by the difficulty in normalising inflation and by the pessimistic views about 
the long run growth prospects of the advanced economies which I will address later.[10] 
Another way to operationalise the longer-term notion of the real interest rate is to take real 
forward  rates  and  remove  the real forward  premium.  An  advantage  of using  market-based 
measures to derive an estimate of the equilibrium real rate is that they are forward-looking and 
available on a daily basis (Bomfim, 2001). That being said, this measure is also subject to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   significant shortcomings. First, removing premia rests on a model and results are usually very 
sensitive to model specifications. Second, whereas the focus is on the expected real rate in 
the distant future, this is the part of the model exercise that may be particularly uncertain.[11] 
Third, market expectations cannot measure the equilibrium real rate per se, but only the market 
perception of it, which can be exposed to bouts of excessive optimism or pessimism. 
Estimates of the real equilibrium interest rate 
Beyond  what  can  be  observed  in  the  markets,  it  is  thus  important  for  monetary  policy  to 
estimate  a  long-term  real  equilibrium  rate.  This  real  rate  should  reflect  an  economy  at  full 
employment,  with  stable  inflation  close  to  the  monetary  authority’s  target.  As  I  mentioned 
before, that rate should be the one used as the intercept in a traditional Taylor rule.  
One way of thinking about the equilibrium rate that has inspired some of the methods used, is 
to connect it with the growth rate of potential output. Current estimates are clearly affected by 
the fact that potential growth has been decelerating markedly in the advanced economies. 
The determinants of the real interest rate in the long run are parsimoniously summarised by 
the Solow growth model. Within this framework, the long-term real interest rate boils down to 
productivity and population growth as well as savings behaviour. The intuition is that these 
forces determine investment and therefore the demand for loanable funds, which have to be 
matched by savings. Studies show that total factor productivity and population growth have 
been slowing in the euro area as well as in other advanced economies for decades (Gordon, 
2016, Goodhart, Pardeshi and Pradhan, 2015).  
Growth models with a richer demographic structure, while supporting this basic insight, allow 
for  more  elaborated  predictions.  In  particular,  according  to  overlapping  generations  (OLG) 
models which allow for life-cycle effects of consumption and savings decisions, variations in 
the real rate in the long run can be linked to additional fundamental forces, like an increase in 
the longevity of agents. Moreover, in comparison with the Solow model, a number of additional 
general equilibrium effects matter, in such settings. For example, income inequality and the 
distribution of private sector debt can matter because of deviations from the assumption of a 
single representative agent. Likewise, the design of pension systems and, more broadly, fiscal 
developments  can  matter  in  view  of  non-Ricardian  model  features.[12] Virtually  all  of  these 
factors shaping the real rate in the long run have been steadily exerting a drag on the real rate.  
This type of OLG models open a possible response to the risks of secular stagnation of growth 
that has been mentioned by Ben Bernanke, Narayana Kocherlakota and many others: in such 
low interest rate environment, if the private sector does not increase investment, the public 
sector could do it by increasing expenditures in infrastructure. In a non-Ricardian model more 
public  debt  issuance  would  also  contribute  to  increase  interest  rates.[13]  There  are  also 
additional factors of a secular nature which have altered the balance between savings and 
investment and as a result, weighed on the real interest rate. This relates, for example, to the 
shift towards human capital-intensive industries, such as software and finance, and away from 
physical capital-intensive industries, such as manufacturing (Bean, Broda, Ito and Kroszner, 
2015).  In  addition,  the  fall  in  the  relative  price  of  capital  goods  is  another  factor  limiting 
investment and deteriorating the balance with savings, and thereby the real interest rate. And 
since capital markets operate on a global scale, downward pressure on returns propagates 
globally. 
The  decline  in  the  real  interest  rate  in  the  long  run  is  also  consistent  with  the  repeated 
downward revisions in the long run growth potential of the economy that we have witnessed. 
Indeed, potential growth shares some of the drivers of the real interest rate in the long run, 
such  as  productivity  and  population  growth.  For  instance,  in  the  early  part  of  2003,  the 
Consensus  estimate  for  U.S.  long  run  real  potential  output  growth  was  3.1%,  with  recent 
estimates revised down to 2.2%. In the euro area, survey expectations for long-term economic 
growth have moved down from 2.2% in April 2003 to 1.4% in the latest estimates (see chart 
below on Growth expectations).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   This decline in economic growth in advanced economies has led some scholars to bring back 
the concept of secular stagnation which was first introduced by Alvin Hansen in 1938 to portray 
the decline in U.S. economic growth he envisaged on account of the decline in innovation, 
population  growth  and  investment  opportunities.  More  recently,  Robert  Gordon  (2016)  and 
Larry  Summers  (2016)  have  reignited  the  debate  on  secular  stagnation,  with  the  former 
emphasising the role of supply-side factors and the latter on the chronic weakness of demand. 
Both frameworks are not mutually exclusive as both supply and demand factors can interact 
and  reinforce  each  other.  For  example,  weak  demand  leads  to  unemployment  and  if  this 
becomes prolonged, workers’ human capital can diminish, which in turn reduces the potential 
output of the economy (Blanchard and Summers, 1986 and Blanchard, Cerrutti and Summers, 
2015). 
The connection between the long-term real equilibrium rate and the potential growth rate of 
the economy is therefore widely used in methodologies to estimate the real equilibrium rate, 
such  as  the  one  developed  by  Williams  and  Laubach  (2003).  This  connection  is  even 
accentuated in a normative sense as in a simple OLG growth model with growing productivity, 
the so-called golden rule that ensures the dynamic efficiency of the economy, (i.e. that the 
economy  does  not  over-invest  or  under-invest  and  maximizes  consumption  equally  across 
generations), implies that the real rate of interest has to be equal to the economy’s growth rate.  
Let me now turn to the description of some available model-based methods to estimate the 
real equilibrium rate.  
One approach to conduct the estimate, placing emphasis on the medium- to long-term, is to 
use a time series approach based on a Bayesian vector auto regression (BVAR) with minimal 
restrictions. For instance, a 5-year ahead forecast of the short-term real interest rate could 
provide a proxy for the equilibrium real rate. This is based on the assumption that at such a 
horizon, the effect of most shocks should have dissipated and as a result the forecast mainly 
reflects persistent developments in the real interest rate.[14] 
A more elaborated approach is to use a semi-structural model, emphasising a medium-run 
concept of the equilibrium rate. In this approach, initiated by Williams and Laubach (2003) that 
I just mentioned, the equilibrium rate depends on the trend growth of the potential output and 
on a time-varying unobserved component that represents all the other drivers of the equilibrium 
rate. This latent component and the trend growth rate are unobserved in a model with an IS 
and  an  inverted  Philips  curve.  In  this  approach,  a  statistical  technique  known  as  Kalman 
filtering is used to estimate several unobserved variables including a time-varying equilibrium 
real rate. This algorithm partially adjusts the estimates of the unobserved components based 
on the distance between the model’s forecasts of inflation and real GDP and the actual values 
of these variables until these statistically converge.[15] 
Still, an alternative approach to operationalise the equilibrium real rate – taking directly into 
account the mandate of central banks to stabilise inflation over a not-too-distant horizon – is 
to compute the real interest rate that, if maintained for some time, would stabilise inflation. For 
the euro area, this corresponds to a level below but close to 2% over the medium-term and, 
for this approach, the model by Christiano, Motto, Rostagno (2014) can be used.[16] 
When applying these approaches to the euro area, it emerges that, in comparison to the years 
prior to the crisis, estimates of the equilibrium real rate have sharply declined during the crisis 
and have kept declining or remain in deep negative territory over the recent periods (see chart 
above on Estimates of the equilibrium real rate). The estimates also show the degree of model 
uncertainty  surrounding  the  measurement  of  the  equilibrium  real  rate,  which  of  course 
compound  to  the  parameter  uncertainty.[17] For  comparison,  the  observed  market  real  rate 
discussed in the previous section is depicted in the green bar. It is apparent that the sharp 
decline of the equilibrium real rate and the recent negative value is not unique to the euro area, 
but it is also found by in the U.S.  
These  measures  of  the  equilibrium  real  rate  contrast  with  the  shorter-term  notion  of  the 
equilibrium  real  rate  typically  adopted  in  the  DSGE  literature,  namely,  the  short-term  real 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   interest rate which at each point in time would stabilise the economy to its equilibrium level in 
the absence of nominal rigidities. Evidently, this approach has the advantage that it is directly 
linked to the nature of frictions in the economy. However, this measure turns out to be highly 
model-dependent  and  volatile,  limiting  its  practical  relevance  for  monetary  policy  setting 
(Barsky, Justiniano and Melosi (2014). 
Overall, available measures indicate that the euro area’s equilibrium real rate appears to have 
turned negative and is significantly lower than it was in the past, irrespective of the specific 
notion and approach used to measure it, even if its precise level is uncertain.  
The use that the central bank should make of the equilibrium real interest rate is straightforward 
if one follows the textbook prescription: the central bank takes the equilibrium interest rate as 
being driven by structural factors which are largely beyond its control, and steers the policy 
rate relative to the level of the equilibrium rate. By doing this, the central bank alters the relative 
attractiveness  of  saving  versus  spending,  which  facilitates  aggregate  demand  to  match 
aggregate supply so that the output gap is closed and price stability is ensured.  
In practice, however, there are many challenges, and not only limited to the conceptual and 
measurement issues I have just described. One challenge is that, in reality, there is not just 
one  interest  rate  affecting  saving  and  investment  in  the  economy,  but  there  is  an  array  of 
market and bank lending rates which apply to different contracts and are linked by spreads 
that  vary  over  time.  This  makes  the  use  of  the  concept  of  the  equilibrium  rate  less 
straightforward. Another challenge is the presence of the zero lower bound on nominal interest 
rates. In the event of being confronted by large adverse shocks, the zero lower bound can 
prevent the central bank from bringing the policy rate to the sufficiently low level that it is called 
for by the declining equilibrium interest rate.  
But  recent  experience  has  shown  that  we  can  look  at  these  challenges  in  a  less  negative 
manner. First, the presence of an array of interest rates can actually provide a way for the 
central bank to inject additional accommodation by lowering such rates even when the policy 
rate is at the zero lower bound; and, second, the lower bound may not be actually at zero but 
in negative territory.  
Negative interest rates and central bank’s asset purchases  
In  effect,  this  has  been  the  ECB’s  response  to  being  confronted  with  a  weak  economy, 
malfunctioning banks’ credit intermediation and severe and persistent disinflationary forces.  
Since mid-2014, our monetary measures can be categorised into three elements: first, we have 
reduced the policy rates and brought the deposit facility rate into negative territory – currently 
it stands at minus 40 basis points; second, we have fostered an overall easing of euro area 
financial conditions via central bank’s asset purchases – we have progressively expanded the 
scope and size of our purchases as well as the horizon, which is intended to run until the end 
of March 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until there is a sustained adjustment 
in the path of inflation; third, we have re-habilitated the bank lending channel via providing 
targeted  long-term  lending to  banks  at favourable  conditions  to  support lending  to  the  real 
economy. And these policy measures have been flanked by our reinforced forward guidance 
which  we  have  provided  pertaining  to  our  future  policy  actions  so  as  to  clarify  our  policy 
reaction function and reduce uncertainty and volatility and thereby, strengthen the control over 
the yield curve.  
Moreover,  these measures  are  designed to  work  in  combination,  positively  interacting  with 
each other through different channels so that the overall easing effect on financing conditions 
is greater than the sum of the individual effects. In doing so, the cost of capital is reduced and 
this provides the incentive for firms to undertake investment in the euro area, which is a crucial 
element for absorbing the considerable amount of economic slack which exists, reducing the 
high level of unemployment and boosting potential output. 
Let me briefly provide some salient features of each of these policy measures.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   The adoption of negative policy rates has allowed money market interest rates and the longer 
end  of  the  yield  curve  to  decline  further.  While  this  shares  some  of  the  mechanisms  of  a 
standard  reduction  of  policy  rates  when  they  remain  in  positive  territory,  the  adoption  of 
negative  rates  provides  additional  accommodation  by  effectively  relaxing  the  non-negative 
constraint on expectations of future short-term interest rates, thus helping to reduce long-term 
yields. In the absence of negative rates, when central banks bring short-term interest rates to 
zero,  forward-looking  investors  start  to  think  that  the  long-term  interest  they  can  earn  by 
investing  in  a  long-term security  is too  low  to  compensate for  a potential  backup  in  yields. 
Therefore, they start fearing a reversal of the low interest rate policy and prefer to invest and 
lend for a very short term. In sum, a zero lower bound suggests to investors that short-term 
rates can only rise and cannot fall further. This scenario was described by John Hicks in his 
1937 Econometrica paper: “In an extreme case, the shortest short-term rate may perhaps be 
nearly zero. But if so, the long-term rate must lie above it, for the long rate has to allow for the 
risk that the short rate may rise during the currency of the loan, and it should be observed that 
the  short  rate  can  only  rise,  it  cannot  fall.”[18]  To  this  end,  we  have  reiterated  in  our  last 
Governing Council communication on 2 June that policy rates would remain at current levels 
or lower for an extended period of time.  
With  our  asset  purchase  programme  (APP)  –  launched  in  January  2015  and  successively 
recalibrated in December 2015 and March 2016 – we have been able to provide substantial 
additional accommodation over and above the easing via policy rates. And the fact that the 
scope of our purchase programmes has been calibrated to include a variety of investment-
grade financial assets has meant that our purchases have allowed the compression of several 
premia across a wide range of markets in which we intervene. Via portfolio rebalancing effects, 
these  effects  propagate  across 
the  whole  array  of  rates,  delivering  broad-based 
accommodation.  
Asset purchases interact with the negative deposit facility rate (DFR), which acts through what 
amounts to an effective tax on liquidity held by banks. Indeed, the portfolio rebalancing effect 
is empowered by the negative DFR, as banks with high amounts of excess liquidity holdings 
have a strong incentive to reduce these holdings and put their reserves to work.  
Another effect of negative rates is to increase the velocity of circulation of excess reserves in 
the interbank market towards the banks that need liquidity to sustain or expand their credit 
portfolio. The banks with excess liquidity have an incentive to pass it on to other institutions to 
reduce the cost of paying for the excess reserves. This is directly related with another effect 
which results from the banks having also the incentive to expand their portfolio of credit or to 
buy securities with longer maturities, thus increasing revenues and reducing their amount of 
excess reserves. This turns out to be an additional element of portfolio rebalancing that that is 
pursued by our policy. We have had some success on both scores and the stimulus to demand 
has benefited the European and global economies. 
Many market commentators link negative DFR with exchange rate policy. However, recent 
experience clearly demonstrates that it does not work in a simple or reliable way. The recent 
ECB and Bank of Japan’s decision to implement negative DFRs, resulted in the euro and the 
yen  appreciation  against  the  U.S.  dollar. There  is  no  inexorable  link  between  the  levels  of 
deposit facility rates and exchange rates, as even the possibility of some form of carry trades 
depends on the general situation of risk aversion. Therefore, negative policy rates are not a 
reliable policy to make the exchange rate more favourable to domestic exporters. In addition, 
negative DFRs should not be seen as a zero sum game as the boost to growth which they 
provide benefits all jurisdictions via trade spill-overs. 
ECB staff finds supportive empirical evidence for the empowering complementarities of our 
measures. For instance, banks in less-vulnerable euro area countries have been granting more 
loans to the real economy than would have been the case without a negative DFR. In addition, 
banks with large holdings of excess liquidity, in particular in less-vulnerable member States, 
were found to have rebalanced significantly more towards non-domestic euro area government 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   bonds than they would have done in the absence of a negative DFR. Overall, the portfolio 
rebalancing effects, triggered by large-scale asset purchases have been strengthened in the 
euro area by the negative DFR. 
Furthermore, in March 2016 we decided that banks could borrow from the ECB in the context 
of the new targeted long-term refinancing operations (TLTROs II) ex-post at rates as low as 
the negative DFR which strengthens the transmission of our conventional policy to the real 
economy. Moreover, this builds on the successful targeted long-term refinancing operations 
(TLTROs) which were introduced in September 2014 and have greatly helped in bolstering the 
bank lending channel. 
The expectations which we held when we first designed the measures introduced in summer 
2014 are being validated by the incoming data. Borrowing costs for NFCs and households 
have  significantly  declined  and  cross-country  heterogeneity  continues  to  recede (see  chart 
below on Cost of borrowing). Loan growth to the euro area non-financial private sector has 
been recovering and according to the latest Bank Lending Survey (BLS), there has been a 
continued  net  easing  of  banks’  overall  terms  and  conditions  for  loans  to  enterprises  and 
increases in loan demand across all categories. 
Notwithstanding the impact in improving financial conditions faced by the real economy, the 
instrument of negative DFR has clear limits and we need to monitor the possible occurrence 
of undesirable side-effects. The first limitation is the risk that, after a certain point, the policy 
could trigger an increase of preference for cash which would be disturbing. Nevertheless, at 
present levels, the risk is not in the horizon as negative rates are not being passed on by the 
banks to depositors.  
Negative interest rates can also be a source of concern for their impact on banks’ profitability. 
In examining this issue, it is important that our measures are viewed in their entirety. Therefore, 
the impact of the overall effects of our purchase programmes and our credit easing measures 
on bank profitability go far beyond the negative DFR. Our policy stance leads to capital gains 
on  the  securities  held  by  banks  and  to  lower  funding  costs.  Furthermore,  the  positive 
macroeconomic effects support the demand for credit. This in turn increases intermediation 
volumes, contributes to increase credit quality and decreased banks’ costs associated with 
loan losses. As a result, these effects can offset the negative impact on banks’ net interest 
margin brought about by lower interest rates on banks’ assets. In 2015, the first full year of 
negative  DFRs,  net  interest  income  increased  and  we  estimated  that,  on  average,  the 
cumulative  effect  of  our  policies  until  2017  will  continue  to  be  overall  positive  for  banks’ 
profitability. Nevertheless, there are limits to the use of negative rates, if maintained over a 
protracted period of time. For example, at some stage, banks may be passing on the cost of 
the  negative  rates  by  increasing  lending  rates  to  boost  their  margins  which  would  be 
detrimental to our final objectives.  
Another  potential  cost  of  the  policy  instrument,  concerns  financial  stability  if  signs  of 
overvaluation emerge in asset markets as a result of the low credit rates and the search for 
yield. Financial stability considerations are taken very seriously at the ECB and a considerable 
amount of resources are devoted to closely monitor this issue. At present, no broad signs of 
instability or excesses in asset price developments have been detected in euro area countries. 
Moreover, together with national authorities, we are prepared to intervene with supervisory and 
regulatory tools should this be needed. Nonetheless, the proposition that the ECB should pre-
emptively  resolve  financial  stability  issues  with  monetary  policy  tools  at  the  expense  of 
delivering on the mandate of price stability is both wrong and very hazardous. 
More generally, two prominent arguments against the low policy rate environment have been 
raised from several quarters. The first is that it is hurting savers and in particular retirees who 
rely heavily on their savings as well as citizens building up their savings for retirement. The 
second  is that  it  is  self-defeating  because  it  distorts  incentives  to clean-up the  private  and 
public sectors’ balance sheets as well as inhibiting the exit of unproductive firms and thereby, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   the creative destruction process which drives economic growth. In doing so – it is argued – the 
expansionary policies perpetuate financial instability from one cycle to the next.  
While I understand why the first argument is made, it fails to recognise that today’s low interest 
rates are greatly assisting the economy to recover and inflation to move to levels below, but 
close to 2% and with this, a return to a normalisation of interest rates in the future. Furthermore, 
the flow-of-funds statistics show that the earnings of households with interest revenues are 
higher than their total interest payments.  
The  second  argument,  which  can  be  characterised  as  the  “liquidationist  view”  deserves 
assessment as well. It should be noted however, that in recent years, monetary policy has 
actually  been  very  effective  in  improving  overall  financial  conditions,  which  has  been  an 
instrumental factor in the balance sheet repair of households and firms and consequently, the 
improving health of the financial sector. Furthermore, debt reduction is facilitated by a growing 
economy, with the latter benefiting directly from our policy response. The alternative policy that 
the “liquidationist view” seems to suggest is that we should ignore the recessionary forces that 
are  driving  down  inflation  and  allow  for  more  recession,  destruction  of  capital  and  higher 
unemployment.  
Naturally, what ultimately matters in determining the need to maintain policy accommodation 
is our price stability objective. According to the latest Eurosystem projections, euro area real 
GDP growth is expected to grow by 1.6%, 1.7% and 1.7% in 2016–18, respectively, and annual 
HICP inflation is projected to be 0.2%, 1.3% and 1.6% in 2016–18. Personally, I believe that 
without upheavals in the world economy we can reach a slightly higher level of inflation in 2018. 
The  full  implementation  of  our  policy  package  adopted  last  March  is  still  going  to  produce 
effects  in  the  forthcoming  months  and  will  contribute  to  achieve  our  mandate  of  delivering 
inflation below but close to 2%, over the medium-term.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. What I have outlined today is that the low interest rates, which currently 
prevail, are a reflection of adverse long-term forces which have combined with the adverse 
implications of the global financial crisis and the sovereign debt crisis. The consequence of 
this has been a decline in the equilibrium real interest rate. I have also tried to portray the 
uncertainty around the concept and measurement of the equilibrium interest rate. Indeed, the 
decline in market interest rates at the global level in a context of low inflation and low – or at 
most moderate – economic growth with no signs of overheating, suggests that the equilibrium 
real rate has significantly declined and turned negative. 
Our monetary policy has provided significant accommodation to limit the negative effects of 
the  global  and  euro-area-specific  shocks  on  the  economy  and  forestall  their  deflationary 
impact. To put it simply, we have shadowed a declining equilibrium interest rate; and we will 
continue to do so with the full implementation of our measures. Absent of this, would have the 
dire consequences that the saving-invest imbalance would find the solution via a fall in nominal 
income levels as a means to compress savings. 
By mitigating a prolongation of the recession, monetary policy can help prevent hysteresis from 
gaining  a  foothold  in  the  labour  market,  which  in  itself  weighs  on  an  economy’s  economic 
potential. And by boosting the productive capacity of the economy by supporting investment 
and capital formation, a link is established between the supply-side and the long-term.  
Other policy actors, however, need to actively pursue structural policies which will ensure both 
a sustainable recovery and an increase in the potential economic growth of the euro area. 
These, in turn, will make investment more attractive, raise the equilibrium interest rate and 
expedite the normalisation of interest rates. Only then can we envisage a stronger recovery 
and can the European policy-makers deliver on their hopes of an improved prosperity for the 
citizens of Europe.  
Thank you for your attention 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   References: 
Abrahams, M., T. Adrian, R. K. Cump and E. Moench (2015), “Decomposing Real and Nominal 
Yield Curves”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. 570. 
Barsky, R., A. Justiniano and L. Melosi (2014), “The Natural Rate of Interest and Its Usefulness 
for Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 104(5): 37–43. 
Bean, C., C. Broda, T. Ito and R. Kroszner (2015), “Low for long? Causes and consequences 
of persistently low interest rates”, Geneva Reports on the World Economy 17, Geneva, ICMB 
and London, CEPR Press. 
Bernanke, B. (2005), “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit”, Sandridge 
Lecture,  Virginia  Association  of  Economics,  Richmond,  Virginia,  Federal  Reserve  Board, 
March. 
Blanchard,  O.  and  L.  Summers  (1986),  “Hysteresis  and  the  European  Unemployment 
Problem”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 1. 
Blanchard, O., E. Cerutti and L. Summers (2015), “Inflation and Activity: Two Explorations, and 
Their Monetary Policy Implications”, presented at the 2015 ECB Forum on Central Banking. 
Bomfim, A. (2001), “Measuring Equilibrium Real Interest Rates: What can we learn from yields 
on indexed bonds?”, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2001-53, Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System. 
Caballero, R. J. and E. Farhi (2014), “The Safety Trap,” NBER Working Paper No. 19927. 
Christiano,  L.  J.,  R.  Motto,  and  M.  Rostagno  (2014),  “Risk  shocks”,  American  Economic 
Review, 104(1):27–65. 
Eggertsson, G. and N. Mehrotra (2015), “A model of secular stagnation”, NBER Working Paper 
No. 20574. 
Friedman, M. (1968) “The role of monetary policy “, American Eonomic Review, volume 58, 
number 1. 
Goodhart C., P. Pardeshi and M. Pradhan (2015), “Workers vs pensioners: the battle of our 
time”, Prospect Magazine, December. 
Gordon, R.J. (2016), “The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since 
the Civil War”, Princeton U.P. 
Gürkaynak, S., P.B. Sack and J. H. Wright (2006), “The U.S. Treasury yield curve: 1961 to the 
present,”  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2006-28,  Board  of  Governors  of  the 
Federal Reserve System. 
Harcourt, G, (1972) “Some Cambridge controversies in the theory of capital”, Cambridge U. P. 
Joslin, J., Scott, K. Singleton and H. Zhu (2011), “A New Perspective on Gaussian Dynamic 
Term Structure Models”, The Review of Financial Studies, Vol 24 No.3. 
Kara, E. and L. von Thadden (2016), “Interest Rate Effects of Demographic Changes in a New 
Keynesian Life-Cycle Framework,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, Cambridge University Press, 
Vol. 20(01), pp. 120–164, January. 
Kim, D, and J. Wright (2005), “An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the 
Recent  Behavior  of  Long-Term  Yields  and  Distant-Horizon  Forward  Rates”,  Finance  and 
Economics Discussion Series 2005–33, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
Kocherlakota, N. (2015) “Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate” speech at 
South  Korea  Central  Bank,  in  https://www.minneapolisfed.org/news-and-events/presidents-
speeches/public-debt-and-the-long-run-neutral-real-interest-rate-20150908 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   Laubach,  T.  and  J.  Williams  (2003),  “Measuring  the  Natural  Rate  of  Interest”,  Review  of 
Economics and Statistics 85, No. 4, pp. 1063–70, November. 
Laubach, T. and J. Williams, (2015), “Measuring the real natural interest rate redux” Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper No. 2015–16, October. 
Mésonnier, J.S. and J.P. Renne (2007), “A time-varying “natural” rate of interest for the euro 
area,” European Economic Review, Elsevier, Vol. 51(7), pp. 1768–1784, October. 
Pilkington, P. (2014) “ Endogenous money and the natural rate of interest: the re-emergence 
of liquidity preference and animal spirits in the post-Kenesian theory of capital” markets”, Levy 
Economics Institute Working Paper No. 817. 
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff (2009), “This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly”, 
Princeton University Press. 
Summers, L. (2016), “The age of secular stagnation: what it is and what to do about it”, in 
Foreign Affairs March/April 2016. 
Taylor, J.B, and V. Wieland (2016), “Finding the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate in a Fog of 
Policy Deviations”, Economics Working Papers 16109, Hoover Institution, Stanford University. 
Wicksell, K. (1936), “Interest and Prices”, translation of 1898 edition by R.F. Kahn, London: 
Macmillan. 
Woodford, M. (2003), “Interest and prices”, Princeton University Press, Princeton. 
Wright,  J.  (2011),  “Term  Premia  and  Inflation  Uncertainty:  Empirical  Evidence  from  an 
International Panel Dataset”, American Economic Review, Vol 101 No.4. 
Wu, J.C. and F. D. Xia (2016), ““Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy at 
the Zero Lower Bound”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 2016, 48(2–3), 253–291. 
 [1]  Wicksell, K. (1898) “Interest and Prices”, edition of 1936 in English published by Macmillan, London, p 102.  
[2]  See a characteristic post-Keynesian view in Pilkington, P. (2014) “Endogenous money and the natural rate of 
interest:  the  re-emergence  of  liquidity  preference  and  animal  spirits  in  the  post-Keynesian  theory  of  capital 
markets”, Levy Economics Institute Working Paper No. 817.  
[3]  See Harcourt, G, (1972) “Some Cambridge controversies in the theory of capital”, Cambridge U. P.  
[4]  See Friedman, M. (1968) “The role of monetary policy “, American Economic Review, volume 58, number 1. 
[5]  Woodford, M. (2003) “Interest and Prices: foundations of a theory of monetary policy”, Princeton U.P. 
[6]  An alternative taxonomy would separate out also additional premia, such as the safety premium and the liquidity 
premium. Furthermore, while the focus of the speech is predominantly on risk-free rates, many assets bear 
credit risk. In addition, in the context of the euro area sovereign debt crisis in 2012 there was a surge in certain 
euro area countries’ re-denomination risk. 
[7]  See Box 2 “Why are interest rates so low?” in the ECB’s 2015 Annual Report. 
[8]  Jonathan Wright  (2011),  using  a  cross-country  study,  shows  that  a  likely  explanation  for  the  decline  in  the 
nominal term premium is the reduction in inflation uncertainty associated with increased credibility of monetary 
policy. 
It should be noted that this approach does not take into account the zero lower bound, for approaches that do, 
see Wu and Xia (2016). 
[9] 
[10]  See speech by V. Constâncio, “International headwinds and the effectiveness of Monetary Policy” delivered at 
the  25th  Annual  Hyman  P.  Minsky  Conference  on  the  State  of  the  U.S.  and World  Economies at  the  Levy 
Economics Institute of Bard College, Blithewood, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York, 13 April 2016. 
[11]  As interest rate processes are usually showing very high persistence, it is difficult to econometrically pin down 
far-ahead expectations. Either the interest rate process is taken as stationary, in which case the unconditional 
mean parameter (that becomes more and more relevant for computing conditional expectations the longer the 
desired horizon) can usually be estimated with high uncertainty only. Or the rate process is assumed to have a 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   unit root, in which the far-ahead expectations are driven to a large extent by current conditions, which may be 
unreasonable. 
[12]  For examples see Kara, E.and L. von Thadden (2016), “Interest rate effects of demographic changes in a New-
Keynesian life-cycle framework”, Macroeconomic Dynamics Vol. 20, No. 1; Eggertsson, G. and Mehrotra, N. 
(2015), “A model of secular stagnation”, NBER Working Paper N. 20574 
[13]  See Kocherlakota, N. (2015) “Public Debt and the Long-Run Neutral Real Interest Rate”, speech at South Korea 
Central  Bank,  in  https://www.minneapolisfed.org/news-and-events/presidents-speeches/public-debt-and-the-
long-run-neutral-real-interest-rate-20150908. 
[14]  As an illustration, this approach is applied to the euro area using a VAR containing real GDP growth, the GDP 
deflator growth, the Eonia rate and a suite of other interest rates, and measuring the short-term real rate as the 
difference between the Eonia and inflation over the subsequent year. 
[15]  The estimates in the chart follow a slightly different approach aligned with that of Mésonnier and Renne (2007), 
which extended the seminal work of Laubach and Williams (2003).  
[16]  In the exercise the real interest rate that stabilises inflation (defined in the model in terms of the GDP deflator) 
at the target over the medium term – which for illustrative purposes is set between two and two-and-half years 
– is computed with the additional requirement to limit volatility. The chart displays the average rate over the two 
–and-half  period.  The  exercise  is  carried  out  with  the  CMR  model,  see  Christiano,  L.  J.,  R.  Motto,  and  M. 
Rostagno (2014). 
[17]  For a recent discussion on uncertainty surrounding the estimation of the equilibrium rate, see for example Taylor 
and Wieland (2016). 
[18]  See Hicks, J. R. “Mr. Keynes and the “Classics”; A Suggested Interpretation.” Econometrica 5, No. 2 (1937): 
147–59. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
