  Andreas Dombret: On the prospects of growing electronification in the 
capital markets 
Statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Eurofi High Level Seminar 2016, Amsterdam, 25 April 2016. 
 When we talk, in broad terms, about the electronification of capital markets, we are in fact 
addressing very divergent matters. Market infrastructure is being challenged by blockchain 
applications  that  have  the  potential  to  render  contracting  and  settlement  between  market 
participants cheaper and faster. Electronic marketplace crowdfunding platforms are oiling the 
wheels  of  the  capital  markets,  helping  to  bring  together  demand-side  and  supply-side 
participants.  Other  fintechs  are  working  to  provide  cheaper,  quicker  or  more  convenient 
services across the financial industry. 
The directions that these developments are taking are not entirely clear. For example, it will 
most likely take some years before blockchain will have a real, potentially disruptive, impact 
on parts of the financial services industry. We have to remain aware of the fact that, given 
the  many  different  policy  fields  involved  and  the  significant  level  of  uncertainty,  our  most 
pressing issue should be to work out a strategy for policy development. 
Where should we head from here? Taking the European Capital Market Union project as a 
blueprint,  I  think  we  can  agree  that  we  want  capital  markets  to  prosper  and  yet  also  be 
reliable  and  resilient.  So  the  key  question  is  whether  there  is  a  reason  to  assume  that 
electronification would, on the whole, eliminate the prevailing risks of the capital markets. 
While it is certainly true that digital applications have promising attributes, it is simply wrong 
to  assume that  digital finance  is  immune  to  errors. The  collective  intelligence  attributed  to 
crowdfunding platforms is no guarantee that the herd is running in the right direction; nor can 
it  prevent  panic  from  setting  in  during  a  future  recession.  Algorithms  may  be  transparent, 
reliable, and even intelligent, but in complex applications, bugs or manipulations can easily 
occur.  As  a  colleague  of  mine  noted  the  other  day,  even  the  self-driving  Google  car  can 
knock down pedestrians. The self-regulation of blockchain technology is no panacea either: 
legal issues have already arisen and any application involving risks to the financial sector will 
still require supervision. 
We should therefore not attempt to create an artificial separation in financial regulation, but 
should instead treat technology neutrally. In Banking supervision, the “same business, same 
risk, same rules” principle has so far proven to be a good standard for innovations. 
Technology will not regulate itself. In whatever direction financial innovations are heading, we 
need to ensure that sector supervisors can continue to assume that a concrete entity will be 
responsible for future operational risks. Because of the uncertainties involved, it is vital that 
developments are closely monitored. 
Let me turn, now, to the growth potential of financial technology. I assume there is little doubt 
about  the  potential  gains  in  terms  of  lower  transaction  costs,  shorter  delays  and  greater 
convenience.  However,  with  regard  to  policy  development,  we  should  avoid  entering  a 
discourse that pits innovation against prudence. 
With a level-playing field and up-to-date-rules, I believe that we can trust market forces to 
work well in the long run. So, rather than bolstering innovation, we should first of all strive to 
remove superfluous hurdles. Our regulation partly ignores digital realities, where participants 
interact  differently  than  in  an  analogue  world.  Legal  ideas  have  to  be  adapted  to  digital 
contexts, and innovators need a reliable planning horizon. 
A consistent, long-term regulatory framework, synchronised on a European scale, would, in 
my view, be the best service we can provide to promote financial innovation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
