  Ignazio Visco: Italy’s economy and banking sector in the aftermath of 
“Brexit” 
Address  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  56th  Italian  Banking 
Association Annual Meeting, Rome, 8 July 2016. 
 The referendum in the United Kingdom 
The  predominance  of  votes  against  the  UK  remaining  in  the  European  Union  in  the 
referendum of 23 June has created an unprecedented situation in the history of European 
integration,  whose  longer-term  implications  are  difficult  to  predict.  The  impact  of  the 
referendum  result  on  the  foreign  exchange  and  financial  markets  was  mitigated  by  the 
actions  taken  by  the monetary  authorities, though  the tensions  only  partly  subsided  in  the 
days that followed. After losing about 6 per cent of its value in the 12 months prior to the 
referendum, since 23 June the pound sterling has depreciated by 11 per cent against the 
currencies of its main trading partners and by 13 per cent against the dollar, hitting a 30-year 
low. The euro has appreciated by 11 per cent against the pound but has depreciated against 
the dollar, the yen and the yuan; in effective terms it has remained substantially unchanged. 
The impact on the interest rate differentials between government securities in the euro area 
has  been  limited,  thanks  above  all  to  the  stabilizing  effect  of  the  Eurosystem’s  asset 
purchase programme: the yield on ten-year Italian government bonds (BTPs) has fallen by 
16 basis points, the differential with respect to the corresponding German Bund has widened 
by 11 basis points. Yet share prices have fallen sharply throughout the euro area, especially 
in  Italy,  and  volatility  has  surged.  Increased  risk  aversion  among  investors  has  mainly  hit 
securities in the sectors most exposed to a slowdown in growth, among which the banking 
sector, already weighed down by concerns over balance sheets; the fall in the stock prices of 
Italian  banks  was  steeper  than  the  euro-  area  average,  with  shares  tumbling  by  29  and 
21 per cent respectively. 
The long-term repercussions of the referendum result on the UK and euro-area economies 
will  depend  on  the  new  arrangements  for  trade  and  finance  resulting  from  complex 
negotiations  whose  outcome  is  uncertain;  in  the  short  and  medium  term  the  scale  of  the 
effects  will  depend  on  the  speed  and  clarity  of purpose  with  which  the  political  authorities 
respond to this new shock. 
The changes in interest and exchange rates observed so far do not significantly affect Italy’s 
prospects for growth. There could be some limited consequences connected to trade links in 
the event of a sharp slowdown of the British economy: a 10 per cent fall in UK imports, close 
to the upper limit of the leading analysts’ evaluations, would shave around one quarter of a 
percentage point off Italy’s GDP in the three-year period 2016–18. 
Higher  risks  to  the  medium-term  outlook  for  the  Italian  economy  and  the  euro  area  could 
stem  from  the  spread  of  unfavourable  expectations  which,  as  our  experience  of  the  crisis 
years  has  taught  us,  can  have  non-linear  and  difficult-to-predict  effects.  A  tightening  of 
conditions in the financial markets and credit supply, triggered by investors’ flight to safety 
and  by  an  exacerbation  of  strains  on  bank  securities,  coupled  with  a  general  decline  in 
business confidence, would harm investment and growth. 
What  matters  most  is  the  ability  to  adopt  measures,  at  the  European  and  national  level, 
capable of containing the tensions on financial markets, strengthening the banking system 
and  shoring  up  confidence.  The  monetary  policy  toolbox  is  well  stocked  but  all  the  other 
policies must play their part. We must take care that supervision does not itself become a 
source of tensions. Recognizing the emergence of risks to financial stability, in the last few 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
days the Bank of England has made use of the flexibility inherent in the rules to reduce the 
countercyclical capital requirements for banks. 
Italian banks 
Non-performing exposures and capital adequacy 
The fall  in  Italian  banks’  share  prices reflected, as  in  other  euro-area  countries, fears  that 
slower  growth  could  dent  banks’  profitability  and  impair  their  capital.  It  was,  however, 
compounded by the large stock of non-performing loans (NPLs), a legacy of the recession, 
and by concerns that current market conditions could make it harder to sell these exposures 
or raise capital. 
Italian banks’ NPL problem is serious but manageable; it must be clearly defined and tackled. 
This  is  being  done,  taking  account  of  the  need  to  deliver  both  swift  and  cost  effective 
solutions. The reduction in the stock of NPLs recorded since last autumn is an encouraging 
sign. 
The loss of almost 10 percentage points of GDP and about 25 per cent of industrial output 
during the crisis inevitably had a severe impact on Italian banks’ balance sheets and on the 
quality  of  their  loans.  Without  the  double-dip  recession,  the  gross  stock  of  bad  loans, 
considering only loans to non-financial firms, which exceeded €140 billion at the end of 2015, 
would have amounted to about €50 billion, or 5 per cent of all loans disbursed, close to pre-
crisis levels. The growth of NPLs was strongly influenced by recovery times, which until now 
have been particularly long in Italy; the measures approved in the last year will shorten them 
significantly.  As  the  Bank  of  Italy  has  emphasized  in  the  past,  reducing  average  recovery 
times  even  by  just  two  years  would  have  determined,  together  with  a  higher  valuation  of 
NPLs, a ratio of bad debt to total loans close to half of what it is today. 
Most Italian banks are capable of dealing with the still fragile cyclical conditions, lending to 
the economy and competing efficiently on the market. A number of assessments made in the 
last  few  weeks  put  the  recapitalization  needs  of  the  entire  Italian  banking  system  at 
somewhere in the order of tens of billions of euros, based on the assumption that the total 
stock of bad loans, and possibly even some of the loans that are “unlikely to be repaid”, must 
be sold at once by all banks at a price equal to approximately half the value of the bad loans 
recorded in banks’ balance sheets. 
In Italy a loan is classified as “non-performing” based on harmonized criteria established at 
the European level and published by the EBA in 2013, which are largely aligned with those 
previously applied in Italy and with international practice. For the valuation of non-performing 
loans in their balance sheets, Italian banks must comply with international accounting and 
reporting  standards  (IAS/IFRS).  As  they  permit  discretion  we  have  constantly  encouraged 
banks  to  adopt  prudent  valuation  policies  that  take  sufficient  account  of  the  degree  of 
uncertainty in recovery times and flows. Our supervisory action on provisioning in 2012 and 
2013 is a clear example of this. 
In the approach traditionally taken in Italy, NPLs can be divided into at least two large and 
very  dissimilar  categories  based  on  the  degree  of  difficulty  faced  by  debtors:  of  the 
€360 billion  worth of gross NPLs outstanding at the end of 2015, bad loans accounted for 
€210  billion;  €150  billion  were  in  loans  classified  as  “unlikely  to  be repaid”,  past-due  or  in 
breach  of  overdraft  ceilings.  These  two  categories  of  NPLs  obviously  have  different 
requirements in terms of coverage and write-downs. Both types of loans must be booked in 
the balance sheets with due prudence, but not at values corresponding to their immediate 
liquidation.  Loans  in  the  second  category  may  return  to  the  performing  loans  category; 
indeed, a significant number did so, even in the extremely difficult conditions of recent years. 
These  loans  represent  “active”  credit  relationships;  it  is  very  likely  that  even  if  they 
experience a particularly difficult phase, debtors will be able to turn a corner and resume the 
payment of their debts. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
As for bad loans, both the write-downs already made by banks and the underlying collateral 
must be taken into account. Net of write-downs, the amount of bad loans drops to €87 billion, 
of which €50 billion backed by collateral worth an estimated €85 billion, while the remainder 
are backed by personal guarantees estimated at €37 billion or are unsecured. The value of 
the real-estate collateral in the balance sheets of Italy’s main banks was revised downward 
following  the  euro-area  asset  quality  review  (AQR)  of  2014,  which  was  conducted  using 
independent, comprehensive and prudent estimates. The average revision was about 10 per 
cent, compared with 13 per cent for all the euro-area banks subject to review, confirming that 
the valuation criteria used by Italian banks were substantially correct. In the period following 
the AQR, the decline in Italy’s real estate prices was moderate; it is also worth recalling that 
mortgages disbursed by Italian banks have a lower loan-to-value ratio than in the other main 
European countries. 
As recent analyses have shown, the bad loan recovery rates actually observed, including in 
the last few years, are generally in line with the valuations banks use in their balance sheets. 
This  confirms  that  not  even  for  bad  loans  can  an  accurate  assessment  of  their  value  be 
based on the assumption that they will be sold immediately. The market value of a bad loan 
basically depends on two factors: the investor’s profit target and recovery times; higher profit 
expectations or longer recovery times mean lower prices. 
Regarding  the first factor,  in  recent  years  virtually  the  only  buyers  in  the  market for  NPLs 
have  been  non-European  private  equity  funds  seeking  very  high  returns,  i.e.  10  to  20  per 
cent, well above Italian banks’ return on equity, which still averages just under 5 per cent. As 
for  the  second  factor,  the  reforms  recently  introduced  to  significantly  speed  up  the  credit 
recovery process could have a major impact on the value of bad loans; they must therefore 
be  given  the  time  they  need  to  bear  fruit.  It  will  also  be  some  time  before  the  necessary 
improvements are achieved in the efficiency of Italy’s courts, whose performance continues 
to vary significantly across the country. 
The  European  authorities  have  also  acknowledged  on  several  occasions  that  solving  the 
problem of NPLs will take time. As the Vice-President of the ECB pointed out just yesterday, 
it is a lengthy and complex process, the positive effects of which will only materialize over the 
medium  term,  beyond  the  horizon  considered  in  the  stress  tests.  Last  year  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism set up a task force on NPLs. Even the news that a simple request 
for information had been made in this context triggered considerable turmoil on the financial 
market at the beginning of this year, highlighting the very sensitive nature of information on 
supervisory matters and the need to handle it carefully. One of the aims of the task force is to 
recommend  to  banks,  especially  those  with  high  volumes  of  NPLs,  the  best  practices  to 
adopt  in  developing  an  effective  strategy  to  deal  with  them.  Divestment  is  just  one  of  the 
options  available;  other  strategies  include,  as  we  have  often  pointed  out,  more  efficient 
management within the group or outsourcing to a specialized credit recovery service. 
The majority of NPLs are booked in the balance sheets of banks that are financially sound 
notwithstanding  the  impact  of  the  long  and  deep  recession.  At  the  end  of  last  year, 
“significant” banks with particularly high levels of NPLs and, among the other banks, those 
with core tier 1 capital ratios below 10 per cent, jointly held €15 billion worth of bad loans net 
of write-downs, also backed by collateral and personal guarantees. 
For  these  reasons  it  is  not  correct  to  speak  of  the  problem  of  NPLs  as  if  it  were  an 
emergency affecting the entire banking system. Effective supervision involves assessing the 
actual  situation  of  each  bank  using  detailed  information,  conducting  robust  analyses,  and 
taking account of average credit recovery times. 
Essentially, Italian banks have suffered from the effects of the recession; for some of them 
these  have  been  compounded  by  weaknesses  stemming  from  their  ownership  and 
governance structures, and regrettably, in several cases, by fraudulent conduct. In respect of 
these banks the supervisory authorities – Italian and, since the end of 2014, European too – 
have acted within the powers assigned to them; we have given account of the actions taken 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
before  the  competent  institutions  and  other  bodies,  publishing  detailed  reports  on  our 
website.  The  supervisory  authorities  have  called  for  restructuring  plans,  which  have  been 
drawn  up,  and  are  closely  monitoring  their  implementation. It  will  take time  to  achieve  the 
objectives; a firming up of the economic recovery with a positive spill-over on banking activity 
will prove decisive. In some cases, the indispensable recapitalization measures requested by 
supervisors  has  been  hindered  by  market  difficulties;  in  others, the recent  tensions,  which 
have hit share prices hard, call for resolute action, to promptly signal a reversal of trend, and 
for possible support measures. 
The reform process and the coming months 
Major  reforms  have  been  launched  in  recent  years  to  allow  Italy’s  financial  system  to 
modernize,  in  line  with  the  new  global  and  European  regulatory  framework  and  with 
economic, social and technological changes. The long overdue reforms of Italy’s cooperative 
banks  (“banche  popolari”)  and  mutual  banks  (“banche  di  credito  cooperativo”)  have  been 
crucial. For the mutual banks, the reform must be implemented quickly and efficiently: public 
consultation on the secondary legislation will begin shortly. 
The  merging  of  two  large  cooperative  banks  announced  a  few  months  ago  will  be  an 
important  test  of  the  system’s  capacity  for  renewal  following  the  reform;  we  expect  other 
mergers to follow relatively soon. The recent overhaul of the senior management of a leading 
bank  lays  the  groundwork  for  an  improvement  of  its  capital  position  and  an  increase  in 
profitability,  in  line  with  supervisors’  and  market  requirements  for  global  systemically 
important groups. 
Other  important reforms  were  adopted  between  mid-2013  and  the first  half  of this  year  to 
remove tax disincentives that have deterred banks from writing down loans and, as I have 
already mentioned, to speed up credit recovery procedures. These reforms are paving the 
way for the development of a large and efficient Italian NPL market. 
The  state  guarantee  scheme  to  securitize  bad  loans  (“Garanzia  sulla  cartolarizzazione  di 
sofferenze”) and the launch of a new survey on bad loans will also contribute to the growth of 
the  market.  The  Bank  of  Italy  has  just  introduced  this  survey  to  collect  and  rationalize 
detailed data on bad loan characteristics, on the type of guarantees used to back them and 
on the status of recovery procedures. We have indeed found that many banks are making 
insufficient use of modern data management and processing technologies, particularly with 
respect to loans handled directly by their legal departments. The difficulty of quickly providing 
potential investors with an adequate and reliable set of information affects the length of time 
needed to conclude negotiations and is partly responsible for the substantial discounts on the 
selling prices of bad loans. The first reports should reach the Bank of Italy soon, before the 
end of next September. 
Important  private  initiatives  undertaken  recently,  such  as  the  establishment  of  the  Atlante 
fund and other instruments aimed at supporting ailing banks (including those in the mutual 
bank sector), seek to help banks successfully navigate this delicate transitional phase. The 
initiatives come as a response to the new European crisis management framework, whose 
rigid application restricts States’ ability to intervene, even when the aim is to avoid contagion 
and maintain financial stability. But there is still much to be done to improve banks’ industrial 
strategies. 
The  stress  test  of  Europe’s  largest  banks,  coordinated  by  the  EBA  and  conducted  by  the 
ECB on the euro area’s “significant” institutions, has almost been completed. The results will 
be published at the end of this month. Exercises of this kind are now a standard part of the 
supervisory toolbox; the stress test results, along with many other quantitative and qualitative 
factors, are used by the supervisory authorities to form a comprehensive assessment of the 
situation of individual banks. Since stress testing is just one of many factors considered by 
supervisors, the results for the banks tested must be analysed and interpreted in detail. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 take  precautionary  measures, 
legislation  also  allows  States 
 
 
Stress  tests  are  hypothetical  exercises  that  are  based  on  highly  adverse  macroeconomic 
scenarios  and  generally  have  the  greatest  impact  when  the  economy  is  emerging  from  a 
protracted, severe recession, as in Italy. In designing the test, the EBA used a static balance-
sheet approach, i.e., one that deliberately disregards the measures that banks would surely 
adopt  over  the  3-year  period  under  consideration  to  mitigate  the  negative  effects  of  the 
hypothetical shock. The authorities in charge of the exercise have clarified that, unlike in the 
past, any capital guidance derived from the stress test outcomes does not in itself constitute 
a  binding  capital  requirement  to  be  met  by  a  certain  date.  In  any  case,  the  risk  that  the 
exercise  could  trigger  procyclical  effects  in  a  fragile  macroeconomic  environment  is  to  be 
avoided. 
In  response  to  the  market  uncertainty  that  followed  the  UK  referendum,  the  Italian 
government notified the European Commission of its plan, which was approved, to guarantee 
new bank bond issues until the end of this year and only where strictly needed. As in the 
past, the banks that take advantage of the guarantee, which will be priced at market terms, 
must comply with the European state-aid rules. 
European 
to 
including 
recapitalization, based on stress test outcomes. The current situation, with its many risks to 
financial stability, requires a public backstop to be used only if needed, in full compliance with 
EU  rules,  bearing  in  mind  the  potential  systemic  effects  of  a  future  crisis  for  individual 
Member States and the euro area as a whole. The argument made by some at the European 
level  that  government  intervention  to  support  Italy’s  banking  system  should  have  been 
carried out in the past, as in other countries, does not take into account how the conditions of 
the national banking systems have evolved differently over time. 
The countries that drew most heavily on public resources in recent years did so to address 
full-blown  bank  crises,  associated  with  very  large  exposures  to  highly  risky  and  opaque 
derivatives or with loans concentrated in notably overvalued real estate sectors. The situation 
in the Italian banking system, as also described in the IMF’s Financial Sector Assessment 
Program  (FSAP)  of  September  2013,  was  very  different  back  then:  Italian  banks  had  not 
been affected by these issues. In Italy, the increase in NPLs has mainly stemmed from the 
weakness  of  the  real  economy,  which  has  continued  until  recently,  within  a  regulatory 
framework  that  in  the  meantime  has  been  radically  transformed.  Today,  in  order  to  limit 
broad-based risks, responses may be needed that, looking forward, recognize the change in 
circumstances and exploit the room for manoeuvre allowed under the rules. 
Any future measures to safeguard systemic stability must not serve as a pretext for delaying 
the  important  remedial  action  that  is  now  demanded  of  intermediaries.  Italian  banks, 
especially  those  in  difficulty  today,  face  multiple  and  important  challenges:  from  the  more 
active management of NPLs in order to sell them or, if they remain on balance sheets, to 
improve  recovery  rates,  to  the  achievement  of  higher  levels  of  efficiency;  from  the 
exploitation  of  the  opportunities  offered  by  the  technological-digital  revolution  to  the 
necessary reorganization of branch networks and the launch of ordinary and, if necessary, 
extraordinary cost-cutting measures, including in relation to staff costs. 
In the short term the recovery of profitability has been made harder by the repeated calls for 
a  strengthening  of  capital,  and  more  generally  of  loss-absorbing  instruments,  from  the 
supervision  and  resolution  authorities,  also  in  order  to  comply  with  increasingly  stringent 
rules.  Regulatory  changes  will  reduce  banks’  riskiness,  endowing  them  with  greater  loss 
absorption  capacity,  increased  liquidity  and  lower  financial  leverage.  This  will  stabilize  the 
entire system, making it more resilient to a crisis. But in the meantime, especially in some 
countries, the new rules risk denting banks’ profitability – already beleaguered by the crisis 
years – even further, increasing the cost of funding and determining a reduction in the overall 
size of the banking system, with potentially adverse effects on the availability of funding for 
the real economy and on banks themselves. The right balance must accordingly be struck 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
between  micro  and  macroprudential  considerations;  international  debate  has  recently  paid 
closer attention to this question. 
This  same  balance  must  be  also  sought  in  the  context  of  the  new  European  regulatory 
framework for the prevention and resolution of bank crises. The Single Resolution Board has 
begun work to define the minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL) 
needed  to  absorb  losses  in  the  event  of  a  resolution.  It  is  important  that  the  eligible 
instruments be explicitly subordinated to ensure a clear and rapid allocation of the losses; 
that an excessive burden not be placed on global systemically important banks, which are 
required  to  comply  with  the  total  loss  absorbing  capacity  (TLAC)  standards;  and  that  the 
requirement be calibrated in such a way as to avoid procyclical effects. Its introduction must 
also take into account the time required for the market to absorb a large number of new debt 
issues. 
 The result of the UK referendum is affecting the euro area at a difficult time. The economic 
recovery has begun but is fragile. Unemployment remains high. Inflation is still very low, far 
from  the  levels  consistent  with  the  definition  of  price  stability.  There  is  the  risk  that  the 
already  widespread  sense  of  dissatisfaction  with  the  European  project  will  grow.  At  this 
juncture it is even more necessary to ensure that further delays in introducing supranational 
intervention tools do not exacerbate the area’s fragilities and make it more difficult to react 
appropriately to a shock or to prevent contagion. 
We do not underestimate the signals of nervousness and anxiety from the financial markets, 
concerning Italian banks. Together with the other authorities we are acting with determination 
to  promote  effective  market  solutions.  Faced  with  the  risk  that,  in  a  highly  uncertain 
environment,  circumscribed  problems  could  undermine  confidence  in  the  banking  system, 
some form of public intervention cannot be ruled out. We trust in a collective commitment to 
overcome the current difficulties. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
