  Andreas Dombret: Are we done now? Reflections on the post-crisis 
supervisory and regulatory regime 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the University of Cape Town, Cape Town, 1 September 2016. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
After roughly eight years of post-crisis reforms there is one simple question that needs to be 
asked:  Are  we  done  now?  According  to  some  newspaper  articles  and  the  opinions  of  a 
number of banking experts, the burden of strengthened regulation and supervision that has 
been imposed on today’s Europe should serve as ample evidence. Admittedly, the post-crisis 
reforms  were  and  will  remain  an  arduous  task  for  all  concerned.  The  Basel  III  rules  from 
2010 alone tip the scales at a massive 616 pages. On top of this, the European Central Bank 
newly hired around 900 employees for the new supervisory regime set up for the euro area 
and  around  4,700  supervisors  from  national  authorities  all  over  the  euro  area  had  to  be 
coordinated  to  serve  this  new  institutional  setup.1  Believe  me  –  I  would  prefer  a  (much) 
lighter workload. But for supervisors, less  work today often means a lot more work farther 
down the road. 
But clearly, the costs of regulation and supervision alone are inappropriate indicators of over- 
or  under-regulation  and  supervision.  Even  as  seen  from  the  banks’  perspective,  cries  of 
overregulation are too simplistic since they neglect the potential long-term benefits of these 
reforms  for  banks,  such  as  increased  strength  and  trustworthiness.  But,  more  importantly, 
what  ultimately  counts  is  how  the  costs  and  benefits  of  regulation  and  supervision  affect 
society as a whole. Costs such as the huge redistribution from taxpayers to financial entities 
and  individuals  as  a  result  of  the  financial  crisis  have  to  be  part  of  any  meaningful 
benchmark.  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  we  may  calculate  costs  and  benefits.  But 
unfortunately, this does not tell us how to identify optimal regulation and supervision for the 
future. 
But  is  there  possibly  a  better  yardstick  with  which  to  identify  optimal  regulation  and 
supervision?  Solvency  is  a  natural  candidate.  Safeguarding  solvent  institutions  is  a  crucial 
element of regulation and of supervision in our current financial architecture. Sufficient capital 
makes it more likely that a bank will survive economic downturns, poor strategic decisions or 
idiosyncratic  problems.  In  fact,  finalisation  of  the  current  Basel  III  framework  aims  at 
safeguarding solvency of institutions by adjusting capital requirements. This involves large-
scale  quantification  of  risks  for  all  aspects  of  banking,  from  bank  lending  and  trading  to 
operational  perils  faced  by  a  bank.  With  respect  to  Basel  III,  the  final  agreements  are 
expected to be ready by the end of this year. Generally, a lot can be learned from analysing 
data and looking at past experiences. But does this imply that we should eventually be able 
to  answer  the  question  “Have  we  done  enough?”  with  certainty?  If  you  ask  me,  this  is  a 
hazardous  interpretation  of  the  question.  By  this  I  do  not  wish  to  demean  the  value  of 
calculations and data-based assessments such as those accompanying Basel III. It’s more a 
matter of making sure they occupy the right place in our mind-set. Therefore, my speech will 
explore  the  progress  we  have  made  towards  achieving  our  idea  of  a  regulatory  and 
supervisory universe. 
To  broaden  the  focus,  I  will  start  by  presenting  financial  stability  in  an  evolutionary 
framework.  After  that I will  address  the financial  reforms  introduced  in Europe  since  2008, 
                                                
1  Human resources for banking supervision in the SSM are expressed in Full Time Equivalents (FTE). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  looking  at them  through  the  lens  of  evolution  in  order to  point  out reforms that go  beyond 
quantitative adjustments. 
Let  me  express  my  pleasure  at  being  invited  to  present  these  thoughts  to  the  scientific 
community  here  at  Cape  Town  University.  Scientists  are  known  for  testing  politicians  and 
legislators against the goals they have set. But it is also essential for scientists to engage in 
the debate about methodology and overarching goals. If we do not conduct the discourse on 
financial stability in an impartial manner, it is soon likely to be governed by short-sighted and 
narrow-minded arguments again. 
2. 
Beyond optimal regulation and supervision: Approaching financial stability 
after the crisis 
Optimality is an attractive analytical concept. But for good reasons, it never completely ruled 
policy for the financial sector. 
First of all, the complex nature of financial markets, products and entities prevents us from 
identifying the optimum. When calibrating policies towards a given optimum, it is necessary 
to combine models and numbers. But numbers can be incorrect and models can be wrong. 
Complexity  may  even  give  rise  to  surprising  side-effects.  The  issues  stemming  from  our 
complex financial world are well-documented by now. Andrew Haldane gave that memorable 
speech about the dog and the Frisbee – it covers the topic almost exhaustively. 
But the financial sector is not just complex. Dozens of crises over the past few decades were 
followed by quick policy responses, only to then be followed by some other sort of crisis. This 
experience has clearly documented that banks and other components of the financial sector 
are complex and adaptive systems – they are alive and kicking, so to speak. Just like living 
organisms, they respond to changes in the environment such as macroeconomic variables or 
new regulation by behaving differently. In economic terms, incentives respond to a change in 
circumstances. This in turn changes observable patterns in the financial sector. The search 
for yield episode immediately prior to the crisis is a typical illustration. 
However,  for  the  sake  of  completeness,  undesirable  incentives  are  not  limited  to  bankers. 
Supervisory  authorities  themselves  have  been  prone  to  bias.  Some  keywords  here  are 
regulatory capture, gold plating and supervisory negligence. During the euro crisis, quite a 
few instances of ineffective supervision came to light. Why did that happen? Evolution theory 
tells  us:  Because  it  was  possible.  One  simple  conclusion  from the financial  as  well  as  the 
Euro  crisis  was  that  rules  will  be  effectively  enacted  and  followed  only  if  they  are 
“dynamically stable rules”. Or, if I may translate this into bankers’ English: People will abide 
by their good intentions or by the formal rules only if we can make it so that it is in their best 
interests to do so. 
This  already  makes  the  political  design  of  rules  and  institutions  a  difficult  task.  But  let  me 
stress  a  third  issue  with  regard  to  optimal  regulation  and  supervision.  It  concerns  the 
undisputed aim of all political efforts in this sector: Financial stability. What exactly is financial 
stability?  We  can’t  put  a  finger  on  it.  Instead,  as  it  turns  out,  financial  stability  may  be  a 
somewhat  elusive  goal.  It  is  only  abstract  in  nature.  As  with  personal  health  its  relevance 
only  becomes  clear  when  we  are  in  a  bad  state.  There  are  many  sources  of  financial 
instability including market turmoil, bank runs, or even hoaxes that lead to (public) distrust in 
banks. Accordingly, we can make a distinction between policies that decrease the probability 
of  a  bank  failure  and  policies  designed  to  make  an  individual  bank  failure  as  bearable  as 
possible and there again policies geared to addressing sources of distrust. Alongside such 
measures there is a need to allow competitive forces to prevail wherever appropriate in order 
to foster profitable and therefore resilient banking as well as to potentially stabilise economic 
conditions.  All  of  these  aims  are  connected,  but  they  are  not  the  same.  Hence,  financial 
stability policies may target different aspects of financial stability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  As a consequence of the arguments mentioned above, it is futile to lay claim to an optimal 
solution  for  regulatory  and  supervisory  activities,  because  these  deal  with  a  constantly 
evolving system along with an abundance of complex, partly unforeseeable interactions and, 
possibly, loopholes. 
The  lessons  learned from  past  crises might  at first  appear quite  restrictive  but  they  in fact 
remind  us  not  to  cling  to  the  illusion  that  we  have  all  the  answers  and  absolute  power. 
Instead, we are always bound to be one step behind and may even sometimes be wrong-
footed.  That  said,  there  is  some  good  news  for  researchers  on  financial  regulation  and 
supervision: Your job is safe as there will always be a constant flow of new developments in 
the financial sector for you to research. 
So  how  do  we  move  forward?  Evolutionary  theory  not  only  highlights  the  problem,  it  also 
illuminates possible strategies. One of these concerns the role of knowledge in an inherently 
uncertain  world.  For  sure,  some  models  of  the  financial  world  and  logical  explanations  for 
past regulation have failed. Such failures have arisen from model risk, in other words the fact 
that  reality  is  (often)  different  from  assumed  causalities.  And  yes,  there  is  also  a  risk  of 
financial players taking unfair advantage of our inclination toward modelling financial risks. At 
the  same  time  we  must  be  careful  not  to  fully  reject  theories  and  extrapolations  about 
finance.  Model-based  hypotheses  and  data-based  research  are  still  valuable  and  they  are 
certainly  better  than  an  erratic  change  to  regulation  or  supervision.  For  example,  I  remain 
convinced of the basic concept of “value at risk” when calculating capital requirements. What 
we  have  to  admit  is  that  these  numbers  can  still  be  falsified  –  and  this  most  certainly  will 
happen  at  some  point  in  the  future.  Ultimately,  quantitative  adjustments  such  as  those 
witnessed with respect to Basel III form part of a bottom-up evolution of the financial stability 
regime. 
Beyond  quantified  requirements,  there  is  little  scope  for  definite  answers.  Such  certainty 
would  require  a  concrete  idea  of  picture-perfect  finance.  Instead,  we  need  to  employ  the 
whole arsenal of procedural wisdom including the application of best practices, multiple lines 
of  defence,  institutional  rivalry,  hierarchies  of  goals,  adaptable  rules  and  principles.  This 
basically means that in order to achieve the elusive goal of financial stability, we have to look 
out for effectual processes rather than perfectionist end states. 
3. 
Supervision and regulation in the EU – merely adapted to the latest crisis or fit 
for the future as well? 
How  are  we  to  interpret  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  regime  against  this  background? 
Development in Basel in the recent past should be viewed as part of a bottom-up evolution of 
the financial stability regime. In spite of the inclusion of a huge mass of statistical data in the 
calibration  of  capital  requirements,  the  final  results  will  remain  hypothetical  and  a  political 
compromise. Safeguarding solvency and liquidity is just one of a number of strategies aimed 
at creating a robust financial framework. Another core element of post-crisis regulation was 
to make rules coherent, internationally consistent and to avoid bypass. Let us not forget that 
financial  actors  and  entities,  as  living  organisms,  will  eventually  discover  and make  use  of 
any available loophole. If there is any way to evade short-term pain, an industry worth trillions 
of  euros  will  always  look for  it. When  I  say  this  I  am  not  expressing  criticism,  I  am  simply 
stating the facts. Bypassing the rules is a key reason why regulation has become even more 
complex. 
But there have been more lessons learned. One important realisation has been that a robust 
banking sector requires more than one line of regulatory and supervisory defence. It is true 
that solvent banks are central to financial regulation and supervision. However, in place of 
one single “perfect” line of defence, where success depends one hundred percent on these 
legal  ideas  and  supervisory  processes,  we  now  rely  more  heavily  on  multiple  lines  of 
defence. Taking solvency and liquidity as a starting point, supervisors have intensified their 
efforts  to  target  the  root  causes  of  the  problems.  Capital  buffers  were  introduced  which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  increase  banks’  room  for  manoeuvre  in  a  downturn.  Stress  tests  examine  how  robust  a 
bank’s  capital  is  in  terms  of  adverse  economic  projections  in  the  future.  What  is  more, 
eurozone  supervisors  are  paying  greater  attention  to  business  models  as  today’s  strategy 
feeds future risk capacity. Supervisors have even sharpened their focus on the culture and 
behaviour  of  bank  officials.  There  is  in  fact  a  link  between  the  behavioural  inclinations  of 
these  officials  and  actual  solvency:  All  of  the  steps  taken  are  geared  to  minimising  the 
likelihood of deterioration and failure at the earliest possible stage. 
But  solvency  is  not  the  only  pillar  of  a  stable  financial  sector.  The  European  resolution 
framework has complemented solvency requirements. For even in cases where all previous 
efforts to keep a bank alive and healthy prove unsuccessful, the financial system should not 
be prone to panic reactions and contagion effects. Banks and responsible authorities have to 
be  prepared  for  failure  scenarios  and  guarantee  smooth  resolution.  Importantly,  resolution 
and solvency policies are not aimed at identical issues. In fact, crisis management maintains 
financial  stability  in  a  different  way,  namely  by  making  sure  that  bank  difficulties  do  not 
negatively impact private savings or market discipline, something which cannot be achieved 
effectively through solvency regulation. 
There are several ways to read the most extensive institutional reform in Europe recently, the 
so-called banking union. Clearly, the euro zone faced serious distress, and our institutional 
framework  had  not  proven  credible  nor  effective  –  market  reactions  showed  this  quite 
unmistakably.  Through  the  lenses  of  evolutionary  adjustments,  the  move  towards  the 
banking union was a patch to our historical supervisory system, because it, too, had shown 
to be a living organism that had reacted in an undesireable way to the financial crisis. The 
most developed part of this banking union is the Single Supervisory Mechanism, which has 
rearranged the supervision of 129 of the largest and most significant institutions in the euro 
area, thus improving supervision in a number of ways. Given the fact that even supervisors 
are prone to error or even bias, the mechanism builds upon international teams under the 
auspices of the ECB, with the favourable effect that national interests are dampened. On top 
of  this,  supervisors’  hands  are  tied  to  a  greater  degree  as  the  setup  makes  it  easier  to 
compare  supervisory  measures  and  results.  Last  but  not  least,  all  supervisory  and 
organisational  decisions  have  to  be  approved  by  a  common  board,  so  that  all  national 
competent  authorities  have  their  say  in  the  joint  architecture.  In  everyday-life,  the  vast 
amount  of  decisions  consume  quite  a  lot  of  resources  in  national  authorities.  But  from  a 
financial  stability  point  of  view  those  institutional  frictions  and  even  opposed  interests  are 
manageable inasmuch as institutional rivalry may enhance checks and balances. In sum, the 
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  has  changed  supervisory  incentives.  It remains  to  be  seen 
whether another pillar of the banking union, the Single Resolution Mechanism, will improve 
effective resolution in a similar fashion. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I began this speech by posing the question: Will the post-crisis regulatory and supervisory 
regime a project be finished soon? My response to this question is that while the Basel III 
reforms are set to be finalised by the end of the year and while there are no further reform 
plans in the policy pipeline, I feel we should frame the overall question a little differently. In 
my  view,  the  supervisory  and  regulatory  changes  witnessed  in  Europe  and  in  many  other 
parts of the planet do not represent a response to a call for “optimal” stability, but they have 
set the basis for an evolutionarily fit regime. It is not just a matter of quantity, as suggested 
by  current  arguments  about  calibration  and  by  newspaper  articles  focusing  on  over-
regulation. 
Confronted with an adaptable financial system, important improvements in supervisory and 
regulatory regime include: 
• 
addressing incoherent regulation across countries and closing regulatory loopholes 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   extending our supervisory lines of defence to circumvent the risk of putting all our 
eggs in one basket 
exploiting the possible synergies of the supervision in the Euro area to make sure 
that existing incentives match the original intentions 
 The evolutionary approach to financial stability amounts to more than an academic dry run. It 
shines a light on regulatory strategies which have come about as a high-priced lesson from 
past crises. Financial stability is not a narrow concept and it cannot be achieved through a 
singular, ideal set of policies and institutions. There is constant evolution wherever we look. 
Instead  of  directing  our  energies  to  identifying  some  unknown  optimal  state,  we  need  to 
strive for plausible processes and a robust set of institutions. 
The current narratives criticising over-regulation and over-supervision need to reflect these 
aspects  as  well.  For  representatives  of  the  financial  industry  who  are  suspicious  of 
overprotective  administrative  bodies  as  the  force  behind  recent  reforms,  the  evolutionary 
perspective should offer some alternative explanations. 
Suffice to say, the precautionary measures that have been taken do not render criticism from 
the banking industry entirely meaningless. Input from the industry is welcome, as this helps 
to  better  understand  the  permanently  evolving financial  system.  But  we  should  be  wary  of 
distorted  arguments  based  on  partial  calculations  and  a  selective  approach  to  the  various 
pros and cons. Rather than looking at the status quo and asking whether there has been too-
much or too little regulation and supervision thus far, we should recognise that we have a 
common interest in achieving better regulation. This is not a matter of mere quantity, but of 
quality and prudence, too. Just as our own health is not defined solely by the number of pills 
we  take, the  health of the financial  sector,  alive  as  it  is,  cannot  be safeguarded  by  simply 
prescribing a narrow set of financial and supervisory remedies. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
