   Malcolm Edey: Card payments and the retail sector 
Speech by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the Australian Financial Review Retail Summit, Melbourne, 28 September 2016. 
I thank Darren Flood for his extensive assistance in preparing this speech.  
 Introductory remarks 
This is a conference about the retail industry, not the payments industry. However, a retail 
business is not a business if the retailer cannot get paid. And a retailer won’t be at their most 
competitive if their payment costs are higher than they should be. This is an issue staff at the 
Reserve Bank think about every day, and one that I hope retailers are taking a close interest 
in as well.  
Today I’ll talk about how the way we pay is changing, and what it means for retail businesses. 
I’ll also talk about the Reserve Bank’s role as a payments regulator and about some of the 
things that are just around the corner in payments.  
The changing nature of payments 
A good place to start is an observation that will not be lost on anyone here. That is that the 
nature  of  the  payments  we  use  is  changing,  and  changing  quite  rapidly  at  the  moment. 
Probably the clearest example to most people has been the take-up of contactless, or tap-and-
go, card payments. These have taken off extraordinarily quickly in Australia, to the point where 
Australia is thought of as the leading contactless market in the world. This is a technology that 
offers a benefit to both consumers and merchants in terms of the time taken to process a 
payment, and as a result it has been embraced – but many merchants might also notice that 
their payments costs have risen because of the resulting change in their payments mix. This 
is a good example of the complex dynamics of competition in the retail payments system.  
But the rise of contactless payments is only one of a range of changes that have been occurring 
to the payments system over time – some of which you might have noticed, some of which you 
have probably never thought about.  
Possibly the most important trend we are seeing is the steady decline in the use of traditionally 
paper-based payments. Think of when was the last time you wrote or received a cheque. In 
2000 the average Australian wrote around 35 cheques per year. In 2015/16 that was down to 
six. What is more, while cheque use has been declining for two decades, the decline if anything 
is accelerating; after falling by an average of about 13 per cent per year in the preceding five 
years, the number of cheques written fell by 17 per cent in 2015/16 (Graph 1).  
We have been observing the decline in cheques for many years, but more recently it has been 
a decline in the use of that other traditionally paper instrument – cash – that has been attracting 
attention.1 The only real way to adequately measure the use of cash is to survey the users – 
something the Reserve Bank does via a consumer diary once every three years. We ran the 
first of these surveys in 2007, when a large majority of consumer payments – 69 per cent – 
were made with cash. By 2010, that percentage had fallen to 62 per cent and by 2013, 47 per 
cent, with the decline occurring across all payment values (Graph 2). We will run the survey 
                                                
1   The replacement of paper by polymer banknotes does not change the essential point here. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   again this year, but it seems a safe bet that there will be a further, probably quite large, decline 
in cash use.2 
This trend is not all about people falling out of love with cash; a significant factor is the rapid 
rise in online commerce, where of course cash is not an option.  
So what has filled the gap left by our paper instruments? In the retail space it is largely cards, 
which have grown by an average of 11 per cent per year over the past five years (Graph 3).  
This reflects cards’ large share in online commerce, as well as their having gained ground at 
the retail point of sale. Based on the Bank’s consumer survey, card payments made up 43 per 
cent of all consumer payments in 2013, and 55 per cent of those over 50 dollars. The ubiquity 
of  card  payments  is  one  reason  we  care  a  lot  about  how  those  systems  operate,  as  I  will 
discuss more a bit later. 
It  is  also  worth  noting  that  in  the  period  measured  by  our  survey,  BPAY  also  gained  an 
increasing share of the market, while the relative newcomer, PayPal showed strong growth 
from a low base. I will speak a little later about some of the other types of payments that might 
start to register on the radar in the coming years.  
The cost of payments 
Of equal interest to these broader trends in payments usage is the cost of payments. The retail 
sector clearly has a strong interest in the cost of payments to merchants, and while the Reserve 
Bank is also interested in this, its principal focus when evaluating the efficiency of the payments 
system is the resource cost of payments – that is, how much it costs the economy in total to 
produce a payment – abstracting from the various fees that determine the cost to any single 
party or sector. Determining resource costs is a large job, requiring detailed information on 
financial institutions’ costs and things like the cost of processing time for merchants.  
The Reserve Bank last went through this exercise in 2014. The most comforting news from 
that study was that the resource cost of consumer to business payments had declined as a 
percentage of GDP since the previous cost study in 2006, from 0.80 per cent to 0.54 per cent, 
even though the number of transactions had risen. Despite the favourable trend overall, the 
mix of payments within the total acted in the direction of increasing costs.  
Looking across the main non-cash retail systems, we see that, unsurprisingly, the highest per-
transaction resource costs were generated by the cheque system, with each cheque written 
costing the economy about $5.12, if account overheads are ignored (Graph 4). This is not 
surprising given the cost of shipping and processing physical cheques, although there have 
been some efficiency improvements in the cheque system since the time of the study.  
Perhaps of more current interest to the retail sector is the cost of our card systems. Credit 
cards are quite costly at around 94 cents for the average sized transaction, while MasterCard 
and Visa debit are less costly and eftpos uses the fewest resources of any of the card systems, 
at around 45 cents per transaction.  
The broad relativities between the resource costs of these systems is similar to those faced by 
merchants. Another way to think about that is that it is merchants who, by and large, bear the 
cost of payments. This is largely achieved by the way fees are used in these systems. I think 
the most telling illustration of that is to compare the actual costs faced by merchants to the 
costs faced by consumers once fees and benefits to consumers, like interest-free periods and 
reward points, are taken into account. What you will see is that, despite being more expensive 
to  produce  and  more  costly  to  merchants,  on  average  a  credit  card  transaction  costs  a 
                                                
2   At the same time, it should be noted that the absolute value and number of banknotes in circulation is still 
increasing, even though their relative use is declining. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   consumer slightly less than a debit card transaction (Graph 5). These are the incentives that 
shape payment choices by consumers. 
Payments as a business 
The arrangement of incentives I have just shown you is a defining feature of card payment 
systems, and one that the Reserve Bank has devoted a great deal of attention to over many 
years.  
The  principal  reason  that  the  relative  cost  of  cards  to  consumers  looks  so  different  to  the 
resource cost of cards is the payment of interchange fees in these systems. An interchange 
fee is a fee paid from a merchant’s bank to the cardholder’s bank every time a card payment 
is  made. While cardholders  and  merchants  have  little  visibility  of  these fees, their effect  is 
nonetheless substantial. They place a floor under the fee that a merchant is charged by its 
bank to accept cards and they help fund the rewards, interest free periods and other benefits 
that encourage consumers to use a particular card. In large part, this can occur because many 
merchants feel that they cannot refuse to accept some types of card payments. This in turn 
means that competition, both between financial institutions and between card schemes, can 
be directed towards influencing the card that the consumer takes from their wallet to make a 
payment.  
The effect of interchange fees has been well understood in Australia for many years, with the 
Reserve Bank first requiring interchange fees to be reduced in 2003 following earlier joint work 
with  the  Australian  Competition  and  Consumer  Commission.  A  number  of  other  regulators 
internationally have subsequently followed the Reserve Bank’s lead.  
The role of interchange fees in affecting payment choices is so powerful that, even under the 
interchange fee caps applied in Australia, card schemes have seen benefit in setting very high 
interchange rates on some categories of cards – to encourage growth in that segment – offset 
by much lower rates on transactions at some “preferred” merchants. The unfortunate effect of 
this  is  that  those  “preferred”  merchants  pay  very  low  fees  on  all  transactions,  while  other 
merchants  pay  the  much  higher  rates  that  support  generous  rewards  programs  on  super-
premium cards. Such a card might cost a large merchant around 0.2 per cent of transaction 
value, whereas a small merchant that did not have a “preferred” rate, might be paying up to 
2 per cent. The Reserve Bank estimates that in 2015, non-preferred merchants on average 
faced interchange fees more than half a per cent higher than preferred merchants.  
This is one of several factors that led the Reserve Bank to conclude in 2015 that a review of 
card regulation was warranted.  
The RBA as a payments regulator 
Before I get onto the details of that review, I would like to revisit how the Reserve Bank has 
come to be involved in this area of regulation.  
Legislative reforms in 1998 following the Wallis Committee’s Final Report enshrined the long-
understood central bank responsibility for the stability of the payments system in the Reserve 
Bank Act. They also gave the Bank for the first time an explicit mandate to promote competition 
and efficiency in the payments system and some new powers that would allow it to pursue that 
mandate.  The  Wallis  Inquiry  had  also  provided  some  guidance  on  areas  where  this  new 
mandate could be applied, including card interchange fees.  
These  developments  set  the  scene  for  a  period  of  fact  finding,  analysis  and  eventually 
regulation to cap interchange fees and force the removal of “no-surcharge” rules. Interchange 
fees  on  MasterCard  and  Visa  cards  were  reduced  in  2003  from  around  one per  cent  of 
transaction value to 0.5 per cent. Fees on MasterCard and Visa debit cards were reduced in 
2006 to 12 cents per transaction.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   While at the time there were predictions from some quarters that regulating interchange fees 
would be catastrophic for card systems, as we have seen, they have thrived. Regulators in a 
number of other countries have now followed Australia’s lead in this area of regulation and 
indeed some – notably the European Union – have gone further.  
Nonetheless, while we think our cards regulation has been very successful, we have known 
for some time that there were elements of it that could be improved upon – either because the 
payments system has evolved since the regulation came into force, or because those affected 
by regulation have adjusted their behaviour over time. This led us to initiate a review of cards 
regulation in 2015, which was completed in May this year. Some changes to regulation have 
already occurred as a result, with the remainder coming into force over the coming year.  
There were three key elements of the reform package that the Bank announced in May.  
First, the Bank considered whether the current regulated levels of interchange fees remained 
appropriate,  particularly  given  that,  as  I  mentioned,  there  were  now  examples  of  lower 
interchange  fee  caps  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  The  Bank  decided  to  leave  credit  card 
interchange fees unchanged, but to further reduce the level of debit card interchange fees – 
from 12 cents to 8 cents. This decision reflected the fact that the average size of MasterCard 
and  Visa  debit  card  transactions  had  fallen  by  43 per  cent  since  2008,  meaning  that 
interchange fees had been rising as a percentage of transaction value.  
I mentioned earlier that specifying the interchange cap as an average had resulted in some – 
typically small and medium-sized merchants – bearing much more of the burden of high-cost 
cards than “preferred” merchants. The Bank has now decided to limit this effect by placing an 
absolute limit on the level of interchange fees for any card or any transaction in addition to the 
cap on the average. A limit of 0.8 per cent will apply to credit cards and 15 cents (or 0.2 per 
cent) to debit cards. The current 2 per cent interchange fees applying to some super-premium 
cards will no longer be possible from July 2017. This will benefit non-preferred merchants. 
Some further technical changes to how the caps are applied will reduce average interchange 
fees by reducing upward drift in the average over time.  
The second element of the May reform package is to place what we refer to as American 
Express  companion  cards  on  the  same  regulatory  footing  as  MasterCard  and  Visa  cards. 
Traditional American Express cards have been issued by the company itself, with Amex also 
arranging acceptance of those cards for the merchant. However in the mid 2000s, banks began 
issuing some American Express cards under license. Under these arrangements, American 
Express paid fees and incentives to card issuers, which had a similar effect to interchange fees 
– funding rewards points and influencing payment choices by consumers. But because these 
payments were unregulated, the rewards tended to be significantly higher than those offered 
on MasterCard and Visa Cards. This raised questions about whether the regulatory regime 
was fully competitively neutral.  
From July 2017 the Bank will now cap interchange fees and other payments to issuers in an 
equivalent  fashion  across  American  Express  companion,  MasterCard  and  Visa  cards. 
Traditional American Express cards, which have no equivalent to interchange fees, will not be 
subject to fee regulation.  
Finally, the May package further strengthens the regulation of card surcharging.  
Giving merchants the ability to signal to consumers through a surcharge that some payment 
methods are more costly to accept than others has been an important element of payments 
regulation in Australia. The overwhelming majority of merchants that have taken up the option 
of surcharging have done so at a level that recovers or under-recovers their card acceptance 
costs. However there has been community concern about a small number of cases where card 
surcharges exceed card acceptance costs – at least for some transactions. The lightning rod 
for  these  concerns  has  been  airlines  and  their  fixed  dollar  surcharges,  which  clearly  over-
recover card acceptance costs for low value airfares. In addition, while the Bank had in place 
a regulatory framework that could cap card surcharges to merchants’ card acceptance costs, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   there were concerns about how these caps could be enforced, given the limits of the Reserve 
Bank’s powers.  
The May package of reforms provides a simpler measure of the allowable surcharge, which is 
already in force for large merchants and will take effect for other merchants from September 
next year. In order to make it as simple as possible to understand payment costs, banks and 
other  organisations  that  provide  card  acceptance  services  will  be  required  to  give  each 
merchant a clear statement of their acceptance cost for each card scheme. A merchant will be 
able to use this to set its surcharge, or could include some limited other costs if they can be 
supported  with  receipts  or  statements.  One  implication  of  the  revised  framework  is  that 
merchants will generally no longer be able to apply fixed dollar surcharges.  
The  other  key  change  from  the  previous  framework  is  that  the  government  has  passed 
legislation to ban excessive surcharging. This step will give the Australian Competition and 
Consumer Commission the power to enforce the ban.  
The ban on excessive surcharging for large merchants has now been in place for a few weeks. 
The airlines have responded. Qantas, for instance, has moved from a $7 fixed fee on domestic 
flights on credit card payments to 1.3 per cent, with a cap of $11 for higher cost fares. For debit 
card payments they now surcharge 0.6 per cent. That means a $200 fare would be surcharged 
$2.60 for a credit card payment, compared with $7 previously. We also know that the large 
event ticketing agents have removed their card surcharges, which seems appropriate for an 
industry where alternatives to paying by card in most cases are limited.  
This  should  already  have  eased  the  broader  community’s  concerns  about  excessive 
surcharges  to  an  extent.  By  this  time  next  year  we  will  have  a  framework  in  place  for  all 
merchants  which  should  give  consumers  confidence  that  any  surcharges  they  pay  are 
reasonable, while at the same time providing merchants with a much clearer understanding of 
their payment costs.  
The future 
I began by talking about the decline of some of last century’s payment systems. I would now 
like to turn briefly to the future, because there are some important developments just around 
the corner.  
One  trend  that  seems  very  likely  in  the  near  term  is  the  migration  of  contactless  card 
transactions to mobile phones. Not everyone will see appeal in this, but the latest generation 
of mobile wallets are secure and convenient and can rely on what is now a very widespread 
contactless acceptance network in Australia. There is little doubt that the prospect of being 
able to leave home with only a mobile phone will have appeal in some circles. Mobile wallets 
bring new players and new processes into the payment flows, and the Bank expects to remain 
closely engaged with these developments in the period ahead.  
It  would  be  unfortunate  if  there  were  a  perception  that  the  Bank’s  only  contribution  to  the 
efficiency of the payments system was regulation of card systems. We do in fact have higher 
ambitions. In my view the most significant contribution to the future of the payments system 
that the Bank has made in recent times – certainly in my time as Assistant Governor in this 
area – has not been regulation, but playing the role of catalyst for a major industry project to 
create a new payments system – the New Payments Platform, or NPP.  
The creation of the NPP has flowed from the Strategic Review of Innovation in the Payments 
System that was undertaken by the Bank between 2010 and 2012. In finalising the review, the 
Bank identified a number of important features that electronic payment systems were not able 
to provide in Australia and challenged the payments industry to look for a solution. To the 
industry’s great credit it took up that challenge and has focused a very large industry effort on 
filling those gaps through the delivery of the NPP in the second half of next year.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   The NPP will allow individuals and businesses to make account-to-account funds transfers, 
with the recipient having access to those funds in most cases in a matter of seconds. That will 
be possible at any hour of the day or night, seven days a week, regardless of the financial 
institutions that the sender and receiver bank with. The sender will not need to know the BSB 
and account number of the recipient; they will be able to use a phone number, email address 
or ABN to address the payment. And importantly, it will be possible to send a much larger 
amount of information with a payment than the 18 characters permitted through our current 
system. That will potentially represent an enormous benefit to business users of the system in 
particular. Finally, with an eye to the rapid pace of innovation, the structure of the NPP will 
allow new types of third party commercial services to be delivered through the system, once 
the initial service, to be offered by BPAY, is up and running.  
Conclusion 
This will be my last opportunity to speak in an official capacity on payments system issues. I 
am proud of the things that the Reserve Bank has been able to achieve in this area, both 
through world-leading regulation and through playing the catalyst role that I spoke of. Efficiency 
of the payments system is not always a high-profile topic, but it is a tremendously important 
one  when  you  consider  the  28 million  non-cash  payments  made  each  and  every  day  in 
Australia. It is certainly in the interests of the people in this room to take a deep interest in 
payments, and I would encourage you to continue to do so. I think retailers understand that 
our  reforms  have  worked  to  reduce  their  payment  costs,  and  I  thank  all  those  retail 
organisations that have participated in our policy consultations and supported the direction of 
reform.  
 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
