  Philip Lowe: Remarks to the Asian Development Bank – Institute of 
Global Finance International Conference 
Remarks by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Asian 
Development  Bank  –  Institute  of  Global  Finance  International  Conference,  Sydney, 
8 September 2016. 
 I would like to welcome you all to Sydney to this important conference. It is fantastic to see 
the Asian Development Bank working so closely with an Australian university, the Institute of 
Global Finance at the University of New South Wales. It is also very pleasing to see that this 
collaboration  is  occurring  in  this  beautiful  city.  I  am  sure  that  you  will  find  this  conference 
stimulating and that you will receive warm hospitality in our city. 
The  title  of  this  conference  is  long.  Ten  words:  “Financial  Cycles,  Systemic  Risk, 
Interconnectedness,  and  Policy  Options  for  Resilience”.  It  is  also  challenging.  I  say  this 
because just below the surface of these 10 words lies a host of complex and difficult issues. 
The  proper  functioning  of  our  modern  economies  depends  on  us  understanding  and 
addressing these issues as best we can. If we get things wrong here, the outcomes can be 
really bad: our economies will be more volatile, job security will be less and people’s hard-
earned savings will be at greater risk. The global financial crisis was a powerful reminder of 
this. So the issues that we will discuss at this conference really matter. 
It  is  appropriate  that  the  discussion  is  taking  place  at  an  international  conference,  which 
features distinguished speakers from the region and elsewhere. After all, financial stability is 
a global issue: instability in one country can ripple right around the world. And many of the 
reforms to address instability are best accomplished internationally. We can also learn a lot 
from one another’s experiences. 
In  my  remarks  this  morning  I  would  like  to  highlight  three  specific  questions  that  are 
suggested to me by the conference title and papers. These questions are: 
i. 
How can we make our financial systems more resilient, particularly in a world in 
which capital flows easily across borders? 
How should we characterise and respond to episodes of financial boom and bust 
– the financial cycle? 
What determines the amount of systemic risk we are exposed to, and how can we 
identify and analyse it? 
ii. 
iii. 
The positive news is that in each of these three areas much has been learnt since the crisis. 
The not-so-positive news is that our answers to these questions are still incomplete and, just 
as one issue is resolved, too often another seems to emerge. I would like to reflect on each 
of these three questions, highlighting the progress that has been made and offering a few 
thoughts on some of the work that remains. 
Resilience 
First, to the issue of resilience. 
Looking  back  at  the  experience  of  the  past  20  years,  I  am  struck  by  the  fact  that  large 
financial disturbances are repeatedly caused by the same factors. Three stand out: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
poor asset quality, particularly in the area of commercial property development 
inadequate attention to liquidity management 
the build-up of unhedged foreign currency exposures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Not  surprisingly  then,  it  is  these  areas  that  have  received  the  most  attention  from  the 
international  regulatory  community.  Over  recent  years,  the  most  extensive  of  the  global 
reforms has been the Basel III package. This package means that, globally, banks now have 
more  and  better-quality  capital,  so  they  are  better  placed  to  absorb  losses.  In  addition, 
minimum standards for banks’ liquidity management are now more rigorous and transparent. 
The  stronger  liquidity  standards  also  help  reduce  vulnerabilities  from  foreign  currency 
exposures,  by  giving  supervisors  new  ways  of  monitoring  liquidity  requirements  on  a  per-
currency basis. Other reforms have helped increase resilience in other parts of the financial 
system, including derivative markets and shadow banking. 
But the reforms remain incomplete and challenges remain. The last chapter of the Basel III 
package is being finalised this year. While some of the reforms have helped address the too-
big-to-fail  problem,  there  are  still  considerable  challenges  in  developing  recovery  and 
resolution  plans  for  the  largest  global  financial  institutions.  And,  in  the  area  of  over-the-
counter (OTC) derivatives market reform, legal restrictions sometimes still make it difficult to 
share information across borders. 
The  Basel  Committee  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board  are  both  reviewing  the  overall 
calibration  of  the  reforms.  This  is  essential  because  with  so  many  new  metrics  and 
requirements, we need to ensure they do not interact in unintended ways. Of course, some 
of the effects that market participants comment on are intended. Maturity transformation has 
become  more  expensive.  So  too,  has  providing  market  making  services  in  some  financial 
instruments, generating concerns about a lack of liquidity in bond markets. More broadly, the 
cost  of  many  forms  of  financial  intermediation  across  banks’  balance  sheets  has  become 
more expensive. The promised benefit of this additional expense is that the system is now 
more stable. But we need to keep an eye on this trade-off, because a well-functioning system 
needs to be able to take risk at a reasonable price. 
A  well-functioning  system  also  needs  to  be  resilient  to  the  shifting  flows  of  capital  across 
borders. Collectively, global investors can deploy funds on a much larger scale than many 
markets  can  absorb  without  large  price  movements.  In  some  countries  this  has  led  to 
discomfort with the free flow of capital. But at the same time, access to foreign capital can 
help drive prosperity and economic development, and allows people to hold more diversified 
portfolios. 
The  challenge  we  face  then  is  to  design  arrangements  that  allow  us  to  all  capture  the 
considerable benefits that open capital markets can deliver, while minimising the attendant 
risks.  The  work  on  the  global  financial  safety  net  being  undertaken  in  international  policy 
circles  is  an  important  contribution  here.  One  of  the  questions  still  to  be  resolved  is  how 
extensive that safety net should be and what form it should take. 
The financial cycle 
An  important  theme  of  this  conference  is  that  of  “financial  cycles”.  Identifying  and 
understanding  these  cycles  has  become  an  active  area  both  for  academic  research  and 
policy development. 
As a concept, the financial cycle has considerable intuitive appeal. It has long been observed 
that financial systems seem to be subject to boom–bust dynamics. We have repeatedly seen 
credit and leverage build up over time in response to some initial impetus, only to generate 
excesses that ultimately unwind, sometimes painfully. 
One question we face is how to define and measure these cycles. It has become common 
practice to start by looking at cycles in credit growth. But there are limitations here. Not all 
credit cycles end in a financial crisis; indeed in industrialised economies, only a minority have 
done so. And in some cases a period of fast credit growth, followed by a period of slower 
growth, might be exactly what is required, and so should not be viewed as problematic. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This means that we need to move beyond a focus on credit only. In my view, it is probably 
more  useful  to  start  with  the  question:  are  balance  sheets  in  the  economy  being 
strengthened or weakened? If credit is growing quickly, we need to think about whether the 
credit  is  being  used  to  create  new  productive  assets  or  simply  to  finance  current 
consumption.  The  implications  are  quite  different.  A  protracted  period  of  balance  sheet 
weakening  might  reasonably  be  viewed  as  problematic,  particularly  if  it  increases  the 
probability of future balance sheet strains and weak economic growth. 
So  a  research  challenge  here  is  to  find  ways  of  systematically  measuring  the  quality  of 
balance  sheets  across  the  economy,  taking  into  account  the  myriad  influences  that  are  at 
work. Close analysis and good judgement are both needed to do this. 
A  related  research  question  is  how  policy  should  respond  to  a  systematic  weakening  of 
balance  sheets.  This  question  is  the  subject  of  a  lot  of  research  at  present,  much  of  it 
prompted  by  work  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS).  The  work  at  the  BIS, 
though  it  has  focused  heavily  on  aggregate  credit  as  the  indicator,  has  advanced  the 
hypothesis that, in some circumstances, the build-up of financial imbalances may be a better 
guide  to  the  sustainability  of  growth  in  the  economy  than  is  the  current  rate  of  inflation. 
Clearly,  this  hypothesis  needs  to  be  tested.  If  it  were  found  to  be  valid,  it  would  have 
implications for policymakers in a number of spheres, including monetary policy, prudential 
policy and even fiscal policy. 
Systemic risk: interconnections and spillovers 
Systemic risk is another theme of the conference, and again, a topic inspiring a great deal of 
academic  research,  some  of  which  is  being  presented  at  this  conference.  Systemic  risk 
cannot be seen, nor can it be easily measured. So we need to explore a range of indicators. 
Academic research is helping ensure that we are looking at the right ones. 
The  aspect  of  systemic  risk  that  I  would  like  to  highlight  is  the  interconnections  between 
banks,  firms  and  countries  that  lie  at  the  heart  of  the  contagion  that  can  turn  a  small 
disruption into something much bigger. In the global financial crisis, when one entity became 
distressed  their  counterparties  incurred  mark-to-market  losses  on  the  value  of  securities 
issued by that entity. Investors also often started refusing to deal with those counterparties 
that  had  –  or  merely  were  thought  to  have –  significant  exposures  to  that  entity.  So, 
contagion could and did occur because of both direct and supposed interconnections. It can 
occur  even  as  a  reputational  effect  when  two  entities  or  economies  are  perceived  to  be 
similar: once investors have reassessed the risks in one institution or country, they often start 
to  probe  similar  vulnerabilities  elsewhere.  We  cannot  escape  the  conclusion  that  greater 
interconnection is a prominent marker of increased systemic risk. 
The  global  policy  response  to  the  financial  crisis  has  recognised  the  importance  of 
interconnections  and  built  that  into  the  design  of  regulatory  reforms.  Some  of  the  design 
details  are  quite  technical,  but  their  essence  is  to  create  incentives  against  excessive 
interconnected exposures between banks, or between banks and other parts of the financial 
system such as so-called “shadow banking”. 
Contagion  is  most  likely  to  occur  when  information  is  not  equally  available  to  all  parties. 
Opacity and a lack of information about exposures were endemic to OTC derivative markets 
during the crisis, making these markets an important locus of contagion. Following the post-
crisis  reforms,  derivative  markets  have  functioned  more  effectively.  Regulatory  mandates 
and  supervisory  incentives  are resulting  in  a  larger  share  of  derivatives  transactions  being 
cleared through central counterparties and more are being collateralised and are therefore 
safer. Policymakers also have more visibility about financial market infrastructures now that 
they  play  a  more  central  role  in  financial  markets.  There  are,  though,  some  information-
sharing issues in this area that still need to be worked out. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  One other outstanding issue is how the multiplicity of indicators of systemic risk can inform 
policymaking,  and  how  one  might  use  the  signal  provided  by  an  indicator  to  develop  a 
particular policy response. This is no easy task. The insights of research such as the work 
presented at this conference will certainly be welcome. 
Conclusion: the role of supervision 
In all three areas I have spoken about – namely, resilience, the financial cycle and systemic 
risk  –  it  is  easy  to  focus  mainly  on  the  regulatory  initiatives.  Regulation  can  be  printed, 
measured and enforced. But history teaches that regulation cannot solve all problems. The 
financial system evolves, so no set of rules can deal with all risks and problems. This is an 
important reason why there needs to be a parallel focus on strong and effective supervision. 
My view is that a strengthening of supervision is at least as important as are the post-crisis 
regulatory  reforms.  Rigorous,  inquiring  supervision  that  takes  a  holistic  view  of  the 
environment is essential to maintaining financial stability and good outcomes for consumers. 
I encourage you to consider how the research agenda can be expanded to consider how to 
best balance regulation and supervision. 
Thank  you  for  your  attention.  I  wish  you  the  best  as  you  grapple  with  this  difficult  set  of 
issues over the next couple of days. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
