  Andreas Dombret: Closer cooperation between the South African 
Reserve Bank and the Deutsche Bundesbank 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at a press conference at the South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria, 29 August 
2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
We meet here today to herald a new phase of closer cooperation between the South African 
Reserve Bank and the Deutsche Bundesbank. And we do so in an environment that looks 
very  different  than  it  did  just  a  couple  of  years  ago  –  especially  from  the  perspective  of  a 
central bank. 
It’s  no  news  that  the  world  has  been  growing  ever  closer  for  decades.  And  the  financial 
sector  is  certainly  no  exception,  with  banks  and  other financial  institutions  globalising  their 
business and becoming increasingly intertwined. 
Structure of the Bundesbank’s international representative network 
1. 
As Germany’s central bank, the Deutsche Bundesbank has adapted to these challenges by 
establishing a network of 
• 
two representative offices: one in New York and one in Tokyo,  
and 
representatives based at German embassies or consulates general worldwide. 
• 
As  early  as  in  1963,  a  financial  economist  from  the  Bundesbank  worked  at  the  German 
consulate  general  in  New  York  and  simultaneously  held  the  post  of  Bundesbank 
representative at the world’s most important financial centre. In the years that followed, the 
Bundesbank  and  the  German  Foreign  Office  agreed  to  create  similar  positions  at  the 
German  Embassy  in  London  and  at Germany’s  Permanent  Mission  to the  OECD  in  Paris. 
Over  time,  further  important  financial  and  political  centres  were  added  to  this  list:  Beijing, 
Brussels, Istanbul, Moscow, Mumbai, São Paulo and Singapore. 
There is an important cornerstone of the Bundesbank’s international representative network I 
should  also  like to mention  –  the  Bundesbank  and  Germany’s  Federal Ministry  of  Finance 
take turns in nominating the German IMF Executive Director and his or her deputy. And we 
together staff the German IMF office. 
Our international representative network got a boost in 1986, when the Bundesbank opened 
representative offices in New York and Tokyo as entities detached from the official German 
missions in those two cities. Moreover, a number of years ago we added trading desks to 
both  representative  offices.  These  trading  desks  now  fulfil  an  important  role  in  the 
administration of the German reserve assets. 
Since  then,  the  Bundesbank  has  repeatedly  evaluated  its  assumptions  and  adjusted  the 
structure of its representative network to reflect changes in the Bundesbank’s mandate and 
the modified framework of its operations. 
The most important structural changes were triggered by 
• 
• 
the establishment of the Eurosystem, 
the functional transformation of the international financial markets, 
and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  growing  importance  of  emerging  market  economies  for  global  economic 
developments. 
 In particular, our international cooperation within the G20 and the Financial Stability Board 
made it a matter of urgency for us to adapt our representative network. At the same time, our 
view of gathering necessary information has changed – alongside macroeconomic aspects, 
micro- as well as macroprudential issues have become increasingly important central bank 
activities.  Furthermore,  national  and 
in 
significance. 
financial  markets  have  gained 
international 
The job of Bundesbank’s representatives 
2. 
The  Bundesbank’s  network  of  international  representatives  is  there  to  comprehensively 
observe economic developments and the expected evolution of financial markets from within 
key countries and regions. Our representatives’ main tasks include observing and analysing 
the financial system, and not least detecting financial crises early on, should they arise. Even 
minor flaws confined initially to the local economy can rapidly take their toll on any national 
financial  system  in  an  interconnected  global  economy  –  and  potentially  engulf  the  entire 
economy. An important lesson learned from the global financial crisis is that isolated national 
efforts cannot safeguard the stability of our financial system. 
Our representatives are expected to promote the exchange of expertise and nurture fruitful 
personal networks with central banks, financial authorities, supervisory authorities, banks etc. 
in their host countries. 
By  the  way,  a  Bundesbank  representative’s  place  of  work  is  not  necessarily  in  the  host 
country’s capital city. In countries where the capital city is not the national financial centre, 
we chose to base our representatives in the latter, eg New York, São Paulo, Mumbai and 
Istanbul. The decision on where to locate each representative and whether to base them at 
German embassies or consulates general is based on technical criteria, the interests of the 
Bundesbank and an agreement with the German Foreign Office. 
This raises the question of why our new representative to South Africa is located in Pretoria, 
and not in your financial centre Johannesburg? The reason for this decision makes sense at 
first glance: Johannesburg is in the vicinity of Pretoria, and the German embassy is located 
in Pretoria. What is more, the headquarter of our colleagues from the South African Reserve 
Bank are also in Pretoria. I shall come to this point in a moment to show why this aspect is so 
important for our representative. 
Why is the Bundesbank in South Africa? 
3. 
South Africa and Germany can look back on a long history of strong economic ties that we 
should  strive  to  promote further.  In fact,  South Africa  is  Germany’s  most  important  trading 
partner in Sub-Saharan Africa, while Germany is the second-largest trading partner for South 
Africa. Trade between the two countries climbed to new records in 2015. 
Encouragingly, the bilateral trade volume grew to more than 15 billion euro in 2015. South 
Africa’s exports to Germany rose by close to 20 per cent to around 5 billion euro. At the top 
of the export list were vehicles, parts and accessories, gems and precious metals as well as 
machinery.  At  the  same  time,  exports  from  Germany  to  South  Africa  also  grew  by 
approximately 16 per cent to about 9 billion euro, the main components also being vehicles, 
parts and accessories together with machinery and electronic equipment. 
There  are  over  600  German  companies  operating  in  South  Africa,  including  BASF,  Bayer, 
Bilfinger  Berger,  BMW,  DB  International,  DHL,  Mercedes  Benz,  MTU,  SAP,  Siemens, 
ThyssenKrupp  and  Volkswagen,  to  name  only  a  few.  Together,  these  companies  are 
estimated  to  provide  around  90,000  jobs  and  contribute  significantly  to  vocational  training 
and technological development. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  industry,  German  businesses  see  particularly  promising 
This engagement shows that South Africa has a lot to offer. Your country has vast economic 
potential,  and  with  your  developed  financial,  communications  and  transport  infrastructures, 
German investors also see South Africa as a bridge to other African markets. 
Conditions are excellent for deepening cooperation and boosting bilateral trade. Besides the 
manufacturing 
investment 
opportunities  in  the  energy  and  infrastructure  sector  as  well  as  the  information  and 
telecommunications industry. 
With our representative network, the Bundesbank can now track developments in nearly all 
the  G20  countries  –  directly  or  indirectly  –  thanks  to  the  regional  expertise:  New  York  is 
responsible for the United States, Canada and Mexico; Tokyo observes Japan, Korea and 
Australia;  São  Paulo  keeps  an  eye  on  all  the  South  American  countries;  and  Singapore 
observes South East Asia, especially including Indonesia as a G20 member of the region. 
By expanding our representative network, we are pursuing the goal of having a presence in 
the main industrial as well as emerging economies and of tracking developments in almost 
all the G20 countries, directly or indirectly. Given the growing role that the African continent 
at large and South Africa in particular is playing in the sphere of international economic and 
financial policy, the African continent has, up till now, been a blank spot on the map of the 
Bundesbank’s representative network. 
And  as  for  the  question  of  whereabouts  in  Africa  to  base  our  Bundesbank  representative, 
there’s  simply  no  getting  round  South  Africa  –  the  most  developed  economy  in  Africa,  a 
country that boasts abundant natural resources, and the only African member country of the 
G20. 
Your country is fertile ground for the private sector. It has a diversified industry and a well-
regulated financial sector with a recognised and independent central bank. 
Because of your ability to promote political and economic stability in southern Africa, German 
companies  use  your  country  as  a  springboard  into  the  African  market,  notably  into  the 
countries of the Southern African Development Community. 
Today sees the Deutsche Bundesbank introduce its first representative to South Africa. My 
visit to celebrate this event is not just an acknowledgement, on the part of the Bundesbank, 
of  the  economic  importance  and  potential  of  South  Africa.  It  also  marks  the  advent  of  a 
frequent  exchange  of  information  on  financial  and  monetary  policy  issues  with  the  aim  of 
better understanding the economic and financial interests of each country and of facilitating 
dialogue in international forums. 
Within  this  broader  objective,  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank  intend  to  cooperate  closely  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  capacity  building  by  each 
party  and  of  supporting  the  formulation  of  policy  in  both  countries.  To  this  end,  on 
28 February  2016  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  represented  by  Deputy  Governor 
Mminele, and the Bundesbank, represented by me, signed at the G20 meeting in Shanghai a 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  defining  the  scope  of  a  cross-border  cooperation  between 
our  two  central  banks.  We  will  start  by  jointly  undertaking  two  research  projects:  one  that 
aims at exchanging best practices in bank stress testing, and another where we will explore 
how  to  cooperate  more  closely  on  G20  issues.  And  that  is  yet  another  reason  why  it  is 
beneficial for our representative not to be located too far away from the SARB. 
On that note, I am delighted that the Bundesbank is today presenting Ms Jenny Kilp as its 
first representative to South Africa. Ms Kilp graduated from Liebig University in Gießen with a 
Diploma  in  Economics,  and  after  gathering  several  years  of  experience  in  the  academic 
world, joined the Deutsche Bundesbank in 2004. Since then, Ms Kilp has been an expert in 
the Bundesbank’s Directorate General Financial Stability, where she was in charge of policy 
issues  regarding  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF).  She  has  analysed  the  economic 
situation of a vast number of countries for the Bundesbank and gained a sound overview of 
the problematic issues facing various parts of the world, also in terms of the spill-over effects 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  of  industrial  countries’  policies  on  other  parts  of  the  world.  Ms  Kilp  is  already  familiar  with 
South Africa as she worked on a project here while she was a student. Now she is committed 
to  moving  with  her  family  to  this  great  country  for  at  least  two  to  three  years.  I  value  her 
openness, excellent specialist knowledge and ingenuity – all traits which will serve her well in 
her new post! Some of you have already met her, and I am sure that she will be a great first 
Bundesbank representative to South Africa. 
By  stepping  up  the  cooperation  between  the  Bundesbank  and  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank, we will be able to jointly shape the future landscape for independent central banks. 
I am looking forward to continuing our close working relationship with our colleagues from the 
South African Reserve Bank. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
