   Benoît Cœuré: Government bond markets in a changing environment 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the Government Borrowers Forum, Paris, 3 May 2016. 
 Summary: 
In  a  keynote  address  at  the  Government  Borrowers  Forum,  in  Paris,  ECB  Board  member 
Benoît Coeuré analyses the impact of recent policy interventions on market functioning. His 
remarks  focus  on  unconventional  monetary  policy measures,  regulatory developments  and 
private-public  partnership  in  financial  market  reforms.  «Policy  interventions  are  having  an 
impact on market functioning today» he says, but in the case of the ECB’s monetary policy, 
«ongoing monitoring so far does not suggest impairments to the price discovery process» and 
«our monetary policy has not suppressed market discipline». The new market environment is 
more constrained, but also more resilient. «At the same time, more safety is not a substitute 
but a complement to well capitalised banks and sound public finances» he concludes. 
 Let me begin by saying thank you to the World Bank and the Agence France Trésor for inviting 
me to speak today. 
The  speed  of  change  during  the financial crisis,  and  of the  regulatory  responses to  it,  has 
particular resonance for borrowers who think in long time scales, such as governments. Six 
years have now passed since the famous Pittsburgh G20 communiqué, where many initiatives 
for the ongoing regulatory agenda to prevent similar crisis in the future were launched. Some 
of those initiatives have already had a profound impact on global interest rate markets, such 
as  those  related  to  derivatives  clearing  and  market  transparency.  Yet  six  years  is  also 
significantly  shorter  than  the  average  new  issuance  maturity  for  the  government  borrower 
members present here today. This implies that many bonds issued in 2010 will be rolled over 
in very different markets – from level, structural and regulatory perspective – from those that 
we knew at the time. And that is not to mention the ultra-long bonds recently issued by several 
governments, including France’s latest 50 year issuance.  
In some cases, for instance for trade reporting and transparency, the crisis simply provided the 
necessary  catalyst  for  overdue  improvements  in  market  practices.  In  others,  related  for 
instance to risk-taking by banks or the rigging of benchmark rates, the bad practices of the 
past had to be curbed by regulatory fiat. A third group of changes, such as the rise of electronic 
trading, were happening already before the crisis. While it is straightforward to see the steady-
state benefits of all these developments, the potential side effects and transition problems are 
more difficult to assess. As a result, a holistic assessment of their impacts on systemic stability 
and economic efficiency is needed. But that is beyond the scope of my remarks today. 
What I would like to focus on is one issue in particular, namely the impact of recent policy 
interventions on market functioning. Specifically, I would like to discuss three areas: the impact 
of unconventional monetary policy measures; the impact of regulatory developments; and the 
role of private–public partnerships in financial market reform. 
The impact of unconventional monetary policies 
1.  
Starting with monetary policy, the key issue is as follows. Efficient price formation requires 
that large transactions can be rapidly executed at low cost with limited price impact – i.e. that 
markets are liquid. But are unconventional measures, such as negative interest rates and asset 
purchases, positively or negatively affecting market liquidity conditions and thereby that price 
formation mechanism? It is of course difficult to disentangle the individual effects of each of 
the policy measures we have taken in the recent years, as they have all been introduced as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   part of wider policy packages. Still, there are some points that can be made about the tools in 
isolation. 
First, negative interest rates on our deposit facility. Beyond some initial hesitation, the transition 
to negative rates has happened smoothly in both capital and money markets. The technical 
challenges  related  to  the  implementation  of  negative  rates,  notably  in  terms  of  market 
infrastructures, have been well anticipated and addressed by market participants, and we now 
have proof that market functioning below zero does not imply different logics and mechanisms. 
Or  as  I  said  elsewhere,  there  is  life  below  zero.1  In  particular,  possible  adverse  effects  of 
negative rates on general trading activities seem to have been limited. While volumes in the 
euro money markets have been declining,2 they have been also impacted by the significant 
increase in excess liquidity as well as regulatory developments.  
A case in point is the volumes traded in the Eonia market, which did fall substantially after the 
deposit facility rate was cut below zero in 2014, but are up 60% since the beginning of this 
year.  In  addition,  negative  rates  have  been  accompanied  by  receding fragmentation  in  the 
unsecured overnight money market, at least for the higher-rated counterparties. For example, 
the spread between rates paid by banks with an investment grade credit rating in formerly 
stressed  and  non-stressed  jurisdictions  is  close  to  its  pre-Lehman  level  and  significantly 
improved since mid-2012. The secured money market and security lending market have also 
been fairly resilient, and repo markets in formerly stressed jurisdictions have seen noticeable 
increases in trading activity, thanks to an overall improving environment. These developments 
are  all  the  more  important  for  us  at  the  ECB  since  we  take  great  care  to  ensure  that  our 
exceptional policy measures do not have an irreversible impact on market structures. 
More generally, we have not yet seen negative rates have a major impact on market makers 
themselves – in particular via the topical channel of banks and their profitability. I can only 
repeat  here  what  the  ECB  has  already  said  on  several  occasions,  namely  that  banks’ 
profitability has actually improved when you look at the overall impact of our monetary policy, 
thanks to a combination of lower funding costs, increased lending volumes and lower loan-loss 
provisions, which dominates by far the direct cost of negative rates. To be sure, this would not 
necessarily remain true if the deposit facility rate were to be set at significantly lower levels. 
But  this  is  why  I  have  said  elsewhere  that  we  would  not  take  it  to  absurdly  low  levels.3  If 
anything,  the  smooth  changeover  to  negative  rates  has  only  underlined  the  adaptability  of 
market participants to this new environment, especially the money market funds industry. 
Turning to the longer end of the yield curve, can the same upbeat assessment by made about 
our asset purchase programme? As of 2 May, the ECB had purchased EUR 733 billion of 
securities  under  its  Public  Sector  Purchase  Programme  (PSPP).  Theoretically,  such  large-
scale asset purchases by the central bank could have either a positive or a negative effect on 
market  liquidity.  On  the  one  hand,  the  willingness  of  the  central  bank  to  purchase  assets 
reduces market risk for potential buyers – that is, the risk that they are unable to sell the assets 
later on when needed to obtain liquidity. Such investors might therefore be ready to buy those 
assets  at  a  somewhat  higher  price,  which  compresses  the  standard  measure  of  market 
liquidity, the bid-ask spread. This situation is more likely in cases where investors fear that 
markets might become disrupted and demand dries up.  
On the other hand, with central bank purchases the risk that potential sellers might be unable 
to sell at a later point in time is also reduced. Those investors may therefore be ready to sell 
now only at a somewhat higher price, which makes the bid-ask spread wider. Moreover, if the 
                                                
1   See Cœuré, B., “Life below zero: Learning about negative interest rates”, Presentation at the annual dinner of 
the ECB's Money Market Contact Group, Frankfurt am Main, 9 September 2014 
2   See for instance European Central Bank, “Summary of the discussion of the Money Market Contact Group”, 
9 September 2015 
3   See Coeuré, B., “Interview with Politico”, 30 March 2016 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   central bank holdings of a particular security are sizeable relative to the total amount issued, 
that security becomes scarcer. This can translate into longer inventory holding problems and 
higher trading costs and this case investors will be more reluctant to hold those securities.  
In other words, the impact of the PSPP on market liquidity remains an empirical question. And 
looking  at  the  available  data,  we  do  not  see  evidence  of  significant  disruptions  in  market 
functioning.  
First, price discovery appears to be smooth and issuers are able to place new securities to the 
market in large volumes. Trading volumes have not fallen systematically as a result of PSPP. 
Based on TradeWeb data, trading volumes in core markets such as Germany are roughly 5% 
lower than two years ago. However, trading volumes in Italian, Spanish and Portuguese bonds 
on that platform are around 20% higher. That said one should not draw hasty conclusions from 
what remains a fragile set of indicators. Too little is known of the liquidity offered by dealers to 
end-investors.  And  therefore,  the  ECB  will  monitor  market  liquidity  carefully  as  our  asset 
purchase programme is further rolled out. 
Second, it is important to learn from Arthur Conan Doyle and note ‘the dogs that didn’t bark’. 
We have witnessed several shocks since we began our purchase programme that, in other 
conditions, might have led to substantial market volatility. For example, the major realignments 
of global FX reserve portfolios in the summer of last year passed without a significant increase 
in euro area yields or yield volatility. In this sense, the presence of PSPP has aided market 
functioning by providing a constant source of demand in the market and by flexibly directing 
this demand towards particularly oversold securities. At the same time, the spike in sovereign 
yields in Portugal earlier this year shows that our monetary policy has not suppressed market 
discipline. 
Finally, as general remark, one should always keep in mind that our combined measures are 
designed to prevent growth and inflation from being too low for too long. If we allowed such a 
situation to materialise, the impact on banks and investors would be much more severe than 
the impact our measures are said to have. 
The impact of regulation 
2.  
Alongside monetary policy, the new regulatory environment is a second key policy parameter 
affecting market functioning. The most prominent regulations cited by dealers as having had 
an impact on market liquidity are the leverage ratio, the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR), the net 
stable funding ratio (NSFR), as well as structural bank reforms (e.g. the Volcker rule). While it 
is difficult to definitively identify a causal link – some observers note that banks and dealers 
are in the process of re-allocating business between risk-weighted asset and leverage ratio 
constrained lines of business – there are some reasons to suggest that market behaviour is 
consistent with the dealer behaviour mainly being constrained by the leverage ratio.  
The implied reduction of balance sheet available to trading desks, however, does not have a 
straightforward effect on liquidity. Instead of a general widening of bid-offer spreads, which 
would be consistent with a general drop of liquidity, the reduction of available balance sheet 
has had two salient features in recent years. First, liquidity has been rationed to a larger degree 
in the sense that dealers have had to deploy their balance sheet selectively towards the most 
profitable  businesses.  Second,  liquidity  itself  has  become  more  volatile  and  unevenly 
distributed across market segments, leading to greater market segmentation. 
In particular, it is now more difficult for dealers to use cross-market positions to bridge liquidity 
across the sub-segments of the euro area bond market, because it is more expensive to carry 
spread positions. Volumes in the bond futures market provide a good example. Before the 
crisis, only three German government bond contracts on Eurex were reasonably liquid and the 
bellwether 10 year Bund contract saw trading of around one million contracts a day. Today, 
daily trading volumes in that contract have fallen to around 600,000, while around 100,000 10 
year  BTP  contracts  and  80,000  10  year  OAT  contracts  trade  every  day.  Neither  of  these 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   contracts even existed before the crisis. Bearing in mind that the locus of trading has shifted 
from cash bonds towards futures, these volume developments show that trading activity has 
decreased overall at the same time as it has splintered across markets.  
To  give  another  example  of  this  trend,  we  can  recently  observe  that  it  has  become  more 
expensive to borrow certain securities, such as those issued by the German government, over 
the quarterly balance sheet closing dates.4 Other securities borrowing markets, however, show 
the more established behaviour of cheapening around the same period. This divergence may 
be being caused by increased focus on sufficient high-quality collateral holdings (linked to the 
LCR)  on  part  of  some  banks  rather  than  the  usual focus  on  cash funding. The  concurrent 
tightening of bank leverage rules may also have restricted the ability of banks to engage in 
collateral  transformation,  further  exacerbating  temporary  collateral  demand  and  supply 
imbalances  in  specific  cases.  Importantly,  the  Eurosystem  is  helping  to  alleviate  these 
collateral shortages by making all securities purchased under the PSPP available for securities 
lending, both by national central banks and by the ECB.5  
But what is the longer term solution to the side-effects of regulation? In the policy discussion, 
the  focus  is  now  turning  from  designing  the  next  piece  of  regulation  to  assessing  the 
compounded impact of what has been done and implemented so far. In my view there is scope 
to fine-tune  and streamline  the regulatory  landscape  to  iron  out  some  of  these  unintended 
consequences. But even if costs are identified, that would not justify rolling back the core tenets 
of what has been achieved. I can only agree with New York Fed President Bill Dudley that 
“even if higher capital and new liquidity requirements were found to result in greater transaction 
costs, these costs would need to be assessed against the benefits of having a more robust 
and resilient financial system and a reduced risk of financial crises in the future.”6 
Remember that in the run up to the financial crisis, there was an illusion that liquidity could be 
provided for free to issuers and investors. Such liquidity was a mirage7 created by distorted 
risk assessments and hidden cross-subsidisation across capital market activities. So even if 
we now legislate to prevent the risks we know, we will not abolish the risks we don’t know. On 
the contrary, the more we eliminate the obvious risks, the higher the conditional probability of 
experiencing a crisis stemming from a non-obvious source. That is why upholding legislation 
to make the financial sector more resilient – in particular stronger bank capital – is such an 
important complement to stronger market regulation. Better regulated markets may mean that 
banks bear less risk, but it does not mean they should not be strongly capitalised.  
The role of private-public partnership in financial market reform 
3.  
The new market environment, however, is not only being shaped by official regulation, but also 
by quasi self-regulation – that is reform initiatives adopted by market participants, with the 
public sector giving it the initial impetus and a strong steer. This brings me to the third 
part of my remarks. While such changes are by definition less spectacular, what could appear 
as “soft developments’” can sometimes lead to considerable improvements in terms of market 
safety and reliability. Take the example of the reference rates, notably in interest rate or FX 
industry.  Over  the  last  years,  a  number  of  scandals  have  illustrated  that  relying  purely  on 
                                                
4   Last 31 March, the repo rate on German general collateral traded as low as -60 basis points while the overnight 
rate on some specific German bonds reached -4%. 
5   The ECB publishes every week on its website the ISINs of the bonds available for lending in the context of the 
PSPP and the Securities Market Programme. Securities lending arrangements of the ECB. 
6   See Dudley, B. “Regulation and liquidity provision.” Remarks at the SIFMA Liquidity Forum, New York City, 
30 September 2015. 
7   Dobrev  and  Schaumburg  use  the  term  in  the  context  of  high  frequency  trading.  See  Dobrev,  D.,  and 
Schaumburg,  E.,  “The  Liquidity  Mirage”,  Liberty  Street  Economics,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York, 
9 October 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   market practices in order to calculate benchmarks was not necessarily optimal, and in some 
specific cases, detrimental to financial stability. 
In reaction, the private sector has been active in improving the benchmark-setting process. 
Codes of conduct have been developed by the benchmark administrators to better control the 
rate-setting  process  and  clarify  the  responsibilities  of  contributors.  The  governance  of  the 
benchmark administrator itself was also clarified so as to avoid interest conflicts. For some 
benchmarks, audits are regularly performed to verify the reliability of the contributions to a 
benchmark.  Additionally,  private  initiatives  to  rethink  market  needs  and  identify  alternative 
benchmarks are taking place. 
But the public sector has not been absent in the genesis of these market changes: since 2013 
the FSB and the International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) have worked 
on a reform process of benchmarks,8 accompanying and steering the efforts of private market 
participants to define more robust and reliable benchmarks and related “best practices”. In 
addition, in the European Union the public sector has supported the process with legal texts. 
Indeed, the final draft of an EU Regulation on financial benchmarks was voted by the European 
Parliament  on  28  April.9  A  wide  range  of  benchmarks  will  now  be  covered  by  the  new 
regulation, improving the reliability of the benchmarks, complementing and supporting the “soft 
law” of market practices.  
On these topics, the ECB has been strongly committed to the improvement of the relevant 
benchmarks for the euro.10 While the ECB was always of the opinion that financial benchmarks 
should be private initiatives to best suit private needs, we have also helped the private sector 
in some of the benchmark reforms given the tremendous consequences of certain benchmarks 
for proper market functioning. 
In particular, we are closely accompanying the transition of the Euribor from a quote-based to 
a  transaction-based  index.  We  have  been  involved  in  the  discussions  for  some  time  as, 
together  with  the  Euribor  administrator,  we  launched  data  collections  in  2012  and  2013  to 
analyse  the  feasibility  of  a  transaction-based  reference  rate.  Now  the  transition  to  the 
transaction-based methodology, with a pre-live phase starting this summer, is foreseen by the 
Euribor  administrator  for  early  2017.  The  small  size  of  the  panel  of  contributors,  however, 
remains a risk for the continuity of this reference rate. For that reason, the ECB expects banks 
as  active  users  of  Euribor to take  responsibility  for  the  benchmark  and  to  stand  behind  its 
production as contributors with the launch of the new calculation methodology. If the private 
sector  fails  to  assume  responsibility  for  the  benchmark,  given  the  major  consequences  at 
stake, the ECB would support the possibility of mandating the banks judged as relevant to 
contribute to the benchmark under the newly voted EU Regulation.11 
                                                
8   See  IOSCO,  “Principles  for  financial  benchmarks:  Final  report”,  FR07/13,  July  2013,  and  “Review  of  the 
Implementation of IOSCO's Principles for Financial Benchmarks”, OR02/2015, February 2015. The 19 IOSCO 
Principles are a set of recommended practices that should be implemented by Benchmark Administrators and 
Submitters. They are covering four areas (governance, quality of the benchmark, methodology, accountability). 
While not superseding existing laws, IOSCO members were encouraged to support the implementation of the 
Principles including through regulatory action where appropriate. IOSCO regularly reviewed which the Principles 
have  been  implemented  by  obtaining  the  input  of  Stakeholders,  Market  Authorities  and,  as  appropriate, 
Benchmark Administrators. 
9   See European Parliament News, Interest rates: final vote to ensure robust and transparent benchmark setting. 
10   See  European  Central  Bank,  “European  Commission’s  public  consultation  on  the  regulation  of  indices: 
Eurosystem’s  response”,  November  2012,  and  “Reference  interest  rates:  Role,  challenges  and  outlook”, 
Monthly Bulletin, October 2013. 
11   While the competence to make Euribor contributions mandatory lies with other EU and national institutions (NB: 
the Belgian supervisory authority and other supervisors forming a college of supervisors following an act of the 
European Commission to establish a list of critical benchmarks), the ECB is willing to provide all necessary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Regarding  FX  benchmarks,  the  ECB  has  also  been  active  in  the  recommendations  of  the 
Foreign  Exchange  Benchmark  Group  of  the  FSB,  along  with  other  central  banks  and 
regulators.  In  particular,  the  ECB  took  the  lead  by  reforming  its  own  FX  reference  rates 
framework so as to discourage market participants’ trading activity related to it. Given that ECB 
reference  rates  are  provided  as  a  public  good  for  individual  citizens  and  institutions,  it  is 
essential to safeguard a high level of integrity.  
Concluding remarks  
4.  
Let me conclude. 
Policy interventions are undoubtedly having an impact on market functioning today. The key 
question, however, is what is the sign and magnitude of those impacts, and whether the trade-
offs they present are worth it.  
In the case of the ECB’s monetary policy, our ongoing monitoring so far does not suggest 
impairments  to  the  price  discovery  process.  But  even  more  importantly,  our  measures  are 
essential to restore a more robust economic environment where inflation is in line with our 
mandate.  That  environment  is  the  most  important  variable  for  dealers  and  investors  and 
therefore for market functioning. 
What  is  more,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  not  only  policy  interventions  affect  market 
liquidity. For example, high frequency electronic trading has been blamed for various rapid 
market  moves  and  charges  have  been  brought  against  some  uses  of  such  technology.12 
Though  innocuous  in  certain  situations,  such  technology  can  also  raise  barriers  to  some 
investors’  access  to  liquidity,  which  would  narrow  the  range  of  trading  interests  and  could 
exacerbate volatility spikes when no market participant is there to “catch a falling knife”.  
So to return to my initial question of how changes in market structure will affect the funding 
strategies  of  long-term  borrowers,  the  best  answer  I  can  provide  is  that  the  interests  of 
regulators,  issuers  and  investors  are  aligned.  All  want  markets  to  be  able  to  absorb  debt 
without large dislocations and price formation to be orderly and transparent. This requires that 
we continue the direction set in Pittsburgh in 2010. 
From regulatory developments to best practices, market structures are progressively changing, 
evolving to a new market environment that is more constrained but also more resilient. At the 
same time, more safety is not a substitute but a complement to well-capitalised banks and 
sound public finances.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 support to the competent authorities in the application of the mandatory contribution as per the EU benchmark 
regulation. 
12   See  for  example  The  US  Department  of  Justice:  Futures  Trader  Charged  with  Illegally  Manipulating  Stock 
Market, Contributing to the May 2010 Market ‘Flash Crash’ (21 April 2015). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
