  Sabine Lautenschläger: Interview in Expansión 
Interview with Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, 
in Expansión, conducted by Ms Alicia Crespo on 7 July 2016, and published on 18 July 2016. 
 How will Brexit affect the Spanish and EU banking sectors? 
The  good  news  is:  there  have  been  no  funding,  liquidity  or  operational  problems  in  SSM 
banks  since  the  referendum.  Operationally,  financial  markets  have  been  functioning  well. 
There is of course the risk that a prolonged period of uncertainty about the future relationship 
of  the  UK  with  the  EU  creates  a  wait-and-see  mood,  including  increased  risk  aversion  of 
investors and markets. With all due respect to the political process, it would be good to settle 
the situation in due course; in fact this is very important. 
However, we are witnessing a new wave of risk aversion affecting share prices of banks not 
exclusively  linked  to  banks  with  relevant  exposure  or  operations  in  UK.  This  risk  aversion 
might partly be linked to concerns about the future profitability of some banks. 
Where should the City relocate to? Frankfurt? Paris...? 
It’s too soon to be talking about this. Whether financial activities relocate away from London, 
and how they do so, depends to a large extent on the negotiations between the EU and the 
United Kingdom, and on the type of relationship they arrive at. 
Brexit  has  exacerbated  the  problems  in  the  Italian  banking  sector.  Should  the 
government inject public money? 
As the banking supervisor for the euro area, we ensure that banks face up to their problems, 
have a strategy regarding the risks in their balance sheets and do their homework. In a best-
case  bad  scenario,  private  money  supports  banks  which  are  struggling.  In  a  worst-case 
scenario, the euro area is fundamentally better prepared than in 2008. We now have a whole 
set of instruments which allows the European Commission, national governments, the Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism, the Single  Resolution  Board, and  other stakeholders to deal  with 
difficult situations. 
But all of the post-crisis legal architecture is seeking to avoid taxpayers having to pay 
for bank failures. Don’t Rome’s plans go against the banking union? 
The responsibilities for state aid and resolution rest with the European Commission and the 
Single Resolution Board, in cooperation with the respective Member State. I trust that any 
solution will fully respect the principles of the banking union. The supervisor has to ensure 
that the banking system is sound and can fulfil its function. If individual banks fail to do so, 
the  supervisor  alerts  the  above-mentioned  authorities  and  works  towards  a  sustainable 
solution. 
Is Italy currently the most serious risk to financial stability in Europe? 
It  must  be  recognised  that  the  resilience  of  banks  and  financial  systems  has  improved 
significantly in recent years. We are far too quick to forget this. The European banking sector 
holds significantly more capital than in 2008, and this capital is of higher quality. There are of 
course unresolved issues and we might be seeing a contagion effect on banks’ share prices, 
which could be an overreaction. Ultimately, a combination of different factors is at play. It’s 
not just Brexit; it’s also a question of the outlook for growth as well as geopolitical risks. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The profitability problem is getting worse. A Spanish banker has said that the banking 
sector is being killed by such low rates. 
Low profitability is not only due to the low interest rates. Fierce competition and unresolved 
legacy  issues  such  as  non-performing  loans  weigh  on  the  profitability  of  banks.  Also,  the 
extremely  accommodative  monetary  policy  also  entails  advantages  for  banks  over  the 
medium and long term. It drives economic growth to the benefit of citizens and companies, 
and  ultimately  the  banks  themselves.  The  banks  must  acknowledge  and  conduct  their 
business within the prevailing macroeconomic environment. Their challenge and their job is 
to make their business models less dependent on interest margins by increasing fees and 
other  sources  of  income.  Efficiency,  sales  channels  and  cost-cutting  also  play  important 
roles. 
How is the Spanish banking sector doing? What advice would you give? 
Its profitability and efficiency are better than the European average. In terms of efficiency, it’s 
among  the  best  in  the  euro  area.  These  are  the  strengths.  As  for  the  weaknesses,  many 
European banks – and not just Spanish banks – must do their homework, and think about 
how  to  cut  costs  to  deal  with  the  challenges  of  2016  and  beyond.  Spanish  banks  are 
dependent on interest margins and need to increase other sources of income, such as fee 
income. They also need to think about new sales channels and opportunities and challenges 
around digitalisation. 
Will all the banks under your supervision survive the next two years? 
The objective of the supervisor is to ensure the functioning of the banking system. It is not 
our responsibility to protect individual banks from market forces. In fact, there may be too 
many banks in the euro area and it is not our job or inclination to block orderly processes of 
consolidation. 
You say that mergers are a solution to the low profitability, but no mergers are taking 
place. Do we need to encourage hostile takeover bids? 
Supervisors don’t do industrial policy but rather call on banks to challenge the viability of their 
business  models,  strategy  and  risk  profile.  You  set  expectations  and  requirements,  and 
banks  have  to  find  ways  to  achieve  them.  We  don’t  have  the  tools  to  directly  promote 
mergers  and  acquisitions  and  I  don’t  think  the  market  should  be  subject  to  this  sort  of 
bureaucratic  intervention.  The  soundest  and  most  sustainable  solutions  are  tough  but 
reasonable supervisory standards and market solutions. 
The banking sector is reducing the cost of credit by lowering rates. Should they also 
charge savers for their deposits? 
This is a matter for the banks, bearing in mind the potential reaction of customers. They have 
to take into account the advantages and disadvantages in terms of costs and revenues. 
What improvements would you suggest to management boards in Spain? 
We hope that our recent review on governance and risk appetite will help banks to get to 
know both themselves and the industry standard better. We have seen major improvements 
in banks’ governance, but we are far from having international best practice throughout the 
euro area banking system. We have, for example, spotted weaknesses in the skillsets and 
independence of some board members. The boards of all banks must have a broad mix of 
skills and different, independent viewpoints to contribute to the debate and reflect all aspects 
of a problem. That’s good for the continued success of an institution. And some banks must 
do more in respect of their risk appetite framework. 
Banks are complaining that the SSM is interfering too much in their governance. 
Good governance is decisive for economic success and the stability of banks. Therefore, the 
relevant regulation gives us the task to push for sound governance structures in banks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The ECB will distinguish between capital requirements and capital guidance in 2016. 
How will it ensure that banks comply with the part which is not binding? 
The capital demand set by the supervisor (SREP) is split in two, with a requirement linked to 
the overall risk profile and a guidance related to the results of the adverse scenario of the 
stress tests, among other factors. The latter would not be binding in the sense of triggering 
automatic supervisory decisions, such as a cap on dividends, but we expect that banks will 
comply with it. In severe cases, we can also transform the guidance into the requirement or 
call for additional measures to mitigate or reduce risks, such as the sale of assets. 
The capital requirements are being eased to help the banking sector pay dividends, 
CoCo bonds and bonuses. 
Capital  demands  are  not  being  eased.  The  level  of  capital  will  stay  broadly  the  same,  all 
things being equal. 
The profitability of the banking industry has fallen but bankers’ pay has risen. 
As prudential supervisors, we are mainly concerned if too high pay endangers the solvency 
of a supervised entity. To this end, we analyse the yearly remuneration packages in relation 
to  the  bank’s  existing  capital  and  the  capital  it  may  need  in  order  to  comply  with  the 
progressive demands of Basel III. If the remuneration is too high and the bank cannot retain 
profits and use them to increase its capital to meet those demands, we impose restrictions. 
How  can  the  market  be  convinced  that  the  stress  tests  are  useful  if  each  bank’s 
results are not published and capital is not required? 
Stress  tests  were  created  to  provide  supervisors  and  the  public  at  large  with  information 
about  the  resilience  of  banks  in  certain  hypothetical  scenarios  and  are  very  useful  in 
identifying vulnerabilities in banks. The solution to these weaknesses is sometimes but not 
always  more  capital.  For  example,  one  solution  could  be  changing  the  composition  of  a 
portfolio of loans in order to avoid excessive risk concentration. But the results will also be 
one  important  input  factor  into  our  capital  guidance.  Let  me  also  remind  you  that  for  the 
upcoming EBA stress test, the results will be published for banks that represent 70% of the 
assets of the euro area. 
Brussels and certain sections of the ECB want to ease capital requirements to boost 
growth. How does the SSM deal with such pressures? 
Only strong banks that are adequately capitalised can offer loans through the cycle and play 
their part in the economy. Lowering capital requirements will not create sustainable growth. 
You are examining the internal risk models which banks use to calculate their capital. 
Do  you  think  they  are  playing  games  with  the  supervisor  in  order  to  circumvent 
solvency requirements? 
We  have  come  from  a  system  with  19  different  supervisors  and  countless  ways  of 
authorising and applying internal models. We are working on a process and joint criteria to 
ensure  a  true  level  playing  field.  The  objective  is  to  define  supervisory  expectations  and 
issue  recommendations  which  ensure  that  internal  models  yield  consistent  results  across 
institutions. 
You want to penalise the holding of government debt by the banking sector. Might that 
not be a major problem for countries and banks? 
The  financial  crisis  has  shown  that  there  is  no  risk-free  asset.  This  includes  government 
bonds. The incentives set by the regulatory framework have to be aligned with this insight. 
Obviously,  this  is  not  only  a  European  issue.  The  solution  has  to  be  global.  We  have  to 
discuss  this  important  issue  in  the  Basel  Committee,  recognise  that  there  are  no  risk-free 
assets and calibrate the rules properly. Sensible rules and adequate transition periods can 
help mitigate all related risks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
