  Jens Weidmann: Aspiration and reality – the situation in the European 
monetary union 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Institut  Ökonomie  der 
Zukunft, Karlsruhe, 15 September 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Professor Weibel 
Professor Sloterdijk 
Professor Puppe 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Linguists  tell  us  that  the  name  “Europe”  comes  from  the  ancient  Greek  word  “erebos” 
meaning “dark”. Europe therefore denotes the Occident ‒ the place where the sun sets. And 
the sun indeed does not seem to be shining brightly over Europe at present. 
According  to  the  investor  George  Soros,  the  European  Union  finds  itself  in  an  “existential 
crisis” following to the UK vote to leave the EU. The political scientist Herfried Münkler, too, 
declared in the wake of the debate on the refugee crisis that “this time we are dealing with a 
crisis as understood by Aristotle and the medical profession: the patient either recovers – or 
will die.” 
Up to now, said Münkler, it was held that the EU was growing with every crisis and that it was 
only thanks to such crises that any progress was being made at all. As Münkler sees it, Jean 
Monnet’s claim that “Europe will be forged in crises,” is no longer valid. 
In  my  view,  two  things  can  be  said  about  that:  talk  about  the  end  of  the  EU  somehow 
reminds me of Mark Twain, who responded to a newspaper report that he had passed away 
with  the  words  “The  report  of  my  death  was  an  exaggeration.”  Nevertheless,  the  mode  of 
operation for European integration does indeed seem to be coming under close scrutiny. 
Jean  Monnet,  one  of  the  founding  fathers  of  the  European  Union,  described  this  mode  of 
operation as a chain reaction. As he envisaged it, the integration of one area of the economy, 
specifically  the  coal  and  steel  industry,  would  entail  an  ever  stronger  economic  and, 
subsequently, also political integration. 
The launch of the euro was based on quite similar ideas. On the occasion of the adoption of 
the Maastricht Treaty, for example, Helmut Kohl stated that “It cannot be said often enough: 
political union is the indispensable counterpart of economic and monetary union.” 
For him, too, the euro was a catalyst for the ongoing process of European unification. The 
merging  of  European  currencies  was  ultimately  designed  to  unify  the  countries  of  Europe 
politically. 
The theory that European integration is a self-reinforcing process in which the integration of 
individual sub-sectors will necessitate the integration of other areas has become known as 
the “locomotive theory”. 
But  this  theory  was  being  called  into  question  even  at  the  time.  The  Bundesbank  –  for 
example – was a proponent of what was known as the “coronation theory”. The idea was that 
monetary union should stand at the end of the European integration process because, if the 
economies  have  not  integrated  and  converged sufficiently,  a  single  monetary  policy  would 
not be suitable for all countries and the monetary union would be prone to crisis. The fact 
that this fear was not entirely unrealistic has been shown by the euro-area crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Proponents of the locomotive theory see such crises less as a threat than as an opportunity. 
That is because, according to the locomotive theory, crises, first and foremost, open up the 
possibility  of  implementing  those  steps  of  integration  that  have  not  yet  been  taken. 
Accordingly, even now there is no lack of proposals that the appropriate response ‒ not only 
to the Brexit vote but also the euro-area financial and sovereign crisis ‒ should be even more 
integration. 
Given that the design of monetary union in its present state is evidently fragile, and in view of 
the not inconsiderably diverging ideas about the fundamental policy stance – just think of the 
almost  irreconcilable  positions  on  communitising  liability  –  such  a  knee-jerk  call  for 
integration is making many people anxious. Surveys show that many citizens of the EU doubt 
whether the existing process of integration is still sustainable. 
In  my following  remarks,  I do  not  intend  to  address  the  undoubtedly  important question of 
how policymakers might reignite enthusiasm for Europe through projects to create a sense of 
common identity and interest or other measures. Instead, I shall concentrate on that which is 
my focus as a central banker, but which is no less important for the general public. 
Essentially, I will discuss what can be done to make the monetary union, in particular, work 
better for everyone as well as the role of the single monetary policy in this context. 
Europe as a promise of prosperity, convergence and integration 
2. 
Looking at the countries of Europe, Jean Monnet concluded as long ago as 1954 that the 
countries  of  Europe  had  “become  too  small  for  today’s  world.”  Given  the  possibilities  of 
modern technology, he felt that primarily about the economy. But he also believed it was true 
of foreign policy. In this respect, he was thinking mainly of the major role being played by the 
United States of America and the Soviet Union, as well as the growing importance of China 
and India. 
In this sense, the EU can indeed be seen as a political response to increasing globalisation ‒ 
as an attempt to establish a strong regional pole in an increasingly multipolar world. 
In  economic  terms,  the  members  of  the  EU  were,  among  other  things,  “to  achieve  the 
strengthening of convergence of their economies” and “advances in economic integration”.1 
The  EU  thereby  gave  a  threefold  promise  to  its  citizens:  to  increase  prosperity,  achieve 
convergence  in  standards  of  living,  and  deepen  integration.  And,  in  actual  fact,  numerous 
studies come to the conclusion that the single European market has led to more prosperity in 
Europe.2, 3, 4 
Looking at the big picture, real economic output in the EU countries has gone up by one-third 
since 1995 despite the financial and sovereign debt crisis. The fact that the increase in the 
USA, Canada and Japan has been just as strong as on an average of the EU countries when 
looking at the per capita growth of the working population does show, however, that other 
factors have also played a part in economic growth in the EU. 
In  a  large  single  market,  differing  preferences  and  skills  mean  more  opportunities  for 
specialisation – for firms and thus, ultimately, also for the employees. In a large market, it is 
                                                
1  Lisbon Treaty, preamble. 
2  H Badinger (2005), Growth Effects of Economic Integration: Evidence from the EU Member States, Review of 
World Economics 141, 50–78. 
3  N  F  Campos,  F  Coricelli  and  L  Moretti  (2014),  Economic  Growth  and  Political  Integration:  Estimating  the 
Benefits  from  Membership  in  the  European  Union  Using  the  Synthetic  Counterfactuals  Method,  IZA 
Discussion Paper No 8162. 
4  A Boltho and B Eichengreen (2008), The Economic Impact of European Integration, CEPR Discussion Paper 
No 6820. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  easier to do what one does best. At the same time, the range of goods on offer becomes 
more diverse. All of that is potentially for the benefit of all. 
Admittedly, this does not mean that everyone benefits equally from the stronger economic 
integration  in  Europe  and  worldwide.  Technological  advances,  especially  in  information 
technology,  enable  the  highly-skilled  to  make  even  more  effective  use  of  their  capabilities 
and  demand  higher  wages  accordingly.  And  the  globalisation  of  the  economy  makes 
competition  more  intense  precisely  for  the  medium  and  low-skilled.  That  dampens  wage 
growth in this segment of the labour market. 
Taking the long view, wage differentiation – in other words, the ratio of very high to very low 
gross wages – has therefore increased; however, this trend has come to a standstill over the 
past few years. 
This flipside of globalisation undoubtedly also played a part in the Brexit vote in the UK. The 
EU became a target for voters to vent their frustration about the downsides of globalisation 
and  migration.  And  there  are  many  who  now  see  the  monetary  union  as  a  drain  on  their 
country’s economy rather than as a guarantor of growth. After all, the countries of the euro 
area can no longer use exchange rates to cushion economic shocks. 
Given  all  the  disappointment  about  Europe  and  its  institutions,  what  is  often  overlooked  is 
that, in the existing institutional structure of the EU, responsibility for releasing the forces of 
growth by means of economic reforms still lies primarily with the individual member states. In 
doing  so,  they  have  pursued  different  approaches  in  the  past  few  years,  which  are  also 
reflected in varying rates of economic growth. 
Along with a sustainable economic policy at the national level, however, it will also be vital to 
strengthen the forces of growth at the Community level. I am thinking here, for example, of 
the completion of the single market for services or a single market for digital services. 
Studies  suggest  that  the  digital  market  alone  could  raise  economic  output  in  the  EU  by  a 
further 4%.5 Not only would that mean more prosperity, it would also create additional jobs ‒ 
more  than  400,000  in  Germany  alone.  And  more  jobs  are  the  best  antidote  to  economic 
anxieties about integration. 
The liability principle: a cornerstone of the market economy 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
One area of the domestic market, however, has revealed serious weaknesses until recently: I 
mean the financial services market, and the banking market in particular. 
This is because no rules existed, either in Europe or in other economic regions such as the 
USA, to guarantee that the shareholders and creditors of large, interconnected banks would 
be on the hook for potential losses. These institutions could count on being bailed out by the 
taxpayer,  since  the  failure  of  such  a  bank  would  inevitably  entail  severe  economic 
disruptions. 
The  bank  bailout  not  only  cost  billions,  but  also  fuelled  the  perception  that  the  market 
economy  had  changed  in  character,  to  the  benefit  of  the  few  at  the  expense  of  many: 
“Privatising the gains while socialising the losses.” 
However, the liability principle is absolutely central to a market economy, as the prominent 
ordoliberal  Walter  Eucken  already  knew:  he  described  this  “market  economy  constitution” 
very aptly, saying: “Those who benefit from it must also carry the loss.” 
                                                
5  Copenhagen Economics (2010), The Economic Impact of a European Digital Single Market, Final Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In  order  for  the  market  economy  to  function,  but  also  to  preserve  trust  in  the  rules  of  the 
game  and  therefore  in  the  EU  as  a  whole,  it  is  essential  that  shareholders  and  creditors 
actually do bear any future losses on bank investments, rather than the taxpayer. 
This is precisely the aim of the more stringent capital rules which were introduced and are 
summarised in the Basel III framework, and particularly the European banking union with its 
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  rules  on  bailing  in  shareholders  and  creditors  in  the 
event of bank failures. 
However, we can only attain this goal if the joint rules on recovery or liquidation of banks are 
consistently applied. Only then will the banks’ shareholders and creditors adjust their future 
behaviour appropriately to avoid excessive risk-taking. 
Strict application of the principle of ownership is absolutely essential, not only for reasons of 
fairness, but also for concrete economic reasons. If economic players do not have to bear 
the consequences of their actions, flawed incentives are set. They will take excessive risks, 
which is precisely what led to the last financial crisis – and to similar crises in the past. 
Enhancing the monetary union 
4. 
Action and liability go hand in hand – this is not only important for the future of the financial 
sector, but also pivotal in enhancing the entire monetary union. 
The construction of the European monetary union is unique in the world. A single monetary 
policy is set against 19 largely autonomous economic and fiscal policies. 
This  construction  makes  the  monetary  union  potentially  vulnerable,  since  the  crisis  has 
shown that, ultimately, the community may have to foot the bill for unhealthy developments in 
individual member states in order to prevent the stability of the entire structure from being 
threatened. 
The  prospect  of  being  able  to  spread  the  consequences  of  unsustainable  policy  over  the 
entire monetary union can weaken the incentive towards sound budgetary policy. This is why 
institutional precautions were taken before launching the euro: the Stability and Growth Pact, 
the “no bail-out clause” and the ban on monetary financing of governments. Unfortunately, 
however, these safety precautions were unable to prevent the crisis. 
Why did we not, at that point, choose the path taken by other currency areas, such as the 
USA or Canada, and transfer economic and fiscal policy to the European level? 
Ultimately, Berlin, Paris, Rome and others opted to go it alone in economic and fiscal policy 
rather than take these decisions together in Brussels; they were unwilling to consent to such 
an extensive transfer of sovereignty rights. 
A common policy is, after all, different from a common market. 
In a common market, all the participants can produce whatever they do best. The interplay of 
supply and demand and the equilibrium provided by the price mechanism ensure that every 
product finds its buyer. 
A  common  policy  has  no  price  mechanism  to  bring  the  different  interests  into  balance. 
Instead  of  the  invisible  hand  of  the  market,  a  far  more  complex,  political  negotiation  or 
coordination process is required to provide this balance. The economist Enrico Spolaore,6 for 
instance, has pointed this out. 
                                                
6  E Spolaore (2013), What Is European Integration Really About? A Political Guide for Economists, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, American Economic Association, 27(3), 125–144, Summer. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  As a result, therefore, only monetary policy was communitised – in the full knowledge that 
certain  economic  adjustment  problems  might  arise  despite  the  existing  safety  precautions 
and coordination mechanisms. 
The monetary union likely puts some people in mind of the quip, attributed to Woody Allen, 
that “marriage is an attempt to solve problems together which you didn’t even have when you 
were on your own.” 
But  like  marriage,  the  monetary  union  is  also  potentially  a  wonderful  thing:  its  physical 
manifestation  as  a  single  currency  is  the  most  visible  symbol  of  the  process  of  European 
unification. This unification process has, without doubt, contributed to Europe’s becoming a 
continent of peace and human rights, for which the EU even won the Nobel Peace Prize in 
2012. 
Going even further, however, the monetary union has concrete economic advantages as a 
union  of  stability.  EU  citizens  no  longer  have  to  change  money  when  they  travel, 
entrepreneurs no longer have to fear exchange rate fluctuations, and everyone can compare 
prices better. This increases competition, which is conducive to growth. 
That is why it is worth solving the existing problems. 
There are basically two options open to us. We could take the path of other monetary unions 
and communitise economic and fiscal policy as well as monetary policy. Proponents of the 
locomotive  theory  are  looking  at  this  option,  arguing  that  incomplete  integration  makes  it 
necessary to take further steps towards integration. 
However, we come up against the same roadblock faced by the architects of the monetary 
union  when  it  was  founded:  member  states  are  still  disinclined  to  abdicate  rights  of 
sovereignty to the European level. 
This is evident in the ongoing discussions about enhancing the monetary union: for example, 
the informal meeting of EU finance ministers and central bank governors which took place in 
Bratislava  last  weekend,  where,  among  other  things,  proposals  going  in  the  direction  of  a 
fiscal  union  were  discussed,  with  the  aim  of  providing  a  fiscal  instrument  to  cushion  large 
macroeconomic  shocks.  The  ideas  discussed  therefore  included  a  joint  unemployment 
insurance and a European investment fund. 
On  the  other  hand, the suggestions  contained  little  in  the  way  of  specific  measures  which 
would enable genuine joint control. On paper, strengthening of the fiscal rules is mentioned. 
However,  the  past  few  months  and  years  have  shown  how  much  this  is  worth.  Fiscal 
surveillance has already been “strengthened” before, in return for the establishment of the 
bailout fund in 2011. However, the rules are still being interpreted very flexibly. The binding 
force of the budgetary rules is weaker than ever before, as we can also see in the decisions 
made concerning France, Spain and Portugal. 
In  any  case,  nobody  is  suggesting  a  genuine  transfer  of  sovereignty,  for  example  to  an 
independent  fiscal  authority  which  could  reject  national  budgets  that  do  not  meet  stability 
requirements. 
If further  political  integration  is  not  possible,  the only  remaining  option  is  the  decentralised 
approach  which  is  already  provided  for  in  the  monetary  union’s  existing  Maastricht 
framework. 
But how do we ensure that unhealthy developments in one part of the monetary union do not 
jeopardise the stability of the whole? 
In  a  nutshell,  it  must  be  possible  in  future  for  heavily  indebted  states  to  default  as  a  final 
resort  without  bringing  the  financial  system  to  its  knees  and  forcing  the  international 
community to come to the rescue. 
This  option  will  hopefully  mean  that  capital  markets  exercise  their  disciplinary  function  for 
fiscal policy better in future, so that if at all possible, government default never occurs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  In the July edition of its Monthly Report, the Bundesbank described what needed to be done 
to ensure that sovereign debt restructuring does not jeopardise stability. 
It is crucial, first of all, that banks hold sufficient capital to be able to absorb any losses on 
government bonds. Regulation currently does not require that of them. Not only that: banks 
are allowed to purchase an unlimited quantity of government bonds – something they cannot 
do with other investments. That, too, will have to change. 
But other action is needed over and above that. 
At  the  moment,  the  purpose  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  is  to  bridge  any 
funding  difficulties  that  a  government  may  experience.  This  means  that,  during  the 
programme, the ESM steps in not only to fund budget deficits but also to provide money to 
enable the country to redeem maturing bonds in the proper manner. This would prevent a 
situation  in  which  European  taxpayers  pay  off  creditors.  For  it  is  they  who  are  ultimately 
behind the ESM. 
But if, following an ESM assistance programme, the debts were still too high, the haircut that 
would then become necessary would be made at the expense not of the original creditors but 
of European taxpayers. This does not exactly foster willingness on the part of the member 
states  to  agree  to  restructure  their  debt.  Instead  of  a  truly  viable  solution  being  reached, 
when push came to shove, a strategy of muddling through would win the day. 
That  is  why  the  Bundesbank  proposes  adding  a  clause  to  the government  bonds  of  euro-
area countries whereby the maturity of the bonds is automatically extended by three years if 
the member state applies for ESM assistance. 
This would keep creditors on the hook. Then, if a haircut really does become necessary, the 
ESM can act as mediator between the government and its creditors. 
A procedure of this kind would make it possible, as a last resort, to restructure debt in an 
orderly manner without putting financial stability at risk. This means it would benefit both the 
ailing member country and the euro area as a whole. 
But  we  need  to  be  clear  about  one  thing.  It  will  take  more  than  just  the  possibility  to 
restructure  government  debt  to  curb  government  debt  effectively  without  jeopardising 
financial stability. It will also be necessary to tighten fiscal policy rules. 
This calls, first, for transparent fiscal rules and, second, for their rigorous enforcement. 
I am convinced that an independent fiscal authority would then be better equipped than the 
European  Commission  is  today  to  effectively  enforce  limits  on  the  ever-increasing 
government debt in the euro area. This is because, on the one hand, the Commission must 
act as the guardian of the treaties and ensure that the rules are implemented. On the other 
hand,  it  is  also  a  political  institution  whose  task  it  is  to  strike  a  balance  between  widely 
varying interests. 
Measures to rein in government debt effectively are urgently needed. Although the indebted 
countries’ debt ratios will decrease slightly over the next few years, the gradual improvement 
in the economic situation and the very favourable funding conditions mask a loosening of the 
fiscal stance in the euro-area countries. In terms of the guidelines on medium-term budgetary 
planning, three-quarters of all euro-area countries will still be far removed from a sound fiscal 
position in 2016. That is not what fiscal consolidation looks like. 
Monetary policy 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I would like to close by turning to the question of monetary policy. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Monetary stability is good for everyone – let me count the ways. First, price stability means 
being able to pay one’s way tomorrow on today’s income. Second, it also makes retirement 
saving easier to plan. 
Third,  it  is  important  from  an  economic  perspective  that  businesses  can  reliably  calculate 
what  an  investment  will  cost  and  what  return  it  will  deliver.  The  more  money  fluctuates  in 
value, the more uncertain investment income becomes and the lower growth will be in the 
long run. 
All these reasons convinced the euro-area member states to opt for an independent central 
bank system committed solely to price stability that was modelled on the Bundesbank. 
And with inflation averaging just under 2% since this system was created, it has been roughly 
as successful in maintaining price stability as the Bundesbank. 
But  the  inflation  outlook  in  the  euro  area  has  been  very  muted  for  quite  some  time  now. 
Inflation  has  been  discernibly  below  the  ECB  Governing  Council’s  inflation  rate  target  of 
close to but below 2% since mid-2013. In fact, it has been hovering around the zero mark for 
the better part of two years. 
Euro-area  prices  in  August  were  only  around  0.2%  above  the  previous  year’s  level.  Price 
inflation in Germany, incidentally, stood at 0.4%. 
In particular, it was the sharp drop in oil prices that pushed inflation down during the last two 
years. This effect on inflation will gradually peter out once the year-on-year decrease in oil 
prices comes to a halt. This should already become clear by the end of the year. 
However,  the  low  inflation  rates  in  the  euro  area  are  not  driven  purely  by  oil  price 
developments.  Core  inflation,  which  is  to  say  the  price  index  excluding  energy  and  food 
prices, is likewise relatively low, hovering at around 1%. 
The  latest  ECB  staff  projections  indicate  that  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  will 
continue – despite the United Kingdom’s decision to leave the EU. Growth will be dampened 
to only a comparatively minor extent; however, price pressures will gradually rise. At the end 
of the projection period, inflation will be largely consistent with the ECB’s definition of price 
stability. 
The expansionary monetary policy will undoubtedly play a part in that. 
But it’s no secret that economic policy measures can produce more than the desired effect: 
they  can  also  entail  side-effects  and  risks.  The  monetary  policy  measures  that  have  been 
adopted are no exception. 
And  whereas  the  effects  of  expansionary  fiscal  policy  decline  the  longer  it  lasts,  the 
associated risks and side-effects rise. 
One  side-effect  of  the  highly  accommodative  monetary  policy  is  that  unviable  enterprises, 
too, are benefitting from the very favourable financing conditions and are being kept afloat. 
One  could  say,  then,  that  monetary  policy  plays  a  part  in  braking  structural  change  in  the 
corporate sector. This tends to harm the productivity of an economy. 
A further side-effect is that the banking sector’s profitability suffers the longer monetary policy 
remains  in  ultra-easy  mode.  This  is  because  most  banks  find  it  difficult  to  pass  on  the 
negative interest rates to their depositors. And while this is good news for depositors, it has a 
detrimental  effect  on  banks’  costs.  And  because,  above  all,  the  Eurosystem’s  bond 
purchases depress long-term interest rates, income that banks may generate through their 
investments decreases. 
Of course, as a central banker, I am not concerned here with the profits that the banks make. 
From  a  monetary  policy  perspective,  however,  it  is  crucial  that  banks  transmit  monetary 
policy stimuli – and this depends partly on their capital base. For only banks with sufficient 
capital can issue loans to enterprises and households. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  This  makes  it  important  for  banks  to  gear  their  operations  towards  sustainable  profitability 
even  in  a  persistent  low-interest-rate  environment.  Failing  this,  they  may  find  it  difficult  to 
retain profits with a view to further strengthening their capital base. 
Particularly the German banks often suffer from structurally weak profitability – all the more 
reason to continuously review their business models, get their balance sheets in order and 
harness any available scope for consolidation in order to cut costs. 
Yet  another  side-effect  of  non-conventional  measures  –  one  I  consider  to  be  especially 
problematic in light of the experiences during the sovereign debt crisis – is that government 
bond purchases blur the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy. That is something 
I’ve be saying over and over again. 
Central  banks  are  becoming  countries’  biggest  creditors.  And  once  finance  ministers  get 
used  to  the favourable financing  conditions,  there  is  a  danger  that  monetary  policy  will  be 
harnessed  to  fiscal  policy  and  will  be  put  under  pressure  to  make  high  levels  of  debt 
sustainable  through  low  interest  rates.  That  would  make  it  increasingly  difficult  to  exit  the 
ultra-easy monetary policy. 
Monetary policy measures that seek to improve the situation in individual member states in a 
targeted  way  are  particularly  problematic.  That  would  be  the  case,  for  instance,  if  central 
banks were to buy only bonds issued by the governments of crisis countries, as was the case 
with the Eurosystem purchases in 2010 to 2012. 
Such  purchases  may  cause  a  redistribution  of  fiscal  risks  through  central  bank  balance 
sheets, as, ultimately, taxpayers in the member states are on the hook for potential central 
bank losses. 
I  have  already  explained  that  redistributing  fiscal  risks  is  alien  concept  to  the  existing 
regulatory framework of monetary union, which is based on the principle of individual national 
responsibility, and would probably be counterproductive. 
If, however, decisions on redistribution are to be taken, then at least they should be taken by 
those with the legitimacy to do so. Those people sit in governments and parliaments; they do 
not work at central banks. 
Otherwise,  the  independence  of  the  Eurosystem  could  be  called  into  question;  an 
independence that the Eurosystem was expressly granted as a central prerequisite for price 
stability in the euro area. 
Let me be clear about one thing. The current public sector purchase programme does not 
provide  for  targeted  purchases  of  bonds  issued  by  the  governments  of  individual  crisis 
countries. All central banks buy only bonds issued by their government in line with the size of 
their country. We should maintain these basic parameters of the existing programme to avoid 
getting the Eurosystem into hot water. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
in  the  public  debate  about  the  expansionary  monetary  policy,  it  is  often  asserted  that  this 
policy is leading to the expropriation of savers. 
I believe judging monetary policy solely on the inflation-adjusted returns on particularly safe 
savings deposits fails to capture the whole picture. 
There  have,  in  the  past,  frequently  been  periods  where  savings  deposits  have  yielded 
negative short-term real interest rates; indeed, they have often even been significantly lower 
than they are today. 
Granted, the situation is a little different in terms of real long-term interest rates. They are, 
indeed, exceptionally low at present. However, this is not just down to monetary policy; the 
muted longer-term growth expectations for the euro-area countries are also to blame. It is up 
to  national  governments  to  conduct  an  economic  policy  which  is  conducive  to  a  lasting 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  increase in growth. While monetary policy can use the instruments at its disposal to smooth 
the economic cycle, it is unable to bring about sustained growth. 
And we must not forget that citizens are generally not just savers, they are also employees, 
shareholders, taxpayers and property owners. 
And  from  that  perspective,  low  interest  rates  are  not  all  bad  news.  The  expansionary 
monetary policy aims to nudge the rate of inflation towards the definition of price stability by 
stimulating  economic  activity.  In  a  situation  characterised  by  slack  in  the  economy,  that 
secures  jobs,  increases  tax  revenues  and  gives  enterprises  opportunities  to  expand.  And 
there  may  even  be  the  odd  person  here  in  this  room  who  is  happy  about  the  low  interest 
rates for their mortgage loan. 
In other words, the central bank performs an important stabilisation function when it smooths 
the business cycle in an attempt to guide price developments. It must not, however, labour 
under the misapprehension that it is able to steer both perfectly. Equally, central banks must 
be aware that interventions in individual markets may result in evasive action. However, I get 
the impression that central bankers are less susceptible to the illusion that they can micro-
manage everything than some analysts  who  would like to see central banks take on even 
greater responsibility and demand increasingly far-reaching interventions into the markets. 
For  “smoothing”  even  to  be  conceivable,  the  central  bank  naturally  requires  room  for 
monetary policy manoeuvre. And that depends, in part, on its long-term inflation rate target. 
If it is aiming for a slightly positive rate, central bank rates, too, will be somewhat higher. This 
means that they can be lowered more sharply when the economy slows. That is one reason 
why the Governing Council of the ECB aims to keep inflation below, but close to, 2 per cent 
over the medium term. 
There are, incidentally, further arguments in favour of a slightly positive rate. Potential errors 
in measuring inflation are one argument that comes to mind. 
The consumer price index measures the average price of the things people buy. However, 
there is a delay before statisticians become aware of changes in purchasing behaviour. They 
therefore tend to overstate inflation. 
Another reason why an inflation rate of zero isn’t a sensible target is because industries or 
entire economies that need to claw back a loss of competitiveness would face the daunting 
prospect  of  having  to  push  through  real  wage  cuts.  That  means,  wages  must  rise  more 
slowly than prices. But if prices do not rise at all, nominal wage cuts are necessary. That, 
however, is pretty much a non-starter. 
Finally,  another  argument  for  a  slightly  positive  inflation  rate  for  the  euro  area  is  that  an 
average of close to 2 per cent allows differences in the rates of inflation within the currency 
area, without prices having to drop in individual countries. Differences in inflation rates will be 
the norm as long as member countries’ economies don’t move exactly in parallel. If monetary 
policy sought to hit an average inflation rate of 0%, there would always be some countries in 
negative territory. 
There  are,  therefore,  good  reasons  why  all  major  central  banks  target  an  inflation  rate  of 
around  2  per  cent.  There  are,  moreover,  good  reasons  not  to  give  in  to  calls  to  raise  the 
inflation target. If the academic literature on the optimum inflation rate shows anything at all, 
it is, in my opinion, the large degree of uncertainty associated with such estimates. 
The ECB Governing Council’s definition of price stability does not, incidentally, demand that 
the inflation rate target of below, but close to, 2 per cent must be met at all times. It expressly 
states that it should be met over the medium term. In this context, the medium term does not 
mean “sometime in the distant future”, nor does it mean “as fast as possible and at all costs”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Conclusion 
6. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
the idea that the name “Europe” comes from the Greek word “erebos”, meaning “dark”, is not 
linguists’  only  theory.  According  to  another  interpretation,  Europe  comes  from  Greek 
mythology and means “the far-sighted woman”. A more optimistic interpretation, indeed. 
The  objective  of  the  reforms  proposed  by  the  Bundesbank  is  to  remedy  deficits  in  the 
architecture of monetary union and thereby to make it more stable. In particular, they help 
redeem the promise politicians gave the public back when the euro was introduced: namely 
that the euro would be as stable as the D-Mark and that the monetary union would therefore 
be a stability union. 
Keeping  promises  and  being  reliable  and  credible  is  a  central  precondition  for  regaining 
political confidence in Europe. 
I now look forward to the discussion. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
