  Peter Praet: The European Central Bank and its role as lender of last 
resort during the crisis 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
“The  Lender  of  Last  Resort:  An International  Perspective”,  a  conference  sponsored  by  the 
Committee on Capital Markets Regulation, Washington DC, 10 February 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the European Central Bank’s website. 
I am grateful for the assistance of F. Hammermann, S. Holton and J. Hutchinson. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Since tensions emerged in the interbank market in August 2007, central banks have been at 
the  forefront  –  and  centre  –  of  the  response  to  the  financial  crisis.  Such  prominence  is 
directly  linked  to  their  ability  to  create  liquidity  for  the  entire  financial  system  as  well  as 
solvent individual banks experiencing funding difficulties and to a central bank’s function as 
lender of last resort (LOLR). This distinctive role was first identified more than two centuries 
ago by Henry Thornton (1802) and elaborated on 70 years later by Walter Bagehot (1873). 
According to their dictum, central banks should lend freely to solvent but illiquid firms against 
good  collateral,  at  a  high  rate  of  interest  (Tucker,  2014). While  much  has  changed  in  the 
intervening period, these overarching principles have influenced central banks ever since. 
In responding to the worst financial crisis in a century, the European Central Bank faced two 
challenges  which  we  tried  to  address  with  two  different  approaches to  our  LOLR function. 
First, we had to deal with a system-wide liquidity shock of unprecedented magnitude which, if 
left  unattended,  would  have  developed  into  a  liquidity  crunch  and,  later,  a  disorderly 
contraction of the stock of broad money and nominal income. We addressed this formidable 
stress  by  resorting  to  what  I  will  term  the  “monetary  approach”  to  LOLR.  In  this  way,  we 
sought to deter a contraction in the stock of bank-created money and to compensate for a 
decline in its velocity of circulation, which could otherwise have provoked a more severe fall 
in spending, employment and prices than what was observed in reality. 
Second,  and  in  parallel,  we  kept  intervening  in  support  of  particularly  acute  idiosyncratic 
liquidity  strains  faced  by  individual  solvent  credit  institutions  (or  groups  thereof)  under  the 
“credit  approach”  to  LOLR,  which  is  embedded  in  the  Eurosystem’s  emergency  liquidity 
assistance (ELA) – a responsibility of the national central banks. 
In my remarks today, I would like to provide a brief overview of the ECB’s standard liquidity 
provision  framework  before  discussing  our  policy  response  to  the  crisis  and  the  rationale 
behind our decisions. 
Monetary policy operations and the lender of last resort function in the pre-crisis 
years 
In the euro area, the vast majority of firms and households meet their financing needs via 
direct bank intermediation, reflecting the fact that market financing and securitisation are less 
developed than in other major jurisdictions. As a result, the euro area banking system lies at 
the heart of the conduct of our monetary policy. In the pre-crisis period the ECB’s conduct of 
monetary  policy  was  founded  on  temporary  credit  operations  in  the  form  of  repurchase 
agreements, or repos, with over 1,500 eligible monetary financial institutions (MFIs). 
When implementing monetary policy via repos, the ECB’s Governing Council decides on two 
parameters.  First,  the  desired  degree  of  monetary  stimulus,  as  reflected  in  the  short-term 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  interest rate that is charged under the main refinancing operations (MROs) and, second, the 
expected aggregate demand for liquidity in the market. By calibrating the amount of liquidity 
to  be  auctioned  in  the  MROs  so  that  it  was  just  enough  to  meet  the  system’s  expected 
demand for cash balances at the intended main refinancing rate (MRO rate), the ECB could 
steer the market rate for overnight liquidity close to the MRO rate during the pre-crisis period. 
Indeed,  in  that  era,  our  prime  overnight  market  rate,  the  euro  overnight  index  average 
(EONIA), was fluctuating closely around the MRO rate. 
The  MRO  is  complemented  by  the  two  standing  facilities  which  form  the  monetary  policy 
corridor.  The  corridor’s  floor  is  the  deposit  facility,  where  banks  can  place  overnight  their 
reserves in excess of reserve requirements and other liquidity needs and earn interest at a 
(pre-set) rate lower than the MRO rate. The corridor’s ceiling is the marginal lending facility, 
where banks can receive overnight liquidity at an interest rate (also pre-set) above the MRO 
rate.  This  marginal  lending  facility  has  a  dual  function:  it  acts  as  a  “built-in”  lender  of  last 
resort for shortfalls in overnight liquidity. But, at the same time, its role in the overall policy 
framework is broader, as it serves as the backstop for fluctuations in overnight money market 
conditions.  It  is  because  of  this  latter  function  in  the  settings  of  the  stance  that  the 
responsibility  for  marginal  lending  is  shared,  as  a  Eurosystem  facility,  among  all  national 
central banks (NCBs) of the euro area and the ECB. 
Euro  area  credit  institutions  can  receive  central  bank  credit  not  only  through  Eurosystem 
monetary policy operations but, exceptionally, also through ELA. Cases in point are banks 
which have run out of collateral considered as eligible under our monetary policy framework 
or whose counterparty status has been suspended on the grounds of prudence. Technically, 
emergency  liquidity  assistance  is  activated  when  a  Eurosystem  national  central  bank 
provides  central  bank  money  and/or  any  other  assistance  that  may  lead  to  an  increase  in 
central  bank  money  to  a  financial  institution  or  a  group  of  financial  institutions  outside 
monetary policy operations. Unlike the marginal lending facility, liquidity provision via ELA is 
at the discretion of the providing NCB and this is why I refer to ELA as embedding the credit 
approach to LOLR. The main responsibility for the provision of ELA lies at the national level, 
i.e. with the NCBs concerned. This means that any costs and risks arising from the provision 
of  ELA  are  incurred  by  the  relevant  NCBs.  Nevertheless,  in  order  to  ensure  that  ELA 
operations  do  not  interfere  with  the  single  monetary  policy,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council 
may object to or restrict the provision of ELA, in line with the Statute of the European System 
of  Central  Banks  and  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  NCB  concerned  and  the 
institutions receiving ELA are subject to a special information-sharing framework. 
Furthermore,  ELA  provision  is  monitored  for  compliance  with  the  prohibition  on  monetary 
financing  which  applies  to  the  Eurosystem  –  and,  in  fact,  to  all  the  central  banks  of  EU 
Member  States  –  and  is  laid  down  in  the  Treaty.  More  specifically,  the  Treaty  stipulations 
pertaining  to  the  prohibition  of  monetary  financing  ban  any  ELA  transactions  akin  to  an 
overdraft facility or any other type of credit facility for a Member State, and any financing of 
the public sector’s obligations vis-à-vis third parties, or any cases in which, through ELA, the 
central  bank  de  facto  takes  over  a  state  task.  Moreover,  ELA  provision  is  prohibited  for 
insolvent  institutions  and  institutions  for  which  insolvency  proceedings  have  been  initiated 
according to national laws. 
In the context of this institutional set-up with many safeguards, the provision of ELA has a 
broader scope than monetary policy operations. First, ELA is not limited to monetary policy 
counterparties,  but  is  available  to  a  broader  set  of  credit  institutions,  provided  they  are 
solvent.  The  wider  focus  takes  into  account  the  fact  that  financial  institutions  outside  the 
narrow  realm  of  our  eligible  counterparties  can  run  into  temporary  liquidity  shortages  that 
could challenge financial stability. Second, the set of assets accepted as collateral for ELA 
purposes  is  wider  than  the  one  required  for  Eurosystem  monetary  policy  operations. 
Therefore, the cost of liquidity drawn under ELA is also higher than the marginal lending rate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The ECB’s response to the crisis 
As  the  crisis  unfolded, our  approach  to the  LOLR  function  evolved  in  parallel.  Three main 
phases can be identified. 
The first and second phases of the crisis: system-wide liquidity strains 
The first and early phase was the immediate post-Lehman Brothers liquidity crisis. Not unlike 
in  other  advanced  economies,  the financial  trauma  that followed  the  demise  of  one  of  the 
largest  global  investment  banks  created  anxiety  about  the  magnitude  of  European  banks’ 
exposure  to  subprime  products  of  uncertain  quality.  This  prompted  a  sudden  stop  in  the 
availability  of  money  market  funding  for  many  credit  institutions  in  the  euro  area  and  a 
systemic  rush  to  cash.  As  interbank  markets  seized  up,  the  strains  were  diffused  with 
virtually no region or sector being spared. 
The  second  phase  of  the  crisis  came  as  a  consequence  of  a  much  more  targeted  and 
disruptive loss of confidence: the sovereign debt crisis. This was special to Europe; it brought 
on  the  development  of  redenomination  risk  and  thereby  threatened  the  integrity  of  our 
currency.  Banks’  exposures  to  selected  governments  came  under  intense  market  scrutiny 
and entire national banking systems lost access to wholesale funding. 
Note that during both the first and the second phase, banks faced an urgent need to replace 
a source of market funding that had suddenly become unavailable – primarily an impaired 
access  to  money  market  borrowing  in  the  post-Lehman  phase  and  the  impossibility  to  roll 
over  maturing  bank  bonds  during  the  debt  crisis.  In  both  episodes,  however,  the  original 
source of stress was investors’ distrust in the quality of banks’ exposures – to the private and 
the public sectors. Our role was the same in both phases, namely to create new reserves, on 
demand, for cash-stripped banks with viable business models, and thus to help these banks 
go through an emergency liability substitution operation without being forced to make large-
scale fire sales of assets that would lead to insolvency. 
Concretely,  for  the  Eurosystem  this  meant  abandoning  its  conventional  framework  for 
liquidity provision. We discontinued the practice to auction a pre-set quantity of liquidity and 
moved instead to an unlimited allotment of funds at a fixed rate. The tenors of our longer-
term refinancing operations were extended from the pre-crisis standard of three months to 
six months in 2008 and to three years in 2011. We also expanded the universe of eligible 
collateral. 
In essence, we adopted a genuinely classical approach to our LOLR responsibilities. 
This approach can be described by using the classical equation of exchange: B*m*V = P*Y. 
This simple equation states that base money (B) times the money multiplier (m) times broad 
money  velocity  (V)  –  or  the  turnover  rate  of  the  broad  money  supply  –  is  always  equal  to 
nominal income, i.e. the price level (P) times real output (Y). The central bank is concerned 
with  preserving  price  stability  and  supporting  the  economy,  but  it  can  do  so  only  very 
indirectly  and  imprecisely  by  controlling  base  money,  i.e.  the  sum  of  currency  and  bank 
reserves. Therefore, in keeping with the monetary approach to LOLR, base money should be 
expanded  sufficiently  aggressively  with  two  intermediate  objectives  and  one  ultimate 
objective  in  mind.  The  intermediate  objectives  are:  compensate  for  the  fall  in  the  money 
multiplier – and the decline in broad money velocity. The ultimate objective is to prevent the 
possibility  of  a  collapse  in  broad  money  leading  to  a  downward  adjustment  in  nominal 
income. 
Why do the money multiplier and broad money velocity tend to fall during confidence crises? 
The money multiplier is a complex function of the public’s preferred ratio of currency holdings 
to  deposits  and  of  banks’  desired  ratio  of  reserves  to  deposits.  Increases  in  uncertainty 
during times of crisis can impact on the behaviour of banks and the money-holding sector, 
leading to changes in these ratios, as banks prefer to hold larger reserves with the central 
bank  as  perceptions  of  counterparty  risk  increase,  and  –  in  the  most  severe  episodes 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  featuring bank runs – the public may try to convert bank deposits into currency. All of this 
alters the association between base money and broad money and increases the quantity of 
base  money  that  the  system  demands  in  order  to  hold  a  given  amount  of  broad  money. 
Turning  to  velocity,  crisis-induced  uncertainty  can  also  lead  to  a  decrease  in  velocity  as 
people prefer to hoard broad money as a precautionary measure to prepare for difficult days 
and reduce spending. Because velocity has a tendency to fall in tandem with the multiplier, in 
episodes  of  financial  dislocation  the  central  bank  has  one  more  reason  to  increase  base 
money in order to keep nominal income from falling. 
This  is  in  essence  what  we  did  over  the  first  two  phases  of  the  crisis.  During  this  period 
(2008–12), the volume of base money was endogenously determined by banks’ demand for 
it, which was accommodated fully by the Eurosystem, the only restriction being availability of 
eligible  collateral.  This  can  be  seen  by  comparing  Chart  1  and  Chart  2.  As  the  multiplier 
started to fall early on, the money base expanded strongly and this cushioned pressures on 
M3 which could have accentuated its trend deceleration (Chart 1). Even more evidently, as 
the  debt  crisis  reached  its  climax  in  mid-2012,  and  banks  started  to  pay  down  the  bonds 
which  the  market  was  refusing  to  roll  over  using  newly  borrowed  Eurosystem  funds,  the 
sharp expansion in base money permitted banks to keep the broad money stock from falling. 
Chart 2 shows a disaggregation of broad money growth by counterparts: in other words, it 
documents the items on banks’ balance sheets which account for and offset the expansion of 
M3.  It  is  clear  that,  starting  in  2012,  the  possibility  offered  to  banks  to  redeem  maturing 
bonds with base money and thus pay them off with newly created deposits (dark green bars) 
provided critical support for M3 expansion. 
The  extraordinary  injection  of fresh  liquidity  into  the  system  had  a  profound  impact  on  the 
Eurosystem’s balance sheet. With hindsight, it proved very successful in building a firewall 
against  financial  contagion  and  a  further  decimation  of  value.  Banks  could  refinance 
themselves  in  the  aggregate,  preserving  a  level  of  intermediation  which  could  bridge  the 
economy  through  a  sharp  contraction  and  avoid  a  more  severe  degradation  of  confidence 
and macroeconomic stability.1 
The third phase: addressing a new round of deleveraging 
However, as the macroeconomic contraction morphed into a prolonged slump, banks in large 
parts of the euro area finally started to engage in a drawn-out process of downsizing their 
exposures and de-risking their operations. In those countries most severely hit by the debt 
crisis, the risk-adjusted returns on loans had declined to the point where banks had a strong 
incentive to redeem loans and deleverage. The crisis had evolved into its third stage: a stage 
characterised  by  a  chronic  malfunctioning  of  bank-based  transmission,  growing  signs  of  a 
credit crunch and a rising risk that the dearth of credit and finance for households and firms 
would feed back into consumption and investment, thereby magnifying the chance that the 
economy might be trapped in a deflationary spiral. 
As  banks  were  actively  deleveraging,  their  funding  conditions  were  normalising  too,  and 
liquidity ratios were being restored. In fact, as the debt runs of 2011 and early 2012 faded, 
banks  were  eager  to  accelerate  reimbursement  of  central  bank  credit  as  the  pressure  to 
                                                
1  Critical as they were in preventing a deeper cataclysm, liquidity operations were only one set of tools deployed 
within a more encompassing crisis control strategy. The Outright Monetary Transaction (OMT) initiative was 
another  major  plank  of  that  strategy  which  proved  key  to  the  resolution  of  the  debt  crisis.  As  markets  lost 
confidence in the capacity of certain euro area countries to refinance their public debt, it was imperative that 
the  guardian  of  the  currency  ward  off  any  unwarranted  tail  risk  threatening  the  dissolution  of  the  currency 
union.  OMT  was  a  clear  commitment  to  eliminate  the  redenomination  risk  premia  from  the  price  of  the 
securities issued by stressed jurisdictions on the condition that those economies undergo economic reforms 
and  fiscal  adjustment.  The  announcement  of  OMT  had  an  extraordinary  effect  and  proved  to  be  a  potent 
circuit-breaker by successfully truncating the most extreme tail of the distribution of possible macroeconomic 
outcomes and, as a result, financial stability was restored. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  refinance  a  leaner  balance  sheet  had  diminished  and  they  viewed  less  dependency  on 
official  borrowing  as  a  way  to  project  a  positive  image  of  financial  health  to  their  investor 
base.  Along  this  process  of  retrenchment,  borrowing  conditions  were  being  tightened  at 
precisely the time when the economy needed support. 
Under these conditions, the ECB had to resort to a different strategy, one which would shift 
focus  from  banks’  liabilities  to  banks’  assets.  Inducing  banks  to  arrest  and  reverse  asset 
redemptions  and  keep  credit  flowing  to  the  real  economy  became  our  policy  priority.  We 
introduced  three  new  instruments:  a  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations 
(TLTROs), a negative interest rate policy, and an asset purchase programme which included 
both private and public sector securities. The TLTROs are a sequence of eight refinancing 
operations  offering  banks  long-term  refinancing  (of  up  to  four  years)  on  the  condition  that 
they  use  the  funds  to  expand  lending.  Indeed,  banks  have  responded  to  the  targeting 
incentives embedded in the new facility by reducing lending rates and increasing their loan 
supply. The asset purchase programme, together with a negative rate on excess reserves, 
quickens  the  pace  at  which  banks  and  other  lenders  are  resuming  providing  credit  to  the 
economy  at  more  favourable  conditions.  Lower  term  spreads  on  public  sector  securities 
encourage a shift in the composition of banks’ portfolios towards other types of exposure with 
a  higher  risk-adjusted  return,  which  primarily  includes  loans.  The  negative  interest  rate  on 
reserves discourages liquidity hoarding and speeds up the process of asset reallocation. 
With the start of the third phase of the crisis, the monetary approach to LOLR had reached its 
limits. Importing LOLR elements into the conduct of monetary policy had been a critical and 
far-sighted decision in a phase when the primary purpose was assisting banks in an orderly 
exercise of liability substitution. But when our priorities shifted towards the need to re-engage 
banks  in  active  credit  intermediation,  those  elements  lost  traction.  The  non-discretionary, 
passive generation of liquidity which is characteristic of systemic LOLR operations had to be 
replaced by a more active strategy of control over the size and composition of our balance 
sheet. 
The credit approach 
Throughout this whole period, in each of its three phases, the credit approach to LOLR has 
remained in place. National central banks have continued to assist banks that are unable to 
take  part  in  standard  Eurosystem  monetary  policy  operations  by  exercising  their  LOLR 
function  under  ELA.  But  the  credit  approach  to  LOLR  that  is  embedded  in  ELA  has  not 
remained static over the crisis period. 
During the early phase of the crisis, ELA support was limited to individual banks. Its original 
construction,  which  foresees  that  funds  be  provided  on  a  discretionary  basis  –  not 
automatically – and be conditional on the Governing Council’s judgement that ELA extension 
does  not  interfere  with  the  determination  of  the  monetary  policy  stance,  was  preserved. 
Discretion  and  conditionality  on  the  Eurosystem’s  non-objection  are  safeguards  against 
moral hazard. 
But as the crisis intensified, and a number of euro area countries became the target of debt 
runs and exhausted their fiscal capacity, entire national banking sectors were deprived of the 
natural port of call which in other circumstances would have acted as a provider of solvency 
support: their  national fiscal  authority.  Very  often, these  countries  had to  have  recourse  to 
multilateral financial assistance programmes which – while replacing the local fiscal authority 
as  the  ultimate  source  of  capital  support  –  placed  banks  under  an  enhanced  regime  of 
supervisory scrutiny and imposed various forms of regulatory conditionality. 
This situation led to two types of innovation in the governance of ELA interventions: first, the 
duration  of  assistance  lengthened;  second,  the  scope  of  assistance  broadened  from 
individual  institutions  to  entire  banking  systems.  For  example,  in  Greece  last  year  the 
combined lending of the ECB and the Bank of Greece to Greek banks reached 71% of the 
country’s GDP. Most of this liquidity was provided via banks’ recourse to ELA. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  This evolution  was proportional to the severity of the circumstances and has proven to be 
effective. 
In  the  case  of  Greece,  provision  of  ELA  was  certainly  necessary  in  order  to  ensure  the 
functioning of the Greek banking system and the continuation of lending to businesses and 
households.  A  discontinuation  of  ELA  would  have  thrown  all  Greek  banks  into  default  and 
would have forced the country to leave the currency union, a decision the Eurosystem could 
not  have  taken  without  violating  the  Treaty.  ELA  provision  was  proportional  as  it  was 
disciplined  and  justified  by  rules.  We  granted  ELA  for  as  long  as  the  Governing  Council 
judged that prospects were favourable for a positive outcome to the negotiations between the 
government of Greece and the European institutions. Its expansion was suspended when it 
appeared that these conditions were no longer confirmed (Draghi, 2015). 
Institutional challenges 
The incomplete institutional construct of the euro area, especially the lack of an integrated 
banking  system,  has  at  times  severely  complicated  the  management  of  the  crisis. 
Fortunately, a great deal of progress has been made in this area in recent years, but it is 
imperative that the banking union be completed, as well as the integration of the euro area 
banking sector. 
With the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) now fully operational, we have a system of 
supervision  that  is  less  liable  to  capture  or  forbearance.  And  the  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)  provides  a  harmonised  and  predictable  framework for  private 
sector risk-sharing across the EU. 
Financial  stability  considerations  are  a  key  driver  behind  the  new  regulatory  landscape. 
Indeed, there are many instances where the framework acknowledges the need to strive for 
exceptional  solutions  in  order  to  achieve  the  overall  goal  of  preserving  the  stability  of  the 
entire  financial  system,  which  is  a  precondition  –  from  the  ECB’s  perspective  –  for 
accomplishing its primary objective of price stability. For example, there is a financial stability 
exception  from  the  general  rule  that  a  bank  which  needs  extraordinary  public  financial 
support  is  deemed  to  be  failing  or  likely  to  fail  and  thus  has  to  be  either  resolved  or 
liquidated.  The  EU  resolution  framework  explicitly  clarifies  that  the  need  for  emergency 
liquidity assistance from a central bank, per se, does not necessarily trigger the resolution of 
a bank, and it acknowledges the role of central banks in providing liquidity to the financial 
system in times of stress.2 
Euro area governments are also on the way to establishing a European public backstop for 
the Single Resolution Mechanism. But significant further steps are still required to complete 
banking union, including the establishment of a common deposit guarantee scheme. 
A  complete  banking  union  would  have  beneficial  macroeconomic  effects,  but  it  would  also 
have positive implications for the central bank’s function as lender of last resort. 
Conclusion 
Please allow me to conclude. 
                                                
2  See recitals 2 and 41 and Article 32(4)(d) of the BRRD. More specifically, access to liquidity facilities including 
ELA  by  central banks  does  not  constitute  “state  aid”,  which  is prohibited  by  our  state  aid  framework,  if  the 
following cumulative conditions are met: the credit institution is temporarily illiquid but solvent at the moment of 
the liquidity provision, which occurs in exceptional circumstances and is not part of a larger aid package; the 
facility  is  fully  secured  by  collateral  to  which  appropriate  haircuts  are  applied,  in  function  of  its  quality  and 
market value; the central bank charges a penal interest rate to the beneficiary; the measure is taken at the 
central bank’s own initiative, and in particular is not backed by any counter-guarantee of the state. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The severity and nature of the financial crisis resulted in an extraordinary response by central 
banks; one which was very much in the spirit of Thornton and Bagehot. 
In  a  complex  and  incomplete  institutional  environment,  the  Eurosystem  has  been  able  to 
adapt  its  set  of  interventions  by  using  all  the  flexibility  allowed  by  our  instruments  in  a 
principled way to address both systemic and idiosyncratic liquidity problems. We will continue 
to do so. And we will be supported to a greater extent than in the past by a more complete 
and consistent institutional framework. 
References 
Bagehot, W., Lombard Street: a description of the money market, London: H. S. King, 1873. 
Draghi, M., Speech at the Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Milan, 5 November 2015. 
Thornton,  H.,  An  enquiry  into  the  nature  and  effects  of  the  paper  credit  of  Great  Britain 
(1802). 
Tucker,  P.,  “The  lender  of  last  resort  and  modern  central  banking:  principles  and 
reconstruction”, contribution to Re-thinking the lender of last resort, BIS Papers, No 79, 2014. 
 
 7 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 