  Sharon Donnery: Macroprudential policy – action in the face of uncertainty 
Address by Ms Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at 
the  Dublin  Economic  Workshop  Annual  Economic  Policy  Conference,  Dublin, 
23 September 2016. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Niamh  Hallissey,  Yvonne  McCarthy  and  Mícheál  O’Keeffe  for  their 
contributions to this speech. 
Introduction 
Good  evening.  I  am  delighted  to  address  the  Dublin  Economic  Workshop.  This  annual 
conference has always been a key policy forum and the subject of this year’s conference – 
“Policymaking for an Uncertain Future” is timely.  
The  recent  vote  by  the  UK  to  leave  the  European  Union  has  led  to  heightened  risks  and 
uncertainties for the euro area and the Union more generally.  
Ireland  is  the  most  exposed  European  economy  to  the  potential  effects  of  Brexit.  This  is 
because the UK accounts for a large percentage of Irish imports and exports.i Labour flows 
and  cross-border  investment  linkages  are  considerable.  In  addition,  certain  domestic  Irish 
banks have large exposures to the UK.  
There  is  considerable  uncertainty  regarding  the  specific  political  and  institutional  construct 
which  may  emerge  once  the  UK  decides  to  trigger  Article  50  of the Treaty.  This makes  it 
challenging to estimate the impact on the Irish economy. This impact will be determined by a 
wide range of factors including: the conditions of the UK’s exit – in particular its degree of 
access to the Single Market; the resulting effect on the UK and the extent to which this is 
transmitted to Irish firms and institutions and the wide range of potential regulatory outcomes 
resulting from the UK’s new arrangements.  
Sentiment and hard data releases point to a mixed picture so far but the short and medium 
term impact on Ireland is likely to be negative. In this context, the Bank recently published 
forecasts that revised down projected Irish GDP growth by 0.2 per cent in 2016 and 0.6 per 
cent  in  2017.ii  However,  quantifying  the  potential  impact  of  such  a  protracted  period  of 
uncertainty and risk aversion with much precision is difficult. 
Small open economies like Ireland are especially vulnerable to such shocks, particularly in 
the context of the legacies of the crisis. As highlighted in the recent Macro-Financial Review, 
household debt remains high, standing at 150 billion euro. This is equivalent to 160 per cent 
of disposable income. Such high levels of debt leave households vulnerable, particularly to 
adverse movements in income or interest rates. iii 
The SME sector also remains highly indebted. This can act as a drag on economic activity, 
given  it  can  restrict  the  ability  of  firms  to  borrow  and  invest.  It  also  leaves  the  sector 
vulnerable to changes in financing conditions.  
In  the  financial  sector,  despite  returning  to  profitability, levels  of  provisions  and  non-
performing loans in domestic banks remain elevated.iv 
Uncertainty  is  a  challenge  faced  not  only  by  policy  makers,  but  it  is  the  backdrop  against 
which  many  decisions  are  made.  Frank  Knight  in  his  seminal  1921  book  formalised  a 
distinction  between  the  concept  of  risk  and  uncertainty  which  has  found  common  use  in 
mainstream  economics.  Risk,  he  suggested,  refers  to  situations  where  the  distribution  of 
future outcomes is known, and hence measurable. Uncertainty, by contrast and by definition, 
is “not susceptible to measurement” and hence cannot be predicted.v  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
This  distinction  captures  many  of  the  challenges  we  policymakers  face  today. For  some 
risks, we can measure with some degree of confidence, their likelihood of occurrence and 
design  policies  accordingly.  Some  outcomes  however  are  unknown.  Policymaking  under 
such uncertainty is more challenging.  
The Central Bank of Ireland has an explicit mandate to protect financial stability and, as the 
designated  macroprudential  authority,  has  a  range  of  tools  to  target  emerging  risks  in  the 
domestic financial system.vi In this context, this evening, I would like to take this opportunity 
to  speak  about  the  Bank’s  framework  for  macroprudential  policymaking  for  this  uncertain 
future. 
The Bank’s policy framework follows four key steps in the policy cycle. vii First, I will discuss 
the assessment and identification of systemic risk. Second, I will elaborate on how we select 
and  calibrate  our  instruments.  Third,  I  will  discuss  policy  implementation  and  issues 
surrounding  inaction  bias,  decision-making  under  uncertainty,  and  communication.  The 
fourth  and  final  critical  step  in  the  cycle  is  policy  evaluation.  I  will  conclude  by  giving  you 
some  insights  into  our  ongoing  review  of  the  mortgage  measures  –  one  of  our  key 
macroprudential instruments.  
 Identifying and assessing systemic risk 
Macroprudential action is just one component of a wider set of macroeconomic and financial 
sector  policies.  The  underlying  rationale  for  macroprudential  policy  lies  in  the  divergence 
between financial and business cycles. Financial cycles have been shown to have different 
frequencies  and  amplifications  to  business  cycles.  Financial  cycles  can  be  self-reinforcing 
and can magnify fluctuations in the economy. They can lead to financial distress and severe 
economic dislocations, as we have seen.viii  
The  ultimate  objective  of  macroprudential  policy  is  to  prevent  and  mitigate  systemic  risk. 
Major disturbances to the financial system can disrupt the provision of financial services. This 
can have serious negative consequences for the real economy.  
There  are  several  externalities  which  can  give  rise  to  systemic  risk.  A  commonly  used 
classification groups these into three distinct types.ix  
First, externalities relating to so-called “strategic complementarities”. These cause a build-up 
of  vulnerabilities  during  the  upswing  phase  of  a  financial  cycle.  Sometimes,  because  of 
competitive  dynamics  in  the  market,  banks  for  example  adopt  similar  strategies  in  asset 
choice or liquidity risk (i.e. they have common exposures).x This can lead to self-reinforcing 
effects,  because  returns  increase,  in  the  short  term,  as  more  banks  follow  suit.  These 
dynamics can affect credit standards, loss recognition, and portfolio quality. It can also lead 
to additional asset price volatility.  
Such “herding behaviour” of both the domestic and international banks is well documented in 
the Nyberg Report into the Irish banking crisis.xi Herding behaviour by households can also 
contribute  to  systemic  risk  through  greater  risk  taking,  for  example  in  mortgage  markets. 
Therefore, even if systemic risks were not emerging in the financial sector, borrower-based 
measures may still be necessary. 
The second set of externalities relates to sell-offs during the downswing phase of a financial 
cycle. Fire sales, for example, can amplify financial distress due to loss spirals resulting from 
pro-cyclical asset price effects, margin or haircut spirals.xii This occurs because a decline in 
the  price  of  an  asset  leads  to  an  erosion  of  capital.  Self-reinforcing  feedback  effects  on 
leverage  can  force  banks  to  further  shed  assets  to  repay  debt  and  restore  equity.  Credit 
crunches can have a similar effect causing a deterioration in balance sheets and a drying up 
of financing.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Finally,  externalities  related  to  interconnectedness  can  result  in  the  propagation  of  shocks 
throughout  the  financial  system. Interconnectedness  can  arise  through  the  many  complex 
transactions and bilateral relationships between institutions. It can also result from feedback 
from the real economy.  
These externalities were clearly evident in Ireland before and during the crisis. Examination 
of  Ireland’s  experience  since  the  crisis  provides  ample  justification  for  the  introduction  of 
macroprudential measures.xiii  
However, in order for macroprudential policy to limit such systemic risks, policymakers must 
first be able to identify and assess them. To do this we must be able measure these risks, 
both in the cross-sectional dimension (measuring the distribution of risk at a point in time) 
and  the  temporal  dimension  (measuring  the  evolution  of  aggregate  risk).  This  is  a 
challenging pursuit for a number of reasons, not least because systemic events are, by their 
very nature, rare tail events.  
Furthermore,  regardless  of  all  the  indicators  we  have  to  identify,  measure  and  assess 
systemic  risk,  in  the  future,  risks  may  arise  from  very  different  sources  that  are  not  fully 
captured by existing indicators.  
The  constant  evolution  and  innovation  of  the  financial  system,  which  has  changed 
fundamentally over recent decades, further complicates the task of measuring systemic risk. 
Thus, macroprudential policymakers face Knightian uncertainty under which it is impossible 
to predict what some outcomes will be.xiv  
Against  this  backdrop,  it  is  vital  that  research  on  systemic  risk  indicators  continues  and 
evolves  with  financial  sector  developments.  Enhancements  are  continually  being  made  to 
systemic  risk  assessments.  For  example,  on-going  developments  in  measuring  the  key 
properties of financial cycles, such as their length and persistence, will enhance the ability of 
policymakers to implement counter-cyclical macroprudential policy.xv  
Much progress has already been made and the Bank makes full use of the data and models 
available  to  measure  systemic  risk  emerging from  various  sectors  of  the  financial  system, 
also drawing on developments at a European level. The European Systemic Risk Board, for 
example,  publishes  quarterly  risk  assessments  on  European  developments  and  the  ECB 
monitors systemic risk and communicates on this via its Financial Stability Review.xvi  
To  enhance  the  Bank’s  assessment  and  identification  of  systemic  risks,  last  week  we 
announced a new stand-alone directorate for financial stability. In line with our mandate and 
Strategic  Plan,  this  will  ensure  enhanced  analysis  and  coverage  of  insurance,  shadow 
banking,  funds  and  credit  union  sector  from  a  financial  stability  perspective.  This  will 
complement our already comprehensive body of work in relation to the banking sector. 
 Instrument selection and calibration 
Following identification and assessment of the risks, the second step in our macroprudential 
policy framework is to select and calibrate the appropriate instruments.xvii  
The Bank’s toolkit has been under constant development since the crisis and includes inter 
alia a range of capital buffers as well as borrower-based measures. These can be used to 
mitigate both structural risks – emerging from segments of the financial system, and cyclical 
risks  –  emanating 
financial  cycle.  These  can  be  combined  with  other 
microprudential  instruments  which  target  bank  specific  exposures  or  maturity  mismatches, 
for  example.xviii  The  most  appropriate  combination  of  instruments  will  depend  on  our 
assessment of the emerging risks. 
from 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
The macroprudential assessment is multifaceted. Financial stability does not have an explicit 
target  like  is  often  the  case  in  monetary  policy.  Therefore  the  different  instruments  at  our 
disposal have different objectives and different transmission channels.  
For example, the Other Systemically Important Institutions (O-SII) buffer is a capital buffer. 
Its aim is to reduce the potential impact of the failure of a systemically important financial 
institution on the domestic economy.  
Last year, two Irish banks were identified as domestically systemically important due to their 
particular role in the Irish financial sector, domestic economy and to the payments system. In 
this context, the Bank decided that a capital surcharge rate of 1.5 per cent of their (CET1) 
capital be applied to these institutions.xix  
The Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) is a different type of buffer and one of a range of 
instruments we can use to mitigate and prevent excessive credit growth. Via the CCyB we 
can require banks to set aside additional capital during periods of strong credit growth and 
growing  systemic  risk.  This  buffer  can  then  be  released  during  economic  downturns  to 
prevent undue restrictions in the supply of credit to the private sector. The buffer therefore 
aims  to  promote  banking  sector  resilience  by  protecting  it  against  potential  losses  and 
ensuring a stable provision of credit over the economic cycle.xx In view of current conditions 
in the credit market, the Bank decided last year to set this buffer to zero. 
These  buffers  can  be  combined  with  other  capital  instruments  which  can  target  sectoral 
exposures should we deem them excessive.  
The macroprudential toolkit is broad and not solely focussed on capital. A leverage ratio will 
also come into force in 2018 and will be further developed as a macroprudential tool. This will 
prevent  against  excessive  leverage  building  up  in  the  banking  sector  during  the  upswing 
phase  of  a  financial  cycle.  It  will  also  stop  destabilising  deleveraging  during  a  downturn. 
Liquidity charges can also be designed to target the resilience of funding bases to outflows in 
stressed periods.  
Whilst the intermediate impacts of the instruments may differ, they all aim to enhance the 
resilience of banks, and hence protect the system as a whole.  
In addition to targeting the resilience of banks, the Central Bank also has powers available, 
such as those that affect the conditions under which mortgage lending occurs. The aim of 
these is to protect borrowers and banks against adverse movements in credit and property 
prices, and other economic shocks. I will return to the mortgage regulations later. 
Finally,  under  so-called  Pillar  2,  other  micro-prudential  instruments  can  also  be  used  to 
ensure  a  holistic  approach  to  mitigating  systemic  risk.  Therefore  close  collaboration  is 
needed between those assessing systemic risk, and those supervising individual institutions. 
 Implementation and communication 
Despite the rich set of indicators, instruments and sophisticated methods to calibrate them, 
the  third  step  of  our  macroprudential  policy  framework  –  implementation  –  is  particularly 
challenging  for  the  Bank.  This  is  because  although  the  costs  of  the  measures  can  be 
immediately felt and quantifiable to the banks or borrowers to which they apply, the benefits 
are often unobservable.  
For  example,  the  benefit  of  the  reduced  probability  of  a  crisis  or  increased  stability  in  the 
financial  system  is  difficult  to  measure,  although  some  analytical  frameworks  have  been 
developed to help assess policy trade-offs.xxi This is also because uncertainty surrounds the 
indicators which are used to identify the risks.  
Take the countercyclical capital buffer I mentioned. If credit supply increases excessively, our 
capital charges will pose a direct cost on the banks. However, this ensures the bank holds 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
extra CET1 capital in upswing of the financial cycle, and provides a cushion when the cycle 
turns.  
Similarly, the mortgage regulations impact individuals’ ability to access credit and purchase 
houses. As one of the public submissions to the review of the mortgage regulations stated – 
“I don’t want a larger mortgage, I want a cheaper house”.  
This is a perfectly reasonable wish. However prices are determined by a complex interaction 
of supply and demand side factors and the instruments at our disposal can only do so much. 
We don’t aim to target house prices, although an impact on prices can be a by-product of the 
measures.  
Others  argue  for  caution  in  using  macroprudential  instruments,  given  the  associated 
uncertainty  about  their  impact  and  the  changing  macro-financial  environment.  However, 
there  is  a  danger  that  such  thinking  can  also  lead  to  inaction  bias  on  the  part  of 
policymakers. 
In  theory,  a  rules-based  approach,  which  would  automatically  trigger  action  if  a  set  of 
indicators is breached, would mitigate the risk of inaction bias.xxii However, some degree of 
judgement  from  policymakers  is  needed  to  calibrate  them  efficiently,  and  once  they  are 
implemented, to respond quickly to evolving risks.xxiii Thus, in practice, it is recognised that 
some judgment is needed given individual indicators and thresholds cannot fully capture the 
emerging risks.  
Our  policy  framework  is  therefore  designed  so  we  operate  under  a  system  of  “guided 
discretion”.  For  example,  Member  States  in  the  European  Union  are  required  to  use  a 
standardised benchmark  to calculate the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  rate. This  acts  as  a 
common guide to designated authorities across jurisdictions. Similarly, the O-SII buffer has a 
cap of 2% of Risk Weighted Assets, to guide our decisions.  
Recent  work  by  staff  at  the  Bank  of  England  considers  whether  a  cautious  stance  to 
macroprudential policy is justified when faced with Knightian uncertainty. It finds that this is 
not  the  case.  A  macroprudential  policy  targeting  resilience  of  the  financial  system  favours 
actions  that  avoid  large  losses  across  scenarios,  regardless  of  how  likely  these  scenarios 
are.  Rather,  their  analysis  suggests  this  should  lead  to  more  active  policy  in  the  face  of 
uncertainty.xxiv 
Experience of the recent crisis has illustrated starkly the cost of inaction and policymakers 
around  the  world  have  thus  embraced  the  need  for  macroprudential  instruments.  In  the 
European Union, sixteen Member States now have some form of loan-to-value and / or debt-
service-to-income or loan-to-income measures in place. Learning from the recent past, the 
Bank has also been proactive in using these tools. 
Communication  is  also  a  central  element  of  implementation.  We  are  committed  to 
transparency  around  all  the  measures  we  implement.  Bank  staff  actively  publish  insights 
from our analysis of the risks in our biannual Macro-Financial Review, Research Technical 
Papers and other publications. With regard to the mortgage regulations, the Bank published 
an  Economic  Letter  in  July  that  presented  insights  on  new  mortgage  lending  in  2015, 
following the introduction of the regulations.xxv  
Furthermore,  the  Bank  will  publish  the  submissions  to  its  public  call  for  evidence  on  the 
impact of the measures at the time of the publication of the review in November. This will be 
accompanied by a feedback statement covering the key issues raised. Such moves should 
help  to  improve  dialogue  on  the  impact  of  the  rules  including  the  distinction  between  the 
operation of the rules and wider issues, for example relating to the supply of housing. In a 
further  bid  to  foster  greater  understanding  of  our  decisions,  we  also  intend  to  publish  in 
October  the  first  account  of  the  meeting  of  the  internal  Macroprudential  Measures 
Committee, where these issues are discussed.  
*** 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Macroprudential policy evaluation  
Evidence-based policymaking is a central principle of the Bank’s work. Given the uncertainty 
about  the  future  evolution  of  the  financial  system  and  of  the  precise  impact  of 
macroprudential instruments, it is important that all the measures be reviewed on a regular 
basis.  The  final  step  in  our  macroprudential  policy  framework  –  namely  evaluation  –  is 
therefore critical. 
The countercyclical capital buffer is reviewed on a quarterly basis, while the O-SII buffer and 
mortgage regulations are reviewed annually. However these reviews should not be seen as 
an indication that the Bank intends to make a change to the measures.  
The first review of the mortgage regulations will be published in November. This will examine 
the effectiveness of the measures against their stated objectives and discuss potential side 
effects.  
Let me briefly reiterate that the objective of the measures is to enhance the resilience of both 
borrowers and the banking sector. As I have stated previously, the mortgage regulations are 
designed to be a permanent feature of the Irish system. 
The evidence threshold to justify a material loosening or tightening of the rules is significant 
for two reasons. First, stable rules are valuable for both households and mortgage lenders in 
eliminating avoidable uncertainty about the regulatory regime. Second, the noisy and volatile 
nature of macro-financial data means that it would be unwise to seek to adjust the rules in 
response to minor and temporary fluctuations in the state of the financial cycle: such a fine-
tuning  approach  could  actually  aggravate  financial  instability  if  revisions  proved  to  be 
unwarranted or badly timed.  
There has been much public focus of late on the ongoing review, so I would like to take a few 
moments now to focus specifically on this.  
A  body  of  empirical  work  is  underway  to  inform  this  and  future  reviews.  This  includes 
analysis  covering  household  resilience  and  borrower  types,  banking  resilience  and  bank 
lending  practices,  and  house  price  and  credit  dynamics.  In  addition  we  are  examining  the 
impact  on  the  rental  market,  housing  supply  and  unsecured  lending. The  review  is  also 
informed  by  recent  international  evidence  and  by  public  submissions  on  the  impact  of  the 
regulations.  
The call for public submissions closed on 31 August. The Bank received fifty submissions in 
total. These  came from a  wide  range  of  individuals,  industry  experts,  and  other  interested 
parties and are currently being analysed. A number of submissions highlighted the need to 
improve awareness on the calibration of the measures and on the availability of allowances 
under the proportionate cap system.  
Early insights which were published in the July Economic Letter capture a period when banks 
and borrowers were transitioning to the new regulatory environment. xxvi However, a number 
of key points emerged over this period. 
As mentioned, an impact on prices can be a by-product of the measures. In this context we 
have  seen  a  moderation  in  Dublin  house  price  increases  since  end-2014,  although  house 
price growth remains strong in commuter counties and some other cities.  
The latest data on house purchase prices for first-time buyers nationally suggests the median 
house price was €210,000 in 2015.xxvii Under our rules, assuming use was not made of the 
available exemptions, this would imply a minimum deposit requirement of 10 per cent of the 
purchase price.  
For first-time buyers in Dublin, the median purchase price over the period was €270,000; the 
deposit requirement in this case is 11.9 per cent.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
These requirements are broadly in line with those observed in the market for first time buyers 
in  the  period  preceding  the  introduction  of  the  regulations,  as  financial  institutions  had 
already adjusted their lending standards to more prudent levels after the financial crisis.  
Second, price expectations have also moderated following the introduction of the measures  
–  although  survey  participants  continue  to  expect  house  prices  to  rise  over  the  short  to 
medium term. Median price expectations have moderated, for both the national and Dublin 
markets. The mortgage regulations are also reported as influencing these expectations. 
Through  our  review,  we  also  noted  a  number  of  differences  in  the  characteristics  of 
borrowers in the data. Under the regulations, a proportion of lending is allowed to take place 
in excess of the loan-to-value and loan-to-income limits.xxviii  
Among  first-time  buyers,  borrowers  with  an  allowance  for  the  loan-to-value  ratio  had,  on 
average, a higher income relative to borrowers without an allowance. Couples and borrowers 
in Dublin also had a higher share of this allowance.  
With regard to the loan-to-income ratio, borrowers with an allowance on average had a lower 
income and were slightly younger. There was also a higher share of single borrowers with a 
loan-to-income allowance. These aspects give us a greater understanding of the effect of the 
regulations  and  of  how,  and  to  what  extent  the  allowances  have  been  used.  This  also 
suggests initial fears regarding the use of the allowances may be unfounded. 
As new data and insights on lending developments and the use of allowances to exceed the 
parameters  of the  rules become  available,  these  will  be  released  on  a  periodic  basis.  For 
example, another Economic Letter on lending in the first half of 2016 will be published in a 
matter of weeks. Similarly, the forthcoming Quarterly Bulletin will include an article entitled 
“Rental markets, savings and the accumulation of mortgage down-payments” which will give 
further insights into these dynamics.  
 Conclusion 
In  the  years  ahead,  Knightian  uncertainty  will  remain  a  central  feature  of  the  backdrop 
against which policy makers must make difficult decisions. With regard to macroprudential 
policy, we must be prepared to take action in the face of such uncertainty. 
Learning  from  the  crisis,  the  Bank  has  taken  clear  and  decisive  action  through  the 
introduction of the mortgage measures and other macroprudential instruments. These were 
implemented in the interests of safeguarding financial stability and protecting the system as a 
whole. We are still early in the life of the mortgage measures which have a medium term 
focus.  It  would  be  unwise  to  seek  to  adjust the  rules  in  response  to minor  and  temporary 
fluctuations in the state of the financial cycle. Therefore, the evidence threshold to justify a 
material loosening or tightening of the rules is significant.  
It is important that we strive to continue to enhance our knowledge on economic and financial 
developments, on their potential impact under various scenarios and on our frameworks for 
assessing, calibrating, and implementing macroprudential policies. I hope that the work of the 
Central Bank of Ireland can contribute to developments in this field.  
Thank you. 
                                                
i  This amounts to 14% of Irish goods and 20% of Irish services exports, and about a quarter of Irish goods and 
around 10% of services imports.  
ii  See the Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin Q3, July 2016, available here 
iii  As of end-year 2015, publicly available data shows the total balance of PDH loans in negative equity, for AIB, 
Bank of Ireland and Permanent TSB, represents 23.5 per cent of lending. For BTLs, the share of total loan 
balances in negative equity was 41.0 per cent at end of year 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
                                                                                                                                                   
iv  See  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  “Macro-Financial  Review  2016:1”,  available  here.  Also  see  the  recent 
International Monetary Fund, “Financial System Stability Assessment – Ireland”, IMF Country Report 26/258, 
July 2016, available here. 
v  Knight, Frank (1921, 1964 p232), “Risk, Uncertainty and Profit”, New York: Sentry Press. 
vi  See “A Macroprudential Policy Framework for Ireland”, Central Bank of Ireland, 2014, available here. 
vii  This  follows  the  standard  European  framework  for  macroprudential  policy  –  see  European  Systemic  Risk 
Board (2014), “Flagship Report on Macro-Prudential Policy in the Banking Sector “March 2014. 
viii  See Borio, Claudio (2012), “The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt?”, BIS Working 
Papers No 395, December 2012. 
ix  See  De  Nicolò,  Gianni,  Favara,  Giovanni,  and  Lev,  Ratnovski  (2012),  “Externalities  and  macroprudential 
policy”,  IMF  Staff  Discussion  Note,  June  7,  2012  (SDN/12/05),  International  Monetary  Fund,  for  a  full 
discussion. An overview is also discussed in Claessens, Stijn (2014), “An Overview of Macroprudential Policy 
Tools”, IMF Working Paper, WP/14/24. 
x  See Silva, André, (2016), “Strategic complementarity in banks’ funding liquidity choices and financial stability”, 
European Systemic Risk Board Working Paper Series, No 19/ July 2016. 
xi  See  “Misjudging  Risk:  Causes  of  the  Systemic  Banking  Crisis  in  Ireland”,  Report  of  the  Commission  of 
Investigation into the banking sector in Ireland, March 2011. 
xii  See  Brunnermeier,  Markus,  Crockett,  Andrew,  Goodhart,  Charles,  Persaud,  Avinash  D.,  and  Shin,  Hyun 
Song, (2009), “The Fundamental principles of Financial Regulation”, Genera Reports on the World Economy 
11, June 2009 International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies. 
xiii  See The Irish Banking Crisis Regulatory and Financial Stability Policy 2003–2008, A Report to the Minister for 
Finance  by  the  Governor  of the  Central  Bank,  and  Regling,  Klaus and Watson,  Max  (2010),  A  Preliminary 
Report on The Sources of Ireland’s Banking Crisis for a full description of the origins of the Irish crisis. 
xiv  Agur, Itai and Sharma, Sunil (2013), “Rules, Discretion, and Macro-Prudential Policy”, IMF WP/13/65. 
xv  See  for  example,  Rünstler,  Gerhard  and  Vlekke,  Marente  (2016),  “Business,  housing  and  credit  cycles”, 
Working Paper Series, No 1915, ECB, June. 
xvi  The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  is  responsible  for  oversight  of  the  European  financial  system  and  for 
preventing  and  mitigating  systemic  risk.  Constâncio,  Vitor  (2016)  “Principles  of  Macroprudential  Policy” 
provides  a  useful  recent  discussion  of  the  indicators  available  at  the  ECB  to  measure  systemic  risk.  The 
European  Commission  has  also  launched  a  review  of  the  EU  macroprudential  framework.  Details  are 
available here 
xvii  These instruments are derived from both European and national legislation. 
xviii  See European Systemic Risk Board (2014), “The ESRB Handbook on operationalizing macroprudential policy 
in the banking sector”, 3 March (ESRB/2014). 
xix  This requirement will be phased in over the period 1 July 2019 to 1 July 2021. A decision on the scope for this 
year’s O-SII buffer will be taken later this year. 
xx  See “A Macroprudential Policy Framework for Ireland”, Central Bank of Ireland, 2014, available here for a full 
list of instruments and their intermediate objectives. A full description of the countercyclical capital buffer is 
explained  in  Creedon,  Con  and  O’Brien,  Eoin,  “Indicators  For  Setting  the  Countercyclical  Capital  Buffer” 
Economic  Letter,  Vol.  2016  No.  2  available  here.  Also  see  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  Countercyclical  capital 
buffer rate announcement of 1 July 2016, available here 
xxi  Arregui, Nicolas, Benes, Jaromír, Krznar, Ivo, Mitra, Srobona, and Andre Oliveira Santos (2013),“Evaluating 
the Net Benefits of Macroprudential Policy: A Cookbook”, IMF/13/167. 
xxii  Ibid. 
xxiii  See IMF (2013), “Key Aspects of Macroprudential Policy”, International Monetary Fund, June 2013.  
xxiv  Saleem Bahaj and Foulis, Angus, (2016), “Macroprudential policy under uncertainty”, Bank of England Staff 
Working Paper No. 584. 
xxv  Keenan, Enda, Kinghan, Christina, McCarthy, Yvonne and Conor O’Toole,(2016). “Macroprudential Measures 
and Irish Mortgage Lending: A Review of Recent Data”, Economic Letter Series, Vol. 2016, No.3. 
xxvi  Ibid. 
xxvii Figures are from a loan-level dataset held at the Central Bank of Ireland. 
xxviii See footnote xxvii. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
