   Yves Mersch: Growth potential and competition – what lies ahead for 
card payments? 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Bank  of  France  Conference  on  “Card  payments  in  Europe  –  latest  trends  and 
challenges”, Paris, 18 January 2016. 
 Introduction 
Besides  cash,  cards  are  the  most  widely  used  payment  instrument  in  Europe.  As  regards 
electronic payment instruments as a whole, card payments have been on a strong and steady 
growth  path,  with  the  number  of  card  transactions  in  the  European  Union  having  almost 
quadrupled in the last 15 years. 
In France, card usage is well above the EU average. Areas with an even stronger card usage 
(and,  correspondingly,  a  lower  share  of  cash  payments)  are  the  Nordic  countries,  the 
Netherlands and Great Britain. In those countries, a preference for cards over cash is often 
highly visible in shops, with merchants often actively encouraging card usage by means of 
signs or other communication. 
While cards are the predominant electronic payment instrument, it should be noted that cards 
–  like  cash  –  were  initially  designed  for  face-to-face  payment  situations.  Given  the  strong 
growth in e-commerce, the necessity of finding appropriate and innovative solutions for new 
payment situations, i.e. internet or mobile payments, has become apparent. The incidence of 
fraud related to purchases made over the internet, which involve “card-not-present” (CNP) 
transactions, has been a source of concern and needs to be addressed by appropriate security 
measures – I will discuss this in more detail later. In general, innovative payment solutions, 
regardless of whether they are based on cards or other payment instruments, will have an 
impact  on  payment  behaviour  and  the  usage  of  cards  and  other  traditional  payment 
instruments in the years to come. 
Nevertheless, there is no doubt that card payments are here to stay. I still see a strong growth 
potential for card transactions, in particular in those countries in central and south-eastern 
Europe where people largely rely on cash. Yet, even a “card-minded” country such as France 
can realise further efficiency gains in the area of retail payments by increasing its number of 
card payments. 
Migration to the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) for credit transfers and direct debits was 
a major milestone in European retail payments integration. SEPA for cards is the next logical 
step in that process. To this day, consumers and merchants, but also banks and other payment 
service  providers,  still  encounter  obstacles  or  experience  geographical  differences  when 
making and accepting card payments. We are not yet there with the SEPA for cards, i.e. a 
harmonised, competitive and innovative European card payments area. 
Without wanting to pre-empt the discussions at this conference, I would first like to highlight 
three  areas  that  are  critical  to  the  realisation  of  the  SEPA  for  cards:  standardisation, 
interoperability and security. Secondly, I would like to touch upon the issue of innovation and 
how it will impact cards. 
SEPA for cards: standardisation, interoperability and security 
In 2015 the Euro Retail Payments Board (ERPB) took stock of the market initiatives which are 
developing  technical  standards  for  payment  cards  in  the  EU,  basing  its  conclusions  on  a 
detailed  report  by  the  Cards  Stakeholders  Group.  As  a  result,  the  ERPB  issued  some 
recommendations on the implementation of the requirements developed in the SEPA Cards 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Standardisation Volume (SCS Volume) in respect of different domains (terminal-to-acquirer, 
card-to-terminal,  terminal  security).  Progress  with  these  recommendations  will  be  further 
monitored. 
Interoperability concerns both the technical compatibility of cards and card terminals (one of 
the domains for which the ERPB has issued recommendations) and cards processing. Given 
the presence of multiple card schemes, multiple banks and multiple processors in Europe, the 
Eurosystem has repeatedly called for the development of a framework for the processing of 
card payments as well as an interoperability framework for SEPA-compliant card transaction 
processing. The technical interoperability of card processors and card schemes – based on 
European  standards  –  is  a key  issue  when  it  comes  to realising  the  SEPA for  cards.  And 
technical interoperability is required by the EU’s Regulation on interchange fees for card-based 
payment transactions (IFR), which will apply as of June 2016. Schemes and processors that 
want to survive in the SEPA for cards will have to become “pan-European” by moving towards 
interoperability based on European standards. 
As regards the third critical area, security and the fight against fraud related to card payments 
in SEPA countries have been high on the agenda of the Eurosystem. The work of France’s 
Observatoire de la sécurité des cartes de paiement (Observatory for Payment Card Security) 
has  been  a  benchmark in  that  area.  Furthermore, since  2012,  the  ECB  has  published the 
Eurosystem’s findings on card fraud in an annual report. 
What we have observed is that two-thirds of all fraud losses on cards issued within SEPA 
countries is related to CNP transactions. This fraud involves card payments for purchases 
made  via  the  internet,  the  phone  network  or  by  email.  Hence, the  adoption  of  appropriate 
mitigation  measures,  such  as  the  implementation  of  strong  customer  authentication,  is 
indispensable to avoid a further rise in CNP fraud in the Single Euro Payments Area. The 
Guidelines  on  the  security  of  internet  payments  of  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA) 
published  in  December  2014  impose  a  minimum  set  of  security  requirements  to  be 
implemented by payment service providers. These guidelines are themselves based on the 
recommendations issued by the European Forum on the Security of Retail Payments (SecuRe 
Pay). Accordingly, I encourage all participants – not only payment service providers but also 
e-merchants – to keep up their efforts to improve the protection of internet payments and swiftly 
adopt strong authentication solutions. The drawing up of Level 2 regulatory technical standards 
and guidelines by the EBA, in close cooperation with the ECB, will provide the market with 
further guidance on security issues related to internet payments. 
Impact of innovation on cards 
As I have said in the introduction, the emergence of innovative payment solutions will impact 
payment behaviour and the usage of cards and other traditional payment instruments in the 
years  to  come.  Innovative  card-based  solutions  for  contactless  proximity  payments,  e-
commerce wallets or mobile person-to-person payments have the potential to further boost 
card usage by replacing cash payments, particularly vis-à-vis person-to-person payments and 
small purchases. At the same time, the card industry will be challenged by strong competition 
from innovative payment solutions based on payment instruments other than cards. 
One  of  these  challenges  is  instant  payments.  The  ERPB  has  decided  that  the  European 
Payments Council should develop an instant payment scheme for euro payments that is based 
on the SEPA credit transfer. 
With regard to e-commerce, another challenge arises from the emergence of new payment 
service providers. Payment initiation services and online payment integrators are expected to 
enter the payments chain with their service offerings. 
Then there is the challenge of distributed ledger technologies. These technologies, of which 
Blockchain is probably the best-known example, can potentially have a profound impact on the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
whole  financial  “ecosystem”.  Their  adoption  has  the  potential  to  disrupt  both  the  use  of 
“traditional” payment instruments and services and the payments processing industry. 
The  Eurosystem  welcomes  more  choice  for  consumers  and  businesses,  provided  that  the 
payment  solutions  offered  in  the  market  are  secure  and  efficient  and  that  both  new  and 
established  providers  play  by  the  same  rules.  The  revised  Directive  on  Payment  Services 
(PSD2) and the IFR have laid down the rules of the game and provide the required clarity. The 
EBA is now developing regulatory technical standards on separation of payment card schemes 
and  processing  entities  (under  the  IFR)  and  also  regulatory  technical  standards  on  strong 
customer authentication and secure communication (under the PSD2). I am sure that we will 
learn more about this during the course of this conference. 
Conclusion 
Please allow me to conclude. I am convinced that cards are here to stay. Moreover, there is 
still a huge growth potential for card transactions in the EU. To unleash this growth potential, 
the SEPA for cards has to be realised. A harmonised, competitive and innovative European 
card  payments  area  must  be  achieved  by  means  of  standardisation,  interoperability  and 
appropriate security measures. Card schemes and card processors that want to stay in the 
market have to become pan-European. 
At the same time, innovative payment solutions will pose a challenge to the cards industry. It 
will face competition from instant payments based on the SEPA credit transfer, from payment 
initiation  services  in  the  area  of  e-commerce  and  from  the  adoption  of  distributed  ledger 
technologies. This competition is welcome, provided the solutions offered in the market are 
secure and efficient and service providers play by the same rules. I am confident that the cards 
industry will find the right responses to these challenges – and to the benefit of users. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
