  Andreas Dombret: Current challenges facing central banks – The 
Bundesbank’s stance 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the AHK (Auslandsaussenkammer) World Conference, Berlin, 11 May 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dr Wansleben, 
Mr Machnig, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Before I begin, I would like to thank you for inviting me to come here and speak with you 
today. 
In  Germany,  foreign  trade  has  traditionally  been  a  cornerstone  of  its  economic  success. 
Chambers  of  Commerce  abroad  make  a  crucial  contribution  to  the  success  of  German 
enterprises in foreign markets. You could say that, today, I am visiting the power houses of 
the German economy, which is why I am so pleased to be here with you in Berlin. 
The  motto  of  this  event  is:  “Where  is  the  global  economy  heading?”  The  answer  to  this 
question will be put together like the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle from the various reports of the 
speakers at your conference, who come from all over the world. 
Within the space of the next 20 minutes, I will try to lay down the foundations for this jigsaw 
by giving you an overview of the global economic situation. I will also be elaborating on the 
consequences that this has for monetary policy and for banking supervision in the euro area. 
Economic activity 
2. 
The new year got off to a bumpy start for the global economy, with the economic slowdown 
in China dampening the New Year’s spirit right at the very beginning of the year. This was 
compounded by the sharp decline in oil prices at the turn of the year, which was perceived as 
having  an  increasingly  detrimental  impact  on  the  global  economy.  Furthermore,  some 
financial market players had doubts as to whether an ever more accommodative monetary 
policy  stance  can  really  solve  the  existing  problems.  This  explains  why  sentiment  on  the 
financial markets was also very nervous at the beginning of the year. 
The  situation  has,  by  and  large,  calmed  down  since  then,  however.  According  to  the 
International  Monetary  Fund,  the  global  economy  will  continue  to  recover,  albeit  at  a 
somewhat  slower  pace  than  at  the  beginning  of  the  year.  The  major  industrial  countries 
remain  on  a  moderate  growth  path,  even  though  growth  in  the  United  States  and  Japan 
slowed  down  somewhat  in  the  in  the  final  quarter  of  2015  and  the  first  quarter  of  2016. 
Nonetheless, the underlying trend is still pointing upwards and developments in the labour 
markets are not pointing to an economic slowdown either. 
In  the  case  of  the  emerging  market  economies  there  are  two  divergent  developments.  In 
some countries, growth is still robust, but not quite as strong as a few years ago. China, for 
instance, grew at an annual rate of 6.9% in 2015 and is expected to continue to grow by an 
annual average of around 6% up until 2020. China is, therefore, a long way off the double-
digit  growth  figures  that  it  had  recorded  in  the  past.  This,  however,  is  not  unusual,  as, 
typically, the catching-up process slows down as per capita income rises. 
The  situation  is  different  in  those  countries  which  are  heavily  dependent  on  commodity 
exports.  These  countries  are  suffering  from  the  still  very  low  oil  prices  –  some  of  these 
countries are on the verge of or in the midst of a recession. Last year, economic output in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Russia declined by 3.7%, for example, and by 3.8% in Brazil. In many of these countries, the 
boom  in  commodity  prices,  which  continued  up  until  2012,  masked  the  structural 
weaknesses in the economies concerned, which are now all the more apparent. 
Looking at the big picture, the IMF has revised its economic forecast for April down slightly. 
IMF economists are now expecting the global economy to grow by 3.2% this year, and to 
accelerate slightly to 3.5% next year. 
What does this mean for the euro area? 
Compared with other regions, the euro-area economy is likely to have made a pretty good 
start to the new year. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, the pace of growth in the first 
quarter  stood  at  +0.6%,  compared  with  +0.3%  in  the  final  quarter  of  2015.  Eurostat  did, 
however, present its first flash estimate just 30 days after the end of the quarter, and not after 
45 days as has been the case in the past. Thus, the new flash estimate is de facto based on 
“hard” data taken from just two months of the first quarter, making it more prone to revision 
than the previous estimate. And unlike many other “hard” indicators, the sentiment indicators 
are not showing a pick-up in the pace of growth. 
Owing to the weaker developments in other parts of the world, growth in the euro area was 
driven primarily by domestic demand of late, and less so by exports. The improved situation 
on  the  labour market  is likely  to  have  contributed  to  the  positive  development  in  domestic 
demand.  The  euro-area  unemployment  rate  stood  at  10.2%  in  March,  which  is  still  well 
above the pre-crisis level; this figure is, however, at its lowest level since August 2011. 
The current economic indicators predominantly suggest that the upward economic trend is 
set to continue, albeit at a somewhat slower pace than at the end of 2015. The ECB revised 
its  growth  forecast  down  slightly  in  March  owing,  first  and  foremost,  to  the  slowdown  in 
growth outside the euro area. It is still, however, projecting euro-area growth of 1.4% for this 
year. 
The inflation forecast was also revised downwards. This is, on the one hand, a reaction to 
the  somewhat  slower  pace  of  growth,  but,  above  all,  the  result  of  the  fact  that  oil  prices 
remain very low. 
The Eurosystem’s monetary policy 
3. 
The inflation rate is currently sitting slightly below zero, and ECB economists have forecast 
an annual average of 0.1% for 2016, 1.3% for 2017 and 1.6% for 2018. This means that the 
inflation  rate  is  only  very  gradually  approaching  the  level  defined  by  the  ECB  Governing 
Council as price stability – below, but close to, 2%. 
Therefore,  in  March,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  adopted  an  extensive  package  of 
measures. The move that gained the most public attention – at least in Germany – was the 
renewed  cut  in  the  ECB’s  policy  rates.  The  main  refinancing  rate  was  lowered  by  5 basis 
points and now stands at 0%, while the interest rate on deposits held with the Eurosystem 
was reduced by a further 10 basis points and is now –0.4%. 
In  addition,  beginning  in  June,  the  Eurosystem  will  be  providing  a  further  set  of  targeted 
longer-term refinancing operations through which banks can acquire liquidity for a period of 
four  years  at  extremely  favourable  conditions.  Moreover,  the  volume  of  monthly  bond 
purchases was raised from €60 billion to €80 billion. This total volume will now also include 
purchases of bonds issued by non-bank corporations, provided that these are investment-
grade  bonds  issued  in the  euro  area. It  is  expected,  however,  that  government  bonds  will 
continue to account for the majority of purchases. 
At the same time, the ECB Governing Council stated that it did not intend to raise its central 
bank rates for a relatively long period of time – not even once the asset purchase programme 
has come to an end. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Given  that  this  was  not  the  first  time  the  inflation  rate  forecast  needed  to  be  revised 
downwards, and also that domestic price pressures – measured using the core inflation rate 
–  have  been  very  restrained,  monetary  policy  intervention  was  required.  An  expansionary 
monetary  policy  stance  is  entirely  appropriate  for  the  euro  area  right  now,  even  though 
people will naturally have different views about individual measures. 
As many of you are no doubt aware, the Bundesbank has repeatedly stated that purchases 
of  euro-area  government  bonds  are  not  “just  another”  monetary  policy  instrument.  Central 
bank purchases of government bonds make for a dangerous combination of monetary and 
fiscal policy. The central banks are becoming the euro-area countries’ biggest creditors. For 
a significant share of sovereign debt, government financing costs have become decoupled 
from  capital  market  conditions.  If  governments  become  accustomed  to  the  favourable 
funding terms and don’t use this time to reduce their large accumulation of debt, this may 
later put pressure on the central banks to put off tightening the monetary reins until a later 
date for the sake of their country’s public finances. 
I am also aware of the fact that many savers are frustrated by the low interest rates. And of 
course, these concerns are perfectly understandable. Their safe investments are providing 
them with either very little or no return at the moment. If you factor the inflation rate into the 
equation, however, the situation does not seem quite so bad. At present, the inflation rate is 
so low that the real interest rate on savings deposits is above zero. This means it is currently 
still higher than it was in the 1970s. To take another example, between 2011 and 2014, the 
real interest rate was actually negative. 
Just  as  euro-area  monetary  policy  cannot  be  focused  on  the  requirements  of  individual 
countries, it is not its responsibility to guarantee savers a certain nominal rate of return either, 
especially since monetary policy is not the only reason why savers are hardly earning any 
interest. The low interest rates are also the result of weak growth in the euro area. And this is 
where policymakers come in. Through appropriate structural reforms and sound fiscal policy, 
it is their job to steer the economy down a path of sustainable growth. 
This  is  not  to  say  that  the  central  bank  doesn’t  care  about  the  plight  of  savers.  Quite  the 
opposite, in fact – monetary policymakers protect savings from devaluation through inflation, 
in part by deciding on an appropriate monetary policy stance while remaining independent. 
Over the long term, this is also in the best interests of savers. But we shouldn’t forget that 
citizens are not just savers. They are also taxpayers, workers and borrowers – and from this 
perspective, low interest rates are not always a bad thing. 
It  is  also  true,  however,  that  ultra-accommodative  monetary  policy  entails  risks  and  side-
effects, and these will continue to grow the longer money remains cheap. Therefore, the low-
interest-rate  policy  must  not  prevail  for  any  longer  than  is  absolutely  necessary  from  the 
perspective of price stability. 
There is a risk, for example, that politicians will start to rest on their laurels because of the 
short-term  stimulus  provided  by  this  accommodative  monetary  policy.  Although  a  central 
bank may be able to temporarily even out weak demand in the short run, it is not able to 
permanently  raise 
the  repeated 
deterioration in global growth prospects suggests that when it comes to the slowdown in the 
global  economy,  we  are  actually  dealing  more  with  supply-side  rather  than  demand-side 
problems. And there is little that monetary policy can do about these. 
longer-term  growth 
trend.  However, 
its  economy’s 
4. 
Low-interest rate environment: challenges for banks and banking supervisors 
Ladies and gentlemen, in the long run, ultra-accommodative monetary policy can also pose 
risks  to  financial  stability.  This  can  happen,  for  instance,  if  bubbles  form  on  the  financial 
markets  as  a  result  of  the  low  interest  rates  or  if  the  generous  liquidity  supply  provides 
incentives to take excessive risks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
It can also happen if the low interest rates endanger the profitability of the banking sector. 
The longer the period of low interest rates persists, the greater this risk becomes. 
When it comes to financial stability risks, macroprudential policy is the first tool of choice, so 
as not to have to water down monetary policy’s focus on price stability. This would involve 
taking supervisory measures to ensure that banks and savings banks are sufficiently resilient 
to withstand financial or economic shocks. However, a monetary policy that aims to ensure 
price  stability  cannot  completely  ignore  financial  stability  risks.  After  all,  the financial  crisis 
has taught us that financial stability risks also frequently endanger price stability. If banks’ 
profitability suffers, the low-interest rate environment can become detrimental. 
Of course, as a central banker, my concern here is not the profits generated by the banks. 
However,  from  a  monetary  policy  perspective,  it  is  crucial  that  banks  transmit  monetary 
policy stimuli – and this is partly dependent on their capital base. The fact that banks transmit 
monetary policy stimuli and issue loans is, incidentally, also crucial for exporting enterprises 
in Germany. 
From the perspective of a banking supervisor, I must also note that it is above all the interest-
oriented business models that are increasingly coming under pressure in the low-interest rate 
environment.  This  affects  precisely  those  banks  that  are  supervised  by  BaFin  and  the 
Bundesbank – something borne out in a survey that we conducted among 1,500 small and 
medium-sized  banks  and  savings  banks  in  Germany.  The  most  important  finding  is  that, 
according to the banks’ own projections, profitability is expected to decline by around 25% by 
2019.  If,  however,  one  assumes  an  even  greater fall  in  interest  rates  and/or  excludes  the 
possibility of balance sheet adjustments, profitability could even fall by up to 75%. 
The  banks  and  banking  supervisors  need  to  examine  how  they  are  going  to  address  this. 
One  obvious  solution  is  for  banks  to  pass  on  the  negative  interest  rates  to  depositors. 
However,  the  survey  also  reveals  that,  due  to  the  intense  competition,  only  a  minority  of 
institutions  would  consider  introducing  negative  interest  rates  if  the  low-interest-rate 
environment persists. 
Instead, the survey suggests that banks will try to expand their business areas that are less 
dependent  on  interest  rates.  This  concerns,  above  all,  the  commissions  business.  Many 
institutions have used the past few years to stock up their capital buffers, so they’ve “fattened 
up for winter”, as it were. This is shown, for example, by the fact that all institutions exceed 
the minimum capital requirements. Many institutions will therefore be able to absorb future 
losses by liquidating reserves. 
Nevertheless, it would be disastrous if banks attempted to ride the situation out, as reserves 
can soon be exhausted when profitability declines. This applies, in particular, if the economic 
situation were to deteriorate. This makes it especially important for banks to be profitable in 
the long term. To achieve this, they need to review their business models, get their balance 
sheets  in  order,  harness  any  available  scope  for  consolidation  and  examine  digitalisation 
possibilities  in  order  to  cut  costs.  Failing  this,  they  may  find  it  difficult  during  a  protracted 
phase of low interest rates to retain profits with a view to further strengthening their capital 
base. 
The  institutions  must  also  examine  their  business  models  with  regard  to  long-term 
sustainability.  We,  as  supervisors,  will  closely  monitor  this  process.  As  supervisors,  we 
evaluate the risks for each institution individually  – but  without losing sight of the financial 
system as a whole. In doing so, we actively seek out direct exchanges with the institutions. 
If an institution stabilises its earnings by taking on greater risk, this must be reflected in its 
overall strategy and be backed by corresponding capital. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I have tried to give you an overview of the global economic conditions. And I have pointed 
out that, above all, the dampened inflation outlook and the subdued growth currently justify 
an accommodative monetary policy  – even though there are of course side  effects, which 
increase over time, and even though opinion may be divided on individual instruments. 
With that, I would like to draw my speech to a close. As the saying goes, a speaker should 
exhaust the topic and not the audience. 
Thank you very much! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
