  Joshua Rosenberg: Operational risk management at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York 
Remarks by Mr Joshua Rosenberg , Executive Vice President and Chief Risk Officer of the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  18th  Annual  OpRisk  North  America  2016 
conference, New York City, 15 March 2016. 
 Good  morning.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  this  year’s 
OpRisk North America conference. Today, I will  share my perspectives on operational risk 
based on my experiences at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York including those in my 
current role as the Bank’s Chief Risk Officer. Before I begin, I wanted to state that the views I 
will be expressing are mine and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York or the Federal Reserve System. 
As you know, operational risk is defined as the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed 
internal  processes,  people  and  systems,  or  external  events.  The  New  York  Fed  faces 
operational  risks  because,  like  other  public  and  private  institutions,  it  relies  on  people, 
processes, and systems to execute its objectives, and, in the same way, the Bank is subject 
to external events that can impact the effectiveness of our people, processes, and systems. 
To give you a better sense of the New York Fed as an operational entity, I wanted to touch 
briefly on the broad range of the Bank’s operations. Most familiar are likely to be the Bank’s 
execution of market operations to implement monetary policy directives of the Federal Open 
Market  Committee  and  financial  supervisory  activities.  As  significant  in  the  Bank’s 
operational profile are the financial services that the Bank provides to the U.S. government, 
financial  institutions  and  businesses,  and  to  foreign  central  banks  and  international 
institutions.  Notably,  the  Bank  operates  the  Fedwire®  electronic  payments  and  securities 
transfer  service,  which  is  a  critical  part  of  the  nation’s  payment  system  infrastructure.  The 
Bank  performs  fiscal  agency  functions  for  the  U.S.  government  including  the  auction  of 
Treasury securities, and it provides correspondent banking and custody services to foreign 
central banks and international institutions.1  
The Bank’s risk framework 
Operations  imply  operational  risk,  so  how  does  the  Bank  approach  operational  risk 
management?  Let  me  back  up  for  a  moment,  since  a  useful  starting  point  to  answer  this 
question is to begin by describing the Bank’s overall approach to managing risk within the 
Bank’s risk framework. 
In  particular,  the  risk  framework  is  designed  to  enable  the  Bank  to  understand  and 
communicate its risk profile to key stakeholders, assess how risks may change in response 
to  planned  activities  or  changes  in  the  environment,  take  action  to  ensure  risks  remain  at 
acceptable levels, recover quickly and effectively from risk events, and continuously improve 
the effectiveness and efficiency of the risk management. 
As part of the risk framework, the Bank defines risk management roles and responsibilities 
using the three lines of defense model.2 The three lines of defense model creates a set of 
layered defenses that align responsibility for risk taking with accountability for risk control and 
provide  effective,  independent  risk  oversight  and  escalation.  In  the  three  lines  model,  the 
assignment of risk management roles is clear and comprehensive in order to prevent gaps, 
                                                
1  https://www.newyorkfed.org/aboutthefed/fedpoints.html. 
2 
IIA Position Paper: The Three Lines of Defense in Effective Risk Management and Control, January 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  ambiguities, or overlaps in responsibility. More specifically, the business areas are the first 
line  of  defense,  independent  risk  management  units  are  the  second  line  of  defense,  and 
internal audit is the third line of defense. 
In  the  Bank, the first  line  of  defense  is  comprised  of the  business  areas  that  execute  and 
support the execution of the Bank’s mission. These first line units are responsible for both the 
operational activities that result in risk as well as control of the resulting risks. The first line 
“owns” its risk in the sense that it is accountable for both positive and negative outcomes and 
is empowered to manage the distribution of outcomes. 
At  its  core,  the  three  lines  model  recognizes  the  strong  incentives  for  effective  risk 
management created by aligning accountability and responsibility. In other words, from the 
perspective of the first line, there is “skin in the game,” and risk management is not viewed 
as someone else’s problem. In addition, putting the first line in charge of risk management 
has  efficiency  and  effectiveness  benefits,  since the  first  line  can  adapt  risk  solutions  to  its 
specific needs and nimbly respond when the risk environment changes. 
The  Bank’s  second  line  of  defense  –  independent  risk  management  areas  including  my 
Group, the Risk Group – provides independent assessment and oversight of the risks taken 
by the first line as well as frameworks that provide a common structure for risk management 
processes and practices. The second line also provides an integrated view of risk to senior 
stakeholders through consolidated analysis of the Bank’s risks. 
A second key insight of the three lines model is that a layered defense increases safety and 
reliability by providing an independent check that reduces the chance of error. The second 
line  is  the  second  layer,  and  provides  a  view  of  risk  that  is  independent  of  the  business 
area’s assessment. What is the value-add from having this type of second opinion? To start, 
while  the  business  has  the  deepest  understanding  of  its  environment,  operations,  and 
objectives,  the  second  line  offers  a  perspective  based  on  expertise  in  risk  identification, 
analysis, and mitigation that is informed by its institution-wide view of operations and risks. 
This allows the second line to provide unique insights by aggregating risks across business 
lines, identifying interactions across risk types, and spotting anomalies in risk exposures or 
risk  practices  that  deserve  additional  attention.  There  also  may  be  externalities  to  actions 
taken in one business line that have implications for the risk of the institution as a whole; it is 
the second line’s responsibility to articulate that perspective to senior management. 
The second line’s responsibility for establishing a common framework for risk management 
creates  benefits  in  terms  of  both  efficiency  and  effectiveness.  The  second  line  is  an 
institution’s center of excellence in risk management and is in an ideal position to identify and 
promulgate  best  practices  and  standards.  In  terms  of  efficiency,  the  second  line  is  well-
positioned  to  collect  and  analyze  risk  information  coming from  all  of the  business  lines,  to 
provide  common  risk  management  tools,  and  to  provide  guidance  to  business  areas  to 
improve their risk management capabilities. 
The Bank’s third line of defense, Internal Audit, provides assurance to senior management 
and the Board of Directors that first and second line risk management and control activities 
are  effective.  Although  I  did  not  say  it  before,  the  second  line  is  not  fully  independent  of 
management. This is because second line risk management (in our case, the Risk Group) is 
involved in a broad range of management decisions related to the Bank’s risk controls, and, 
in terms of reporting lines, I am part of the Bank’s Management Committee and report to the 
Bank’s  president.  Our  Audit  Group,  however,  provides  a  fully  independent,  final  layer  of 
defense.  Internal  Audit  does  not  participate  in  management  decisions,  and  our  General 
Auditor  reports  to  the  Chair  of  the  Audit  and  Risk  Subcommittee  of  the  Bank’s  Board  of 
Directors. 
In addition to defining clear and comprehensive risk management roles and responsibilities 
using the three lines of defense model, the Bank’s risk framework establishes governance, 
escalation, and reporting processes around risk exposures, risk decisions, and risk events. A 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  strong governance regime provides assurance to stakeholders (Management Committee, the 
President, and the Board) who delegate risk-taking authority to the business lines. 
From  first-line  businesses  and  support  functions,  risk  information  flows  to  the  second  line, 
and  then  to  the  Risk  Subcommittee  of  our  Bank’s  Management  Committee.  The  Risk 
Subcommittee  discusses  significant  emerging  and  existing  risks,  provides  perspectives  on 
managing  and mitigating  risks,  and  supports  Management  Committee  review  and  decision 
making. The Audit and Risk Subcommittee of the Bank’s Board of Directors and the Board of 
Directors itself are at the top of the governance chain, although there are limitations on their 
roles with respect to supervisory and monetary policy issues.3  
Operational risk management 
The  Bank’s  operational  risk  approach  sits  within,  and  is  shaped  by  the  Bank’s  overall  risk 
framework. Roles and responsibilities as well as escalation and reporting follow the general 
structure I previously described. At this point, though, I can drill down into operational risk 
specifics. 
In the first line of defense, operational risk management is conducted by staff in the front line 
units with support from first-line’s centralized risk management resources (usually as part of 
a  business’  shared  services function). The first  line  is  responsible  and  accountable for the 
identification, analysis, management, and monitoring of the operational risks that arise as a 
result of its activities. 
Second line operational risk management is led by the Central Operational Risk Function in 
the Risk Group. Central Operational Risk provides independent assessment and oversight of 
first-line operational risks and risk management practices and is responsible for maintaining 
and enhancing the Bank’s operational risk framework. 
Our third line, Internal Audit, assesses the design and implementation of the operational risk 
framework and provides feedback on risk issues as an observer on governance committees. 
The foundations of the Bank’s operational risk program are the risk event reporting process 
and  the  risk  and  control  self-assessment  process.  These  processes  are  central  to  risk 
identification,  analysis,  and  response.  The  risk  event  reporting  process  involves  real-time 
collection,  classification,  analysis,  and  escalation  of  operational  risk  events  including 
establishment  of  root  causes  and  determination  of  remediation  plans.  You  are  all  likely 
familiar with reporting risk events that have impacted your institution and categorizing them 
as low, moderate or significant. We do this as well. In addition, we require reporting of near 
miss events, which is when a control failure has occurred but we’ve been fortunate that there 
was  no  impact to  the  Bank. These  near miss  events  are  a  window  into  vulnerabilities  that 
could cause an adverse impact in the future. 
The risk and control self-assessment process establishes a methodology for business areas 
to periodically assess their operational risks and ensure that appropriate mitigation is in place 
for key business processes. Importantly, the Central Operational Risk area is responsible for 
synthesizing  the  outputs  of  these  two  processes,  along  with  follow-up  discussions  with 
business areas, to identify significant Bank-wide residual operational risks. 
We  have found  it  useful  to  view  operational  risk  through  the  lens  of  processes,  risks,  and 
controls.  We  have  defined  a  comprehensive  set  of  processes  to  characterize  the  Bank’s 
primary services and transactions. Along with that, we have articulated a standardized set of 
risk  drivers,  risk  events,  risk  event  impacts,  and,  finally,  controls  that  prevent,  detect,  or 
mitigate the consequences of a risk event. We are using this risk taxonomy on a forward-
                                                
3  https://www.newyorkfed.org/aboutthefed/audit.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  looking basis to assess the risks of Bank processes and as an analysis tool to investigate 
risk events after the fact. 
Using standardized process, risk, and control types allows us to aggregate as well as slice 
and  dice  our  risks  around  dimensions  of  interest.  For  example,  we  identify  processes 
associated with the highest levels of residual risk and the largest number of risk events as 
areas for additional attention. It may be the case that additional mitigation is required or there 
are  weaknesses  in  controls.  We  identify  common  control  profiles  for  process  types  and 
assess  their  effectiveness  based  on  risk  ratings  and  past  risk  events.  That  informs  the 
second  line’s  recommendations  to  business  areas  on  control  protocols.  We  also  use  the 
common control profiles to assess where we are over-controlled and have the opportunity to 
shift resources to other priorities. 
The risk information collected and the risk analysis performed by the second line is the basis 
for  operational  risk  reporting  in  the  Bank’s  risk  profile  report  that  is  presented  to  the  Risk 
Subcommittee, the Management Committee, and the Audit and Risk Subcommittee. The risk 
profile report shows the Bank’s most significant risks (including operational risks) along with 
a risk rating and the status of mitigating actions and mitigation plans. In addition, the report 
highlights significant and notable risk events along with the event’s impact, root causes, and 
remediation activities. We have found that the risk profile report provides the necessary flow 
of  information  to  create  meaningful  committee  dialogue  around  risk  issues,  feedback  to 
business  areas,  coordination  across  Groups  and  lines  of  defense,  and  when  necessary, 
additional escalation. 
Past, present, and future 
As  the  theory  and  practice  of  operational  risk  management  and  the  complexity  of  our 
operations  have  evolved,  so  has  our  approach. In  the  mid-2000’s,  the  Bank formalized  its 
operational risk program. That included starting a Bank-wide Operational Risk Committee (a 
predecessor to the Risk Subcommittee) led by the First Vice President, establishing the risk 
event  reporting  and  risk  control  self-assessment  processes,  and  creating  the  Centralized 
Operational Risk Function (then located in the Bank’s Corporate Group). Later developments 
included  instituting  new  Bank-wide  control  policies  reflecting  a  deeper  understanding  of 
sources of operational risk. For example, the Bank established policies to govern end-user 
developed automation tools and the management of contingent workers. 
The past several years have been characterized by a focus on integration of the Bank’s risk 
management program. As part of a review of the Bank’s governance, the Risk Subcommittee 
of  the  Management  Committee  was  established  with  a  broad  risk  management  mandate 
spanning  financial,  operational,  and  compliance  risk.  The  Bank  also  enhanced  the 
coordination  of  risk  management,  resource  allocation,  and  strategic  planning  through 
linkages between the Risk Subcommittee and our planning and resources committee. Most 
indicative  of  this  trend  was  the  establishment  in  2015  of  the  Risk  Group’s  Enterprise  Risk 
Management Function which is responsible for providing an integrated view across all of the 
Bank’s risks. 
In  thinking  about  areas  for  future  improvement,  I  ask  myself:  How  can  we  accelerate 
organizational  learning  from  our  mistakes?  Does  our  analysis  of  risks  and  risk  events 
sufficiently reveal organizational and structural issues that contribute to the risk? How can I 
further create a positive risk culture that encourages reporting and escalating of risk issues? 
Are  we  finding  the  right  balance  in  our  controls  between  specificity  of  rules  and  the 
adaptability of principles? 
These and other questions will continue to focus us on improving and enhancing our policies 
and  practices  with  the  goal  of  supporting  the  Bank’s  ability  to  manage  risk  within  its  risk 
tolerance. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
