  Stephen S Poloz: The Canadian economy – a progress report 
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Yukon Chamber of 
Commerce, Whitehorse, Yukon, 15 June 2016. 
 I would like to thank Russell Barnett for his help in preparing this speech. 
Introduction 
It’s a great pleasure to be here and see the Land of the Midnight Sun first-hand. The last time 
I was here it was mid-January, and the locals promised me I would see the northern lights – 
but it snowed the whole time I was here! 
This time, we get to take in the natural beauty of Whitehorse in the daylight while meeting 
with  the  business  leaders  of  the  region.  Visits  like  these  supplement  the  invaluable  work 
done by the Bank’s regional staff, who help keep us on top of how things look to the people 
who actually make the economy tick. 
I don’t have to tell you that the Canadian economy has faced its share of challenges these 
past few years. Our exports plunged in the wake of the global financial crisis, and we lost 
many  exporting  companies  and  their  jobs.  The  global  recovery  since  2010  has  been 
disappointing  and  so  has  our  export  recovery.  High  oil  prices  boosted  Canada’s  income 
growth and increased investment in the energy sector through 2014, offsetting some of the 
bad news. But over the past 18 months that growth engine, too, has throttled back. 
So,  today  we  find  ourselves  partway  through  two  distinct  economic  narratives.  First,  the 
resource  economy  is  going  through  a  painful  and  complex  adjustment  to  low  prices  –  an 
adjustment that will mean lower levels of income, investment and employment, as well as the 
migration of families within Canada. This process will take another couple of years to work 
itself  out.  Second,  the  non-resource  economy  is  still  healing  from  the  post-crisis  trauma, 
moving unevenly toward full capacity – two steps forward, one step backward. 
And  then  there  are  the  wildfires  in  Northern  Alberta,  which  devastated  the  town  of  Fort 
McMurray, forced 90,000 people from their homes and affected production in the oil sands. 
This has made a challenging situation even more so. 
The one constant in recent years has been the Canadian consumer. In part supported by low 
interest  rates,  Canadian  consumers  have  been  a  steady  source  of  economic  growth, 
particularly through the housing sector. The result? Canadian households are carrying near-
record debt loads, and we are growing increasingly concerned about risks in some housing 
markets. 
So, you might be wondering how Canada is really doing in the face of all these conflicting 
economic forces. Today I’d like to offer you a progress report. And let me say at the outset: 
we are making progress. 
Four  times  a  year,  the  Bank  publishes  its  Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR),  containing  our 
latest projections for the Canadian economy. Our model-based forecasts are complemented 
by  judgment,  which  is  supported  by  extensive  consultations  with  companies  and  other 
contacts. Conditional on this economic projection, we choose a path for interest rates that will 
keep projected inflation on target or bring it back to target over a reasonable time frame. 
At the end of each MPR we highlight several risks to our forecast – issues that require the 
Governing  Council  to  exercise  judgment.  In  principle,  if  one  of  those  risks  were  realized, 
projected  inflation  would  deviate  from  the  target,  and  an  adjustment  to  policy  might  be 
indicated. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The Governing Council spends a lot of time debating and forming judgments around these 
risks. So, I thought it might be interesting to invite you into our forecasting tent today and talk 
about how we have been seeing Canada’s key economic risks evolve since our last MPR in 
April. 
The base forecast and risks 
For  the  past  18  months,  the  biggest  issue  for  our  forecast  has  been  tracking  how  the 
Canadian economy is adjusting to low resource prices. In the first instance, this has meant a 
big drop in investment spending, especially in the oil patch. It has also meant a lower value 
for the Canadian dollar and two interest rate cuts during 2015. 
Our forecast in April saw the Canadian economy making its way back to full capacity during 
2016 and 2017 – a process that would see inflation sustainably at our target of 2 per cent by 
late next year. Without last year’s interest rate cuts, it would have taken much longer to have 
inflation return to target. 
While  the  April  projection  was  being  developed,  the  Canadian  economy  appeared  to  be 
doing better than previously expected. However, our analysis suggested that we should not 
extrapolate  that  first-quarter  surge  in  growth  for  the  rest  of  the  year  –  that  some  of  the 
apparent strength represented a catch-up from a soft fourth quarter, and some other factors 
were probably temporary. 
Accordingly,  our  April forecast  anticipated  a  significant  slowdown  in  growth  for the  second 
quarter and a decent pickup in the second half of the year, in part due to the government’s 
fiscal plan. Several risks played an important role in these discussions; I will now discuss four 
of  the  most  important  and  consider  how  well  the  economic  data  have  supported  those 
judgments since April. 
Risk 1: Stronger US economic growth 
We  might  as  well  start  with  the  most  obvious  risk  –  the  outlook  for  US  economic  growth, 
which,  of  course,  feeds  directly  into  our  recovery  narrative  for  Canada’s  non-resource 
economy. 
When we were preparing our forecast in April, the US economy was showing signs of faster 
growth,  but  we  were  skeptical  that  it  would  be  sustained.  The  fact  is  we  had  been 
disappointed too many times in the past. As in all such debates, however, there was a risk 
that  we  were  being  too  conservative  and  would  be  surprised  on  the  upside  as  things 
unfolded.  This  would,  of  course,  have  been  welcome,  because  it  would  have  meant  more 
exports for Canada. 
As it turned out, though, the first quarter in the United States was even softer than we had 
been  expecting.  US  energy  companies  were  cutting  back  on  investment  –  much  like  they 
were in Canada – and US consumers slowed the growth of their spending. 
But the second quarter is looking better for the United States. We’re seeing renewed strength 
in housing and auto sales, and consumer confidence is near a post-crisis high. America’s job 
market  stumbled  in  the  latest  monthly  report,  but  we  don’t  think  this  one  month  of  data 
heralds a significant downshift in growth. Besides, some moderation in monthly employment 
gains and GDP growth is inevitable as the US economy approaches full employment. 
So, after tilting a little to the downside early in the year, the balance of risks around the US 
outlook now appears to be reasonably close to our view in April. A full reassessment of this 
risk is being done now, for our next MPR in July. 
Risk 2: Stronger Canadian exports 
Generally speaking, a stronger US economy will mean more export sales for Canada. But in 
recent  years  this  link  has  proven  less  reliable  than  in  the  past.  Accordingly,  the  second 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  forecast  risk  that  has  been  preoccupying  us  is  the  possibility  that  our  Canadian  export 
forecast would again miss the mark. 
Toward  the  end  of  2015  and  in  early  2016,  in  fact,  non-energy  exports  started  showing 
surprising strength. While this was encouraging, more granular analysis suggested to us that 
some of that strength would be temporary – in auto exports, for example – and we judged 
that exports would slow. Therefore, the risk we set out in the MPR was that we may have 
been  too  conservative  on  the  export  outlook  –  that  perhaps  exports  would  continue  to 
surprise us on the upside. 
Sure enough, exports have taken a step back in the past couple of months, validating our 
cautious  analysis.  Even  so,  the  levels  of  several  export  categories  have  shown  good 
progress. For example, exports of building and packaging materials are up 35 per cent since 
2012 to levels last seen before the financial crisis. Furniture and fixtures exports are up 45 
per cent over the same period and exports of pharmaceutical and medicinal products have 
grown by 70 per cent. 
And then there is tourism. I know the Yukon government has been actively working to draw 
visitors, both from Canada and abroad. Land border crossings, which are how most visitors 
enter Yukon, are up almost 9 per cent from last year. Accommodation and food services jobs 
were about 15 per cent higher in March than a year ago. These trends are being replicated in 
many  parts  of  Canada.  Data  on  day  trips  between  Canada  and  the  United  States,  where 
people cross the border but don’t stay overnight, have shifted sharply with more Americans 
crossing the border to shop in Canada and many fewer Canadians travelling in the opposite 
direction. 
Given  the  past  depreciation  of  the  currency  and  our  confidence  in  the  US  expansion,  we 
expect  our  export  sector  to  continue  to  heal.  Many  firms  are  close  to  their  capacity  limits, 
which augurs well for future investment spending and new job creation. So, while the whole 
process has been disappointingly slow and uneven, we remain confident that we have the 
right narrative. 
Risk 3: Deeper adjustment to low oil prices 
The third big source of uncertainty in our forecast is how our economy will ultimately adjust to 
a world of significantly lower oil prices. This basically comes down to the actions of individual 
firms and their investment plans, and we have managed to track this reasonably well through 
conversations with the firms themselves. In the energy sector, investment spending this year 
is  expected  to  be  about  60  per  cent  below  2014  levels.  And,  since  the  process  began, 
companies have cut investment spending each quarter by more than we expected, so this 
has been framed as a downside risk. 
We’ve seen a similar phenomenon here in Yukon, as mineral exploration spending has fallen 
and is expected to drop further and several mines have closed in recent years. This includes 
the plans for a temporary shutdown at the Minto copper mine next year. 
The recent uptick in oil prices might lead some to expect an end to investment spending cuts. 
We are not persuaded of this, for two reasons. The first is that some of the recovery in prices 
is due to supply disruption that will probably be temporary, so we should reserve judgment. 
The more important reason, though, is that it’s highly uncertain what price level will rebalance 
the oil market on a sustained basis. It certainly looks as though prices will not be returning to 
their  old  highs  in  the  foreseeable  future.  Oil  companies  and  their  suppliers  and  service 
providers have found many ways to cut costs, and this is lowering break-even prices. This 
means that new oil supply can come back on stream profitably – especially in US shale plays 
– at lower prices than before, perhaps putting a lid on further price increases. 
The recent pickup in oil prices is, of course, welcome, because it means a boost to Canadian 
income  for  every  barrel  exported.  But  an  extended  period  of  oil  prices  at  recent  levels  is 
unlikely  to  lead  to  greater  investment  spending  in  the  Canadian  oil  patch.  Indeed,  market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  intelligence  suggests  there  is  further  downside  risk  to  investment  at  these  still-low  price 
levels. Accordingly, this remains a potential source of downside risk to our forecast. 
Risk 4: Will consumers rein in their spending? 
The  fourth  risk  we’ve  been  giving  special  attention  to  is  the  possibility  that  Canadian 
households might become more cautious in their spending. At the heart of this uncertainty is 
the high level of household debt. It is natural to expect that, at some point, households will 
rein in their spending and put more effort into paying down their debt. 
There is no evidence of this downside risk so far, however. Indeed, data from the first quarter 
show  that  household  spending,  including  big-ticket  items  such  as  motor  vehicle  sales  and 
housing, has remained strong. Nevertheless, we will need to remain alert for signs that this 
risk is emerging. 
Low  interest  rates  and  a  resilient  job  market  have  certainly  helped  sustain  consumer 
spending, and the tax rate changes that the government introduced at the beginning of the 
year may also be playing a role. We also think spending is being supported by the impact of 
cheaper gasoline, since the average Canadian household is spending about $600 less per 
year to fill their tank. On the other side of the ledger, the decline in the Canadian dollar has 
raised the price of a wide range of imports. 
A  strong  consumer  is,  of  course,  a  key  contributor  to  Canada’s  strong  housing  market. 
However,  a  number  of  other  factors  are  at  play,  as  seen  in  the  significant  regional 
divergences in housing sales and prices. We continue to see very strong markets in British 
Columbia  and  Ontario,  fuelled  by  strong  population  and  employment  growth,  declines  in 
energy-producing regions such as the Prairies and modest growth elsewhere in the country. 
Indeed, we noted last week in our Financial System Review that house prices in Vancouver 
and Toronto have been rising at a pace that probably can’t be sustained. It’s possible that 
self-reinforcing expectations of higher prices are affecting these markets, and the risk of a 
decline in prices, while difficult to quantify, is growing. 
Summing up 
So, after looking at those four risks, where do we stand? 
I have no doubt that the growth forecast numbers will change when we do our full analysis in 
July, and that will have implications for our projection of inflation and our policy deliberations. 
But  it  does  seem  that  our  core  forecast  narratives  around  the  US  economy  and  around 
Canada’s exports remain intact. 
Investment plans in the energy sector, and the possibility that households will suddenly rein 
in spending to pay down debt, do still present downside risks that we will continue to monitor 
carefully. And of course, there may be a whole new set of risks to consider in July. 
Impact of the Alberta wildfires 
Unfortunately, there is still one major economic factor to consider that was not foreseen at all 
– the Alberta wildfires. 
The  fires  were  brutal.  Almost  90,000  people  were  displaced  and  about  2,400  buildings, 
mostly  homes,  were  destroyed.  Canadians  rallied  to  support  their  neighbours,  as  you’d 
expect. Insurance claims are expected to be somewhere between $2 billion and $6 billion – 
the largest such event in Canadian history. 
It’s difficult to estimate the impact of this disaster on the economy. Lost oil output amounts to 
around 1 million barrels per day, but since it is unclear when production will be fully restored, 
the cumulative loss of income remains uncertain. In addition, the vast majority of the local 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  population wasn’t working during the evacuation. From a GDP standpoint, there will be some 
offsets to these losses, from emergency services and the like. 
We  estimate  that  the  Alberta  fires  will  reduce  annualized  growth  in  the  second  quarter  by 
about  1.00  to  1.25  percentage  points.  Part  of  this  decline  in  GDP,  stemming  from  the  oil 
production  shortfall,  will  probably  be  made  back  sometime  in  the  third quarter,  but the  net 
effect on the level of GDP over time will depend on the pace of rebuilding, which at present is 
difficult to foresee. 
This suggests that GDP growth will be very choppy in the second and third quarters. Growth 
will probably be flat or slightly negative in the second quarter and show an outsized recovery 
in the third quarter. That type of quarterly growth profile could yield average growth over the 
two quarters quite close to that set out in the Bank’s forecast in April. But we will have to wait 
and see. 
We  will  bring  a  completely  new  analysis  to  the  table  in  July,  so  all  these  estimates  are 
subject to change, based on these risks or new ones. Just by way of illustration, the outcome 
of the Brexit referendum next  week poses new risks at the global level that could mean a 
shift in view. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  As  I  said  at  the  beginning,  the  economic  situation  we  face  is  very 
complicated  and  riddled  with  uncertainty.  But  I  am  confident  that  we  are  making  real 
progress. 
The global economy retains the capacity to disappoint us, but it is gradually healing. The US 
economy  appears  to  be  doing  well,  despite  the  usual  variability  in  the  data.  Our  export 
recovery is proving to be very uneven, but several categories are encouraging. Many export 
sectors are operating near their capacity limits, which augurs well for future investment and 
job  creation.  The  structural  adjustments  to  low  oil  and  other  commodity  prices  are  clearly 
under  way  and  will  persist  for  some  time  yet.  Financial  stability  risks,  especially  in  the 
household  sector,  remain  an  area  of  concern  but  should  diminish  as  the  economy 
strengthens. 
Continued patience is required, but we have the right to be optimistic. Let me acknowledge, 
though,  that  many  of  the  macroeconomic  processes  that  economists  talk  about  sound 
impersonal, or even mechanical. I know they are not. Companies are run by real people, who 
risk  real  money  in  creating  jobs  and  economic  growth.  Hesitating  to  do  so  in  the  face  of 
uncertainty is only human. Workers who lose their jobs as a result of low oil prices may need 
to contemplate moving to another part of Canada, and layering the Alberta wildfires on top 
only increases the human burden. Economic adjustment processes that seem so ordinary in 
our models are painful, costly and take time at the human level. 
Still, there’s a resilience and flexibility among Canadians that gives me confidence that we 
will  get  through  these  adjustments  and  our  economy  will  return  to  natural,  self-sustaining 
growth. My message is that the process has been uneven, and probably will remain so, but 
we are making real progress. Rest assured the Bank of Canada will keep doing its part to 
support Canadian workers and businesses along the way. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
