  Mark Carney: Resolving the climate paradox 
Text  of  the  Arthur  Burns  Memorial  Lecture  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
England and Chairman of the Financial Stability Board, Berlin, 22 September 2016. 
 I am grateful to Alice Carr, Carsten Jung, Ben Nelson and Iain de Weymarn for their assistance in preparing these 
remarks. 
Introduction 
I. 
It is an honour to give the Arthur Burns Memorial Lecture. 
In  Arthur  Burns’  day,  financial  diplomacy  was  limited  to  weighty  issues  of  monetary  policy 
coordination,  particularly  the  search  for  a  new  international  monetary  system  following  the 
collapse of Bretton Woods. 
Your invitation to discuss climate change is a sign of the broadening of the responsibilities of 
central  banks  to  include  financial  as  well  as  monetary  stability.  It  also  demonstrates  the 
changing nature of international financial diplomacy. The quest for a renewal of the Bretton 
Woods treaty, with associated protocols and enforcement mechanisms, has been replaced 
with the more flexible governance of the G20 and the FSB. These groups gather principals 
who work together to forge consensus and implement global solutions to common problems. 
When I spoke at Lloyd’s of London a year ago about the financial stability risks arising from 
climate change, I, in effect, highlighted two paradoxes.1 
First,  the  future  will  be  past.  That  is,  climate  change  is  a  tragedy  of  the  horizon  which 
imposes a cost on future generations that the current one has no direct incentive to fix. The 
catastrophic  impacts  of  climate  change  will  be  felt  beyond  the  traditional  horizons  of  most 
actors including businesses and central banks. Once climate change becomes a clear and 
present danger to financial stability it may already be too late to stabilise the atmosphere at 
two degrees. 
The second paradox is that success is failure. That is, too rapid a movement towards a low-
carbon  economy  could  materially  damage  financial  stability.  A  wholesale  reassessment  of 
prospects, as climate-related risks are re-evaluated, could destabilise markets, spark a pro-
cyclical crystallisation of losses and lead to a persistent tightening of financial conditions: a 
climate Minsky moment. 
Resolving these conundrums requires first distinguishing the three channels through which 
climate change affects financial stability. 
The first concerns the physical risks that arise from the increased frequency and severity of 
climate- and weather-related events that damage property and disrupt trade. 
At present, general insurers are on the front line.2 Thus far, a combination of sophisticated 
forecasting, a forward-looking European insurance capital regime and business models built 
around short-term coverage has left insurers relatively well-placed to manage physical risks.3 
                                                
1  See  Carney  (2016),  “Breaking  the  Tragedy  of  the  Horizon  –  climate  change  and  financial  stability”, speech 
given at Lloyd’s of London, September 2015.  
2  While  the  attribution  of  increases  in  claims  to  specific  factors  is  complex,  work  done  at  Lloyd’s  of  London 
estimated that the 20cm rise in sea-level at the tip of Manhattan since the 1950s, when all other factors are 
held constant, increased insured losses from Superstorm Sandy by 30% in New York alone. See Lloyd’s of 
London (2014), “Catastrophe Modelling and Climate Change”.  
3  As described in Prudential Regulation Authority, (2015), “The impact of climate change on the UK insurance 
sector”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Which  is  why Warren  Buffett  can  observe  that climate  change  is  not  a  threat  to  Berkshire 
Hathaway’s insurance business.4 
Insurers have to update their models constantly and adjust coverage prudently. And in time, 
growing  swathes  of  our  economies  could  become  uninsurable  absent  public  backstops  – 
hardly the prescription for a growing business.5 
Moreover,  if  coverage  is  not  maintained,  the  broader  financial  system  would  become 
increasingly exposed to large and variable physical risks. 
With their motives as global citizens sharpened by commercial concerns, insurers have some 
of  the  greatest  incentives  to  understand  and  tackle  climate  change  in  the  short  term.  For 
example, Lloyd’s of London underwriters are required to consider climate change explicitly in 
their business plans and underwriting models. Their genius has been to recognise that past 
is not prologue and that the catastrophic norms of the future are in the tail risks of today. 
With such insights, it is perhaps not surprising that the insurance sector has been particularly 
active in organising itself to address these existential issues.6 
The  second  channel  concerns  liability  risks.  These  stem  from  parties  who  have  suffered 
loss  from  the  effects  of  climate  change  seeking  compensation  from  those  they  hold 
responsible.  Such  claims  could  arise  well  into  the  future,  as  the  science  and  evidence  of 
climate change hardens, though some are already taking action against companies on the 
grounds of failure to disclose the risks posed to their business models by climate change.7 
The final and most important channel involves transition risks, which could result from the 
adjustment  towards  a  lower-carbon  economy.  Changes  in  policy,  technology  and  physical 
risks  could  prompt  a  reassessment  of  the  value  of  a  large  range  of  assets  as  costs  and 
opportunities become apparent. 
The  speed  at  which  such  re-pricing  occurs  is  uncertain  but  could  be  decisive  for  financial 
stability.  There  have  already  been  a  few  high  profile  examples  of  jump-to-distress  pricing 
because of shifts in environmental policy or performance. 
Tonight, I would like to discuss how building new markets – in climate transition and green 
finance – can help resolve the tragedy of the horizon. Over the past year, the focus of G20 
Leaders and the aegis of the FSB have spurred important progress. The upcoming German 
presidency of the G20 now has a historic chance to mainstream climate finance and turn risk 
into opportunity. 
To add impetus, there is also a growing macroeconomic case for action. Let me begin with 
that imperative. 
                                                
4  Buffet noted “insurance policies are customarily written for one year and repriced annually to reflect changing 
increased  premiums”.  See: 
Increased  possibilities  of 
translate  promptly 
into 
exposures. 
http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/letters.html. 
loss 
5  The report ‘Risky Business – the economic risks of climate change in the United States’ (2014) suggests that 
in the USA $238–507 billion worth of coastal property could be below sea level by 2100.  
6  The Insurance Development Forum was formed in 2015 as a public-private partnership between the United 
Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and the insurance sector to use the industry’s expertise to 
insure  people  in  developing  countries  who  are  unprotected  but  vulnerable  to  climate  change  risk.  This 
protection gap currently represents 90% of the economic costs of natural disasters that are uninsured. 
In late 2015, the New York Attorney General launched an investigation into allegedly insufficient disclosure of 
climate change risk by a large energy company; Attorneys General in numerous US states have since joined 
this investigation or launched their own. 
7 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The macroeconomic imperative 
II. 
Throughout this decade, global growth has serially disappointed as the combination of huge 
debt overhangs, profound demographic changes and enormous uncertainties have weighed 
on activity (Chart 1).8 Nominal growth in the euro area, the UK and globally, is running at half 
of its pre-crisis rate. 
Consistent downward revisions to GDP growth forecasts 
Chart 1  
Actual GDP growth
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2016
Per cent
8.0
Dotted lines = Emerging economies
Solid lines = Advanced economies
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
 Source:  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook.  Each  line  shows  how  forecasts  for  a  particular  calendar  year  have 
evolved over time. The diamond shows the eventual outturn. 
Growth  has  been  weak  despite  significant  progress  repairing  the  financial  system,  recent 
moves  to  somewhat  expansionary  fiscal  policies  in  a  number  of  countries,  and  of  course, 
years of unprecedented monetary policies. 
                                                
8  See  Carney  (2016),  “Uncertainty,  the  economy  and  policy”,  speech  given  at  the  Court  Room,  Bank  of 
England, June 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Chart 2 
Three eras of uncertainty: geopolitical, economic and policy 
Geopolitical risk index
UK Economic uncertainty
UK Policy uncertainty
Gulf war
9/11
Iraq Invasion
Northern Rock & Global 
financial Crisis
Scottish 
Independence 
Referendum
Lehman Brothers 
Failure
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
 n
a
e
m
m
o
r
f
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
v
e
d
 
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S
i
 Source:  Bank  calculations  and  Caldara  and  Iacoviello  (2016),  Baker  et  al  (2015),  and  Haddow  et  al  (2013). 
Economic  policy  and  geopolitical  uncertainty  indices  are  de-meaned  and  shown  relative  to  their  respective 
standard  deviations.  Chart  shows  two-year  centred  moving  average  for  each  measure.  See  Caldara,  D  and 
Iacoviello,  M  (2016),  “Measuring  geopolitical  risk”,  Federal  Reserve  Board,  mimeo;  Baker,  S,  Bloom,  N  and 
Davis, S (2015), “Measuring economic policy uncertainty”, NBER Working Paper No. 21633, October; Haddow, 
A, Hare, C, Hooley, J and Shakir, T (2013) “Macroeconomic uncertainty: what is it, how can we measure it and 
why does it matter?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Q2. 
Further  restraining  growth  is  a  deep  risk  aversion  amongst  businesses  and  investors 
stemming  from  a  combination  of  elevated  geopolitical,  economic  and  policy  uncertainties 
(Chart 2). 
This has particularly affected business investment. Across advanced economies, investment 
has  fallen  by  more  than  2½  percentage  points  of  GDP  (Chart  3),  creating  substantial 
investment shortfalls, relative to pre-crisis trends, of around 20% in Germany and 25% in the 
UK and US (Chart 4). 
In  financial  markets,  despite  a  recovery  in  equities  in  recent  years,  equity  risk  premia  are 
unusually high and government bond yields are consistent with very  low growth for a very 
long time (Chart 5).9 
In short, both business and investors appear to be hedging future disaster risk. 
 
                                                
9 
In  the  UK  and  Germany,  real  interest  rates  are  negative  as  far  as  the  eye  can  see.  Even  in  the  US,  real 
30-year  rates  are  well  below  1%.  Low  bond  yields  suggest  that  market  is  discounting  low  future  growth, 
accounting for some of the wedge between those yields and equity dividend yields. Indeed, year in, year out, 
earnings  forecasts  have  proven  wildly  optimistic.  However,  risk  premia  are  also  likely  playing  a  role.  Put 
simply, investors are not only less optimistic about future growth, but are also less certain about that subdued 
outlook. They are demanding a discount on risky assets to compensate, and seeking risk-free assets instead. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 3 
Chart 4 
Advanced economy investment has  
fallen relative to GDP and remains  
lower than past episodes 
Whole economy real investment 
substantially weaker than  
pre-crisis forecasts  
1980
2001
1989
2007
Residual
Non-residential
Total
Equipment
Residential
Per cent 
pp fall in investment
share of GDP
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
-3.0
-3.5
-4.0
-4.5
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
-60
d
n
a
l
r
e
z
t
i
n
e
d
e
w
S
T
T+1 T+2 T+3 T+4 T+5 T+6 T+7 T+8
Years
 
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook and Bank 
calculations. 
 i
n
a
p
S
l
y
a
t
I
k
r
a
m
n
e
D
S
U
e
c
n
a
r
F
a
d
a
n
a
C
K
U
y
n
a
m
r
e
G
 
Source: 
calculations. 
 
IMF  World  Economic  Outlook  and  Bank 
w
S
Chart 5 
UK equity risk premium up since 2000, and together with lower growth  
expectations, explains bulk of the spread between earnings yield  
on equities and bond yields currently 
Percentage points
Unexplained component
ERP contribution
Growth contribution
Equity-bond yield spread
2000
2005
2010
2015
Source: IMF, Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations. The equity-bond yield spread 
is  the  difference  between  the  reciprocal  of  the  FTSE  All-Share  price-earnings  ratio  and  the  UK  10-year 
government  bond  yield.  The  growth  contribution  is  calibrated  from  the  IMF  5-year-ahead  world  growth  and 
inflation forecasts. The ERP contribution is calibrated using the VAR model described in Chin and Polk (2015), 
‘A forecast evaluation of expected equity return measures’, Bank of England Working Paper, No. 520.  
 12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The Bank of England has long stressed that central bank policies are not the cause of low 
rates but responses to them.10 We are actors in a play written by others.11 
That  is  because  the  level  at  which  interest  rates  must  ultimately  settle  to  ensure  demand 
consistent with supply and so inflation at target – the “equilibrium” interest rate, or “r*” – is 
determined, not by central banks, but by the real, fundamental factors driving desired savings 
and investment in the global economy. 
These  include  technology  growth,  demographics,  the  ease  of  financial  intermediation,  and 
inequality. Colleagues at the Bank have estimated that such factors have conspired to lower 
real interest rates by around 450 basis points since the early 1980s.12 
Long-run prosperity was never in the gift of monetary policy makers. As the 10th anniversary 
of the start of the crisis approaches, a consensus is growing that escaping this low-growth 
low-inflation trap will require a rebalancing between monetary, fiscal and structural policies. 
The last are the most important. In addition to their merits in raising potential growth directly, 
structural  reforms  could  improve  the  savings  and  investment  balance,  thereby  increasing 
equilibrium interest rates (r*) and giving monetary policy more traction. 
Bank staff estimate that shortfalls in public investment represent only a modest portion of the 
450 basis points fall in global interest rates since the early 1980s. 
Clear  policy  frameworks  that  encourage  sustained  private  investment  are  thus  essential, 
including  those  that  mobilise  private  investment  to  finance  the  transition  to  the  low-carbon 
economy. As I will discuss, the magnitudes required are significant, the horizons long, and 
the distribution Pareto improving. 
Theory  suggests  capital  should  flow  from  advanced  to  emerging  economies  –  where  the 
returns are highest. For long spells, however, the opposite has happened, confounding the 
textbooks and further driving down advanced economy bond yields. And on the occasions 
when  capital  has  flowed  to  emerging  markets,  it  has  been  too  volatile,  amplified  cycles, 
distorted asset prices and fed credit imbalances in recipient countries. 
In this context, green finance is a major opportunity. By ensuring that capital flows finance 
long-term projects in countries where growth is most carbon intensive, financial stability can 
be promoted. By absorbing excess global saving, equilibrium interest rates can be raised and 
macroeconomic  stability  enhanced.  And  by  allocating  capital  to  green  technologies,  the 
prospects for an environmentally sustainable recovery in global growth will increase. 
Seizing this opportunity requires a comprehensive climate policy framework. 
Paris brings forward the horizon 
III. 
With the Paris Agreement, governments have stepped up. 
In a display of international coordination of which Arthur Burns would have been proud, world 
leaders committed to curb carbon emissions and limit the rise in global average temperatures 
                                                
10  See Carney (2013), “The spirit of the season”, speech to the Economic Club of New York; Broadbent (2014), 
“Monetary  policy,  asset  prices  and  distribution”,  speech  at  the  Society  of  Business  Economists  Annual 
Conference; Bank of England Inflation Report, February 2014, page 40. 
11  See Broadbent (ibid.). 
12  See Rachel, L and Smith, T (2015), “Secular drivers of the global real interest rate”, Bank of England Working 
Paper No. 571.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  relative  to  those  in  the  pre-industrial  world  to  2°C,  and  to  pursue  efforts  to  limit  the 
temperature increase to 1.5°C.13 
Underpinning the Paris Agreement is recognition that the stock of greenhouse gases in the 
atmosphere  should  not  exceed  the  remaining  carbon  budget,  which  according  to  the 
Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC)  amounts  to  1000  gigatonnes  of  CO2 
from 2011 onwards.14 
Countries  have  set  their  ambitions  by  submitting  their  Nationally  Determined  Contributions 
(NDCs).15 At present, these commitments are of varying degrees of specificity, and most still 
need  to  be  fleshed  out  to  be  consistent  with  the  aggregate  carbon  budget.  The  Paris 
Agreement requires that NDCs be updated regularly and that each should be a progression 
on the last. 
Crucially,  the  Paris  Agreement  provided  an  objective  assessment  that,  even  if  all  of  the 
policies implied by the Agreement were implemented, global temperatures would rise by at 
least 2.7 degrees by 2100.16 In other words, the world has committed to do something, but 
not yet enough to meet its stated goals. 
Therefore,  Paris clarifies  actual  and  stretch  objectives.  It  provides  detailed  climate  policies 
and creates the prospect of a future ratcheting up of efforts. In doing so, it greatly increases 
transition risks as well as opportunities. By bringing forward the horizon, it puts a premium on 
the ability of private markets to adjust. 
Building a market in transition to a low-carbon economy 
IV. 
Smooth adjustment is crucial because transition risks are how success could turn into failure. 
Specifically,  sudden  changes  in  policy,  technology  and  physical  risks  could  prompt  a 
reassessment of asset values as costs and opportunities become apparent. In other words, 
an abrupt resolution of the tragedy of horizons is in itself a financial stability risk. 
We  have  already  seen  cases  where  there  have  been  sharp  changes  in  valuations.  The 
combined  market  capitalisation  of  the  top  four  US  coal  producers  has  fallen  by  over  99% 
since the end of 2010, and three have recently filed for bankruptcy (Chart 6).17 There has 
been similar, albeit less acute, drama for the more diversified German utilities (Chart 7). 
 
                                                
13  See  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change,  “Paris  Agreement”,  2015,  available  at: 
http://unfccc.int/files/essential_background/convention/application/pdf/english_paris_agreement.pdf.  
14  IPCC Synthesis Report (2014) and Bank calculations, in Batten, S, Sowerbutts, R, and Tanaka, M, “Let’s talk 
about  the  weather:  the  impact  of  climate  change  on  central  banks”,  Bank  of  England  Staff Working  Paper 
(2016). 
15  For example, the US will seek to reduce emissions against 2005 levels by 26–28% by 2025; China will seek to 
reduce against 2005 levels by 40–45% also by 2025 and the European Union will seek to reduce by more 
than 40% against 1990 levels by 2030.  
16  See United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, (2015). 
17  Those filing for bankruptcy were Peabody Energy, Arch Coal and Alpha Natural. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 End-2010 = 100
200
150
100
50
0
2010
Chart 6 
US coal sector index and S&P 500 against regulatory  
announcements and other demand factors 
China's
emissions 
reduction 
plan (a)
US MATS(b)
implemented
US NSPC (c)
US CCR(d)
S&P 500 (LHS)
US Clean Power 
Plan 
announced(e)
Natural gas 
price (RHS)
Dow Jones US Coal 
Index (LHS)
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
 US$/MMBTU
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Source: Thomson Reuters DataStream, Bank calculations. (a) The Chinese government announced emissions 
reductions  targets  in  March  2011,  which  may  have  contributed  to  slowing  of  coal  consumption,  including  a 
marked  slowdown  in  coal  imports  from  the  US.  (b)  Mercury  and  Air  Toxic  Standards  (MATS)  required 
installation  control  technology  which  a  large  share  of  coal plants  did  not  have.  (c)  New  Source  Performance 
Standards: raised efficiency requirements for new coal units. (d) The Coal Combustion Residuals (CCR) Rule 
introduced a set of requirements for the safe disposal of CCRs, commonly known as coal ash, from coal-fired 
power plants. (e) Proposed to reduce CO2 emissions by about 30% by 3030. 
Chart 7 
Share prices of German utilities and DAX 30 index,  
against key energy sector regulatory announcement 
End-2000 = 100
350
Renewable energy law passsed
Ambitious renewables
targets 
passed
Energy transition plan passed
Earlier phase out of nuclear plants 
decided
E ON
ENBW
RWE
DAX 30
2001
1999
Source: Thomson Reuters DataStream, Bank calculations. 
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Markets bring the future forward, with financial impacts often occurring immediately, even if 
the real impact is several years into the future. For example, in today’s low rate environment, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    around 90% of the value of the average German utility bond derives from cash flows beyond 
five years (Chart 8). 
Chart 8 
Net present value of a typical German utility bond with 30 year maturity  
> 5 years
< 5 years
% of total NPV 
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
 €A yield curve
5%
Discount rate
10%
Source:  Bank  calculations.  A  30-year  maturity  is  representative  of  bonds  recently  by  German  private 
utilities in 2015 and 2016. 
 
The  point  is  that  the  more  we  invest  with  foresight;  the  less  we  will  regret  in  hindsight. 
Financial  stability  risks  will  be  minimised  if  the  transition  begins  early  and  follows  a 
predictable path, thereby helping the market anticipate the transition to a two-degree world. 
And  that  requires  the  right  information.  On  this  front,  there  has  also  been  considerable 
progress in a short period of time. 
V. 
The task force on climate-related financial disclosures (TCFD) and the need 
for better information 
An  obstacle  to  a  smooth  adjustment  has  been  the  absence  of  information  to  help  market 
participants make a market in climate-related financial risk. Companies do not know what to 
report  or  how  to  report  it.  Investors  –  even  well-informed  ones  –  cannot  access  the 
information they need to assess the risks in their portfolios. 
In  late  2015,  at  the  request  of  G20  Leaders18,  the  FSB  established  an  industry-led  Task 
Force,  under  the  leadership  of  Michael  Bloomberg.  It  is  developing  recommendations  for 
voluntary,  consistent,  comparable,  reliable  and  clear  disclosures  around  climate-related 
financial risks for companies to provide information to lenders, insurers, investors and other 
stakeholders. 
Since a private sector solution is needed to get this right, the Task Force consists of a careful 
balance  of  issuers,  investors,  creditors,  rating  agencies,  accounting  firms  and  climate  risk 
                                                
18  The  G20  had  previously  asked,  in  its  April  2015  Communique,  that  the  FSB  “convene  public-  and  private-
sector participants to review how the financial sector can take account of climate-related issues”.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  experts.  Members  are  drawn  from  advanced  and  emerging  economies,  including  from  the 
German energy and auto sectors.19 
In April, the Task Force published for consultation its Phase I Report, which took stock of the 
existing landscape of disclosure initiatives and set out the scope and objectives of its work.20 
Initial  findings  confirmed  that  existing  schemes  vary  in  their  status  (from  laws  to  voluntary 
guidelines) and in their ambition (breadth and depth of disclosures). Disclosure is currently 
incomplete  and  fragmented,  with,  for  example,  only  around  a  third  of  the  top  1000  US 
companies producing broadly comparable information on the financial risks posed by climate 
change.21 
Let me offer an outside observer’s perspective on three of the core issues which the Task 
Force touched on in its Phase I Report and must address in its Final Report to be submitted 
to the G20 early in the German Presidency. 
First, static disclosures of current carbon footprints are not sufficient to reveal a company’s 
climate-related financial risks. Investors and creditors need to know the strategic as well as 
the static. 
A mix of forward-looking, and sufficiently granular, qualitative and quantitative information is 
needed  to  offer  real  insight  into  how  climate-related  risks  and  opportunities  may  impact  a 
firm’s existing and future business lines. This could include information on governance and 
management  of  such  risks,  and  on  a  firm’s  mitigation  strategy  and  its  financial  planning, 
including capital expenditures and R&D. 
Second, the robustness of a firm’s strategy and targets could be further illuminated through 
scenario analysis. For investors to price financial risks and opportunities correctly, they need 
to  weigh  firms’  strategies  against  plausible  public  policy  developments,  technological 
advances, and evolving physical risks. 
A  full  exploration  of  transition  risks  may  require  consideration  of  financial  risks  and 
opportunities under several scenarios. An important question is what form these scenarios 
should take. 
One option for a global firm operating across multiple markets could be to apply a transition 
scenario  that  takes  into  account  the  NDCs  of  the  countries  in  which  its  businesses  are 
located.  This  could  support  analysis  of  whether  a  company  is  under-  or  over-performing 
relative  to  articulated  policy  frameworks.  Another  very  relevant  scenario  is,  of  course,  the 
ultimate two-degree goal agreed in Paris. 
Firms  may  develop  their  own  transition  scenarios  or  build  on  commonly  available  models. 
The latter may prove useful to assess against the commitments made in Paris. Either way, 
the  assumptions  and  methodologies  will  need  to  be  sufficiently  transparent  to  allow  for 
comparisons and external challenge. 
Third, there may be merit in considering a proportionate approach that scales the granularity 
of  disclosures  to  the  risks  faced  by  firms.  As  a  proxy,  Calpers  estimates  that  out  of  the 
10,000 firms in their equity portfolio, 314 are responsible for 75% of the emissions.22 
In  determining  a  proportionate  approach,  I  would  caution,  however,  against  losing  sight  of 
one  of  the  potential  benefits  of  improved  disclosures,  namely  that  of  helping  to  make  a 
                                                
19  A full list of Task Force members can be found at: https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/about/#. 
20  See “Phase I Report of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures”, (March 2016), available at: 
https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/Phase_I_Report_v15.pdf. 
21  As  described  in  Ceres  (2014),  “Gaining  Ground  –  Corporate  Progress  on  the  Ceres  Roadmap  for 
Sustainability”. 
22  Forthcoming at: https://www.calpers.ca.gov. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  market. This requires that investors have the information they need to seek out prospective 
risks  and  rewards  across  all  sectors,  from  agriculture  to  car  manufacturing  to  consumer 
goods. 
I am pleased to report that the Task Force is getting to grips with these thorny issues and is 
on track to report to the FSB later this year and to submit its Final Report to the German G20 
Presidency in early 2017. 
for  both 
long-term 
Mainstreaming green finance 
VI. 
Financing  the  de-carbonisation  of  our  economies  implies  a  sweeping  reallocation  of 
resources and a technological revolution. 
The International Energy Agency estimates that globally as much as €45 trillion of investment 
in  total  could  be  needed  in  power  supply  and  end-use  efficiency  to  meet  the  two-degree 
target agreed in Paris.23 China alone is likely to require around €500 billion a year from 2016 
to 2020 to finance its national environmental goals.24 A substantial proportion of this is likely 
to be raised off shore, absorbing excess global savings, helping to push up global equilibrium 
interest rates, and ultimately increasing global growth. 
With  investment  in  long-term  infrastructure  assets  needing  to quadruple,  green  investment 
represents  a  major  opportunity 
investors  and  macroeconomic 
policymakers  seeking  to  jump-start  growth.  For  this  to  happen,  however,  green  finance 
cannot conceivably remain a niche interest over the medium term. 
That’s why, at the request of G20 Leaders, authorities are exploring ways to mobilise private 
capital for green investments. During 2016, under China’s G20 Presidency, a Green Finance 
Study Group (GFSG)25, undertook a stocktake of institutional and market barriers to green 
finance and identified ways to mobilise private capital for green investment. 
One  proposal  is  international  collaboration  to  facilitate  cross-border  investment  in  green 
bonds. 
The development of this new global asset class is an opportunity to advance a low carbon 
future while raising global investment and spurring growth. 
For  investors,  green  bond  markets  offer  a  stable,  rated  and  liquid  investment  with  long 
duration. For issuers, green bonds are a way to tap the huge US$100 trillion pool of patient 
private capital managed by global institutional fixed-income investors. The shift to the capital 
markets  from  banks  will  also  free  up  limited  bank  balance  sheet  capacity  for  early-stage 
project financing and other important infrastructure lending. 
The  green  bond  market  is  gradually  gathering  speed.  Annual  issuance  rose  from  just 
US$3 billion in 2012 to US$42 billion in 2015.26 It could double this year with issuers ranging 
from US regional authorities raising funds domestically to invest in water projects, to Chinese 
and Indian corporates, issuing in a range of currencies, in major financial centres, including 
London, to finance renewable energy projects.27 
                                                
23  This figure consists of (i) investment that will be needed to stay in line with current policy commitments and 
(ii) additional  investment  needed  to  achieve  a  least-cost  two  degree  outcome.  See:  International  Energy 
Agency, World Energy Outlook 2015. 
24  See “Green Finance – A Growing Imperative”, Paulson Institute, SIFMA, Green Finance Committee, UNEP 
Inquiry, 2016.  
25  The GFSG was jointly chaired by the Bank of England and People’s Bank of China, with the United Nations 
Environment Programme providing the secretariat.  
26  See Climate Bonds Initiative, “2015 Green Bond Market Round-up”.   
27  For a list of green bonds issued see: https://www.climatebonds.net/cbi/pub/data/bonds.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  Despite  this  progress,  total  issuance  still  accounts  for  less  than  1%  of  holdings  by  global 
institutional investors. 
To reach escape velocity, market participants and public authorities will need to coordinate to 
deliver  common  green  bond  frameworks  and  definitions,  and  other  necessary  supporting 
infrastructure, to build local and cross-border markets. 
Specific measures could include: 
• 
Developing  a  “term  sheet”  of  internationally  recognised  standardised  terms  and 
conditions for a green bond. 
Creating  voluntary  definitional  frameworks,  certification  and  validation  to  give 
certainty to issuers and investors that the project being financed is “green”. 
Integrating environmental risk and green certification into credit ratings. 
Developing green bond indices to unlock the potential investment power of passively 
managed investments. 
Assessing the scope for standardisation and harmonisation of principles for green 
bond listings to promote efficient trading and adequate liquidity. 
   Authorities are now working with the private sector to develop a green bond term sheet with 
standardised  terms  and  conditions.28  This  should  significantly  improve  the  ease  and 
efficiency  of  green  bond  issuance  and  simplify  investor  access  to  green  bond  markets  in 
multiple currencies, thereby moving them into the mainstream of finance. 
Conclusion: markets that value the future 
VI. 
Financial policymakers will not drive the transition to a low-carbon economy. Governments 
will establish the frameworks, and the private sector will make the investments. 
Nonetheless, financial policymakers do have a clear interest in ensuring the financial system 
is  resilient  to  any  transition  hastened  by  those  decisions.  Our  role  is  to  help  develop  the 
frameworks for markets to adjust efficiently. 
Given  the  uncertainties  around  climate,  not  everyone  will  agree  on  the  timing  or  scale  of 
adjustment required. The right information allows sceptics and evangelists alike to back their 
convictions with their capital. 
A market in the transition to a two-degree world can be built. It will reveal how the valuations 
of companies that produce and use fossil fuels might change over time. 
It  will  expose  the  likely  future  cost  of  doing  business,  paying  for  emissions,  changing 
processes to avoid those charges, and tighter regulation. 
It will help smooth price adjustments as opinions change, rather than concentrating them at a 
single climate “Minsky moment”. 
And it would allow feedback between the market and policymaking, making climate policy a 
bit  more  like  monetary  policy,  with  policymakers  learning  from  markets’  reactions,  and 
markets internalising policymakers’ objectives, strategies and instruments. 
When rates are low, the present value of future returns and risks are greater. 
                                                
28  Specific issues being addressed include: (i) ensuring use of proceeds is clearly delineated for a green project 
or activity; (ii) issuers having a clearly defined process to validate proceeds are being used for intended, and 
stated  purpose;  (iii)  a  clear,  transparent  and  regular  mechanism  for  reporting  the  use  of  proceeds,  often 
involving second or third-party verification; and (iv) finally an appropriate dispute mechanism for when these 
other conditions are not met.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  That  is  why  a  vocal  minority  are  already  calling  on  businesses  to  invest  for  the  future, 
including  by  supporting  the  transition  to  a  low  carbon  economy,  and  for  investors  to 
internalise the risks and opportunities of climate change.29 
With better information as a foundation, we can build a virtuous circle of better understanding 
of  tomorrow’s  risks,  better  pricing  for  investors,  better  decisions  by  policymakers,  and  a 
smoother transition to a lower-carbon economy. 
By managing what gets measured, and building a mainstream green bond market, we can 
help resolve the Tragedy of the Horizon. 
The  G20  –  whose  members  account  for  around  85%  of  global  emissions  –  has  a  unique 
responsibility. The German Presidency could be decisive. 
                                                
29  For  example,  Blackrock,  the  world’s  largest  asset  manager,  has  called  on  businesses  to  lengthen  their 
horizons, and for all investors to take the risks and opportunities of climate change into account. Larry Fink, 
Chief Executive at Blackrock, sent a letter to chief executives at S&P 500 and large European corporations in 
February 2016.  See also Blackrock, “Adapting portfolios to climate change”, (September 2016).   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
