   Raghuram Rajan: Issues in banking today 
Speech by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Confederation 
of Indian Industry’s (CII) first Banking Summit, Mumbai, 11 February 2016. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  here  today.  In  a  country  that  is  growing  at  above  7  percent,  is 
brimming with entrepreneurial zeal, has a young population which has grown up with mobile 
technology, one would think that the banking sector would be buoyant. Yet the recent decline 
in bank share prices has investors on the edge. Of course, part of the reason is that markets 
are in turmoil. Some of the greater decline of bank share prices can therefore be explained by 
the fact that they are seen as a leveraged play on the economy. On bad days, they move down 
more, on good days they move up more. With markets generally in decline, the decline in bank 
share prices has been more accentuated. 
However, part of the reason is that some bank results, mainly public sector banks, have not 
been, to put it mildly, pretty. Clearly, an important factor has been the Asset Quality Review 
(AQR) conducted by the Reserve Bank and its aftermath. So it may be useful to understand 
the rationale for the AQR, the process, and what I believe will be the outcome. 
Dealing with stressed loans 
Over time, as you know, a number of large projects in the economy have run into difficulty. 
Reasons, as Mr. Mundra articulated this morning, include poor project evaluation, extensive 
project delays, poor monitoring and cost overruns, and the effects of global overcapacity on 
prices and imports. Loans to these projects have become stressed. 
There are two polar approaches to loan stress. One is to apply band aids to keep the loan 
current, and hope that time and growth will set the project back on track. Sometimes this works. 
But most of the time, the low growth that precipitated the stress persists. The fresh lending 
intended to keep the original loan current grows. Facing large and potentially unpayable debt, 
the promoter loses interest, does little to fix existing problems, and the project goes into further 
losses. 
An alternative approach is to try to put the stressed project back on track rather than simply 
applying band aids. This may require deep surgery. Existing loans may have to be written 
down somewhat because of the changed circumstances since they were sanctioned. If loans 
are written down, the promoter brings in more equity, and other stakeholders like the tariff 
authorities or the local government chip in, the project may have a strong chance of revival, 
and the promoter will be incentivized to try his utmost to put it back on track. 
But to do deep surgery such as restructuring or writing down loans, the bank has to recognize 
it has a problem – classify the asset as a Non Performing Asset (NPA). Think therefore of the 
NPA  classification  as  an  anesthetic  that  allows  the  bank  to  perform  extensive  necessary 
surgery to set the project back on its feet. If the bank wants to pretend that everything is all 
right with the loan, it can only apply band aids – for any more drastic action would require NPA 
classification. 
Loan classification is merely good accounting – it reflects what the true value of the loan might 
be. It is accompanied by provisioning, which ensures the bank sets aside a buffer to absorb 
likely losses. If the losses do not materialize, the bank can write back provisioning to profits. If 
the losses do materialize, the bank does not have to suddenly declare a big loss, it can set the 
losses  against  the  prudential  provisions  it  has  made.  Thus  the  bank  balance  sheet  then 
represents a true and fair picture of the bank’s health, as a bank balance sheet is meant to. Of 
course,  we  can  postpone  the  day  of  reckoning  with  regulatory  forbearance.  But  unless 
conditions in the industry improve suddenly and dramatically, the bank balance sheets present 
a distorted picture of health, and the eventual hole becomes bigger. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   In 2008–9, after the global financial crisis, the Reserve Bank agreed to forbear on certain kinds 
of stressed loan restructuring, hoping that this was a temporary need pending stronger growth. 
Unfortunately, for a variety of reasons, the stress has not been temporary, and growth in these 
sectors has proved elusive. Therefore, early in the process, the Reserve Bank set about giving 
banks  the  tools  to  deal  with  stressed  loans,  including  information  about  the  degree  of  the 
borrower’s collective indebtedness from the system and more effective ways to reduce the 
project’s financial stress such as the Joint Lender’s Forum, the Strategic Debt Restructuring 
mechanism, and the 5/25 mechanism. In a way, the RBI has been trying to create a functioning 
resolution process in a situation where the existing bankruptcy system functions poorly. 
Asset quality review 
Of course, every new tool can be used to deal with a problem, but also perversely, to avoid it. 
So after giving banks the tools, the RBI ended forbearance in April 2015, and then started the 
Asset  Quality  Review  to  ensure  that  banks  were  taking  proactive  steps  to  clean  up  their 
balance sheets. Working with the banks, our supervisors, led superbly by our head of banking 
supervision, Ms. Parvathy Vairasundaram, our Executive Director for supervision, Ms. Meena 
Hemchandra, and, of course, our Deputy Governor, Shri S.S. Mundra, identified loans that 
were of concern, as well as loans that had potential weaknesses. For the loans that are of 
concern, the banks are attempting to regularize the loans that can be put back on track, and 
are classifying those that cannot for deeper surgery – and taking provisions in accordance with 
the degree of extant stress in the loan. They will also make provisions for loans that have 
weaknesses. Our intent is to have clean and fully provisioned bank balance sheets by March 
2017. 
Why not do everything in one go rather than over a period of six quarters? Precisely because 
a number of these loans can be regularized, or stabilized when weak but regular, through the 
right  collective  actions.  Sometimes,  an  NPA  classification,  even  while  permitting  deeper 
surgery, prompts risk aversion on the part of bank boards and they stop lending even when 
the project is viable. We need to overcome this view – we have issued circulars stating that a 
loan to a project whose other loans are NPA does not automatically become an NPA – but it 
will take time. Pending the change in attitude, which I think will come as banks turn to unlocking 
the value in NPAs, we are working with them to sequence the most obvious actions up front. 
However, the end game is clear to everyone and bounded. We do not envisage a sequence 
of AQRs. 
Having pointed out the contours of the task to be accomplished, our teams are working with 
the banks to ensure that they are all broadly on the same page in terms of recognition and 
provisioning,  even  though  each  one  has  flexibility  on  individual  cases.  This  means  that 
December 2015 quarter results can be compared across banks to get a rough sense of the 
task each bank has to accomplish. Some banks have expressed an intent to moves faster, so 
as to put the problem behind them, and we have not held them back. We have not put out any 
of our final estimates because we believe it is a moving target, with more bank action, promoter 
response, and growth diminishing the eventual cost. It is important to recall that underlying 
many of these stressed loans is an economically viable productive asset, not ghost townships. 
A lot of work has gone into this review, including many meetings with the Government at every 
level including the highest. The Government has been fully involved and supportive. We have 
mapped out a variety of scenarios on possible outcomes. The Finance Minister has indicated 
he will support the public sector banks with capital infusions as needed. Our estimate is that 
the Government support that has been indicated will suffice. Our various scenarios also show 
private sector banks will not want for regulatory capital as a result of this exercise. Finally, the 
RBI is also working on identifying currently non-recognizable capital that is already on bank 
balance sheets, such as undervalued assets. The RBI could allow some of these to count as 
capital as per Basel norms, provided a bank meets minimum common equity standards. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   There  are  some  wild  claims  being  made  by  some  financial  analysts  about  the  size  of  the 
stressed asset problem. This verges on scare-mongering. Our projections are that any breach 
of minimum core capital requirements by a small minority of public sector banks, in the absence 
of any recapitalization, will be small. They will need government equity or preference share 
infusion since they are typically banks that will find it difficult to raise equity in the markets. A 
few others will need a top up of their capital to ensure they have a reasonable buffer over and 
above minimum capital. What the Government has already explicitly committed is, in our view, 
enough to take care of all reasonable scenarios, and the Government has committed to stand 
behind its banks to whatever extent needed. The RBI will provide whatever liquidity is needed 
by any bank that needs it, though we do not foresee liquidity stress. 
In sum, while the profitability of some banks may be impaired in the short run, the system, once 
cleaned,  will  be  able  to support  economic growth  in  a  sustainable  and profitable  way.  The 
economic assets of our public sector banks, such as the trust they are held in by the population, 
their knowledgeable employees, their location and reach, and the low-cost funding they have 
access to, can then be fully realized. 
Why now? 
Why  now? Why  did  we  have  to  pick this  period of global market turmoil for  banks to  start 
cleaning up? Why not let growth take care of the problem? As I have already said, the process 
started in April 2015. We knew at that time that the global economy would continue to be weak 
but not that markets would be in turmoil today. Nevertheless, this simply reinforces our belief 
that we needed to act when we did. 
While growth will help the system, it would likely be significantly impaired if we did not nudge 
the process of clean up. Non-food credit growth from public sector banks, the more stressed 
part of the system, grew at only 6.6% over the calendar year 2015. Industrial credit growth for 
PSBs was only 3.3% while growth in lending to agriculture and allied lending was only 10.4%. 
The only area of strength was personal loans, where growth was 16.9 %. In contrast, non-food 
credit growth in private sector banks was 20.2 %, in agriculture 25.4%, in industry 14.6%, and 
23.5% in personal loans. Put differently, in each of these areas except personal loans, loan 
growth in private sector banks was at least 10 percentage points higher than public sector 
banks, while loan growth in personal loans was 6.6 percentage points higher. 
The most plausible explanation I have is that the stressed balance sheet of public sector banks 
is  occupying  management  attention  and  holding  them  back,  and  the  only  way  for  them  to 
supply the economy’s need for credit, which is essential for higher economic growth, is to clean 
up. The silver lining message in the slower credit growth is that banks have not been lending 
indiscriminately in an attempt to reduce the size of stressed assets in an expanded overall 
balance sheet, and this bodes well for future slippages. In sum, to the question of what comes 
first, clean up or growth, I think the answer is unambiguously “Clean up!” Indeed, this is the 
lesson from every other country that has faced financial stress. 
Some citizens are outraged by the size of the losses that will have to eventually be absorbed 
and want the perpetrators to be brought to justice. Let me emphasize that all NPAs are not 
because of malfeasance. Indeed, most are not. Loans can go bad even if the promoter has the 
best intent and banks do the fullest due diligence before sanctioning. Nevertheless, where 
there is evidence of malfeasance by the promoter, it is extremely important that the full force 
of the law is brought against him, even while banks make every effort to put the project, and 
the workers who depend on it, back on track. This is why we have strengthened the fraud 
detection and monitoring mechanism, and look forward to bank support to make it effective. 
The  Government  is  taking  direct  action  to  clear  bottlenecks  and  revive  stalled  stressed 
projects, and intends to support them with equity infusion through the National Investment and 
Infrastructure Fund. Private well-funded players are looking to buy assets, and in recent weeks 
we have seen some promoters sell assets to raise money to pay banks or infuse in projects. 
All this activity bodes well for the success of the clean up. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Improving bank management and governance 
We must also ensure that we are not faced with this situation again. The Government, through 
the Indradhanush initiative, has sent a clear signal that it wants to make sure that public sector 
banks,  once  healthy,  stay  healthy.  Strengthening  Board  and  management  appointments, 
decentralizing  more  decisions  to  the  professional  board,  finding  ways  to  incentivize 
management, all these will help improve loan evaluation, monitoring and repayment. Banks 
must  review  their  procedures  to  ensure  they  can  make  good  credit  decisions.  The  new 
bankruptcy  code,  when  enacted,  will  finally  give  creditors  a  way  of  collecting  repayment 
through the judicial process in reasonable time. So my hope and belief is that the next time will 
be different for public sector banks – they will emerge from this clean up stronger and more 
capable. 
Liquidity 
Let me turn to a final issue, unrelated to the AQR, that is, system wide liquidity. The RBI has 
been infusing plenty of liquidity in the system to offset any seasonal build up in Government 
balances. Indeed, money market rates have dipped dramatically on some days because of the 
liquidity infusion. Nevertheless, market participants have complained about shortage. 
We invited a number of market participants to the Reserve Bank to discuss their concerns. 
While  we  are  still  trying  to  understand  which  of  their  concerns  have  merit  and  can  be 
addressed, we are acting today on one issue that we were cognizant of, the use of SLR bonds 
to  meet  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  needs.  While  the  circular  was  in  the  works,  we  have 
expedited its issue because of what we heard from the participants. As of today, we will allow 
banks to count 3 percentage points more of their SLR holdings towards LCR requirements. A 
more detailed announcement will be released this evening. 
In conclusion 
The market turmoil will pass. The clean-up will get done, and Indian banks will be restored to 
health. While we should not underplay the dimensions of the task, we should be confident that 
it is manageable and that the Government and the RBI will do what it takes to make sure that 
banks are able to support the tremendous growth that lies ahead. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
