  Ravi Menon: Singapore’s financial centre – resilience, dynamism, trust 
Speech by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, to the 
Foreign Correspondents Association of Singapore, Singapore, 6 September 2016. 
 Good afternoon. I accepted your invitation to speak not without some trepidation. 
• 
The  Foreign  Correspondents  Association  in  any  country  makes  for  a  formidable 
audience. 
But  I  figured  that  if  you  were  going  to  write  about  Singapore’s  financial  sector  or 
economy, it might as well be with at least some residue at the back of your minds of 
what MAS has to say. 
In  any  case,  having  partaken  of  your  generous  luncheon  meal,  it  is  too  late  to 
escape now. 
  Before I go any further, some disclosures: 
• 
If you came for this luncheon expecting to hear about 1MDB, I am sorry I will not be 
mentioning that word or anything associated with it for the rest of my remarks. 
I am also sorry I have no juicy announcements to make. For central bankers and 
regulators, no news is generally good news. 
So,  if  you  want  to  slip  away  quietly,  now  would  be  a  good  time  to  do  so.  I  will 
pretend I did not notice. 
  This  afternoon,  I  want  to  share  my  thoughts  with  you  on  how  the  MAS  sees  the  financial 
sector. Many of you, especially from abroad, are sometimes intrigued by MAS’ role as both 
regulator and developer of the financial sector. 
• 
As one of you put it recently, the adjectives used by bankers to describe the MAS 
are “no-nonsense”, “business-friendly”, “pragmatic”. 
You will be forgiven to think that we are sometimes schizophrenic. 
In my meetings with foreign bank CEOs, I have sometimes, in the same breath, said 
we  would like to see an improvement in the bank’s risk management and internal 
controls  and  then  asked  what  we  could  do  to  encourage  the  bank  to  expand  its 
operations in Singapore – safely of course! 
 Let me explain why we are both “no-nonsense” and “business-friendly”. 
The financial services sector is one of the key pillars of the Singapore economy. 
• 
It accounts for about 13% of GDP and has strong positive demand spillovers on the 
rest of the economy. 
The sector employs about 200,000 people, 84% of them are Singapore citizens and 
PRs. 
– 
– 
It creates good jobs. 
The median wage for Singaporeans in financial services is $6,400, compared 
to the national median of $4,000. 
 Financial services will become even more important in the future economy. 
• 
The sector grew by an average of 8.6% p.a. during the last five years (2011–2015), 
two times faster than the overall economy at 4.0%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  If the sector continues to grow twice as fast as the economy over the next five years 
– not easy but we aim to – financial services will make up 14% of the economy in 
2020, compared to 11% in 2010. 
 Now, the bad news. 
The financial sector is inherently vulnerable to risk and volatility. 
• 
  As  crisis  after  crisis  has  shown,  problems  in  the  financial  sector  quickly  become 
problems for the entire economy. 
The  Global  Financial  Crisis  imposed  a  tremendous  cost  with  the  global  economy 
estimated to have lost 5 percentage points of growth between 2007 and 2009, not to 
mention the human dimension in jobs lost and companies closed. 
As  an  international  financial  centre  –  connected  to  the  global  network  of  financial 
flows  and  playing  host  to  hundreds  of  foreign  financial  institutions  –  Singapore  is 
particularly vulnerable to contagion and shocks from abroad. 
  The global financial industry is facing unprecedented headwinds. 
• 
We  are  looking  at  a  prolonged  period  of  low  growth  and  low  interest  rates  –  a 
combination  that  spells  reduced  earnings  and  increased  risks  for  most  financial 
institutions. 
The  regulatory  and  compliance  burden  has  increased  significantly, following  wide-
ranging regulatory reforms in the wake of the global financial crisis. 
The reforms were necessary to help make global finance safer; but their cumulative 
effects  do  pose  a  challenge  for  the  profitability  of  financial  institutions,  especially 
banks. 
Unprofitable banks are not necessarily safe banks. 
• 
Finally, the financial industry in many parts of the world is facing a crisis of trust. 
• 
Financial institutions have come under increasing public scrutiny over their business 
conduct. 
Globally,  we  have  seen  repeated  cases  of  mis-selling 
financial  products, 
manipulating benchmark rates, and using the financial system for illicit transactions. 
Singapore’s financial sector has to overcome these headwinds and manage these risks as it 
develops further. And it must do this while seizing on opportunities presented by a growing 
Asia and technological change. 
Let me touch on three attributes that our financial sector needs to maintain and strengthen in 
the years ahead: resilience, dynamism, and trust. 
 A resilient financial centre 
I will start with resilience. 
• 
We  cannot  insulate  our  financial  sector  from  the  stresses  and  turbulence  in 
international financial markets. 
• 
We must remain open but be able to absorb shocks from abroad and bounce back. 
High  prudential  standards  have  therefore  been  a  hallmark  of  Singapore’s  financial  sector 
since the very beginning. 
• 
In recent years, we have further strengthened the resilience of the system through 
higher capital requirements and enhanced liquidity rules. 
Singapore banks operate well above the regulatory capital minimums. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The Basel Committee prescribes a minimum Tier 1 capital adequacy ratio of 6%; 
MAS has set a regulatory minimum of 8%; 
The three local banking groups have Tier 1 ratios in excess of 13%. 
• 
• 
• 
Singapore banks are well-placed to meet the Basel III leverage ratio requirements, currently 
proposed as 3%. 
• 
MAS  has  had  a  liquidity  requirement  long  before  an  international  standard  was  developed 
and has recently increased the risk sensitivity of our liquidity rules. 
• 
The three local banks’ Liquidity Coverage Ratio or LCR is already well above 100%, 
the target set by the Basel Committee for 2019. 
In fact, the three local banks have leverage ratios above 7%. 
These strong buffers – built up in good times – are now serving us well as we enter a soft 
patch in economic conditions. 
• 
The banking system’s ratio of non-performing loans went up to 1.9 % in Q2, from 
1.3% a year ago. 
But  the  banking  system  has  set  aside  provisions  to  cover  more  than  100%  of  its 
NPLs. 
 The O&G industry has been under pressure from low global oil prices for some time. 
We expect to see some of that pressure showing up in our banks’ NPLs. 
There have been concerns raised about the impact of the oil and gas (O&G) sector. 
• 
• 
The banks have been actively managing the risks from the O&G sector. 
• 
The  banking  system’s  exposures  to  the  O&G  sector  as  a  proportion  of  total 
exposures (i.e. including non-bank loans, debt securities and contingent liabilities) is 
less than 10%. 
Among the local banks, O&G exposures are even lower, at about 6%. 
• 
It is also important to appreciate that there is no systemic problem across the O&G industry. 
The  problems  in  the  O&G  industry  are  concentrated  in  the  upstream  marine  and 
• 
offshore engineering segment which makes up less than one-fifth of the industry. 
About  60%  of  the  surveyed  banks’  O&G  exposures  are  to  the  more  resilient 
downstream,  oil  trading,  and  integrated  firms,  which  are  less  impacted  by  the 
decline in oil prices. 
Firms focusing on oil refining have also fared better on account of regional demand 
for refined petroleum products and lower feedstock prices. 
  The most recent stress tests conducted by the MAS indicates that the banking system would 
not do too badly even under some pretty severe scenarios. 
The stress scenario assumed: 
• 
the US, EU, Japan and several emerging Asian economies slipping into recession 
and China’s economic growth falling below 3%; 
sharp  depreciation  in  regional  currencies  and  oil  and  commodity  prices  falling  by 
another 50% over 3 years; 
a  protracted  recession  in  Singapore  with  resident  unemployment  spiking  to  more 
than 6%; 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   property prices falling by another 50% over 3 years, with similar declines in China 
and Hong Kong; and 
the banks’ top O&G counterparties failing. 
Banks will continue to meet the Basel minimum capital requirements comfortably. 
And they will have sufficient liquidity to meet their cash flows. 
• 
Under these rather dire conditions, the banks’ NPL ratios could rise to 8–10% by the end of 
2018. That should not be surprising. What’s important is that the banking system will be able 
to absorb these losses. 
• 
• 
This  resilience  did  not  come  about  by  accident.  It  reflects  prudence  and  sound  financial 
management in the financial industry: 
• 
• 
• 
building up capital and liquidity buffers; 
identifying and managing risks proactively; 
provisioning against losses conservatively. 
A dynamic financial centre 
I have talked about imagining the worst and preparing for it – that is resilience. Let me now 
talk about seizing opportunities – that requires dynamism. 
Our financial sector has been able to grow handsomely because it is plugged into the region 
– which is growing two to three times faster than our own economy. 
• 
• 
But the continued growth of the financial sector is not a given. 
MAS  and  the  financial  industry  have  been  working  hard  together  to  realise  this 
potential. 
A key priority is to strengthen infrastructure. Let me give an example. 
Emerging  Asia  has  enormous  infrastructure  needs.  At  the  same  time,  global  investors  are 
seeking investment projects with good, long-term yields. There ought to be a good match. 
Yet, for all the promise and rhetoric, infrastructure finance has not really taken off. 
• 
The  basic  problem  is  this:  infrastructure  projects  are  not  structured  in  a  way  that 
would draw investors. 
MAS has been working closely with stakeholders to improve the bankability of projects. 
• 
There  is  now  a  recommended  template  to  help  regional  governments  structure 
meaningful public-private-partnership agreements for infrastructure projects. 
The latest innovation is an infrastructure debt takeout facility. 
• 
By  providing  a  guaranteed  takeout  arrangement,  the  facility  will  enhance  banks’ 
ability to originate, arrange and provide infrastructure project finance loans. 
At the same time, it will make it easier for institutional investors to invest in long-term 
infrastructure debt instruments as an asset class. 
 Second, we need to deepen our markets. 
Take the asset management industry, where Singapore plays the role of a regional hub with 
S$2.6  trillion  of  assets  under  management.  To  deepen  our  market,  we  are  embarking  on 
several initiatives: 
• 
To add diversity and resilience to the industry, we are seeking to anchor sovereign 
wealth funds and pension funds. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     To  fund  managers  who  use  Singapore  as  their  hub  for  Asian  growth,  build  their 
investment capabilities and strengthen their local talent pool, MAS is giving out more 
investment mandates. 
To facilitate the domiciliation of funds in Singapore, MAS together with the Ministry 
of Finance is putting in place a more efficient corporate fund administration structure 
for asset managers. 
To meet the growing demand for family offices, we are providing greater clarity on 
the regulatory treatment of single family offices. 
The  third  way  in  which  we  build  dynamism  in  the  financial  sector  is  by  enhancing 
connectivity. 
One of Singapore’s key roles as a financial centre is to connect investors and markets across 
Asia and beyond. Our expanding financial ties with China is a good example. 
Singapore is one of the top three offshore RMB centres globally. 
• 
Singapore’s  financial  centre  has  played  a  constructive  role  in  supporting  the 
internationalisation of the RMB. 
This has in turn helped to forge stronger trade and investment links between China 
and South-east Asia. 
 Singapore also offers a gateway for the expansion of Chinese corporates into the region. 
• 
• 
More than 6,500 Chinese enterprises are established in Singapore. 
Many  of  them  have  based  their  regional  headquarters  in  Singapore  to cover  their 
Southeast  Asia  portfolio  –  well-known  firms  like  Xiaomi,  Alibaba,  Haier,  Baosteel 
and Qingjian, to name a few. 
As  an  international  financial  centre,  Singapore  offers  Chinese  corporates  the  necessary 
breadth and depth of banking and capital market services – from advice on regional markets 
to funding solutions. 
A trusted financial centre 
The third key attribute for the success of Singapore’s financial centre is trust. 
• 
Financial  institutions  from  all  over  the  world  come  to  Singapore  because  this  is  a 
jurisdiction they can trust. 
There  is  rule  of  law,  clarity  and  consistency  in  regulation,  rigour  and  fairness  in 
supervision, and no tolerance for misconduct. 
 market misconduct and misdemeanours; and 
illicit finance, namely money laundering and terrorism financing. 
Upholding  high  standards  of  integrity  in  the  financial  industry  is  an  absolute  priority.  This 
means having an effective regime against: 
• 
• 
MAS  is  stepping  up  enforcement  action  against  misconduct  such  as  insider  trading,  false 
trading and front running by individuals and traders in the securities market. 
• 
We have sought criminal actions or higher civil penalties to send the right deterrent 
message. 
In  April  last  year,  MAS  imposed  a  civil  penalty  of  close  to  $12  million  for  insider 
trading – the highest quantum in a single case so far. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  When  it  comes  to  anti-money  laundering  and  countering  the  financing  of  terrorism 
(AML/CFT), the rules are strict and in line with international standards. Financial institutions 
must: 
• 
• 
• 
Supervision of financial institutions is rigorous. 
• 
know their customers; 
assess the risks and perform additional due diligence where the risks are higher; 
monitor transactions on an ongoing basis and report any suspicious activities. 
In recent years, MAS has stepped up its onsite supervision of AML/CFT controls – 
increasing the number of inspections by six-fold. 
This  is  resource-intensive  business:  each  AML/CFT  inspection  of  a  bank  takes 
about 4–8 weeks and involves 4–6 supervisors. 
 We have now set up a dedicated AML Department. We will: 
• 
make  more  robust  risk  assessments  of  financial  institutions’  business  activities, 
client  profiles,  geographical  connections,  transaction  volumes,  and  quality  of 
controls; 
intensify supervision of financial institutions that pose higher risks; 
conduct  thematic  inspections  of  activities  that  pose  higher  risk  across  financial 
institutions; and 
step up engagement with financial institutions to promote deeper understanding of 
emerging risks and typologies as well as best practices to mitigate these risks. 
put in place robust monitoring mechanisms to detect suspicious activities; 
promote strong risk awareness and constant vigilance among all staff; and 
empower their compliance and risk management people. 
But MAS cannot inspect every bank every year. Nor can we go through all transactions. And 
we certainly do not set out to detect fraud – which would take months of intense scrutiny. 
Responsibility  for  AML/CFT  rests  with  the  board  and  senior  management  of  financial 
institutions. They must: 
• 
• 
• 
My  advice  to  senior  managers  in  our  financial  institutions  is  this:  keep  your  risk  and 
compliance people close to you. 
• 
• 
• 
Ultimately, trust and conduct boil down to culture more than any externally imposed rules. By 
culture,  I  mean  the  shared  values,  attitudes  and  norms  that  guide  behaviour.  Financial 
institutions must get the culture right. 
This requires setting the right moral tone from the top. 
• 
They are often seen as hindering opportunity and profits. 
But when things go wrong, you wish you had heeded them. 
When they say ‘I think something’s not right here’, listen to them. 
Boards and senior management in particular must send a clear signal that profits do 
not come before values and ethics. 
Compensation  structures  must  motivate  not  just  high  performance  but  also  right 
conduct. 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion 
Good fortune has played a role in the growth of Singapore’s financial sector. 
• 
Our  financial  centre  has  benefited  from  connecting  one  of  the  fastest  growing 
regions in the world with global markets. 
But  fortune  can  be  fickle  and  economic  cycles  will  turn.  To  stay  relevant  and  thrive  as  a 
financial centre requires us: 
• 
• 
• 
MAS  is  committed  to  working  with  the  industry  and  all  our  stakeholders  –  including  an 
inquisitive and fair media – to ensure that. Thank you. 
to remain resilient through good times and bad; 
to be dynamic in serving the changing needs of the region; and at all times 
to be trusted as a clean and credible place to do business in. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
