   Karnit Flug: The challenges facing short- and long-term economic policy 
Main  point  of  remarks  by  Dr  Karnit  Flug,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  Calcalist 
conference  “The  challenges 
long-term  economic  policy”,  Tel-Aviv, 
30 December 2015. 
facing  short-and 
 I would like to relate in these remarks to the challenges facing macroeconomic policy: monetary 
policy, under the auspices of the Bank of Israel, which is focused on smoothing the short-term 
effect of volatility in the economy (business cycles) on inflation and on growth and employment; 
and fiscal and structural policy, which is focused on achieving inclusive growth that will support 
an increase in the standard of living of the entire population over time. 
Two days ago, the Bank of Israel Research Department published its macroeconomic forecast 
for the coming two years, from which we can assess the trends forecast for the short term. 
The  growth  forecast  was  revised  downward,  influenced  by  a  further  downward  revision  of 
global growth and global trade forecasts. The forecast projects continued moderate growth of 
2.8 percent in 2016, and some acceleration in the following year. Exports are expected to grow 
in accordance with the global trade forecast, and private consumption is expected to moderate 
slightly, following a relatively sharp increase in 2015. 
This is the main scenario of the forecast. However, it is important to remember that there is 
uncertainty surrounding the forecast – as there is with any forecast – as presented graphically 
in the fan chart (which presents the range of projections with a likelihood of 66 percent). Some 
of the uncertainty regarding growth in Israel is derived from similar uncertainty that exists in 
relation to the global environment that will exist during that period. It is important to remember 
that monetary policy affects inflation and growth with a lag. In other words, it is forward-looking, 
and therefore, by definition, it operates under uncertainty. 
Another illustration of the uncertainty, as well as the dynamism, of the environment in which 
we  are  operating  can  be  seen  in  the  significant  revisions  of  the  forecasts  made  by  the 
international organizations (in this case the IMF) in relation to global growth and – even more 
importantly for the Israeli economy – in relation to growth in global trade. During the past year, 
the forecast for global trade was revised downward by 2 percentage points for each of the 
years 2015 and 2016, which obviously has an impact on the forecast for Israeli exports, and 
therefore on the growth of the economy in general. 
As we know, inflation has been very low for the past two years – far below the inflation target 
– and is expected to remain low during the coming year as well. Despite that, it is important to 
note that the  inflation target  regime  continues to  enjoy trust,  as  shown  in  the medium  and 
longer-term inflation expectations. The low inflation is to a large extent the result of commodity 
and energy price declines and of price reductions initiated by the government. In the past year, 
these factors were responsible for a 1.7 percentage point decline in the CPI, such that the CPI 
excluding these factors increased by 0.8 percent. In this context, it is important to emphasize 
that monetary policy does not aim to offset such one-off factors, but rather is forward looking, 
and acts to gradually return inflation to within the target range. By the way, for the coming 
months, the government has already made decisions to reduce prices that together come to 
0.4 percentage points of the CPI. 
Another factor that has an impact on both activity and inflation is obviously the exchange rate. 
The  (effective)  appreciation  of  the  shekel,  which  is  impacted  by  the  surplus  in  the  current 
account and by the very accommodative policies of the major central banks, makes it difficult 
for exports to grow under conditions where demand for Israeli exports is in any case moderate, 
and acts to further moderate inflation. Our assessment is that at its current level, the shekel is 
over-appreciated relative to what is in line with the basic economic forces, and we are therefore 
continuing to operate in the foreign exchange market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Against  this  background,  the  Bank  of  Israel  has  used  a  variety  of  policy  tools:  an 
accommodative interest rate policy, together with a declaration that the Monetary Committee’s 
assessment  is  that  policy  is  expected  to  remain  accommodative  for  a  considerable  time, 
intervention in the foreign exchange market in order to prevent an even sharper appreciation, 
and a series of prudential measures to deal with the risks inherent in the housing market. 
Another factor taken into account in the Bank of Israel’s policy is the housing market. Home 
prices that have been increasing since 2007, and with them mortgage volumes, and which 
have also been affected by the low interest rate environment, are sources of concern to us 
from both the financial stability aspect of borrowers’ ability to repay, and the social aspect of 
affordability – the economic ability of a household to provide itself with housing services. It is 
therefore important to continue dealing with the problem comprehensively through a continuing 
increase  in the supply  of  homes  in  high-demand  areas. In practice,  the  increase  in  supply 
reacted with a large lag to the increase in demand. Government measures in this matter, and 
a  focus  of  efforts  on  shortening  the  planning  process  together  with  specific  programs,  will 
contribute to change. 
The monetary policy tools support economic activity in a moderating global environment, and 
a return of inflation to within the target range. Accommodative monetary policy, which acts to 
moderate the cyclical effects of the global environment on the Israeli economy, can enable the 
government  to  focus  its  policy  on  the  long-term  challenges  to  achieving  inclusive  and 
sustainable growth. 
The long-term challenge – inclusive and sustainable growth 
I would now like to focus on two main challenges facing the government: increasing the growth 
in  productivity,  which  will  contribute  to  an  increase  in  earning  power  and  in  growth;  and 
narrowing gaps and reducing the dimensions of poverty. 
Productivity in Israel is lower than in other advanced economies. While countries with low per 
capita GDP generally grow faster and reduce the gap relative to other countries, the growth in 
productivity in Israel is moderate and is not narrowing the gap vis-à-vis other countries. There 
are various causes of this, which the Bank of Israel has already discussed at a number of 
opportunities. The low productivity is particularly prominent in the industries that focus on the 
domestic market and that are not exposed to international competition – industries in which 
product per work hour is low by any standard. 
Earlier  I  presented  the  short-term  macroeconomic  forecast.  In  preparing  the  long-term 
forecast,  there  is,  obviously,  greater  uncertainty.  The  result  of  the  simulation  based  on 
demographic  trends  is  worrying.  The  expected  trends  of  growth  in  the  proportion  of  the 
population  characterized  by  low  labor  force  participation  rates  and  low  earning  power, 
alongside the aging of the population and the dissipation of the contribution of the increase in 
education  in  the  coming  years,  indicate  that  the  “automatic  pilot”,  meaning  the  expected 
increase in GDP absent a change in policy, will reflect a marked slowdown in the projected 
rate of growth. If we add to that the widespread assessment that the growth of global trade will 
also be moderate in the coming years, then without a policy focused on increased productivity, 
the standard of living that the Israeli economy can provide to its citizens is expected to become 
more distant from that at the forefront of advanced economies. 
Beyond the low productivity and its slow growth, the Israeli economy is also characterized by 
high levels of inequality and poverty. Inequality in economic income – income before taxes and 
transfer  payments  –  is not  exceptional  by  international  standards.  But the tax  and  transfer 
payments  policy  is  less  active  than  in  other  countries  in  reducing  inequality.  Therefore, 
inequality in disposable income – income after direct taxes (which are progressive) and transfer 
payments (benefits) – is high. Inequality is not predestined. In the same way, the dimensions 
of  poverty  in  economic  activity  are  not  exceptional,  but  the  government’s  policy  to  reduce 
poverty,  which  is  relatively  modest,  is  reflected  in  a  particularly  high  poverty  rate  by 
international standards in terms of disposable income. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The trends I have outlined, or a low productivity growth rate, processes that are expected to 
further slow future growth, together with high levels of poverty and inequality in disposable 
income,  bring  into  sharper  relief  the  need  to  focus  government  policy  on  encouraging 
productivity and reducing inequality and poverty. 
So what can we do? 
We  can  continue,  with  greater  vigor,  implementing  (with  emphasis  on  the  term 
implementing) policies to include population groups in employment (the program to reduce 
gaps with the Arab community that was supposed to have been discussed by the government 
included many positive components in this area); act to increase human capital – both in the 
framework of the education system and through professional and technical training – in order 
to  increase  productivity  an  earning  power;  act  to  remove  impediments  to  growth,  through 
investment in infrastructure, improving the business environment, increasing competition in 
industries where it is insufficient, promoting reforms in essential infrastructures, and supporting 
R&D, including in low technology industries. There is also room to upgrade the public services, 
and for adjustments in the tax system through benefits – for instance by increasing the earned 
income tax credit (negative income tax), and more. 
If  we  act  decisively  to  implement  multi-year  plans,  most  of  which  exist  but  are 
implemented sluggishly, we will be able to maximize the immense potential of the Israeli 
economy for the good of all its citizens.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
