  Raghuram Rajan: Financial reforms – past and present 
Text of the C D Deshmukh Lecture by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of 
India,  at  the  National  Council  of  Applied  Economic  Research  (NCAER),  New  Delhi, 
29 January 2016. 
 I  thank  Shekhar  Shah  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the  C.D.  Deshmukh  lecture  at  NCAER. 
Sir Chintaman Dwarakanath Deshmukh, an ICS officer, was truly a giant of modern India. In 
1943, he was the first Indian, as well as the youngest in its history to date, to be appointed 
the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India. He subsequently served as the Finance Minister 
in the Union Cabinet. It was during this time that he also became a founding member of the 
Governing  Body  of  NCAER.  After  resignation  from  the  Union  Cabinet  over  a  matter  of 
principle,  he  served  at  various  times  as  Chairman  of  the  University  Grants  Commission, 
Vice-Chancellor  of  the  University  of  Delhi,  President  of  the  Indian  Statistical  Institute,  and 
founding member and lifetime President of the India International Center. Among his many 
contributions  were  his  insightful  interventions  at  Bretton  Woods  as  part  of  the  Indian 
delegation to that historic meet. He was awarded the Padma Vibhushan in recognition of his 
services. Sir C.D. Deshmukh died in 1982. 
C.D.  Deshmukh  was  an  institution  builder.  I  am  currently  the  caretaker  of  one  he  led,  the 
Reserve Bank of India. Let me assure him that the Reserve Bank is in fine fettle. In a country 
where  time  has  weighed  heavily  on  the  quality  of  institutions,  the  integrity,  capability,  and 
motivation of my colleagues allows the Reserve Bank to continue to stand tall. 
The world today, however, is much less comforting. Industrial countries are still struggling, 
with a few exceptions, to grow. Our fellow BRICS all have deep problems, with confidence 
about China waxing and waning. Indeed, India appears to be an island of relative calm in an 
ocean of turmoil. What is different here and how can we be assured that it will continue? 
A lesson from Brazil? 
Perhaps Brazil offers a salutary lesson. Only a few years ago, the world was applauding the 
country’s thriving democracy, its robust economic growth, and the enormous strides it was 
making in reducing inequality. It grew at 7.6 percent in 2010, and had discovered huge oil 
reserves which the then President Lula likened to “winning a lottery ticket”. Yet the country 
shrank by 3.8% last year, and its debt got downgraded to junk. Growth will be no better this 
year. What went wrong? 
Paradoxical as it may seem, Brazil tried to grow too fast. The 7.6 percent growth came on 
the back of substantial stimulus after the global financial crisis. In an attempt to keep growth 
high, the New York Times says the central bank was pressed to reduce interest rates, fueling 
a  credit  spree  that  overburdened  customers  are  now  struggling to repay.1  Further,  Brazil’s 
government-funded  development  bank  hugely  increased  subsidized  loans  to  corporations. 
Certain  industries  were  favored  with  tax  breaks  while  price  controls  were  imposed  on 
gasoline and electricity, causing huge losses in public sector firms. Petrobras, the national oil 
company, which was supposed to make enormous investments in oil drilling, instead became 
embroiled in a corruption scandal. Even as government pensions burned an ever larger hole, 
budget deficits expanded, and the political consensus to narrow them has become elusive. 
Inflation touched double digits in the 4th quarter of 2015. 
                                                
1 
“As a Boom Fades, Brazilians Wonder How it all Went Wrong”, Simon Romero, New York Times, September 
11, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  While the Brazilian authorities are working hard to rectify the situation, let us not ignore the 
lessons their experience suggests. It is possible to grow too fast with substantial stimulus, as 
we did in 2010 and 2011, only to pay the price in higher inflation, higher deficits, and lower 
growth  in  2013  and  2014.  Of  course,  India  is  not  in  the  same  situation  today.  Given  the 
inhospitable world economy and two successive droughts, either of which would have thrown 
the economy into a tail spin in the past, it is to the immense credit of the government that we 
have over 7 percent growth, low inflation, and a low current account deficit. But it is at such 
times that we should not be overambitious. 
Macroeconomic stability 
As  Brazil’s  experience  suggests, the  enormous costs  of  becoming  an  unstable  country far 
outweigh  any  small  growth  benefits  that  can  be  obtained  through  aggressive  policies.  We 
should  be  very  careful  about  jeopardizing  our  single  most  important  strength  during  this 
period of global turmoil, macroeconomic stability. 
There  is  a  public  discussion  of  whether  India  should  postpone,  yet  again,  the  fiscal 
consolidation  path  it  has  embarked  on.  Clearly,  the  Government  will  balance  various 
compulsions in taking its decision. But a number of facts are worth pointing out: 
The  consolidated  fiscal  deficit  of  the  state  and  centre  in  India  is  by  far  the  largest  among 
countries  we  like  to  compare  ourselves  with;  presently  only  Brazil,  a  country  in  difficulty, 
rivals  us  on  this  measure.  According  to  IMF  estimates  (which  is  what  the  global  investor 
sees), our consolidated fiscal deficit went up from 7 percent in 2014 to 7.2 percent in 2015. 
So  we  actually  expanded  the  aggregate  deficit  in  the  last  calendar  year.  With  UDAY,  the 
scheme to revive state power distribution companies, coming into operation in the next fiscal, 
it is unlikely that states will be shrinking their deficits, which puts pressure on the centre to 
adjust more. 
Some say that fiscal expansion is necessary to generate the growth needed to put our debt 
to GDP ratio back on a sustainable path. This is a novel argument. Ordinarily one would think 
that a government should borrow less, that is, run lower fiscal deficits, in order to reduce its 
debt.  But  there  is  indeed  a  theoretical  possibility  that  the  growth  generated  by  the  fiscal 
expansion is so great as to outweigh the additional debt that is taken on. Unfortunately, the 
growth multipliers on government spending at this juncture are likely to be much smaller, so 
more  spending  will  probably  hurt  debt  dynamics.  Put  differently,  it  is  worth  asking  if  there 
really are very high return investments that we are foregoing by staying on the consolidation 
path? 
Of course, the common man does not really care whether we stay on the consolidation path 
or not. But the bond markets, where we have to finance over ₹ 10 lakh crore of deficits plus 
UDAY  state  bonds,  do  care.  Deviating  from  the  fiscal  consolidation  path  could  push  up 
government bond yields, both because of the greater volume of bonds to be financed and 
because of the potential loss of government credibility on future consolidation. It was James 
Carville who said “I used to think if there was reincarnation, I wanted to come back as the 
President or the Pope or a .400 baseball hitter. But now I want to come back as the bond 
market.  You  can  intimidate  everybody.”  The  Government  understands  the  importance  of 
bond  market  confidence,  but  I  wonder  if  the  economists  debating  in  public  put  adequate 
weight on it. 
The fall in inflation has been a major contributor to lower bond yields, and is the joint work of 
the  Government  and  the  RBI,  aided  to  some  extent  by  the  fall  in  international  commodity 
prices. This is no mean achievement given two successive droughts that would have, in the 
past,  pushed  inflation  into  double  digits.  Despite  this  success,  we  hear  voices  suggesting 
weakening  the  fight  against  inflation.  Let  me  reiterate  that  macroeconomic  stability  relies 
immensely  on  policy  credibility,  which  is  the  public  belief  that  policy  will  depart  from  the 
charted course only under extreme necessity, and not because of convenience. If every time 
there is any minor difficulty, we change the goal posts, we signal to the markets that we have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  no staying power. Let me therefore reiterate that we have absolutely no intent of departing 
from the inflation framework that has been agreed with the Government. We look forward to 
the  Government  amending  the  RBI  Act  to  usher  in  the  monetary  policy  committee, further 
strengthening the framework. 
Macroeconomic stability will be the platform on which we will build the growth that will sustain 
our country for many years to come, no matter what the world does. Indeed, I am reminded 
today of the period 1997–2002 when India labored and reformed with only moderate growth, 
only to see a decade of high growth after that. 
Before  I  turn to  the  main  body  of  this  talk,  a  word  on  interest  rates.  Industrialists  grumble 
about high rates while retirees complain about the low rates they get today on deposits. Both 
overstate their case, though as I have said repeatedly, the way to resolve their differences is 
to bring CPI inflation steadily down. 
Let  me  explain,  starting  with  the  retiree.  The  typical  letter  I  get  goes,  “I  used  to  get  10% 
earlier on a 1 year fixed deposit, now I barely get 8%”, please tell banks to pay me more else 
I won’t be able to make ends meet”. The truth is that the retiree is getting more today but he 
does not realize it, because he is focusing only on the nominal interest he gets and not on 
the underlying inflation which has come down even more sharply, from about 10% to 5.5%. 
To see this, let us indulge in Dosa economics. Say the pensioner wants to buy dosas and at 
the beginning of the period, they cost ₹50 per dosa. Let us say he has savings of ₹1,00,000. 
He could buy 2,000 dosas with the money today, but he wants more by investing. 
At 10% interest, he gets ₹10,000 after one year plus his principal. With dosas having gone 
up by 10% to ₹55, he can buy 182 dosas approximately with the ₹10,000 interest. 
At  8%  interest,  he  gets  ₹8,000.  With  dosas  having  gone  up  by  5.5%,  each  dosa  costs 
₹52.75,  so  he  can  now  buy  only  152  dosas  approximately.  So  the  pensioner  seems 
vindicated: with lower interest payments, he can now buy less. 
But wait a minute. Remember, he gets his principal back also and that too has to be adjusted 
for inflation. In the high inflation period, it was worth 1,818 dosas, in the low inflation period, it 
is worth 1,896 dosas. So in the high inflation period, principal plus interest are worth 2,000 
dosas  together,  while  in  the  low  inflation  period it  is  worth  2,048  dosas. He  is  about  2.5% 
better off in the low inflation period in terms of dosas. 
This  is  a  long  winded  way  of  saying  that  inflation  is  the  silent  killer  because  it  eats  into 
pensioners’ principal, even while they are deluded by high nominal interest rates into thinking 
they are getting an adequate return. Indeed, with 10% return and 10% inflation, the deposit is 
not giving you any real  return net of inflation, which is  why  you can buy only 2,000 dosas 
after a year of investing, the same as you could buy before you invested. In contrast, when 
inflation is 5.5% but the interest rate you are getting is 8%, you are earning a real rate of 
2.5%, which means 2.5% more dosas. So while I sympathize with pensioners, they certainly 
are better off today than in the past. 
Let us turn to the industrialist. At a recent conference, I met a businessman who complained 
that  his  business  was  getting  torn  to  shreds  by  imports.  He  was  lobbying  for  safeguard 
duties. When asked for evidence of unfair competition, he said his revenues had not grown 
at  all,  with  his  volume  growth  barely  offsetting  the  price  decline  for  his  product.  While 
commiserating with him, I said lower input costs must be a boon, because commodity prices 
have  fallen  even  more  sharply  than  output  prices.  He  grudgingly  agreed  they  had  helped. 
When  asked  about  his  profits,  he  eventually  admitted  they  were  at  an  all-time  high.  But 
nevertheless,  he  said,  we  need  safeguard  duties  because  foreigners  are  dumping  below 
cost!  Put  differently,  businesspeople  complain  about  low  output  price  inflation,  but  the 
inflation  that  matters  to  them  is  the  inflation  in  their  profits,  which  is  higher.  For  instance, 
analyzing  2nd  quarter  results  for  non-financial  non-government  corporations,  we  find  that 
while revenues have fallen by 8.8% year on year, input costs have fallen by an even higher 
12.4%, so that gross value added has gone up by 10.8%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Clearly,  there  are  industries  in  trouble.  We  should,  however,  be  particularly  careful  about 
raising tariffs at a time when costs are falling everywhere – aside from the inflationary impact, 
for every happy domestic businessman whose prices are raised by the imposition of tariffs on 
imports,  we  have  an  unhappy  domestic  businessman  whose  costs  are  raised  by  the  very 
same tariffs, as well as unhappy consumers. 
Cleaning up the banks 
One very important contributor to macroeconomic stability is healthy banks. Banks in India 
have a number of stressed loans on their balance sheet. In some cases, the reality is that 
existing  loans  will  have  to  be  written  down  significantly  because  of  the  changed 
circumstances  since  they  were  sanctioned  (which  includes  extensive  project  delays,  cost 
overruns,  global  overcapacity,  and  overoptimistic  demand  projections).  If  loans  are  written 
down, the promoter brings in more equity, and other stakeholders like the tariff authorities or 
the  local  government  chip  in,  the  project  may  have  a  strong  chance  of  revival,  and  the 
promoter will be incentivized to try his utmost to put it back on track. But to do all this deep 
surgery, the bank has to classify the asset as a Non Performing Asset (NPA), a label banks 
are eager to avoid. Alternatively, instead of deep surgery, the banks could apply band aids, 
they  could  “extend  and  pretend”,  lending  the  promoter  the  money  he  needs  to  make  loan 
payments. The project’s debt obligations grow, the promoter loses further interest, and the 
project goes into further losses. 
A number of good banks in our system have taken the necessary action to recognize and 
resolve  stressed  loans  in  a  timely  fashion.  But  some  others  need  to  take  more  proactive 
action. Over the last few quarters, the Reserve Bank has expanded the tools banks have to 
recognize and deal with stressed loans. It is now working with the Government and banks to 
ensure that the stressed assets are dealt with on a proactive basis, and that bank balance 
sheets  both  reflect  a  true  and  fair  picture,  and  are  adequately  provisioned.  The  Finance 
Minister  has  indicated  he  will  support  the  public  sector  banks  with  capital  infusions  as 
needed. Our estimate is that the support that has been indicated will suffice, especially when 
coupled with other capital sources that are usually available to banks. Our various scenarios 
also show private sector banks will not want for regulatory capital as a result of this exercise. 
Finally,  the  RBI  is  also  working  on  identifying  currently  non-recognizable  capital  that  is 
already on bank balance sheets, such as undervalued assets. The RBI could allow some of 
these  to  count  as  capital  as  per  Basel  norms,  provided  a  bank  meets  minimum  common 
equity standards. 
In sum, we believe enough capital is available. While the profitability of some banks may be 
impaired in the short run, the system, once cleaned, will be able to support economic growth 
in  a  sustainable  and  profitable  way.  To  be  less  proactive,  as  our  past  and  the  history  of 
banking  across  the  world  suggests,  will  only  see  the  problem  get  bigger  and  less 
manageable. 
Let me now turn to the structural reforms that we intend to implement in the financial sector, 
which  will  build  on  the  platform  of  macroeconomic  stability  to  generate  growth.  We  will 
increase efficiency through greater entry and competition. We need more participation in our 
financial markets to increase their size, depth, and liquidity. Participation is best enhanced 
not through subventions and subsidies but by creating supporting frameworks that improve 
transparency, contract enforcement, and protections for market participants against abusive 
practices.  Technology  can  be  very  helpful  in  reducing  the  costs  of  the  supportive 
frameworks,  and  can  bring  hitherto  excluded  populations  into  the  financial  fold.  It  is  these 
ideas that guide our medium-term reform strategy. Let me be more specific. 
Fostering competition 
In order to get sustained growth, we need more competition, especially from new entrants 
who are in a better position to reach hitherto excluded parts of our economy. After over a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  decade of no new entry, we have seen two new private banks enter last year, and a number 
of  payment  banks  and  small  finance  banks  will  enter  this  year.  We  will  put  licensing  for 
universal banks on tap soon. 
Incumbents have expressed fears about unfair competition. Competition is only unfair if it is 
not on the same playing field. In fact, new entrants have no privileges that incumbents do not 
already  enjoy.  We  hope,  though,  that  the  new  entrants  will  find  innovative  ways  of  giving 
customers better services at lower prices, thus shaking up and changing the banking sector 
for the better. Payment bank kiosks, post offices, or business correspondents could be the 
means  by  which  the  remote  villager  traverses  the  last  mile  to  the  formal  financial  system. 
Small finance banks could be the low cost assessment and monitoring mechanism to lower 
lending costs to small urban and rural firms. 
Clearly,  public  sector  banks  (PSBs),  with  their  large  branch  network,  will  have  to  adapt 
because  some  of  these  new  entrants  will  go  after  their  customers.  This  is  no  bad  thing 
because, hitherto, those customers have had limited choice. Public sector banks will need to 
automate more so as to reduce transactions costs, cut administrative overheads and improve 
response times, even while improving their risk assessment and monitoring systems so that 
they  can  use  the  wealth  of  information  they  have  gathered  over  the  years  to  make  sound 
lending decisions. Almost surely, this transformation will require more lateral hires at market 
wages, including skilled loan officers, risk managers, forensic accountants, IT professionals, 
lawyers, and human resource professionals. While PSBs can undertake contractual hiring at 
market  wages,  it  remains  to  be  seen  whether  they  can  attract  professionals  without 
promising them the means for career advancement within the bank. 
Public sector banks will also require more professional boards that can chart a differentiated 
strategy for them. The Bank Board Bureau, which will select board members, will come into 
operation soon. We have to pay board members of PSBs a market compensation if we are to 
attract decent talent – otherwise we risk attracting an unwieldy mix of the truly patriotic and 
the  truly  unscrupulous,  with  the  latter  intending  to  profit  by  their  board  position.  When 
thousands of crores can be diverted by a bad board decision, should we not ensure we have 
adequate integrity and talent on bank boards? 
More decisions need to be decentralized from the Government to the PSB boards, once they 
have been fully professionalized. For instance, should boards not determine strategy as well 
as the appointment or renewal of their chief executive? What about their executive directors? 
Can bank boards have more freedom in choosing these? Can boards be given the freedom 
to  set  compensation  structures  and  performance  measures  for  their  senior  executives, 
including long term stock options? If we want to address the concern that many public sector 
banks have identical strategies and are competing for the same pie, we have to allow the 
boards more freedom to differentiate their banks. 
Finally, as bank health recovers, the issue of PSB mergers can be addressed. Almost surely, 
some  banks  will  have  to  merge  to  optimize  their  use  of  resources.  But  talking  of  bank 
mergers, which take a lot of management attention, especially when each bank management 
is preoccupied with dealing with stressed assets, is probably premature. At the same time, 
some banks could benefit from governance help to deal with their current problems. Is it an 
opportune time to induct skilled financial firms as strategic investors into public sector bank 
boards, perhaps with a 10 or 15% stake? Certainly, the experience of countries like China 
who inducted such investors is worth studying. 
Technology and innovation 
Regulators are naturally a conservative lot. It is good we are that way else there would be no 
speed breakers in the economy to slow its propensity to get into trouble. But we also should 
not stand in the way of innovation. There is a Chinese saying: “Cross the river by feeling the 
stones”.  The  RBI  has  tried  to  follow  that  path  of  experimentation  and  incremental 
liberalization. So, for example, as increasingly innovative new services want their customers 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  to have the ability to make payments quickly, we have allowed small value card payments 
without  two-factor  authentication.  As  we  and  financial  institutions  gain  experience,  and  as 
new  technologies  ensuring  security  emerge,  we  can  liberalize  further.  More  generally,  our 
philosophy is to allow innovation in institutions, instruments and practices so long as they do 
not present a clear and present danger. Once we understand them better, and they grow to a 
material size, we can do a deeper analysis on how they should be regulated. 
A number of innovative structures are likely to be implemented soon. NPCI will go live soon 
with the Unified Payment Interface, which when fully rolled out will allow anyone to make a 
payment  to  anyone  else  with  a  bank  account  simply  via  a  mobile  and  a  unique  email-like 
address. The Trade Receivables Exchanges will be a boon to small businesses. Essentially, 
any business that has a receivable against a large firm can sell it as a bill on the exchange, 
after the large firm acknowledges it has been supplied the goods. Not only will the small firm 
get paid quickly, buyers will discount the bill at the rate associated with the large firm, and 
thus pay the small firm more. Importantly, the three Trade Receivables Exchanges that have 
been licensed will get a fillip if public sector firms and government departments are required 
to allow their receivables to be traded. This will also discipline these entities to pay on time, a 
huge boon to the system. 
Yet  another 
internet 
marketplaces and financial firms. The information obtained from monitoring sales and cash 
flows of the online merchant can be the basis for making him a loan and recovering payment. 
I am especially excited by the possibilities afforded the carpet seller from Srinagar, who can 
display her wares across the globe, with the marketplace arranging marketing, logistics, and 
finance for her. 
technological  development 
the  alliance  between 
to  watch 
is 
Financial inclusion 
The  Prime  Minister’s  Jan  Dhan  Yojana  has  created  accounts  for  much  of  the  excluded 
population. Government has taken the next step of attaching a variety of financial services 
such as accident and life insurance to these accounts, and sending Direct Benefits such as 
scholarships, pensions, and subsidies to these accounts. We also have to ease access to 
bank  accounts  through  Business  Correspondents,  payment  banks,  and  point-of-sales 
machines so that they are used frequently. Easy payments, access to cash-in and cash-out 
facilities,  and  widespread  availability  of  safe  savings  instruments  have  to  be  our  next 
objectives in the financial inclusion of households. 
When credit leads the process of financial inclusion, we risk lending to people who have little 
ability to manage money and overburdening them. By drawing them into the formal system 
through savings and payments first, then insurance, we get them accustomed to managing 
money before tempting them with credit. This is the successful method we have followed with 
Self Help groups, and is what we should do more widely. Importantly, we need a variety of 
firms and NGOs to help small businesses with management advice so that they can flourish. 
Technology  will  also  help  reduce  transaction  costs,  facilitating  inclusion. We  now  have  an 
internet portal (Vidyalakshmi) where students can apply to a variety of banks for education 
loans. We are exploring a similar portal for MSMEs, where MSMEs can apply easily to banks 
and where we can monitor timely responses to the loan applications. 
In all such lending, we need to address the issue of collateral. Credit flows easily only when 
the  lender  is  persuaded  that  he  will  get  his  money  back,  so  easier  access  to  credit 
necessitates harsher consequences of default, including the loss of collateral. Aadhaar has 
given individual borrowers the possibility of using their future access to credit as collateral. I 
do  hope  the  Supreme  Court  clears  up  the  cloud  over  its  use  quickly.  But  there  are  also 
situations where borrowers have physical collateral they can use to lower their cost of credit 
and improve access. We really need to reexamine mandates that banks should lend without 
collateral to certain segments. While the intent is laudable, the consequence may simply be 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  that banks fear taking collateral even when available, and thinking the borrower is too risky, 
do not lend. 
More generally, the best way to facilitate lending to the excluded is to reduce transactions 
costs, improve borrower information and frameworks for recovery, and create institutions that 
have lower costs and easier access to the borrower than existing ones. For this, we need to 
improve  the  structure  and  working  of  credit  information  bureaus,  collateral  registries,  and 
debt  recovery  tribunals. Perhaps the most  important  source  of  collateral value  is  land. We 
need better digital mapping and clean records of land ownership across the country so that 
land can be used more effectively as collateral. Andhra Pradesh’s pattas for tenant farmers is 
also an innovation that will help tenants get access to credit. 
Consumer protection and literacy 
Finally, newcomers and outsiders need protection against unfair practices. As one example 
of  what  we  are  doing,  RBI  has  developed  a  Charter  of  Consumer  Rights  after  public 
consultation.  Bank  boards  have  been  asked  to  put  in  place  frameworks  that  ensure  those 
rights  are  protected,  including  creating  an  internal  office  of  ombudsman.  Soon,  those 
frameworks will have been in operation for about a year. After studying practices, RBI will 
take  a  view  on  best  practices  and  even  regulation,  if  any  is  needed.  In  the  meantime, 
incognito field visits by  RBI, to check mis-selling as well as the proper functioning of bank 
infrastructure such as branches and ATMs, will be expanded. We are also working with state 
law enforcement authorities through State Level Coordination Committees to try and nab fly-
by-night operators before they do real damage. 
As access to finance improves, we need customers to protect themselves. Higher education 
is not sufficient protection. Many of you must have received an email from me saying that the 
RBI had concluded a pact with the IMF or the British Government to take over the gold found 
on pirate ships in the sixteenth century, sell it, and give the proceeds to deserving citizens 
like you. In return for a small transaction fee of ₹20,000, the email goes on, I would be happy 
to transfer the sum of 50 lakh rupees into your bank account. Without pausing to think why I 
need ₹20,000 when I supposedly have ₹50 lakhs of your money with me, some of you send 
₹20,000 as requested into an untraceable account. My office then gets repeated phone calls 
from you asking what happened when the ₹50 lakhs does not show up. The truth is that we 
are all gullible – no amount of warnings that the Reserve Bank does not ask you for your 
money helps. The central theorem of financial literacy is “There is no such thing as a free 
lunch”.  In  the  context  of  financial  investments,  it  can  be  restated  as  “There  is  no  return 
without risk”. We need to imprint these two statements in everyone’s head and we intend to 
roll out campaigns to do so. 
Conclusion 
I have described some of the ways we will position the financial system towards sustainable 
growth on a base of macroeconomic stability. Of course, finance can only facilitate growth, 
the true engine of growth is the real economy, where the government’s structural reforms are 
facilitating the way. 
Throughout its 81 year history, the RBI’s staff has always risen to the challenges posed by a 
dynamic,  growing  economy.  We  have  never  hesitated  to  say  no  when  the  stability  of  the 
system is at stake. At the same time, we have liberalized when it is needed. Following the 
traditions set by our past leaders like Shri C. D. Deshmukh, we will help take India forward. 
Thank you very much again for inviting me to give this talk. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
