  S S Mundra: Asset quality challenges in India – diagnosis and prognosis 
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Edelweiss Credit Conclave, Mumbai, 28 April 2016. 
 1. 
Shri  Rashesh  Shah,  Chairman  and  CEO  –  Edelweiss  Group;  members  of  the 
finance fraternity; delegates to the Conclave; ladies and gentlemen! It is indeed a pleasure to 
be here this morning. In my address, I primarily intend to focus on some of the contemporary 
issues  around  our  banking  sector  that  have  come  to  dominate  news  rooms,  court  rooms, 
board  rooms  and  drawing  rooms  alike.  I  am  hinting  at  loud  vilification  of  bankers  and 
promoters  without  distinguishing  between  the  victim  and  the  black  sheep.  This  is  not  an 
endeavor to bat for either the banks or the promoters but only an attempt to put the things in 
right perspective and to encourage an objective assessment of the situation. But before I do 
that, let me begin with some good news on the economic front. 
2. 
Amidst the continued global sluggishness, domestic growth outlook remains positive 
for 2016–17 mainly on account of various structural reforms undertaken, expectations of a 
normal monsoon, easing of CPI inflation and rising private consumption. Focus on rural and 
social infrastructure sector and decline in subsidy outgo have resulted in improvements in the 
fiscal  front,  both  quantitatively  and  qualitatively.  Over  the  recent  past,  steel  prices  have 
strengthened  both,  globally  and  domestically,  especially  after  introduction  of  the  Minimum 
Import Price. Cement and auto sectors have also shown signs of growth pick up while the 
demand for oil has also increased by about 11 % in terms of quantity conveying some signs 
of buoyancy in economic activity in the country. 
3. 
Let me now come to the main issue that I wanted to focus on this morning. What I 
am going  to  speak  may  sound  like  a medical  script  but  that  is  how  this  story  can  be  best 
described. I begin with talking about the symptoms of the disease that had shown signs of 
turning malignant. 
Symptoms 
4. 
The signs of rising stress in the banking system became increasingly evident in the 
years  beginning  2012.  The  stressed  assets  (GNPA+  Restd.  Std.  assets  +Written  Off 
Accounts) for the banking system as a whole, which stood at 9.8% as at the end of March 
2012, moved up sharply to 14.5% as at the end of December 2015. During the same period, 
the stressed assets for the PSBs spiked from 11.0 % to 17.7%. 
5. 
Similarly,  the  growth  in  net  profits  of  SCBs  was  also  on  a  declining  trend  since 
2011–12  and  turned  negative  in  2013–14.  This  decline  in  net  profits  of  SCBs  during  this 
period was primarily the result of higher provisioning on banks’ delinquent loans during the 
period  2012–14.  This  in  turn  impacted  their  return  on  assets  (RoA)  and  return  on  equity 
(RoE). The banks’ spread and net interest margin (NIM) also witnessed a decline during the 
period. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Diagnostic or root cause analysis 
6. 
As in any medical exercise, the next step is to run a diagnostic check to understand 
the root cause of the problems. The asset quality problems can be fundamentally ascribed to 
one of the following four factors: 
Environmental factors 
a) 
The economic downturn that has engulfed the global economy since the onset of the 
 
Financial  Crisis  in  2008  can  be  counted  as  one  of  the  major  cause  for  the  asset 
quality problems in India. Then, there are other external factors like fall in commodity 
prices,  dumping  by  China  etc.  which  has  led  to  reduced  competitiveness  and 
consequently idle capacities and cash flow problems. The situation got aggravated 
due to the policy logjam that followed in the country. Several large scale projects in 
the  country  have  remained  stalled  due  to  lack  of  environmental  clearances, 
cancellation of coal block allocation, falling through of the fuel supply arrangements, 
local  protests  etc.  Now,  where  do  you  bracket  these  promoters  or  the  lending 
banks?  Do  you  brand  such  promoters  as  wilful  defaulters  or  such  lenders  as 
ill-motivated? 
Corporate imprudence 
The imprudence of the corporates can be attributed as the second most important 
factor  for  poor  asset  quality  in  the  system.  Some  of  the  major  failings  that  the 
corporates exhibited are: 
• 
b) 
 
Overleverage  –  All  debt,  no  equity;  Veiled  corporate  structures  impeded 
assessment by banks 
Obsession for higher growth- Excess capacities, Unrelated diversification. The 
liquidity  generated  due  to  ultra-accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  by 
Central Banks in advanced economies also created misaligned incentives. 
Chasing profits eg. ignoring risks inherent in unhedged forex exposures 
 c) 
Not  all  promoters/borrowers  have  had  a  clear  conscience  and  some  of  them  were  out  to 
dupe  the  system  by  using  foul  means.  They  are  willful  defaulters  in  banks’  books  as  they 
have been unwilling to honour their payment obligations even while having a capacity to do 
so. Some of the promoters have diverted borrowed funds for purposes other than for which 
the  finance  was  availed.  There  are  also  occasions  where  some  of  the  borrowers  have 
siphoned off funds for personal gains and not created any productive asset. A section of the 
promoters have also disposed off movable fixed assets or immovable property given for the 
purpose  of  securing  a  term  loan  without  the  knowledge  of  the  lender.  The  consequent 
defaults, in such cases are intentional, deliberate and calculated and hence willful. It is this 
set of promoters that need to be singled out and quickly brought to justice. 
• 
Corporate misdemeanors 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Banks’ failings 
d) 
It is not corporates alone that caused pain in the system. In several instances, the bankers 
have also not exercised due caution while conducting due diligence on the projects that they 
have financed. Some of the common shortcomings that the banks exhibited include: 
• 
• 
Governance deficit 
Poor credit appraisal particularly in infra financing such as highways where contracts 
were  ‘gold  plated’;  Power  which  suffered  from  Faulty  FSAs,  absence  of  Pass 
through arrangements, lack of provision for termination payments etc.; 
Weak risk management; 
• 
Chasing quick growth; 
• 
Pretend and Extend 
• 
7. 
The  mistakes  committed  by  the  banks  and  the  corporates,  whether  incidental  or 
intentional,  have  resulted  in  a  massive  pile  up  of  non-performing  assets  in  the  banking 
system.  While  the  banks  needed  to  guard  against  growing  credit  concentration  risks 
especially  in  sectors  which  had  witnessed  excessively  high  growth,  the  corporates  should 
have  had  the  foresight  of  analyzing  the  emerging  market  dynamics.  There  was  a  general 
reluctance from the banking community to admit the level of stress in their books. It was built 
on the premise that NPAs are taboo and no one would be willing to lend to such accounts. 
Though,  this  perception  has  some  real  life  truth,  my  question  is  should  we  not  administer 
drug to the sick? Sometimes, there are overblown fears of unknown. If we don’t address the 
stressed accounts, what are our alternatives? Company position would deteriorate further, hit 
banks’  books  and  would  still  invite  further  scrutinies.  Having  said  that,  it  is  important  to 
quickly decipher whether the disease is curable or terminal and also if curable, medicinal or 
surgical. 
Pre-operative procedures 
8. 
As any surgery is preceded by certain medication or other pre-operative procedure, 
here  also,  RBI  did  prescribe  them.  It  started  with  creation  of  the  CRILC  database  which 
enabled compilation of information on level of indebtedness of various groups to the financial 
system.  This  was  followed  by  issuance  of  Guidelines  on  “Early  Recognition  of  Financial 
Distress,  Prompt  Steps  for  Resolution  and  Fair  Recovery  for  Lenders:  Framework  for 
Revitalising Distressed Assets in the Economy by RBI, which were aimed at improving the 
system’s ability to deal with corporate and financial institution distress. Detailed Guidelines 
on  formation  of  Joint  Lenders’  Forum (JLF),  Corrective  Action  Plan  (CAP),  ‘Refinancing of 
Project Loans’, ‘Sale of NPAs by Banks’ and other regulatory measures were also issued to 
banks for enabling prompt steps for early identification of problem cases, timely restructuring 
of  accounts  considered  to  be  viable  and  recovery  or  sale  of  unviable  accounts.  The  5/25 
scheme  and  the  Strategic  Debt  Restructuring  scheme  were  also  introduced  with  a  view  to 
enable reduction in stress levels and early resolution. 
Surgical procedure 
9. 
After the pre-operative procedures, RBI undertook a surgical procedure in the form 
of Asset Quality Review at banks. The exercise was aimed at tracing the sources of pain and 
pressure  points  so  that  remedial  procedure  could  be  administered.  GOI  must  be 
complimented for extending total support by infusing capital /committing to infuse capital in 
the weaker PSBs. 
10. 
Whether this surgery is successful? Did it have the desired impact? I would think so. 
In my interaction with various players, I sense it has a very positive impact, even in Tier II 
and Tier III towns. The promoters have realized that the banks are going to come hard after 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  them if they don’t observe credit discipline. Of course, there are skeptics who say whether it 
was the right time to RBI to undertake this initiative especially at a stage when the economy 
is growing slowly. Interestingly, some of these are the very same people who earlier criticized 
RBI  for  letting  things  drift  and  banks  being  allowed  too  much  of  forbearance.  In  sum,  the 
larger fallout of the exercise is that there is a “better credit discipline in the country”. 
Unsolicited advices 
You must have experienced how many advices come your way if you suffer from an 
11. 
ailment.  Every  other  person  has  an  opinion  and  a  remedy  for  the  same,  including  weird 
alternate therapies. Situation here is not much different. Even as RBI has launched steps to 
cleanse the banking system of its ill-health, everyone seems to have become wiser about the 
issue and have a prescription to offer. Some blame the patient, some blame the doctor and 
still others are blaming the procedure. So called expert opinions are being voiced about the 
credit  appraisal  process  of  banks,  collateral  availability,  personal  guarantee,  restructuring, 
staff accountability and so on. If all these prescriptions are followed, the outcome would be 
akin to a successful operation, but a dead patient. In other words, the lending process would 
freeze. 
Post-operative care 
12. 
All  post-operative  cases  require  rehabilitation  and  so  would  the  banking  system. 
There is a need for the system to pause and reflect on what has gone wrong. The form of life 
style change for the banks would be to concentrate on credit risks that they understand and 
which fall well within their risk appetite. Going forward, they have to refrain from binging on 
what their neighbors are eating. More simply put, the Board and the Top Management have 
to steer the bank in a manner that they have a robust credit appraisal process, effective post-
disbursement  supervision  system,  a  diversified  portfolio  and  better  risk  governance.  The 
lifestyle  changes  for  the  borrowers  on  the  other  hand  would  entail  adoption  of  a  regimen 
more  attuned  to  a  marathon  runner  than  a  sprinter.  Running  enterprises  is  not  a  one-off 
sprint. Like a marathoner, one has to be conscious of the external environment at all times 
and run at a steady pace without exhausting himself. 
Remedial measures 
13. 
Even post AQR, challenges abound. What are the possible solutions? That a vast 
majority of the corporates are overleveraged with severely diminished debt servicing ability is 
common knowledge. There are projects which need fresh capital, new management and new 
promoters. Banks are wary of increasing their commitments to accounts which are in stress, 
for  a  variety  of  reasons.  It  may  be  extremely  difficult  to  operate  the  enterprise  profitably 
without paring down debt levels and hence, a first step could possibly be to bring down the 
debt to a manageable level. This might involve writing down a part of the debt by the lenders 
and/or converting them into equity and bring in a new promoter to run the enterprise. This 
might, however, be a time consuming process and hence, in the interim the banks may need 
to appoint an O & M agent to run the operations. 
14. 
In  certain  cases,  there  may  be  a  need  for  additional  funding  for  some  residual 
investment or for working capital needs. A major impediment observed in JLF functioning is 
slow evolution of consensus among the consortium members and hence, the resultant action 
plan gets delayed invariably. The delay somehow defeats the very purpose for which the JLF 
mechanism is set up. There are some views about setting up an investment fund which might 
come in as a last mile lender. The investment fund could lend to the truncated enterprise and 
help it get back to profitability at which level banks could profitably dilute their equity holdings 
in the firm. Question is who would fund this investment fund? My sense is it would have to be 
joint endeavor of multiple players in this arena. Moreover, extending financial support would 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  not  be  sufficient.  Such  fund  would  also  need  to  have  capability  to  provide  management 
bandwidth to the concerned projects. 
Conclusion 
15. 
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  the  global  economy  has  been  passing  through  a 
difficult  phase  and  vulnerabilities  remain.  Against  this  backdrop  and  that  in  a  globally 
integrated  economy,  a  general  decline  in  the  asset  quality  was  not  totally  unexpected. 
However,  the  extent  being  witnessed  could  have  been  avoided.  It  is  probably  because 
neither  the  banks  nor  the  corporates  resorted  to  preventive  healthcare.  I  am  sure  that 
everyone  would  emerge  much  wiser  after  enduring  the  pain  and  be  circumspect  in  the 
approach and get a periodic checkup done so that they can stay healthy and live longer. 
16. 
For the enterprises under temporary duress, we must stretch every sinew to ensure 
that a productive enterprise does not become terminally ill. There are suppliers- sometimes 
in the form of small ancillary units or MSMEs and then, there are workers and their families. 
Each  enterprise  supports  many  lives.  There  is  an  entire  ecosystem  around  a  factory  or 
company. Closure of any running unit would impact the lives of scores of people and hence, I 
feel it’s a collective societal responsibility that productive enterprises don’t run aground. 
I  thank  Edelweiss  Management for  inviting  me to  this  Credit  Conclave  today  and  wish  the 
deliberations all success. 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
