   Takahide Kiuchi: Recent developments in economic activity, prices and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Takahide Kiuchi, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Kagoshima, 25 February 2016. 
I.   
Economic activity and prices in Japan 
 Current situation 
A.     
I would like to start my speech with a look at developments in economic activity and prices  in 
Japan. 
Japan's  economy  has  continued  to  recover  moderately. Overseas  economies  –  mainly 
advanced economies – have continued to grow at a moderate pace, despite the slowdown in 
emerging  economies.  In this situation,  exports have been picking  up, although  sluggishness 
remains  in  some  areas,  and  industrial  production  has  been  more  or  less  flat.  On  the 
domestic demand side, business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing  trend 
as corporate profits have continued to improve markedly, and private consumption has  been 
resilient  against  the  background  of  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income 
situation. The  first  preliminary  estimate  of  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  for  the  October-
December  quarter  of  2015  was  minus  1.4  percent  on  an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter 
basis. Meanwhile, as for prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the  consumer price index 
(CPI, all items less fresh food) is about 0 percent. 
B.      Outlook 
Against the background of such developments, the Bank of Japan revised the forecasts for 
both  economic  activity and  prices for  the  period from fiscal  2015 through fiscal  2017  in  its 
January 2016 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report). 
Comparing the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts in the January 2016 Outlook 
Report with that in the October 2015 report, the projection for the real GDP growth rate was 
more or less unchanged.  In other words, Japan's economy is likely to continue growing at  a 
pace above its potential through fiscal 2016, and thereafter, through fiscal 2017, is likely  to 
maintain  its  positive  growth,  although  with  a  slowing  in  its  pace,  due  mainly  to  the  effects 
of the consumption tax hike planned in April 2017. 
The projection for the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) for 
fiscal 2016 was revised downward somewhat largely, due to the assumption of lower crude 
oil  prices. Specifically,  the  projection  was  revised  downward  from  1.4  percent  in  the 
October  2015  Outlook  Report  to  0.8  percent  in  the  January  2016  report. For  fiscal  2017, 
however,  the  projection  was  more  or  less  unchanged  at  1.8  percent.  In  other  words,  the 
year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)  is  likely  to  be  about 
0  percent for the time being, due to the effects of the decline in energy prices, but the rate will 
likely accelerate gradually, on the assumption that crude oil prices will rise moderately. 
II.     
Considerations regarding the outlook 
Policy board members' baseline scenario and my outlook 
A.     
I  believe  that  Japan's  economy  has  already  regained  stability  that  is  consistent  with  its 
growth  potential,  mainly  due  to  the  effects  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing 
(QQE). This can be seen by how the output gap – which represents the degree of  utilization 
of production capacity and labor – recovered to a more or less neutral level at  around the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   end  of  2013  from  being  significantly negative  at  the  time  of  the  introduction  of  QQE,  and 
has  remained  at  almost  the  same  level  thereafter. Moreover,  I  think  that  the  underlying 
trend  in  inflation  has  also  already  regained  stability  that  is  consistent  with  the  growth 
potential of Japan's economy. According to my baseline scenario for the outlook,  such stable 
economic  and  price  conditions  will  continue  through  fiscal  2017  –  the  projection period 
covered in the January 2016 Outlook Report. 
However, my view on the outlook for Japan's economic activity and prices, when expressed 
in  figures,  is  more  cautious  compared  with  the  median  of  the  Policy  Board  members' 
forecasts in the January 2016 Outlook Report. I hold a relatively cautious view based on  the 
following  two  reasons.  First, 
the  potential  growth  rate  of  Japan's  economy,  which 
represents – from the supply side – the pace of growth that is consistent with the economy's 
growth  potential,  is  currently  estimated  to  be  around  0.5  percent  or  lower,  and  thus  has 
stayed at a low level. Given this situation, I believe that its pace of improvement is likely  to 
remain moderate. Second, I do not think that there is a strong driving force from the demand 
side  –  including  in  terms  of  the  additional  effects  of  monetary  easing  –  that  will  even 
temporarily bring about economic growth at a pace much higher than its potential and  clearly 
improve the output gap. 
Let me share some of my considerations regarding the outlook with you. 
Corporate profits and business fixed investment 
B. 
Corporate profits have been at high levels, and it has been expected that making active use 
of corporate funds to increase business fixed investment and wages in Japan would make 
the virtuous cycle from income to spending operate more effectively. However, I  personally 
consider that fixed investment and wages have not increased to the extent  initially expected. 
While  this  situation  is  largely  due  to  the  fact  that  the  recent  improvement  in  corporate 
profits has been supported by temporary factors, I believe that it also is attributable to firms' 
assessment that the domestic market has not yet improved sufficiently. For example, while  the 
recent improvement in current profits of large manufacturing firms has been brought  about 
largely  by  factors  that  cannot  necessarily  be  considered  sustainable,  such  as  the 
depreciation of the yen and low crude oil prices, the contribution of the increase in domestic 
sales volume to such profits is limited. Moreover, the potential growth rate has stayed at a  low 
level, and its pace of improvement is likely to remain moderate. Under these  circumstances, 
firms would make active use of their profits in overseas markets – where  expectations are 
high for increases in sales and profits – while in the domestic market, they  would maintain 
their cautious stance toward spending. 
Based on these developments, for firms to increase fixed investment relative to cash flow, I 
think  that  a  rise  in  their  growth  expectations  for  the  domestic  market  is  indispensable. 
However,  with  strong  headwinds  such  as  the  population  decline  with  a  low  birth  rate  and 
aging,  I  personally  consider  that  it  would  still  take  considerable  time  to  raise  the  growth 
potential of Japan's economy through various measures and thereby raise firms' medium- to 
long-term growth expectations for the domestic market. 
Real income and private consumption 
C. 
In my view, private consumption has continued to lack momentum on the whole, although it 
has somehow maintained its resilience supported by the favorable environment, such as the 
improving employment and income situation and accommodative financial conditions. I  think 
that some of the factors behind this sluggishness in consumption have been that, in  addition 
to  such  temporary  factors  as  bad  weather,  consumers  have  been  more  acutely sensing 
inflation while their expectations for wage increases have stayed low. Indeed,  since around 
spring  2015  in  particular,  prices  of  a  wide  range  of  food  and  daily  necessities  have  been 
raised  while  the  rate  of  increase  in  wages  has  remained  moderate,  and  this  may  have 
negatively affected consumer sentiment to a considerable degree. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Let  us  look  at  this  situation  from  the  perspective  of  monetary  easing  effects. While  real 
interest  rates  continued  to  decline  due  to  the  policy  effects  of  QQE  at  the  time  of  its 
introduction,  there  was  no  significant  change  in  the  outlook  for  real  income.  Therefore,  a 
monetary  easing  effect  emerged  –  that  is,  the  bringing  forward  of  future  consumption. 
Currently,  however,  the  pace  of  the  decline  in  real  interest  rates  has  been  slowing  on  the 
whole,  and  in  this  situation,  consumers  seem  to  be  increasingly  expecting  that  the  rate  of 
increase in wages will not immediately catch up with that in prices. Therefore, the outlook  for 
real income may have deteriorated, thereby leading to conservative consumption  activity. 
In relation to this, according to the Bank's December 2015 Opinion Survey on the General 
Public's  Views  and  Behavior  –  although  the  results  of  the  survey  are  subject  to  a 
considerable margin of error due to the limited number of respondents – while the  proportion 
of  respondents  who  described  the  price  rise  as  "rather  unfavorable"  was  82.4  percent 
(82.5  percent  in  the  September  survey),  the  proportion  of  those  who  described  the  price 
decline  as  "rather  favorable"  jumped  to  52.4  percent  from  23.8  percent  in  the  September 
survey.  I  think  that  these  results  suggest  the  possibility  that  there  are  concerns  among 
consumers about a decline in real income due to price rises. Going forward, if the  positive 
effects of the decline in energy prices on real income run their course, consumption  activity 
might  become  even  more conservative.  This trend  may be  observed  more clearly  among 
elderly  households, including  those of  pensioners, and  low-income households,  taking into 
account,  for  example,  the  recent  improvement  in  their  sentiment  reflecting  the  decline in 
energy prices. 
D.      Overseas economies and Japan's exports 
Exports have shown signs of picking up.  Real exports for the October-December quarter  of 
2015 have increased for the second consecutive quarter, mainly  in those of motor vehicles 
and IT-related goods, registering an increase of 2.8 percent on a quarter-on-quarter  basis. 
However,  I  personally  consider  that,  from  the  January-March  quarter of 2016  onward,  the 
pace of growth in exports is likely to slow due to a dissipation of the effects of  the introduction 
of new cars  to the market  and to weaker-than-expected  demand related  to  new models of 
smartphones.  Accordingly,  there  is  a  possibility  that  the  pace  of  increase  in 
industrial 
production will decline markedly in and after the April-June quarter. 
Regarding the environment surrounding exports, the outlook for overseas economies is not 
optimistic. In  the  United  States,  firmness  in  private  consumption  has  been  maintained 
supported by the favorable income situation and financial conditions, but production  activity 
in  the  manufacturing  sector  has  been  stagnant  accompanied  by  inventory  adjustments, 
reflecting  weak  exports  bound  for  emerging  economies  and  sluggish  demand  of  energy-
related  firms  for  capital  goods. Although  we  cannot  make  a  simplistic  comparison with the 
past, the current phase of economic recovery in the United States has  already lasted for a 
period longer than the average of past recoveries, and this is a matter of  some concern in 
view of the sustainability of the current recovery. 
Excess production capacity and excess debt in emerging economies including China should 
not  be  overlooked  as  downside  risks  to  the  global  economy  as  a  whole. Since  the  global 
financial crisis, corporate debt has increased significantly in countries such as China,  Turkey, 
and  Brazil. A breakdown  shows  that  (1)  debt related to  commodities  and  energy  reflecting 
excessive  expectations for growth  in  demand for  these goods accounts for  a  considerable 
share, and  (2) not a few  countries  carry  a large share of  foreign  currency-denominated 
debt.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies  could  gradually 
heighten  pressure  to  reduce  debt,  thereby starting  a  downward  spiral in  the economies in 
a mutually reinforcing manner.  Furthermore, I am paying due  attention to  the  risk that  the 
change in the global flow of funds – triggered by the fall in  commodity prices as well as the 
change in financial and economic conditions in the United  States – might rapidly heighten 
pressure to reduce debt, through the depreciation of  currencies and the rise in the long-term 
interest rates in emerging economies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   If growth in overseas economies decelerates due to the materialization of the aforementioned 
risks and exports clearly turn to a decreasing trend, this might push down production activity 
in  Japan  and  negatively  affect  business  fixed  investment,  as  well  as  private consumption 
through deterioration in employment conditions. Furthermore, I am  paying  attention  to  the 
possibility that  volatile  movements  observed  in global financial  markets since the beginning 
of  2016  will  cause  the  economic  activity  of  firms  and  households  to  become  cautious. I 
therefore  consider  the  outlook  for  overseas  economies  and financial conditions as major 
downside risks to Japan's economy. 
Price developments and the outlook 
E.     
The underlying trend in consumer prices, in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI  for  all  items  less  food  and  energy  and  that  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  and  energy, 
showed some signs of peaking out in the October-December quarter of 2015, after having 
risen  markedly  in  the  first  half  of  the  fiscal  year.  Meanwhile,  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase  in  the  trimmed  mean  –  an  indicator  intended  to  capture 
the  trends  of  price 
movements  by  mechanically  excluding  items  with  large  price  fluctuations  –  has  been 
relatively stable at around 0.5 percent recently, a level somewhat higher than before. 
As  for  the  outlook,  I  think  that  there  is  not  much  room  for  these  indicators,  which  are 
intended to capture the underlying trend in prices, to see a further rise in their year-on-year 
rates of increase, given that (1) the effects of the depreciation of the yen on a year-on-year 
basis have almost run their course; (2) materials prices and the producer price index (PPI), 
both of which represent upstream prices, have been on a clear declining trend; (3) upward 
pressure  on  prices  stemming  from  the  output  gap  is  not,  in  my  opinion,  likely  to  increase 
noticeably;  and  (4) the  rise  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  seems  to  have 
paused.  Furthermore,  my  impression  is  that  plans  to  raise  sales  prices  of  food  and  daily 
necessities  –  which  many  firms  announced  at  around  the  beginning  of  2015  –  are  not  so 
common  this  year. Therefore,  I  believe  that  there  is  a  risk  that  the  year-on-year  rates  of 
increase  in  these  indicators  around  the  April-June  quarter  of  2016  will  come  in  somewhat 
lower than expected. 
In  considering  the  outlook  for  prices,  it  also  is  important  to  focus  on  the  relationship 
between prices and wages. Although wages as a whole have risen moderately,  I think that 
wage growth  has  been  weaker  than  expected  despite  the  extremely  tight  labor  market 
conditions. The  background  to  this  is  that,  as  is  the  case  with  business  fixed  investment, 
firms remain cautious about raising scheduled cash earnings of their employees as this will 
lead to an increase in fixed costs, in a situation where their growth expectations for Japan's 
economy have not risen clearly. I think that this stance by firms is also constraining a rise  in 
households' medium- to long-term expectations for income growth, or in other words, a  rise 
in  growth  expectations  for  permanent  income.  Moreover,  it  is  possible  that  sluggishness 
in the outlook for the rate of increase in real income would constrain private  consumption, 
thereby exerting downward pressure on prices. 
Taking  these  factors  into  consideration,  I  personally  believe  that  the  underlying  trend  in 
inflation is likely to maintain a relatively stable level without declining substantially for the  time 
being,  albeit  growing  at  a  reduced  pace.  On  this  basis,  I  expressed  dissent  from  the 
description presented in the January 2016 Outlook Report regarding the year-on-year rate of 
change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) that the timing of reaching around 2 percent is 
projected to be around the first half of fiscal 2017.  Even at this point, I still hold the view  that 
the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) will be about 0  percent 
for the time being, and thereafter accelerate very moderately, and consider that the  rate of 
change is unlikely to reach around 2 percent even through fiscal 2017 – the  projection period 
covered in the January 2016 Outlook Report. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 III.      Conduct of monetary policy 
  My proposals at times of QQE decisions 
The Bank's decisions leading to QQE with a Negative Interest Rate 
A. 
1. 
The  Bank  decided  to  introduce  QQE  in  April  2013  with  a  view  to  achieving  the  price 
stability  target  of  2  percent  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  at  the 
earliest  possible  time,  with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years. In  October  2014,  the  Bank 
expanded  QQE. The  specific  measures  of  the  expansion  included  (1)  acceleration  in  the 
annual  pace  of  increase  in  the  monetary  base  from  about  60–70  trillion  yen  to  about 
80  trillion  yen,  and  (2)  an  increase  in  the  Bank's  Japanese  government  bond  (JGB) 
purchases so that the amount outstanding of its holdings would be increased from an annual 
pace  of  about  50  trillion  yen  to  about  80  trillion  yen. And,  in  December  2015,  the  Bank 
adopted  the  following  as  supplementary  measures  for  QQE  for  such  purposes  as 
facilitating its  smooth implementation: (1) extension of the average remaining maturity of JGB 
purchases;  (2)  establishment  of  a  new  program  for  purchases  of  exchange-traded  funds 
(ETFs); and (3)  an  increase  in  the  maximum  amount  of  each  issue  of  Japan  real  estate 
investment  trust  (J-REIT) to be purchased. 
The  Bank  took  another  step  forward  in  January 2016  by introducing  QQE  with  a  Negative 
Interest  Rate,  under  which  it  would  apply  a  negative  interest  rate  of  minus  0.1  percent  to 
some  of  the  outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  that  financial  institutions  hold  at  the 
Bank. 
2.      My proposals at times of QQE decisions 
I supported the  decision  to  introduce QQE  in  April 2013,  judging that  its  scale  was  one in 
which  the  associated  positive  effects  would  just  about  outweigh  the  side  effects  when 
confined  to  a certain  time period. At that  point, however,  I considered  that  the side  effects 
would  outweigh  the  positive  effects  over time. I therefore  continued  to  submit a  proposal – 
that  is,  to  designate  QQE  as  an  intensive  measure  with  a  time  frame  of  about  two  years, 
and  thereafter  to  review  the  monetary  easing  measures  in  a  flexible  manner  –  since  the 
introduction of QQE through the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held in March 2015.  This 
was  because,  while  I  personally  considered  it  difficult  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target 
of  2  percent  in  a  short  period  of time,  I  was  concerned  that,  if the  Bank  carried  out  QQE 
with  the  rigid  purpose  of  achieving  the  2  percent  price  stability  target,  the  policy  decided 
at the time of introduction would be more protracted or strengthened than expected  and the 
side effects would increase in a cumulative manner. 
On  the  decision  to  expand  QQE  in  October  2014,  I  cast  a  dissenting  vote  based  on  the 
judgment  that  the  timing  of  the  associated  side  effects  outweighing  the  positive  effects 
would  be  moved  forward. Since  then,  I  have  continued  to  cast  a  dissenting  vote  on  the 
guidelines. 
Moreover, I submitted a proposal in April 2015 that included a reduction in the annual paces 
of increase in the monetary base and in the amount outstanding of the Bank's JGB holdings 
from the current ones of about 80 trillion yen to about 45 trillion yen, which would be levels 
below the initial paces employed at the time of the introduction of QQE. Thereafter, I  have 
continued to submit the same proposal through the most recent MPM held in January  2016, 
which  was  formulated  based  on  the  judgment  that  the  associated  side  effects  were 
outweighing  the  positive  effects  even  under  the  guidelines  employed  at  the  time  of  the 
introduction  of  QQE,  in  terms  of  such  aspects  as  the  pace  of  the  Bank's  JGB  purchases. 
This judgment was formed on careful examination of whether the side effects of QQE were 
outweighing the positive effects given that two years had passed since the introduction. 
Meanwhile,  in  December  2015,  as  they  were  inconsistent  with  my  proposal  mentioned 
earlier,  I  cast  a  dissenting  vote  on  adoption  of  the  following  supplementary  measures  for 
QQE: (1) extension of the average remaining maturity of JGB purchases; (2) establishment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Thinking behind my proposal 
of a  new  program for  purchases  of ETFs;  and (3)  an  increase  in  the maximum  amount of 
each issue of J-REIT to be purchased. 
In  addition,  in  January  2016,  I  cast  a  dissenting  vote  on  the  introduction  of  QQE  with  a 
Negative Interest Rate, mainly because it would have adverse effects on the smooth conduct 
of the Bank's JGB purchases and therefore would only be an appropriate policy measure in 
a crisis situation. 
3.     
My  proposal,  which  I  have  continued  to  submit  at  MPMs  since  April  2015,  has  not  been 
intended to reduce the stock of the Bank's asset holdings, but to reduce the pace of increase 
in such holdings.  I have considered the following as consequences of the Bank's change in 
the current guidelines of the annual pace of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB 
holdings to  about  45  trillion  yen,  a  level  below  the  initial pace employed  at the  time  of the 
introduction  of  QQE:  the  excessive  pressure  on  the  JGB  market  would  be  eased 
considerably, and the Bank's JGB purchases, for the time being, would be more sustainable 
and  stable  as  the  risk  that  the  Bank  faces  a  limit  to  its  JGB  purchases  at  an  early  stage 
subsides. Meanwhile, even if the paces of increase in the monetary base and in the amount 
outstanding  of  the  Bank's  JGB  holdings  were to  be  reduced,  accommodative  financial 
conditions would be strengthened in a cumulative manner as the amount outstanding of its 
asset holdings increases. Given that it will take considerable time before the end of QQE – 
that is, when excess reserves are depleted and the amount outstanding of the Bank's JGB 
holdings is normalized – the Bank must be careful when deciding on policies. 
Next,  I  would  like  to  elaborate  on  the  thinking  behind  my  proposal,  focusing  on  policy 
effects and side effects. 
Policy effects and side effects 
Policy effects through long-term real interest rates 
B. 
1. 
I think QQE is effective in increasing domestic private demand, mainly through a decline in 
long-term  real  interest  rates,  bringing  forward  future  real  private  consumption. In  this 
regard,  by way of  pushing down  long-term  real interest  rates, the cumulative policy effects 
already  have  firmly  taken  hold  in  Japan's  economy,  as  especially  evident  by  the  following 
developments:  (1)  the  output  gap  in  Japan  recovered  to  a  more  or  less  neutral  level  at 
around the end of 2013 and has generally stayed at this level; and (2) the gap has narrowed 
between  the  actual  inflation  rate  and  the  medium- to  long-term  expected  rates  of  inflation, 
on which basis firms and households carry out their economic activities. 
However,  I  consider  that  the  additional  effects  of  QQE  have  been  diminishing. This  is 
because long-term real interest rates, which showed a marked decline for about a year after 
the  introduction  of  QQE,  have  generally  seen  a  slowdown  in  their  pace  of  decline  since 
around the middle of 2014, although the levels of these rates were reduced somewhat very 
recently  due to the introduction of QQE with a Negative Interest Rate. Medium- to  long-term 
inflation  expectations  in  various  surveys  and  market  indicators  have  been  at  a  level  that 
remains far  from  the  price  stability target  of 2  percent,  and  some recent  results  showed a 
downward trend. 
Under these circumstances, I believe it remains difficult to encourage a rise in medium- to 
long-term  inflation  expectations  solely  through  the  Bank's  policy  measures. Long-term  real 
interest  rates  have  become  less  likely  to  decline  despite  the  continued  increase  in  the 
amount outstanding of the Bank's JGB holdings, and therefore the additional effects of QQE 
have  been  diminishing. Given  this  situation,  I  consider  that  a  reduction  in  the  pace  of  the 
Bank's JGB purchases will only marginally decrease the additional effects of QQE, while it 
can restrain the increase in its side effects, thereby  enabling the balance between the positive 
effects and the side effects to improve. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Attention required to potential side effects of QQE 
Sustainability of JGB purchases and stability of interest rates 
2. 
The  side  effects  of  QQE  have  not  yet  materialized  fully  because  they are  mostly potential 
effects. However,  due  attention  needs  to  be  paid  because,  once they do  materialize,  it  will 
become  difficult  to  handle  them  appropriately  and  promptly.  Given  this,  I  am  personally 
paying  particular  attention  to  the  side  effects  of  QQE  arising  from  the  Bank's  large-scale 
purchases and holdings of JGBs, which impair the proper functioning of the JGB market. 
Specifically,  these  particular  side  effects  include  risks such  as the following:  (1) the  proper 
functioning of the JGB market – in terms of liquidity and the price-discovery function –  will 
be  impaired  and  financial  institutions'  profits  will  deteriorate,  both  of  which  could  lead  to 
instability  in  the  financial  system;  (2)  interest  rates  will  rise  in  the  course  of  normalizing 
monetary policy; and (3) drastic fluctuations in JGB prices will cause revisions to prices of  a 
wide range of financial products and assets, thereby exerting severe effects on the  financial 
system  and  economic  activity. With  the  Bank's  large-scale  JGB  purchases,  I  consider that 
attention should also be given to (1) the further heightening of the possibility  that the Bank's 
large-scale  JGB  purchases  will  be  perceived  as  central  bank  financing  of  fiscal deficits; 
and (2) the impairment of the mechanism to maintain fiscal discipline  through interest rates, 
reflecting overly heightened expectations that the stability in the JGB  market will be ensured. 
3. 
From the perspective of the side effects regarding the Bank's JGB purchases, I would also 
like to discuss the sustainability of such purchases and stability of interest rates. 
Under QQE, the share of the Bank's holdings in the JGB market has continued to increase. 
As of September 30, 2015, the Bank held about 30 percent of the total outstanding amount 
of JGBs issued. Meanwhile, financial institutions in Japan need to hold a certain amount  of 
JGBs  for  such  purposes  as  collateral  for  transactions,  a  safe  asset  portfolio  in  asset-
liability management (ALM), and compliance with financial regulations. Therefore,  it  is  not 
possible for the Bank to hold all of the JGBs issued. Looking at the share of central banks' 
holdings  in  the  respective  government  bond  markets,  in  2016,  the  Bank  of  Japan's  share 
of  holdings  will  exceed  that  of  the  Bank  of  England  at  its  peak  level  and  proceed  into 
unprecedented  territory  for  a  major  central  bank.  In  addition,  purchasing  government 
bonds in Japan is potentially more difficult than in other countries given that,  while  the  share 
of  overseas  investors  –  who  tend  to  hold  JGBs  for  short-term  trading  purposes  –  is 
small, a large share is held by life insurance companies and pension funds –  which tend to 
hold JGBs to maturity. 
So  far, the Bank has conducted outright purchases of  JGBs smoothly and a technical problem 
has not materialized. Nevertheless, if financial institutions in Japan become more  risk averse 
due  to  concerns  over  overseas  financial  markets,  for  example,  and  increasingly  prefer  to 
hold  JGBs,  this  may  tighten  supply  and  demand  conditions  of  JGBs  and  in  turn  abruptly 
make  it  difficult for  the Bank to  continue with  its JGB  purchases.  I personally  believe  that 
such  potential  risks  have  increased  steadily  with  the  progress  in  the  Bank's  large-scale 
JGB purchases. 
I do not think that the economy and financial markets will be negatively affected to a large 
degree  if  long-term  nominal  interest  rates  rise  as  improvement  in  economic  and  price 
conditions  brings  about  an  increase  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  and  an 
upward  revision  to  the  outlook  for  the  economic  growth  rate. However,  if  long-term 
nominal interest rates rise due to a rise in term premiums on JGBs – which are determined 
by  factors  other  than  inflation  expectations  and  the  outlook  for  short-term  interest  rates  – 
caused, for example, by concerns over the sustainability of the Bank's JGB purchases, the 
subsequent impact on the economy and financial markets could be serious.  Therefore, it is 
important to prevent a significant rise in term premiums. 
Based on the thinking that, under the Bank's policy of purchasing JGBs, term premiums are 
determined not only by the current amount outstanding of the Bank's JGB holdings but also 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   Financial soundness of the Bank 
by 
the  projection  for  the  amount  outstanding,  if  market  participants  suddenly  become 
concerned about a limit to the  Bank's  JGB  purchases,  they may revise  their forecasts that 
the  time  frames  for  such  purchases  and  for  maintaining  the  amount  outstanding  of  the 
Bank's  JGB  holdings  will  be  shorter  than  expected,  or  that  the  peak  level  of  the  amount 
outstanding of its JGB holdings will be lower than expected, thereby leading to a significant 
rise in term premiums. 
In  relation to  this, I view the mindset  that it is acceptable for the  Bank  to  continue with its 
JGB  purchases  until  a  limit  comes  into  sight  as  inappropriate. Considering  that  financial 
institutions  need  to  hold  a  certain  amount  of  JGBs  for  such  purposes  as  collateral,  as 
mentioned  earlier,  there  will  be  a  phase  in  which  they  will  not  sell  their  JGB  holdings 
actively  even  amid  declining  interest  rates.  In  this  situation,  as  the  responsiveness  of 
interest rates to the level of JGB demand will decline substantially, there is a possibility that 
interest rates will tend to show large fluctuations, thereby exerting severe effects on  financial 
markets and the economy. When reaching such a phase, it also is likely that the  Bank will 
face difficulties, including in terms of reducing the amount outstanding of its JGB  holdings 
while  maintaining  financial  market  stability,  and  the  normalization  of  QQE  will  not be an 
easy process. Furthermore, there is a possibility that fiscal risks will heighten as  interest rates 
fluctuate  largely  depending  on  the  government's  debt  issuing  policy  and  its  outlook. 
4.     
As  another  potential  side  effect  that  will  heighten  steadily  from  maintaining  QQE  for  a 
protracted period, I am paying attention to the effect on the Bank's profits and balance sheet 
when  it  raises  interest  rates  applied  to  excess  reserve  balances  of  financial  institutions' 
current accounts at the Bank in the course of normalizing QQE. 
Under  QQE,  the  Bank  has  conducted  large-scale  JGB  purchases  and  its  annual  interest 
income  on  JGBs  has  exceeded  1  trillion  yen. Meanwhile,  the  Bank  has  financed  such 
purchases at low cost through financial institutions' current accounts at the Bank – to most 
of  which  is  currently  applied  a  positive  interest  rate  of  0.1  percent  –  and  issuance  of 
banknotes,  which  entails  little  cost. Therefore,  with  the  continuation  of  QQE,  the  Bank's 
profits  have  continued  to  improve  amid  the  increase  in  net  interest  income,  which  is  the 
difference  between  interest  income  on  JGBs  and  interest  payments  on  excess  reserve 
balances of financial institutions' current accounts at the Bank. This net interest income  can 
be  regarded  as  seigniorage  under  QQE.  Most  of  the  Bank's  profits  are  paid  to  the 
government and this constitutes government revenue; therefore, seigniorage has the effect 
of indirectly reducing the tax burden on the private sector. 
However, it should be noted that, in the course of normalizing QQE in the future, due to the 
Bank's  current  accounting  rules  under  which  securities  are  valued  at  amortized  cost,  its 
interest  income  on  JGBs  will  increase  only  moderately  despite  rises  in  long-term  interest 
rates. On  the  other  hand,  depending  on  when  and  how  interest  rates  applied  to  excess 
reserve balances of financial institutions' current accounts at the Bank are raised, payment 
of such interest could increase substantially and a negative spread could occur. This could 
lead to  a  deterioration  in the  Bank's  profits  and  impairment  of its capital,  and  at  the  same 
time cause a possible decrease or delay in the Bank's payment to the government, which in 
turn could decrease government revenue. What is notable here is that the more protracted 
the period of maintaining QQE and the higher the level of excess reserves at the Bank, the 
larger the magnitude of such effects. 
In the long run, it can be expected that, on the back of a rise in long-term interest rates, the 
negative  spread  will  be  resolved  with  a  gradual  increase  in  the  Bank's  interest  income  on 
JGBs,  and  the  environment  for  its  profits  will  improve,  making  it  possible  for  the  Bank  to 
restore  its  capital. As  a  result,  the  effects  of  QQE  on  the  Bank's  profits,  and  ultimately on 
government 
long-term  perspective. 
Nevertheless, the path toward realization of this projection is highly uncertain, as it depends 
revenue,  may  be  considered  neutral 
from  a 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Side effects of QQE with a Negative Interest Rate 
on the actual measures of monetary policy and developments in market interest rates, and 
also requires considerable time. 
I have focused so far on the possibility of a deterioration in the Bank's profits and  impairment 
of  its  capital  deriving  from  the  difference  between  interest  income  on  JGBs  and  interest 
payments on excess reserve balances of financial institutions' current accounts at the  Bank. 
However,  attention  also  needs  to  be  paid  to  the  fact  that  a  similar  issue  could  arise;  for 
example, in case of a fall in the prices of ETFs and J-REITs – of which the Bank's holdings 
have increased under QQE. 
It also is important to note that a decrease in the Bank's payment to the government, by way 
of causing a decrease in government revenue, could be the trigger for the public to clearly 
acknowledge the costs of QQE, which had been hard to discern without such a decrease. 
In other words, it will be widely shared among the public that the Bank, through its pursuit of 
QQE, is deeply involved in income distribution. 
Although the deterioration in the Bank's profits and impairment of its capital that I  mentioned 
earlier may not directly hinder its business operations, the possibility cannot be  denied that 
these could negatively affect the stability in the value of currency in some way.  In addition, 
the Bank has communicated its stance that it will implement the policy  measures  necessary 
to  achieve  price  stability  while  giving  consideration  to  its  financial  soundness. However, 
given the Bank's accounting rules under which the capital adequacy  ratio  is  maintained  at 
around  10  percent,  within  the  range  of  about  two  percentage  points  above  or  below  that 
level,  speculation  in  financial  markets  could  be  raised  that  the  Bank  might,  as  economic 
and price  conditions  improve,  place  priority on  maintaining financial  soundness  over  price 
stability  and  maintain  interest  rates  on  excess  reserve  balances  of  financial institutions' 
current accounts at the Bank at relatively low levels. 
5.     
QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate  may  have  additional  negative  effects  on  financial 
institutions'  profits,  mainly  through  a  narrowing  of  interest  rate  margins  on  loans  and  a 
reduction in yields on financial assets, and this potentially could undermine financial system 
stability. It also should be noted that financial institutions – to compensate for  deterioration 
in their profits –could pass on costs to their depositors and borrowers by, for  example,  not 
only  lowering  deposit  rates  but  also  increasing  lending  rates  and  transaction  fees. This 
conversely could lead to monetary tightening effects. 
In  addition to such side  effects,  my concern  is the  possibility of impairing the sustainability 
and  stability  of  the  Bank's  JGB  purchases,  which  are  the  core  of  QQE. Many  financial 
institutions – regional banks in particular – are said to have a strong tendency to hold JGBs 
with  the  aim  of  obtaining  stable  income  gains  rather  than  having  temporary  capital  gains. 
For  these  financial  institutions,  if  the  levels  of  interest  rates  applied  to  excess  reserve 
balances  of  their  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  become  lower  relative  to  yields  on  their 
current  JGB  holdings,  or  if  yields  on  reinvested  JGBs  decline,  this  could  reduce  their 
incentive  for  selling  JGBs  to  the  Bank. Financial  institutions  also  could  become  less 
encouraged  to  increase  funds  in  their  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  to  which  a  negative 
interest rate is applied, in view of difficulty in satisfying their stockholders and of reputation 
risks. Taking these possible effects into account, if an introduction of a negative interest  rate 
leads  market  participants  to  become  aware  that  the  Bank  could  face  a  limit  on  its  JGB 
purchases sooner than expected, there is a risk of financial market instability, such as a rise 
in term premiums, which in turn could negatively affect the economy. 
In this regard, some may argue that, in the euro area, the negative interest rate policy and 
the asset purchase program are being pursued simultaneously at present, and thus the Bank 
can  do  so  as well. However,  the  example in  the  euro  area  is not  necessarily applicable to 
Japan, as there are great differences in the situations between the two, such as the following. 
First,  the  scale  and  the  implementation  period  of  asset  purchases  in  the  euro  area 
significantly fall below those in Japan. Second, in the euro area, a large share of  government 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   bonds  are  purchased  from  financial  institutions  that  are  not  eligible  for  the  deposit facility, 
and  their incentive for  selling such  bonds  is  not  directly affected  by the  level of the deposit 
facility rate. 
Therefore,  with  regard  to  the  negative  interest  rate  policy,  I  considered  that  the  following 
two  conditions  should  be  met  for  its  introduction.  First,  that  it  would  be  necessary  to 
ensure that the sustainability and stability of the Bank's JGB purchases is enhanced through 
a  reduction  in  the  pace  of  such  purchases.  Second,  on  this  basis,  that  the  policy  would 
only  be  appropriate  in  a  crisis  situation,  such  as  when  financial  and  economic  conditions 
deteriorate markedly. Based on the judgment that the two conditions were not being met, I 
expressed dissent from introduction of QQE with a Negative Interest Rate at the MPM held in 
January  2016.  In  addition,  I  considered  that  the  Bank  should  have  refrained  from 
implementing the measure and saved it for the future, as any additional monetary easing – 
not  limited  to  the  introduction  of  a  negative  interest  rate  –  was  not  necessary,  given  that 
economic and price conditions in Japan were stable and that volatile movements in financial 
markets had not been critical. 
the  markets,  rather  than 
Future conduct of monetary policy 
Policy change and market stability 
C. 
1. 
As explained so far, I have been proposing at MPMs a change to the guidelines for money 
market operations and asset purchases, including a reduction in the annual pace of increase 
in the amount outstanding of the Bank's JGB holdings. In light of my proposal, how such  a 
reduction,  if  actually  implemented,  will  affect  financial  markets  in  particular  has  been 
drawing  wide  interest.  My  understanding  is  that  the  additional  effects  of  the  Bank's  JGB 
purchases  have  already  been  diminishing,  and  that  there  is  a  limit  to  such  purchases. I 
therefore  consider  that  the  risk  of  impairing  financial  market  stability  will  be  smaller  if  the 
Bank  proceeds  with  a  reduction  in  the  pace  of  its  JGB  purchases  at  an  early  stage  in  an 
orderly  manner  while  closely  communicating  with 
further 
proceeding  with  its  JGB  purchases  and  then  implementing  the  reduction  once  such 
purchases come close to the limit. 
It  also  is  possible  to  reduce  the  risk  of  impairing  financial  market  stability  by  providing  a 
thorough explanation, or forward guidance, to the markets that the reduction in the pace of 
the  Bank's  JGB  purchases  (1)  will  not  in  the  near  future  lead  to  a  rise  in  interest  rates 
applied to excess reserve balances of financial institutions' current accounts at the Bank or a 
reduction  in  the  amount  outstanding  of the  Bank's  JGB  holdings,  which  could  weaken  the 
accumulated effects of its JGB purchases, and (2) will instead enhance the sustainability and 
stability of the Bank's JGB purchases for the time being. 
Based on this understanding, with regard to the Bank's future monetary policy stance, I have 
been  proposing at  MPMs  that it  should continue  with  asset  purchases  and a virtually zero 
interest  rate  policy  as  long  as  each  of  these  policy  measures  is  deemed  appropriate,  in 
addition  to  the  proposal  to  change  the  guidelines  for  money  market  operations  and  asset 
purchases. 
2. 
It should be noted that, although I have been proposing a reduction in the pace of the Bank's 
asset purchases, I am not ruling out the possibility of implementing additional policy tools  in 
the case of future marked deterioration in financial and economic conditions. 
My  understanding  is  that,  even  if  the  Bank  starts  to  normalize  its  asset  purchases,  it  is 
highly  likely  that  it  would  take  considerable  time  for  this  to  be  completed;  given  this,  it  is 
necessary to fully take into account the side effects of such purchases that may emerge over 
a  considerable  period  of  time  and  also  try  to  conduct  monetary  policy  in  a  much  more 
forward-looking manner than when conducting the interest rate policy. I therefore think  that 
Examination of a wide range of policy measures 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   My view regarding the price stability target 
it is  inappropriate to  expand  the  amount  of assets to  be  purchased, to  address  short-term 
changes in financial and economic conditions. 
At  the  same  time,  I  consider  it  desirable  that  monetary  policy  be  conducted  flexibly  and 
comprehensively  with  an  appropriate  combination  of  various  measures.  If  stability  in 
economic activity and prices, or in financial conditions, were to be undermined significantly, 
thereby causing a serious situation in which economic, price, and financial conditions could 
deteriorate in an accelerated manner without a monetary policy response, I personally think 
it necessary to examine possible additional measures other than expansion in the amount of 
assets  to  be  purchased  –  such  as  those  to  fully  ensure  financial  system  stability  by 
temporarily providing ample funds in yen and foreign currencies regardless of the target for 
the annual increase in the monetary base. 
3. 
In addition to the proposal to change the guidelines for money market operations and asset 
purchases, I have been submitting a proposal not to restrict the time frame for achieving the 
2 percent price stability target to about two years, but to aim to achieve it in the medium to 
long term.  I consider it appropriate to implement these two proposals together. Next, I  would 
like  to  explain  my  view  regarding  the  price  stability  target  that  lies  behind  such 
consideration. 
The Bank's price stability target of 2 percent aims to maintain the 2 percent inflation rate in  a 
stable  manner,  and  not  to  merely  reach  it  temporarily. In  order  to  achieve  this,  it  is 
important to have a positive change in economic structure that is in line with the 2 percent 
price  stability 
target.  In  the  process  of  the  change  in  economic  structure,  firms'  and 
households'  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  –  on  which  basis  they  carry  out 
their economic activities – will become stable at around 2 percent, and this will support the 
actual inflation rate continuing to be stable at around 2 percent. In this regard, I consider  that 
firms'  and  households'  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  mainly  determined 
by  supply-side  factors  –  or,  the  economy's  growth  potential  –  such  as  the  potential 
growth  rate  and  the  productivity  growth  rate,  rather  than  by factors  such  as  the  following: 
the level of the Bank's price stability target; the supply and demand balances in  goods and 
services, as well as in the labor market; and developments in the actual inflation  rate. 
In light of this view, I think that the price stability target of 2 percent is well above the level  that 
is consistent with the growth potential of Japan's economy. Therefore, it is difficult at  this point 
to  achieve  the  2  percent  price  stability target  in  a  stable  manner  through  monetary  policy 
alone, unless further progress is made in economic structural changes that would  increase 
the  underlying  trend  in  inflation.  In  this  situation,  my concern  is  that,  if  the  Bank,  through 
monetary  policy,  tries  to  push  prices  higher  in  the  short  term  than  levels  justified  by 
the 
economy's  growth  potential,  this  could  in  turn  impair  the  stability  in  economic  activity  and 
prices. 
Let me note that the joint statement by the government and the Bank released in January 
2013 indicated that "the Bank recognizes that the inflation rate consistent with price  stability 
on  a  sustainable  basis will rise as  efforts by a  wide  range  of entities toward  strengthening 
competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of  Japan's  economy  make  progress.  Based on this 
recognition, the Bank sets the price stability target at 2 percent in terms of the  year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI." In my interpretation, the statement was based on  the recognition 
that a prerequisite for the Bank to set the 2 percent price stability target is a  rise in the growth 
potential of Japan's economy to the level that is in line with price stability  at 2 percent inflation 
through efforts such as by the government and firms. 
4.     
In order to raise the growth potential of Japan's economy, it is necessary for firms to make 
technological innovations, as well as active fixed investment, so that such innovations lead 
to  increased  productivity. Moreover,  to  encourage  firms  to  make  active  fixed  investment  in 
New role of monetary policy in the future 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   Japan  and  increase  the  potential  growth  rate  through  accumulation  of  capital  stock,  it  is 
necessary that the government take various measures to increase firms' medium- to  long-
term expectations for the growth rate of domestic demand. 
As mentioned earlier, my assessment is that QQE has exerted a considerable effect. In this 
current situation, I personally consider that the new role that monetary policy should play in 
the overall economic policy has shifted to consistently providing, while maintaining  favorable 
financial conditions, indirect support for positive efforts by the government and  firms so that 
the economy's growth potential – which is represented mainly by the potential  growth  rate 
and  the  productivity  growth  rate  –  will  increase  to  the  level  consistent  with  the  2 percent 
inflation rate. To this end, it is important to conduct monetary policy with the aim of achieving 
prolonged  economic  recovery,  albeit  moderate,  at  a  pace  consistent  with  the  economy's 
growth potential – that is, the potential growth rate -– by reducing the side effects of monetary 
easing that could lead to financial market turmoil, thereby making the  utmost efforts to lessen 
future uncertainty. 
My  proposal  to  change  the  guidelines  for  money  market  operations  and  asset  purchases, 
which  I  have  been  submitting  at  MPMs,  is  based  on  such  a  viewpoint. I  believe  that  this 
proposal is in fact a quicker way of achieving the 2 percent price stability target. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
