   
Lawrence Schembri: Connecting the dots – elevated household debt and 
the risk to financial stability 
Remarks by Mr Lawrence Schembri, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Guelph 
Chamber of Commerce, Guelph, Ontario, 24 February 2016. 
 The charts and tables can be found at the Bank of Canada’s website. 
I would like to thank Don Coletti, Marc-André Gosselin, Gino Cateau and Brian Peterson for their help in preparing 
this speech. 
Introduction 
Thank you for the invitation to speak here today. Let me start by congratulating my host, the 
Guelph  Chamber  of  Commerce,  for  the  impressive  work  it  has  done  over  the  years  to 
strengthen  the  local  business  community  and  economy.  Economic  vitality  needs  to  be 
nurtured,  which  is  what  members  of  your  organization  have  been  doing since  1827,  when 
Guelph was little more than a gleam in the eye of its founder, John Galt. Although Galt never 
succeeded in establishing the bank that he knew was necessary for growth, early residents 
created a building society to help them save and borrow for their farms and businesses. That 
society supported the economic development of Guelph. 
My topic today is the financial system in Canada that emerged from those modest beginnings 
in Guelph and other communities across the country, and the role the Bank of Canada plays 
in helping to maintain its overall stability. 
Like the transportation system, the financial system is essential infrastructure.1 It provides core 
functions necessary to facilitate economic activity and is constantly evolving, incorporating new 
technology and other innovations to become more efficient. It is as vital to the economy as our 
system of roads and highways. 
Although  the  Bank  of  Canada,  unlike  some  other  central  banks  such  as  the  U.S.  Federal 
Reserve or the Bank of England, is not responsible for directly overseeing banks and insurance 
companies, we help to promote financial stability and efficiency in a number of different ways. 
In these efforts, we take a system-wide perspective that encompasses all financial institutions 
and markets at the federal and provincial levels, especially those that are “systemic” or, in 
other  words,  critical  to  the  functioning  of  the  entire  system.  This  system-wide  perspective 
allows us to “connect the dots” not only across the financial system but, equally importantly, 
between the financial system and the real economy, including households and non-financial 
firms. By seeing how all the components work together, we can identify potential problems 
before they become serious and help maintain the flow of financial traffic2 
An important vehicle in our efforts to promote financial stability is the Financial System Review, 
which  we  publish  twice  a  year.  The  Review  summarizes  the  Bank’s  analysis  of  the  main 
vulnerabilities and risks to the stability of the Canadian financial system. Its purpose is to inform 
                                                
1   The core functions of the financial system include credit allocation, maturity transformation, risk transfer, price 
discovery, the provision of liquidity, and the facilitation of payments. 
In  addition  to  identifying  systemic  vulnerabilities  and  risks,  the  Bank  oversees  key  financial  market 
infrastructures, provides liquidity to the financial system and, if necessary, acts as lender of last resort to qualified 
financial institutions. 
2  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   both the private and public sectors of our assessments so that they can take appropriate steps 
to mitigate these vulnerabilities and reduce their exposures to them.3 
In  2014,  we  incorporated  into  the  Review  a  new  framework  for  identifying  and  gauging 
vulnerabilities and assessing risks. In my talk today, I will cover three main points. 
First, I’ll begin with an overview of this framework. 
Second,  I’ll  illustrate  the  application  of  this  framework  by  stepping  you  through  our  latest 
assessment of a key vulnerability, elevated household debt, drawing on recent Bank research 
into the increasing prominence of highly indebted households. 
And third, I’ll briefly discuss the Bank’s contribution to reducing vulnerabilities. 
Assessing risks to financial stability 
The better we understand the sources and the transmission of financial system stress, the 
better we will be able to prevent, or at least limit, the impact of financial crises. To that end, our 
new  framework  informs  and  directs  our  risk-assessment  process.4  At  the  heart  of  the 
framework  is  the  explicit  identification  of  vulnerabilities  and  risks.  Such  transparency 
encourages  everyone  involved  in  the  financial  system  to  consider  how  to  mitigate  the 
vulnerabilities and react if the risks were to materialize. 
Our framework sets out three steps (Figure 1): 
1. 
2. 
3. 
identifying financial system vulnerabilities; 
developing risk scenarios; and 
assessing each risk scenario by determining the probability of it occurring, as well as 
its impact should it occur. 
The  first  step  is  identifying  vulnerabilities,  which  are  conditions  that  could  amplify  and 
propagate shocks throughout the financial system. Examples of potential vulnerabilities include 
high levels of indebtedness or leverage, liquidity and maturity mismatches, and the mispricing 
of  assets.  In  contrast,  risks  are  events  or  outcomes  that  could  threaten  the  ability  of  the 
financial system to perform its core functions. Risks materialize when trigger events – which 
are adverse shocks such as the recent dramatic drop in oil prices – interact with vulnerabilities. 
To illustrate the difference between a vulnerability and a risk, imagine a bridge with fractures 
in its concrete supports. That’s the vulnerability. The risk is that the bridge could collapse if a 
trigger event, such as an earthquake, shook its foundations. 
Focusing explicitly on vulnerabilities in the Canadian financial system allows us to highlight 
where the fragilities lie and how they are evolving. We identify a range of vulnerabilities and 
consider  them  in  relation  to  a  wide  variety  of financial  institutions,  markets,  end-users  and 
payment systems (Table 1).5  
                                                
3   We share  our assessments  of  systemic  vulnerabilities  and risks  with  our  federal  regulatory  partners  on  the 
Senior Advisory Committee (SAC). The SAC is chaired by the Deputy Minister of Finance and includes the Bank 
of Canada, the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions, the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation 
and  the  Financial  Consumer  Agency  of  Canada.  Our  work  contributes  to  the  committee’s  discussions  of 
systemic vulnerabilities and potential remedial policy actions. 
4   See “Enhanced Risk-Assessment Framework,” Bank of Canada Financial System Review (June 2014): 1–2; 
and I. Christensen, G. Kumar, C. Meh and L. Zorn, “Assessing Vulnerabilities in the Canadian Financial System,” 
Bank of Canada Financial System Review (June 2015): 37–46. 
5   The sectors we examine include the following: (i) financial institutions (including large and small banks), credit 
unions, trust companies, life insurance companies, and pension funds; (ii) financial  and property markets and 
non-bank  financial  intermediation;  (iii)  the  end-users  of  financial  system  services  such  as  households, 
governments and non-financial corporations; and (iv) payment clearing and settlement systems and financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The  second  step  is  developing  a risk  scenario for  each  of the  most  serious  vulnerabilities, 
including a list of possible triggers. A risk scenario describes how a trigger event will interact 
with a vulnerability to affect the financial system. 
Third, we assess the probability of each risk occurring and the impact if it did. The rating of 
risks  summarizes  our judgment  on their  importance  to  the financial  system  and  their  likely 
effect on the real economy. 
That, in brief, is our framework. Now, let’s look at high household debt, a key vulnerability we 
analyzed in the December issue of the FSR.6 
Key vulnerability: household indebtedness 
Canada was spared some of the most serious negative consequences of the global financial 
crisis  because  of  our  strong  financial  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  and  the 
effectiveness of our policy response. This response included a reduction in the policy interest 
rate  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  to  support  aggregate  demand  and  help  achieve  our  inflation 
target.7  
As a result of these policies, the Canadian economy recovered relatively quickly, supported by 
solid  growth  in  household  spending  that  was  funded  by  household  income  growth  and 
borrowing.8  
The buildup of household debt, however, has increased the vulnerability of the economy and 
the financial system to adverse shocks to incomes and interest rates.9 With high indebtedness 
or  elevated  leverage  –  an  important  indicator  of  vulnerability  in  the  financial  system  –  the 
household sector is less resilient. During times of stress, people with higher debt will typically 
cut back on their spending disproportionately more than those with less or no debt. This means 
that high household indebtedness can amplify the impact of a shock. In more extreme cases, 
adverse shocks could lead to an increase in household defaults, which would mean losses for 
banks, other lenders and mortgage insurers. In the worst case, if the losses were extensive 
and spillovers were large, the increase in stress could potentially deplete the capital buffers 
built into the financial system to absorb losses, impairing its functioning, with large negative 
effects on economic activity. 
 market infrastructures, which are the systems that facilitate the clearing, settlement and recording of payments, 
securities and derivatives or other financial transactions among participating entities.  
Vulnerabilities  in  these  different  sectors  are  measured  along  various  dimensions,  such  as  the  degree  of 
leverage, complexity, and liquidity and maturity transformation, as well as the behaviour of asset prices. While 
these elements are part of the normal functioning of the financial system, they may make the system vulnerable 
if they become excessive. In addition, we review the external exposures of the sectors and their degree of 
interconnectedness across the Canadian financial system. For example, the interbank market is an important 
source of funding, but it could rapidly transmit funding problems through the system in the event of a financial 
shock. 
6   G.  Cateau,  T.  Roberts  and  J.  Zhou,  “Indebted  Households  and  Potential  Vulnerabilities  for  the  Canadian 
Financial System: A Microdata Analysis,” Bank of Canada Financial System Review (December 2015): 49–58. 
7   The Bank of Canada’s action was part of a global effort at broad policy coordination among G20 countries that 
included fiscal stimulus, financial reform and interest rate cuts. See www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2009/pdf/ 
g20_040209.pdf 
8   The borrowing has led to increasing levels of household debt, against a backdrop of rising house prices. For a 
discussion of monetary policy and its impact on household debt, see S.S. Poloz, “Integrating Financial Stability 
into  Monetary  Policy”  (speech  to  the  National  Association  of  Business  Economics,  Washington,  D.C., 
12 October 2015). 
9   Global long-term real interest rates have been on a steady decline for almost 20 years, in part because of lower 
risk premiums.  See  L.  Schembri,  “The  Long-Term  Evolution  of  House  Prices:  An International  Perspective” 
(speech to the Canadian Association of Business Economics, Kingston, Ontario, 25 August 2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   To  understand  the  magnitude  of  this  potential  threat  to  the  financial  system  we  need  to 
understand both the sustainability of household debt and the impact on the financial system of 
increased defaults, should they occur. That raises three key questions: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Which households are holding the debt? 
How likely are the highly indebted to lose their jobs? 
How able are highly indebted households to service their debt? 
Which households are holding the debt? 
Data from Ipsos Reid’s Canadian Financial Monitor from 2002 to 2014 show that household 
debt in Canada has not only increased significantly but has also become more concentrated 
over time in households with higher levels of indebtedness. 
For example, the level of debt held by Canadian households with a debt-to-gross-income ratio 
of less than 250 per cent has increased only modestly in inflation-adjusted terms over the past 
12 years. In contrast, the debt of households with a debt-to-gross-income ratio equal to or 
greater than 250 per cent increased by almost 75 per cent over the same period. 
Within this group is a subgroup of highly indebted households, defined as those with a debt-
to-gross-income ratio that is equal to or more than 350 per cent (Chart 1).10 Most of the people 
in this subgroup are young – under the age of 45. The size of this subgroup doubled from 
around  4  per  cent  during  the  2005–07  pre-crisis  period  to  around  8  per  cent  of  indebted 
households  in  2012–14.That  amounts  to  about  720,000  households  holding  close  to 
$400 billion in debt, about one-fifth of the overall household debt. 
A  deeper  dive  into  the  characteristics  of  these  highly  indebted  households  reveals  that, 
compared with less-indebted borrowers, highly indebted borrowers tend to be younger, have 
lower  incomes  and  wealth  and  are  less  likely  to  have  pursued  post-secondary  studies  or 
training.  Highly  indebted  borrowers  are  also  disproportionately  more  likely  to  live  in  British 
Columbia, Alberta or Ontario, provinces where house prices are the highest (Chart 2).11, 12 
How likely are the highly indebted to lose their jobs? 
Members of highly indebted households are more likely to lose their jobs because they tend to 
be younger and are less likely to have a post-secondary degree or training. 
                                                
10   Households are defined as “highly indebted”if their debt-to-income ratio, calculated as the total amount of debt 
divided by grosshousehold income, exceeds a certain threshold.This threshold was determined by using the 
Bank of Canada’s Household Risk Assessment Model (HRAM) to analyze which households, in different debt-
to-income categories, are more susceptible to arrears on their debt under a hypothetical stress scenario.See 
Cateau, Roberts and Zhou (2015). 
11   Although 63 per cent of Canadians live in British Columbia, Alberta or Ontario, these three provinces account 
for 81 per cent of the debt held by highly indebted households. 
12   Focusing on mortgage debt only, Alexander and Jacobson (2015) find that the proportion of highly indebted 
households roughly doubled between 2005 and 2012 (from 5.5 per cent to 10.8 per cent). Using data from 
Statistics  Canada’s  Survey  of  Financial  Security,  they  define  households  as  highly  indebted  if  their  ratio  of 
mortgage debt to disposable income exceeds 500 per cent. Using CFM data, Bank researchers find similar 
numbers when focusing only on mortgage debt and assuming an average personal income tax rate of 30 per 
cent.  See  C.  Alexander  and  P.  Jacobson,  “Mortgaged  to  the  Hilt:  Risks  from  the  Distribution  of  Household 
Mortgage Debt,” C.D. Howe Institute Commentary No. 441 (December 2015). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   How able are highly indebted households to service their debt? 
An analysis by the Bank suggests that highly indebted households would be less able to make 
their payments after a shock.13 Although the median share of gross income needed to service 
the debt of highly indebted households has fallen notably over the past decade from 43 per 
cent of gross income to 34 per cent, largely as a result of much lower interest rates, the liquid 
financial  buffers  held  by  this  group  remain  relatively  modest,  roughly  equivalent  to  only 
6.5 months of current debt servicing.14  
Still, debt loads and arrears in Canada today are not nearly as high as they were for U.S. 
households at the start of the financial crisis. For example, relative to Canadian households in 
2012–14, more U.S. households in 2007 carried debt, more of those households were highly 
indebted and twice as many of those highly indebted households had debt service ratios of 
40 per cent or more (Table 2). 
Risk scenario: highly indebted households 
Assessing  the  risk  associated  with  the  vulnerability  arising  from  more  highly  indebted 
households starts with the development and analysis of a plausible risk scenario. A number of 
triggers could set off the risk, but the most likely is a severe recession that causes a sharp, 
widespread  rise  in  unemployment,  which  reduces  the  ability  of  households  to  service  their 
debt. 
To gauge the effect of such a shock on the stability of the financial system we simulated a 
large and persistent increase in the unemployment rate of 5 percentage points.15 While the 
probability of such a scenario is low, it is similar to the magnitude of the adverse shock used 
by the International Monetary Fund in its 2014 assessment of the stability of the Canadian 
financial sector.16  
Our  simulations  suggest  that  in  response  to  this  shock  household  arrears  rates  could  rise 
significantly, from 0.4 per cent in 2014 to reach as high as 1.8 per cent after three years. About 
20 per cent of this estimated rise would be attributable to the increase in debt and its greater 
concentration among highly indebted households since 2007.17  
                                                
13   The incidence of arrears increases significantly for households with debt-to-income ratios between 250 and 350 
per cent, with even higher increases for households with debt-to-income ratios equal to or above 350 per cent. 
See Cateau, Roberts and Zhou (2015). 
14   Liquid financial buffers are defined as non-pension financial assets and include GICs, bonds, stocks and mutual 
funds held outside a group pension plan. The financial buffers held by less-indebted households are equivalent 
to about 26 months of debt payments. See Cateau, Roberts and Zhou (2015). 
15   The simulation was conducted using our Household Risk Assessment Model (HRAM). For further details on 
HRAM, see U.Faruqui, X. Liu and T. Roberts, “An Improved Framework for Assessing the Risks Arising from 
Elevated Household Debt,” Bank of Canada, Financial System Review, (June 2012): 51-57. 
16   See  International  Monetary  Fund  “Canada:  Financial  Sector  Stability  Assessment,”  IMF  Country  Report 
No.14/29, February 2014 
17   Historically, this increase in household arrears is significant. Arrears are defined as the percentage 
of consumer loans by dollar value held at chartered banks that are currently 90 days or more behind 
in  payments.  For  example,  during  the  global  financial  crisis  the  rate  of  households  in  arrears  in 
Canada only rose from 0.30 per cent in the first quarter of 2008 to 0.65 per cent in the first quarter of 
2010. Given the regulatory regime in place at the time, this doubling in the arrears represented less 
than 5 per cent of Tier One Capital held by Canada’s chartered banks. Clearly, a larger increase in 
arrears would have a much greater impact on the banks’ capital. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   What would be the impact on the financial system and economy? 
What would be the possible implications for the financial system if the vulnerability arising from 
highly indebted households were triggered? 
The rise in household arrears could force some vulnerable homeowners to sell their homes or 
eventually default on their mortgages and other consumer debt.18 If defaults rose quickly or if 
many households were forced to sell their homes, house prices could drop sharply across 
Canada, particularly in Vancouver and Toronto, which have recently experienced exceptionally 
strong price growth. 
A broad-based decline in house prices would, in turn, have large direct effects on Canadian 
lenders  and  mortgage  insurers.  Results  from  stress  tests  show,  however,  that  there  are 
sufficient buffers in the financial system to withstand such a scenario.19 For example, the six 
largest  Canadian  banks,  which  hold  roughly  70  per  cent  of  outstanding  mortgages,  have 
increased the quantity and quality of their capital in recent years and are well diversified across 
regions  and  sectors.  In  addition,  most  of  the  mortgages  they  hold  are  supported  by 
government-backed mortgage insurance programs or by high homeowner equity. 
Nonetheless, if such a decline in house prices occurred, the impact on the broader Canadian 
economy and the financial system would be large. 
What is the probability of this risk occurring? 
Despite the drop in the price of oil and some non-energy commodities, the probability of this 
risk being triggered remains low. The decline in Canada’s terms of trade has set off a complex 
and  lengthy  chain  of  adjustments  within  the  economy,  as  capital  and  labour  re-allocate 
between resource and non-resource sectors. The negative impact of this shock has been felt 
most  acutely  in  the  oil-producing  regions,  where  employment  insurance  claims  have  been 
rising. The non-resource sector, however, is expected to gain further traction, supported by a 
strengthening global economy – most notably in the United States – the stimulative effects of 
a lower Canadian dollar, and accommodative monetary and financial conditions. Indeed, the 
Bank’s interest rate reductions in 2015 helped to reduce the probability of this risk materializing. 
Although the Canadian economy appears to have stalled in the fourth quarter of last year, we 
expect growth to pick up to 1 per cent in the first quarter and then to move above 2 per cent 
for the remainder of 2016. 
What is the assessed rating for this risk? 
Although there is a low probability of this risk being realized, the Bank’s Governing Council 
assessed it as “elevated” because of the large potential impact it would have on the economy 
(Table 3). 
Mitigating the Vulnerability: The Role of the Bank of Canada 
While the expected uptick in economic activity will help stabilize household debt as output, 
incomes and interest rates rise, economic growth alone may not be sufficient to mitigate this 
vulnerability. Other policies should be adopted to complement the impact of economic growth. 
To promote the stability of the financial system, a range of policy responses can – and have 
been – deployed.20 These include the following: 
                                                
18   Another  trigger  could  be  a  rise  in  global  interest  rates,  unlikely  in  the  current  environment  of  weak  global 
demand. 
19   International Monetary Fund “Canada: Financial Sector Stability Assessment,” IMF Country Report No.14/29, 
February 2014. 
20   See S. S. Poloz (12 October 2015). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
        responsible 
the  agencies 
Encouraging prudence on the part of borrowers and lenders. Through the FSR 
and  other public  communications,  the  Bank  has informed  households  and  lending 
institutions of its analysis and thereby raised their awareness of high household debt 
in  an  effort  to  encourage  them  to  exercise  appropriate  caution.21  In  particular, 
borrowers and lenders should take into account the impact of higher borrowing rates 
in the future on the cost of servicing mortgages and other loans. 
Enhancing  market  discipline  through  increased  transparency.  By  making  its 
analysis and assessments public, the Bank aims to also increase awareness of this 
vulnerability  among 
for  assessing  consumer 
creditworthiness, on one side, and bank analysts and investors, on the other side. 
Strengthening  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  financial  sector.  As  I  noted 
earlier, financial institutions and markets in Canada were relatively well regulated and 
supervised  before  the  global  financial  crisis.  Since  then,  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework has been further strengthened. The Bank, along with other 
public authorities, has helped develop more rigorous global standards and promote 
their implementation in Canada.22 An important example is the implementation of the 
Basel  III  regulatory  reforms,  which  require  banks  to  hold  more  and  higher-quality 
capital and meet new liquidity and leverage requirements. Consequently, Canadian 
banks are now in a better position to cope with unexpected downturns in economic 
activity. 
The Bank also works with other public authorities at the federal and provincial levels 
to stress-test the ability of financial institutions to withstand various macroeconomic 
shocks. These tests incorporate existing vulnerabilities. The goal is to encourage the 
institutions themselves, as well as the supervisory bodies, to take remedial measures 
to increase resilience, as necessary.23 
Adopting  macroprudential  measures.  In  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  crisis, 
household debt and house prices resumed growing faster than disposable income in 
response  to  the  lower  interest  rates  and  the  recovering  Canadian  economy.  The 
federal  government  and  a  number  of  agencies  worked  together  to  mitigate  this 
growing systemic vulnerability. The Bank’s analysis of these vulnerabilities helped to 
inform these decisions. 
For  example,  the  federal  government  tightened  rules  for  government-supported 
mortgage insurance four times over five years, starting in 2008. In December 2015, 
                                                
21   This effort by the Bank is complemented by the communications of other public authorities, for example, the 
Financial Consumer Agency of Canada and the Department of Finance. 
22   The Governor of the Bank of Canada is a member of the Board of Directors of the Canada Deposit Insurance 
Corporation and the Financial Institutions Supervisory Committee and chairs the Heads of Agencies committee. 
These groups provide oversight of the implementation of, and adherence to, the new global standards for banks 
(for  example,  Basel  III  standards  and  standards  for  effective  resolution  regimes)  and  financial  markets  (for 
example,  standards  for  over-the-counter  derivatives),  as  well  as  non-bank  financial  intermediation  (shadow 
banking, for example, standards for repos and securities lending). See L. Schembri, “Born of Necessity and Built 
to Succeed: Why Canada and the World Need the Financial Stability Board” (speech to the CFA Society, Ottawa, 
24 September 2013). Similarly, the Bank works with provincial securities regulators to ensure the adoption of 
the  Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures,  developed  by  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market 
Infrastructures/International Organization of Securities Commissions. 
23   Stress tests of Canadian financial institutions by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) suggest that even though 
our largest banks would suffer a decline in their capital positions in very severe stress scenarios, they would still 
be able to generate capital internally and continue their critical functions. Similarly, the IMF stress test for large 
life insurers and the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation found similar results. For more information, 
see  International  Monetary  Fund  “Canada:  Financial  Sector  Stability  Assessment,”  IMF  Country  Report 
No.14/29, February 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
    the federal government made a fifth change, increasing the minimum down payment 
for houses valued at from $500,000 to $1 million. 
For its part, the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI) released 
new guidance on mortgage underwriting and mortgage insurance that implemented 
enhanced global standards.24 In December, OSFI announced that it would issue for 
public  consultation  proposed  rules  for  how  much  capital  the  banks  and  mortgage 
insurers must hold against vulnerable insured mortgages. 
These  measures  help  to  limit  access  to  borrowing  to  the  most  creditworthy 
households, for example, those with higher credit scores, and thus complement the 
accommodative  monetary  policy  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  by  better  targeting  the 
stimulus to those households with the capacity to borrow.25  
Keeping the focus of monetary policy on the right objective. Since the crisis, the 
Bank has kept its policy interest rate relatively low, by historical standards, to support 
economic growth  and  thereby  achieve  its  primary  goal  of  returning  inflation  to  the 
2 per  cent  target  within  a  reasonable  time  frame.  Because  we  conduct  monetary 
policy within a risk-management framework, we recognize that elevated household 
debt could represent a risk to financial stability. Although we have the flexibility to 
choose a different path for interest rates to restrain the accumulation of household 
debt and mitigate vulnerabilities in the financial system, we have focused on attaining 
the 2 per cent inflation target. We believe that there are other measures, including 
public policies and private remedial actions, better suited to targeting and reducing 
these vulnerabilities than monetary policy, which affects the entire economy and is 
thus a very blunt instrument to address financial stability.26 
To  summarize  my  main  points,  then,  the  financial  vulnerability  associated  with  elevated 
household debt has increased over the past decade. It has done so, in part, because the debt 
has become more concentrated in highly leveraged households, especially those whose ability 
to  service  their  debt  may  be  more  vulnerable  to  an  economic  downturn.  Our  assessment, 
therefore, of this vulnerability depends not only on the magnitude of the debt but also on its 
distribution. 
However, the Canadian financial system is very resilient and could withstand the triggering of 
this  vulnerability.  And  public  authorities  in  Canada  have  taken  appropriate  measures  to 
mitigate it. Moreover, this vulnerability should stabilize as the economy and household incomes 
strengthen and interest rates normalize. 
The Bank is, nonetheless, concerned about high household debt and will continue to monitor 
it closely. 
                                                
24   OSFI’s  B-20  Guideline  on  Residential  Mortgage  Underwriting  Practices  and  Procedures  is  available  at 
http://www.osfi-bsif.gc.ca/eng/fi-if/rg-ro/gdn-ort/gl-ld/pages/b20.aspx.Its  B-21  Guideline  on  Residential 
Mortgage Insurance Underwriting Practices and Procedures is at www.osfi-bsif.gc.ca/eng/fi-if/rg-ro/gdn-ort/gl-
ld/pages/b21_let.aspx. 
25   For more details on the complementary nature of monetary and macroprudential housing policy during the post-
crisis  period,  see  L.  Schembri,  “The  Long-Term  Evolution  of  House  Prices:  An  International  Perspective” 
(speech to the Canadian Association of Business Economics, Kingston, Ontario, 25 August 2015). For more 
details on the impact of the macroprudential policies, see A. Crawford, C. Meh and J. Zhou, “The Residential 
Mortgage Market in Canada: A Primer,” Bank of Canada, Financial System Review (December 2013): 53–63; 
and L. Schembri, “Housing Finance in Canada: Looking Back to Move Forward,” National Institute Economic 
Review,  230,  no.  1  (November  2014):  R45–R57.  Available  at  www.niesr.ac.uk/media/press-release-future-
housing-finance-11970#.VsNMm-bG-HM. 
26   T. Lane, “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability – Looking for the Right Tools” (speech to the HEC Montréal, 
Montréal, Quebec, 8 February 2016). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The Bank of Canada’s mandate is to promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada. 
Those  who  established  the  Bank  of  Canada  in  the  wake  of  the  Great  Depression  clearly 
understood that the two goals of financial andeconomic stability must go hand-in-hand. One is 
a necessary condition for the other. 
But  the  experience  of  history  tells  us  that  economic  stability,  supported by  the  appropriate 
monetary policy to achieve low and stable inflation, is not sufficient for financial stability. That 
was an important lesson taught by the global financial crises of the late 1920s and 2000s. 
Other policies are needed to help to safeguard financial stability, namely, effective regulation 
and  supervision  of  the  financial  system,  and  close  monitoring  and  timely  remediation  of 
emerging financial vulnerabilities. 
The Bank of Canada makes important contributions to these other means of achieving financial 
stability. 
First,  we  use  our  system-wide  perspective  and  our  new  framework  to  identify  and  assess 
vulnerabilities and risks and, thereby, “connect the dots” within the financial system and with 
the real economy. 
Second, we work collaboratively with our partner agencies, sharing our research and analysis 
with them and the public at large to collectively mitigate emerging vulnerabilities. 
The Bank’s close collaboration with other agencies has helped Canada achieve a remarkable 
period of financial stability over the past quarter century. This collective effort to monitor and 
mitigate  financial  vulnerabilities,  such  as  elevated  household  indebtedness,  is  essential  to 
maintaining a stable and efficient financial system and promoting economic growth in Canada. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
