  Simon M Potter: Implementing monetary policy post-crisis – what have 
we learned? What do we need to know? 
Remarks  by  Mr  Simon  M  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Markets  Group  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at a workshop organized by Columbia University SIPA 
and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 4 May 2016. 
 I would like to thank Antoine Martin for his assistance in preparing these remarks. 
I would like to welcome you to this workshop, organized jointly by the School of International 
and Public Affairs at Columbia University and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. We 
have  assembled  an  excellent  set  of  presenters  and  discussants  focused  on  the  topic  of 
implementing monetary policy post-crisis, who are here to ask important questions such as 
what have we learned from our experience and what do we need to know going forward? I 
am  expecting  an  active  and  stimulating  dialogue  on  a  range  of  topics.  As  always,  these 
remarks are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York or the Federal Reserve System. 
As  most  of  you  know,  the  Federal  Reserve  System  is  engaged  in  an  extended  effort  to 
evaluate  potential  long-run  monetary  policy  implementation  frameworks.1  There  are  many 
reasons to take a close look at the issues now. For example, the Federal Reserve has new 
tools, like the authority to pay interest on reserves and reverse repurchase agreements with 
an expanded set of counterparties, which were not available pre-crisis.2 The money markets 
in  which the Trading Desk of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (the Desk) operates 
have different dynamics than before, in part because of our large-scale asset purchases. We 
want to take stock of these changes and ask ourselves what the best way of implementing 
monetary policy is today and in future environments in a manner that is consistent with the 
Federal Reserve’s normalization principles.3  
To make good choices about the monetary policy implementation framework going forward, it 
is,  of  course,  useful  to  learn  from  the  past.  Our  task  is  to  assess  the  strength  and 
weaknesses  of  existing  and  previous  frameworks,  particularly  through  the  lens  of  what 
happened  during  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  when  central  banks  were  called  on  to 
innovate in a number of ways. In addition, the varied experience of other central banks prior 
to the crisis can also provide valuable insights. What have they learned about what worked 
well, or did not work so well, with their frameworks? 
The current framework in the United States looks very different than the pre-crisis framework. 
One way in which it is different is that excess reserves are much higher than they used to be. 
This shift is due, in large part, to the large-scale asset purchases that the System undertook, 
starting in December 2008. But, if you look closely, you’d see that excess reserves actually 
                                                
1  An extended effort to evaluate potential long-run monetary policy implementation frameworks was announced 
in  the  July  2015  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  meeting  minutes.  This  effort  was  previously 
discussed at the dinner address for the Bank of England-Federal Reserve Bank of New York Conference on 
Money Markets and Monetary Policy Implementation. 
2  Congress had agreed to give the Federal Reserve the authority to pay interest on reserves in 2006, but this 
authority  was  to  take  effect  on  2011.  The  effective  date  of  the  authority  was  moved  forward  to  October  1, 
2008, with the passage of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008. 
3  The FOMC published its Policy Normalization Principles and Plans on September 16, 2014. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  started  expanding  earlier  and  control  of  the  federal  funds  rate  deteriorated.4  So  what 
happened? 
In  reviewing  the  events  of  the  second  half  of  2007  and  most  of  2008,  it  is  clear  that  the 
Federal Reserve faced a tension between the need to provide liquidity to ease money market 
strains and the need to keep control of the interest rate target within its earlier framework. 
Demand  for  dollar  liquidity  increased  in  many  money  markets  and  some  of  that  demand 
came from banks headquartered outside of the United States. A by-product of the Federal 
Reserve’s  efforts  to  provide  liquidity  to  the  financial  system  is  that  the  supply  of  reserves, 
which  can  only  be  held  by  banks,  increased.  Reducing money  market  strains  may  require 
injecting more reserves than banks want to hold at the target rate, creating an excess that 
can lead to a decrease in interbank money market rates. This tension is a potential feature of 
implementation frameworks that rely on scarcity of reserves. If reserves become less scarce, 
and if you cannot pay interest on reserves, you will lose control of the interest rate that you 
are trying to steer. Francesco Papadia’s presentation later today will  illustrate some of the 
flexibility  that  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  had  in  its  framework  in  2007  relative  the 
Fed. 
It might be difficult to recall, but for the period prior to mid-December 2008, the Desk was 
directed to hit a point target for the federal funds rate significantly above zero. The Federal 
Reserve did not have authority to pay interest on reserves until October 2008, so maintaining 
a scarcity of reserves was the only method available to control the federal funds rate. If the 
Desk had allowed reserves to increase above predicted demand at the target rate, the traded 
rate would have fallen well below the target rate set by the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC). 
To maintain scarcity and thus control, the Desk had to “sterilize” operations aimed at easing 
strains in money markets; that is, it had to offset any injection of reserves by removing an 
approximately equivalent amount from the system. One possibility would have been for the 
Fed to borrow from its traditional counterparties, the primary dealers. But dealers are usually 
borrowers in our money markets, not lenders, meaning they had limited capacity for these 
kinds  of  transactions,  especially  during  the  crisis.  Knowing  that  fact,  we  designed  the 
System’s securities portfolio to accommodate some amount of sterilization. The portfolio was 
composed  of  a  substantial  stock  of  short-dated  Treasury  securities,  so  that,  as  these 
securities matured, the supply of reserves would shrink. Draining reserves in that way takes 
time, however, and the amount of liquidity that would have been needed to ease the strains 
in our financial markets far exceeded the amount that could be supplied while still keeping 
control  of  the  federal  funds  rate.5  Another  way  to  drain  reserves  is  by  selling  assets.  The 
Desk  did  some  of  that  in  response  to  the  crisis,  but,  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  including 
operational  constraints and  concerns  that  sales  of  securities  could  have  counterproductive 
effects, the amounts were small. Other tools that can be used to drain reserves, which were 
5 
                                                
4  The Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.3 shows that the monthly average of excess reserves of depository 
institutions was $1.875 billion in August 2008 and $767.319 billion in December 2008. During that period, the 
effective federal funds rate was often well below its target, sometimes by more than a percentage point. 
In  practice  in  the  fall  of  2008,  as  excess  reserves increased  dramatically  following  the  collapse of  Lehman 
Brothers, the Federal Reserve relied heavily on the Treasury’s Supplementary Financing Program to soak up 
many  of  the  excess  reserves  in  the  system.  That  program  consisted  of  a  series  of  Treasury  bill  auctions, 
separate from Treasury’s regular borrowing program, with the proceeds from these auctions maintained in an 
account at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Funds in this account drained reserves from the banking 
system,  and  therefore  helped  offset  the  reserve  impact  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  lending  and  liquidity 
initiatives. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  developed  later,  are  a  Term  Deposit  Facility  and  term  reverse  repos  with  extended 
counterparties.6  
Providing liquidity to financial markets at the onset of the crisis was important to ensure that 
the  stance  of  monetary  policy  would  be  transmitted  to  the  real  economy.  One  simple 
measure  of  the  stance  of  policy  is  that  the  average  of  trading  in  the  overnight  interbank 
market is very close to the FOMC’s target rate. However, this simple measure can provide a 
misleading picture. The experience of the crisis suggests that transmission of the appropriate 
stance can be impaired even when temporary open market operations keep the effective fed 
funds  rate  at  the  target.  Recall  that  in  this  period  the  fed  funds  and  Eurodollar  markets 
exhibited a bifurcated structure with many foreign banks paying considerably more to borrow 
than  U.S.  banks.  As  Marvin  Goodfriend  will  discuss,  part  of  this  was  due  to  appropriate 
market pricing of credit risk, but other aspects reflected segmentation in the money markets 
that was exacerbated by a pronounced lack of dollar liquidity. Some of this decline in money 
market functioning was not reflected in the effective fed funds rate as it was measured at that 
time.7 
The situation today is very different for a number of reasons. The Federal Reserve has the 
authority to pay interest on reserves. Many countries that run a “corridor” system of monetary 
policy  implementation  have  had  this  authority  for  a  long  time  and  could  transition  from 
reserves scarcity to a state of more plentiful supply of liquidity  while maintaining adequate 
control of their interest rate, as I noted was the experience for the European Central Bank. 
In addition, the Desk has augmented an old tool, reverse repurchase agreements, or RRPs 
for  short,  that  allow  an  expanded  set  of  counterparties  to  invest  with  the  Federal  Reserve 
either  at  a  fixed  interest  rate  or  up  to  certain  quantity.8  With  the  advent  of  interest  on 
reserves, RRP, and the Term Deposit Facility mentioned previously, policymakers have more 
tools for influencing market interest rates, and sterilization is no longer necessary to control 
rates with large amounts of excess reserves. 
Perhaps the most important development is the successful liftoff of the federal funds rate in 
December.  Although  we  don’t  know  yet  whether  the  interest  rate  control  exhibited  to  date 
with the new tools will continue at different settings of the target range, so far, things have 
gone as well as could have been expected. 
While other countries have operated a “floor” system before, no country with as complex a 
financial system as the United States, with its wide variety of bank and nonbank institutions, 
had ever attempted to raise interest rates with such a large supply of excess reserves. The 
success of the new tools so far has been important for instilling confidence that policymakers 
can control overnight interest rates at levels appropriate to meet their goals. It also means 
that, in future, the Federal Reserve will not have to face the same technical constraint that 
leads to a conflict between easing strains in broad money markets and controlling the policy 
rate whether it uses a floor or corridor system. This could make the Federal Reserve System 
more agile and better able in future circumstances to provide the elastic currency that has 
                                                
6  The Term Deposit Facility was established to facilitate the conduct of monetary policy by providing a tool with 
which  the  Federal  Reserve  can  manage  the  aggregate  quantity  of  reserve  balances  held  by  depository 
institutions. An increase in term deposits outstanding drains reserve balances because funds to pay for them 
are removed from the accounts of participating institutions for the life of the term deposit. 
7  This  was  due,  in  part,  to  the  fact  that  the  effective  federal  funds  rate  was  a  volume-weighted  mean.  The 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York recently changed the calculation of the effective federal funds rate from a 
weighted-average  mean  to  a  weighted-average  median  to  make  it  more  robust.  In  addition,  it  started 
publishing a broader measure of bank funding costs, the overnight bank funding rate. 
8  The  list  of  counterparties  can  be  found  at  this  link:  https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/expanded_ 
counterparties. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  been one of our stated purposes since the Federal Reserve Act became law more than a 
century ago. 
Until  a  few  months  ago,  many  conversations  about  the  long-run  framework  for  monetary 
policy  implementation  considered  at  least  two  options;  on  the  one  hand,  we  had  the  old 
system based on reserve scarcity inducing competition for reserves, and, on the other hand, 
we had a theory about how competition in a range of money markets would pull market rates 
up  in  line  with  the  interest  rates  administered  by  the  Federal  Reserve.  The  old  system 
certainly  had  flaws,  many  of  which  were  exposed  during  the  crisis,  but  it  had  worked 
reasonably well. And a system that works reasonably well is often more appealing than one 
that  exists  only  in  theory.  The  successful  liftoff  has  brought  theory  into  practice,  and  the 
results have been good so far. 
I am not claiming that the current framework is perfect, or that it is necessarily better than the 
old framework augmented with the new tools used to directly absorb excess reserves, but it 
is  useful  to  have  flexibility  in  how  to  implement  monetary  policy.  We  have  now  seen  in 
practice  that  changes  in  administered  rates  can  effectively  move  market  rates  –  both 
because effective competition helps bring administered and market rates closer together and 
because the mere existence of administered-rate facilities, like the RRPs I mentioned earlier, 
can  affect  competition  between  private  borrowers  and  investors  even  when  these facilities 
see little usage. As we learn more about the practical aspects of using these mechanisms to 
influence money market rates in the United States, a much wider range of potential operating 
frameworks  becomes  viable.  It  will  now  be  important  to  make  sure  that  all  the  costs  and 
benefits of different approaches are considered carefully to get the most effective framework 
for monetary policy implementation. 
In particular, there are important trade-offs that may need to be considered in a framework 
that  can 
implementation  and  broader 
transmission. It is possible, for example, that financial market participants may anticipate that 
the central bank will make liquidity plentiful during times of stress and that this could reduce 
their  incentives  to  manage  their  liquidity  conservatively.  For  banks,  new  Basel  III  liquidity 
regulation,  such  as  the  liquidity  coverage  ratio  and  the  net  stable  funding  ratio,  partially 
mitigates this concern. Nevertheless, these regulations do not apply to all participants in U.S. 
money markets. Paul Tucker’s presentation will discuss a number of the broader costs and 
benefits of such potential flexibility for the role of central banks in democratic societies. 
Another  important  aspect  of  the  future  framework  is  that  it  should  be  as  transparent  as 
possible. Market participants can make better decisions if they have a clear understanding of 
the  way  the  central  bank  operates  and  can  anticipate  its  actions  in  a  wide  range  of 
circumstances.  Indeed,  it  is  well  understood  that  in  the  case  of  coordination  failures,  a 
commitment to maintaining liquid markets can prevent illiquidity from occurring, in some case 
without  even  having  to  intervene.  For  example,  during  the  crisis,  some  money  market 
participants  did  “hoard”  liquidity  and  refuse to  lend  to  other  institutions  because  they  were 
concerned that they might need the liquidity for themselves. This behavior led to a situation 
where  liquidity  was  in  short  supply  because  all  market  participants  expected  it  to  be.9  A 
central  bank  can  help  create  conditions  where  market  participants  contribute  to  market 
liquidity because they believe that market will remain liquid. 
There  are  many  other  considerations  and  trade-offs,  but  let  me  wrap  up  by  saying  that  to 
make sure we learn the right lessons from the experience of the last few years, we surely 
benefit from drawing on a wide range of perspectives, including those of academics, current 
and former central bankers, and market participants – people like you, who “live and breathe” 
for  monetary  policy 
flexibly  provide 
liquidity 
                                                
9  See, for example, V.V. Acharya and D. Skeie, “A Model of Liquidity Hoarding and Term Premia in Interbank 
Markets,” Journal of Monetary Economics 58, no. 5 (July 2011): 436–47. Proceedings of Normalizing Central 
Bank Practice in Light of the Credit Turmoil, Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  this  somewhat  technical  topic.  It  is  also  valuable  to  share  the  findings  more  broadly  to 
enhance discourse on the subject. 
I hope that you will be frank in your assessment of the things that worked well or did not work 
well in the Federal Reserve’s framework, and perhaps in other systems. There is much to 
learn from a robust discussion of our different experiences. These lessons will be an input 
into our thinking as we examine the long-run framework. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
