   Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 13 April 2016. 
 Good morning. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I are happy to be here to answer your 
questions about today’s interest rate announcement and our Monetary Policy Report (MPR). 
Let me begin as usual with a few remarks about the issues that were most important to the 
Governing Council’s deliberations. 
I’ll start with a reminder of where we were at the time of our last MPR in January. Financial 
market participants started the year in a very anxious mood. The global growth outlook was 
being  downgraded  again,  commodity  prices  were  plumbing  new  lows  and  we  had  new 
intelligence  that  Canadian  energy  companies  would  be  cutting  investment  even more  than 
previously thought. In this context, we said that we entered deliberations with a bias to easing 
policy further, but first we needed to see the government’s fiscal plan. 
Our new economic projection incorporates that fiscal plan, but let me first talk about three other 
important changes that we have also taken into account. 
First, projected global economic growth has once again been taken down a notch for 2016 and 
2017. This includes the US economy, where the new profiles for investment and housing mean 
a mix of demand that is less favourable for Canadian exports. 
Second, investment intentions in Canada’s energy sector have been downgraded even further. 
True, oil prices have recovered significantly from their extreme lows. But Canadian companies 
have told us that even if prices remain around current levels, there will be significant further 
cuts beyond what we foresaw in January. By convention, we incorporate the average oil price 
from the few weeks before we make our forecast, letting us look through variability in markets. 
Because of this, our oil price assumptions are only $2 to $3 per barrel higher than in January. 
Third, the Canadian dollar has also increased from its lows. Our assumption in this projection 
is  US  76  cents,  four  cents  higher  than  in  January.  While  there  are  many  factors  at  play, 
including oil prices, most of the increase appears to be due to shifts in expectations about 
monetary policy in both the US and Canada. The higher assumed level of the dollar contributes 
to a lower profile for non-resource exports in our projection, as does lower demand from the 
US and elsewhere. 
Governing Council judged that the combination of slower global and US growth, a new round 
of cuts to investment in Canada’s energy sector, and a stronger Canadian dollar would have 
meant a lower projected growth profile for the Canadian economy than we had in January. I 
know  this  sounds  contrary  to  what  you  have  heard  lately,  because  a  range  of  monthly 
economic indicators have started the year strongly. Some of this strength represents a catch-
up after temporary weakness in the fourth quarter, and some of it reflects temporary factors 
that will unwind in the second quarter. We think it is best to look through that variability, and 
note that the economy appears to be achieving average growth of close to 2 per cent in the 
first half of the year, which is encouraging. 
That brings me to the fourth important item that’s changed since January – the recent federal 
budget. We can’t be entirely certain about the full effects of the budget on the economy, as 
some will depend on how households react over time. But Governing Council judged that the 
budget  actions  will  more  than  offset  the  negatives  from  the  other  three  changes  I  just 
mentioned. The net effect is that our projected growth profile is generally higher than it was in 
January. 
When  it  comes  to  projecting  inflation,  we  must  consider  our  forecast  for  economic  growth 
relative to the economy’s potential, or capacity. We do a fulsome review of Canada’s economic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   potential at this time each year, and this was an especially important part of the Governing 
Council’s  deliberations.  That  is  because,  as  we  highlighted  in  last  October’s  MPR,  it  is 
particularly  difficult  to  measure  capacity  when  an  economy  is  undergoing  a  structural 
adjustment, as Canada’s is. That translates into increased uncertainty around the size of the 
output  gap  and  the  speed  at  which  it  will  close,  and  therefore  the  point  at  which  the 
disinflationary pressures we see today will dissipate. 
Specifically, the collapse in investment in the commodity sector will mean a slowdown in the 
economy’s potential growth rate. In the near term, we’ve lowered potential output growth from 
1.8 per cent to 1.5 per cent. You can find details in a staff analytical note we published today. 
Later  this  year,  the  natural  sequence  of  higher  non-resource  exports  and  a  tightening  of 
capacity constraints should lead to higher investment and employment in the non-resource 
economy, and therefore growing capacity. Looking beyond the projection horizon, growth in 
potential output overall should pick up again. This newly-added capacity may give the economy 
some additional room for non-inflationary growth beyond what we are assuming today. 
Today’s forecast suggests that the economy will likely use up its excess capacity somewhat 
earlier than we predicted in January – sometime in the second half of 2017. However, as I 
said, there is more than the usual degree of uncertainty around that timing. For example, we 
are taking a conservative approach in assuming that only some of the legacy effects of the 
past several  years  –  such  as  reduced  labour force  participation  by  young  people  –  will  be 
reversed over the next few years. This would add back to economic potential some of what 
has been lost. However, we will need to monitor carefully data on investment, labour force re-
entry and new firm creation to update this judgment over time. 
In sum, recent economic data have been encouraging on balance, but also quite variable. The 
global economy retains the capacity to disappoint further, the complex adjustment to lower 
terms  of  trade  will  restrain  Canada’s  growth  over  much  of  our  forecast  horizon,  and 
households’ reactions to the government’s fiscal measures will bear close monitoring. We have 
not yet seen concrete evidence of higher investment and strong firm creation. These are some 
of  the  ingredients  needed  for  a  return  to  natural,  self-sustaining  growth  with  inflation 
sustainably on target. 
In light of all of these considerations, Governing Council agreed that the current level of our 
policy rate remains appropriate. With that, Carolyn and I are ready to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
