   Benoît Cœuré: The future of the euro area 
Remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at Le Cercle Europartenaires, Paris, 21 March 2016. 
 The footnotes can be found at the end of the speech. 
President Guigou, 
Minister Jeanneney, 
Ambassador Meyer-Landrut, 
Excellencies,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Thank you for inviting me here.  
This morning I would like to share with you some thoughts which echo your association’s motto 
“Acting for Europe with Europeans”.  
Role of the European Central Bank 
“Acting for Europe with Europeans” could also be the ECB’s motto. One of its strengths is 
indeed its European mandate. The Governing Council takes its monetary policy decisions in 
the interest of the euro area as a whole, with a view to ensuring price stability. As a quid pro 
quo  for  its  independence,  the  ECB  is  accountable  for  its  actions  to  the  people’s 
representatives, who are elected to the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage.  
At a time when so many European citizens express doubts about Europe, the duty of European 
institutions is to strengthen their legitimacy both by reinforcing their democratic accountability 
and by showing that they meet the objectives they’ve been entrusted with.  
Regarding democratic accountability, it would be wrong to underestimate the importance the 
ECB places on its relationship with the public. Recent studies show that people’s knowledge 
and  understanding  of  the  objectives  and  principles  of  monetary  policy  influence  inflation 
expectations[1] as well as trust in the European Central Bank.[2] At the same time, these studies 
indicate  that the  level  of  knowledge  and  understanding  can  be further  improved. We have 
taken several initiatives in this area in the last years, such as publishing the accounts of our 
monetary  policy  discussions  and  the  diaries  of the  Executive  Board members.  But  we  can 
certainly do more to facilitate the understanding of the ECB’s role and policies by the general 
public. 
Rebuilding trust in Europe implies above all that European institutions deliver on the objectives 
which have been assigned to them as part of their mandates. During the crisis, the ECB did 
not hesitate to act decisively.[3] To preserve price stability, we have adopted an accommodative 
monetary policy stance that has no precedent. Our measures, whether standard (i.e. relating 
to the key interest rates) or non-standard, have achieved several objectives. 
• 
They have supported demand for goods and services in the euro area. As the ECB’s 
President recently stated[4], our models show that half of the recovery in the euro area 
(as a percentage of GDP) in the past two years is attributable to our monetary policy 
and half is mainly the result of lower oil prices. 
Our monetary policy has also improved financing conditions and remedied financial 
fragmentation.  As  a  result  of  our  non-standard  measures,  credit  conditions  have 
improved across the euro area[5]: from May 2014 to January 2016, interest rates on 
loans declined significantly (by 84 basis points for non-financial corporations and by 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  68 basis points for households). Furthermore, the steepest decline observed was in 
the most fragile economies of the euro area.[6] 
Finally, our decisions have helped maintain trust in the single currency in a context of 
financial instability and high uncertainty. Indeed, not only has market confidence in 
the euro remained strong, but public confidence has too: according to Eurobarometer 
data, trust in the euro is virtually unchanged compared to its pre-crisis level.[7] 
  The measures we announced on 10 March 2016 form a very substantial package which gives 
priority  to  loans  for  households  and  businesses,  and  thus  supports  the  recovery.  They 
underline our determination to fulfil the mandate entrusted to us by the people of Europe: to 
bring inflation back to nearly 2%, and they show that we have no shortage of tools.  
But the ECB cannot single-handedly create the conditions for a sustainable recovery in growth. 
This requires a concerted effort in terms of economic and fiscal policies. While unemployment 
started to decline in the euro area in January (10.3% compared with 11.9% two years earlier), 
ambitious reforms are still needed in most of the euro area economies, given the low growth 
potential and high structural unemployment. The measures to raise productivity and to improve 
the business environment, including public infrastructure, are essential to increase investment 
and boost job creation. It’s true that there is limited room for manoeuvre in terms of using fiscal 
policy to support growth, and the fiscal rules cannot be stretched to the point where they would 
lose all their credibility. But while some countries have such margins under the Stability and 
Growth Pact (which they are already partly using to support refugees), all countries can make 
their  tax  structures  more  favourable  to  growth  and  redirect  public  spending  towards 
investment, research and education.[8] 
Our monetary policy provides a favourable context for these reforms.[9] It is sometimes argued 
that our monetary policy discourages governments from undertaking the necessary reforms. 
For one thing, this idea is belied by the facts: were these reforms carried out when interest 
rates were higher? Also, it fundamentally conflicts with the set-up of the euro area, which gives 
the ECB a narrow mandate focused on price stability. The ECB’s role is not to police fiscal and 
structural policies. It’s up to governments to do it with impetus from the Commission.  
The progress necessary for Economic and Monetary Union 
We  must  also  continue  working  to  strengthen  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  in  order  to 
increase its resilience to economic shocks. This is in our economic interest, of course, but it’s 
also a factor in terms of political stability. Uncertainty, polarisation and political fragmentation 
increase  substantially  in  the  aftermath  of  financial  crises[10].  Such  uncertainty  is  harmful, 
economically speaking[11], and tends to make crisis resolution more difficult.  
The  crisis  we’ve  just  gone  through  is  no  exception.  Across  Europe,  it  led  to  a  decline  in 
confidence  in  the  European  institutions.  The  intergovernmental  dimension  of  European 
decision-making  mechanisms  has  also  led  to  a  polarisation  of  positions  among  Member 
States, stirring up nationalistic impulses and hampering decision-making[12]. Maintaining this 
approach would prevent the establishment of a common growth strategy and condemn us to 
a future of low growth and repeated crises. 
However,  significant  progress  has  been  made  as  Member  States  remain  determined  to 
preserve the integrity of the euro. In particular, the euro area has adopted a crisis resolution 
mechanism  (the  European  Stability  Mechanism)  and  has  developed  financial,  fiscal  and 
economic supervisory tools. It has also created the Single Supervisory Mechanism for banks, 
which  has  been  entrusted  to  the  ECB,  and  a  resolution  mechanism  for  banking  crises 
supported by a Single Resolution Fund.  
However, there is still much work to be done to tackle the vulnerabilities that persist in certain 
Member  States.  The  country-specific  recommendations,  which  each  year  identify  the  key 
objectives to tackle these vulnerabilities, are hardly or not at all acted upon.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The time has come to initiate a new economic convergence process, thus relaunching the 
convergence  efforts  that  each  euro  area  country  agreed  to  prior  to  adopting  the  single 
currency[13].  After  its  adoption,  these  efforts  dwindled  and,  before  the  crisis,  we  saw  a 
divergence in terms of inflation levels, unit labour costs, current account balances and levels 
of GDP per capita[14]. The abrupt adjustment necessitated by the crisis showed the economic 
and social cost of this divergence.  
Political  convergence  is  a  necessary  condition  for  economic  convergence[15],  as  it  implies 
making  economic  and  fiscal  policy  a  shared  competence  in  the  same  manner  as  policies 
relating  to  the  internal  market.  This  is  particularly  true  for  France  and  Germany,  whose 
cooperation is a driving force. The idea isn’t to always move towards harmonisation, but rather 
to give ourselves the option to adopt common solutions where it makes sense to do so – a 
common  framework  to  manage  insolvent  businesses  and  households  could,  for  example, 
facilitate the resolution of non-performing loans and contribute to the development of cross-
border investment.  
Relaunching the economic convergence process is also essential if we eventually want to set 
up a fiscal tool to absorb shocks at the euro area level, without creating the risk of permanent, 
one-way transfers, which are not part of the euro area’s initial “contract”. As I said elsewhere, 
this is about establishing a new European social contract, which can only be designed under 
John  Rawls’  “veil  of  ignorance”[16].  The  private  sector  component  of  risk-sharing  is  also 
extremely important – in the United States, the capital and credit markets act as a buffer for 
around two-thirds of economic shocks[17]; flexible economies and the free movement of goods, 
services and workers are necessary conditions for the smooth functioning of the monetary 
union. Again, however, risk-sharing must be accompanied by a common framework that avoids 
excessive  risk  concentration.  This  is  the  essence  of  the  ongoing  debates  concerning  the 
European deposit guarantee scheme and the Capital Markets Union. 
This economic convergence process could include a timeline and clearly defined milestones, 
and would ultimately bring about deeper integration in the fiscal sphere and the creation of 
shared  fiscal  tools.  The  management  of  these  tools,  including  the  European  Stability 
Mechanism, could be entrusted to a euro area treasury that is accountable to the European 
Parliament. Defining its mandate and its tools is a political issue that presupposes a democratic 
debate[18]. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  progress  of  European  integration  has  increased  interdependence  between  Member 
States. But we still haven’t drawn all the necessary conclusions and European politicians still 
don’t have the tools that would allow them to respond to the expectations placed on them. This 
shortcoming feeds popular frustration with European policies, sometimes to the point that they 
question European integration itself. There is nothing inevitable about the status quo, but, to 
move forward, we need to redefine a common project. It will take many years to implement this 
project. It is all the more urgent to start defining it. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
[1]  Carvalho, C. and Nechio, F. (2014), “Do people understand monetary policy?”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 
66, 108-123; van der Cruijsen, C., Jansen, D.-J. and de Haan, J. (2015) “How Much Does the Public Know 
about  the  ECB’s  Monetary  Policy?  Evidence  from  a  Survey  of  Dutch  Households”,  International  Journal  of 
Central Banking, 11, 169-218. 
[2]  Ehrmann, M., Soudan, M. and Stracca, L. (2013), “Explaining European Union Citizens’ Trust in the European 
Central Bank in Normal and Crisis Times”, The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 115, 781–807; Hayo, B. 
and Neuenkirch, E. (2014), “The German public and its trust in the ECB: The role of knowledge and information 
search”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 47, 286–303. 
[3]  A more detailed discussion of the measures taken during the crisis can be found in B. Cœuré, “Consolidating 
the  euro  area’s  economic  recovery”,  introductory  remarks  prior  to  an  informal  exchange  of  views  with  the 
European Affairs Committee and the Finance Committee of the National Assembly, Paris, 13 May 2015.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   [4]  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European  Parliament,  Monetary  Dialogue  with  Mario 
Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, 15 February 2016.  
[5]  See also “Results of the January 2016 euro area bank lending survey”, 19 January 2016.  
[6]  Between May 2014 and January 2016, the composite rate of bank borrowing for non-financial corporations has 
fallen by 62 basis points in Germany, 46 in France, 111 in Spain and 130 in Italy. For households, the composite 
rate of bank borrowing has fallen by 65 basis points in Germany, 77 in France, 98 in Spain and 100 in Italy.  
[7]  The Standard Eurobarometer 84 survey published in December 2015 indicated that 68% of respondents trusted 
the euro (26% did not trust it), which is the same level as at the end of 2006. 
In the euro area, the share of GDP accounted for by public investment fell from 3.2% in 2007 to 2.6% in 2015. 
The share of the total primary public expenditure accounted for by public investment also fell from 7.6% in 2007 
to 5.8% in 2015. 
[8] 
[9]  Recent  empirical  research  shows  that  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  strengthens  the  positive 
effects of structural reforms and increased investment in public spending. See Bordon, A.R., Ebeke, C. and 
K. Shirono,  “When  Do  Structural  Reforms  Work?  On  the  Role  of  the  Business  Cycle  and  Macroeconomic 
Policies”,  IMF  Working  Paper,  No.  16/62,  March  2016,  and  “Public  investment  in  Europe”,  ECB  Economic 
Bulletin, Issue 2, 2016, forthcoming. 
[10]  Funke, M., M. Schularick and C. Trebesch (2015) “Going to extremes: Politics after financial crises, 1870–2014”, 
CEPR, Discussion Paper No. 10884. 
[11]  Baker, S.R., Bloom, N. and S. J. Davis (2015), “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty”, NBER Working Paper 
No. 21633. 
[12]  See B. Cœuré, “Drawing lessons from the crisis for the future of the euro area”, speech at “Ambassadors Week”, 
Paris, 27 August 2015. 
[13]  “Completing  Europe’s  Economic  and  Monetary  Union”,  report  by  J.-C.  Juncker,  in  close  cooperation  with 
D. Tusk, J. Dijsselbloem, M. Draghi and M. Schulz, 22 June 2015. 
[14]  Real convergence in the euro area: evidence, theory and policy implications, ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 5, 
2015; Auf dem Brinke, A., Enderlein, H, and J. Fritz-Vannahme (2015), “What kind of convergence does the 
euro area need?”, Gütersloh: Bertelsmann Stiftung and Jacques Delors Institut – Berlin. 
[15]  See B. Cœuré, “Towards a political convergence process in the euro area”, speech at the Interparliamentary 
Conference “Towards a Progressive Europe”, Berlin, 16 October 2015. 
[16]  See B. Cœuré, “Drawing lessons from the crisis for the future of the euro area”, speech at “Ambassadors Week”, 
Paris, 27 August 2015. 
[17]  Asdrubali, P., Sørensen, B. E. and Yosha, O., “Channels of interstate risk sharing: United States 1963–1990”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(4), 1996. 
[18]  See B. Cœuré, “Time for a new Lamfalussy moment”, speech in Budapest, 1 February 2016. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
