  Andreas Dombret: From dream to reality – how finance serves the 
economy, and how not 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  South  African  Institute  for  International  Affairs,  University  of  Pretoria, 
Pretoria, 30 August 2016. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Dreams can be built – at least, if you believe the movie Inception. In that motion picture’s 
scenario, a technology has been developed that allows one to enter another person’s dream. 
In that dream, then, thoughts can be planted – or incepted. For this, the intruder needs to 
construct a dream scenario inside the target person’s dream. 
By incepting an idea in a person’s mind, his actions in the real world can be manipulated. 
Unfortunately,  politics  sometimes  shows  surprising  parallels  to  the  world  of  cinema  –  in 
politics, colourfully painted dreams are often used to sway voters. 
But all too often, political dreams are built on a limited understanding of reality. That’s why 
they  are  bound  to  crumble.  That’s  why  swayed  voters  wake  up  to  a  nightmare  version  of 
reality. 
Such  a  dream  world  is  the  political  strategy  of  finance-led  growth,  a  dominant  political 
ideology  since  the  1980s.  The  dream  goes  as  follows:  growth  of  financial  markets  fuels 
investment; and in this way, it leads to an increase in wealth and well-being for all people. 
Many  people,  among  them  the  majority  of  experts,  believed  this  to  be  true  –  explicitly  or 
implicitly. However sophisticated the construct of the dream, it did not pass the test of reality. 
It crashed hard when the financial crisis erupted in 2007. 
Nine years later, one might think that we would have sorted out what went wrong. And so we 
have, to an extent: we have learned that markets cannot regulate themselves; they do not 
work without rules. That’s why we devised far-reaching reforms. 
But unfortunately, we are still struggling with perhaps the most important lesson. In our quest 
for well-being, the dream of finance-led growth has still not been replaced with more realistic 
policies. As memories of the crisis fade, decision makers are once again pushing for finance 
to produce illusionary wealth. 
Today, I want to talk to you about the dreams and the reality of finance-led growth – about 
what finance can deliver, and what not. 
Old temptations … and relapse into old patterns? 
2. 
Immediately  after  the  financial  crisis  struck,  stringent  financial  market  regulation  was 
considered to be the silver bullet to end the excesses of the financial industry. The idea was 
that  strict  rules  would  end  banks’  risky  behaviour  to  ensure  they  never  again  take  down 
entire economies with them. 
As memories of the crisis fade, this attitude is becoming less visible. The general public and 
the policy makers are faced with other, more pressing worries – in the economic sector these 
are,  notably,  concerns  about  growth.  In  this  context  we  refer,  in  particular,  to  emerging 
market economies such as South Africa and China, as well as to the euro area. We bemoan 
low growth levels because growth is seen to be the main source of jobs and prosperity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Unfortunately, this policy logic causes us, time and again, to seek a quick fix – fast, easy-to-
understand  and  convincing  solutions.  This  makes  the  finance-led  growth  dream  the  ideal 
mantra. 
The dream of finance-led growth 
3. 
Greater  growth  through  increased  credit  and  enhanced  financial  market  activity  has  long 
been an attractive policy idea. It is held to be a magic formula for economic development, the 
rationale  being  that  higher  levels  of  debt  and  liquidity  at  financial  institutions  lead  to 
increased  lending. This,  in  turn,  promotes  investment  and therefore growth  and  so, finally, 
economic development. 
All too often, policy decisions are driven by this seductive notion – or by fear of missing out 
on the growth that’s been promised. The problem with this idea, however, is that it’s flawed. 
Which makes finance-led growth a truly dangerous dream. 
Believing the dream that greater growth is created by the financial markets, there are many 
who  would  like to  see financial  institutions given kid-glove  treatment  – meaning  that  credit 
institutions should be subjected to less stringent regulation and supervision. 
We saw something along those lines before the last financial crisis. Calls for bigger and more 
liquid financial markets that encourage investment and lending to the private sector, thereby 
leading – so the idea goes – to more growth, put deregulation and lenient supervision on the 
policy agenda. 
Economic theory and empirical evidence backed up this policy. Various studies pointed to a 
positive correlation between the volume of loans granted to the private sector and economic 
development1  These  results  would  appear  to  confirm  the  finance-led  growth  dream.  I  will 
come back to this. 
But is the situation the same for advanced economies on the one hand and emerging ones, 
like South Africa, on the other? Well, not entirely. For these economies, experts and policy 
makers  had  –  in  addition  to  finance-led  growth  –  a  further  dream  ready:  that  of  growth 
through openness to international capital flows. The dream suggested that developing and 
emerging  economies  should  allow  international  finance  to  enter  the  country  without 
restrictions. Such a capital account liberalisation, as it is called, would lead to higher growth 
rates.  The  dream  was  constructed  on  the  basis  of  state-of-the-art  economic  theory  at  that 
time. And most developing and emerging economies went along with it. 
…and the reality 
4 
Both dreams crumbled once they were hit by a financial crisis. 
The growth through capital liberalisation dream fell apart with the onset of the Asian financial 
crisis in 1997. Since then, studies have clearly shown that capital liberalisation has no direct 
positive  effect  on  growth,  and  only  rarely  has  an  indirect  one  as  a  result  of  improving 
markets. Rather, it seems that those countries grow faster that rely less, not more, on foreign 
capital.2  
Most importantly, the studies suggest one crucial insight: whether capital liberalisation is a 
good thing for an economy depends heavily on its specific situation. For example, if a country 
                                                
1  R Levine (2005), Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence, Handbook of Economic Growth. 
2  D Rodrik & A. Subramanian (2009). Why Did Financial Globalization Disappoint? In: IMF Staff Papers, 56(1): 
112–138;  ES  Prasad  &  RG  Rajan  (2008)  A  Pragmatic  Approach  to  Capital  Account  Liberalization.  In:  The 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(3) 149–172. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  has  insufficient  savings,  foreign  capital  might  be  the  solution.  If,  however,  there  are  not 
enough incentives or opportunities to invest in a country, additional capital won’t help. 
Which brings me to the other dream, that of finance-led growth. This was not challenged until 
the financial crisis of 2007 hit. But this has changed thanks to more recent academic studies. 
They  show  that  increased  credit  and  a  higher  volume  of  financial  transactions  can  have 
negative effects, too. There are two reasons why more finance can be negative. 
First, higher credit volumes lead to more frequent and more serious financial crises.3 In other 
words, as more credit is granted and more financial transactions are carried out, a financial 
system becomes more crisis-prone. 
Second:  the  larger  the  mountain  of  debt  that  has  built  up  until  a  crisis  erupts,  the  more 
severe the crisis typically is and the longer it typically lasts.4 Debt was at a very high level 
before the most recent crisis, too – which is why many economies are still suffering from the 
fallout. 
The more growth through finance dream became the more crises through finance nightmare. 
Excessive credit growth leads to greater vulnerability to crises and their consequences, but it 
also unleashes yet another negative effect. Most recent studies provide evidence that it really 
is  possible  to  have  “too  much  of  a  good  thing”  –  which  is  to  say  too  much  credit  and  too 
much financial market. 
Various  analyses  show  that  economies  expand  more  slowly  when  they  arrive  at  an 
unsustainable, excessively high credit volume.5 These studies do not state a universally valid 
limit.  But  they  do  suggest  that  additional  credit  growth  adversely  affects  growth  when  the 
ratio  of  total  private  sector  loans  to  gross  domestic  product  oversteps  90  to  100  per  cent. 
Many developed economies exceeded that level before the crisis – and, unfortunately, they 
still exceed it today. 
In a nutshell, this means that more lending and the expansion of financial market activities is 
not  unreservedly  positive.  The  effect  is  better  described  by  an  arc.  Growth  can  pick  up  in 
times of weak economic development; at later stages of development, a further increase can 
have negative implications. For developed countries, this means that more financial market 
alone will do little to advance prosperity. But emerging and developing countries, too, should 
be careful not to raise finance to unsustainable levels. 
The task: finance for the future 
5. 
I  would  recommend  all  financial  market  participants  and  policy  makers  with  an  interest  in 
promoting public welfare to heed these findings. 
But as John Maynard Keynes once wrote about the influence of academic advice: pragmatic 
decision-makers who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influence, 
are usually the slaves of some defunct economist. The false and outdated assumptions of 
deceased economists serve, he argued, as the basis for their decisions. At this point I make 
                                                
3  A Turner (2015), Between Debt and the Devil: Money, Credit, and Fixing Global Finance, Princeton University 
Press. 
4  C  M  Reinhart  &  K  S  Rogoff  (2008),  This  Time  is  Different.  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly,  Princeton 
University Press. 
5  J L Arcand, E Berkes and U Panizza (2015), Too much finance? Journal of Economic Growth, 20(2): 105–
148;  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (2014),  Is  Europe  Overbanked?  Report  of  the  Advisory  Scientific 
Committee No 4/June 2014; SG Cecchetti, E Kharroubi (2012), Reassessing the impact of finance on growth. 
BIS Working Paper No 381; SG Cecchetti, E Kharroubi (2015), Why does financial sector growth crowd out 
real economic growth? BIS Working Paper No 490. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  a conscious decision not to quote the man, as his wording was not especially diplomatic.6 
Unfortunately, however, the point Keynes made was spot on. 
The main problem at the heart of Keynes’ remark is the attraction that simple theories with 
clear, universal recommendations have for policy makers. By contrast, insights which would 
be useful, but which are more complex and inconvenient, are sadly often neglected in the 
heat of policy arguments. 
For this reason, when we contemplate the role financial markets should play in our economy, 
we  must  discard  the  simplistic  notion  that  more  financial  market  automatically  spells  more 
development. 
Instead, what we need is a better quality of financial markets. What does that mean? By and 
large,  financial  markets  serve  the  economy  through  five  quality  assurance  mechanisms. 
First:  payment  services  facilitate  the  day-to-day  exchange  of goods  and  services.  Second: 
the  pooling  of  savings  plays  a  part  in  funding  large-scale  projects.  Third:  the  systematic 
review of investments and loans reduces the workload for the individual, thus leading to an 
increase  in  investment  and  lending  activity.  Fourth:  after  loans  have  been  granted,  this 
review is continued in the form of controls. Fifth: because a bank offers a wide and varied 
range of products, it is able to spread risks and therefore manage them better. 
None of these functions contributes directly to economic growth. Rather, they are supporting 
functions. The main purpose of these mechanisms is to facilitate development by contributing 
to the efficient distribution of resources. Financial markets are not in themselves engines of 
growth;  but  every  engine  of  growth  needs  a  powerful  catalyst.  And  our  financial  system 
needs to focus more on precisely that function. This is where market players, policy makers, 
supervisors, researchers and, of course, qualified university graduates come into the picture. 
Only if we all look at and steer the financial sector in terms of our long-term economic and 
social responsibilities will the financial system perform its supporting function successfully. 
We don’t need financial market transactions in  a financial system that is only focussed on 
itself.  We  need  banks  and  other  institutions  that  take  their  job  seriously  and  promote  the 
appropriate, forward-looking investments by distributing funds efficiently. And we need banks 
that are prudent in their lending. 
What  should  be  done?  Policies  need  to  be  chosen  wisely,  away  from  the  extreme, 
ideologically tainted positions. We should certainly not think that our modern economies can 
thrive without the catalytic functions of banks and financial markets. On the other hand, we 
should not fall prey to claims that regulatory reform and limitations of market freedoms will 
hurt development. 
Policies should aim to enable financial markets to work at the service of the economy – as a 
supporting function. At the same time, these policies should aim to limit those transactions 
that  only  serve  profit-maximisation  while  externalising  costs  to taxpayers.  This might  imply 
somewhat  lower  volumes  of  financial  market  transactions  and  somewhat  lower  credit 
volumes. 
What does this mean? From the perspective of banking and financial market supervisors, it 
means  that  we  need  to  regulate  risky  trading  strategies  and  risky  business  models  more 
rigorously.  Therefore,  to  give  you  just  one  example,  we  now  expect  institutions  with  such 
approaches to refinance themselves to a greater extent using equity, rather than debt. 
                                                
6  Practical  men  who  believe  themselves  to  be  quite  exempt  from  any  intellectual  influence,  are  usually  the 
slaves of some defunct economist. Madmen in authority, who hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy 
from  some  academic  scribbler  of  a  few  years  back  […]”  (JM  Keynes  (1936),  The  General  Theory  of 
Employment, Interest and Money. Macmillan, p 383). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  From  a  political  perspective,  this  means  that  we  cannot  rely  on  financial  markets  to  fix 
structural  political  problems.  For  example,  if  it  is  felt  that  the  income  of  low  income 
households  is  growing  too  slowly,  it  is  not  enough  to  simply  rely  on  credit  institutions  to 
finance  investments  in  the  hope  that  this  will  create  jobs.  This  is  because  the  financial 
markets  would  provide  more  loans  to  such  households  –  and  if  this  is  not  sustainable,  it 
could lead to  yet another financial crisis. Thus, politics must enable banks and markets to 
support the economy, not to fix it. 
Finally,  let’s  turn  to  capital  liberalisation  in  emerging  markets.  Full  capital  account 
liberalisation may not be the best strategy for many developing and emerging economies. A 
careful analysis of national circumstances is needed here – followed by a careful choice of 
economic policies.7  
Here,  too,  simply  hoping  for  more  finance  to  lead  to  more  development  is  a  tempting 
strategy, but not a promising one. As is the case in advanced economies, one cannot rely on 
financial markets to fix structural political problems in emerging markets either. 
That being said, in countries with low savings rates, the additional funds may help to foster 
investment. In countries without savings restrictions, foreign capital can indirectly support the 
economy  by  improving  market  structures  and  establishing  best  practices.  In  both  types  of 
countries, it is crucial to have strong supervisory institutions as well as market regulation to 
provide  the  necessary  environment for  markets  to function.  The  less  countries  are  able  to 
regulate and supervise markets, the more careful they should be with regard to liberalising 
capital movements.8 
Conclusion 
6. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Dreams are an essential element of brain activity. Likewise, economic dreams and theories 
are essential for developing policy strategies. 
However,  both  types  of  dreams  become  problematic  if  taken  at  face  value,  and  without 
careful analysis. The dreams of finance-led growth and growth through capital liberalisation 
have turned into nightmares – and clinging to them will do us no good. We need to find a 
new path to guide our economies into better territory. 
Credit, banks, and financial markets – no doubt –  will play a key role in that strategy. But 
growth will not be finance-led – it will be finance-supported. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
7  R  Hausmann,  D  Rodrik  &  A  Velasco  (2005)  In:  N  Serra  &  J  Stiglitz  (Eds)  The  Washington  Consensus 
Reconsidered: Towards a New Global Governance, Chapter 15: 324–355; D Rodrik (2005) Growth strategies. 
In: P Aghion & SN Durlauf (Eds) Handbook of economic growth, Volume 1, Part A, Chapter 14: 967–1014. 
8  ES  Prasad  &  RG  Rajan  (2008)  A  Pragmatic  Approach  to Capital  Account Liberalization.  In:  The  Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 22(3) 149–172. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
