   Ksenia Yudaeva: National debt – vice or virtue? 
Statement by Ms Ksenia Yudaeva, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Russia, at the Gaidar 
Forum 2016 “Russian and the world – looking to the future”, panel discussion “National debt – 
vice or virtue?”, Moscow, 13 January 2016. 
 Before  starting  the  discussion I  would  like  to say  a few  words  about  the  current  market 
situation. Following the 2008–2009 crisis, bursts of volatility can occasionally be observed 
in global markets. The reasons are different: debt crisis in the peripheral eurozone countries, 
changes  in the  US Fed’s  policy,  changes  in the  structure  and  strategies  of the  oil  market 
players or, as in the past six months, the situation in the Chinese market. Anyway the bursts 
of volatility relate to the adjustment of global imbalances, which have been piling up for years, 
and they are inevitable to a certain extent. This is a part on the new reality we are living in. 
Given the situation, the Bank of Russia’s main task is to stabilise the Russian economy 
amid external shocks, create conditions for its quick adaptation to the new environment while 
retaining  high  price  stability,  and  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  in  general,  and 
henceforth maintain basic conditions for economic growth. 
If  we turn  to the  situation  in the  Russian  markets,  we can  see  that  recently  it has  been 
rather  stable  despite  global  volatility.  There  are  no problems  with  liquidity  and  other  risks 
to financial stability. Risks related to the corporate debt burden are under control. The Bank 
of Russia is monitoring financial stability, promptly and regularly adjusts its macroeconomic 
forecasts  and  its  policy.  The  central  bank  is prepared  to use  all  available  instruments 
to stabilise the situation in case of need. 
However,  in order  to maintain  macroeconomic  stability  we need  not  only  a balanced  policy 
pursued by the central bank, but also the appropriate fiscal policy, including the government 
debt management policy. 
The national debt in national currency is a basic financial instrument for any country 
of the world. It plays a leading part in the financial markets, is actively used by central banks 
in their  monetary  policies,  as well  as in banking  and  financial  regulation.  This  is the  role 
of a risk-free  liquid  asset,  as we conditionally  call it.  The  rates  on other  riskier  assets  are 
usually calculated with due account of the risk premium to government debt. As distinct from 
short-term interest rates regulated by central banks, long-term rates in the economy depend 
on  inflation  expectations  and  expectations  with  regard  to government  finance 
sustainability. 
The ‘risk-free’ is a key word describing the relationship between the financial system and the 
government  debt.  The  latter  may  perform  all  these  functions  only  if the  state  budget 
is balanced in the medium and long terms and the government may honour its obligations 
without  resorting  to defaults  and  the  printing  press.  Budget  discipline  impacts  the  central 
bank’s ability to function as an economic and financial stabiliser amid economic shocks. 
You may find a lot of examples in the Russian and international history. The Russian policy 
between the end of the 19th century and the start of the First World War serves as a model 
of how  the  balanced  fiscal  policy  allowed  the  government  to preserve  national  currency 
stability,  refrain  from  increasing  taxes,  and  stabilise  debt  in per  cent  of GDP  at the  levels 
acceptable to the market. At that time a sustainable economic growth persisted despite the 
lost war with Japan and the revolutionary upheavals. (Vice versa, uncontrolled budget deficit 
growth  and  in effect  the  breakdown  of government  finance  during  the  First  World  War  led 
to an economic collapse and triggered the 1917 revolution.) 
Let’s  turn  to more  contemporary  examples.  The  development  of the  so-called  emerging 
markets, i.e. the financial markets of developing countries, started following the state budgets’ 
stabilisation and inflation reduction. Market uncertainty about fiscal stability may cause shocks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
in the  financial  and  FX markets.  Both  the  situation  in Brazil  in recent  months  and  the 
Russian  crisis  of 1998  can  serve  as an example.  Moreover,  market  concerns  over  the 
consistency  of the  Bank  of Russia’s  policy  and  our  adherence  to announced  goals,  which 
we felt in 2014 and to a lesser extent in 2015, were also linked to the budget. All the theories 
of the  ruble  exchange  rate  pegged  to a certain  ruble  price  of oil  originated  from 
considerations of budget balance and concerns that the central bank would intentionally 
generate inflation to finance budget liabilities. That is the Bank of Russia was suspected 
of being  ready  to give  up inflation  targeting  for  the  sake  of budget  replenishment. 
It took us many months to persuade the market of the opposite. 
Does Russia have a potential to build up government debt? Yes, it does, in theory, since 
our  country  may  boast  one  of the  lowest  levels  of government  debt.  Consequently,  the 
development of the government debt market could be conducive to the development of the 
financial  system  as a whole.  Anyway  I would  proceed  from  the  conservative  assessments 
of the maximum possible debt burden on the Russian economy, which does not pose a threat 
to macroeconomic stability, say, no more than 25–30% of GDP. Anyway examples from the 
Russian history show that the real interest rates the Russian budget has to pay, should the 
government debt exceed 35–40%, became exorbitant and accelerated the debt spiral. Among 
the negative outcome of government debt growth I may also call the ousting of corporate and 
private borrowers by the state. By the way, the maximum permissible debt burden is higher 
in the  countries  witnessing  persistently  low  inflation  and  persistently  low  inflation 
expectations. The long-term real interest rates in these countries are lower, which means that 
debt burden limits are higher. This is another manifestation of interdependence between fiscal 
and  monetary  policies:  the  more  successful  the  central  bank  is in terms  of securing 
sustainable  price  stability,  the  larger  is the  room  for  manoeuvre  used  by the 
Government  to build  up budget  deficit  and  government  debt  to pursue  a countercyclical 
policy. 
Actually, there is no choice whether the government debt is good or bad. Any medicine 
can be fatal, or at least toxic, if overdosed. The same is true of the government debt: it can 
easily turn out from a basis for the financial system development to its grave digger. This is one 
of the reasons which cannot help being taken into account in shaping fiscal policy. 
While assessing the size of potential development of the Russian debt market, one cannot 
help  taking  into  account  several  material  risk factors. The first  one  is various  off-balance-
sheet budget liabilities, explicit and implicit ones. The case of Vnesheconombank shows 
that  they  may  be rather  significant.  Therefore,  balancing  federal  budget  alone  without 
accounting for debt accumulation by the regions is insufficient. Such factor as population 
aging and the need to finance the growing costs of pension provision in the next five to ten 
years  cannot  be ruled  out  either.  The  second  factor  is high  uncertainty  in the  global 
commodity markets, first of all, the oil market. This is another argument in favour of using 
conservative scenarios. Finally, there is uncertainty with regard to the duration of the period 
of low oil prices. But the total amount of the macroeconomically stable debt burden is, 
unfortunately, an absolute value not depending on the period, during which the debt 
is being  accumulated.  The  lack  of clear  fiscal  strategy  in the  future  can  destabilise  the 
markets already now. 
Whether the government debt is good or bad, as I have already mentioned, is a sham question 
to a certain extent. Another sham question is a choice between the financial stability and 
economic growth. Both the central bank and the Ministry of Finance are being quite often 
criticised  for  focusing  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  respectively  on the  problem  of financial 
stability  to the  detriment  of economic  growth.  In actual  fact,  economic  growth  is impossible 
without financial stability. While a stable budget is the basis of financial stability. It is possible 
to stake  money,  including  government  one,  at the  microlevel,  at the  level  of small  specific 
projects.  To take  risks  at the  macrolevel  means  to endanger  economic  growth  and  social 
stability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
An important question is how to finance the deficit: through reserves or through debt? 
Strictly speaking, both options lead to growth in net debt (net of reserves) and consequently 
to debt burden accumulation. That is why this choice is also a sham one to a large extent. 
Nevertheless, since the commodity market risks are high, we believe that today the priority 
should be given to debt financing and keeping reserves for more complicated scenarios, 
when the access to debt financing is even more difficult. Moreover, no doubt that the available 
reserves serve as an insurance from the market point of view and make the access to debt 
financing somewhat easier. 
In  conclusion I  would  like  to say  a few  words  about  how  to reach  the  path  of  strong 
economic  growth  amid 
fiscal  policies  and  prudent  build-up 
of government  debt.  The  matter  is the  structure  of budget  expenditure,  rather  than  its 
volume,  and  the  use  of structural  reform  potential.  The  external  conditions  push  the 
economy  towards  structural  changes  and  balanced  structural  reforms  may  accelerate  this 
process and make it less painful. The emphasis should be put on those industries, which 
turned out to be competitive in the current situation without government support. Only 
they could become an efficient engine of development amid new reality. As it often happens, 
the  best  way  to help  businesses  in the  current  conditions  is  not  to interfere.  The  deficit 
resources of government support should be concentrated on assistance to the most vulnerable 
population groups, as well as on the development of infrastructure and human capital. 
tough  monetary  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
