 Andrew G Haldane: The Sneetches 
  Speech by  Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of 
England, at the Scottish Business Friends dinner in aid of BBC Children in Need, Edinburgh, 
12 May 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to thank Kiran Bance, Venetia Bell, Stephen Brown, Gurmaj Dhillon, Will Dowson, Jeremy Franklin, 
Richard Galletly, Cat Hines, Charlotte Hogg, Tom Mann, Matthew  Manning, Alex Mitchell, Ben Nelson, Raakhi 
Odedra, Charlotte Pope-Williams, Alice Pugh, Amandeep Rehlon, May Rostom, Emma Sinclair, Anne Wetherilt and 
Richard Wyatt for their comments and contributions. I would also like to thank Professors Philip Bond and Heidi 
Johansen-Berg and Alan Milburn and Emma Hardaker-Jones for their insights. 
In 1953, Dr Seuss published The Sneetches.1 It tells the tale of an imaginary creature of which 
there are two types: those with and those without stars on their bellies (Figure 1). Star-bellied 
Sneetches are perceived in Sneetch society to be superior to those without. Until, that is, those 
without discover a machine for adding stars to their bellies. At that point the original star-bellied 
Sneetches, no longer distinctive, begin removing their stars to regain their special status. And 
so it goes on in a merry-go-round, until the Sneetches collectively realise they are better off 
treating equally those with and those without.   
The Sneetches is a parody of status and discrimination. It has been enjoyed by generations of 
children, so it has a particular resonance at tonight’s event supporting Children in Need. And 
it  has  a  happy  (diverse,  multi-cultural)  ending.  But  The  Sneetches  also  shines  an 
uncomfortable  spotlight  on  a  psychological  flaw  in  us  all  –  the  desire  to  differentiate,  to 
stereotype. A half-century on, this flaw is one with which society continues to wrestle, not least 
in a world where the co-mingling of cultures, races and creeds has never been greater. In 
practice, this co-mingling has not always had such a happy ending.  
Tonight, I want to discuss some of the issues around diversity. These are relevant to groups 
large and small, from communities and organisations to economies and nation states. These 
issues affect all of us, children and adults, whether at school, work or play. In keeping with the 
spirit, I want to discuss diversity by drawing on a diverse a set of disciplines to explore the 
lessons they hold. And I will conclude with suggestions for some new directions in promoting 
diversity, in particular in organisations such as the Bank of England. 
We are all sneetches 
Let  me  start  with  what  might  appear,  on  the  face  of  it,  a  rather  controversial  statement. 
Everyone is this room is a star-bellied Sneetch. I am, all of you are and everyone outside this 
room is too. By that I mean we all discriminate, to a certain degree and in certain situations, 
based on the characteristics and creeds of the individuals we encounter. Sometimes these 
biases  are  extreme,  at  other  times  subtle.  Sometimes  they  are  conscious,  at  other  times 
unconscious. But all of our minds are biased. 
Looked at through an evolutionary lens, this is not as controversial as it may appear. Let me 
explain why. Humans are sentient, water-filled whoopee cushions moulded over millions of 
years of evolutionary experience. For the vast majority of that period, they operated in hunter-
gatherer communities of less than 100 people. Evolutionary biologists believe that behaviours 
learned, and neurological pathways cleared, during that period may have had a lasting impact 
                                                
1   Seuss (1953). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   on our brains and bodies.2 The neurological and physiological traces of our ancient past are 
still very much visible and audible today. 
The hunter-gatherer bands of primitive man occupied a hostile environment. Groups of that 
size were acutely vulnerable to events that could threaten their extinction. Chief among these 
existential threats was conflict and disease. And the most likely sources of conflict and disease 
were not found within communities but outside of them – from dangerous strangers, bearing 
ill-will or ill-ness.3 Evolutionary biologists believe this existential risk from conflict and disease 
installed a deep-seated “fear of strangers”. It embedded stranger-danger. 
Strangers, for this purpose, could be anyone with characteristics different than those of the “in-
group”. In fragile hunter-gatherer communities, this mind-set made sense. It was a rational, 
risk-averse response to existential threat. “Do not trust strangers” was a learned evolutionary 
heuristic, a simple and robust decision-making rule to guard against the threat of extinction. 
Paranoia in primitive man was rational – everyone really was out to get you.  
Psychologists call this ecological rationality.4 Fear of strangers was a rational response to the 
ecology of the time. This behavioural trait is shared by other primates, such as apes.5 What is 
interesting is that these primordial fears may have persisted long after the ecology itself has 
changed. To give a trivial example, fear of snakes, spiders and dense rainforests probably 
arose on the grasslands of Africa in 50,000 BC. It was an ecologically rational response then. 
Whether it is an ecologically rational response on the high streets of Edinburgh and London 
today is altogether more questionable. 
What  is  true  about  fear  of  snakes  and  spiders  is  true,  too,  about  fear  of  strangers.  The 
evolutionary heuristic – “do not trust a stranger” – remains alive and well today. And in some 
situations, it remains a useful guide. Among parents, it is a simple but still powerful decision-
making rule for children. As Benjamin Franklin put it: “Distrust and caution are the parents of 
security”. At the same time, this neurological relic from the ancient past may be seriously out 
of kilter with the workings of a modern, multi-cultural society. 
Given its neurological roots, it should perhaps come as no surprise that history is pock-marked 
with instances of overt and enduring fear of strangers, whether that “strangeness” derives from 
differences in race, gender, culture, religion, political ideology, socio-economic status or age. 
The notion of the evil stranger is steeped in ancient folklore and political discourse.  
Historically,  fear  of  strangers  has  plainly  not  been  the  only  reason  for  discrimination  and 
oppression.  
Self-interest, and the pursuit of power or command over scarce resources, has also had a 
huge influence throughout history. From Ancient Egypt, where colour prejudice was thought to 
depend on which ethnic group held sway, to the slave trade to apartheid, unpalatable historical 
examples of power-based discrimination are depressingly legion.6 
Even if such biases have been ever-present through human history, their precise form appears 
to have changed over time as societies themselves have evolved. Tectonic shifts in flows of 
people, and in laws and social norms, have brought about a significant reshaping of biases 
over the course of the past few centuries.  
One important shaping factor here is likely to have been migratory patterns. 
                                                
2   Schaller and Neuberg (2008). 
3   Faulkner et al (2004). 
4   Todd and Gigerenzer (2012). 
5   Goodall (1986). 
6    Goldin et al (2011). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Cross-border flows of people have occurred throughout human history: at times an involuntary 
response  to  poverty  or  persecution,  at  others  a  voluntary  response  to  opportunity  and 
prosperity. The scale of these flows has waxed and waned, but it is clear cross-border flows 
of people today are at high levels historically.7 In London, the fraction of non-UK born residents 
was almost 3 million or 37% of the population in 2011. And Edinburgh has the largest non-UK 
born population of any region in Scotland at 16%.  
Accompanying this co-mingling of ethnicities and cultures has been an evolution, bordering on 
revolution, in social attitudes. Through the course of several centuries, laws have emerged 
forbidding discrimination based on race, gender, disability, ethnicity and age. And, during the 
latter part of the 20th century, there has been rapid growth in a new set of social norms and 
policies to promote diversity in schools and universities, in the workplace, in sport and leisure 
activities and in wider society. 
One  interesting  window  on  these  changing  societal  attitudes  is  provided  by  looking  at  the 
etymological roots and evolution of the word “diversity” itself. These can be traced to the Latin 
“divertere” meaning “to turn aside” – which in turn led to our word ‘divert’, meaning to change 
course - and the old French expression “diversite” meaning “difference, uniqueness, oddness”. 
In other words, the semantic roots of diversity support a dual interpretation, part positive, part 
negative.8 
That dual interpretation has continued through the ages. Chart 1 plots the incidence of the 
word diversity in books printed since the 15th Century.9 Diversity entered the English lexicon in 
the mid-14th century. At that time, its meaning was broadly neutral. From the late 15th Century 
onwards, however, the term appears to have taken on negative connotations: “being contrary 
to what is agreeable or right; perversity; evil”.  
During the 18th Century, its fortunes changed again. At least some modern democracies began 
to view diversity as a virtue, a safeguard against any one faction exerting too much power. And 
from the middle of the 20th century, there has been a surge in the use of the word diversity, as 
laws and social norms have adapted actively to embrace it.  
Secular trends – demographic, legal, social – appear, then, to have reshaped the meaning of 
diversity.  Overt  discrimination  has  become  unacceptable,  legally  and  socially.  Yet  while 
reshaping  biases,  this  changing  societal  landscape  seems  unlikely  to  have  eliminated  it 
entirely. Indeed, it is possible that societal shifts may have nurtured a different, more elusive, 
form of behavioural bias. Like its evolutionary forebears, this is to some extent rational, given 
the social ecology of the time.  
During  the  20th  century,  psychologists  began  documenting  work  on  social  interaction  in 
communities of people with differing characteristics. In the 1970s, Henri Tajfel and colleagues 
discovered that this behaviour often exhibited a strong “in-group” bias. People quickly adopted 
a social, as well as an individual, identity having attached to a group. For that reason, this has 
since become known as “social identity theory”.10 
Several  important  behavioural  consequences  flow  from  this  theory.  Groups  become  an 
important source of pride and self-esteem for the individuals attached to them. To enhance 
their own self-image, members of the group often then systematically exaggerate differences 
with other groups, while emphasizing similarities within their own.11 Perhaps most important of 
                                                
7    Goldin et al (2011). 
details 
8    Further 
the 
http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=diversity. 
available 
on 
Online 
Etymology 
Dictionary 
at 
9    It uses Google’s Ngram Viewer. 
10   For example, Tajfel et al (1971). 
11   Karlan and List (2007). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   all, people may discriminate or negatively stereotype the “out-group”, as a means of enhancing 
the image of the “in-group” and hence their own self-image. 
Behaviour consistent with social identity theory has since been detected in a wide range of 
social  settings:  in  families,  sports  teams,  schools,  gangs,  colleges  and  organisations.  It 
generates  important,  but  often  subtle,  biases  in  decision-making  which  may  discriminate 
against  members  of  the  out-group.  Despite  laws  against  racial  discrimination  in  most 
developed countries, there is evidence that racial stereotyping and discrimination in everyday 
decision-making has persisted, in everything from selling cars to making loans.12 
While deeply undesirable, these behaviours cannot be dismissed as entirely irrational. Indeed, 
economists and psychologists have developed models to show this behaviour may indeed be 
rational  once the role  of  social  identity  and social  norms  are  recognised.13  And  because  a 
multicultural society gives rise to greater numbers of distinct groups and identities, this socially-
discriminatory behaviour might even have become more, not less, powerful over time. 
These biases in behaviour are similar in spirit, but different in form, to those of primitive man. 
Both  generate  negative  sentiment  towards  strangers  or  the  “out-group”.  In  ancient  times, 
biases were based on the physical identity of strangers; they were overt and visible. Today, 
many biases are based on the social identity of strangers; they are often covert and subtle. 
Where primitive man had conscious biases, modern man often has unconscious ones too.14 
That these biases are sometimes covert, rather than overt, does not diminish their importance 
for society. Unconscious biases are likely to be just as prevalent, and sometimes as pernicious, 
as conscious one. And precisely because they are harder to detect, sometimes even among 
those exhibiting these behaviours, unconscious biases are more likely to go unnoticed, and 
thus  unchallenged,  than  conscious  ones.  As  conscious  biases  were  violent  and  visible, 
unconscious biases are silent and invisible.  
The Sneetches is, at one level, a children’s story with a moral message. At another, it is a case 
study in social identity theory, a parable for modern times. Even in advanced economies with 
little  fear  of  conflict  or  infection,  with  laws  against  discrimination  and  with  social  norms 
favouring  diversity,  we  all  remain  Sneetches.  Our  biased  minds  are  in  part  a  neurological 
hangover  from  our  hunter-gatherer  past  and  in  part  a  sociological  side-effect  of  our  multi-
cultural present. Either way, these biases are embedded in our brains and behaviours. 
Diversity as a social good 
Saying  that  behavioural biases  among  individuals  are  understandable  is  one thing.  Saying 
these biases are acceptable, when viewed from the perspective of society as a whole, is quite 
another. There are at least two reasons why our biased minds may carry a significant societal 
cost. 
First,  fear  of  strangers  is  in  part  a  neurological  relic  of  the  past,  a  time  of  hunter-gather 
communities, a different ecology. Our biased minds may, in a sense, still be adapting to a 
multi-cultural environment. In this respect, discrimination is the neurological equivalent of the 
appendix:  essential  at  the  time  man  ate  grass  on  the  savannahs,  but  today  a  sometimes-
dangerous  physiological  fossil.  Fear  of  strangers  today  may  be  a  sometimes-dangerous 
neurological fossil. 
                                                
12   Akerlof and Kranton (2011) . 
13   For example, Akerlof and Kranton (2011) explore how our conception of who we are, and who we want to be, 
may influence our actions and decisions rather than just economic incentives. 
14   For  further  details,  please  see  the  literature  review  provided  by  the  Equality  Challenge  Unit  at 
http://www.ecu.ac.uk/publications/unconscious-bias-in-higher-education/.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Second, there are many instances where the collective consequence of individually rational 
decisions gives rise to sub-optimal outcomes for society. It is perfectly rational for everyone to 
head to the exits if the fire alarm sounds in the theatre. But the collective consequences of 
such  actions  are  potentially  catastrophic.  Economists  call  this  an  externality  problem.  And 
diversity (discrimination) can be seen as just such a positive (negative) social externality, a 
public good (bad).  
This is not a new orthodoxy. Writing back in 1848, John Stuart Mill captured well the societal 
benefits of diversity:15 
 “It  is  hardly  possible  to  overrate  the  value,  in  the  present  low  state  of  human 
improvement,  of  placing  human  beings  in  contact  with  persons  dissimilar  to 
themselves, and with modes of thought and action unlike those with which they are 
familiar…Such communication has always been, and is peculiarly in the present 
age, one of the primary sources of progress” 
More recently, Scott Page (2011) has encapsulated the positive social externality of diversity 
more formally. Economists love an equation, so here is one: 
Collective Ability = Individual Ability + Diversity 
Recent evidence, drawn from a range of disciplines and settings, has tended to confirm Mill 
and Page’s conjectures. Diversity generates a positive social externality, helping the collective 
far exceed the sum of its individual parts. Diversity is synergy. This has been found at almost 
every scale of social grouping, from small communities and organisations, to large economies 
and nation states. The benefits have been found, too, in non-social settings, such as ecological 
and logistical systems.16  
One channel through which diversity may improve societal outcomes is by fostering innovation 
and creativity. If different raw ingredients are added to the intellectual melting pot, the final dish 
is likely to be richer and more innovative.17 Psychologists believe that divergent thinking is the 
cradle  of  creativity.  That  is  why  creativity  is  often  found  to  be  greatest  among  very  young 
children whose thinking is unconstrained by convention. Their brains have license to diverge 
and roam free.18 
Education and adulthood put a stop to that. They constrain cognitive freedom. But there are 
means of freeing our brains from these constraints. For example, convening diverse groups 
can be seen as a means of adults rediscovering the creativity of childhood. It is a synthetic 
way of manufacturing divergent thinking, a sociological recipe for artificial intelligence that does 
not require a robot or a PhD in physics. As childhood individualizes the creativity process, 
diversity can collectivise that process. 
At a micro level, there is fairly strong evidence for such an effect in communities, organisations 
and  cities.  In  early  societies,  there  is  evidence  of  brides  being  given  to  other  tribes  and 
introducing new ideas and technologies.19 Inter-group marriage was, in effect, a vehicle for 
technology transfer. And, later, waves of migrant-merchants are believed to have served as a 
major  stimulus to technology-transfer across civilised  communities  – for  example, from  the 
ancient Orient to ancient Greece.20  
                                                
15   Mill (1848). 
16   For example, Anderson and May (1979). 
17   For example, Alesina et al (2015).  
18   Land and Jarman (1993), and Land (2011). 
19   Manning (2005). 
20   Goldin et al (2011) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Coming  closer  to  today,  within  organisations  there  is  widespread  evidence  of  diverse 
leadership  teams  improving  firm-level  performance.21  There  is  also  evidence  of  diverse 
workforces improving firm-level productivity, at least under certain conditions.22 Within cities, 
there  is  evidence  from  the  US  and  Europe  of  diverse,  multicultural  cities  being  a  spur  to 
economic development and growth.23 Richard Florida argues that what defines a thriving city 
these days is the three “t”s – talent, technology and tolerance – with the third a key enabler of 
the first two.24 
At the macro level, the evidence is more mixed but in general suggests a positive relationship 
between diversity and economic growth. The historical experience of creatively-fertile empires, 
cities or epochs – from ancient Greece to Medieval Florence, from Elizabethan London to post-
revolutionary  Paris  –  is  suggestive.  Each  of  these  social  systems  was  notable  for  its 
cosmopolitan culture, with a rich mix of religions, ideas and disciplines. Conversely, the cultural 
isolation  of  China  for  several  centuries  is  held  by  some  scholars  to  be  responsible  for  its 
extended period of stifled innovation and growth.25 
More  recent  empirical  evidence,  looking  across  a  range  of  countries,  has  added  empirical 
support to this historical experience. Among advanced economies, measures of (genetic and 
birthplace) diversity have been found to support economic growth and development under the 
right conditions.26 And the effects can be large: increasing the diversity of skilled immigrants 
by 1 percentage point raises long-run output by around 2%.27 On this evidence, diversity of 
peoples has been an important ingredient behind organisations, cities and economies growing 
over time. 
A second dimension along which diversity may matter is in supporting the resilience of social 
systems in the face of uncertainties and shocks, be it organisations or nation states. Courtesy 
of  behavioural  economics,  we  now  know  that  individuals  suffer  from  a  heady  cocktail  of 
behavioural biases.28 Two of the more important are hubris bias (an exaggerated individual 
sense of ability) and conformity bias (a tendency to act in line with consensus).29 The first 
leaves  decisions  vulnerable  to  the  whims  of  an over-confident  individual,  while  the  second 
generates insufficient challenge of prevailing orthodoxy, so-called “groupthink”. 
What links these biases is that they increase greatly the chances of a large, perhaps even 
catastrophic, error of judgement. History, including economic history, provides a rich catalogue 
of  these  errors,  from  autocratic  emperors,  kings  and  rulers  overtaken  by  hubris  to  inert 
academics and policymakers consumed by consensus. Fortunately, social institutions have 
often adapted to lean against these biases. Indeed, some have argued that these institutional 
safeguards are the reason some nations succeed and others fail.30 
One bulwark against bias comes from placing decision-making in the hands of a committee, 
diverse in its composition, independent in its mindset. Experimental evidence suggests that, 
so  comprised,  committees  make  for  more  robust  decisions.  They  do  so  by  avoiding  large 
                                                
21   For example, McKinsey (2015). 
22   For example, O’Reilly (1998). 
23   Florida (2002), Ottaviano and Peri (2005). 
24   Florida (2003). 
25   Goldin et al (2011). 
26   Ashraf and Galor (2013), Ager and Bruckner (2013), Bellini et al (2013), Alesina et al (2015). 
27   Alesina et al (2015). 
28   Kahneman (2012). 
29   For example, Haldane (2014). 
30   Acemoglu and Robinson (2013). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   errors,  by  leaning  against  the  eccentricities  of  individuals  and  the  groupthink  of  crowds.31 
Decision-making diversity makes for greater systemic resilience. 
Such diverse perspectives have also been found to improve our powers of clairvoyance. In his 
recent  book  “Super-Forecasting”,  Philip  Tetlock  explores  what  makes  for  a  good  forecast, 
based  on  experimental  and  real-world  experience.32  A  set  of  forecasters  with  diverse 
perspectives, experiences and ideas is found to be a key ingredient. Indeed, teams of diverse 
amateurs have been shown to out-perform experts in some settings. In other words, there is 
forecasting wisdom in crowds, provided they are cognitively diverse. 
Over time, these insights have found their way into institutional design. For example, diverse 
decision-making underlies judicial practices in many countries – for example, the design of the 
US  Supreme  Court.33  It  is  also  embodied  in  the  design  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  policy 
committees – the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), Financial Policy Committee (FPC) and 
Prudential  Regulation  Committee  (PRC).  Each  comprises  internal  and  external  members, 
individually accountable and drawn from diverse backgrounds.34  
The global financial crisis provides the example, par excellence, of the resilience benefits of 
diversity. A lack of intellectual diversity sowed the seeds of the crisis. So too, arguably, did a 
lack of gender diversity.35 And a lack of diversity within the financial eco-system – with many 
institutions holding very similar portfolios – fed and watered these seeds. This lack of diversity, 
intellectual and financial, contributed significantly to the depth and severity of the crisis.36 This 
old lesson from evolutionary biology and systems theory was learned painfully and abruptly by 
policymakers and practitioners in 2008. 
What applies at the level of institutions and systems may also apply at the level of nation states. 
Democracy  can  be  thought  of  as  a  sociological  mechanism for maximising the  diversity of 
decision-making. By design, it leans against the hubris bias of autocracy or monarchy while 
reducing the groupthink bias of single-party rule. As synergy is diversity, so too is democracy. 
And for the same reasons as among institutions and eco-systems, democracy has also been 
found to make for more robust decision-making.37  
So much for the benefits. None of this is to say that diversity is costless. History is littered with 
examples  of  the  problems  associated  with  integrating  and  assimilating  diverse  peoples. 
Several recent empirical studies have corroborated those perceptions, again at both the micro 
and  macro  scale.  For  example,  there  is  evidence  that  diversity  in  the  workplace  may 
sometimes lower employee morale and job performance.38 And there is evidence that racially 
diverse communities have fewer social interactions and thus are associated with lower levels 
of trust.39   
At the macro level, studies drawing on cross-country experience have suggested that certain 
measures of diversity – in particular, the degree of ethnic fragmentation – may sometimes be 
associated  with  lower  levels  of  economic  growth.40  One  explanation  for  this  finding  is  that 
                                                
31   Lombardielli et al (2005) 
32   Tetllock (2015). 
33   Iaryczower et al (2013)  
34   Haldane (2014). 
35   Lagarde (2014). 
36   Haldane (2009). 
37   Landemore (2013). 
38   Guillaume et al (2015). 
39   Alesina and La Ferrara (2000). 
40   Easterly and Levine (1997), Alesina et al (2003). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   fragmentation may make it harder for society to agree on the public goods it wishes to provide 
– transport, schools, energy, defence – thereby retarding growth.41 Another is simply that it 
increases the risk of conflict and friction, which absorbs human and social capital and thus 
damages growth. 
The potential fragility of more complex systems is a familiar theme from other disciplines too. 
In ecological biology, complex eco-systems, like tropical rainforests, are known to be more 
fragile than simple ones, such as savannahs. Cascades, conflicts and contagion are both more 
likely  and  more  potent,  the  greater  the  number  of  interacting  parts.  That  means  complex 
societies, like complex eco-systems and financial systems, may exhibit a “robust-yet-fragile” 
property.42 The greater richness of the rainforest or cosmopolitan city may come at a cost.  
So  diversity  is  no  one-way  street,  no  panacea.  It  confers  collective  social  and  economic 
benefits, at both the micro and macro level, but at some cost. Which one is likely to win the 
day? The cost/benefit balance seems to be context-specific. It also seems to depend on a 
country’s level of economic development.43 For developing countries, there is evidence this 
balance may sometimes be growth-negative. For developed countries, the evidence is more 
compellingly  growth-positive,  perhaps  owing  to  their  more  developed  public  and  social 
infrastructure to support diversity. 
Diversity of what? 
Thus far, I have used the word “diversity” in a very general sense. That is inadequate when it 
comes to crafting policies which promote diversity. Diversity of what exactly? Specifically from 
a policy perspective, which dimensions of diversity are most important if we wish to maximise 
the social externalities it confers? 
In his book, The Difference, Scott Page distinguishes identity diversity (race, gender, ethnicity, 
age etc) and cognitive diversity (intelligence, problem-solving, personality etc).44 To this, we 
might  usefully  add  a  third  –  experiential  diversity  (socio-economic  background,  skills, 
experiences etc). While there is some overlap between them, these measures are conceptually 
distinct: the first physiological and pure nature; the second neurological and part nature, part 
nurture; the third environmental and pure nurture.  
The aspect of diversity most extensively studied is identity, specifically ethnicity and gender. 
That is for the very simple reason that these dimensions of diversity are the ones most easily 
observable and, latterly, reportable. Moreover, there is plenty of evidence, accumulated over 
recent years, which suggests that identity-diversity can yield significant social benefits, in part 
at least because it serves as a proxy for cognitive and experiential diversity. 
For example, research by McKinsey has looked at how gender and ethnic diversity affect firm 
performance.45 Looking at a wide cross-section of international firms, it finds that companies 
with  higher  levels  of  ethnic  and  gender  diversity  have  tended  to  out-perform  less  diverse 
companies, often by material amounts. These effects are stronger, the greater is the degree 
of diversity on these companies’ leadership teams. Diversity, in short, supports the bottom line 
of the annual report, not just the CSR paragraph. 
And what is true of companies appears also to be true of cities. Researchers have created 
“creativity  indices”  for  cities  measuring  their  degree  of  technological  innovation  and 
                                                
41   Alesina et al (1999) 
42   May and Anderson (1991), Watts (2002), Haldane (2009) 
43   Alesina and La Ferrara (2000). 
44   Page (2007). 
45   McKinsey (2015). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   dynamism.46 There is a striking correlation between these indices and a city’s degree of sexual 
and ethnic diversity – cities such as San Francisco, Boston and Seattle in the US, and also 
London,  Dublin,  Vancouver  and  Sydney.  It  seems  a  vibrant  city  both  helps  create,  and  is 
created by, a diverse and cosmopolitan populace in a virtuous loop.47 
The source of these benefits may well lie, at least in part, in behavioural differences between 
groups. The most extensively studied of these differences is between the sexes. For example, 
men have been found to exhibit greater levels of risk-taking than women.48 The reasons for 
this appear to be partly physiological, given the larger amounts of testosterone generated by 
the  male  body.49  This  risk-taking  bias,  taken  together  with  the  strong  male  bias  within  the 
financial  services  sector,  has  led  some  to  posit  a  causal  link  between  the  lack  of  gender 
diversity and the global financial crisis.50 
There is also evidence of systematic differences in approaches to decision-making between 
the sexes. Men tend to attach to a single principle, or heuristic, when making decisions and 
then stick with it. Women, by contrast, show a greater willingness to switch between decision-
making principles and heuristics, depending on the context.51 Or, to caricature things a little, 
women multi-task while men have one-track minds. 
Recent neurological research has explored whether there is a link between these behavioural 
traits and the wiring of the brain using imaging techniques. It is early days. But one recent 
study found gender differences in the wiring between the left and right cerebral hemispheres, 
with women exhibiting greater connectivity between hemispheres and men showing greater 
connectivity  within  each  hemisphere.52  This  wiring  difference  might  explain  women’s 
superiority at multi-tasking and men’s greater spatial awareness. 
Yet  it  is  important  to  place  these  behavioural  and  cognitive  differences  in  context.  Even  if 
neurological differences exist, they should not be exaggerated. For example, research has 
suggested these gender differences are typically smaller than the differences in brain wiring 
that exist within each gender. Or, put differently, neuroscientists have challenged the notion 
that  brains  are  either  “male”  or  “female”.  Instead,  most  brains  are  transgender,  a  property 
known as “mosaicism”.53 
Our androgynous brains are also far from static. They evolve and re-wire over time in response 
to experience and circumstance. Neurologists call this property “plasticity”.54 The malleability 
of our brains means that differences in the environment facing the sexes can have a lasting 
impact on their behaviour. Indeed, some studies have suggested that, once allowance is made 
for  these  environmental  factors,  behavioural  differences  between  the  sexes  effectively 
disappear.  
For example, differences in the relative competitiveness of the sexes tend to be equalised once 
environmental factors are take into account.55 And differences in mathematical performance 
                                                
46   This is measured as the fraction of high-tech industry output relative to that in the economy as a whole. 
47   Florida (2002, 2011). 
48   For example, Charness and Gneezy (2012). 
49   Coates (2012). 
50   For example, Lagarde (2014), Davies (2015). 
51   For example, Ertac and Gurdle (2011). 
52   Ingalhalikar et al (2014)  
53   Joel et al (2015) 
54   Brooks (2011) . 
55   Wozniak et al (2009), Cardenas et al (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   between the sexes, often apparent in simple tests, tend similarly to disappear once attempts 
are made to create an environment which avoids gender stereotyping about numerical ability.56  
Overall,  then,  identity-based  characteristics,  such  as  gender  and  ethnicity,  may  provide  a 
useful basis for judging some aspects of behavioural diversity. But these differences may be 
as much the result of differences in environment and cognition as identity per se. Identity may 
be more measurable proxy, than root cause, of diverse decision-making.57 The evidence here 
is revealing. 
Looked at through an historical lens, the “Medici effect” – historical episodes of great leaps 
forward in ideas and innovation – typically arose from a melding of cultures, disciplines and 
experiences,  rather  than genders. The  creativity  exhibited  by  five-year  old  children  derives 
from their cognitive processes, not their gender or ethnicity. Tetlock’s “super-forecasters” are 
defined by their cognitive and environmental diversity, not their identity. And crowd-sourcing 
and gamification are means of harnessing the cognitive and experiential creativity of crowds, 
blind to their identities. And so on.  
Moving the diversity dial 
Against this backdrop, what might be done to support diversity? The “first wave” of diversity 
initiatives has been building steadily over recent decades. This has tended to focus on identity-
based  characteristics,  such  as  gender  and  ethnicity.  And  it  is  heartening  to  know  that 
considerable progress has been made here.  
Trends  in  female  labour  market  participation  have  improved  significantly.  The  employment 
ratio for females has increased dramatically across a selection of OECD countries over the 
past four decades. Data on ethnicity are harder to obtain, but there have been improvements 
in employment rates among foreign-born residents in many countries over the past 15 years. 
Numbers of women and ethnic minorities in senior positions have also increased. The Davies 
Review  recently  found  that  the  UK  has  now  reached  its  target  of  25%  female  board 
representation among FTSE-100 companies, having doubled in less than 5 years.58  
Although progress has been made, there are a number of areas where we still fall short. In the 
UK, the employment rate for those with Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic (BAME) backgrounds 
is still materially lower than for the population at large.59  Women still only account for a third 
of employment in higher managerial roles in the UK. Although the pay gap has fallen, average 
pay for men in the UK remains almost 20% higher than for women.60 And male CEOs across 
European public companies earn on average over 30% more than their female equivalents.61  
The Bank has itself made good progress over recent years. For example, we currently have 
43%  female  representation  across  the  organisation  and  we  are  working  towards  a 
50/50 gender split by 2020. At senior management levels, 27% are women with a target to 
boost this number further. If we rewind 10 years, the equivalent figure would have been only 
7%. The proportion of BAME employees is around 17%, greater than the proportion for the UK 
as  a  whole.  Representation  at  senior  management  remains  much  lower  at  5%,  but  is 
increasing.   
                                                
56   Walton and Spencer (2009). 
57   Page (2010). 
58   Davies (2015) 
59   Resolution Foundation (2015) 
60   Although around half of that reflects the fact that there is a greater proportion of women working part time than 
men. 
61   European Women on Boards (2016) 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Like many other organisations, the Bank has sought to support diversity through a range of 
diversity  networks  covering,  among  other  things,  gender,  ethnicity,  LGBT,  mental  health, 
disability, caring and some of the main religions. One of my responsibilities is as Executive 
Sponsor of the Bank’s Ethnic Minority Network. This Network has put in place some valuable 
new initiatives to support greater ethnic diversity across the Bank over recent years, including 
reciprocal mentoring schemes and an Afro-Caribbean Scholarship Programme which funds 
students through university. The Bank has also recently signed up to UPstanding – an initiative 
to showcase BAME professionals working in the US, UK and Ireland.  
Plainly, there is further to go along these identity-based dimensions of diversity, in the Bank 
and  more  broadly.  But  there  is  wind  in  society’s  sails,  as  well  as  in  the  Bank’s,  on  these 
dimensions of diversity, which gives good grounds for optimism about the future. That being 
the case, it is worth considering the “second wave” of diversity initiatives that might augment 
the first. 
An  obvious  place  to  start  here  would  be  the  other  dimensions  of  diversity  –  cognitive  and 
experiential.  The  evidence  suggests  these  confer  societal  benefits  every  bit  as  great  as 
identity.  Indeed,  diversity  of  thought  and  experience  go  the  very  heart  of  decision-making 
diversity.  Moreover,  because  these  dimensions  are  less  well-recognised  and  harder  to 
measure,  unconscious  biases  around  them  may  be  harder  to  detect  and  correct.  That 
underscores the importance of purposive action to move the diversity dial in these directions.  
(a)  Cognitive diversity 
Cognitive diversity is far from easy to define and measure. It is stored between our ears in an 
organ which, despite recent neuro-scientific advances, remains largely a black (or grey) box. 
A  second  reason  is  that  it  is  clearly  multi-faceted,  including  diversity  of  perspectives, 
interpretations,  heuristics  and  predictive  models.62  It  comprises  not  just  technical  problem-
solving, in an IQ sense, but also social and interpersonal problem-solving, in the EQ sense. 
Together, these comprise an individual’s cognitive toolbox. 
Recognising even that this toolbox exists, and what might lie inside, is a useful first step. Work 
by sociologists, psychologists and neuro-scientists has, over recent decades, shone a light on 
these wide-ranging cognitive competencies, their implications for behaviour and their source. 
Yet this evidence is only now beginning to percolate into the workplace, much less into wider 
society. 
Let  me  give  an  example.  A  recent  article  in  The  Economist  discussed  whether  autism  is 
adequately recognised and rewarded in the workplace.63 It is well-known that those with autism 
often have an above-average ability to spot patterns and errors, to conduct repeated tasks with 
high levels of accuracy and to concentrate for lengthy periods. Indeed, given these cognitive 
gifts, it has been claimed that half of the innovators in Silicon Valley have Asperger’s syndrome, 
a form of autism.64  
Yet when it comes to the world of education and work, these gifts appear largely to have gone 
unrecognised and unrewarded. In the UK, only 12% of high-functioning autistic adults are in 
work.  Globally,  the  United  Nations  estimate  that  80%  of  those  with  autism  are  not  in  the 
workplace. Even once in work, the skills and performance of autistic adults may not be properly 
recognised and rewarded. In the workplace, as in wider society, we are some distance from 
recognising the true potential of those with autism. 
                                                
62   Page (2007). 
63   “Beautiful minds, wasted: how not to squander the potential of autistic people”, The Economist April 2016. 
64   Temple Grandin (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   Once cognitive diversity is recognised, the next step is measurement. This, too, is far from 
straightforward because the dimensions of cognition and personality are many and varied. Yet 
there is no shortage of psychometric tests these days which seek to capture these many and 
various dimensions. And, increasingly, these tests are being applied in recruitment decisions, 
when seeking to match the characteristics of potential employees to an organisation.  
These  same  tests  have  been  far  less  often  used  by  organisations  to  gauge  the  cognitive 
diversity of their existing employees. For example, there is no reason they could not be used 
to construct a cognitive map of an entire organisation to gauge its degree of cognitive diversity. 
Making transparent that cognitive map would then provide incentives to take seriously any lack 
of cognitive diversity, as well as enabling peer comparison. As the measurement technology 
exists, these would be big but eminently feasible steps for organisations to take.  
To be futuristic for a moment, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans these days provide 
a different lens on cognitive and personality traits – a techni-colour cognitive map. It is early 
days to be drawing firm links between the brain’s wiring and individual character traits, but 
progress has been rapid. As one example, the neuro-biology company Emotiv Lifesciences 
has  created  a  brainwave  reading  rig,  which  offers  real-time  analysis  of  cognitive  activity.65 
While  we  are  some  way  from  arming  ourselves  with  only  an  MRI  scan  when  judging 
performance and potential, perhaps in future that will not seem so fanciful. 
The Bank is taking steps to improve its own cognitive diversity. For example, it has sought to 
widen the range of disciplines from which it recruits over the past few years. Of this year’s 
graduate cohort, only 40% has a degree in pure economics and finance. I say “only” because, 
as recently as 2009, the corresponding fraction would have been 60%. This year’s graduate 
cohort is drawn from diverse disciplines ranging from particle physics to aerospace engineering 
to ancient history. Disciplinary diversity is on the rise.  
That in part reflects changes to the Bank’s responsibilities, as over recent years it has taken 
on new staff and new tasks. Those tasks require different skills and experience – commercial 
and operational skills, as well as analytical. That has changed the cognitive make-up of the 
Bank, potentially quite significantly. Bringing together those different skills and experiences in 
cross-Bank teams – for example, our recently published work on the implications of the UK’s 
EU membership for monetary and financial stability – is a good way of making use of cognitive 
diversity across the Bank, collectivising the creativity process. 
The  Bank  has  also  been  encouraging  intellectual  diversity  through  its  new  research 
programme.66 This has extended the range of topics on which the Bank is researching – for 
example,  to  embrace  the  impact  of  technology,  demography  and  climate  change  on  the 
economy and financial system. And because expertise on those issues often does not reside 
in-house, the Bank is encouraging cross-disciplinary and unorthodox approaches to research, 
including through outside collaboration and through crowd-sourcing research.  
When it comes to publishing those ideas, through its blog Bank Underground Bank staff are 
now unshackled from the constraint of only publishing material which chimes with the prevailing 
policy  orthodoxy.  This  provides  room  for  divergent  thinking,  the  cradle  of  creativity.  It  also 
serves as an antidote to groupthink. These may be baby steps but they are, I hope, steps in 
the right direction.  
                                                
65    Deloitte University Press (2013). 
66   Please see the One Bank Research Agenda, available here: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/documents/onebank/discussion.pdf.  The  full  discussion  paper  is 
available here: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/documents/onebank/discussion.pdf. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   (b)  Experiential diversity 
A related, but distinct, dimension to diversity is the background and experience of individuals. 
Again, this is multi-faceted. One dimension which has attracted some attention recently is the 
socio-economic status of individuals. That has been found to have a striking impact on levels 
of educational attainment, employment and income prospects, independent of ability. 
Here, the seeds appear to be sown early in childhood. Studies have looked at the educational 
evolution of sets of children from different socio-economic backgrounds over time. Parental 
income  and  wealth  has  been  found  to  be  a  key,  if  not  the  key,  determinant  of  a  child’s 
educational progression.67 Indeed, these socio-economic effects are sufficiently large that they 
may dwarf factors such as a child’s cognitive ability.68 
For example, imagine testing the cognitive ability of children when two years old. How does 
socio-economic status then affect their educational progression? Some studies have found 
that a low-ability child from a high-status group will exhibit higher levels of attainment by the 
age of six than a high-ability child from a low-status group.69 And, thereafter, the differences 
begin to widen further. This evidence suggests it is far better to be born rich and stupid than 
bright and poor. 
Moreover, these early-stage differences in educational attainment, shaped by socio-economic 
background,  have  a  life-long  impact.  That  is  why  there  is  a  very  high  degree  of  inter-
generational persistence in incomes and wealth, even once account is taken of ability. As one 
diagnostic  on  that,  consider  the  following  evidence,  courtesy  of  the  Commission  on  Social 
Mobility and Child Poverty: although independent schools comprise only 7% of pupils in the 
UK, the independently-educated comprise over 70% of the upper echelons of the judiciary, 
55% of permanent secretaries in the civil service and 62% of senior armed forces officers.70 
Branching of the opportunity tree starts early, it appears, and then keeps widening. 
At present, as with cognitive diversity, there is often a lack of recognition of these inbuilt socio-
economic biases. And, as with cognitive diversity, one reason for this lack of recognition is a 
lack  of  measurement.  There  is  no  agreed  set  of  metrics  for  measuring  someone’s  socio-
economic background. In the UK, the Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission has begun 
to  develop  some  metrics.  But  there  is  widespread  recognition  that  we  are  still  in  the  early 
stages of measurement. 
Measurement would enable organisations to draw their own experiential diversity maps. As 
with cognitive diversity, beyond that there is potentially value in making transparent those maps 
to provide incentives for purposive action if experiential diversity is found to be wanting. The 
Bank has just begun to put in place a system for measuring the socio-economic background 
of its recruits. In future, that might help in sketching the contours of the Bank’s own experiential 
diversity map.  
Some  organisations  have  taken  more  purposive  action  still  to  promote  social  mobility.  For 
example,  some  have  set  themselves  recruitment  targets  for  employees  drawn  from  lower 
socio-economic groupings. Others have put in place so-called “contextualised” recruitment, 
adjusting  their  entrance  requirements  to  prevent  filtering  out  of  candidates  based  on  their 
socio-economic background. The Bank has also made some initial steps in the direction of 
contextualised recruitment, as well as signing up as a member of the so-called Social Mobility 
Compact, which promotes social inclusion and mobility in the UK.  
                                                
67   Heckman  (2006)  finds  that  very  early  intervention  for  disadvantaged  children  is  crucial  in  order  to  affect 
outcomes. Intervening when a child is over the age of six has comparatively little effect.  
68   Attanasio and Blundell (2014). 
69   Feinstein (2003). 
70   Commission on Child Poverty and Social Mobility (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
   Across  all  organisations  and  institutions,  there  is  plainly  much  further  to  go.  This  new 
dimension  to  the  diversity  debate  could,  if  the  evidence  is  even  half-right,  yield  high 
organisational and societal returns from a modest investment in better measurement and in 
different approaches to recruitment and performance.  
Recruitment strategy 
(c)  
Recruitment  is  typically  a  singular  pursuit.  The  successful  candidate  is  typically  the  one 
deemed to best meet the job requirements. In this way, recruitment is meritocratic, a Darwinian 
survival of the fittest. Yet most organisations are not singular. They are team sports. What 
matters  most  to  organisations  is  collective  performance,  not  individual  brilliance.  Most 
successful ones are not a Darwinian dog-fight.   
Diversity  is  important  precisely  because  it  improves  collective  functioning,  over  and  above 
individual ability – recall the “Page equation”. Diversity is, by definition, a collective concept. 
That lays bare a potential tension between recruitment practices, which typically focus on the 
characteristics  of  the  individual,  and  organisational  success,  which  typically  relies  on  the 
characteristics of the collective.  
This disconnect is, interestingly enough, the self-same one exposed by the global financial 
crisis. Pre-crisis regulation was also individually-focussed. Regulators looked at banks one by 
one. Each of them individually had good CVs, strong social skills, were smartly dressed. Yet 
the collective consequence was a financial system in which everyone looked the same, thought 
the same and placed the same bets. That lack of diversity left the whole system vulnerable to 
collapse which, of course, it duly did. 
Since  the  crisis, regulators  have  learned their  lesson.  Regulation  has taken  on  a  systemic 
orientation, with regulatory measures calibrated to risk across the financial system as a whole. 
That  means  regulators  taking  measures  which  promote  system-wide  diversity,  such  as 
encouraging new entrants into the field with new business models. In short, financial regulation 
these days seeks to take explicit account of the social externalities of systemic risk. 
Recruitment  policy  might  usefully  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  regulatory  policy  if  it,  too,  is  to 
maximise the organisational and social externalities of diversity. To see how and why, consider 
a simple example.71 There are two candidates for a position, A and B. They do a test based 
on  the  attributes  useful  for  the  hiring  organisation.  These  tests  might  be  state  of  the  art, 
including  all  of  the  diverse  attributes  one  would  wish  in  an  organisation  –  cognitive, 
interpersonal and experiential skills. 
In this test out of 10, candidate A scores 8 and candidate B scores 4. Which one should be 
hired? The answer is easy. The evidence points strongly to A as the candidate best meeting 
the requirements for the job. They have, quite literally, ticked the right boxes. But let’s add a 
twist. What if the answers A gets wrong are the ones B gets right? And what if the questions 
existing employees get wrong are also the ones B gets right? In other words, what if candidate 
B brings skills to the organisation which otherwise do not exist. 
The right recruitment decision for the organisation is then to choose B rather than A. Candidate 
B  adds  more  to  the  collective  ability  of  the  organisation,  even  though  they  are  weaker 
individually. The question is, how often would existing recruitment practices deliver such an 
outcome? In practice, I think rarely. Individuals are typically judged on the alignment between 
their skills and those of the existing organisation. It takes quite a leap of faith to choose instead 
the candidate whose skills are misaligned with the hiring organisation.  
Back in 2006, the Bank of England did some personality-type evaluations of middle managers 
and  graduate  entrants,  using  the  well-known  Myers-Briggs  psychometric  test.  This  was  a 
                                                
71   Drawn from Page (2007) and Deloitte (2013). 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   population of 240 individuals, large enough to make reasonable statistical inferences, although 
it is worth bearing in mind that no psychometric test is without its drawbacks. The Myers-Briggs 
test groups individuals according to four classifiers, each with two possible outcomes.72 So 
there are in total 16 possible personality types, typically summarised by a four-letter acronym. 
For example, I am an INTJ: Introvert, iNtuitive, Thinking, Judging.  
Although these 16 personality types are not uniformly distributed across the population, no one 
category typically comprises more than 12–14% and none less than 2–3%. Viewed from this 
vantage point, the Bank’s results were interesting. Around 60% fell into a single category: ISTJ. 
In 2006, ISTJ’s were the star-bellied Sneetches of the Bank of England. The chances of this 
occurring by chance in the population at large are far less than one in a million. 
The good news on this front is that, with the arrival of new staff with new and different skills at 
the Bank over the past few years, its personality has already become more diverse, perhaps 
significantly so. But longer-term, the challenge for all organisations is this: to put in place a 
more system-oriented approach to recruitment and performance management, which weighs 
diversity explicitly and systematically. We are not close to being there yet. This would be a leap 
of faith. But it would not be a leap into the unknown given the known benefits such diversity 
confers.  
Conclusion 
We are all Sneetches, some with stars, some without. The sooner we recognise that our minds 
are biased, the better placed we will be for dealing with its consequences. Diversity is a public 
good  because  it  corrects  our  biased  minds  in  ways  which  benefit  society  –  from  greater 
creativity and innovation to more robust and resilient decision-making, in every social setting 
from  schoolrooms  to  sports  fields,  from  companies  to  communities,  from  eco-systems  to 
economies.  
This public good, like all public goods, requires an on-going investment. Society has made a 
real investment in identity-based diversity over the past few years. So too has the Bank. That 
first diversity wave is reaping significant societal rewards. There has probably never been a 
better time for making progress on creating that second diversity wave, one which cultivates 
the subtle, but as important, cognitive and socio-economic dimensions. While leopards can’t 
change their spots, Sneetches can change their stars. 
References 
Acemoglu, D and Robinson, J (2013), “Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity and 
Poverty”, ISBN: 978-1846684302 
Ager, P and Brückner, M (2013), “Cultural diversity and economic growth: Evidence from the 
US during the age of mass migration”, European Economic Review, Elsevier, vol. 64(C), pages 
76–97. 
Akerlof, G and Kranton, R (2011), “Identity Economics: How Our Identities Shape Our Work, 
Wages, and Well-Being”, Princeton University Press 
Alesina,  A,  Harnoss,  J,  and  Rapoport,  H  (2015),  “Birthplace  Diversity  and  Economic 
Prosperity”,  available  at:  http://scholar.harvard.edu/alesina/publications/birthplace-diversity-
and-economic-prosperity   
Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2000), “Participation in Heterogeneous Communities”, Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 115(3): 847–904. 
                                                
72   Extrovert or Introvert (E or I); iNtuitive or Sensing (N or S); Thinking or Feeling (T or F); Perception or Judging 
(P or J). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
   Alesina,  A.,  A.  Devleeschauwer,  W.  Easterly,  S.  Kurlat  and  R.  Wacziarg  (2003), 
“Fractionalization”, Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2): 155–194. 
Alesina,  A,  Baqir,  R  and  Easterly, W (1999)  “Public  goods and  ethnic  divisions”,  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 114:4, pages 1243–84. 
Anderson, R and May, R (1979), “Population biology of infectious diseases Parts I and II”, 
Nature 180, 361–367 
Ashraf, Q and Galor, O (2013), "The “Out of Africa” hypothesis, human genetic diversity, and 
comparative economic development", American Economic Review 103(1): 1–46 
Attanasio, O and Blundell, R (2014), ‘Human Capital in the 21st Century’, presentation at the 
‘Capital in the 21st Century’ conference hosted at the Bank of England on December 19  
2014. Slides available here: 
http://www.cepr.org/sites/default/files/bank%20of%20england.pdf   
Bellini,  E, Ottaviano, G, Pinelli,  D  and  Prarolo, G (2013),  “Cultural  Diversity  and  Economic 
Performance:  Evidence  from  European  Regions”;  in  R.  Crescenzi  and  R.  Percoco,  eds.: 
Geography, Institutions and Regional Economic Performance, Advances in Spatial Science, 
Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer Verlag: 121–141. 
Brooks, D (2011), “The social animal: a story of how success happens”, ISBN 978-1907595448 
Cardenas, J, Dreber, A, von Essen, E and Ranehill, E (2014), “Gender and Cooperation in 
Children:  Experiments 
in  Colombia  and  Sweden”,  PLoS  ONE  9(3):  e90923. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0090923 
Charness, G and Gneezy, U (2012), “Strong Evidence for Gender Differences in Risk Taking”, 
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 83 (2012) 50– 58 
Coates, J (2012), “The Hour Between Dog and Wolf: Risk-taking, Gut Feelings and the Biology 
of Boom and Bust”, ISBN: 978-0007413515 
Commission  on  Child  Poverty  and  Social  Mobility  (2014),  “Elitist  Britain?”,  available  at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/347915/Elitist_
Britain_-_Final.pdf  
Davies,  E  (2015),  “Improving  the  gender  balance  on  British  boards:  five  year  summary”, 
available at:  
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/482059/BIS-
15-585-women-on-boards-davies-review-5-year-summary-october-2015.pdf  
Deloitte  University  Press 
frontier”, 
http://dupress.com/articles/diversitys-new-frontier/ 
Easterly, W and Levine, R (1997), “Africa's Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions”, 
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 112(4), pages 1203–1250. 
Ertac,  S  and  Gurdle,  M  (2011),  “Deciding  to  decide:  gender,  leadership  and  risk-taking  in 
groups”, Journal of Economic Behavior 83, 50–58. 
European  Women  on  Boards  (2016),  “Gender  Diversity  on  European  Boards:  Realising 
Europe’s  Potential:  Progress  and  Challenges”,  available  at:  http://european.ewob-
network.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/EWoB-quant-report-WEB-spreads.pdf  
Faulkner,  J,  Schaller,  M,  Park,  J,  &  Duncan,  L  (2004),  “Evolved  disease-avoidance 
mechanisms  and  contemporary  xenophobic  attitudes”,  Group  Processes  and  Intergroup 
Behaviour, 7, 333–353. 
Feinstein (2003), “Inequality in the Early Cognitive Development of British Children in the 1970 
Cohort”, Economica Vol 70 Issue 277 
“Diversity’s 
available 
(2013), 
new 
at: 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   R 
the 
and 
“Cities 
(2003) 
class”, 
creative 
available 
Ferrie, J and Hatton, T (2015), “Two Centuries of International Migration”, Handbook of the 
Economics of International Migration 
Florida,  R  (2002),  “The  rise  of  the  creative  class”,  Washington  Monthly,  available  at: 
http://www.washingtonmonthly.com/features/2001/0205.florida.html  
Florida, 
at: 
http://creativeclass.com/rfcgdb/articles/4%20Cities%20and%20the%20Creative%20Class.pd
f.  
Florida, R (2011), “How Diversity Leads to Economic Growth”, The Atlantic City Lab, available 
at: http://www.citylab.com/work/2011/12/diversity-leads-to-economic-growth/687/  
Florida, R and Gates, G (2001), “Technology and Tolerance: The Importance of Diversity to 
High-Technology  Growth”,  The  Brookings 
Institution  Survey  Series,  available  at: 
http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/research/files/reports/2001/6/technology-florida/techtol.pdf  
Goldin, I, Cameron, G and Balarajan, M (2011), “Exceptional People: How Migration Shaped 
our World and Will Define our Future”, Princeton University Press 
Goodall, J (1986), “The chimpanzees of Gombe: patterns of behaviour”, Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge (Massachusetts). 673 pages. ISBN 0-674-11649-6 
Guillaume,  Y,  Dawson,  J,  Otaye-ebede,  L,  Woods,  S,  West,  M  (2015),  “Harnessing 
demographic  differences  in  organizations:  What  moderates  the  effects  of  workplace 
diversity?”, Journal of Organisational Behaviour 
Haldane  (2009),  “Rethinking  the  financial  network”,  Speech  given  at  the  Financial  Student 
Association, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/documents/historicpubs/speeches/2009/speech386.
pdf  
Haldane (2014), “Central Bank Psychology”, Speech given at the ‘Leadership: stress and 
hubris conference’, available at:  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech776.pdf  
Heckman, J (2006), “Investing in Disadvantaged Young Children is an Economically Efficient 
Policy” 
available 
http://jenni.uchicago.edu/Australia/invest-disadv_2005-12-
22_247pm_awb.pdf  
Iaryczower, M, Lewis, G and Shum, M (2013) “To elect or to appoint? bias, information, and 
responsiveness of bureaucrats and politicians”. Journal of Public Economics 97, 230–244. 
Ingalhalikar,  M,  Smith,  A,  Parker,  D,  Satterthwaite,  T,  Elliott,  M,  Ruparel,  K,  Hakonarson, 
H, Gur, R, Gur, R and Verma R (2014), “Sex differences in the structural connectome of the 
human  brain”,  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academiy  of  Sciences  of  the  United  States  of 
America Vol 111 No. 2 
Joel D, Berman Z, Tavor I, Wexler N, Gaber O, Stein Y, Shefi N, Pool J, Urchs S, Margulies 
D,  Liem  F,  Hänggi  J,  Jäncke  L,  Assaf  Y  (2015),  “Sex  beyond  genitalia:  the  human  brain 
mosaic”, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
Vol 112 No 50 
Kahneman, D (2012), ‘Thinking, Fast and Slow’, ISBN: 978-0141033570 
Karlan, D and List, J (2007), “Does price matter in charitable giving? Evidence from a large-
scale natural field experiment”, American Economic Review 97:5 pages 1774–93. 
Lagarde,  C  (2014),  “The  Economic  Power  of  Women’s  Empowerment”,  Keynote  speech, 
Tokyo, available at: https://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2014/091214.htm 
Land, G and Jarman, B (1993), “Breaking Point and Beyond”, San Francisco: HarperBusiness. 
Land, G (2011), “The failure of success”, TEDxTucson available on youtube. 
here: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
   Landemore, H (2013), “Democratic Reason: Politics, Collective Intelligence, and the Rule of 
the Many”, Princeton University Press 
Lombardelli,  C,  Proudman,  J,  Talbot,  J  (2005),  ‘Committees  versus  individuals:  An 
experimental  analysis  of  monetary  policy  decision  making’, International  Journal  of  Central 
Banking. Available at: http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb05q2a5.htm  
May,  R.B  and  Anderson,  R.M  (1991),  ‘Infectious  Diseases  of  Humans’,  Oxford  University 
Press. 
Manning, P (2005) “Migration in World History”, ISBN: 978-0415516792 
McKinsey  (2015),  “Diversity  Matters”,  available  here:  http://www.mckinsey.com/business-
functions/organization/our-insights/why-diversity-matters  
Mill,  J  S  (1848),  “Principles  of  Political  Economy  with  some  of  their  Applications  to  Social 
Philosophy”, Longmans, Green and Co 
O’Reilly, C and Williams, K (1998), “Demography and Diversity in Organisations: A review of 
40 years of research”, Research in Organisation Behaviour, Volume 20 Pages 77–140 
ONS (2016), “What is the gender pay gap?”, available at: http://visual.ons.gov.uk/what-is-the-
gender-pay-gap/  
Ottaviano, G and Peri, G (2005), “The economic value of cultural diversity: evidence from US 
cities”, Journal of Economic Geography Vol 6 Issue 1 
Page  (2007),  “The  Difference:  How  the  Power  of  Diversity  Creates  Better  Groups,  Firms, 
Schools, and Societies”, Princeton University Press 
Page (2010), “Diversity and Complexity”, Princeton University Press 
Resolution Foundation (2015), “26 percentage point gap between best and worst parts of the 
UK  for  BAME  employment”,  available  at:  http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/media/press-
releases/26-percentage-point-gap-between-best-and-worst-parts-of-the-uk-for-bame-
employment/ 
Schaller,  M  and  Neuberg,  S  (2008),  “Danger,  Disease,  and  the  Nature  of  Prejudice(s)”, 
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Volume 46 
Seuss (1953), “The Sneetches and Other Stories”, Harper Collins Childrens Books 
Tajfel,  H,  Billig,  M,  Bundy,  R  and  Flament,  C  (1971),  “Social categorization  and  intergroup 
Behaviour”, European Journal of Social Psychology, 1, 149–178. 
Temple Grandin (2011), comments based on a telephone interview in 2011, for further details 
please see: http://www.templegrandin.com/ 
Tetlock,  P  (2015),  “Super  forecasting:  The  Art  and  Science  of  Prediction”,  ISBN: 
978-1511358491 
Todd, P and Gigerenzer, G (2012), “Ecological Rationality: Intelligence in the World”, Oxford 
Scholarship Online 
Walton,  G  and  Spencer,  S  (2009)  “Latent  ability:  grades  and  test  scores  systematically 
underestimate  the  intellectual  ability  of  negatively  stereotyped  students”,  Psychological 
Science Vol 20 
Watts, D (2002), ‘A simple model of global cascades on random networks’, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 9: 5766-5771. 
Wozniak, D, Harbaugh, W, Mayr, U, (2009), “Choices about competition: differences by gender 
and  hormonal  fluctuations,  and  the  role  of  relative  performance  feedback”,  University  of 
Oregon Working Paper 
 
 18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Figure 1: The Sneetches 
Source: Dr Seuss (1953) 
   
 
 
 
 
Chart 1: Incidence of the word diversity in books printed since the 16th Century 
Source: Google Ngram Viewer.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    19 
