  Philip Lowe: Remarks at a Reserve Bank Board dinner with members of 
the Sydney community 
Speech by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at a dinner 
with members of the Sydney community, Sydney, 6 September 2016. 
 Good evening. 
On behalf of the Reserve Bank Board, I would like to warmly welcome you all to this dinner. 
These dinners, which we hold in all the state capitals, have become one the highlights of our 
calendar. They provide a fantastic opportunity for us to talk with leaders from the worlds of 
business, politics, academia and the community sector. So thank you all for taking the time to 
join us this evening. 
This particular dinner marks a very special occasion. Earlier today, Glenn Stevens chaired 
his final – and 110th – meeting of the Reserve Bank Board. As you probably know, Glenn 
has been the Governor of the RBA for 10 years. Before that he was the Deputy Governor for 
five years. And before that he was the chief economic advisor to the Board for more than five 
years. All up, he has attended 215 meetings of the Board over some 20 years. Glenn has 
also attended and chaired 41 meetings of the Payments System Board. I am delighted that 
many of the current and former members of both boards who have served under Glenn are 
here this evening. 
Given  the  sheer  scale  of  Glenn’s  contribution,  it  is  appropriate  to  begin  this  dinner  by 
delivering – on behalf of us all – a few words of tribute to him. After that, and after we have 
had our entrée, the Treasurer, the Hon. Scott Morrison MP will speak and then Glenn will say 
a few words. That will bring the formalities to a close and then we will enjoy the rest of the 
meal and conversation. 
Many of you may know Glenn personally. Those of you who don’t know him might feel like 
you do: there are few Australians whose public utterances are so closely scrutinised and so 
widely covered by our media. But whether you know him personally, or through the media, I 
am sure you will have formed the same impression of Glenn. 
That is of an incredibly dedicated servant of the public over a career that spans 36 years, 
and  a  man  of  the  highest  integrity.  Glenn  has  relentlessly  served  the  interests  of  the 
Australian people. He has brought a very high level of analytical rigour to the task. He has 
exercised an independence of thought that is not always seen in public life. He has patiently 
explained difficult economic issues to Australians. He has talked to us about the challenges 
that  Australia  faces,  but  also  the  opportunities  we  have.  In  a  world  where  optimism  has 
sometimes  been  in  short  supply,  he  has  more  than  once  reminded  us  that  the  glass  is  at 
least half full. He has been deliberate, logical, thoughtful and measured in his remarks. He 
has done this all without fear or favour. He is a man of courage, prepared to say things that 
are true, even when they are not popular. And last – but not least – he helped successfully 
navigate  our  economy  through  the  biggest  resources  boom  in  a  century  and  a  global 
financial crisis. 
Glenn, I could pay no higher tribute to you than to say that you have rightfully earned the 
trust  of  the  Australian  people.  This  was  acknowledged  a  few  months  ago  when  you  were 
awarded the Companion of the Order of Australia in the Queen’s Birthday Honours for 2016. 
An honour, richly deserved. 
While Glenn’s strengths are many, I doubt he himself would include his comedic skills on the 
list. Underneath that exterior, though, is a seriously dry sense of humour. I recall only one 
time when Glenn tried a joke in public. That was in July 2013, when he started a speech by 
saying  ‘As  some  of  you  may  know,  the  Reserve  Bank  Board  meeting  was  in  Brisbane 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  yesterday at which we deliberated for a long time … to leave the cash rate unchanged’. The 
market thought the reference to “a long time” was Glenn’s way of sending a secret message 
in central bank code that the Board would probably cut interest rates the next month. The 
exchange rate immediately responded by falling by around a cent. The truth was that Glenn 
was just drawing attention to the fact that some might think it curious, even humorous, that 
after  all  the  hype  surrounding  a  meeting  of  the  Reserve  Bank  Board,  we  did  precisely  … 
nothing. I would have to say that Glenn was not particularly pleased with the media coverage 
of his comedic efforts that day, as they overshadowed another very thoughtful speech. After 
this unsuccessful attempt, I don’t recall subsequent efforts at humour in public. A practice I 
hope to continue. 
So that is the Glenn you see publicly: a serious and courageous man of the utmost integrity 
who has dedicated his life to the task of serving the public interest. 
Of  course,  much  of  the  time  Glenn  is  not  in  the  public  eye.  Instead,  he  is  quietly  and 
efficiently running the Reserve Bank. While most people don’t see that, I, and my colleagues, 
do every day. So I just want to draw your attention to three aspects of that work that speak to 
the man. 
The first is Glenn’s dedication to the task. It has not been unusual for him to spend a full day 
at  65  Martin  Place,  have  an  official  dinner  in  the  evening  and  then  go  home  and  join  an 
international conference call starting at 11pm to discuss some arcane regulatory issue. And 
then after getting to bed in the small hours of the morning he is back in the office early to 
lead our regular morning discussions of overnight developments in global markets. He has 
put in a herculean effort. 
The  second  is  Glenn’s  relentless  commitment  to  work  of  the  highest  standard.  At  the 
Reserve Bank we pride ourselves on producing work of the highest quality: whether in our 
written work or in the way we operate key parts of the national financial infrastructure. Glenn 
– in his unassuming style – has led the way here. Through his example, he has encouraged 
us  to  be  the  best  we  can  be,  and  to  be  worthy  of  the  trust  that  the  public  has  put  in  our 
institution. 
The third is Glenn’s open and consultative style. As you can imagine, in an institution with 
lots of economists there are lots of opinions too! Glenn has managed this with great aplomb. 
He is always ready to listen and to seek out alternative perspectives. He has chaired both the 
Reserve  Bank  Board  and  the  Payments  System  Board  in  the  same  way.  We  have  all 
benefited from his inclusive and consultative manner. 
In short, what you see externally is what my colleagues and I see internally as well. He is 
going to be a darn hard act to follow! 
Before  I  finish,  I  also  want  to  acknowledge  the  contribution  of  Glenn’s  wife,  Sue  Stevens, 
who is also here this evening. I know Sue has been a fantastic support to Glenn. Sue has 
had to endure her husband working very hard and constantly being in the public spotlight. 
Sue,  you  have  done  this  with  great  dignity  and  quiet grace  and  you  should  be  immensely 
proud of what you and your husband have accomplished. Thank you. 
Finally, could I ask you to be upstanding for a toast. 
Glenn, on behalf of all of us here tonight, and more importantly, on behalf of the 24 million 
Australians whom you have served so well, thank you. Glenn Stevens. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
