   Andreas Dombret: Could less be more? The role of finance for the 
economy 
Dinner  speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the SAFE Conference on Regulating Financial Markets, Frankfurt am Main, 
30 May 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Mr. Kick, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Given  that  my  speech  is  standing  between  you  and  the  next  course  of  our  dinner,  I  will 
endeavour to be brief. 
One colloquial definition of insanity is doing the same thing, over and over again, but expecting 
different results.1 By that standard, how sound is current financial regulation? 
Looking at the many new topics of financial regulation on the agenda of this conference, it 
would appear that the response to the crisis has been quite sound. Your contributions and this 
conference in general are, in my view, very valuable in helping to understand why financial 
regulation needs to be strong and how it can work for the economy and our society. 
And since you will be debating the details of these issues all day long, I will not go into the 
specifics of financial regulation. 
Instead, I will discuss a remaining fundamental problem of financial policy making – one where 
our current policies might fit the definition of insanity I quoted earlier. It relates to the question 
of how much finance we need for solving our current economic problems. 
For over three decades before the crisis, the simple answer was “more is better.” This mind-
set led us into the crisis, the consequences of which we are still witnessing today. To keep 
relying on more finance seems questionable. 
The core problem, I believe, is one of mind-set. I am talking about the idea that more credit 
and financial activity lead directly to economic growth. According to this plain idea, leverage 
and liquidity in banks lead to more lending, which in turn fuels investment, which then leads to 
more growth and economic development. In that spirit, some are, again, arguing that what the 
economy needs is less regulation and more lending. 
I  refer  to  this  ideology  as  a  “finance-led  growth  strategy”.  I  am  convinced  that  we  must 
overcome these intuitively appealing ideas and their ideological siblings. In that spirit, tonight I 
will talk about our current economic challenges and the role that finance, on the one hand, and 
financial regulation, on the other, can play in underpinning sustainable economic development. 
Less and more in the current economy 
2. 
After the financial crisis, financial regulation has been hailed as a saviour of the economy. Yet 
the current state of the world economy and that of most advanced national economies are 
eroding this standing. In the face of populist pressures, simple political solutions that hold out 
                                                
1   Even though this definition is often attributed to Albert Einstein, he most likely never actually said it. One 
verified usage of this axiom is in the novel Sudden Death by US author Rita Mae Brown. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   the promise of jobs and participation in growth are being sought. Finance offers an imaginary 
panacea for this situation. 
This situation is familiar from the pre-2008 period. It seems to be back on the rise, as global 
economic growth continues its sluggish trajectory of recent years. Fittingly, the IMF reported in 
April  “Too  Slow  for  Too  Long”.2  Moreover,  the  Fund  expects  growth  to  remain  stubbornly 
stagnant. These growth problems seem to be based on fundamental economic challenges, all 
of immense magnitude: secular stagnation, be it driven by weak demand or weak supply; debt 
overhang; and demographic change. 
Policies that do not look beyond the end of the election cycle are not the right way to address 
these types of challenges. Which is probably why the success of policy responses seeking to 
put output levels and growth back on track was only short-lived. Growth has been slowing in 
most advanced countries. So what now? 
In the past, a popular response to sluggish growth was finance-led growth policy. But there are 
a couple of problems with that strategy which make it an unhealthy policy choice. The recent 
financial crisis offered yet another impressive example. However, too much finance leads not 
only to financial turmoil but also to economic growth being stifled by mountains of debt. 
The overblown financial system and the extreme leveraging have left the world economy with 
a severe debt overhang, a mountain of debt. It was this excessive credit creation which paved 
the way for the financial crisis. During the crisis itself, it was plain to see that leverage needed 
to be lowered, especially in the financial sector. But precious little headway has been made in 
this regard, leaving us with an unstable financial system.3 
What’s worse, the tectonic movements of these debt mountains have serious repercussions 
on the stability of the financial system. Doubts about the sustainability of the mountains of 
credit increase uncertainty about the economy in general and the financial sector in particular. 
Non-performing loans and unsustainable business models – which in many cases continue to 
build on the assumption that the pre-crisis environment will return – are still a drag on the 
resilience of the financial system. 
Thus, while finance-led growth might be intuitively appealing, pursuing it once again would 
seem to fit our definition of insanity above. 
How much is enough? More finance is not a panacea 
3. 
Nevertheless, policymakers are looking for solutions. Unfortunately, some still think that more 
finance is a sound way to ignite investment and development. Such a finance-led growth policy 
emerged as the dominant political strategy in the 1980s. That meant that financial deregulation 
was high on the agenda to foster financial development. And theory appeared to support this 
intuition, with studies showing that financial development corresponded strongly with economic 
growth.4 
But, while finance seemed to be conducive to economic growth in the early stages, it also had 
serious negative repercussions for the economy. We learned the hard way that more finance 
is not a panacea! For two reasons: first, more credit and finance tend to lead to more frequent 
and  more  severe  financial  crises.5  Excessive  credit  creation  increases  the  fragility  of  the 
IMF World Economic Outlook, Update April 2016. 
                                                
2  
3   See also McKinsey (2015), Debt and (not much) deleveraging. 
4   R Levine (2005), Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence, in: Handbook of Economic Growth. 
5   A Turner (2015), Between Debt and the Devil: Money, Credit, and Fixing Global Finance, Princeton University 
Press. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   financial system and the likelihood of financial crises. And the bigger the mountain of debt, the 
more severe post-crisis recessions tend to be.6  
Moreover, financial turmoil is not the sole possible outcome of excessive debt. The second 
reason why more finance is not a panacea is that leverage seems to hamper economic growth 
once it exceeds GDP levels of around 90 to 100 per cent. Recent evidence reveals that there 
is indeed such a thing as too much finance.7 Financial depth starts having a negative effect on 
output growth once credit to the private sector reaches 100 per cent of GDP. Most advanced 
countries exceeded this level prior to the financial crisis – and continue to do so. 
Recent studies found even lower thresholds at which financial deepening unleashes negative 
effects. In a Bank for International Settlements working paper, Cecchetti and Kharoubi found 
that the effects of credit on GDP growth turn negative once corporate debt exceeds 90 per 
cent – or household debt 85 per cent – of GDP.8 The OECD’s report on finance and inclusive 
growth last year found that the effects of private leverage on GDP growth turn negative once 
total private credit – household and corporate credit combined – exceeds 90 per cent. 
For sure, there is no exact science to determine the appropriate level of leverage, but two 
crucial insights can be derived: first; there is such a thing as too much debt; second, current 
levels  in  most  advanced  and  emerging  economies  exceed  these  levels.  Together,  these 
insights  provide  much  better  guidance  for  prudent  policy  and  regulatory  strategy  than  the 
finance-led growth agenda. 
Thus, the diagnosis for advanced economies like the EU und the US is that increasing credit 
and financial activity is beneficial, but only up to a point. This point has been exceeded in most 
developed economies. 
Better finance? More quality, please 
4. 
What’s  the  takeaway  from  all  this?  It’s  that  more  finance  is  not  the  solution  to  our  current 
problems. Sticking to the simple “more finance, more growth” trajectory is not sustainable. That 
would run the risk of focusing on what is currently our most pressing problem – lifting growth 
expectations – at the expense of our long-term – and fundamental – goal of achieving a stable 
financial system that serves the real economy.9 And by doing that, we would also sacrifice 
sustainable growth. 
But, at the same time, excessive limits on financial intermediation would certainly undermine 
economic development. 
Thus – as you all know – there is no simple, linear positive or negative relationship between 
finance and growth. And that is because there is a problem with the simple indicator that is 
typically used to assess the effects of financial deepening on economic development – that is 
private credit to GDP. It’s a crude measure which is incapable of measuring the quality and 
                                                
6   C  M  Reinhart  and  K  S  Rogoff  (2008),  This  Time  is  Different.  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly,  Princeton 
University Press 
7   J L Arcand, E Berkes and U Panizza (2015), Too much finance? Journal of Economic Growth, 20(2): 105-148; 
European Systemic Risk Board (2014), Is Europe Overbanked? Report of the Advisory Scientific Committee No 
4/June 2014. 
8   SG Cecchetti, E Kharroubi (2012), Reassessing the impact of finance on growth. BIS Working Paper No 381; 
SG Cecchetti, E Kharroubi (2015), Why does financial sector growth crowd out real economic growth? BIS 
Working Paper No 490. 
9   AR Dombret (2016) More More painkillers, please? Why more finance is the wrong medicine or our growth 
problem.  Keynote  remarks  delivered  in  Armonk,  New  York  on  8  April  2016  at  the  Harvard  Law  School 
Symposium on Building the Financial System of the 21st Century: An Agenda for Europe and the US. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   efficiency of a financial system – but that’s what further development of an already advanced 
economy is about. 
The problem with the current simple measure mirrors the problem with the political reality: a 
simple measure enables researchers to build great data sets and publish papers. Likewise, a 
finance-led growth strategy enables policymakers to create a simple political narrative and win 
support for a campaign or a specific policy action. The scientific and the political problem are 
of the same nature: complexity and detail simply aren’t sexy. 
Until  the  crisis,  it  was  very,  indeed  very  sexy  to  claim  that  more  finance  meant  more 
development. That truth was simple; it was clear; it was sexy. But it turned into an ugly sham. 
To find the new truth appealing, we need to embrace the complexity of the quality of finance 
and the subtle, indirect roles it plays for the economy. In other words, we need to accept the 
fact that the role of the financial sector in real economic development seems to lie in the quality 
of financial intermediation. And the importance of quality increases as an economy becomes 
more advanced. 
The  quality  of  finance  can  be  found  in  the  five  mechanisms  through  which  it  serves  the 
economy.  Payment  services  reduce  transaction  costs;  the  pooling  of  savings  helps  to 
overcome investment indivisibilities; the large-scale organisation of screening and monitoring 
investments  and  loans  reduces  costs  and  increases  overall  investment;  the  reduction  of 
liquidity risk enables long-term investment; portfolio diversification helps to spread out cross-
sectional and inter-temporal risk. 
None  of  these  functions  contributes  directly  to  growth.  Instead,  all  of  these  functions  are 
support functions for economic development. Payment services, for example, are an important 
backbone of a monetary economy. The same goes for collecting and pooling savings, and, of 
course, the screening of investments. Yet, none of these functions in and of itself generates 
economic development – they merely facilitate it. This means, that finance can enhance growth 
sustainably only by supporting real economic development. 
So  what  do  we  take  away  from  this?  First,  the  economic  value  of  intra-financial  market 
transactions should be viewed with some scepticism. Second, the intermediation function – in 
particular to enterprises and to investment projects – is a crucial component of high-quality 
finance. Third, private credit is a double-edged sword: too much of it poses a hazard to financial 
stability and sustainable economic development. 
In sum, in pursuing economic development, we should focus less on the cheap credit channel, 
and  more  on  finding  answers  to  two  important  questions:  what  kinds  of  investment  are 
important  for  fostering  economic  and  social  progress?  And  how  can  the  financial  sector 
enhance the quality of its intermediation? The first question is for politicians and the public to 
discuss. The second requires the sector, researchers and also supervisors to come up with 
answers.  
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
For over three decades, the finance-led growth agenda hid the dangers of an uncontrolled 
financial system. This had serious negative repercussions for the economy. More finance is 
not a panacea: beyond sustainable levels, more credit and financial activity may lead to more 
frequent  and  more  severe  financial  crises.  And,  moreover,  without  the  event  of  a  financial 
crisis, they seem to hamper economic growth once they exceed around 100 per cent of GDP. 
We must not lapse back into bad old habits when finalising, implementing and enforcing the 
reforms aimed at restoring financial stability. 
Moreover,  some  deeper  challenges  remain  to  be  addressed:  we  need  to  understand  how 
secular stagnation and debt overhang trends affect the economy, and which structural reforms 
are necessary. And, we need to understand how the financial sector can contribute effectively 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   to the economy: the actual mechanisms through which financial intermediation can serve the 
real economy of advanced nations. 
The bottom line is: what advanced economies need is not more finance, but better finance. 
In that sense let me quote Antoine de Saint Exupéry, author of “The Little Prince”, who said 
that “perfection is attained not when there is nothing more to add, but when there is nothing 
more to remove.” That wisdom could serve financial policy makers well, but it should not keep 
you any longer from continuing to enjoy a delightful dinner! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
