  Javier Guzmán Calafell: Uncertainties about the global financial safety 
net 
Remarks  by  Mr  Javier  Guzmán  Calafell,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the 
7th Annual  Conference  of  the  Central  Reserve  Bank  of  Peru  and  the  Reinventing  Bretton 
Woods Committee, Arequipa, Peru, 6 July 2016. 
 The views expressed in this document are strictly personal. 
I am very glad to participate in this 7th Annual Conference of the Banco Central de Reserva 
del  Perú  and  the  Reinventing  Bretton  Woods  Committee.  I  thank  Julio  Velarde  and  Marc 
Uzan for the invitation to attend this event. 
Over  the  last  several  years,  the  International  Monetary  and  Financial  System  (IMFS)  has 
been subject to a number of shocks that have compromised its adequate functioning. Indeed, 
the global financial crisis made the weaknesses of the IMFS much clearer and highlighted 
the consequent need to reform it on several fronts. The liquidity provisioning function of the 
system, especially in times of crisis, is one of the most evident among them. Certainly, the 
severe liquidity shortage that took place during 2008–2009, and the swings in global liquidity 
that we have witnessed in subsequent years, have underlined that the current system needs 
better  mechanisms  to  allow  it  to  fulfill,  in  a  systematic,  timely  and  efficient  manner,  the 
liquidity requirements of the global economy during episodes of distress. 
The demand for emergency liquidity in the global  system should decline to the extent that 
appropriate macroeconomic and financial policies are in place. However, the reality is that 
financial  and  macroeconomic  crises,  as  well  as  episodes  of  contagion  to  fundamentally 
sound  economies,  are  inevitable  and  hard  to  predict.  Hence,  the  need  for  a  sufficiently 
funded and evenly balanced Global Financial Safety Net (GFSN) should not be overlooked. 
This,  not  only  because  of  its  vital  importance  for  the  resolution  of  crises,  but  also,  and 
perhaps even more important, because of the significant role it may play in their prevention. 
The GFSN has undergone a profound transformation as a result of the global financial crisis 
of 2008–2009. To start with, in view of the prevailing uncertainty and in an effort to protect 
themselves against external risks, many countries decided to increase substantially the size 
of  their  international  reserves.  In  addition,  the  financial  resources  available  to  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  were  enlarged  and  its  financial  facilities  revamped. 
Simultaneously, a number of new regional financial arrangements (RFAs) were created with 
some  of  the  existing  ones  strengthened.  Finally,  in  an  effort  to  tackle  liquidity  shortages, 
central  bank  bilateral  swap  arrangements  (BSAs)  were  made  available  to  many  countries. 
Although distinct in nature, these four layers constitute the general structure of the GFSN as 
it currently stands. 
Notwithstanding  its  recent  transformation,  the  GFSN  still  faces  important  challenges.  First 
and foremost, even though its financing potential has increased substantially in recent years, 
this is mostly explained by reserve accumulation which, as explained below, has a number of 
drawbacks.  In  fact,  once  international  reserves  are  excluded,  the  evolution  of  GFSN 
resources does not keep pace with the growth of global external liabilities in recent years.1 
Furthermore, the GFSN’s ability to prevent contagion is undermined by its uneven country 
coverage, as sizeable financing gaps in many economies still remain unattended. In addition, 
the growing size and complexity of the GFSN, in particular the proliferation of bilateral and 
regional arrangements, has led to greater difficulty in coordinating its various components, 
                                                 
1   See  International  Monetary  Fund  (2016):  “Strengthening  the  International  Monetary  System-A  Stocktaking”, 
IMF Policy Paper, February. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
thus  resulting  in  a  more  fragmented,  less  reliable  framework.  To  this  one  must  add  high 
costs,  either  of  a  financial  or  political  nature,  of  several  layers  of  the  safety  net,  and  the 
absence  of  an  appropriate  conditionality  structure  in  most  of  these  layers,  implying  the 
potential of inadequate policy incentives and moral hazard, among other risks. 
Against the backdrop of persistently volatile international financial conditions, elevated risks 
to the global economy stemming from cyclical and structural developments, and the lack of 
sufficient  space  in  both  the  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  fronts  in  many  countries  to 
accommodate  potential  shocks,  the  implementation  of  measures  aimed  at  tackling  the 
shortcomings affecting the current GFSN is of utmost relevance. In the absence of decisive 
action in this direction, we may see increasing risks for the global financial system and an 
additional accumulation of international reserves by individual countries. 
The experience of the last years has underscored the merits of holding a comfortable level of 
international  reserves.  However,  reserve  accumulation  can  also  entail  significant  costs.  At 
the country level, the financial burden deriving from the sterilization operations that need to 
be  carried  out  in  order  to  avoid  the  adverse  macroeconomic  implications  of  larger 
international  reserves  cannot  be  disregarded.  Such  costs  are  potentially  high  due  to  the 
uncertainty  surrounding  the  definition  of  an  adequate,  or  optimal,  level  of  international 
reserves,  in  light  of  which  a  precautionary  over  accumulation  becomes  more  likely.  At  an 
international level, the excess demand for safe, reserve assets contributes to global current 
account imbalances, introduces downward pressures on international interest rates, and may 
result  in  distortions  in  the  valuation  of  assets;  more  leveraged  positions  by  governments, 
firms and households; and a search for yield, all of which contribute to a more fragile, less 
stable IMFS.2 
What should the international community do to strengthen the GFSN? 
With  an  emerging  market  perspective  in  mind,  from  my  point  of  view  any  strategy  in  this 
direction  should  have  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  at  its  center.  Given  its  nearly 
universal membership, ample financing, a wide range of facilities at its disposal, and a highly 
qualified and experienced staff, the Fund is in a unique position to play this role. However, for 
this to be a viable, fruitful path, further efforts in several areas are needed. Let me point to 
three of them which I consider to be particularly important. 
First of all, the IMF needs to have adequate resources. Certainly, the recent doubling in Fund 
quotas  under  the  14th  General  Review,  the  largest  ever,  is  a  major  step  in  this  direction. 
However, it should be noted that the net effect of this measure on the Fund’s overall lending 
capacity is negligible, vis-à-vis the amount available with the previous quota base and the 
borrowing agreements negotiated in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. Furthermore, 
standard indicators of the adequacy of Fund resources, such as the ratio of quotas to GDP, 
trade and capital flows, and international reserves, suggest that an additional quota increase 
is needed to endow the Fund with resources commensurate to potential demand. While an 
excessive reliance on borrowed resources would have important shortcomings, this source of 
funding has played a useful role when capital has to be mobilized swiftly. In this regard, it is 
also important to emphasize that renewal of the New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB) for the 
five year period starting in 2017 has yet to be discussed and agreed upon, and that there is a 
risk that the bilateral borrowing agreements set forth in 2012 will not be extended and thus 
start to expire later this year. 
The  current  characteristics  of  the  world  economy  also  underline  the  need  for  a  financially 
strong IMF. The global economic and financial environment is bound to remain complex and 
highly uncertain for a significant period. Not only are linkages among individual economies 
                                                 
2   See  Denbee,  Edd,  Carsten  Jung  and  Francesco  Paternò  (2016):  “Stitching  Together  the  Global  Financial 
Safety Net”, Bank of England Financial Stability Paper No. 36, February. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
expected to continue growing, but also legacies from the crisis in a number of key, systemic 
players are likely to persist. Under such circumstances, the possibility of deeper, longer and 
more  frequent  crises  is  a  real  one.  Moreover,  the  global  financial  crisis  has  served  as  a 
reminder  that  advanced  economies  (AEs)  may  also  require  emergency  liquidity,  implying 
potentially large demands on the Fund. 
Second,  the  IMF  needs  adequate  financing  tools.  Indeed,  the  Fund  has  made  significant 
progress  in  recent  years  to  streamline  the  financial  facilities  available  to  its  members.  In 
addition to the more traditional, crisis resolution-oriented facilities it has historically offered, a 
number  of  instruments  were  created  after  the  eruption  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  with  a 
stronger  focus  on  crisis  prevention  and  higher  access  (the  Flexible  Credit  Line  and  the 
Precautionary  and  Liquidity  Line).  Unfortunately,  demand  for  these  instruments  has  in 
general been modest. 
While I concur with the view that there is still room to improve some of the features of the 
available financing windows, this is unlikely to provide the explanation for their limited use. 
Take  the  case  of  the  FCL.  The  features  of  this  facility  in  terms  of  access  and  flexibility  of 
resource use, among others, would have simply been unthinkable before the global financial 
crisis.  Yet,  only  three  countries  are  at  present  supported  by  the  FCL.  This  situation  is 
paradoxical, since some potential FCL beneficiaries would clearly profit from the availability 
of additional external liquidity. 
Although the reasons for this are clearly varied, one crucial element behind the reluctance to 
demand Fund support is the stigma associated with use of the institution’s resources. This is 
related to factors such as the historical relationship with the IMF, the perceived success (or 
lack thereof) of Fund programs, the conditionality typically associated to them, the political 
sensitivities  of  each  country  and  the  legitimacy  of  Fund  decision  making,  among  others. 
Clearly, the search for means to overcome this complex problem must continue, especially in 
view  of  the  potential  benefits  for  the  world  economy  of  a  more  intensive  use  of  financing 
frameworks that stimulate crisis prevention. I would like to note in this regard that the FCL 
has  been  instrumental  to  support  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  in  Mexico  through 
several channels, including the availability of large amounts of external financing in case of 
need,  lower  costs  of  international  reserve  accumulation,  endorsement  of  the  country’s 
policies  under  the  most  strict  Fund  standards  and  a  reinforcement  of  the  authorities’ 
commitment with sound fundamentals. 
Third, the IMF has to be seen as a legitimate body. The recent implementation of the quota 
and governance reforms under the 14th General Review of Quotas, has implied a major shift, 
of around 6 percent points, in both quota shares and in voting power towards dynamic EMEs. 
Additionally,  the  IMF’s  Executive  Board  will  now  consist  entirely  of  elected  Executive 
Directors,  effectively  ending  some  countries’  ability  to  directly  appoint  members  of  the 
Board.3 These are major steps forward, but still insufficient. In particular, an important gap 
between  EME  participation  in  the  global  economy  and  their  IMF  quota  and  voting  share 
remains, even after taking into account the recent reforms: as a group, EMEs accounted for 
nearly 60 percent of world GDP (in PPP-adjusted terms) in 2015, while they contribute only 
slightly over 40 percent to the IMF quotas under the current arrangements. Furthermore, a 
modification  of  criteria  for  the  designation  of  the  Fund’s  top  management  has  been 
disregarded. In the absence of further reform of Fund governance, the institution´s credibility 
will be eroded, while the proliferation of alternative schemes for international cooperation will 
possibly  continue,  thus  undermining  the  Fund’s  role  in  the  world  economy  and  further 
entangling global governance. 
                                                 
3   See International Monetary Fund (2016): “Historic Quota and Governance Reforms Become Effective”, Press 
Release No. 16/25, 27 January. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
Naturally, a reliable and efficient GFSN cannot depend on IMF funding alone. An adequate 
functioning of the other layers is also essential. I already referred to the role of international 
reserves. Therefore, let me say now a few words about the other two components, namely 
bilateral swap lines and regional financial arrangements. 
The  number  of  central  bank  swap  lines  increased  sharply  in  the  early  years  of  the  global 
financial crisis, including arrangements between advanced economies only and also between 
advanced  and  a  few  emerging  market  economies.  In  subsequent  years,  a  small  group  of 
advanced economies decided to maintain bilateral swaps among them as a means to face 
the  risk  of  new  liquidity  shortages.  However,  those  negotiated  with  other  advanced  and 
emerging market economies were allowed to expire.4 
Bilateral swap agreements played a crucial role in stabilizing markets during the early stages 
of  the  global  financial  crisis.  Other  features,  such  as  their  relative  low  cost  and  speed  of 
access,  also  contribute  to  make  them  an  attractive  vehicle  for  liquidity  support  in  times  of 
stress. Not surprisingly, then, some countries have suggested the institutionalization of swap 
lines. This is a sensible proposal, since to become a useful component of the GFSN, swaps 
need to be a credible source of liquidity in case of need. The negotiation of swap agreements 
ex post, though useful, does not meet this requirement. 
Nevertheless, bilateral swap arrangements involve risks for the party providing the liquidity, 
that  are  not  easily  dealt  with  through  the  use  of  collateral.  In  addition,  there  is  a  concern 
among  reserve  currency  issuers  that  the  ex  ante  commitment  by  central  banks  to  provide 
bilateral swap lines may give rise to moral hazard. As a result, these institutions have been 
reluctant to participate in arrangements of this nature with emerging market economies, thus 
preferring to adopt a “constructive ambiguity” approach. 
While  these  concerns  are  understandable,  considering  the  potential  contribution  of  an 
institutionalized network of swap lines to the GFSN, options to increase its feasibility should 
continue  to be  explored.  One  possible  course of  action  that  deserves  to  be looked  at  is  a 
mechanism  including  qualification  criteria,  sanctions  and  monitoring,  coordinated  jointly  by 
the participating reserve currency issuing central banks and the IMF.5 Another simpler option 
is  to  condition  country  access  to  swap  arrangements  to  an  IMF  “stamp  of  approval”,  be  it 
through a formal program or other acceptable means. Naturally, IMF involvement could imply 
costs in terms of stigma and speed of access, but this would still be a superior option to the 
status quo. 
Let me turn now to RFAs. 
Although  frameworks  aimed  at  providing  financial  support  to  countries  in  difficulties  with 
resources pooled at a regional level have existed for many years, the importance of RFAs as 
a layer of the GFSN increased substantially following the global financial crisis. According to 
some estimates, the total amount of resources currently available through RFAs amounts to 
US$1.2 trillion, i.e. a lending capacity at least in theory somewhat above that of the IMF at 
present.6 
Indeed, RFAs can make an important contribution to the functioning of the GFSN. Beyond 
the increased amount of resources available to face potential crises, they may allow a better 
                                                 
4   Since  late  2008,  an  extensive  global  network  of  renminbi  swap  lines  with  China  has  emerged,  but  this  is 
concentrated on supporting trade with and investment from China, and promoting the international use of the 
renminbi. 
5   See  Fahri,  Emmanuel,  Pierre-Olivier  Gourinchas  and  Hélène  Rey  (2011):  “Reforming  the  International 
Monetary System”, Center for Economic Policy Research e-Book. 
6   See International Monetary Fund (2016): “Adequacy of the Global Financial Safety Net”, IMF Policy Paper, 
March;  and  Cheng,  Gong  (2016):  “The  Global  Financial  Safety  Net  through  the  Prism  of  G20  Summits”, 
European Stability Mechanism Working Paper No. 13, April. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
understanding of the participating economies and a higher degree of ownership of economic 
adjustment  programs.  As  shown  by  the  experience  of  the  European  Financial  Stability 
Facility and the European Stability Mechanism, this kind of arrangements can play a crucial 
role in times of severe stress. 
Nevertheless,  RFAs  are  also  affected  by  a  number  of  shortcomings:  their  resources  are 
unequally distributed, with many EMEs having no access to this source of financing; while 
they  can  be  a  useful  source  of  support  to  tackle  problems  faced  by  individual  countries, 
major limitations may arise in case of shocks of a global or regional nature; flexibility in the 
use  of  resources  may  be  limited;  and,  very  importantly,  the  reliability  of  most  of  these 
arrangements beyond short term periods has never been tested. 
It  is  not  easy  to  make  recommendations  of  a  generalized  application  to  improve  the 
functioning of RFAs, since they constitute a very heterogeneous group. In my opinion, the 
most  important  course  of  action  of  a  general  nature  is  to  put  in  place  the  conditions  for  a 
better coordination with the IMF. Several suggestions have been made to this effect over the 
last years, including at the level of the G20, with the recent case of Europe providing a useful 
experience. But the reality is that a more formal framework for cooperation between the Fund 
and  RFAs,  focused  on  a  rational  division  of  responsibilities  and  a  proper  assimilation  of 
synergies, is still missing. 
To conclude, I just want to note that it is difficult to expect that a transformation of the GFSN 
along the lines suggested here will be thoroughly addressed any time soon, given difficulties 
of a political nature and the sheer complexity of some of the issues raised. In the absence of 
a  stronger,  more  efficient  GFSN,  efforts  to  accumulate  international  reserves  are  likely  to 
continue,  with  the  corresponding  costs  at  the  national  and  global  levels.  Hopefully,  as 
awareness of the disadvantages of this strategy increases and the merits of a solid GFSN 
become more evident, efforts to follow the proper course of action will gain ground. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
