  Minouche Shafik: A new heart for a changing payments system 
Speech by Ms Minouche Shafik, Deputy Governor for Markets and Banking of the Bank of 
England, Bank of England, London, 27 January 2016. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Andrew  Hauser,  Chris  Salmon,  Ankita  Mehta,  Grellan  McGrath,  Toby  Davies  and  John 
Jackson for their comments. 
The Bank at the heart of the payment system 
Sometime  around  1770,  just  a  few  yards  from  where  we  are  sitting  tonight,  two  of  the 
commercial banks’ so-called “Walk Clerks” congregated at the Five Bells Tavern for lunch, 
weary after a morning spent visiting each of their competitors in the City of London.1 They 
reflected  disconsolately  on  their  increasingly  impossible  task  of  exchanging  ever-rising 
numbers  of  paper  cheques  at  each  individual  bank  and  settling  ever-larger  outstanding 
balances. The idea occurred to one of them that they might encourage all of their colleagues 
– for each bank had such Clerks – to join them for lunch at the Five Bells every day, where 
instead  of  their  tiring  morning  tours  they  could  carry  out  a  much  speedier,  more  reliable 
exchange of cheques. Thus a clearing system for the City of London was born, from which 
many of the UK’s modern payment systems descend. 
From the start, the Bank of England has stood at the very heart of this system. Historically, 
banks had settled their net obligations to one another in coin. But coins were an inefficient 
settlement asset, being difficult and risky to transport. So banks increasingly looked to the 
Bank of England to help settle the mutual obligations, using Bank of England bank notes as 
the settlement asset. Later, clearing began to take place directly across accounts held at the 
Bank. The Bank’s Archive still holds copies of the ledgers recording the balances on those 
accounts – Figure 1 shows example pages from the late 1870s.2 
A  lot  has  changed  in  the  past  250  years.  Pubs,  thankfully,  no  longer  form  the  hub  of  the 
clearing system! Paper – whether in the form of elegantly-scribed ledgers, or IOUs – is also 
almost  wholly  extinct  in  interbank  clearing,  with  98%  of  payments  by  value  now  made 
electronically,  and  only  2%  using  notes,  coins  and  cheques.  The  pace  of  development  of 
alternative  methods  of  payment  for  households  and  companies  has  also  accelerated 
dramatically,  driven  by  new  and  innovative  technology.  It  is  hard  to  imagine  what  one  of 
those Walk Clerks from the 1770s would make of the range of cashless, real-time, mobile 
payments  options  available  in  the  shops,  restaurants  and  stations  in  and  around  Lombard 
Street today. 
Yet, amidst all this change, some things remain the same. 
The  Bank  of  England  still  lies  at  the  heart  of  the  sterling  interbank  payment  system  and 
banks still value the finality provided by settlement in risk-free central bank money. The role 
of the Bank of England as settlement agent originally arose from its unique ability to create 
sterling. But the fact that it retains this role after so long a time also reflects the trust placed in 
it by financial market participants and the wider public. 
                                                
1  See Matthews (1921). 
2  Cashier’s Department: Drawing Office Customer Account Ledger. The Bank of England Archive, Reference 
No. C98/4172. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Paper ledgers are long gone at the Bank of England. But in their place lies the Real Time 
Gross  Settlement  system  (RTGS),  across  which  all  payments  between  banks  are  settled.3 
The amounts involved are immense. On an average day, RTGS settles around £500 billion 
between  banks;  that  is  almost  a  third  of  the  UK’s  annual  GDP  every  single  day.  In  turn, 
those payments back nearly every other payment that matters to all of us on a daily basis – 
from  salaries  to  company  invoices,  from  car  purchases  to  coffee  sales,  from  pensions  to 
investment flows. So it is no exaggeration to say that RTGS is the beating heart of the UK 
payment system. 
Indeed,  RTGS  is  more  critical  to  the  UK  economy  than  even  these  statistics  suggest.  By 
hosting  the  reserves  accounts  of  the  banking  system,  RTGS  provides  the  mechanism 
through  which  the  Bank  provides  liquidity  for  financial  stability  purposes  and  implements 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decisions on Bank Rate. So it is intimately linked to the 
delivery of every aspect of the Bank’s mission. 
The Bank’s primary motivation in the provision of a high value payment system has always 
been to promote stability and resilience. From today’s vantage point, it is easy to forget how 
revolutionary  the  introduction  of  RTGS  was  back  in  1996.  Before  RTGS,  all  interbank 
payments were subject to some element of settlement risk – the risk that a bank would fail 
between the time it promised to make a payment, and the time it delivered on that promise. 
By allowing banks to settle high value transactions between each other, electronically, in real 
time, RTGS eliminated settlement risk on the largest payments flows – the ones most likely 
to threaten financial stability by bringing down the system if they failed. 
But that is not the only innovation that RTGS has delivered over the years. As the financial 
system has evolved, RTGS has been regularly updated, introducing a raft of new functions 
and risk mitigants to respond to changing demands. Today, we are announcing that the Bank 
has completed, or agreed steps that will complete, all the actions in response to the Deloitte 
report4 published in March last year following the RTGS outage in October 2014. 
Looking forward, as we celebrate RTGS’ twentieth birthday during 2016, it is again time to 
ask fundamental questions  about  the  shape  of the  Bank’s  settlement  operations. The  way 
payments  are  made  has  changed  dramatically  in  recent  years,  reflecting  changes  in  the 
needs  of  households  and  companies,  changes  in  technology,  and  an  evolving  regulatory 
landscape.  The  range  of  payment  providers  is  growing  rapidly.  Given  the  implications  of 
these  changes  for  the  Bank’s  mission  and  for  users,  businesses  and  regulators,  it  is 
important that the Bank consider how RTGS will need to evolve to meet and shape payments 
trends in the coming decades. That is why  we  are today announcing our plan to design a 
blueprint for a new heart that can support the future demands placed on the UK’s high-value 
sterling settlement system. 
In  my  remaining  remarks  tonight  I  want  to  do  three  things.  First,  set  out  some  of  the  key 
drivers of change. Second, explain some of the strategic questions we want to ask on the 
future role of RTGS. And, third, set out how we will go about developing a blueprint for a new 
high value payments system. 
                                                
3  Either directly in the case of high-value payments made via CHAPS, or indirectly after netting in the case of 
retail payments made via the various private sector schemes.  
4  The Deloitte Report on the October 2014 RTGS outage can be found here: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
publications/Documents/news/2015/rtgsdeloitte.pdf. An update on the completion of the recommendations of 
the Deloitte Report can be found here: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/paymentsystems/ 
deliotteactions.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Evolution in the payments landscape 
Much has changed in the UK payments landscape in the past twenty years. In particular, I 
want  to  highlight  two  linked  drivers  of  change  as  being  important  in  shaping  the  future 
demands  placed  on  the  Bank’s  provision  of  real-time  settlement:  the  changing  regulatory 
environment and developments in payments technologies. 
Some of the most important recent changes in the payment landscape have been catalysed 
by  regulatory  intervention,  for  example  the  development  of  the  Faster  Payments  Scheme 
(FPS).5 In the past, regulatory intervention in retail payments has been targeted, addressing 
specific problems as and when they have emerged. Going forward however, the Payments 
Systems  Regulator  (PSR)  which  launched  in  2015  is  likely  to  create  a  new  dynamic  by 
stimulating a greater focus on competition and innovation in payment systems. 
Alongside  this  new  regulatory  focus,  the  pace  of  technological  change  in  payments  has 
picked up sharply. Recent years have seen huge growth in demand for payments services 
that  can  be  accessed  in  real  time,  at  any  time  (“24x7x365”),  in  a  wide  variety  of  locations 
through mobile phones and tablets. The software on these devices also makes growing use 
of  so-called  Application  Programming  Interfaces  or  “APIs”  which  allow  the  seamless 
integration of payment into websites, and offer new ways to utilise payments data to improve 
services  to  customers.  The  “electronification”  of  payments  and  rise  of  mobile  banking  has 
enabled  non-banks  to  deliver  services  using  existing  payments  infrastructure  and  made  it 
possible for challenger banks to grow without having to build an extensive branch network. 
The emergence of various forms of Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) poses much more 
profound  challenges  because  it  enables  verification  of  payments  to  be  decentralised, 
removing  the  need  for  a  trusted  third  party.  It  may  reshape  the  mechanisms  for  making 
secured  payments:  instead  of  settlement  occurring  across  the  books  of  a  single  central 
authority  (such  as  a  central  bank,  clearing  house  or  custodian),  strong  cryptographic  and 
verification algorithms allow everyone  in a DLT  network to have a copy of the ledger, and 
give  distributed  authority  for  managing  and  updating that  ledger to  a  much  wider  group of 
agents.  The  Bank  is  undertaking  work  to  understand  the  implications  of  new  digital  or 
e-monies  and  new  methods  of  payments  and  financial  intermediation  as  part  of  the  One 
Bank Research initiative6. 
Machine  learning  also  promises  to  transform  financial  services  and  widen  the  potential 
players in payments. Banks will increasingly be able to automate interaction with customers. 
As ever more data is analysed and algorithms that “learn” replace rules-based programming, 
a number of areas such as credit assessment, risk management, fraud detection and product 
personalisation  will  increasingly  rely  on  technology.  Many  banks  are  already  embracing 
these  changes,  but  many  non-bank  players  with  ready-made  access  to  a  wide  range  of 
customers and their data are well positioned to compete. 
Alongside the potential opportunities offered by changes in technology, there are also potential 
risks. For example, the demand for real-time retail payments can make it harder to implement 
effective defences against money laundering, terrorist financing, identity theft or other forms of 
fraud.  More  connected,  IT-intensive  networks  provide  more  channels  for  cyber  attackers  to 
target and greater risks of contagion. And rapid growth of non-bank payment providers could 
have  profound  implications  for  the  business  models  of  banks,  challenging  their  revenue 
streams, altering the economics of credit provision and changing the risks to financial stability. 
                                                
5  The Faster Payments Scheme launched in May 2008 and allows payments to be made 24 hours a day, seven 
days a week.  
6  Further information on the One Bank Research initiative can be found here: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
research/Pages/onebank/agenda.aspx  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  New payments technologies also pose practical  challenges, such as ensuring they  interface 
effectively with legacy IT systems in banks and payments infrastructure. 
What does all of this mean for the future of RTGS? Because of the changing context I have 
described, the Bank of England has decided the scope of the blueprint should be broad. We 
need  to  understand  these  trends,  whilst  recognising  that  there  is  considerable  room  for 
debate about the impact of the current wave of technological innovation. We need to think 
about  to  whom  we  give  access  to  the  advantages  of  central  bank  money  with  its  unique 
qualities of finality of settlement. Trying to predict the future is a risky business, but when we 
make decisions about investment in systems that will last for a decade or more, they need to 
enable the kinds of changes that users will demand. So we need to make sure that we have 
“optionality” built in so that we can cope with different states of the world. 
We  may  conclude  that  the  right  way  forward  is  a  like-for-like  replacement  of  the  current 
RTGS  using  more  modern  technology.  Or  we  may  decide  that  more  radical  change  is 
needed  to  meet  the  needs  of the  UK’s  future financial  system. We genuinely  do  not  have 
preconceptions on this question – and will want to consult closely with all of you, and a wide 
audience beyond this room, on the benefits, costs and risks of alternative options. 
A blueprint for RTGS and the Bank’s settlement infrastructure 
Having set out the context in which we will develop the blueprint, I want to say a few words 
about how it will be structured. 
The blueprint will seek to answer four overarching questions. First, what should the Bank’s 
policy objectives be in the delivery of sterling settlement in central bank money? Second, 
what functions  should the  UK  High  Value  Payments  System  have?  Third,  who  should  be 
able to access it, and how? And, fourth, what should the role of the Bank of England be in 
the delivery of that service? 
Let me elaborate a little on each – starting with policy objectives. 
The  mission  of  the  Bank  of  England  is  to  promote  the  good  of  the  people  of  the  United 
Kingdom  by  maintaining  monetary  and  financial  stability.  The  Bank  promotes  stability  in 
sterling  payments  in  four  ways:  through  its  operation  of  RTGS;  through  the  provision  of 
liquidity  insurance  to  the  banking  system;  through  its  supervision  of  CHAPS,  the  other 
recognised  payment  systems,  CREST  and  Central  Counterparties;  and  through  the 
prudential supervision of banks by the PRA. 
As  discussed  at  the  Open  Forum  in  November,  where  there  are  coordination  or  market 
failures  the  Bank  can  and  has  used  its  unique  position  to  shape  financial  markets  for  the 
public good.7 The Bank of England has a long history of using its convening powers to solve 
collective action problems, not least the introduction of RTGS itself in the mid-1990s. Around 
the same time, the Bank also had to step in to take over the design and construction of the 
UK’s securities settlement infrastructure CREST, after the collapse of the Stock Exchange’s 
TAURUS project. We were strong supporters of the Continuous Linked Settlement8 initiative, 
which  since  2002  has  played  a  major  role  in  reducing  settlement  risk  in  foreign  exchange 
transactions. More recently, the Bank has taken opportunities to modernise and innovate in 
response to the changing external environment. For example, the Bank has overhauled its 
framework for liquidity provision and is preparing to introduce polymer banknotes. 
                                                
7  The  Open  Forum  session  on  the  role  of  central  banks  in  financial  markets  can  be  watched  here: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SJCilk1XdZ0&index=12&list=PLslyOrpjJ0z38nDN-8fCiDKpCDpKMKZc9. 
8  Further  information  on  the  Continuous  Linked  Settlement  system  can  be  found  here:  http://www.cls-
group.com/Pages/default.aspx. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  sum,  while  our  primary  concern  will  always  be  stability,  we  recognise  that,  given  the 
importance of the Bank’s settlement operations to the overall system, our decisions will not 
only reflect but also shape the future payments landscape. 
The second issue is the desired level of functionality. 
RTGS  has  evolved  considerably  over  its  twenty  years.  Recent  examples  from  a  long  list 
include:  the  introduction  of  a  liquidity  savings  mechanism  in  2013,  reducing  the  risk  that 
banks  will  be  unable  to  settle  payments  due to  liquidity  shortfalls9;  the  introduction  of “pre 
funding” in 2015, ensuring that all net exposures in retail schemes that settle in RTGS are 
backed  by  central  bank  money;  and  the  planned  extension  in  June  this  year  of  RTGS 
opening hours.10 
Against  this  backdrop,  we  will  ask  what  further  changes  might  be  required  from  a  new 
platform,  as  the  needs of  the  wider  payments  universe  develop.  There are  many  potential 
questions.  What  are  the  implications  of  growing  demand  for  a  “24x7x365”  model  of  retail 
payments? What enhancements to cyber security will be required in future years? Have we 
pitched the balance between minimising settlement, liquidity and operational risk in the right 
place?  What  will  be  the  impact  of  relatively  nascent  technologies  such  as  the  distributed 
ledger? Should RTGS adopt the latest messaging standards, not least to promote their use 
more broadly within the UK’s financial system? Are stakeholders comfortable that the right 
types of payments are being made in real-time across RTGS? 
We cannot answer all of these questions in a year – so an early priority, with your help, will 
be to identify the most pertinent areas to focus on. 
The third theme of the blueprint is access. 
Access  to  a  settlement  account  in  RTGS  is  currently  open  to  any  bank,  building  society, 
broker-dealer or CCP that holds a Bank of England reserves account or any financial market 
infrastructure  whose  participation  is  judged  by  the  Bank  to  be  enhancing  to  financial 
stability.11  Compared  with  similar  systems  in  other  major  jurisdictions,  access  to  RTGS  is 
relatively highly “tiered”: almost 90% of the roughly 400 licensed banks and smaller banks 
choose  to  settle  indirectly  through  a  correspondent  bank.  In  order  to  enhance  financial 
stability  by  reducing  dependencies  between  large  banks  and  smaller  banks,  the  Bank  of 
England  and  CHAPS  Co  undertook  a  de-tiering  initiative  which  has  resulted  in  a  greater 
number of banks having direct access to RTGS. 
There is a question about whether we should go further and encourage or require a much 
larger number of banks to become direct members of major UK payment systems and have 
an RTGS settlement account, in order to spread the settlement risk benefits of RTGS more 
widely. The emergence of a new breed of on-bank payments service providers, regulated by 
the FCA, has extended that debate further, since it is currently a requirement of a number of 
retail  systems  –  in  particular  FPS  and  Bacs  –  that  direct  participants  should  have  a 
settlement account at the Bank. 
Major  changes  to  the  access  arrangements  to  settlement  accounts  raise  both  policy  and 
practical questions for the  Bank  –  and  could  have  implications  for market  participants  and 
fellow regulators too – so it is right that they should be considered as part of the development 
                                                
9  See Davey and Gray (2014). 
10  Further 
information  on 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Pages/paymentsystem/extending.aspx. 
the  planned  extension  of  RTGS  opening  hours  can  be 
found  here: 
11  The Bank stands ready to act as a settlement agent for payment systems recognised under the Banking Act or 
whose access to settlement in central bank money is otherwise judged by the Bank to be likely to reduce the 
risk of widespread disruption. There are currently 6 payment schemes for which the Bank acts as settlement 
agent  (as  well  as  the  CREST  securities  settlement  system)  and  there  are  around  40  settlement  account 
holders in RTGS. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  of  a  broader  blueprint.  Targeted  extensions  in  access  could  bring  benefits  in  terms  of 
innovation. But we need to think through the implications for stability, market structure and 
costs. 
The final theme of the blueprint is the role of the Bank. 
The Bank developed the RTGS infrastructure itself, and is responsible for the maintenance 
and development of all elements of its hardware and software. The Bank is also responsible 
for the day-to-day operation of RTGS, although these running costs are in turn charged out 
to its users on a full cost recovery basis. The rules and procedures of the various payments 
systems that settle in RTGS – CHAPS, Bacs, FPS, LINK, Cheque & Credit, and Visa Europe 
–  are  maintained  by  their  respective  private  sector  members,  though  there  is  close  co-
operation between the schemes and the Bank’s operational team. The recognised payments 
schemes  are  themselves  supervised  by  the  Financial  Markets  Infrastructure  Directorate  of 
the Bank. 
We  will  want  to  examine  the  Bank’s  role  in  delivering  payments  and  settlement  services, 
looking closely at how the United Kingdom compares to elsewhere around the world and the 
international  guidance  on  risk  standards  set  out  in  the  Principles  for  Financial  Market 
Infrastructure. The Bank’s experience, particularly during the financial crisis, has been that 
having direct operational control over RTGS has paid substantial dividends in terms of the 
delivery of its mission, so I think it is fair to say we start with a certain bias in that regard. But 
the  appropriate  model  for  IT  development,  service  governance  and  risk  management 
depends quite heavily on the chosen way forward for the RTGS infrastructure. 
In light of the emerging results of the blueprint, the Bank’s supervisory function will review 
whether  any  changes  are  necessary  to  the  supervisory  model  for  the  high  value  sterling 
payments system. 
A blueprint with buy-in 
The agenda I have set out today is an ambitious one, with important implications both for the 
many institutions and infrastructures that interface with the system today and for those that 
might do so in the future. Our aim is that by the end of 2016 we will have agreed a blueprint 
for high-value sterling settlement in the years ahead, with technological development of that 
blueprint beginning in 2017. 
To reach that deadline, there is a great deal to do – and we cannot do it on our own. In the 
first  part  of  2016  we  will  be  seeking  input  from  a  wide  range  of  stakeholders,  both  in  the 
industry and outside it, to help define the questions and ensure we have identified the right 
options. We will be looking overseas to learn what we can from similar exercises conducted 
in  other  jurisdictions.  Later  in  the  year  we  expect  to  consult  formally  and  in  public  on  a 
focussed set of alternative  ways forward. Throughout that process, we  will need your help 
and  guidance  –  to  ensure  we  understand  how  the  future  payments  landscape  is  likely  to 
develop, to identify the needs of market participants, and to provide practical guidance and 
assistance.  At  a  time  when  firms  face  many  competing  initiatives,  we  understand  the 
importance of minimising uncertainty, and providing rigorous costings for what we propose. 
Throughout  the  year  and  beyond,  we  will  work  closely  with  the  industry,  our  supervisory 
colleagues  at  the  Bank  of  England,  the  Payment  Systems  Regulator  and  its  Payments 
Strategy  Forum,  HM  Treasury  and  the  Financial  Conduct  Authority  to  develop  a  blueprint 
with the broadest possible buy-in. 
Conclusions 
In the pursuit of financial stability, the importance of resilience can hardly be overstated: a 
persistent  disruption  to  people’s  ability  to  make  and  receive  payments  would  cause  great 
damage to the UK economy, so Parliament and others rightly hold the Bank and the wider 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial  community  to  the  highest  standards  of  stability.  It  is  sometimes  claimed  that  this 
relentless focus on stability makes central banks the enemies of innovation, and defenders of 
the status quo. 
I believe that is a fallacy. Innovation and stability can go hand in hand, as some of the history 
of payment systems has shown. The innovation of meeting in the Five Bells every lunchtime 
reduced  the risk  that Walk  Clerks  would  lose  track  of  their  notes  and  coins  while  trooping 
from one bank to another around the streets of the City of London. The move to a central 
ledger  at  the  Bank  of  England  removed  the  need  for  notes  and  coins  to  be  exchanged 
between banks at all. The advent of RTGS removed the risk that a bank would fail before it 
made  a  promised  payment.  More  recent  reforms  have  reduced  liquidity  risk  in  RTGS  and 
extended  access  and  hours  of  service.  Our  challenge  will  be  to  navigate  a  path  that 
redesigns RTGS in such a way that its resilience is further enhanced, while at the same time 
enabling innovation for the public good. 
Thank you. 
Figure 1: Customer account ledger from 1878, from the former Bank of England Cashier’s 
Department Drawing Office, now held in the Bank of England’s Archive collection. 
 References 
Bank of England (1989), ‘Challenges facing the sterling wholesale payment systems’, Bank 
of England Quarterly Bulletin, August, pages 401–06. 
Bank of England (1994), ‘The development of a UK real-time gross settlement system’. Bank 
of England Quarterly Bulletin, May, pages 163–68. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Davey,  N  and  Gray,  D  (2014),  ‘How  has  the  Liquidity  Saving  Mechanism  reduced  banks’ 
intraday liquidity costs in CHAPS?’ Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 54, No. 2, pages 
180–186,  2014  Q2,  available  at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/ 
quarterlybulletin/2014/qb14q207.pdf. 
Dent,  A  and  Dison,  W  (2012),  ‘The  Bank  of  England’s  Real-Time  Gross  Settlement 
infrastructure’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 52 No. 3, pages 234–244, 2012 Q3, 
available  at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/qb 
1203.pdf. 
Matthews, P (1921), ‘The Bankers’ Clearing House: what it is and what it does’, Sir I. Pitman 
& Sons limited. 
Norman,  B,  Shaw,  R  and  Speight,  G  (2011),  ‘The  history  of  interbank  settlement 
arrangements:  exploring  central  banks’  role  in  the  payment  system’,  Bank  of  England 
Working Paper No. 412. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
