   Már Guðmundsson: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Iceland 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the 55th Annual 
General Meeting of the Central Bank of Iceland, Reykjavík, 17 March 2016. 
 Mr.  President,  Speaker of  Parliament,  Minister of  Finance  and  Economic  Affairs,  directors, 
foreign ambassadors, ladies and gentlemen! 
 
As we gather here for the 55th Annual General Meeting of the Central Bank of Iceland, the 
state of the economy is in many respects good. It is now the first quarter of 2016, and the 
current period of GDP growth has lasted since the second quarter of 2010, or six years. This 
quarter’s GDP is estimated at over 4% above the pre-crisis peak. The slack in the economy 
has turned into a positive output gap, and we have full employment, at least.  
 
Unlike  many  previous  periods  of  full  employment,  the  external  and  internal  balance  of  the 
economy is still relatively good.  
 
Last year’s trade surplus amounted to 7% of GDP. It sufficed to cover the deficit in interest, 
dividend, and wage movements to and from the country (excluding the calculated interest on 
the old banks’ estates), and the current account surplus thus measured was probably close to 
5% of GDP. If this turns out to have been the case, there will have been an underlying current 
account surplus averaging over 5% of GDP each year since 2009. This has played a major 
role in the ongoing reduction in Iceland’s foreign debt, as I will touch on later.  
 
Inflation has been at or below target for two full years. This is the longest such period since 
inflation targeting was adopted 15 years ago this Easter. And it has happened in spite of steep 
wage increases, which under typical conditions would have generated much higher inflation. 
But  it  so  happens  that  conditions  are  far  from  being  typical.  Iceland’s  terms  of  trade  have 
improved  markedly  with  the  decline  in  oil  and  commodity  prices,  and  tendencies  towards 
deflation  can  be  seen  widely  abroad.  This  has  worked  to  counteract  domestic  inflationary 
pressures. At the same time, exports of goods and services have grown strongly, not least 
because of the booming tourism industry. According to newly published figures from Statistics 
Iceland, national income grew by nearly 8% in real terms in 2015, looking through the failed 
banks’ estates. When national income is measured, GDP is adjusted for income that reverts 
to non-residents and for changes in terms of trade. This tells us more about purchasing power 
in  the  economy  as  a  whole  than  GDP  does,  and  it  explains  in  part  why  the  recent  wage 
increases have thus far generated much more real wage growth than inflation.  
 
There has been a substantial change recently in Iceland’s net external debt. According to newly 
published figures, external debt amounted to 14½% of GDP at the end of 2015. One must go 
as far back as the herring boom of the 1960s to find a comparable debt position. The end-2015 
external debt ratio was probably more noteworthy than it might otherwise have been because 
the net debt position as measured according to international standards was nearly three-and-
a-half times GDP only a quarter earlier. That figure was highly misleading, however, because 
it included, at full price, all of the debt of the failed banks’ estates, even though it had long since 
become clear that those debts would not be repaid except in part. For this reason, the Central 
Bank had adopted the practice of publishing what it called the underlying external position, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   which looked through the expected settlement of the estates. By this measure, Iceland’s net 
debt totalled just over one-third of GDP at the end of Q3/2015, down from nearly one GDP at 
the end of 2008. Nearly 40% of the reduction is due to the current account surplus and GDP 
growth during the period, and the rest is due to default, debt restructuring, and other factors. 
The reduction in the debt position in Q4/2015, from 35% of GDP to 14½%, is due for the most 
part to the settlement of the failed banks’ estates on the basis of stability conditions.  
 
As can be discerned from what I have just said, the state of the Icelandic economy is quite 
good. According to current forecasts, the outlook is relatively good as well. According to the 
Central  Bank’s  forecast  from  February,  GDP  growth  will  be  robust  in  2016  and  above  its 
historical average for the two years thereafter. This certainly entails an increase in the positive 
output gap this year, but that tension will subside as the forecast horizon progresses, owing in 
part to a tighter monetary stance. Inflation will also rise with a larger positive output gap and 
reduced deflationary pressures from abroad as the year progresses, but monetary policy will 
counteract it. According to the forecast, inflation will peak at just over 4% in 2017 and then 
taper off over the remainder of the forecast horizon. Unlike in many previous forecasts, the 
strong current account surplus will persist for the entire forecast period, which extends until 
2018, in part because national saving will remain above the historical average.  
 
In this context, we must bear in mind that things can change quite suddenly. It is also worth 
noting that numerical economic forecasts, by their very nature, have a tendency to be much 
more  stable  than  historical  reality.  In  the  recent  past,  we  have  reaped  the  benefits  of 
developments abroad, but we do not know how long this will last, and tailwinds could turn into 
headwinds. History also tells us that we have a tendency to make economic policy mistakes 
during booms and mistake temporary positive shocks for permanent improvements. If history 
repeats  itself,  domestic  demand  and  inflation  could  increase  more  than  is  assumed  in  the 
forecast. We must therefore be vigilant and be careful when taking the decisions that lie ahead. 
The Central Bank’s next comprehensive analysis of economic developments and prospects 
will appear in Monetary Bulletin in mid-May. 
 
Honoured guests: As has been reported, the Central Bank bought large amounts of foreign 
currency in 2015 and has continued to do so this year. From May 2013, when the Bank began 
its regular FX purchase programme, until the close of business yesterday, the Bank was a net 
buyer of foreign currency in the amount of 471 b.kr. Some of this currency has been used to 
pay down foreign debt and the rest to increase the size of the foreign exchange reserves. Both 
of these measures increase the proportion of the reserves financed in krónur. At the end of 
February,  the  reserves  totalled  721  b.kr.  including  382  b.kr.  financed  in  krónur.  This  has 
reduced foreign liquidity risk, of course, but it would also have a large negative impact on the 
Bank’s finances if such an arrangement persisted, as domestic interest rates are much higher 
than the rate of return on the reserves. This point is discussed in greater detail in the Bank’s 
Annual Report, which is available here today. The report states that, as of year-end 2015, the 
negative interest rate differential on the Bank’s foreign exchange balance was 18 b.kr. on an 
annualised basis.  
 
The forthcoming auction of offshore krónur could change this position radically, however, and 
as a result, there is no reason to despair about the Central Bank’s finances. Furthermore, it is 
at the core of central banking to prioritise macroeconomic objectives over the central bank’s 
own finances. Moreover, this situation could make it possible to resolve most of the problem 
in the auction, in a more permanent way than was previously envisioned. Preparations for the 
auction are now well underway, and the date and format will be publicised soon, so that the 
auction can take place in the first half of the year. Other things being equal, it should then be 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   possible to move relatively quickly towards lifting capital controls on residents, as the current 
account surplus, foreign exchange inflows, and robust foreign exchange reserves provide ideal 
conditions for it. On the other hand, it is important to reach successful conclusion regarding 
offshore krónur before general liberalisation of controls on residents can take place.   
 
Now I would like to turn to longer-term issues regarding monetary policy and its relationship to 
other aspects of economic policy and prudential policy. In its reports entitled Monetary policy 
after  capital  controls  and  Prudential  rules  following  capital  controls,  published  in  2010  and 
2012,  respectively,  the  Central  Bank  described  the  new  monetary  policy  framework  and 
prudential  rules  that  will  be  necessary  to  preserve  financial  stability  and  support  monetary 
policy after the capital controls are lifted. The assumption underlying both reports was that the 
Central Bank’s key objective would continue to be price stability, as is mandated by law, and 
that the exchange rate of the króna would remain flexible, although it would not need to be 
entirely free-floating. I will not explain the grounds for these assumptions here, as they have 
been discussed widely, except to point out that it is unrealistic to entrust monetary policy with 
objectives other than those it has the chance to fulfil using the available instruments, and that 
adopting a fixed exchange rate would eliminate the advantages of an independent currency 
and  independent  monetary  policy  without  eliminating  the  disadvantages.  Therefore,  policy 
formation lies in finding a framework that can work under the above-described conditions.  
 
There were a number of drawbacks to Iceland’s pre-crisis monetary policy framework. A major 
flaw was the lack of an adequate response to the excessive capital inflows that contributed to 
credit and asset price bubbles and domestic residents’ significant foreign exchange risk, which 
was to a large extent unhedged. Furthermore, monetary and fiscal policy were not well enough 
aligned, and the same can be said of other Government decisions that affected demand. The 
burden on monetary policy was therefore greater than it would have been otherwise, which 
further stimulated capital inflows. This, together with strong demand, pushed the real exchange 
rate higher than it would have been otherwise and exacerbated macroeconomic imbalances, 
as could be seen most clearly in a sizeable current account deficit. These developments and 
the banking crisis contributed to the currency crisis that struck in the first half of 2008.  
 
The Bank’s two publications on post-capital controls monetary policy and prudential rules have 
stood the test of time, as many of the proposals in them have already been implemented. We 
now intervene in the foreign exchange market with the aim of smoothing out fluctuations due 
to temporary capital flows and mitigating short-term exchange rate volatility. We no longer have 
a free-floating currency, but a managed float. We have adopted prudential rules that severely 
limit  the  banking  system’s  ability  to  take  risk  in  foreign  currencies. We  have  established  a 
Financial Stability Council and a Systemic Risk Committee in order to monitor financial system 
risk  more  effectively  than  we  did  previously,  and  we  are  developing  prudential  rules  and 
macroprudential tools to respond to systemic risk. This will also support monetary policy.  
 
One important step remains, however: to develop policy instruments that can be applied so as 
to curtail carry trade-related capital inflows when such inflows interfere significantly with the 
transmission of monetary policy along the interest rate channel, as was the case last summer 
and autumn. Analysis of the options available has been underway in the recent term, but these 
mainly involve a tax or a special reserve requirement. In both instances, statutory amendments 
would be necessary. It can be argued that such policy instruments should be on the law books 
by the time the auction of offshore krónur takes place because, if the auction is as successful 
as we intend, it is possible that confidence in Iceland will grow still further and capital inflows 
will increase.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Why do we need all of these additional tools and contingency measures? An important reason 
is the risk to financial stability that accompanies excessive and volatile capital movements that 
are  unconnected  to  economic  fundamentals.  Another  important  reason  is  that  in  an 
increasingly financially integrated world, it is more difficult for small countries to deviate too far 
from  the  monetary  policy  pursued  in  the  larger  countries  that  determine  global  financial 
conditions. We saw this before the financial crisis, in New Zealand and here in Iceland. And 
we have seen it more recently, in countries like Switzerland and Sweden.  
 
We can better understand why this is so if we consider a situation where cross-border financial 
integration is nearly perfect, so that capital movements very quickly even out the difference in 
risk-adjusted real returns on assets in different countries. The interest rate channel of monetary 
policy  transmission  then  becomes  clogged  up  in  small,  open,  and  financially  integrated 
economies,  where  long-term  interest  rates  are  determined  by  rates  in  large  countries  and 
transmission takes place largely through the exchange rate channel. But transmission through 
the exchange rate channel is uncertain and volatile, as the exchange rate is also an asset price 
that fluctuates with speculative capital flows and can deviate from equilibrium over time, only 
to  correct  quite  suddenly.  Unless  the  financial  system  is  that  much  better  protected,  this 
process can interact negatively with financial stability, as was the case in Iceland during the 
financial  crisis.  This  is  at  the  heart  of  the  problem  faced  by  small  countries  that  pursue 
independent  monetary  policy  and  permit  unrestricted  capital  flows  simultaneously.  The 
problem can be solved by adapting monetary policy to that prevailing in large countries even 
though it is not suited to domestic conditions, or by placing restrictions on cross-border capital 
flows, particularly those related to carry trade. The need for such restrictions is likely to surface 
earlier and more strongly in countries with shallow financial markets.  
 
But capital flow management measures that aim to restrict both carry trade and destabilising 
capital movements cannot be used as the first line of defence in the fight against inflation and 
macroeconomic imbalances, except under extraordinary circumstances. Such instruments will 
have adverse side effects and could push international obligations to their limits. But some sort 
of tools must be available for use if the need arises. In general, the first line of defence must 
be  conventional  management  of  the  monetary-fiscal  policy  mix,  supported  by  structural 
reforms and sound economic incentives. The second line of defence, then, is prudential rules 
and  macroprudential  tools  aimed  at  hindering  excessive  indebtedness,  enhancing financial 
system resilience, and mitigating procyclicality. Capital flow management tools are the third 
line of defence and are intended to support other aspects of economic policy if the need arises.  
 
In formulating a new economic and prudential policy framework in the near future, we must try 
to make the interactions between the various components most conducive to achieving the 
desired results. This applies to fiscal policy, monetary policy, decisions made in the labour 
market, and decisions designed to safeguard financial stability. In this context, it should be 
borne in mind that monetary policy is unique in that it can have a very rapid response time, as 
its instruments can be applied at short notice. This means that monetary policy can have the 
last move and can consider the decisions made in other policy areas. Furthermore, experience 
shows that monetary policy is most effective in the long run if central banks are independent 
in  applying  monetary  policy  instruments  but  have  clear  objectives  decided  by  elected 
representatives and are then accountable for their decisions after the fact. The framework for 
the  interactions  among  the  various  components  of  economic  policy  must  not  limit  this 
independence. This does not change the fact that, for these interactions to have maximum 
effectiveness, there must be a clear understanding of which factors will determine the decisions 
of each party. And the greater the consensus on the analysis of the situation and outlook, the 
more effective it will all be. One way to promote this is to establish a forum for discussion and 
exchange of information without restricting each party’s legally defined role. In this context, I 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   welcome the forthcoming establishment of a Macroeconomic Council with representation from 
the Government, the labour market, and the Central Bank. It has also been decided that the 
Monetary Policy Committee and the Systemic Risk Committee, which prepares analysis and 
recommendations for the Financial Stability Council, will hold a joint meeting at least once a 
year. The first such meeting took place last November.  
 
Honoured guests: The financial system plays an important role in the functioning of modern 
society, in channelling diversified saving towards a profitable but larger investment, assessing 
and diversifying risk, and intermediating payments between parties in the economy. It would 
be difficult to engage in modern external trade if we did not have some sort of domestic banking 
system  that  worked  with  foreign  banks  and  could  transmit  payments  across  borders.  The 
financial  system  is  therefore  an  inalienable  part  of  value  creation  in  a  modern  society.  Its 
importance is often forgotten in the heat of negative discourse but is never as clear as when 
things go wrong – as they did in the financial crisis.  
 
The structure and condition of the financial system at any given time is determined by historical 
factors, economic and market conditions, the regulatory environment, technology, and culture 
and ethics. The Central Bank and the regulatory environment are also part of the financial 
system.  The  public  sector  can  affect  developments  in  the  financial  system  through  the 
regulatory framework, through transactions with the system – not least through the Central 
Bank – and by affecting culture and ethics.  
 
At present, the system is shaped by the financial crisis and the responses to it, including the 
capital controls. It is a relatively homogeneous system dominated by three domestic-oriented 
banks with similar business models and risk profiles. The capital controls, implementation of 
international regulations, and more stringent Icelandic regulations on foreign exchange risk all 
affect the banks. The capital controls will be lifted, but much of the regulatory environment will 
remain.  
 
Risk in the financial system has diminished markedly in recent years as resilience has grown, 
which can be seen in capital adequacy and funding; furthermore, liquidity relative to the scope 
of  operations  is  much  greater  than  before  the  crisis.  The  three  largest  commercial  banks’ 
combined capital amounted to 669 b.kr. at the end of 2015. The banks’ equity ratios have risen 
by nearly a third since 2010, from 21% to 28%. In real terms, their equity  has increased by 
180 b.kr. over this period.  
 
Furthermore, the banks’ foreign exchange imbalances have been reduced, and the regulatory 
framework  prevents  excessive  risk-taking  in  foreign  currencies.  Moreover,  risk  related  to 
borrowers  has  diminished  as  the  economic recovery  has  progressed  and  debt  levels  have 
fallen; indeed, at the end of 2015, total private sector debt was down to around the level last 
seen in 2000.  
 
Financial system risk is assessed four times a year by the Systemic Risk Committee and the 
Financial Stability Council, greatly increasing the monitoring that takes place. The Central Bank 
publishes its Financial Stability report twice a year, with the next issue forthcoming on 20 April. 
I will not expand further on this here.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   However, I think it appropriate to mention four issues that, in the near future, could have a 
major impact on long-term developments in the financial system. 
 
The first is technology, which is advancing rapidly worldwide. In addition, we are engaged in 
renewing  many  of  Iceland’s  key  financial  market  infrastructure  elements  and,  in  doing  so, 
adopting new technology. This could create excellent opportunities to enhance security and 
reduce  costs,  including  through  joint  utilisation  of  infrastructure  elements,  while  increasing 
competition in areas where economies of scale are less in evidence. The Bank’s Financial 
Market Infrastructure report, to be published later this year, will discuss this in greater detail.  
 
The next is culture and ethics. In international discussion, it is widely emphasised that post-
crisis reform will not achieve its goals in the long run unless it involves an improvement over 
the pre-crisis situation. It seems to me that considerable improvements have already been 
made here in Iceland. But there is more to be done, and it is a long-term project. It is also 
necessary to drive home the point that bank directors’ role is not only to maximise short-term 
profits; as the system is currently structured, bank directors are also guardians of public goods 
as represented by joint financial market infrastructure. 
 
The  third  is  financial  literacy.  A  number  of  studies  show  that  increased  financial  literacy 
enhances  financial  market  stability,  monetary  policy  transmission,  and  understanding  of 
monetary policy actions. This is why the Central Bank has participated in and supported the 
preparation  and  implementation  of  Financial  Literacy  Week  in  recent  years  and  intends  to 
continue doing so. It so happens that Financial Literacy Week is underway right now.  
 
The fourth topic is discussion of what type of financial system we need and want as we emerge 
from the aftermath of the financial crisis. That includes the international aspect of the system, 
the scope of the system, and whether we need to shelter our infrastructure even more from 
risk-taking than we have already done with recent and planned reforms, including forthcoming 
legislation on insolvency and winding-up of financial institutions. In this context, there are other 
options  available  than  the  complete  separation  of  commercial  banking  from  investment 
banking. After important steps concerning capital account liberalisation are complete, which 
will be soon, there will be opportunities to say more about these topics and others.  
 
And now I have come to the conclusion of my speech today. We are not yet finished settling 
the financial crisis, but that moment is rapidly approaching. I would like to thank the Supervisory 
Board and the Monetary Policy Committee for its work over the past year, and I wish to thank 
the Central Bank’s many colleagues and collaborators for their cooperation – not least the 
Prime  Minister’s  Office,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Affairs,  and  the  Financial 
Supervisory Authority. I would also like to thank the financial institutions with which the Bank 
interacts  for  their  cooperation.  Moreover,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Parliament  of  Iceland, 
particularly  the  Economics  and  Commerce  Committee,  for  their  collaboration.  And  last  but 
certainly not least, I want to thank the staff of the Central Bank for a job well done over the past 
year.  
 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
