   
Christopher Kent: Economic forecasting at the Reserve Bank of Australia 
Address  by  Mr  Christopher  Kent,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia,  to  the  Economic  Society  of  Australia  (Hobart),  University  of  Tasmania,  Hobart, 
6 April 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech 
I thank Daniel Rees, who provided invaluable assistance in preparing these remarks, and is the Head of the Bank’s 
new Macroeconomic Modelling Section (see below). 
Introduction 
Let  me  start  by  thanking  the  University  of  Tasmania  and  the  Tasmanian  branch  of  the 
Economic Society of Australia for hosting this event.  
Today I am going to talk about economic forecasting, which plays an important role in policy 
deliberations  at  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  (RBA).  It  assists  in  interpreting  economic 
developments and, because monetary policy typically affects economic activity and inflation 
with a lag, it is a necessary part of determining and communicating the appropriate stance of 
policy.  
I’m  also going to  discuss the  results  of  an  external  review  of  our forecasting methods  and 
processes, which we have just published, and our responses to the recommendations therein.  
Our current approach to forecasting has been in place for some years. While it has served us 
well, we thought it was time to consider whether our methods and processes would continue 
to be appropriate and how we might improve upon them. To do this, we commissioned two 
eminent economists to conduct a review, Professor Adrian Pagan of the University of Sydney 
and Dr David Wilcox of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors.1  
The existing approach to forecasting at the RBA 
The process of economic forecasting actually involves a wide range of activities. The most 
familiar  relates  to  the  construction  of  forecasts  that  reflect  our  best  estimates  of  future 
economic outcomes.2 Each quarter in the Statement on Monetary Policy, we publish forecasts 
for Australia’s major trading partners’ GDP growth, as well as Australia’s terms of trade, GDP 
growth, unemployment rate and inflation over the next two-and-a-half years. However, these 
numbers  are  just  a  summary  of  an  extensive  process  in  which  our  analysts  incorporate 
incoming data, assess the relevance of new events, construct forecasts for a large number of 
economic variables, analyse various scenarios and consider a range of key risks to the outlook. 
All of this provides a useful framework to guide policy deliberations and then communicate 
those decisions.  
This process may lead us to revise the economic outlook – either in response to unexpected 
developments or shocks, or to news that changes our views on how the economy is evolving. 
If a change in the outlook is judged to be significant, it may warrant a change in the stance of 
monetary  policy.  However,  that  link  between  the  forecasts  and  policy  is  by  no  means  a 
                                                
1   Professor Pagan is one of Australia’s foremost academic economists and served on the Board of the Reserve 
Bank from 1995 to 2000. Dr Wilcox is Director of the Division of Research and Statistics at the Federal Reserve 
Board of Governors in the United States. 
I use the term “forecast” somewhat loosely, since these are conditioned on a range of assumptions, such as a 
fixed nominal exchange rate and a particular path for the cash rate, and hence could better be described as 
“projections”. 
2  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   mechanical one. In part, that is because any policy response will depend on the nature of the 
change to the outlook, including whether it has been driven primarily by supply or demand 
shocks, and how persistent those shocks are likely to be. Also, any policy response will depend 
on  an  assessment  of  the  extent  to  which  the  economy  will  adjust  of  its  own  accord.  It  is 
important to recognise that sufficiently flexible economies can do much to right themselves, 
with  households  and  businesses  responding  to  the  signals  provided  by  changes  in  prices, 
wages and the exchange rate. Such changes have played a major role in the adjustment of 
the Australian economy to the decline in commodity prices and mining investment over recent 
years.3  Another  important  consideration  is  the  sizeable  degree  of  uncertainty  about  the 
outlook. While a revision to the central outlook might appear to be of substance, it may still be 
relatively small compared with the considerable degree of forecast uncertainty. And finally, 
other considerations, beyond the near-term outlook of the macroeconomy, may be relevant, 
including the prospects for financial stability.  
The role of models 
Modelling can play a useful role in the forecasting process, including by helping to identify the 
nature  of  the  shocks  affecting  the  economy.  Models  can  also  provide  a  sense  of  how  the 
economy  might  respond  to  alternative  policy  paths  or  different  assumptions  about  key 
variables, such as commodity prices or the exchange rate to name just two. In addition, models 
allow us to check whether our forecasts are consistent. For example, does the path for output 
and  employment  imply  a  plausible  path  for  productivity?  And  do  they  imply  patterns  of 
economic behaviour that are broadly in line with historical experience? A recent instance is the 
decline in wage growth over recent years, which has been larger than implied by the historical 
relationship with the unemployment rate. Of course, we may be justified from time to time to 
think  that  history  is  likely  to  be  a  poor  guide,  but  it’s  worth  being  explicit  about  any  such 
deviations. Finally, while models play an important role in the forecasting process, the value of 
models should not be overstated, particularly because no one model that we have captures all 
of the relevant features of an economy or consistently “beats” other forecasts.4  
Central forecasts 
Central  forecasts  attract  a  great  deal  of  attention  and  commentary  from  financial  market 
participants, the press and the general public. The extent of that attention is often unwarranted. 
As several of my colleagues have noted over the years, point forecasts should be treated with 
a healthy degree of scepticism.5 It is unlikely that GDP growth or inflation will exactly match 
point forecasts, or even narrow ranges around those points. Instead, central forecasts are best 
thought of as our view of the most likely of a wide range of possible outcomes, with small 
changes in the forecasts unlikely to reflect anything more than a modest shift in the balance of 
risks.  
To avoid fallacies that can accompany false precision, we recently altered what we refer to as 
“Table 6.1” of the forecasts in the Statement by presenting ranges for GDP and inflation in 
½ percentage point increments, rather than ¼ percentage point increments (shown below). No 
                                                
3   For a discussion of these issues, see Lowe P (2016), “Resilience and Ongoing Challenges”, Keynote Address 
to the UDIA National Congress 2016, Adelaide, 8 March. 
4   Models usually involve some reasonable simplifications of reality so as to make them tractable and possible to 
estimate. Such models will be unable to capture all relevant considerations all of the time. 
5   For example, see Stevens G (2011), “On the Use of Forecasts”, Address to the Australian Business Economists 
Annual Dinner, Sydney, 24 November; Lowe P (2010), “Forecasting in an Uncertain World”, Address to the 
Australian  Business  Economists  Annual  Forecasting  Conference  Dinner,  Sydney,  8  December;  Stevens  G 
(2004), “Better Than A Coin Toss? The Thankless Task of Economic Forecasting”, Address to the Economic 
Society of Victoria and the Australian Industry Group, Melbourne, 17 August; and Stevens G (1999), “Economic 
Forecasting and Its Role in Making Monetary Policy”, Address to the Economic Society of Australia Forecasting 
Conference, Melbourne, 19 August. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   doubt that will not discourage some readers from using their rulers to measure the graphs and 
focus on revisions down to the nearest 0.1 percentage point! Also, some commentators will be 
tempted to draw attention to what they might describe as “large ½ percentage point changes” 
when  the forecasts  are revised,  even  though  any  such revisions  may  reflect  much  smaller 
adjustments if it is the case that the forecasts have merely crossed rounding barriers.6 The key 
point I’d like to make here is that if we judge any forecast revision to be of substance worth 
noting, we’ll note it!  
To emphasise this point further, it is worth remembering that the available data are subject to 
a degree of measurement error. In the case of real GDP, for example, quarterly growth rates 
can easily be revised up or down by ½ percentage point or more in the first four years after the 
initial estimate (Graph 1).7 The recent revision to GDP growth – of 0.2 percentage points in the 
September quarter of 2015 – was relatively minor, though the data now suggest that GDP 
growth  picked  up  in the  second  half  of  2015 to  be  more  in  line  with  the  strength  that  was 
apparent in a range of indicators of the labour market and business conditions at that time.  
Starting points 
A critical element of forecasting is to have a sense of where the economy is now and in which 
direction it’s currently heading. This comes from carefully dissecting the incoming economic 
data in an attempt to disentangle signals from noise and determine the extent to which shocks 
will  be  long-lived  or  transitory.8  In  addition  to  publicly  available  data,  we  make  use  of 
information obtained from our business liaison program. We also use information gleaned from 
econometric models, which include both single-equation models of individual variables as well 
as larger models that attempt to capture the behaviour of multiple variables simultaneously.  
The  various  information  sources  that  we  use  don’t  always  provide  a  clear  message  about 
where we are and where we are heading. Indeed, it is naïve to think that the truth can reside 
in a single source of data or a particular model. To an extent, this reflects the usual noise in 
the various types of information, as well as uncertainty about the strength of different economic 
relationships. Combining information from a variety of sources, and models, typically results in 
more robust conclusions than relying exclusively on a single source.  
The behaviour of inflation provides a timely example. A wide range of information suggests 
that inflation is low and likely to remain so over the next couple of years. This includes both 
structural (DSGE) and statistical (VAR) models of inflation. These attribute the outcomes over 
the past year or more, in part, to the influence of foreign “factors” – as captured by low inflation 
and low interest rates in the advanced economies. These can have a direct effect on inflation 
in Australia via the prices of imports. There are indirect effects as well, whereby spare capacity 
in  product  and  labour  markets globally  may  have  contributed to relatively  low  inflation  and 
wage outcomes in Australia. The models suggest that these influences on Australian inflation 
are typically quite persistent, which reinforces the message from other sources that inflation is 
likely to remain low for some time.  
                                                
6   To be clear, if an initial forecast of a particular number had been close but less than say 2¼ per cent, for example, 
it would have been rounded down to 2 per cent, but a minor upward revision of less than ½ percentage point 
could mean it subsequently rounds up to 2½ per cent. 
7   J Bishop, T Gill and D Lancaster (2013), “GDP Revisions: Measurement and Implications”, RBA Bulletin (March), 
pp. 11–22, discuss the pattern and size of revisions to real GDP over recent years. 
8   Lowe P (2010), “Forecasting in an Uncertain World”, Address to the Australian Business Economists Annual 
Forecasting Conference, Sydney, 8 December, describes the inputs into the forecast process in greater detail. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Uncertainties 
For  several  years  we  have  presented  confidence  intervals  for  GDP  growth  and  inflation 
forecasts in the Statement (Graph 2).9 These summarise the extent of uncertainty based on 
previous  forecast  errors.  Since  February  of  last  year,  we  have  also  published  an 
unemployment rate forecast and confidence intervals around that.  
In addition to confidence intervals, the forecasting process leads us to think about the risks 
associated with specific economic developments and to quantify those where possible. Each 
quarter, we discuss a range of scenarios that explore how the economy might respond under 
conditions  that  vary  from  the  central  case.  For  example,  what  if  commodity  prices,  the 
exchange rate or overseas economic conditions evolve differently to the paths embedded in 
our central forecasts? These exercises help us to identify events that could have a meaningful 
effect on the economy and to which policymakers may need to respond.  
Background to the Pagan-Wilcox review 
We  commissioned  Adrian  Pagan  and  David  Wilcox  to  conduct  a  review  of  forecasting  in 
Economic Group in late 2014. We asked for their views on whether there were areas we could 
improve upon, whether the tools of forecasting were the right ones and whether we were using 
the forecasts appropriately. We did not commission the Review as a result of any concerns 
about our recent forecasting experience or because we felt that our existing procedures were 
fundamentally flawed. But it was time for a careful health check of our approach.  
Professor  Pagan  and  Dr  Wilcox  visited  the  Bank  for  two  weeks  during  one  of  our  regular 
forecasting rounds. They spent time with individual sections in Economic Group, examining 
our models and forecasting approaches in detail. They also met with senior management and 
attended our internal forecast discussions.  
Their review represents a thorough analysis of our forecasting procedures. We have made it 
publicly available today. I will attempt to summarise its key conclusions and describe how we 
have responded to the recommendations.  
The review’s conclusions and recommendations  
The Review concluded that our forecasting practices were fundamentally sound and produced 
information conducive to good policymaking. The reviewers praised the knowledge, motivation 
and technical proficiency of our analysts. They also commended the use of models and the 
spirit of open debate in our internal forecasting discussions.  
But there is always room to improve. The Review made a number of recommendations, which 
can be summarised in three categories: the development of new models; changes to forecast 
procedures; and organisational changes.  
Development of new models 
There were two recommendations regarding the modelling tools we used.  
• 
First, the Review recommended that we put additional resources into developing and 
analysing  “full-system”  or  “general  equilibrium”  models  of  the  economy  –  that  is, 
models  which  account  for  the  simultaneous  responses  of  a  large  number  of  key 
variables to unexpected developments (or shocks).  
                                                
9   For information on the construction of these confidence intervals, see Tulip P and S Wallace (2012), “Estimates 
of Uncertainty around the RBA’s Forecasts”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2012–07. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    The  Review  recommended  supplementing  our  existing  models  with  one  that 
incorporates our separate single equation estimates for a range of key variables into 
a system of equations.10  
Second, the Review noted the enormous changes to the structure of the Australian 
economy over the past decade or more, particularly, but not exclusively, related to the 
mining  boom.  These  developments  caused  shifts  in  the  composition  of  economic 
activity, such as the large pick-up in mining investment that peaked in 2012. Hence, 
the relationships between economic variables may be different from the past. The 
Review  recommended  placing  more  emphasis  on  investigating  the  robustness  of 
existing economic models to structural change and provided a number of suggestions 
on how to do this.11  
Changes to existing forecast procedures 
The Review also recommended some modifications to some of our forecast procedures.  
Forecast horizon 
It suggested we consider extending the forecasting horizon beyond two-and-a-half years. It 
was  acknowledged  that  doing  so  would  be  more  straightforward  when  using  model-based 
forecasts. Moreover, the current approach has a number of advantages. A two-to-three year 
horizon is a period over which monetary policy, and what could broadly be termed “demand-
side”  factors,  tend  to  influence  economic  activity.  Over  longer  horizons,  “supply-side” 
influences, like changes in the trend rate of productivity growth or the non-accelerating inflation 
rate of unemployment (NAIRU), are likely to be more important. These factors are more difficult 
to forecast than short-run, demand-side influences, and are not affected by monetary policy 
decisions.  
However, following large and persistent disturbances, such as a once-in-a-century boom in 
commodity prices, the economy may not return to its steady state within the existing forecasting 
horizon.  This  could  complicate  the  assessment  of  whether  current  policy  settings  are 
appropriate, hence the recommendation to extend the horizon.  
Cash rate paths 
Another recommendation  was  related  to  a  “technical  assumption”  about  the  cash  rate that 
underpins our forecasts. At the time of the Review, we typically assumed that the cash rate 
                                                
10   I should note that full-system models of one sort or another have a long history at the Bank and already play a 
role in the forecasting process. The earliest examples of such models date back as far as the 1970s and include 
the RBA1 model (Henderson J and P Norman (1975), “The Equations of the RBA1/74 Model of the Australian 
Economy”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 7504) and the RBA76 model (Jonson P, E Moses and C Wymer 
(1976), “A Minimal Model of the Australian Economy”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 7601). In the late 
1990s, Economic Research Department staff constructed a small empirical model of the Australian economy. 
This model was documented in Beechey M, N Bharucha, A Cagliarini, D Gruen and C Thompson (2000), “A 
Small Model of the Australian Macroeconomy”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2000-05 and Stone A, T 
Wheatley and L Wilkinson (2005), “A Small Model of the Australian Macroeconomy: An Update”, RBA Research 
Discussion  Paper  No  2005-11.  More  recently,  our  staff  have  developed  more  complex  dynamic  stochastic 
general equilibrium (DSGE) models. These models were documented in Jääskela J and K Nimark (2011), “A 
Medium-scale New Keynesian Open Economy Model of Australia”, Economic Record (87), pp. 11–36 and Rees 
D, P Smith and J Hall (2015), “A Multi-sector Model of the Australian Economy”, RBA Research Discussion 
Paper No 2015-07. These sorts of models feature in our internal forecast meetings. However, I think it is fair to 
say that full-system models have not been fully integrated into our forecasting procedures and the nature of 
those models has been somewhat distinct from the single-equation models that most of our analysts work with 
day-to-day. 
11   For  example,  by  estimating  models  incorporating  time-varying  coefficients  or  using  techniques  such  as 
exponential smoothing that reduce the weight given to certain observations when estimating the parameters of 
a model. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   would  remain  constant across  the forecast  horizon.12 This  has the  advantage  of  simplicity. 
Also, over short horizons it often provides a reasonable approximation to what econometric 
models  and  financial  market  participants  would  expect.  However,  over  longer  horizons  a 
constant cash rate assumption may be less plausible, particularly when interest rates are far 
from average levels. The Review recommended considering alternatives to a constant cash 
rate assumption. A number of alternatives exist, including: the path implied by financial market 
prices; a path consistent with the past behaviour of the Bank as summarised by an estimated 
“monetary policy rule”; or an ad hoc path postulated by staff members. There is no consensus 
about which of these alternatives is optimal.13  
Broaden discussion of the forecasts 
The  Review  also  made  suggestions  relating  to  the  presentation  of  our  forecasts  in  the 
Statement.  In  particular,  the  authors  recommended  that  we  publish  a  forecast  for  the 
unemployment rate. They noted that to assess the state of the real economy it is not sufficient 
to know the pace of GDP growth; one also needs to know how this rate of growth relates to 
potential growth and hence the extent to which spare productive capacity is rising or falling. 
While  we  have  always  focused  on  these  concepts  in  our  internal  analysis,  publishing 
unemployment rate forecasts provides useful information in this regard.  
Discussion of the risks 
An additional suggestion was to alter our discussion of risks to the forecasts in the Statement. 
The Review argued that there was scope to provide more guidance on the plausibility and 
implications of alternative scenarios, rather than merely providing a list of events that could 
affect the outlook.  
It is possible to come up with any number of scenarios that may cause economic outcomes to 
differ from a given set of forecasts. It is worth noting, however, that many plausible scenarios 
may have fairly benign implications. To give one example, we typically condition our forecasts 
on a constant exchange rate, even though it would be unusual for the exchange rate to remain 
steady for any length of time. However, the effect of an exchange rate movement will depend 
in large part on whether it has occurred in response to other developments, such as a change 
in commodity prices. The consequences of such exchange rate movements are predictable to 
some degree and, in many instances, have tended to help insulate the economy from adverse 
developments offshore or even domestically. In other circumstances, a large exchange rate 
movement (or even a lack of movement in the face of other developments) may represent an 
important shock to the economy.  
One can also imagine scenarios that are unlikely to occur but may have far more substantial 
implications for the economic outlook if realised. These scenarios can be difficult to quantify 
but may be worth discussing nonetheless. An example that we discussed in our most recent 
Statement was the potential for financial instability in China to lead to a sharp slowdown in 
economic activity there and in the Asian region more broadly.  
Organisational suggestions 
Finally,  the  Review  made  some  recommendations  regarding  the  organisation  of  Economic 
Group.  
                                                
12   However, we have used different conditioning assumptions at various times. For example, during the global 
financial crisis we conditioned our forecasts on financial market interest rate expectations. 
13   Some central banks, including the Bank of England and the European Central Bank, condition their forecasts 
on  paths  implied by  financial market  prices;  others,  including  the  Sveriges  Riksbank and  the  Norges  Bank, 
condition their forecasts on staff expectations of the future policy interest rate. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The  first  was  to  establish  a  section  dedicated  to  the  development  and  use  of  full-system 
macroeconomic  models.  It  would  build  upon  the  work  of  the  existing  modelling  team  and 
develop a new model. The establishment of such a section would facilitate the greater use of 
models  within  the  Bank,  increase  cooperation  between  different  sections  generating  the 
forecasts and help to enhance the familiarity of our staff with these types of models.  
The Review also encouraged the Bank to consider whether existing hiring and staffing policies 
encouraged the right mix of generalists and technical specialists. In particular, it highlighted 
macroeconomic modelling as an area requiring technical expertise. In addition, the Review 
questioned  whether  personnel  across  Economic  Group  were  distributed  optimally,  with  the 
suggestion that more staff could be dedicated to modelling if there were fewer staff monitoring 
overseas economies and/or participating in the Bank’s Regional and Industry Analysis section, 
which conducts liaison across the country.  
Responses to the review 
My colleagues and I have spent time discussing the Review’s conclusions, re-examining our 
existing procedures and developing appropriate responses.  
We have already implemented some of the Review’s recommendations:  
• 
We have added a quantitative discussion of our unemployment rate forecasts to the 
Statement, with a graph of confidence intervals to illustrate the extent of uncertainty.  
The Statement’s Outlook chapter now provides a more comprehensive explanation of 
the uncertainties around our forecasts, including more information about the channels 
through which risks could affect the economy.  
We have changed the nature of the cash rate assumption underpinning our forecasts. 
Since the start of 2015, we have conditioned our forecasts on the assumption that the 
cash rate moves broadly in line with the path implied by financial market pricing.  
To increase the Bank’s capacity to use full-system models, we have established a 
new  Macroeconomic  Modelling  section  within  the  Economic  Analysis  Department. 
This has primary responsibility for generating model-based analysis to enhance the 
quality of our forecasting processes and policy advice. I should emphasise that this 
section will complement our existing forecasting processes, not replace them. As is 
the case at many other central banks, our forecasts will still be generated by a range 
of analysts and will feature a degree of judgement, rather than be mechanical, model-
based forecasts. However, the forecasts will be usefully informed by the insights and 
analysis that full-system models can provide.  
   The Review recommended redirecting resources from monitoring overseas economies and 
conducting  business  liaison  to  other  activities,  particularly  modelling.  However,  we  have 
sourced staff for the new modelling section from across Economic Group more broadly and 
have no intention of reducing the extent of our liaison program. This reflected our assessment 
that the benefits of monitoring overseas economies and conducting domestic economic liaison 
go well beyond the direct contribution to our quarterly forecasting process.14 In addition, the 
                                                
14   Liaison information helps fill information gaps to strengthen the Bank’s capacity to assess structural trends in 
the Australian economy. Two recent examples of this include better understanding the responsiveness of the 
construction sector to changes in interest rates and whether this has changed over time, and understanding 
why non-mining business investment has not picked up as forecast. The State Offices also play a key role in 
enhancing the Bank’s engagement with the public via presentations on economic developments to businesses 
and community organisations, teacher conferences, and university and school students across the country. For 
more information about the role of the RBA’s Business Liaison program see RBA (2014), “The RBA’s Business 
Liaison Program”, RBA Bulletin (September), pp. 1–6 and Heath A (2015), “The Role of the RBA’s Business 
Liaison Program”, Address to the Urban Development Institute of Australia, Perth, 24 September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   liaison  program  provides  valuable  insights  for  forecasting.  For  example,  during  the  mining 
investment boom, liaison provided timely and accurate information about construction projects 
that  was  not  available  elsewhere.  Combining  our  liaison  on  each  project  has  provided  a 
reasonably accurate picture of what has transpired. Moreover, because a commodity price 
boom of this magnitude had not been experienced before, models estimated using historical 
data would have had difficulty anticipating the extent of the response of mining investment. 
Similarly, our analysts monitoring overseas economies help us to understand the economic 
and financial developments affecting our trading partners, particularly in the Asian region, in a 
way that would not be possible from using publicly available forecasts of a limited range of 
variables such as GDP and inflation from organisations like the International Monetary Fund 
or Consensus Economics.  
Conclusion 
The Pagan-Wilcox Review was a comprehensive health check of our forecasting approach. 
While the Review confirmed that our methods are fundamentally sound, it provided a number 
of  valuable  suggestions  for  how  we  could  improve  the  way  we  forecast. We  have  already 
responded to many of the suggestions and are in the process of following up on others. While 
these changes are unlikely to see much of an improvement in forecast accuracy, they have 
the potential to enhance the role that forecasting plays in the policy process and facilitate the 
usefulness of the forecasts as an important tool of communication.  
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
