   Juyeol Lee: Bank of Korea’s 66th anniversary 
Speech by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the commemorating ceremony 
of the Bank of Korea’s 66th anniversary, Bank of Korea, Seoul, 10 June 2016. 
 Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea family, 
Today marks the 66th anniversary of the Bank of Korea’s foundation. On this happy occasion 
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to all those who served before us in the Bank of 
Korea over the years, devoting themselves to the development of our Bank and the national 
economy, and to those who have supported and encouraged us during this time as well. Let 
me  also  express  my  compliments  to  each  and  every  member  of  our  current  staff,  for  so 
faithfully carrying out the duties entrusted to you. 
Our economy exhibited growth in the mid-2 percent range last year, below our potential growth 
rate, and it has not shown any clearly marked recovery this year either. The trend of declining 
exports continues, the improvement in domestic demand such as consumption and investment 
has been unsatisfactory, and the sentiments of economic agents remain sluggish. Consumer 
price inflation is also substantially below its newly set 2 percent target. 
To  cope  with  these  economic  conditions, the  Bank  of  Korea greatly  increased  the support 
provided  under  its  Bank  Intermediated  Lending  Support  Facility  in  March  of  this  year,  and 
yesterday cut its Base Rate to 1.25 percent per annum. 
In  view  of  domestic  and  external  economic  conditions,  however,  it  seems  unlikely  that  our 
economy can easily emerge from its trend of low growth and low inflation in the near future. 
First, it is difficult to expect any remarkable improvement in our exports, due to the delays in 
economic recovery in major countries and the consequent slowdown in growth of world trade. 
The euro area and Japan have adopted quantitative easing policies and negative policy rates, 
but the concerns about possible long-term low growth there have persisted. The US economy 
has exhibited relatively solid growth so far, but given the slowing pace of its improvement in 
employment the markets expect the US Federal Reserve to delay its policy rate hike. And 
China, our largest trading counterpart, amid the slowing of its pace of economic growth is also 
shifting to a domestic demand-centered growth strategy. 
The structural factors limiting our domestic demand recovery persist as well, such as our low 
birth  rate  and  population  aging,  the  buildup  in  household  debt,  and  excessive  slack  in 
manufacturing  capacity.  And  given  the  corporate  restructuring  planned  going  forward,  the 
consumption and investment sentiments of economic agents may contract further. 
Against this backdrop, in order to help restore our economy’s vitality it is important, along with 
our implementation of accommodative monetary and fiscal policies, that we carry out structural 
reforms consistently. In the absence of structural reform our macroeconomic policy will not 
generate the desired effects, and we will only find our policy space being exhausted. 
We should also devote great efforts to discovering and nurturing new growth engines, which 
can drive our economy going forward. We need to create new industries and new markets, by 
investing actively in and fostering digital innovation, the so-called “4th Industrial Revolution”, 
which is progressing rapidly especially in some advanced countries. 
Together with this, we should also work to expand employment. In the past, it was understood 
that the role of employment was limited to supporting the demand for labor following economic 
growth. However, as discussed during last month’s Bank of Korea International Conference 
on Employment and Growth, attention is now focusing on the role of employment in leading 
growth. 
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea,  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   I would like to touch now on the tasks that we will need to focus on from the latter half of this 
year. 
Moving forward we must maintain our accommodative monetary policy stance, with a focus on 
revival of the domestic economy. This will also work to lessen the negative short-term impacts 
of corporate restructuring on production, employment and the sentiments of economic agents. 
Second, given the long period of monetary easing undertaken to this time, we will need to pay 
even more attention to financial stability. It is essential to keep a closer eye on developments 
related to household debt, which has been maintaining a trend of high growth recently, and to 
carry out macroprudential policies as necessary in a timely manner in consultation with the 
government  and  the  supervisory  authorities.  With  the  prolongation  of  our  low  interest  rate 
stance,  economic  agents’  risk  appetites  are  likely  to  grow,  and  imbalances  in  the financial 
system in consequence likely to build up. We should therefore devote more attention to these 
imbalances. We should also not spare efforts in examining the potential risks that can cause 
expansions  in  financial  market  volatility  at  home  and  abroad,  such  as  the  uncertainties 
surrounding  the  US  Fed’s  monetary  policy  normalization  process,  and  the  potential  for  a 
resurfacing of financial and economic unrest in China. 
If  a  credit  crunch  or  any  other  financial  instabilities  occur  in  the  course  of  corporate 
restructuring, the Bank of Korea will have to respond actively through use of various policy 
tools, including open market operations and its lending facilities. Although the recapitalization 
of state-owned banks, where worsening capital adequacies are feared, is an issue that should 
in principle be addressed through fiscal measures, the Bank of Korea has decided to also take 
part in this project, as a precaution against financial system instability. And going forward the 
Bank  of  Korea  must  do  its  utmost  to  fulfill  its  role  in  achieving  the  desired  goals,  while 
maintaining its fundamental principles. 
We also need to step up our efforts devoted to policy communication. To achieve effective 
communication there is nothing more important than heightening the accuracy of evaluations 
of and forecasts for economic conditions, and then delivering consistent policy signals to the 
market  based  upon them. The  Bank  of  Korea needs  to  continuously  improve  its  monetary 
policy  decision  statements,  while  expanding  its  channels  of  communication  with  economic 
agents.  From  this  year  on  we  have  accountability  to  provide  the  public  more  detailed 
explanations  of  our  inflation  targeting  operations.  We  will  therefore  have  to  fulfill  this 
responsibility  faithfully,  and  by  doing  so  will  ensure  enhanced  public  understanding  of  and 
confidence in our monetary policy. 
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
Given the challenging conditions facing the Korean economy, expectations of the role of the 
central bank have become higher than ever. The policy environment around us can however 
be described as one of “radical uncertainty,” since the directions and speed of changes are 
very hard to understand. Against this backdrop, if we hope to lay out policy alternatives that 
reflect reality well, then we should change our fundamental patterns of behaviour and thinking 
decisively. We should also listen carefully to new ideas, with flexible thinking and open minds 
free from the influence of past custom. 
However, this does not mean that we can overlook the basic principles of a central bank. If we 
are bent on keeping step with external changes without deep reflection, then we may easily 
forget where we stand and what the raison d’etre of a central bank is. We must bear in mind 
the fact that the central bank has to conduct its policies from the long-term perspective of the 
national economy as a whole, rather than being distracted by short-term outcomes. 
As  in  any  organization,  it  is  IT  sector  capability  that  will  determine  the  Bank  of  Korea’s 
development in this 4th Industrial Revolution era. We will therefore have to review how we can 
change our IT-related work processes, and what areas need supplementing, and if necessary 
streamline our organization structure accordingly. Given its growing importance, our payment 
and  settlement  sector  must  be  enhanced.  We  should  also  devote  concerted  efforts  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   strengthening  our  capacities  for  responding  to  cyber  threats,  which  have  been  increasing 
recently. 
It is also important to improve our HR and wage systems in ways that heighten the expertise 
and diversity of our staff, and focus more on efficiency and competition. We plan to implement 
certain proposals that we have reviewed in this regard, after soliciting the opinions of staff. The 
Bank  of  Korea  is  currently  pursuing  construction  of  an  integrated  annex  building  and  the 
remodeling of its headquarters building. We must devote our best efforts to ensure that our 
new buildings are safe and practical, while being dignified as well. 
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea! 
I would like to urge each of you to continue devoting your very best efforts in carrying out the 
duties entrusted to you, with strong responsibility and pride as members of our nation’s central 
bank, as you have always done until now. Please remember that, as I have emphasized many 
times, we are required to maintain much higher levels of morality than other people. 
In drawing my remarks to a close, I should like to express my gratitude to all of those who have 
participated in the preparation of this commemorative event, and I wish you all and all of those 
whom you hold dear the very best of good health and happiness. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
