  Glenn Stevens: Observations on the current situation 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Credit 
Suisse Global Markets Macro Conference, New York City, 19 April 2016. 
I thank Emily Perry for assistance in compiling these remarks. 
 It is good to be in New York once again. Thank you to Credit Suisse for the invitation. 
By way of a preface to these remarks, I note that we have all just been in Washington, D.C. 
for  the IMF  and  G20  meetings. With that  context,  my  comments  today  are  international  in 
focus, rather than carrying any particular message about my own country. 
It has certainly been another interesting few months in global financial markets. Faced with 
falling commodity prices, diverging policy stances among major jurisdictions, the odd policy 
surprise  and  the  sense  that  the  economic  growth  outlook  was  a  bit  softer  than  had  been 
assumed  before, market  participants  had  a  lot to  digest. To this  picture  was  added  a  new 
dimension  of  uncertainty  about  the  way  regulations  pertaining  to  some  capital  instruments 
might affect returns, and about the way resolution actions may work in some places. 
In  the  opening  weeks  of  this  year  we  saw  sovereign  yields  in  major  advanced  economies 
move  towards  historic  lows,  while  spreads  for  some  other  sovereigns  and  corporates  – 
especially  high-yield  obligations  –  moved  out,  with  particularly  sharp  increases  for  bonds 
issued  by  resources  companies.  Share  market  volatility  increased,  with  prices  generally 
lower,  especially  for  banks.  Currencies  of  a  range  of  emerging  market  countries,  already 
marked  down  considerably  over  the  preceding  year,  came  under  more  pressure  and 
sovereign spreads for some, though not all, of these countries increased. 
Since  about  the  middle  of  February,  markets  seem  to  have  regained  some  composure.  A 
range of commodity prices have risen. Share prices have recovered some ground, though 
they remain mostly lower than they were a year or six months ago, and bank share prices in 
Japan  and  Europe  are  back  around  their  recent  lows.  Investment-grade  spreads  have 
declined to where they were about six months ago. That is higher, to be sure, than a year or 
two years ago, but those spreads were unusually compressed. Even energy-related spreads 
have narrowed quite noticeably, to be back around their levels at the start of the year. The 
same  is  true  for  emerging  market  sovereign  spreads,  while  yields  on  advanced-economy 
bonds  remain  close  to  their  record  lows.  Emerging  market  currencies  have  generally 
appreciated, as have the currencies of commodity-exporting nations. 
So things have calmed down somewhat. That said, I think most observers and policymakers 
tend to the view that while some recovery is welcome, the relative ‘calm’ seems a little eerie 
– perhaps fragile. Certainly, these events have posed a few questions for policymakers, at 
least  for  the  present  speaker.  Among  the  questions  being  considered  over  recent  weeks 
were the following: 
• 
Does  the  “turbulence”  simply  reflect the  same  information  that  is  embodied  in  the 
softer global  growth forecasts that  have  been  emerging  over  this  period?  In  other 
words is it just a noisier version of a signal that is already being received? 
Or has the financial volatility been telling us there has been a significant shock, the 
effects of which are coming but which we can’t see (yet) in forecasts or other data? 
Alternatively, could the turbulence be a shock that leads to a worse global outcome 
– by leading to a tightening of credit conditions, loss of wealth and confidence, etc., 
and therefore crimping demand? 
Or is it just a bout of market nervousness that carries little lasting importance? 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  As always, it is impossible to be sure, but it would not be unreasonable, I think, to draw the 
tentative conclusion that while these movements did reflect some underlying softening in the 
global outlook that was already emerging, the reaction was overdone. Commodity prices are 
well  down,  but  actually  some  prices  had  been  declining  for  quite  a  while.  Iron  ore,  for 
example,  peaked  as  long  ago  as  February  2011.  Moreover,  in  many  cases  declining 
commodity  prices  reflect  additional  supply,  which  usually  carries  a  different  –  positive  – 
implication for global growth, as opposed to weaker demand. 
While global growth forecasts are being lowered, at this stage they see higher growth rates 
than in 2001, which was a relatively mild slowdown episode. Of course that is just a forecast 
– but so far there are not any actual data that invalidate that view. Given some recovery in 
markets of late, it seems too extreme to conclude that this event itself is developing into a 
significant financial shock with important additional macroeconomic significance beyond the 
softer global growth already understood to be in prospect. 
Having  said  all  that,  I  don’t  think  we  should  write  the  episode  off  as  just  another  bout  of 
nervousness. Even if the volatility was not necessarily a reflection of fundamentals, it’s worth 
ensuring that we have extracted all the information we can from it. In addition, some quite big 
policy  questions  are  lurking.  It  may  be  that  these  are  playing  a  role  in  bouts  of  market 
nervousness – and could do so again. 
With  that  in  mind,  let  me  talk  about  a  few  issues  –  some  familiar,  but  one  or  two  rather 
newer. 
Liquidity 
One issue that both the regulatory community and many market participants have focused on 
for a while now is an apparent decline in market liquidity at a time when capital markets have 
become a more important source of funding for the economy. We can debate how much of 
that decline in liquidity is a result of regulation – and certainly some of it is – and how much 
simply  owes  to  large  players  deciding  to  alter  the  way  they  run  their  businesses 
independently of regulatory changes.1  
There  is  at  least  some  evidence  that  market  liquidity  is  more  costly  than  it  used  to  be. 
Whether that is a big a problem is not clear. It could matter, for example, through the cost of 
capital to the productive side of the economy, as investors price the illiquidity of the assets 
they buy. This would mean that borrowers pay a little more than otherwise as a result. But 
are  creditworthy  borrowers  actually  having  material  difficulties  accessing  finance  on 
reasonable terms, beyond what is explainable by their own macroeconomic fundamentals? 
It  also  seems  that  liquidity  is  somewhat  less  reliable  even  under  conditions  that  could  be 
thought to be “normal”, even in some of the largest sovereign markets in the world. Recent 
events  have  not  obviously  demonstrated  any  deterioration,  nor  any  improvement,  in  that 
situation. 
We  don’t  know  how  liquidity  will  stand  up  under  genuine  stressed  conditions.  This  is  of 
increasing  importance,  particularly  given  the  large  growth  of  assets  under  management. 
Regulators  are  rightly  emphasising  the  need  for  sound  liquidity  management  by  the  asset 
managers,  while  market  participants  rightly  point  to  the  practices  and  tools  they  have  to 
address these questions. But the key question is: what liquidity promise do the investors – 
many of them retail – think they have been given? Not what the fine-print says, but what are 
they  actually  assuming?  If  their  assumptions  are  at  variance  with  the  genuine  underlying 
liquidity  in  the  relevant  markets,  there  could  still  be  trouble  even  with  careful  planning  by 
                                                
1 
It’s also important to recall that many markets never had that much real liquidity anyway. Outside the United 
States,  corporate  bond  markets  weren’t  really  liquid  at  any  time  and  some  observers  say  that  even  in  the 
United States – the biggest corporate market – genuine liquidity was always a bit doubtful. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  asset managers. The Financial Stability Board continues to work on these issues and over 
time presumably we will be able to refine our assessments. 
Monetary policy 
Turning  to  other  policies,  when  the  financial  crisis  ushered  in  a  very  serious  economic 
downturn in late 2008, central banks around the world reduced their policy rates dramatically 
–  in  a  number  of  cases  reaching  the  so  called  “zero  bound”.  Central  bank  balance  sheet 
expansions  were  also  enacted.  These  were  initially  associated  with  system-wide  liquidity 
provision,  but  their  more  persistent  use  was  an  effort  to  provide  more  monetary  policy 
support to weak economies. Together with more explicit guidance about the future path of 
short rates, these actions were aimed at reducing rates further along the yield curve. Some 
details differed, such as whether measures were configured to work through general capital 
market  pricing  or  through  the  banking  system,  or  indeed,  through  exchange  rates.  These 
details were determined by the institutional details of the various countries. But overall, “non-
conventional” policies had the effect of lowering borrowing costs by pushing savers further 
out on the yield and risk curves. 
That is, they prompted a search for yield. They were supposed to do so. Portfolio substitution 
is part of how monetary policy works. When the central bank removes low-risk (and perhaps 
some not so low-risk) financial assets from the system as a monetary policy action, its intent 
is  that,  much  further  out  along  a  long  chain  of  substitution  effects,  consumers  and 
businesses will respond by purchasing real goods and services. 
The extent to which demand for real goods and services was increased as a result of these 
actions is hotly debated. In the United States, business investment as a share of GDP had 
largely  recovered  by  2015.  Of  course,  that  might  have  happened  anyway.  Meanwhile, 
investment is still below pre-crisis levels in Europe. In Japan, it has never recovered to levels 
prior to the collapse of the bubble in the early 1990s. Of course, those levels may well have 
been unsustainably high, and we can’t know the counterfactual. So the debate continues. 
My personal view is that central bank policy at the global level was very effective at heading 
off  a  potential  catastrophe  after  the  Lehman  event,  but  was  always  going  to  have  limited 
capacity to accelerate the recovery. That is not to say central bank policy should not have 
done  all  it  could,  only  that  we  should  be  realistic  about  what  it  can  achieve.  I  think  the 
evidence is consistent with that view. But of course it is also consistent with the argument 
that the measures were very effective, and that the recovery would have been much weaker 
in the absence of these actions. And that is why the debate will continue. 
In the meantime, there are some new areas of discussion emerging and, in a way, they are 
related. 
Interest rates and savers 
The first  is the  increasing  concern  that  this  world  of  ultra-low  interest  rates  over  a  lengthy 
period is a big problem for savers. Here we are not talking about short-term trends. When 
everyone wants to save, the return to doing so will fall – that’s economics. In a cyclical sense 
that has to be expected, just as costs of borrowing rise when demand is strong. 
The issue is when long rates are very low for a long time. In such a world, the whole set of 
assumptions embodied in retirement income plans will be called into question. Increasingly, 
we hear commentary about the difficulty – or impossibility – of defined-benefit pension plans 
making good on their promises with long-term rates of return so low. The fact that accounting 
rules and regulation now strongly incentivise trustees to hold bonds – at the lowest rates of 
return in human history – so as to minimise mark-to-market valuation changes over the short 
term only exacerbates the problem. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The problem is surely not confined to defined-benefit plans. Accumulation arrangements are 
still predicated on some set of assumptions about future income needs and returns. It may 
take longer but surely many of the owners of these funds are going to feel disappointment. 
The implicit promises – even if made only to themselves – about their retirement incomes are 
in danger of not being fulfilled. It is not a very daring prediction to say that these issues will 
loom ever larger over the years ahead. 
Some critics lay these problems at the door of the central banks, whose policy actions have 
worked to lower long-term yields on financial assets. If it were really true that central bank 
policies were the only factor at work in very low long-term interest rates, while at the same 
time they were not helping growth, the critics might have a point. 
But  are  central  banks  alone  responsible  for  the  decline  in  long-term  interest  rates?  Real 
interest rates have fallen noticeably since 2007 – nearly a decade ago now. For there to be 
persistent  effects  on  real  interest  rates  as  a  result  of  central  bank  actions  is  perhaps  not 
impossible, but seems contrary to everything we were taught when we studied economics. 
Monetary policy is not supposed to be able to affect real variables – like real interest rates – 
on  a  sustained  basis.  Presumably,  changes  in  risk  appetite,  subdued  growth  and 
expectations that growth will continue to be subdued have also played a role in lowering real 
rates. 
Interest rates and growth 
This brings into focus the really critical question: what are the prospects for sustained growth 
in the future? Relatedly, what expectations about rates of return in the future are reasonable? 
The real economy needs to generate decent returns on the real capital stock that are then 
matched (risk-adjusted) by the yield on financial assets. The financial assets are, in the end, 
just paper claims on that flow of real returns – directly in the case of private sector obligations 
and  indirectly  for  government  obligations,  which  rely  on  being  able  to  tax  growing  private 
incomes. If the real economy can’t perform to provide real returns to capital, there is nothing 
to  back  higher  yields  on  financial  assets.  In  that  world,  nominal  and  real  yields  on  bonds 
would remain extremely low, the income being generated by those working with the capital 
stock would struggle to fund the benefits required by retirees through dividends and returns 
on  bonds  and  bank  deposits.  Governments  may  not  receive  all  the  revenue  they  need  to 
service their obligations. On the other hand, the stronger the prospects for long-term growth 
and good returns on the real capital stock, the smaller those problems will be and the more 
we can expect that, sooner or later, the yield on financial assets will be higher, in line with 
those real outcomes. 
Which outcome will it be? 
The more pessimistic are moving closer to the position of “secular stagnation”: that situation 
where  the  desire  to  save  is  so  overwhelming  and  the  apparent  opportunities  for  profitable 
investment so weak, that real interest rates cannot equilibrate saving and investment for the 
system at positive rates of interest and full employment. The result is that the ex ante excess 
saving leads to a sustained below-full-employment equilibrium. The concept arose originally 
in the 1930s, but has recently been articulated by Lawrence Summers as a description of the 
current environment.2  
I  still  find  this  a  bit  too  pessimistic,  because  I  struggle  to  accept  that  today,  to  an  extent 
virtually  unprecedented 
technological  development, 
entrepreneurial  drive  and  opportunity  for  improvement  are  so  weak  –  so  unprecedentedly 
in  modern  history, 
ingenuity, 
                                                
2  See Summers L (2016) ‘The Age of Secular Stagnation: What Is It and What To Do About It’, Foreign Affairs, 
15 February. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  weak – and people’s desire to defer gratification so strong, that the equilibrium real rate of 
interest is actually going to be negative over an extended period. 
What  is  undeniable,  though,  is  that  monetary  policy  alone  hasn’t  been,  and  isn’t,  able  to 
generate  sustained growth  to  the  extent  people  desire.  Maybe  this  is  simply  the  inevitable 
outcome  after  a  period  of  excessive  optimism  and  over-leverage  –  an  essentially  cyclical 
explanation,  where  the  cycle  is  a  low-frequency,  financial  one.  Or  maybe  it  is  something 
more deep-seated and structural. That can all be debated. Either way, though, policies that 
encourage  growth  through  means  other  than  just  ultra-cheap  borrowing  costs  are  surely 
needed. 
It is often said, rightly, that policymakers should try to avoid unnecessary policy uncertainty. 
For  central  banks, this has  meant trying to  be clear  about  our  objectives  and  our  reaction 
functions – and what we will, or might, do in various states of the world. Maybe we need to 
be clearer about what we can’t do. Monetary solutions are for monetary problems. If there 
are other problems in the underlying working of the economy, central banks won’t be able to 
solve those. 
It  could 
transfers  (gifts) 
involve  unrequited 
fiscal-monetary  operation. 
funding  of  government  spending  by  central  bank 
Helicopter money? 
It is this recognition that purely monetary actions can go only so far, coupled with the need 
for some more growth and more inflation, that lies behind the recent discussion of “helicopter 
money”. In essence, this approach, were it to be attempted, would really be fiscal policy or a 
combined 
to 
individuals’  bank  accounts  by  the  central  bank  –  which  diminishes  the  central  bank’s  net 
worth  and  so  would  require  the  acquiescence  of  its  owner.  Alternatively,  it  could  involve 
direct 
finance  –  monetary-fiscal 
coordination. 
There  would  be  a  host  of  practical  issues  to  sort  out  in  the  ‘helicopter  money’  approach. 
Other commentators have talked about these recently.3  
The main complication is surely that it would be a lot easier to start doing helicopter money 
than to stop, if history is any guide. Governments have found that a difficult decision to get 
right.  That  is,  after  all,  how  we  got  to  the  point  where  direct  central  bank  financing  of 
governments is frowned upon, or actually contrary to statute, in so many countries. It would 
be a very large step to overturn those taboos, which exist for good reason. The governance 
requirements in doing so would be, if not intractable, at least very complex. Desperate times 
call for desperate measures, perhaps. Are we that desperate? 
Before we even got close to that point, one would have thought that for many governments 
today there must still be projects of an infrastructure kind that would, through conventional 
fiscal operations at current bond rates, offer returns comfortably above their cost of funding. 
Helicopter  money  is  surely  not  needed  in  these  cases.  Questions  may  arise,  in  some 
jurisdictions  at  least,  in  the  minds  of  citizens  about  the  ‘soundness’  of  such  conventional 
policies. But if such questions arise about conventional fiscal actions, it seems unlikely that 
adding central bank financing to the mix would allay them. 
It all comes back to growth 
But the very fact – extraordinary as it is – that such possibilities are being openly discussed 
by serious commentators reinforces the point that, while people find global growth outcomes 
still a bit disappointing, we are reaching the limits of monetary policy in boosting it. Central 
                                                
3  See, for example, Bernanke (2016), ‘What tools does the Fed have left? Part 3: Helicopter money’, Brookings 
Institution, 11 April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  banks must of course do what they can, consistent with their mandates, and they continue to 
explore  options.  It  is  certainly  clever  to  find  ways  of  pushing  the  effective  lower  bound  for 
interest  rates  down  a  bit  further.  It  is  inventive  to  find  ways  of  lending  more,  at  more 
generous terms, to the private sector. 
But  surely  diminishing  returns  are  setting  in.  My  suspicion  is  that  more  and  more  people 
realise  this.  Maybe  this  has  something  to  do  with  market  confidence  being  easily  rattled. 
There was a hint in the recent episode of the feeling that central banks didn’t have much left 
they could do, if things got worse. 
So in the end we will collectively have to face up to the question of whether trend growth is 
lower  and,  if  so,  what  is  to  be  done  about  that.  A  few  candidates  might  be  advanced  as 
contributing  to  such  an  outcome.  Demographics  is  one.  What  we  might  label  productivity 
pessimism – or is it realism? – along the lines of Robert Gordon’s views might be another. 
Others would point to excess debt in many jurisdictions as another. 
If  trend  growth  is  lower  and  we  can’t  or  don’t  want  to  do  anything  about  that,  then 
expectations about future incomes, tax bases and so on will have to be reconfigured. People 
will  need  some  explanation  of  why  we  have  to  accept  that  outcome.  It  may  be  that  this 
reconfiguration  is,  in  fact,  what  is  happening.  That  would  help  to  explain  why  ultra-low 
interest rates are not, apparently, as successful in boosting growth in demand as might have 
been expected. The future income against which people would borrow looks lower than it did, 
not to mention that the current income against which some already had borrowed has turned 
out to be lower than assumed. 
Alternatively,  even  if  we  accept  that  demographic  headwinds  and  the  legacy  of  earlier 
problems make growth harder to achieve, perhaps we can re-double our efforts to address 
the things that may be unnecessarily restraining growth today and in the future. They might 
be things like: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
in some jurisdictions, inadequately capitalised banks 
over-leveraged firms or households 
poor incentives for risk-taking of the “right” kind 
practices that unnecessarily impede productivity, or that slow down the re-allocation 
of capital from old industries to new ones. 
If  we  could  engender  a  reasonable  sense  that  future  income  prospects  are  brighter,  that 
there is a good return to innovation and ‘real economy’ risk taking, and so on, then people 
might use low-cost funding for more productive purposes than just bidding up the prices of 
existing assets. Over time, the return on financial instruments could rise in line with returns in 
the real economy. Pension funds and insurers would be better able to meet their obligations. 
Governments would more easily service their debts. Citizens, having had some explanations 
as to why changes were necessary, would, in time, see some gains in their way of life, or at 
least  some  threats  to  their  living  standards  abate.  They  would  see  less  resort  to  very 
unorthodox policies, because there would be less need for them. And I can’t help thinking 
they would feel better about that. 
Conclusion 
We have lived through various bouts of financial market volatility before and doubtless these 
will recur from time to time. To some extent, this is inevitable. 
But  we  can  limit  the  damage  from  these  mood  swings  by  keeping  a  strong  focus  on 
improving growth fundamentals. It is surely time that policies beyond central bank actions did 
more  in  this  regard.  Our  inability,  so  far,  durably  to  lift  growth  prospects  is  arguably  the 
biggest vulnerability the global financial system faces today. This needs to be our focus. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
