  Jens Weidmann: Introductory comments delivered at the press 
conference on the annual accounts 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of the 
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the press conference for the 
Annual Report 2015, Frankfurt am Main, 24 February 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I too would like to welcome you to this press conference marking the 
publication of the Bundesbank’s annual accounts for 2015. 
The annual accounts and underlying balance sheet of an enterprise or an institution like the 
Bundesbank  reflect  not  just  the  setting  in  which  it  operates  but  also  the  results  of  its  own 
actions. I would therefore like to begin by providing a description of this setting before going 
on to present the annual accounts with my esteemed colleague Dr Nagel. 
Challenges for monetary policy 
2. 
Last  year,  low  inflation  rates  once  again  set  the  tone  of  the  monetary  policy  debate. 
Consumer prices rose at a rate of just 0.2%, thus increasing at an even slacker pace than in 
2014.  This  was  compounded  by  economic  forecasts,  including  Eurosystem  projections, 
which  suggested  that  inflation  would  only  gradually  approach  the  target  rate  of  below,  but 
close to 2% at which it should stand over the medium term according to the ECB Governing 
Council’s definition of price stability. 
Consumers  are  likely  to  welcome  this  prospect  because  of  its  effect  on  their  purchasing 
power,  but  in  monetary  policy  terms  these  forecasts  have  stoked  discussion  about  the 
credibility of this policy and a narrower safety margin to the zero interest bound, which limits 
the  possible  responses  to  future  adverse  developments.  Against  this  background,  inflation 
developments  both  at  the  start  and  at  the  end  of  2015  triggered  a  lively  debate  among 
members of the ECB Governing Council. 
In  the  upshot,  the  Council  decided  in  January  2015  that  for  the  next  19  months  it  would 
purchase not just certain private debt securities but also government bonds on a large scale. 
At its meeting in early December 2015, this programme was extended by an additional six 
months up to March 2017. Moreover, the Council lowered the deposit facility rate to –0.3%, 
thus  obliging  banks  to  pay  a  higher  penalty  interest  rate  whenever  they  deposit  excess 
liquidity with the central banks. 
At its monetary policy meeting at the beginning of March this year, the ECB staff will once 
again present an update of the projection for economic output and price developments for 
the period 2016 to 2018, which the Governing Council will then use to assess its monetary 
policy stance. 
As regards developments in the real economy, doubts have arisen of late as to whether the 
global economy is still providing the stimulus to euro-area economic growth which had been 
factored  into  the  Eurosystem’s  December  projection. This  projection  anticipated  muted  but 
steady global growth overall. 
That outlook has recently been called into question, in part on account of economic data for 
the USA and Japan that were generally felt to be disappointing, but also due to heightened 
political uncertainty surrounding the future reform efforts of some euro-area countries and the 
future composition of the European Union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  On  top  of  this,  fears  have  been  expressed  with  respect  to  banks’  longer-term  earnings 
prospects and revisions to overblown expectations regarding the capacity of monetary policy 
to  resolve  structural  problems.  These  doubts  have  now  also  spread  to  the  international 
financial  markets,  helping  to  engender  strong  risk  aversion  among  participants  since  the 
beginning of this year. 
As a consequence, investors have shifted their focus from riskier assets to safe ones. This 
has  caused  shares,  and  in  particular  securities  and  corporate  bonds,  to  sustain  at  times 
significant  price  losses  around  the  globe.  By  contrast,  US  government  bonds  as  well  as 
bonds issued by Germany, France and other euro-area countries have been in demand. 
As  a  side-effect,  these  shifts  have  triggered  considerably  elevated  price  fluctuations  in 
virtually all the financial market segments. While a certain degree of volatility – also for the 
purposes of a functioning market – should not be viewed as an automatic cause for concern, 
a  protracted  phase  of  high  market  uncertainty  could  put  additional  pressure  on  the  global 
economy. And this would make it more difficult and expensive for enterprises to raise capital. 
Economic developments in China were also in the markets’ spotlight. In this context, it is right 
to  say  that  Chinese  growth  has  slowed  down;  however,  there  are  currently  no  signs  of  a 
severe slump. Up until now, this growth shift has in fact been entirely consistent with China’s 
transition to a more services-oriented, domestically-driven economic model. 
Even  so,  a  valuation  adjustment  is  on  the  cards  for  another  key  factor  relating  to  current 
developments, that factor being the price of oil. Looking at the global economy as a whole, 
the  continued  decline  in  oil  and  commodity  prices  seems  to  be  having  an  increasingly 
detrimental impact. This decline has now reached such a magnitude that it has at times led 
to  a  self-reinforcing  downward  spiral  in  prices  as  oil  producers  react  to  falling  prices  by 
boosting production as a way of stabilising their revenue. 
Numerous  countries  that  are  heavily  dependent  on  oil  and  commodity  exports  are  on  the 
verge of a recession or have already entered one. Their government revenue is drying up 
and it is becoming more difficult for the buffers that are available to cushion their worsening 
budgetary position. They have therefore been curbing their private and public expenditure, 
which has hit euro-area exporters, amongst others. 
The weakened growth prospects of many emerging economies have effectively (ie in trade-
weighted terms) led to an appreciation of the euro, which on the one hand puts an additional 
brake on exports and on the other hand dampens price inflation in the euro area. 
In any case, the oil and commodity price slump is likely to continue to fuel economic activity 
on balance. The repeated sharp drop in energy prices compared with the level forecast in the 
December Eurosystem staff projection will probably also yield expenditure savings equating 
to  just  over  ½  percentage  point  of  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  for  consumers  and 
enterprises this year – both in Germany and in the euro area as a whole. 
The transfer of purchasing power from oil-exporting to euro-area countries does not translate 
one to one to consumption or investment. However, even if it is partially put aside for a rainy 
day or used to reduce debt, it can help consumers and enterprises to reduce their high level 
of leverage, which, importantly, can remove brakes on growth in the euro area. 
There is, moreover, no need to preach doom and gloom. All in all, the economic outlook for 
the  euro  area  remains  upbeat.  The  euro  area’s  gradual  economic  recovery  is  likely  to 
continue throughout the rest of this year and in 2017. At the current juncture, we expect the 
output gap to continue to close over the forecast period, causing domestic price pressures to 
increase. 
However, the renewed fall in energy prices is further impeding the already sluggish rise in 
inflation towards the price stability target as defined by the Governing Council of the ECB. In 
December, we assumed that annual average consumer price inflation would amount to 1% 
for full-year 2016. But given falling oil prices, this forecast will probably not be feasible. In the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  first  half  of  2016,  in  particular,  inflation  rates  could  conceivably  drop  back  below  zero 
temporarily. 
However, this short-run inflation outlook is less decisive for monetary policy – especially if it 
reflects, above all, energy price movements. If we factor out such energy price fluctuations, 
the relevant inflation rate in the euro area currently stands at 1%. 
Even  though this  indicator  of  domestic  price  pressure  is  below  the medium-term target for 
price stability, it will rise over time and is far removed from the territory of deflation, in which 
monetary  policy  would  be  much  more  constricted  and  a  self-reinforcing  downward  spiral 
could be set in motion. 
It is the medium-term price outlook which is decisive for monetary policy. And the key factor 
in this outlook is how big the risk is of second-round effects caused by the fall in oil prices 
and low inflation rates. 
Such a loss of confidence could make it difficult for the Eurosystem to execute its monetary 
policy mandate going forward. 
Lower inflation expectations mean that, at a given level of nominal interest rates, real interest 
rates will rise, causing monetary policy to have a less expansionary effect. 
We are now seeing that longer-run inflation expectations have fallen since the beginning of 
the  year.  The  financial  market  data-based  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  have  even 
fallen markedly. 
One of the factors behind this fall could have been that the already-mentioned increase in 
risk aversion in the financial markets resulted in safe haven capital flows to the euro area. 
In  addition,  the  indicators  of  market-based  longer-run  inflation  expectations  also  always 
contain  a  hedging  premium  for  inflation  surprises.  Since  investors  are  currently  keen  on 
hedging  particularly  against  a  period  of  surprisingly  low  inflation  rates,  the  inflation 
expectations derived from financial market data, which currently stand at 1.4%, could actually 
understate the price increase expected by market players over the longer run. 
Certainly, this is what is suggested by a comparison with survey-based longer-run inflation 
expectations – according to an ECB survey, they have most recently dropped only very little, 
to 1.8%. The Consensus Economics surveys are even showing a slight pick-up. 
One possible sign of a de-anchoring of longer-run inflation expectations might be if market-
based inflation expectations were to respond more strongly than before to surprises in the 
published inflation figures or other economic indicators. This would cause the central bank 
definition  of  price  stability  to  lose  relevance  as  an  anchor  of  expectations.  A  forthcoming 
Bundesbank  study,1  however,  finds  no  statistically  significant  indication  of  such  a  loss  of 
confidence among market players in the ECB’s stability orientation. 
However,  any  second-round  effects  could  also  be  reflected  in  lower  wage  agreements. 
Indeed,  some  believe  that  the  current  wage  growth  rates  in  the  euro  area  are  already 
sounding  warning  bells.  But  I  have  a  different  take  on  the  wage  growth,  which  is  indeed 
moderate. 
It is more likely to reflect a necessary employment-oriented wage policy. For some euro-area 
countries will have to increase their price competitiveness further in order to recoup global 
market share lost in the run-up to the crisis. Although this wage moderation is dampening 
wage growth, it is promoting competitiveness and employment in the affected countries and 
is thus sustainably supporting aggregate demand. 
                                                
1  Christian  Speck  (2016),  “Inflation  Anchoring  in  the  Euro  Area”,  Deutsche  Bundesbank  Discussion  Paper, 
forthcoming. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Ladies and gentlemen, the risks to economic growth have undoubtedly risen, and this is, per 
se, reducing price pressures. A further easing of the already very accommodative monetary 
policy  stance  is  therefore  on  the  table.  However,  such  a  monetary  policy  response  could 
have longer-run risks and side-effects that it would be dangerous to simply ignore. 
Even the volume of sovereign bond purchases currently planned under the programme will 
make  the  Eurosystem  the  member  states’  largest  creditor.  For  a  significant  share  of 
sovereign  debt,  government  financing  costs  have  become  decoupled  from  capital  market 
conditions: for this share, governments pay interest to central banks; they then transfer these 
funds, which constitute part of their profit, back to their respective government coffers. The 
bottom line is that governments are obtaining funding for this share at the deposit rate, since 
these purchases are ultimately increasing banks’ surplus liquidity. For these bonds, naturally, 
no distinction is being made any longer between these types of interest rates in terms of the 
soundness of government finances. This undercuts market discipline, the intent of which is to 
secure not only compliance with fiscal rules but also sustainable budgets. 
Once governments have become accustomed to historically favourable funding terms for a 
considerable  portion  of  their  debt,  pressure  could  subsequently  mount  to  keep  the 
programme alive longer than advisable from a monetary policy perspective, especially if the 
exceptionally  low  funding  costs  are  not  used for fiscal  consolidation  but more to  dilute the 
fiscal policy. 
And this is precisely the case: if the lower interest expenditure is factored out of the euro-
area countries’ structural budget deficits, these deficits have seen no improvement for two or 
three years or have even become worse. The opportunity opened up by the low interest rates 
to bring down budget deficits particularly quickly is being squandered. 
Moreover,  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  can,  in  and  of  itself,  encourage  financial 
actors, especially banks, to more eagerly take on risk. If low-risk investments generate lower 
and  lower  yields,  at  least  nominal  yields,  financial  actors  will  tend  to  add  higher-risk,  but 
higher-yielding investments to their portfolio. 
A survey of 1,500 small and medium-sized banks conducted by the Bundesbank and BaFin 
has shown that these banks are, on the whole, responding to the low-interest-rate setting not 
only by shifting their assets to higher-risk forms but also by expanding their average residual 
maturity. 
To a certain degree, a greater risk propensity is also desirable, since investments which are 
profitable  and  sensible  from  an  economic  and  business  perspective  are  frequently  also 
associated with somewhat greater risk. 
Using monetary policy to foster a risk appetite, however, is a fine line. As we now know, in 
the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  capital  in  many  countries  was  invested  in  a  too  high-risk  or 
unproductive manner given interest rates which, at the time, were regarded as exceptionally 
low. 
A  new  Bundesbank  study2  looks  at  this  risk-taking  channel  and  shows,  like  work  by  other 
economists,3,  4  that  it  can  indeed  make  sense  to  pursue  a  somewhat  less  accommodative 
monetary policy. For such an approach, according to the analysis, dampens banks’ tendency 
to take excessive risks. 
                                                
2  Angela  Abbate  &  Dominik  Thaler  (2015),  “Monetary  policy  and  the  asset  risk-taking  channel”,  Deutsche 
Bundesbank Discussion Paper 48/2015. 
3  DellʼAriccia, Giovanni & Laeven, Luc & Marquez, Robert (2014), “Real interest rates, leverage, and bank risk-
taking”, Journal of Economic Theory, Elsevier, Vol 149(C), pages 65–99. 
4  Borio, Claudio & Zhu, Haibin (2012), “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: A missing link in the 
transmission mechanism?”, Journal of Financial Stability, Elsevier, Vol 8(4), pages 236–251. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Of course, whenever financial stability risks are looming, this represents a challenge, above 
all,  to  macroprudential  policy.  However,  a  monetary  policy  which  is  intended  to  ensure 
longer-term  price  stability  cannot  completely  ignore  these  risks,  for  generally  financial 
stability risks ultimately also threaten price stability – as was clearly shown by the financial 
crisis. 
In addition, we should not ask too much of macroprudential policy: in the euro area, we have 
only just begun to develop its instruments and acquire initial experience of its efficacy. 
The current banking environment 
3. 
The low-interest-rate environment is placing a particular strain on credit institutions’ earnings 
prospects. This has also been reflected in the acute fluctuations in some bank share prices 
over  recent  weeks  and  raises  questions  as  to  how  effectively  monetary  policy  stimuli  are 
transmitted via the banks. 
Admittedly, banks are benefiting from lower interest rates in the short term as their liabilities 
tend  to  have  shorter  maturities  than  their  assets.  In  other  words,  funding  costs  are  falling 
before there is a dip in income from assets. 
But the more protracted the period of low interest rates and the steeper the decline in interest 
rates, the sharper the drop in interest income and the lower the profit. This is especially the 
case  in  the  current  low-interest-rate  environment  as,  for  business  policy  and  competitive 
reasons, it is difficult for banks to introduce negative deposit rates. 
In any case, this was the takeaway from the survey of 1,500 small and medium-sized banks 
conducted  by  the  Bundesbank  and  BaFin  that  I  mentioned  earlier.  Looking  at  their  own 
calculations and forecasts, the banks reported a total drop in pre-tax profits of one-quarter up 
to 2019. If the low-interest-rate environment persists until 2019, profits could slump by up to 
50% – worse still, if interest rates experience a further decline compared with last autumn 
and total assets remain unchanged, the plummet could be as great as 75%. 
As  central  bankers,  our  concern  here  is  not  the  profits  generated  by  the  banks  per  se; 
instead,  it  is  the  banks’  ability  to  transmit  monetary  policy  stimuli.  German  banks  have 
balance sheet reserves and are well capitalised. Even so, the average tier 1 capital ratio was 
recently raised to 15.6% – having stood at 8.2% in 2006, it is now almost twice as high as it 
was  prior  to  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis.  Institutions  should  therefore  be  able  to 
withstand macroeconomic shocks and economic slowdowns. 
Despite this, the banks have to position themselves such that they remain profitable in the 
long  term.  To  achieve  this,  they  need  to  review  their  business  models  and  utilise  any 
available scope for consolidation in order to cut costs. Failing this, banks may find it difficult 
in the face of limited access to the capital markets during a protracted phase of low interest 
rates  to  retain  profits  with  a  view  to  strengthening  their  capital  base,  if  necessary. 
Furthermore, banking supervisors from BaFin and the Bundesbank will be keeping a watchful 
eye on those institutions that were revealed in the survey to be particularly vulnerable with 
respect to the low-interest-rate environment. 
In  addition  to  general  as  well  as  country  and  institution-specific  strains  that  have  made 
themselves increasingly felt, a key regulatory change came into force on 1 January 2016 that 
likely  had  an  impact  on  banks’  funding  costs.  I  am  talking  here  about  the  important  and 
absolutely vital regime shift from a bail-out regime to a bail-in regime. If a bank fails in future, 
shareholders  and  certain  creditors  will  henceforth  be  systematically  called  upon  to  foot  a 
greater share of the resulting bill. This is the right course of action as it ensures that risks are 
borne by the investors who ultimately also took the risks. 
The new regime reduces the incentives for banks to take excessive risks and then pass them 
on to taxpayers – the taxpayers now represent the last line of defence rather than the first. 
However, this has also caused the interest rates on debt instruments that are eligible for bail-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  in to rise. The fact that the prices of these instruments, known as CoCos, have contracted 
across  the  board  –  irrespective  of  whether  they  were  issued  in  core  countries  or  crisis-hit 
countries – is a sign that banks in Europe are now clearly judged less based on the solvency 
of their home country. And that sums up the aim of banking union perfectly. 
If the outlook for the banks is to be improved, the process of overhauling Basel III also needs 
to be brought to a swift close this year. First, the revised framework will provide banks with 
greater stability. Much has already been achieved in this regard, as I have already pointed 
out. Second, the regulatory debate should not become a source of uncertainty in and of itself. 
Financial institutions need to be able to adapt to the new regulatory regime, and they require 
a  reliable  basis  for  planning  to  make  this  happen.  This  will  also  quash  market  uncertainty 
over regulatory requirements, as the financial strains associated with regulatory change are 
then easier to calculate. 
The state of play in Germany 
4. 
Yet for all the challenges facing the banking sector, we should not lose sight of the fact that 
the German economy is in good shape overall. That’s allowing domestic banks to keep their 
risk provisioning low, lifting their profitability. 
Last  year  saw  employment  reach  yet  another  record  high  and  unemployment  diminish 
further, again reflecting the healthy macroeconomic situation in Germany. Wage growth was 
marked, while inflation remained subdued, leading to a distinct rise of 2.2% in real disposable 
income. 
It  was  not  surprising,  then,  that  private  consumption  was  the  main  engine  driving  the 
economy  last  year.  This  year,  too,  brisk  domestic  demand  will  probably  fuel  economic 
activity, which is set to follow a clear upward trajectory despite the slight upturn in risk. 
Activity  will  be  stimulated  by  both  the  very  low  energy  prices  and  expenditure  on 
accommodating  and  providing  for  refugees.  But  considering  these  tailwinds  and  the  fairly 
favourable conditions overall, the projected growth rates aren’t actually all that strong. And 
that’s down to the unsatisfactorily low long-term growth trend in Germany, which has been 
sapped  over  the  past  few  years  by  demographic  developments  and  policy  decisions.  This 
firmly underscores the need to permanently strengthen growth forces within Germany, too. 
On  top  of  the  prevailing  uncertainty,  the  bleak  growth  prospects  are  another  major  factor 
inhibiting  private  investment  and  the  reason  why  it  has  stalled  despite  low  financing  costs 
and capacity utilisation running at more or less normal loads. 
This year and next, expenditure on refugees could account for around ½% and ¼% of GDP, 
respectively. Nonetheless, we expect the government budget to be broadly balanced in both 
years. 
But  when  it  comes  to  immigration,  it’s  the  longer-term  outlook  that  counts.  Over  the  next 
decade, more  and  more  baby  boomers  will  be  moving  into retirement,  leaving  gaps  in the 
labour market. Immigration that is geared to the needs of the labour market could at least 
partially plug this gap. 
But for now, we are taking in refugees for different reasons altogether – to offer them safety. 
The qualifications they have are not always suited to the needs of our labour market. But the 
more  we  help  them  acquire  the  language  skills  and  qualifications  they  currently  lack,  the 
better equipped those who are able to remain in Germany will be to earn a living here. 
Not  only  does  this  boost  these  individuals’  self-esteem,  it  also  goes  a  long  way  towards 
integrating  them  into  society.  And  of  course,  successful  integration  also  reduces  the  cost 
involved in this humanitarian cause. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  But it will take time and patience to integrate these people into the labour market. And even if 
we  succeed,  it  would  be  illusory  to  believe  that  the  influx  of  refugees  alone  will  solve  our 
demographic problems. 
A consistent framework for monetary union 
5. 
But it’s not just Germany that is facing its own national challenges. Every single euro-area 
country must continue to make every effort to strengthen their growth forces still further and 
thus  make  the  euro  area  less  vulnerable.  At  the  European  level,  too,  there  is  untapped 
potential. Besides the capital markets union, the creation of a common digital market and the 
completion of the single market for services spring to mind. 
Yet there is no doubt that the stiffest challenge lies in underpinning monetary union with a 
robust and consistent structural framework. The structural integrity of the euro area has been 
found wanting. A decision needs to be taken, because, in a vulnerable currency union mired 
in  stagnation,  the  onus  is  repeatedly  put  on  monetary  policymakers  to  paper  over  the 
structural cracks with cheap money. 
In a monetary union it all boils down to preventing unsound developments in one member 
state from  jeopardising the  stability  of  the  union  as  a  whole.  There  are two  ways  that  this 
objective  can  be  achieved.  The  first  is  to  ensure,  via  a  framework  based  on  national 
responsibility, that unsound developments in a member state are prevented from occurring in 
the first place and that any developments that do occur cannot destabilise the entire currency 
union. The second is for member states to transfer much of their responsibility for fiscal and 
economic policy to the supranational level, essentially creating a fiscal union. Both ways are 
suited, in essence, for restoring the equilibrium between action and liability. 
A genuine fiscal union would mean that action and liability in the euro area would be united 
at the European level. A fiscal union would undoubtedly be the largest step in the European 
integration  process  since  the  launch  of  the  euro.  But  it  would  be  impossible  to  transfer 
sovereignty to the extent required without making substantial amendments to the EU Treaty 
and national constitutions. 
So, the political obstacles on the path to a genuine fiscal union are very high. If this course of 
action fails to attract sufficient political support, the only other option to make the monetary 
union more stable in the long run would be to eliminate the weaknesses and contradictions of 
the Maastricht framework and its core principle of national responsibility as it stands today. I 
have stressed this point repeatedly in the past, most recently in a joint article with my French 
counterpart François Villeroy de Galhau. 
There are many ways to bring about such improvements, and there are two I would like to 
highlight in particular: first, automatically extending the maturities of government bonds if a 
member  state  applies  for  an  ESM  programme,  and  second,  abolishing  the  preferential 
regulatory treatment of government bonds. 
Government  bonds  could  be  structured  in  such  a  way  that  their  terms  are  automatically 
extended by three years as soon as a government applies for ESM assistance. That would 
dramatically  reduce  the  financing  requirements  under  a  potential  adjustment  programme. 
European taxpayers’ money would then only be needed to spread the fiscal adjustment over 
a  longer  period  and  thus  make  the  impact  more  bearable  for  the  people  in  the  country 
concerned.  It  would  not,  however,  be  needed  to  replace  maturing  government  bonds  with 
ESM loans, a step that would absolve investors of their responsibility. 
The second area of reform, namely the abolition of the preferential regulatory treatment of 
government bonds, ultimately boils down to the nexus between banks and sovereigns – that 
is  to  say,  the  overly  close  relationship  between  the  soundness  of  a  member state’s  public 
finances and the stability of its banking system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  This nexus fanned the flames of the crisis. The incentives banks currently have to fund their 
sovereigns to an unhealthy extent must be reduced by requiring banks to set aside capital for 
government bonds, too, and to observe corresponding ceilings. If the preferential regulatory 
treatment  were  done  away  with,  this  would  increase  banks’  incentives  to  take  greater 
account of the differing risk profiles of the individual states, which in turn would strengthen 
the  disciplinary  function  of  capital  markets.  Countries  that  pursue  unsustainable  policies 
would then face rising risk premiums. 
It  is  an  encouraging  sign  that  the  regulatory  treatment  of  sovereign  debt  is  now  on  the 
agendas  of  various  bodies  and  that  it  will  also  attract  intense  debate  this  year  at  both  the 
global and European levels. 
Restrictions on cash usage 
6. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the current monetary policy environment is fuelling the imagination of 
some academics with regard to how the “leg room” of monetary policy could be increased. 
Their proposal is to do away with cash entirely. 
The interest rate policy currently pursued by the Eurosystem, and also by the other European 
central banks, shows that the zero lower bound is not a fixed floor for central bank interest 
rates.  That  said,  there  is  no  disputing  the  possibility  of  a  “flight  to  cash”  if  interest  rates 
venture  too  far  below  zero.  If  cash  were  to  be  abolished,  central  banks  would  be  able  to 
broadly enforce negative interest rates. 
But  as  I  see things, that  would  be  wrong  and  an  entirely  disproportionate  response to the 
monetary policy challenges close to the zero lower bound. I believe that the right approach is 
more  a  question  of  strengthening  the  growth  forces  in  the  euro  area,  thereby  a  return  to 
higher nominal interest rates. 
A clear distinction should, however, be made between the discussion motivated by monetary 
policy  about  abolishing  cash  and  the  current  debate  about  imposing  restrictions  on  cash 
usage. Both the proposal to impose caps on cash transactions as well as the initiative to do 
away  with  the  €500  banknote  would,  it  is  claimed,  help  to  combat  terrorist  financing  and 
money laundering. 
The  aims  pursued  by  these  measures  are  certainly  worthy  of  support.  I,  however,  am 
doubtful as to whether terrorists or criminals can really be deterred from illegal activities by 
imposing a cap on cash transactions or doing away with large-denomination banknotes – just 
take  the  calls  now  being  raised  in  some quarters  of  the  USA  to  abolish  the  USD100  note 
because it is still considered to be “too big”. 
The Bundesbank takes a neutral stance with regard to the various forms of payment. It sees 
its role in assisting and supporting the general public in using those payment methods which 
they wish to use. To this end, we have made it our job to ensure that the cash in circulation 
maintains  its  high quality  and  that  the  supply  is  sufficient.  At the  same time, the TARGET 
system that we operate is pivotal to the handling of cashless payment transactions. 
German citizens value cash very highly, and that’s quite simply a fact. For them, it offers a 
whole  range  of  advantages.  These  merits,  alongside  many  other  interesting  findings,  are 
described  in  detail  in  an  article  in  the  Annual  Report.  On  balance,  cash  is  still  the  most 
popular means of payment in Germany, with just under 80% of all transactions at the point of 
sale being settled using cash. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A study conducted by the Bundesbank shows that Germany, together with Austria, are at the 
vanguard by international standards when it comes to paying by cash.5 Incidentally, we will 
also be publishing a research newsletter on this study today. These research newsletters are 
a  new  series  of  publications  by  the  Bundesbank,  which,  in  future,  will  present  important 
research findings, at regular intervals, to a specialist audience in a brief and concise manner. 
Although  the  significance  of  cash  payments  has  decreased  in  recent  years,  payment 
behaviour itself is only changing gradually. Payments by card or by smartphone, as well as 
online  purchases  appeal  to  the  young,  technology-savvy  generation  in  particular.  These 
means of payments are on the increase, but they are by no means undergoing rapid growth. 
One factor that probably plays a role here is that, in contrast to what some believe, cash is 
not  a  particularly  expensive  means  of  payment.  In  terms  of  costs  per  transaction,  cash 
payments are much cheaper than both debit card and credit card payments. As for costs in 
relation  to  the  transaction  amount,  which  generally  tends  to  be  higher  when  making 
payments by card, cash is admittedly more expensive than debit card payments, but is still 
cheaper than making payments by credit card. 
As you can see, there are a number of strong arguments that speak in favour of cash. It is 
hardly surprising, then, that surveys show that more than three-quarters of the population – 
or  even  more  –  state  that  they  could  not  do  without  cash.  Bearing  that  in  mind,  I  would 
consider it disastrous if the general public were to be given the impression that the mooted 
abolition of the €500 note and imposition of caps on cash usage were the first steps towards 
abolishing cash entirely. 
All eyes may be on cash right now, but it would be unwise to ignore the far-reaching changes 
that may well transform the area of cashless payment systems at some point in the future. 
Blockchain technology is seen as the key innovation in this regard, allowing as it does values 
to  be  transferred  cheaply  and  comparatively  anonymously,  while  bypassing  centralised 
authorities such as banks, card companies and clearing houses. 
Similarly, I can also well imagine that it will soon be possible to use digital currencies, such 
as  bitcoins,  which  are  based  on  this  technology,  to  trade  in  financial  products,  such  as 
shares,  bonds  or  derivatives  in  decentralised  systems.  This  would,  of  course,  present  a 
challenge for the existing payment and settlement systems. 
It therefore stands to reason that not only financial service providers, but also central banks 
are investigating whether this very interesting technology is actually suitable for mass use. 
This is why the Bundesbank is, inter alia, also a member of a working group on this topic at 
the Bank for International Settlements in Basel. 
Bundesbank’s profit and risk provisioning 
7. 
Ladies and gentlemen, in closing I would now like to come to our annual accounts and thus 
also to the Bundesbank’s profit last year. The profit and loss account for the 2015 financial 
year closed with a net profit of €3.2 billion. That’s €0.2 billion up on the previous year’s figure. 
The drop in net interest income was more than offset by the improved net result of financial 
operations,  write-downs  and  risk  provisions,  hence  the  slight  increase  in  the  Bank’s 
profitability on the year. 
This was mainly due to a tentative reduction in risk provisioning. Foreign currency holdings 
have  traditionally  been  the  chief  source  of  risk  in  the  Bundesbank’s  balance  sheet,  but 
                                                
5  J Bagnall, D Bounie, K P Huynh, A Kosse, T Schmidt, S D Schuh and H Stix (2015), Consumer Cash Usage: 
A  Cross-Country  Comparison  with  Payment  Diary  Survey  Data,  Deutsche  Bundesbank  Discussion  Paper, 
No 13/2014, Frankfurt am Main, forthcoming in the International Journal of Central Banking. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  between 2010 and 2012, the SMP holdings, refinancing assets and euro securities portfolios 
(CBPP/CBPP2 and own funds portfolio) also emerged as major risk items. This explains why 
risk provisioning was increased in three steps to an overall €14.4 billion between 2010 and 
2012. 
Since then, the risk stemming from the refinancing loans and SMP securities, which used to 
be in the focus of the Bank’s risk provisioning, has diminished as the volume of securities 
has shrunk. Moreover, unlike in the previous two years, the annual result expected for 2016 
and thus the Bundesbank’s available financial resources don’t look set to decline any further. 
At  the  same  time,  however,  the  ABSPP,  CBPP3  and  PSPP  purchase  programmes  have 
created  additional  credit  risk,  albeit  less  than  had  been  assumed  one  year  ago.  These 
securities holdings are also a source of interest rate risk. We chose not to set aside any risk 
provisions  in  this  regard  this  year,  but  we  are  aware  that  the  risk  factor  will  become 
significantly  more  important  in  the  future.  All  in  all,  risk  provisioning  was  reduced  by 
€0.8 billion to €13.6 billion. 
Conclusion and handover to Dr Nagel 
8. 
Ladies and gentlemen, this overview and the key data from our annual accounts bring my 
introductory statement today to a close. 
Dr  Nagel  will  now  explain  the  annual  accounts  in  greater  detail  before  you  have  the 
opportunity to ask any questions you might have. Thank you very much for listening. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
