  Luis M Linde: The Spanish banking system – situation and challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  University  of  Almeria, 
Almeria, 18 July 2016. 
 Let  me  first  thank  the  Universidad  de  Almería  and  all  the  sponsors  for  their  invitation  to 
participate in the inauguration of this three-day conference on cooperative banks. 
In my address I shall first briefly review the current situation of the Spanish banking system, 
including the cooperative sector, and the main challenges it faces. Secondly, I shall tackle 
some of the current regulatory developments in the banking sector, with a reference to the 
European regulation on bank recovery and resolution. 
Situation of and main challenges to the Spanish banking sector 
During  the  first  half  of  2016  global  financial  markets  were  markedly  volatile,  as  a  result  of 
various factors. 
Firstly,  forecasts  of  global  economic  growth  have  been  revised  downwards  since  the  last 
quarter  of  2015;  secondly,  the  weakness  shown  by  the  emerging  economies,  particularly 
those most dependent on commodities exports; and, thirdly, the unstable social and political 
setting,  compounded  by  the  decision  by  UK  citizens  on  23  June  to  back  the  exit  from  the 
European Union. 
These factors have prompted a correction in asset prices on different markets which, though 
it  eased  from  mid-February,  has  regained  momentum  since  23  June  as  a  result  of  the 
increase in uncertainty and greater volatility. 
The  correction  in  prices  was  particularly  marked  in  the  case  of  assets  issued  by  the 
European banking sector; the above-mentioned global factors were joined by other elements 
stemming from the euro area, from its banking systems and, indeed, from specific banks. 
These factors include most notably the following: the low profitability of banking business in 
Europe, a matter on which I shall focus in view of its significance; the concern over the high 
volume  of  non-performing  loans  in  certain  European  jurisdictions;  and  the  extension  and 
intensification of regulatory requirements, a clear example of which is the new Recovery and 
Resolution  Directive  which,  ultimately,  may  translate  into  an  increase  in  requirements  in 
respect of capital or of the holding of loss-absorbing liabilities. Against this background, it is 
vital  to  understand  the  causes  behind  the  European  bank  stock  market  corrections,  given 
that  their  lower  share  prices  hamper  the  possibility  of  tapping  the  markets  for  capital  to 
reinforce their solvency levels. 
In this setting common to European banks, Spanish institutions increased their consolidated 
assets  by  2.5%  in  2015,  essentially  owing  to  their  international  activity.  As  to  business  in 
Spain, credit to the resident private sector continued to fall in 2015, albeit at more moderate 
rates than in 2014, both for households and for non-financial corporations. For the latter the 
fall in credit progressively eased, with the rate of decline for SMEs (-2.8%) appreciably lower 
than that for credit to large corporations (-6.4%). 
Non-performing loans continued to decline in 2015, falling by more than €37 billion (against 
the  fall  of  €24  billion  in  2014).  At  end-2015  the  proportion  of  NPLs  on  Spanish  banks’ 
balance sheets was 22% down on the previous year. This trend has been seen both in credit 
to non-financial corporations and in that to households. 
Profitability is unquestionably a fundamental challenge facing European and Spanish banks. 
In  2015,  consolidated  income  at  the  global  level  for  the  sector  as  a  whole  was  close  to 
€14 billion, almost 13% down on the previous year; and the return on equity fell from 6.9% in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
2014  to  5.6%  in  2015.  In  terms  of  domestic  business,  profitability  was  worse  than  for 
consolidated activity at the global level, with the ROE in 2015 standing at 4.4% (against 5% 
in 2014). 
The main factor bearing down on the sector’s profitability may be said to be the environment 
of very low interest rates, and this environment might be expected to hold as long as inflation 
expectations  justify  the  highly  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance  in  the  euro  area.  The 
spread  between  the  return  on  assets  and  liabilities  in  domestic  business  is  at  levels  very 
close to all-time lows. Also, there is little room for further downward movement as regards 
the  cost  of  funds;  accordingly,  if  asset-side  rates  continue  falling,  net interest  income  may 
continue declining. 
But we should mention another two factors bearing down on profitability. On one hand, a still-
low level of banking activity (as credit continues to fall). On the other, the significant volume 
of  non-productive  assets  (non-performing  and  foreclosed)  still  on  bank  balance  sheets, 
although  it  is  true  that  non-performing  assets  are  declining  notably,  which  translates  into 
fewer provisions and an improvement, therefore, in results. Against this backdrop, efforts to 
cut costs and bring about efficiency gains are of particular importance. 
Lastly,  it  should  be  stressed  in  connection  with  banks’  solvency  that  the  maximum-quality 
capital ratio, namely CET1, has increased by more than 80 bp over the last year, rising to 
12.6%  at  end-2015  for  Spanish  banks  as  a  whole,  comfortably  exceeding  the  regulatory 
minimum. 
The cooperative sector in Spain 
Let me now turn to the cooperative sector. 
I should begin by stressing that, although the relative weight of cooperative banks in Spain is 
modest compared with that of commercial banks, the cooperative sector plays a significant 
role  in  financing  the  productive  system  in  various  industries  and,  therefore,  in  activity  and 
employment generation. 
The  sector’s  total  consolidated  assets  amounted  in  December  2015  to  €131  billion.  In 
comparative terms, they account for 3.6% of Spanish deposit institutions’ total consolidated 
assets.  We  need  not  recall  that  one  of  our  hosts,  Cajamar,  is  a  major  component  of  the 
sector, accounting for slightly more than 30% of co-operatives’ overall assets. 
Co-operatives  are  for  the  most  part  small  institutions,  rooted  in  the  territory  where  they 
operate.  Focusing  on  business  in  Spain,  with  individual  data,  the  cooperative  sector  has 
more than 18,000 employees distributed across more than 4,300 offices. On December 2015 
data, cooperatives employ more than 9% of workers in the banking sector in Spain, and they 
account for 14% of the offices operating on national territory. 
As regards the composition of the sector’s balance sheet, of note on the liabilities side is the 
significance of private-sector deposits, equivalent to over 70% of total assets (almost 20 pp 
more than for total deposit institutions). On the asset side, the differences with the rest of the 
banking sector are fewer. However, the proportion of credit to the private sector is slightly 
higher  for  the  cooperative  sector.  The  proportion  of  own  funds  for  cooperatives  (7.2%  in 
December 2015) is also slightly higher than that of the banking sector as a whole. 
Focusing  on  business  in  Spain,  the  cooperative  sector  provides  around  7%  of  the  total 
volume  of  credit  used  to  finance  non-financial  corporations  and  households,  in  particular 
house purchases. The sector’s NPL ratio stood at 11.2% in December 2015, having fallen by 
almost 1.5 pp over the course of the year. 
In the analysis by sector, the household NPL ratio stands at 5%, and at 20.4% in the case of 
non-financial corporations. Notably, on one hand, this ratio has fallen by more than 3 pp in 
2015;  and,  on  the  other,  if  construction  and  real  estate  development  companies  are 
excluded, the ratio stands below 12%. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Net income for the cooperative sector as a whole in 2015 exceeded €450 million, entailing an 
increase  of  close  to  15%  on  2014.  The  return  on  equity  was  4.8%,  having  increased  by 
somewhat more than 0.5 pp in 2015. 
This  improvement  in  profitability  is  due  to  the  almost  60%  reduction  in  asset  impairment 
losses  over  the  past  year  (practically  €700  million),  the  result  of  the  reduction  in  NPLs  I 
mentioned earlier. Net interest income held relatively stable, with both revenue and financial 
costs having fallen, while the efficiency ratio improved by several percentage points. 
As regards the sector’s solvency, the highest quality capital ratio, namely CET1, for Spanish 
cooperatives  as  a  whole  was  13.7%  in  December  2015,  almost  70  bp  up  on  the  related 
December 2014 level. This gives a level of CET1 almost 1 pp higher than the aggregate for 
the Spanish banking sector. 
In conclusion, the cooperative sector in Spain is holding up with figures and ratios in line with 
those of the rest of the banking sector, and is currently evidencing solvency levels somewhat 
higher than those of the rest of the sector. 
Regulatory agenda: recent developments in the Basel III capital framework 
I would now like to review the reforms outstanding. But I shall first offer you a brief reminder 
of the key elements of the new regulatory framework we know as Basel III. 
The global financial crisis highlighted a series of weaknesses in regulation, including most 
notably  high  bank  leveraging,  excessive  credit  growth  (boosted  in  part  by  lax  lending 
standards), a high degree of systemic risk and insufficient liquidity levels. 
The FSB and the Basel Committee have been developing a set of reforms involving, first, the 
adoption of more demanding criteria as regards the levels and quality of capital required of 
banks;  and,  further,  a  reassessment  of  the  general  framework,  thereby  acknowledging  the 
need to complement the solvency ratios with other measures. 
Among  these  measures  we  may  first  mention  the  leverage  ratio,  which  purports  to  be  a 
simple, transparent and complementary metric to the risk-based capital ratio. 
Second,  given  the  lack  of  liquidity  risk  regulation  before  the  crisis,  the  Basle  Committee 
decided to adopt two new ratios: one geared to ensuring the coverage of liquidity needs in 
the event of tensions (over a 30-day period); and the other aimed at achieving a financing 
structure suitable for the activities of each institution. 
Finally,  the  Basel  III  regulatory  framework  has  included  a  new  micro-prudential  facet  with 
twin  aims.  The  first,  to  consider  the  impact  that  problems  at  a  very  large  or  complex 
institution may have on the rest of the financial system; and the second, to attempt to avoid 
the tendency of banks to excessively increase their risk during the cyclical upturn. 
Basel III has incorporated the so-called “capital buffer for the most significant (or systemic) 
institutions”,  applicable 
institutions  exceeding  certain  size,  complexity  and 
interconnectedness  thresholds;  and,  moreover,  the  “countercyclical  capital  buffer”,  which 
requires  an  increase  in  capital  at  times  of  credit  expansion  in  order  to  reinforce  bank 
solvency when the risks associated with such credit materialise. 
After all these changes, what would be left for post-crisis reform? 
Fundamentally,  the  completion  of  the  review  of  the  risk-based  capital  framework  being 
undertaken by the Basel Committee. 
In terms of the essentials, Basel is reviewing the way the denominator of the capital ratio, 
Risk-Weighted Assets (RWAs), is calculated, i.e. the way in which the risks for which capital 
is  required  are  measured.  The  aim  of  this  review  is  to  strike  a  better  balance  between 
simplicity, comparability and risk-sensitivity. 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
From now to the end of 2016, the date set for the finalisation of the post-crisis reforms, what 
are still to be decided are the reforms of the standardised approaches for measuring credit 
and operational risk; the use of internal models for these two risk categories: the possibility of 
establishing  an  additional  surcharge  based  on  the  leverage  ratio  for  global  systemic 
institutions; and the design of the so-called “capital floors” in the calculation of RWAs. 
With regard to the standardised approaches, I shall focus on that applied to measuring credit 
risk, as this aspect is one of the most important, as it is of course for credit cooperatives. In 
the  opinion  of  the  Banco  de  España,  the  standardised  operational  risk  approach  that  the 
Basel  Committee  has  submitted  to  public  consultation  should  be  improved  in  various 
respects 
The review of the standardised approach seeks to provide greater sensitivity to credit risk in 
the calculation of RWAs and, in turn, to prevent the approach from residing excessively and 
automatically on the ratings given by external rating agencies. 
The  Basel  Committee  is  striving  to  design  a  standardised  approach  that  redresses  these 
shortcomings,  and  is  adjusting  certain  elements  and  deciding  on  their  calibration.  The 
position of the Banco de España, like that of other national supervisors, is that this review 
should not give rise to capital increases, or in any event increases that may prove significant 
for the banking sector. 
The use of internal models is also under review, with the internal credit and operational risk 
models pending finalisation this year. The aim is to reduce the excessive variability of RWAs, 
and in this connection work is under way in several directions, which may be summarised as 
follows. 
First, not all risks are deemed subject to modelling. Such is the case of operational risk. The 
current proposal is to cease to model this risk. 
Second, under credit risk, not all portfolios will be equally subject to modelling. Specifically, 
“low-default  portfolios”  would  be  a  case  in  point,  as  would,  for  instance,  that  of  banks,  or 
certain segments of that of corporations. 
And third, and this would not only affect credit risk but might also have implications for the 
trading portfolio, there is a possibility that floors to the results of the internal models may be 
established,  floors  or  minimum  points  that  would  be  based  on  standardised  approaches. 
Hence,  the  final  result  of  a  model  could  not  stand  below  the  threshold  calculated  using  a 
certain  percentage  of  the  result  that  were  to  be  obtained  from  applying  the  standardised 
approach. 
In  our  opinion,  this  review  of  the  use  of  internal  models  pursues  a  reasonable  objective, 
namely to reduce the unwarranted variability of risk-weighted assets that is manifest among 
banks  from  different  jurisdictions,  conditional  –  as  I  stated  –  upon  this  not  giving  rise  to 
significant increases in capital requirements. 
We should further bear in mind that the greater regulatory requirements are not confined to 
prudential regulation. In this connection, allow me to refer to one of the key questions of the 
moment,  namely  the  new  requirement  for  own  funds  and  eligible  liabilities  (MREL),  which 
should allow for the bail-in of losses arising from bank crises, transferring the cost to private 
agents instead of the public coffers. 
The  current  European  regulation  approved  in  2014,  i.e.  the  Recovery  and  Resolution 
Directive,  is  very  demanding.  Generally,  this  regulation  prevents  the  use  of  public  funds  if 
there has previously been no burden-sharing by shareholders and creditors for an amount, at 
least,  of  8%  of  the  total  balance  sheet.  This  condition  is  currently  difficult  to  comply  with, 
since banks are still in the process of setting up their MREL and, for some, it will not be easy 
to attain these thresholds as their access to the capital markets is limited, or there may be an 
adverse impact on their income statement. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
To date, the Single Resolution Board (SRB), the European resolution authority, has not taken 
a  final,  firm  decision  on  the  MREL,  but  everything  suggests  it  will  be  demanding.  At  the 
Banco de España we advocate that the requirements should take into account the resolution 
strategy and should be prudent and adapted to banks’ economic and financial reality. 
In  any  event,  cooperatives  should  build  the  concept  of  resolution  into  their  planning  and 
management, and continue working on the formation of voluntary and private mutual support 
mechanisms. 
Conclusion 
In sum, let me say that all the banking supervisors and regulators participating in this process 
are mindful of how important it is to finalise the Basel III review as soon as possible and of 
the significance of providing banks and market participants with certainty. 
I  would  not  wish  to  conclude  without  reiterating  the  importance  of  a  healthy  and  efficient 
cooperative sector, as it faces today’s challenges: the pressure exerted by the low interest 
rate  environment  on  results,  as  is  the  case  for  other  banks;  the  new  regulatory  demands; 
enhanced  governance;  the  management  and  commercialisation  of  resources;  and  deeper 
association initiatives. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
