  Veerathai Santiprabhob: Monetary and financial sector policy – moving 
forward 
Speech  by  Dr  Veerathai  Santiprabhob,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Foreign 
Correspondents’ Club of Thailand (FCCT), Bangkok, 1 June 2016. 
 Members of the FCCT Executive Committee, 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Good evening to you all, 
It is my pleasure to be here with you tonight. Although this is my first time speaking at the 
FCCT, I can feel the vibes of active journalism, which underpins the club’s foundation and its 
long history in the community of journalists in Thailand. As one of the oldest press clubs in 
Southeast Asia, I would like to thank you for your continued commitment and contribution to 
the  Thai  economy  and  the  Thai  society.  Public  perception  and  expectation  indeed  play  a 
large part in establishing credibility and effectiveness of economic policy. As public opinion 
influencers, journalists greatly contribute to achieving desired policy outcome. 
As we progress half way through the year, today I would like to share with you the Monetary 
Policy Committee’s latest economic assessment and monetary policy stance to support the 
current economic recovery and safeguard stability of the Thai financial system. After that, I 
will  turn  to  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  financial  sector  development  policy,  with  a  view  to 
facilitating Thailand’s economic transition towards strong, sustainable and inclusive growth. 
Let me start by talking about recent developments in the global financial markets. We 
started off this year with heightened volatility in the global financial markets, mainly 
due to concerns over the China’s economic slowdown, declining oil and commodity 
prices and monetary policy divergence among major central banks. Lately, the global 
volatility  has  subsided  as  the  Chinese  government  has  shown  a  strong  commitment  to 
limiting  the  possibility  of  hard  landing  with  additional  fiscal  and  credit  stimulus  while 
restructuring  the  economy.  Commodity  prices  have  also  begun  to  edge  higher.  Financial 
market  participants  expect  monetary  policy 
remain  highly 
accommodative,  despite  an  increased  possibility  of  another  rate  hike  by  the  US  Federal 
Reserve in the next few months. 
While relative calm has returned to the global financial markets, I must stress that the 
global  financial  environment  remains  fragile.  Development  on  China’s  economic 
restructuring and concerns over its corporate debt, the possibility of Brexit, and major central 
banks’ policy divergence are among the most significant factors that can trigger new bouts of 
volatility.  Investors’  sensitivity  to  unexpected  news  and  events  could  also  amplify  the 
volatility. 
Amid  the  fragile  global  financial  climate,  the  Thai  financial  markets  have  been 
relatively resilient compared to those of other emerging markets, thanks to Thailand’s 
strong  external  position.  Current  account  position  last  year  registered  a  surplus  of 
9 percent of GDP, and is projected to remain at that level in 2016. Our international reserves 
have been at a healthy level, standing at around three times of the short-term external debt 
and 1.3 times of the total external debt. Foreign holdings of the Thai government and Bank of 
Thailand bond outstanding are less than 9 percent, compared with more than 30 percent in 
some other emerging markets in the region. External debt of the corporate sector has been 
relatively  low,  and  mostly  belongs  to  large  companies,  which  manage  their  exchange  rate 
risk sufficiently well. 
in  major  countries 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
While  Thailand’s  financial  strength  serves  as  a  buffer  against  external  shocks,  it  is 
important that the private sector is not complacent and should continue to be prudent 
in their financial risk management. Global financial volatility can definitely trigger two-way 
movements  of  currencies  and  asset  prices.  As  a  small  open  economy,  Thailand  cannot 
escape, but to find effective ways to live with the global volatility. 
On  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  part,  under  the  flexible  exchange  rate  regime,  currency 
movement serves as the first line of defense against unexpected external events. We 
continue  to  be  prudent  in  using  an  appropriate  mix  of  policy  tools  to  help  prevent 
excessive  volatility  of  the  currency  and  asset  prices.  In  addition,  to  build  market 
resilience  in  the  longer  run,  we  embrace  on  financial  market  developments,  as  deep  and 
liquid markets would better absorb large swings in capital flows. We also plan to further relax 
capital flow regulations to allow more balanced flows in and out of the country, which would 
enhance stability against short-term speculative flows. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Moving from the financial side to the real side, let me share with you the Monetary Policy 
Committee’s  latest  assessment  to  summarize  where  the  Thai  economy  stands  at  the 
moment. 
This  year,  the  Thai  economy  is  projected  to  gradually  recover,  driven  mainly  by 
government  spending  and  the  tourism  sector.  Government  spending,  mainly  through 
small  investment  projects,  has  lent  support  to  the  recent  economic  recovery.  Contribution 
from large-scale infrastructure projects is expected to become more evident in the latter half 
of this year. Meanwhile, tourism has been an important growth driver, with a broad-based 
improvement in a number of tourists from China and other regions. In 2016, we estimate that 
more than 32 million foreign tourists, improving from 30 million last year, will choose Thailand 
as one of their destinations. 
In addition, the Thai economy has benefited from expansion of investment in certain 
sectors,  notably  those  related  to  telecommunication  and  alternative  energy.  Exports  of 
goods to CLMV countries, which now account for around 10 percent of our total exports, has 
supported  economic  growth  and  has  potential  to  grow  further,  despite  a  decline  in  export 
volumes  of  oil  in  recent  months  due  to  temporary  factors.  Overall,  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee forecasts that the economy will grow at 3.1 percent in 2016, picking up from a 
growth rate of 2.8 percent in 2015 and 0.9 percent in 2014. 
However, I must admit that overall momentum of the Thai economic recovery remains 
slow  at  this  stage.  Exports  of  goods,  excluding  gold,  continue  to  contract,  largely 
attributable to weak external demand, notably from China and Asian trading partners, as well 
as structural constraints of the Thai industries and changes in global trade structure. 
Weak  exports  have  mainly  weighed  on  private  investment  which  only  saw  a  modest 
expansion. Private consumption, particularly which of rural agricultural households, has been 
dragged  by  high  indebtedness,  low  income  growth  and  severe  drought.  Amid  gradual 
economic recovery, employment conditions remain intact. Flexibility in the labor market 
has allowed workers to move from the agricultural sector to other sectors. There have been 
no extensive layoffs, despite a reduced number of working hours. 
In  recognition  of  lower-than-potential  growth  and  low  inflationary  pressure,  the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  has  maintained  an  accommodative  policy  stance  to 
support  the  economic  recovery.  At  its  latest  meeting  a  few  weeks  ago,  the  Committee 
decided to maintain the policy interest rate at 1.50 percent. In the Committee’s view, current 
monetary conditions have eased further as bond yields remained low, and commercial bank 
lending rates declined. Therefore, the policy interest rate should be kept on hold to preserve 
limited  policy  space,  which  can  be  deployed  if  unforeseen  events  emerge  in  the  future. 
Moreover, maintaining the policy interest rate would not add risks to financial stability. Under 
a prolonged period of low interest rate environment, some tentative signs of search-for-yield 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 in  this  sphere,  there  are  at 
 
 
behavior,  such  as  higher  demand for  risker financial  instruments,  have  emerged  and  thus 
warrant close monitoring going forward. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
As  the  Thai  economy  gradually  recovers  and  inflationary  pressure  remains  subdued, 
monetary policy will ensure that monetary conditions are adequately supportive to growth. At 
the  same  time,  we  must  not  forget  to  chart  a  course  towards  the  country’s  long-term 
economic development. As the Thai economy is in need to upgrade growth potentials and 
increase competitiveness, the Bank of Thailand will contribute to this process of economic 
transformation by taking a proactive role in the financial sector development policy. 
Ongoing 
least  three  development  plans  under 
implementation,  namely,  the  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan,  the  Payment  Systems 
Roadmap, and the Capital Account Liberalization Master Plan. Although the three plans 
have different objectives, they complement each other and together form a strong foundation 
for the country’s financial sector development. I will highlight a few key elements we hope to 
get out of these plans. 
The first one is the Financial Sector Master Plan (FSMP) Phase III. 
Approved by the Cabinet in March this year to set out strategic directions for the next five 
years (2016  – 2020), FSMP III is aimed to promote a competitive Thai financial sector, to 
support more diverse needs at fair and undistorted prices, as well as promote regional trades 
and investments, with proper supervision to ensure macroeconomic and financial stability. In 
short, this plan’s motto is to promote a “competitive, inclusive, connected, and sustainable” 
financial system. 
After five years, the Bank of Thailand expects to see growing financial innovation with 
more diverse players, both banks and non-banks, especially those offering digital financial 
services. These services will allow a new segment of customers to gain access to financial 
services through new channels. SMEs entrepreneurs, for example, could pitch their ideas to 
a wider group of investors, through crowd funding and peer-to-peer lending platforms. New 
ideas  would  have  a  higher  chance  of  being  translated  into  businesses,  thus  promoting 
innovative  spirit  among  the  Thai  entrepreneurs.  Financial  innovation  will  also  promote 
competition and drive higher efficiency in the banking sector. 
At the same time, we expect most Thai individuals to have access to basic financial 
services at a fair price and have an appropriate level of financial literacy.  Financially 
deserved  enterprises  should  receive  adequate  funding,  using  proper  financial  instruments. 
We  expect  to  improve  households’  financial  literacy,  leading  to  more  prudent  financial 
management  and 
institutions,  we 
encourage  them  to  improve  the  level  of  consumer  protection  and  quality  of  financial 
professionals,  and  to  incorporate  more  sustainability  practices  into  their  core  business 
operation. 
On the road to enhancing regional connectivity,  under the ASEAN Banking Integration 
Framework,  we  encourage  banks  to  further  extend  their  regional  presence  to  support 
expanding economic activities, or use Thailand as a springboard to expand their business in 
regional  countries,  leveraging  on  Thailand’s  established  legal  framework,  financing  facility, 
infrastructure,  logistics  and  IT  capability.  In  addition,  the  use  of  local  currency  in  regional 
trade and investment has been promoted to lower business transaction costs and mitigate 
volatility of the major currencies. We hope that policy to strengthen financial connectivity with 
our neighbors will facilitate closer economic integration for the shared benefits of the region. 
The second plan is the Payment Systems Roadmap. 
The  plan  is  aimed  to  promote  safe  and  efficient  electronic  payment  services  with  new 
technologies  and  innovation,  with  a  view  to  reducing  transaction  costs,  improving 
governance standards, and being supportive of expanding economic activities. In particular, 
lowered  households’ 
indebtedness.  For 
financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
integrated  payment  channels,  such  as  mobile  phones,  internet,  debit/  credit  cards,  and  e-
money along with a competitive fee structure, will support e-Commerce/ m-Commerce and 
benefit  both  businesses  and  consumers  alike.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  will  also  continue  to 
work  with  regional  regulators  to  advance  payment  systems  connectivity  to  support 
international trades, labor movements, and tourisms. 
Under this roadmap, the Bank of Thailand has worked closely with the government to 
advocate the idea of digital economy by taking a lead in the National e-Payment Plan 
to promote Any ID infrastructure and debit card usage. Development of a new payment 
infrastructure  as  the  “open  architecture”  to  allow  network  interoperability  among  various 
types of players will lower payment fees and discourage the use of cash, thus resulting in 
much lower operating costs and higher efficiency for the corporate and banking sectors. As 
fundamental parts of infrastructure development, we adopt international best practices on the 
security and prudential standards to ensure confidence as the country moves from a cash-
based economy towards a digital economy. 
The  third  area  of  financial  sector  development  policy  is  the  Capital  Account 
Liberalization Master Plan, Phase II. 
The  plan  aims  to  deepen  Thailand’s  financial  markets  by  allowing  greater  flexibility  and 
diversification in products and services offered to residents and non-residents, and to support 
the  growth  and  development  of  the  Thai  economy.  So  far,  a  number  of  regulations  on 
foreign-exchange management have been relaxed for greater flexibility and lower transaction 
costs. 
This year, the Bank of Thailand plans to further relax foreign-exchange regulations by 
allowing qualified investors to invest in securities abroad directly within a certain limit without 
the need to go through local intermediaries. We also plan to allow securities companies to 
buy and sell foreign currencies with their clients within the scope of their brokerage business. 
Lastly, foreign  corporations  located  in  neighboring  countries  are  to  be permitted to  borrow 
direct  loans  in  Thai  baht  from  domestic  financial  institutions  to  invest  in  Greater  Mekong 
Subregion (GMS). 
We have also started to see the results of the increased flexibility, which helps Multi-
National  Companies 
International 
Headquarters  (IHQ)  in  Thailand.  As  of  now,  there  are  13  companies  holding  Treasury 
Center licenses, of which 4 have been granted in the past 3 months, with one more awaiting 
approval from the Ministry of Finance. Many more have also made inquiries which I am very 
glad to see. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me now turn to the concluding part of my talk tonight. 
Amid  the  volatile  global  financial  climate,  Thailand’s  strong  external  positions  will 
serve  as  buffers  against  financial  shocks.  The  private  sector’s  prudent  financial 
management  and  policymakers’  credible  policy  will  allow  us  to  successfully  ride  with  the 
global tides. 
In the real sector, the Thai economy is expected to maintain its gradual recovery path, 
driven mainly by government spending and tourism. Exports of goods, on the other hand, is 
subject to a slowdown in trading partners’ economies and structural constraints of the Thai 
industries. Inflationary pressure remains subdued, but the headline inflation will gradually rise 
in line with a recent pick up in oil prices. Against this backdrop, monetary policy stance will 
remain  adequately  accommodative  to  support  economic  activities,  while  safeguarding 
financial stability. 
Over  a  longer  horizon,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  is  committed  to  creating  financial 
infrastructure and nurturing the financial eco-system to help lift up growth potentials 
of  the  Thai  economy.  We  aim  to  promote  financial  innovation,  financial  inclusion  and 
to  establish  Treasury  Centers 
(TC)  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
financial literacy, as strong foundations for sustainable economic development. With regard 
to  the  payment  systems,  the  new  infrastructures  are  being  built  to  support  the  transition 
towards the digital economy. Rules and regulations on exchange-rate management are to be 
relaxed  further  for  greater  flexibility  of  investors  and  multinational  companies.  We  believe 
these policies would put Thailand on a strong foothold to serve as a regional connector to 
support closer economic integration. 
Last but not least, let me once again thank the FCCT for organizing this forum. The road 
ahead for the Thai economy indeed brings new opportunities as well as challenges, urging 
us to adjust ahead of the changing conditions. Being among policymakers, businesses, and 
journalists who gather here tonight, I hope we will continue to work together on the route to 
enhancing competitiveness and sustainable development of Thailand. 
Kob Khun Krub. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
