    Remarks by Timothy Lane 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada 
Centre for International Governance Innovation (CIGI) 
16 November 2016 
Waterloo, Ontario 
  Follow the Money: A Canadian 
Perspective on Financial Globalization 
 
Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me to speak to you today. The movement of goods, 
services, people and money across international borders has always been 
controversial and seems to be becoming more so by the day. In this context, 
Canada needs to be fully engaged in the global dialogue. As a medium-sized 
country, we can only have an impact on this dialogue by bringing new ideas and 
careful analysis to the table. This is where the Centre for International 
Governance Innovation’s contribution continues to be particularly vital.  
Today, I would like to focus on one aspect of globalization: international capital 
mobility. 
I’ll start by opening up some basic questions associated with capital mobility and 
then review key trends in capital flows over the past few decades. I’ll discuss the 
benefits and challenges of being open to capital flows and the policy tools that 
are being deployed by some countries to manage them. Finally, I’ll take you 
through Canada’s experience and the factors that have enabled us to conduct an 
effective monetary policy in the face of free capital mobility. 
Capital Flows: Servant or Master? 
It is striking how perceptions of international capital mobility differ across 
countries.  
In Canada, we take our ability to move funds across our borders for granted. 
Canadian investors hold US equities. Snowbirds open US bank accounts and run 
up bills on US credit cards. Canadian banks fund themselves in New York. 
Canadian companies borrow and issue shares in US markets. And our 
governments sell bonds to foreign central banks and other foreign investors. 
There are, of course, certain types of transactions that are periodically a source 
of controversy—notably, foreign investment in Canadian real estate and certain 
foreign acquisitions of Canadian companies. But for the vast bulk of the capital 
I would like to thank Mark Kruger for help in preparing this speech. 
 Not for publication before 16 November 2016 
11:50 Eastern Time 
 - 2 - 
flowing across our borders, in both directions, most of us don’t give it a second 
thought.  
To draw the bigger picture: capital flows in and out of Canada in response to 
broader economic trends. At the present time, Canada is going through a 
complex adjustment to lower prices for oil and other commodities in the face of 
persistently weak demand for our non-commodity exports. We have had to rely 
on domestic demand to keep our economy growing. In that context, Canada as a 
whole is spending more than it earns from the rest of the world—a current 
account deficit. Capital is flowing into Canada, in various forms, to finance that 
deficit. The inflows are accommodating the needed economic adjustments that 
are taking place. 
The experience of many emerging-market and developing countries has been 
quite different. Many of these countries have, at some time, faced the economic 
devastation of capital account crises, when sudden halts in foreign capital, often 
accompanied by capital flight by domestic residents, forces the economy through 
wrenching adjustments. In such episodes, capital flows take on a life of their own: 
they become a driver, rather than an enabler, of economic decisions. They can 
raise significant concerns for both economic and financial stability.  
In many of these countries, capital flows are seen as driven mainly by external 
forces, in particular, the monetary policies of the major advanced economies. In 
the eight years since the global financial crisis, ultra-low interest rates and 
unconventional monetary policy in the United States, the euro area and Japan 
have created incentives to search for yield, which have led to large surges of 
foreign investment in many emerging-market economies (EMEs). There are 
concerns that these flows are not sustainable—that when monetary policies in 
the advanced economies return to normal, the flows could reverse in a disruptive 
way, particularly for those EMEs with weaker domestic fundamentals. We had a 
hint of that with the “taper tantrum” in 2013.1 In the same vein, over the past 
week, market interest rates and capital flows worldwide have shifted sharply, 
along with changing perceptions of the direction of the economic policies of the 
United States.  
Financial globalization raises another question: Can a central bank still conduct 
an effective monetary policy to fit its own circumstances and objectives? 
International capital mobility has given rise to a “global financial cycle” through 
which asset prices, longer-term interest rates and capital flows in many countries 
tend to move together. But long-term interest rates and asset prices are key 
transmission channels through which monetary policy affects the national 
economy. If these channels are compromised, policy could become less 
effective.  
In Canada, we have been living with an open capital account for several 
decades. But our flexible exchange rate gives us room to conduct an effective 
                                            
1 The term “taper tantrum” refers to how markets reacted in 2013 to comments by Federal 
Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke that the Fed might slow down, or taper, the rate of bond 
purchases, which are part of its quantitative easing (economic stimulus) program.   
 - 3 - 
monetary policy that is consistent with domestic conditions and promotes the 
economic and financial welfare of Canadians. In many other countries, however, 
there are legitimate concerns that their monetary policies may be overwhelmed 
by the global financial cycle. In this light, some have even argued that capital 
controls are a precondition for monetary policy independence. 
In contrasting the Canadian experience with that of EMEs, we could conclude 
that capital flows are a good servant but a bad master. Being open to global 
capital flows is beneficial when it serves residents by creating a wider range of 
opportunities to save, invest and borrow. But it is harmful if it becomes a 
controlling influence on the economy and curtails the country’s freedom to chart 
its own course. So how can a country learn to live with capital flows, to reap the 
benefits while insulating its economy from their effects and maintaining its policy 
independence?  
Overview of the Trends 
Before I talk about recent trends, let’s start with some basics—what we mean 
when we talk about gross and net capital flows.  
Gross private inflows refer to net purchases of domestic assets by foreign 
residents. They are defined as the sum of foreign direct investment, portfolio 
inflows, derivatives inflows and other investment inflows (which include trade 
credit and bank lending). (Gross outflows are the reverse, net purchases of 
foreign assets by domestic residents.)  
Gross flows, then, measure the extent and form of cross-border investment. They 
include foreign direct investment (FDI)—say, an American company buying a 
Canadian gold mine; portfolio flows—such as a Hungarian investor buying 
Ontario government bonds; and other flows—for example, a Canadian pension 
fund carrying out derivatives transactions in London.2 
The net capital flow is the sum of these gross inflows and outflows and any 
change in the country’s official reserves. This is a key macroeconomic variable: it 
is the mirror image of a country’s current account balance, the difference 
between domestic savings and investment. Indeed, a net capital inflow is the way 
in which a current account deficit is financed.  
Now, let me turn to the global trends. 
For much of the past decade and a half, advanced countries ran current account 
deficits and received funding from emerging-market and developing countries 
(Chart 1). This seems odd, since rapidly growing emerging economies surely 
had vast needs for investment—creating opportunities to earn much higher yields 
than those offered by investments in advanced countries. This counterintuitive 
flow of funds corresponds to large differences in national savings. In particular, 
while Chinese households and firms save a lot, those in the United States do not. 
These differences in savings rates, in turn, reflect a combination of factors, 
                                            
2 FDI is distinguished from portfolio flows because it involves a resident of one country having 
effective control of real assets in another.  
 - 4 - 
including the different stages of development of these countries’ financial 
systems.3 
Chart 1: Poorer countries lent to richer ones for most of the past 15 years 
Current account balances  
US$ billions 
800
400
0
-400
-800
0
0
0
2
1
0
0
2
2
0
0
2
3
0
0
2
4
0
0
2
5
0
0
2
6
0
0
2
7
0
0
2
8
0
0
2
9
0
0
2
0
1
0
2
1
1
0
2
2
1
0
2
3
1
0
2
4
1
0
2
5
1
0
2
Emerging and developing economies
Advanced economies
Sources: International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, and Haver Analytics 
Last observation: 2015 
 Over the same period, we saw a massive expansion in gross flows, a testament 
to rapidly increasing global financial integration. This process has been anything 
but smooth. Global gross flows more than tripled in the early 2000s, from just 
over US$3 trillion in 2000 to close to US$12 trillion in 2007 (Chart 2). The flows 
fell sharply in 2008–09 during the global financial crisis, recovered somewhat in 
2010 and remain well below pre-2008 highs. 
Chart 2: World gross capital flows peaked in 2007 
Four-quarter rolling sum  
US$ billions 
15000
12000
9000
6000
3000
0
-3000
Sources: International Monetary Fund Balance of Payments Statistics and Haver Analytics 
Last observation: 2015Q4 
                                             
3 This channel is analyzed in, for example, E. G. Mendoza, V. Quadrini and J. V. Ríos-Rull, 
“Financial Integration, Financial Development, and Global Imbalances,” Journal of Political 
Economy 117, no. 3 (2009). 
 - 5 - 
The composition of gross capital inflows also shifted considerably over this 
period (Chart 3). FDI has been the most stable form of capital flows, since it 
tends to be driven by longer-term corporate decisions. Portfolio flows are easier 
to liquidate than FDI and thus are often more volatile. Other flows, mainly 
banking flows, have been the most volatile of all. Bank lending is procyclical, 
rising in good times and falling in bad times. This is not only because banks 
respond to the attractiveness of lending opportunities, which are themselves 
procyclical, but also because they typically lever up to increase lending during 
booms and de-leverage during downswings.4 After the global financial crisis, 
global bank lending dropped off sharply, since banks needed to repair their 
balance sheets and comply with more-stringent regulatory capital requirements. 
So how does Canada fit in?  
We have traditionally been a capital importer. Our current account balance—the 
difference between how much we invest and how much we save—has typically 
been in deficit to the tune of 2–3 per cent of GDP. We have depended on 
external financing to fund this gap. In the early 2000s, strong foreign demand and 
high commodity prices raised our national incomes, and we ran current account 
surpluses for a number of years. During those years we exported capital to the 
rest of the world (Chart 4). Since the global financial crisis, foreign demand has 
been on a weaker track and commodity prices are lower. Our current account is 
again in deficit and, once more, we are relying on capital imports from the rest of 
the world.  
Benefits and Challenges of Financial Globalization 
As I’ve already mentioned, opening up an economy to capital flows brings both 
benefits and challenges.  
Benefits 
The benefits of financial globalization are similar to those of free trade. Open 
borders create opportunities for transactions that benefit both parties because of 
their differences in endowments or preferences. For example, a country where a 
large share of the population is of working age can benefit from being able to 
channel its savings to other countries—a net capital outflow. As the country’s 
population ages further and more of its citizens retire and start to draw on their 
savings, foreign assets are liquidated, generating a capital inflow from the rest of 
the world.  
Cross-border investments, which give rise to gross capital flows, enable investors 
to diversify risk. Canada’s pension funds have, for example, used international 
opportunities to effectively provide more-secure retirement income for 
Canadians.  
FDI brings other benefits, since it bundles financing and know-how. This helps 
residents of the investing country use these capabilities where they can be most 
                                            
4 See Committee on International Economic Policy and Reform, Banks and Cross-Border Capital 
Flows: Policy Challenges and Regulatory Responses, September 2012. 
 - 6 - 
productive and creates opportunities in the recipient country. Over the years, 
Canada has benefited from sizable flows of FDI in both directions.  
Chart 3: Banking flows are the most volatile capital flows 
Per cent of group GDP, four-quarter moving average 
% 
30
20
10
0
-10
FDI direct inflows
Portfolio inflows
Other inflows
Derivative inflows
Gross inflows
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook. IMF Balance of Payments Statistics, Haver Analytics and Bank of Canada calculations 
Last observation: 2015Q4 
Chart 4: Canada’s current account balance is once again in deficit 
Per cent of GDP 
  3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook 
Last observation: 2015 
 Being open to capital flows can also have collateral benefits. It can catalyze 
competition, promote the development of the domestic financial system and 
provide a force for better governance. For example, foreign financial institutions 
can bring a healthy dose of competition, boosting the quality and bringing down 
the cost of financial services. An open capital account can also lead to improved 
corporate governance as companies bring their practices in line with what is 
required to attract and retain foreign investors. In the same vein, some countries, 
including Poland, the Philippines, Thailand and Malaysia, have used foreign 
inflows as a tool to broaden their investor base and develop domestic equity and 
 - 7 - 
bond markets.5 To the extent that these forces are at work, they should 
contribute to stronger productivity growth and higher living standards throughout 
the economy. 
While these potential benefits of capital mobility are real, they are hard to pin 
down empirically. That is partly because they materialize over a longer time 
period.  
Challenges 
At the same time, the challenges associated with financial openness are only too 
easy to identify. Take the examples of Mexico and Thailand in the 1990s and of 
Greece in the mid-2000s. The experiences of these countries taught that 
financial flows from abroad can fuel macroeconomic and financial imbalances 
that later unwind in a destructive way. A capital inflow surge can encourage 
unsustainable spending by domestic households, companies and government; 
this unsustainable spending is mirrored in a current account deficit. A sudden 
stop in those inflows—particularly if accompanied by capital flight, where a 
country’s own residents move their assets abroad—results in a crisis that forces 
an abrupt contraction of domestic spending.6 
Inflows of capital are often associated with a buildup of financial system 
vulnerabilities, which can have important consequences for financial stability. 
This is particularly the case where the domestic financial system is lacking the 
ability to efficiently intermediate large gross flows.  
To the extent that there are weaknesses in a country’s financial system, opening 
the capital account can feed those weaknesses and result in a larger buildup of 
imbalances. These can include currency, maturity and liquidity mismatches: in 
some instances, where liquid short-term banking flows denominated in foreign 
currencies are used to finance longer-term domestic currency lending, you get all 
three. Waves of foreign capital can also fuel credit booms, which are associated 
with mounting leverage and deteriorating credit quality. When the flows reverse, 
these vulnerabilities can amplify the effects on the domestic economy, in some 
cases triggering a wave of bankruptcies. 
In theory, exchange rate flexibility should mitigate the risks associated with large 
net capital inflows. This was framed by Robert Mundell as a trilemma: a country 
cannot have an open capital account, a fixed exchange rate and an independent 
monetary policy; but with a flexible exchange rate, it can use monetary policy to 
                                            
5 E. S. Prasad and R. G. Rajan, “A Pragmatic Approach to Capital Account Liberalization,” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, no. 3 (2008):149–172; R. B. Johnston, S. M. Darbar and C. 
Echeverria, “Sequencing Capital Account Liberalization: Lessons from the Experiences in Chile, 
Indonesia, Korea, and Thailand,” IMF Working Paper No. 97/157 (November 1997); M. Rodlauer 
and P. N’Diaye, “IMF and PBC Joint Conference on Capital Flows Management: Lessons from 
International Experience, Summaries and Presentations,” IMF, 20 March 2013. 
6 K. J. Forbes and F. E. Warnock, “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and 
Retrenchment,” Journal of International Economics 88 (2012): 235–251, distinguish between 
episodes of surges and stops (respectively, sharp increases or decreases in foreign inflows) and 
flight and retrenchment (respectively, large increases and decreases in domestic outflows).  
 - 8 - 
stabilize its economy in the presence of international capital flows.7 Consider the 
case of a country experiencing capital inflows. Its currency would rise in value, 
which—other things being equal—would have a negative effect on its net exports 
and on economic activity more generally. The country’s central bank, tasked with 
stabilizing the economy, would typically respond with a lower policy interest rate. 
The combination of a stronger currency and lower domestic interest rates would 
make foreign investments in the country less attractive, thus attenuating the 
capital inflows.  
However, it doesn’t always work this way. Many countries do not allow their 
currencies to adjust fully. Indeed, credit booms typically occur in countries with 
fixed and managed exchange rate regimes.8  
It is also possible that, even with a floating exchange rate, appreciations can 
perversely encourage further capital inflows, exacerbating the problem. This 
occurs through the “risk-taking channel.”9 If domestic borrowers have local 
currency assets and foreign currency liabilities, an appreciation increases the 
value of their domestic assets and makes their balance sheets look stronger. 
This increase in perceived creditworthiness could lead to the provision of more 
foreign currency loans as capital inflows through the banking sector increase. 
In a similar vein, it has been argued that, even with a floating exchange rate, a 
country’s financial conditions depend primarily on a global financial cycle, limiting 
a central bank’s ability to use monetary policy independently to influence its 
economy. One scholar thus argues that Mundell’s trilemma boils down to a 
dilemma: “Independent monetary policies are possible if—and only if—the capital 
account is managed, directly or indirectly, via macroprudential policies.”10 
The most familiar examples of international capital flows enabling the buildup of 
domestic economic and financial imbalances come from EMEs. But this is not 
just a developing-country issue: think of the United States before 2008. The 
distorted incentives and regulatory weaknesses in the US financial system during 
that period are well known. In that context, the ability to borrow cheaply, at global 
interest rates reflecting high savings rates in China and other EMEs, contributed 
to a growing financial bubble. This pattern, and the ensuing financial crash in the 
world’s most sophisticated financial system, had many elements that are familiar 
from EMEs in the past. 
To sum up, while there are known benefits to financial openness, a country can 
reap those benefits only if it avoids some important pitfalls. If a country has major 
distortions in its financial system, perhaps reflecting weaknesses in regulations, 
opening the economy to capital flows may just feed those distortions. To turn this 
                                            
7 R. A. Mundell, “Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible Exchange 
Rates,” The Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science 29, no. 4 (1963): 475–485.   
8 E. G. Mendoza and M. E. Terrones, “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence from Macro 
Aggregates and Micro Data,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.14049 
(May 2008). 
9 H. S. Shin, “Exchange Rates and the Transmission of Global Liquidity” (speech at Bank of 
Korea-IMF Conference, Seoul, 11 December 2015). 
10 H. Rey, “Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy 
Independence,” London Business School, CEPR and NBER, August 2013. 
 - 9 - 
around: a country may need to achieve a certain level of financial system 
soundness and standard of governance before it can fully reap the benefits of 
capital mobility. 
Based on this logic, a number of researchers have suggested that there is a 
threshold: capital flows are beneficial only once a country has reached a certain 
degree of institutional and financial sector development.11 Where those 
conditions are lacking—say, when financial regulation is inadequate or property 
rights are not fully protected—financial openness invites instability and, on the 
whole, can be detrimental to economic growth.12 Above that threshold, capital 
flows can provide broader benefits, which can support rising living standards. 
The threshold suggests that countries may choose two distinct strategies. One is 
to try to manage or control capital flows, or at least to cushion the economy and 
financial system from their impact. The other approach is to try to achieve the 
threshold. Of course, these strategies can be complementary if a country 
effectively manages capital flows to buy time to strengthen its domestic system. 
Capital Controls 
The international view of capital controls has shifted over time. Most advanced 
economies maintained pervasive restrictions on capital movements during the 
period following the Second World War, but they opened their borders to capital 
flows during the 1960s through to the early 1990s. Liberalization was generally 
seen as irreversible: as one observer said, “You can’t put the toothpaste back in 
the tube.”13  
While many developing countries maintained capital controls, the Washington 
Consensus saw liberalization as the right destination—albeit with important 
issues concerning pace and sequencing.14 In contrast—and based on extensive 
international experience—capital control measures were viewed as distortionary 
and ineffective. 
The role of capital controls is being reassessed in light of the experience of both 
the crisis and the subsequent capital flow surges associated with the monetary 
policies of the major advanced economies. In this context, capital controls are 
often viewed as a type of macroprudential tool to limit the resulting buildup of 
vulnerabilities. Used in combination with other macroprudential tools, it could give 
monetary policy a freer hand in maintaining domestic macroeconomic and price 
stability. 
The reassessment is reflected in international discussions. In the autumn of 
2011, G20 finance ministers and central bank governors drew up non-binding 
                                            
11 G. Bekaert, C. R. Harvey and C. Lundblad, “Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?” 
Journal of Financial Economics 77, no. 1 (2005): 3–55. 
12 E. S. Prasad, R. G. Rajan and A. Subramanian, “Foreign Capital and Economic Growth,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (2007): 153–230. 
13 Remarks by Morris Goldstein in presenting “Determinants and Systemic Consequences of 
International Capital Flows,” International Monetary Fund Occasional Paper 77 (March 1991).  
14 The so-called Washington Consensus refers to the idea of combining macroeconomic stability, 
trade and financial liberalization, and privatization. 
 - 10 - 
“Coherent Conclusions for the Management of Capital Flows Drawing on Country 
Experiences.” These conclusions accepted that capital controls could be 
appropriate, provided they were temporary, targeted and transparent.15 This was 
complemented by the development by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) of 
an “institutional view” that characterizes the role of capital controls as part of the 
macroeconomic policy tool kit.16 
However, capital controls, like tariffs on trade, have spillovers to other countries. 
This suggests a need for governance similar to that for trade restrictions. The 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries 
have entered into a legally binding agreement—the Code of Liberalisation of 
Capital Movements—which is also open to adherence by non-OECD countries.  
The G20 has established a working group on international financial architecture, 
which is focusing on managing the risks stemming from capital flow volatility.  
This group has highlighted a need for better data on the composition of capital 
flows to better identify currency and maturity mismatches. It is also supporting 
analytic work that draws lessons from countries’ experiences in capital flow 
management. A broader goal is to complete the global financial safety net—the 
set of financing arrangements available to countries faced with unexpected 
reversals of capital inflows. For example, the group is exploring the scope for 
contingent debt instruments such as GDP-linked bonds that would provide 
insurance to countries that may be faced with adverse shocks.17 These 
measures to strengthen the safety net should make it less necessary for 
countries to resort to controls on capital outflows.  
The emerging global consensus is that capital controls can be used under some 
circumstances to mitigate the buildup of financial vulnerabilities. But they should 
not be used to compensate for inconsistent or inappropriate macroeconomic 
policies. Their effectiveness varies and typically diminishes over time. For 
example, research at the Bank of Canada has found that capital control actions 
have only a limited impact on net capital inflows, monetary policy autonomy or 
the exchange rate.18  
Finally, if controls are used to shore up an unsustainable exchange rate peg, 
they may exacerbate rather than stem volatility. This is the classic “one-way bet” 
scenario: the strategy creates the expectation that the exchange rate will 
eventually adjust, thereby inducing additional speculative capital flows. 
                                            
15 This view was elaborated on in a 2011 speech by M. Carney, “The Paradigm Shifts: Global 
Imbalances, Policy, and Latin America” (speech to the Intern-American Development Bank, 
Calgary, Alberta, 26 March 2011). 
16 See IMF, The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows: An Institutional View, 
14 November 2012, available at www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2012/111412.pdf. 
17 See “G20 Agenda towards a More Stable and Resilient International Financial Architecture,” 
available at www.g20.org/English/Documents/Current/201609/P020160914405291681904.pdf. 
18 G. Pasricha, M. Falagiarda, M. Bijsterbosch  and J. Aizenman,“Domestic and Multilateral 
Effects of Capital Controls in Emerging Markets,” Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper No. 2015-
37 (October 2015). 
 - 11 - 
Living with an Open Capital Account 
To summarize the argument so far: capital controls are available as a tool to 
cope with volatile capital flows—but they are, at most, a second-best tool. Over 
the past 20 years or so, many EMEs have adopted a different approach: they 
have taken action to prepare their financial systems and economies to cope with 
the free movement of capital. They have put their fiscal deficits onto a 
sustainable track, established credible frameworks for fiscal and monetary policy, 
developed deeper and more-liquid domestic financial markets and stronger 
financial systems, and tackled structural issues that impede growth. All of these 
actions reduce their vulnerability to capital flows.  
In some respects, Canada’s experience has been similar. Around the time of the 
Mexican peso crisis in the 1990s, our dollar was sometimes called the “northern 
peso.” Our exchange rate and borrowing costs were buffeted by changing market 
perceptions of the financial strength of our governments and our banks. 
That wake-up call caused us to put our house in order. In the wake of the failures 
of some small financial institutions, Canadian policy-makers strengthened the 
regulation of our financial system, taking the prudent, principles-based approach 
that today underpins the soundness of the system. The federal government cut 
the deficit and now has fiscal room to manoeuvre. And the Bank of Canada has 
adopted a clear target for monetary policy and has established its credibility 
around this target.  
These actions have not completely insulated the Canadian financial system from 
the global financial cycle. Canada’s market-determined interest rates are heavily 
influenced by global term premiums—as examined in recent Bank of Canada 
research.19 Despite that influence, however, the Bank of Canada retains the 
ability to affect those interest rates and other aspects of financial conditions in 
Canada.  
One key element is the country risk premium. The currencies and assets of many 
EMEs contain risk premiums that reflect their creditworthiness compared with 
that of the United States. These risk premiums can be time-varying and 
correlated with the global financial cycle: they rise during “risk-off” periods and 
they fall during “risk-on” periods.20 Canada’s credit risk premium has been 
reduced to a very low level as a result of our strong economic and financial 
fundamentals, which underlie our AAA credit rating (Chart 5). As a result, our 
asset prices and interest rates are less affected by the global financial cycle.  
Many of Canada’s large gross flows of capital tend to be offset by other flows—
contributing to our overall resilience. IMF research has shown that such offsetting 
flows are characteristic of countries with sound policy, well-regulated institutions, 
flexible exchange rates and open capital accounts—all of which are features of 
                                            
19 G. Bauer, G. Pasricha, R. Sekkel and Y. Terajima, “The Global Financial Cycle, Monetary 
Policies and Macroprudential Regulations in Small, Open Economies,” Bank of Canada Staff 
Working Paper No. 2016-38, (August 2016). 
20 B. S. Bernanke, “Federal Reserve Policy in an International Context,” (paper presented at the 
16th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, Washington, DC, 5–6 November 2015). 
 - 12 - 
Canada.21 In contrast, capital controls may reduce resilience by impeding such 
offsetting flows.  
Another factor that works in Canada’s favour is that (unlike many EMEs) it is able 
to borrow in its own currency. This means that our national balance sheet does 
not have an excessive currency mismatch. Where such mismatches are 
important, exchange rate depreciations can be contractionary because the 
balance-sheet effects of a weaker currency inflate the size of national liabilities, 
overwhelming the expenditure-switching effects through the trade channel. In 
contrast, a depreciation of the Canadian dollar tends to support the Canadian 
economy. For example, the substantial depreciation of the Canadian dollar 
during the past few years has helped to cushion the Canadian economy by 
making our non-commodity exports more competitive. Being able to borrow in 
one’s own currency, in turn, is a benefit of having a strong track record of sound 
macroeconomic and financial policies. 
Chart 5: Canada’s risk premium has been reduced to a very low level 
Risk premium on 10-year government bond yields in Canada and the United States, monthly data 
 3
2
1
0
-1
Canadian Recession
Canada
United States
Sources: Bank of Canada  and C.D. Howe Institute 
Last observation: October 2016 
 The credibility of Canada’s monetary policy framework, together with our floating 
exchange rate, also gives us more room to respond to shocks that are likely to 
have a differential impact on the Canadian economy than on the United States.22  
For example, last year the Bank of Canada cut the policy interest rate twice, to 
help cushion the Canadian economy from the collapse of oil prices. We were 
confident that inflation expectations would remain well anchored despite the 
depreciation of the Canadian dollar that was occurring.  
                                            
21 IMF, World Economic Outlook, “Chapter 4, The Yin and Yang of Capital Flow Management: 
Balancing Capital Inflows with Capital Outflows,” October 2013 
22 M. Obstfeld, “Trilemmas and Trade-offs: Living with Financial Globalisation,” BIS Working 
Paper No. 480, Monetary and Economic Department, January 2015. 
 - 13 - 
The global financial cycle and policy actions by the Federal Reserve can have 
important implications for Canada. These are, of course, factored into the Bank 
of Canada’s monetary policy decisions. As a concrete (but still hypothetical) 
example, suppose the Federal Reserve were to make an upward adjustment to 
its policy rate. Such a tightening in US monetary policy would affect Canada 
through two main financial channels. It leads to higher market interest rates 
globally and thus in Canada (in a sense, a tightening effect for Canada). But it 
also leads to a stronger US dollar, which increases the competitiveness of our 
exports (in a sense, a stimulative effect for Canada). It is important to note that 
the economic setting for such an interest rate move also needs to be taken into 
account: the Fed’s rate move would likely be made in response to a 
strengthening US economy, which is itself typically favourable for our exports.23 
The Bank of Canada would thus clearly need to take the net effects of the Fed’s 
move into account, alongside many other factors, in making Canadian monetary 
policy. We could directly observe the effects on interest rates and exchange rates 
prior to making a policy decision. And certainly, we would not consider the 
implication of such a move by the Fed in any mechanical way.   
The Bank of Canada’s track record—delivering low, stable and predictable 
inflation for the past 25 years, in the face of many shocks affecting our 
economy—attests to Canada’s ability to pursue an effective monetary policy in a 
world of globalized capital flows. We are free to adjust our policy interest rate in 
the context of Canadian economic conditions—and, in particular, do not need to 
move in step with the Federal Reserve. And that policy rate is transmitted 
effectively to stabilize the Canadian economy.  
Conclusion 
I began these remarks by noting that Canadians have learned to live with an 
open capital account. That goes for policy-makers, too. While global 
interconnections are a major factor in gauging the effects of our policies, they do 
not circumscribe our ability to set our own course.  
But the variety of international experience and our own past remind us that our 
resilience has been hard won; that, even now, not all countries are ready to 
benefit from financial globalization; and that we should be supportive of other 
countries as they take actions to safeguard their own economic and financial 
stability. A stable world is something from which we can all benefit. 
                                               
23 B.S. Bernanke, “Federal Reserve Policy in an International Context.” These effects are also 
discussed in Bank of Canada, Monetary Policy Report, October 2012. 
