Mugur Isărescu: Gaps and economic crises in South-East Europe –
present and past
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  at  the
conference "Gaps and Economic Crises in South-East Europe: Present and Past", Bucharest,
28 October 2016.
 Distinguished guests,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Allow me to warmly welcome you to the National Bank of Romania. The board of the National
Bank  of  Romania  and  I  are  glad  to  host,  for  the  second  time,  the Annual  Conference  of  the
South-East  European  Monetary  History  Network.  Five  years  ago,  in  March  2011,  when  NBR
hosted this event for the first time, we expressed our interest and support. We firmly believe that
a good understanding of history, of how our forerunners addressed issues linked to monetary
and economic developments, sets the foundation for finding solutions to present day challenges.
This  conference  brings  together  central  bank  representatives  from Albania, Austria,  Bulgaria,
Greece,  Serbia  and  Romania,  as  well  as  prominent  members  of  academic  and  scientific
European circles. I welcome you to Romania and hope you will have opportunity to enjoy your
brief stay.
This  year,  the  meeting  is  focused  on  economic  cycles  and  economic  crises  in  South-East
Europe, both past and present. This is a generous and challenging research topic. All the more
so, there has always been a permanent concern in the past 150 years for the policy makers in
the region to reduce the economic gaps between the countries in South-East Europe and the
developed ones. In spite of this preoccupation, the real life was, in almost all the cases, different.
This  kind  of  historical  research,  stretched  over  a  longer  period  of  time,  could  reveal  to  which
extent the solutions adopted in time were the appropriate ones. Given the interest shown by both
economic and political decision-makers, we find it useful to highlight the role that central banks
have played in the catching-up process.
I have to confess that I am personally interested in this topic and I look forward to seeing the
outcome of your debate. I do wish you success.
Allow me to say a few words about the South-East European Monetary History Network.
After a decade since it has been launched in Sofia, the Network achieved notable results in its
aim to collect and extract value from statistical and historical data. The most important one was
the  release,  in  2014,  of  a  book  titled  “South-Eastern  European  Monetary  and  Macroeconomic
Statistics from the Nineteenth Century to World War II”. It was the result of the joint efforts of
specialists from all seven participating banks and several members of the academia.
The National Bank of Romania shared the costs of editing this publication with the central banks
in Austria, Bulgaria and Greece. The book has been the first one to include a full set of statistical
and historical data showing key indicators in the economic and monetary areas for the countries
in South-East Europe, starting from the establishment of central banks in the 19th century to the
end of World War II. The book has proven ever since its value and utility.
Last  year  in  Vienna,  there  was  a  proposal  regarding  further  research  work  based  on  the
information  contained  within  the  balance  sheets  of  the  central  banks.  Looking  closer  at  the
structure and the evolution of these balance sheets over time provides experts with useful insight
as  to  how  monetary  policies  have  changed  and  have  been  implemented,  how  the  main
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
operations  have  evolved,  what  profit  the  central  banks  have  made  and  to  what  extent  central
banks have been able to secure and preserve their independence.
I trust that the South-East European Monetary History Network could further capitalise on both
the  researchers’  experience  of  compiling  the  statistical  and  historical  data  series  and  the
cooperation among central banks.
The National Bank of Romania has always shown interest in monetary and banking history. In
that respect, we are currently re-organising/redesigning the NBR Museum – which you are going
to visit after lunch – aiming to bring to the visitors’ attention both pieces of history and the role of
the central bank in shaping the economy, thus shaping history.
I will conclude here my brief address, wishing you fruitful debates and viable, useful solutions by
the end of today. To all the foreign guests, may you enjoy your stay in Romania.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
