 Monetary policy: achievements and review? 
 
Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland. Monetary policy 
meeting of the Iceland Chamber of Commerce, held at Harpa in Reykjavík on 
17 November 2016 
 
 
Madame Chairman, honoured guests,  
 
The  Iceland  Chamber  of  Commerce  has  a  long-standing  tradition  of 
holding  a  meeting  like  this  one  on  economic  developments  and 
prospects  and  monetary  policy.  The  meeting  is  held  following  the 
publication of the Central Bank’s autumn forecast and, in latter  years, 
the Monetary Policy Committee’s interest rate decision. In recent years, 
it has been the practice to select a particular topic for the meeting, and 
in keeping with this, today’s topic  is:  Is  independent  monetary policy 
too  costly?  This  departs  somewhat  from  the  contents  of  the  Central 
Bank’s  Monetary  Bulletin  and  current  tasks of  monetary  policy,  but  I 
will touch on these towards the end of my speech today.  
 
Yesterday  the  Bank  published  Monetary  Bulletin  2016/4,  which 
contained the Bank’s new macroeconomic forecast, and announced the 
Monetary Policy Committee’s interest rate decision. The big picture of 
the current state of the economy is that things have seldom been better. 
Icelanders  have  received  a  significant  boost  from  improved  terms  of 
trade and growing goods and services exports, particularly due to strong 
growth in the tourism sector. It is this that underlies the vast increase in 
Icelanders’  real  income  and  the  country’s  high  employment  level.  In 
addition,  Icelanders  have  proven  more  cautious  this  time  than  often 
before during an economic boom. Debt levels continue to fall, and the 
propensity  to  save  is  considerably  stronger  than  has  usually  been  the 
case during post-World War II upswings. This is probably due in part to 
greater  caution  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis,  but tight  monetary 
policy  has  been  a  factor  as  well,  by  contributing  to  slower  demand 
growth than would otherwise have been the case and by shifting a part 
of  the  steep  rise  in  income  and  wealth  towards  saving.  All  of  these 
factors have pulled together to create a better balanced economy than I 
have  seen  in  my  entire  career.  We  have  a  handsome  surplus  on  the 
current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments.  Inflation  has  been  below 
target  for nearly three  years  in spite of  large pay  increases and strong 
demand  growth.  Positive  supply  shocks  and  the  resulting  currency 
inflows play a role here, and so does importation of labour. As a result, 
imported  deflation  and  the  appreciation  of  the  króna  have  proven 
stronger  than  the  inflationary  pressures  from  the  domestic  labour 
market.  Monetary  policy  has  pulled  in  this  direction  as  well,  as  I 
1 
mentioned,  and  in  a  historically  important  development,  inflation 
expectations are close to target by most if not all measures.  
If this continues, monetary policy will have greater scope to mitigate the 
impact  if  positive  developments  give  way  to  negative  shocks.  And 
according to the Bank’s baseline forecast, the outlook is good: continued 
strong  GDP  growth  and  full  employment;  a  current  account  surplus 
throughout the forecast horizon; the prospect that Icelanders will soon 
own  more  assets  abroad  than  foreign  nationals  own  in  Iceland;  and 
inflation at target for the entire period.  
 
One can ask, in view of this, why some observers are so dissatisfied with 
monetary policy. I will discuss this in more detail later on. But there are 
significant  risks,  and  we  must  be  on  the  watch  for  them.  There  is  an 
obvious risk of economic overheating. The labour market could spiral 
out of control. Economic policy mistakes could take place – for instance, 
if fiscal policy begins to pull too strongly in a different direction from 
monetary policy. We have seen the repercussions of this before.  
 
I  will  now  turn  to  the  main  topics  of  my  speech  today:  the  level  of 
interest  rates  in  their  long-term  context, the  foreign  exchange  market, 
and possible changes to the monetary policy framework.  
 
 
 
Level of interest rates 
 
During  the  run-up  to  the  recent  Parliamentary  elections,  there  was 
considerable discussion of the level of interest rates in Iceland. If we are 
to come to a sensible conclusion on whether the nominal interest rate set 
by monetary policy is appropriate or not in terms of inflation, inflation 
expectations, the business cycle, a plausible estimate of the equilibrium 
real rate, and foreign interest rates, it is important that the discussion be 
based  on  facts.  When  we  consider  the  interest  rates  that  are  most 
important for households and businesses – i.e., longer-term real interest 
rates  rather  than  the  rates  decided  directly  by  the  Bank  –  it  is  also 
important  to  realise  to  what  extent  monetary  policy  can  affect  those 
rates. The answer to this is that monetary policy only has a short-term 
impact  on  long-run  real  rates  that  are  ultimately  determined  by 
underlying  economic  fundamentals,  not  least the interactions  between 
the propensity to save and the impetus to invest.  
 
Let us now examine a few facts of importance in this context. First, it 
should be noted that international long-term real rates have been falling 
over the past three decades, as can be seen in Chart 1.  
2 
Chart  1:  Real  long-term  Treasury  rates  on  price  indexed 
bonds 1985-2016 
 1985 
 
1990 
2015 
1995 
2000 
2005 
2010
— International interest                    —Iceland  
Rates on indexed long-term Treasury bonds (5-10 years). International interest rates 
are the simple average of rates for the US (from 1999), the UK, and Germany. The 
Icelandic data are compiled from data on initial offerings of Treasury savings bonds 
and yields on Housing Financing Fund bonds and indexed Treasury bonds. The figure 
from 2016 is the average through mid-November. 
Sources: Bank of England, US Federal Reserve Bank, Central Bank of Iceland.  
 
This development began long before the financial crisis. The crisis, the 
ensuing economic contraction, and the monetary easing in response to 
the crisis amplified this tendency still further, and long-term real rates 
are  now  at  an  absolute  historical  low.  In  part,  this  is  related  to  the 
business  cycle  position  in  larger  advanced  countries  and  could  turn 
around in coming years. However, it is unlikely that the decline in real 
rates over the past few decades will reverse to any large degree in the 
near future.  
 
One  of  the  main  theories  in  conventional  economics  is  that  monetary 
policy  cannot  affect  real  variables  –  including  long-term  real  interest 
rates  –  except  temporarily.  Although 
is  something  of  a 
simplification, and it is possible that monetary policy that is either far 
too tight or far too loose over a long period could have more of an impact 
than this, particularly in an economy with major imbalances, the theory 
is  nevertheless  a  close  enough  approximation  under  normal 
circumstances to take account of  it here. The period under scrutiny  is 
too  long  for  monetary  policy  to  have  had  a  substantial  impact  on 
developments. Furthermore, it is clear that the tendency to cut interest 
rates is not limited to individual countries; it is an international pattern, 
although it surfaces to varying degrees in different countries. Therefore, 
this 
3 
the  explanations  will  most  likely  be  found  in  factors  affecting  the 
propensity  to  save,  the  willingness  to  invest,  and  weaker  growth  in 
potential output globally.  All three of these  have  contributed to lower 
real rates over this period, although reduced growth in potential output 
might  be  more  recent.  The  aging  of  the  population,  increased  public 
saving  in  emerging  countries  (including  the  accumulation  of  foreign 
exchange  reserves),  and  increased  income  inequality  within  countries 
are  among  the  factors  that  have  contributed  to  the  increase  in  the 
propensity to save. Declining relative prices of investment products and 
increased  uncertainty  and  risk  aversion,  particularly  during  the 
aftermath  of  the  crisis,  have  negatively  affected  the  willingness  to 
invest.  
 
But  how  does  Iceland  fit  into  this  picture?  As  Chart  1  indicates, 
developments here have been similar, although interest rates have been 
–  and  still  are  –  higher  than  in  larger  industrialised  countries.  This  is 
quite  at  odds  with  what  could  be  expected  based  on  some  of  the 
discussion taking place in Iceland. The fact is that long-term real rates 
in Iceland are currently at their lowest for this entire period, apart from 
a short time in the midst of the economic crisis, when the real policy rate 
was held very low so as to stimulate the economy and presumably pulled 
longer-term rates downwards for a while.  
 
I have said that monetary policy had little to do with these developments. 
This  does  not  change  the  fact  that  these  developments  have  affected 
monetary  policy,  as  they  reflect  in  part  the  decline  in  short-term 
equilibrium real interest rates. Monetary policy has therefore responded 
to this with lower nominal interest rates than would otherwise have been 
appropriate. Nominal rates have fallen even further during this period, 
for three reasons. First of all, inflation and inflation expectations were 
brought to target levels in major industrialised countries in the last two 
decades  of  the  20th  century;  therefore,  it  was  not  necessary  to  keep 
nominal and real rates as high as before. It could be said that the same 
development has taken place here in Iceland in the recent term. Second, 
global  deflationary  tendencies  have  been  strong  in  recent  years, 
following the inclusion of China and Russia in the global trading system 
and  due  to  technological  advances  and  developments  in  international 
production  and  value  chains.  Third,  a  pronounced  economic  slack  in 
major industrialised countries after the financial crisis has led to much 
more  accommodative  monetary  policy  than  would  otherwise  have 
prevailed  in  those  countries.  All  of  these  factors  combined  have 
contributed to the current situation, where nominal central bank rates in 
leading industrialised economies are extremely low in historical terms. 
Actually,  many  observers  consider  them  dangerously  low  as  regards 
their  potential  impact  on  financial  stability  and  the  efficacy  of  the 
financial system. 
 
4 
What about Iceland in this context? The Central Bank’s key rate is the 
interest rate that determines short-term market rates at any given time. 
In  the  recent  past,  this  has  been  the  rate  on  seven-day  term  deposits, 
which is now 5.25%, as Chart 2 indicates. It is far below the average for 
the period since the adoption of the inflation target in late March 2001, 
in spite of the significant tension in the economy. This is a reflection of 
the progress made in the recent term in bringing inflation expectations 
to target. The Bank’s key rate has been slightly lower on two occasions 
since the adoption of the inflation target: in early 2011 and in early 2015. 
It  peaked  at  18%  in  late  2008.  It  is  therefore  incorrect  to  say  that  the 
Bank’s key rate is always high, no matter what the economic situation. 
Nor is it appropriate to say that the Bank’s interest rates are off the charts 
in the context of Iceland’s economic history: quite the contrary.  
 
 
 
It  is also  interesting to compare domestic  interest rates with  historical 
interest rates in developed countries. The chart shows that the average 
of short-term nominal interest rates in the US and the UK was slightly 
below 5% over the period from 1870 through 2007. This is not far from 
the short-term nominal rate in Iceland at present, and it should be noted 
that we are in that part of the economic cycle where the output gap is 
positive,  whereas  the  business  cycle  tends  to  average  out  over  such  a 
long period as is shown in this chart. However, post-crisis interest rates 
5 
in  these  countries  are  far  below  their  previous  historical  low  and 
therefore  much  more  “off  the  charts”  than  Iceland’s.  There  could  be 
sound reasons for this, although opinion is divided on the matter.  
 
 Let us examine Iceland’s current interest rates more closely, ignoring for 
the  moment  the  problems  associated  with  pursuing  independent 
monetary  policy  in  small,  open  economies  with  unrestricted  capital 
flows,  which  I  will  mention  later.  Let  us  also  assume  that  inflation 
expectations  remain  at  target,  as  they  are  at  present.  The  question  of 
whether or not a nominal policy rate of 5.25% is appropriate then centres 
on  what  is  considered  to  be  the  equilibrium  real  policy  rate;  i.e.,  the 
interest rate that would keep inflation at target when the economy is in 
balance.  With  inflation  expectations  at  2½%,  the  real  policy  rate  is 
currently  just  over  2½%.  Before  the  financial  crisis,  the  equilibrium 
policy  rate  was  estimated  to  be  quite  a  bit  higher.  As  is  the  case 
elsewhere, it has probably fallen in the wake of the crisis. Furthermore, 
recent success in monetary policy may mean that we do not need as high 
an interest rate as before to keep inflation at target. We do not know how 
much the equilibrium rate has fallen, although the subject has been under 
close  scrutiny  within  the  Bank  and  has  been  discussed  repeatedly  at 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  meetings.  The  newest  research  on  the 
assessment  of  the  equilibrium  real  rate  will  be  presented  at  a  seminar 
held at the Central Bank on 29 November.  
 
Perhaps there will be scope in the future to lower the short-term real rate 
as  measured  by  inflation  expectations  somewhat  further.  This  will 
depend on developments, including exchange rate developments and the 
stance  of  other  economic  policies.  In  addition,  nominal  interest  rates 
could  change  in  response  to  developments  in  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations.  Under  current  conditions,  however,  it  must  be  borne  in 
mind that the economy is not in balance but in the boom part of the cycle. 
Furthermore, the contribution from other economic policies is uncertain 
at the moment because a new Government has yet to be formed after the 
Parliamentary elections and next year’s fiscal budget proposal has yet to 
be presented. Moreover, it is too early to say what the impact of capital 
account liberalisation is. One thing is certain, however: if steep interest 
rate cuts are made without being warranted by economic conditions, it 
is  clear  that  the  real  rate  would  decline  for  a  while.  But  because 
credibility  would  undoubtedly  suffer  as  a  result  of  poorly  grounded 
measures of this type, it would have to rise again, to a higher level than 
before, and for a longer period than would otherwise have been needed 
to bring inflation and inflation expectations back down to target. 
 
Is  it  a  lost  cause,  then,  that  Iceland’s  interest  rates  might  with  time 
become similar to those in trading partner countries? Not at all. First, we 
must hope, for their sake, that neighbouring countries will not need to 
6 
maintain such abnormally low interest rates for the long term. Second, 
the  longer  we  keep  inflation  expectations  at  target,  maintain  a  current 
account  surplus,  and  continue  to  pay  down  debt,  the  more  the  risk 
premium  component  of  interest  rates  and  the  equilibrium  real  rate  in 
Iceland will continue to fall. The current propensity to save, adjusted for 
the business cycle position, is much greater than it has been for quite a 
while, and over time, it will contribute to  a reduction  in the long-term 
equilibrium  real  rate.  If  inflation  expectations  remain  at  target,  both 
nominal and real rates will decline accordingly.  
  Exchange rate of the króna and Central Bank foreign currency 
purchases 
 
Responding  to  the  recent  strong  inflows  into  the  foreign  exchange 
market is one of the Central Bank’s most complex tasks at present. The 
problem lies, among other things, in distinguishing between short-term 
inflows,  which  are  only  loosely  connected  to  economic  fundamentals 
and are much more likely to stop suddenly or even reverse, and inflows 
that  reflect  more  lasting  positive  changes  in  fundamentals,  although 
these can change for the worse as well. It can be argued that, other things 
being equal, there should be more foreign exchange market intervention 
in the former instance and less in the latter.  
 
While the foreign exchange reserves were being increased to the desired 
size  during  the  prelude  to  general  capital  account  liberalisation,  this 
distinction was less important for policy responses than it is now, as the 
premises were in place to buy the inflows and top up the reserves, more 
or  less  irrespective  of  the  origins  of  the  inflows.  Carry  trade-related 
inflows  into  the  bond  market  did  cause  some  disruption  of  monetary 
policy  transmission  in  summer  2015  and  last  winter  and  could  have 
posed risks for financial stability further ahead. For this reason, and also 
to prevent the development of a new “overhang” following the offshore 
króna auction in June 2016, it was considered appropriate to take action 
to  mitigate  these  inflows.  Since  then,  they  have  largely  stopped. 
However, there has been no let-up in foreign currency inflows in recent 
months,  and  by  the  end  of  last  week,  the  Central  Bank  had  bought 
foreign currency in the amount of 160 b.kr. since the beginning of July 
and the exchange rate had risen by nearly 12% over that same period.  
 
The available data indicate that foreign currency inflows are to a large 
extent  related  to  the  trade  surplus,  which  has  been  quite  large,  owing 
partly  to  growth  in  tourism  and  positive  terms  of  trade,  plus  foreign 
investors’  increased  interest  in  direct  investment  in  the  Icelandic 
economy.  The  banks’  and  other  Icelandic  firms’  improved  access  to 
foreign credit could play a role as well. On the other hand, speculative 
7 
flows related to the interest rate differential appear to account for only a 
small part of the inflows. Another important factor is that liberalisation-
related outflows are still limited. It should be noted, though, that balance 
of  payments  figures  for  Q3/2016  could  change  the  picture  somewhat, 
but they will not be available until the beginning of next month.  
 
The  Central  Bank  has  bought  a  smaller  share  of  foreign  exchange 
inflows in the recent past than it did earlier in the year, and the króna has 
appreciated  more  as  a  result.  This  is  because  the  foreign  exchange 
reserves are larger and somewhat above the recommended minimum for 
liberalisation  of  the  capital  controls.  The  nature  of  the  inflows  is 
important, as is the view that if the currency appreciates due to a rise in 
the  equilibrium  real  exchange  rate,  this  is  part  of  the  desirable 
countercyclical role of the exchange rate; furthermore, it is not desirable 
to disconnect the exchange rate channel of monetary policy transmission 
entirely.  Nevertheless,  the  foreign  currency  purchases  have  been 
substantial, based on precautionary principles concerning the durability 
of  the  inflows  and  attempts  to  prevent  excessive  appreciation  of  the 
currency in advance of liberalisation-related outflows.  
 
In the wake of the Central Bank’s large foreign currency purchases this 
year, the question has arisen whether large foreign exchange reserves are 
a problem in and of themselves; i.e., whether they jeopardise the Bank’s 
finances to such a degree that they could undermine its ability to pursue 
appropriate monetary policy at any given time. We do not have time to 
explore this in depth here, but the short answer is: no, they are not. First 
of all, we must not focus only on the cost of financing the reserves; we 
must  also  consider  the  benefits  associated  with  them.  Second,  in 
assessing the current size of the reserves, it is important to bear in mind 
that  the  impact  of  general  liberalisation  of  capital  controls  seems, 
fortunately, to come to the fore gradually, although this does not mean 
that  it  couldn't  become  significant  going  forward.  Large  reserves 
generate  confidence  during  this  process.  Third,  we  should  not  project 
current  conditions  to  the  infinite  future  and  therefore  come  up  with  a 
huge  problem.  The  monetary  stance  changes  over  the  course  of  the 
business cycle, as is normal, and the interest rate differential with abroad 
varies  from  one  point  in  time  to  another.  Furthermore,  there  are 
fluctuations  in  foreign  currency  flows  and  exchange  rates,  and  the 
opportunity could arise later to sell off a portion of the reserves so as to 
mitigate these  fluctuations  and  generate  revenues to offset the  current 
cost of the reserves.  
 
None  of  this  changes  the  fact  that  we  must  always  think  in  terms  of 
reducing the cost of financing the reserves. Larger reserves provide for 
the  possibility  of  placing  a  portion  in  riskier  investments  that  could 
generate larger returns, as many central banks in a similar position have 
done in recent years. It is also possible that, in addition to the distribution 
8 
of the costs and benefits of the reserves, which is built into the current 
regulatory framework for the financial interactions between the Treasury 
and  the  Central  Bank,  ways  could  be  found  for  banks  and  even  other 
financial institutions to participate in the cost of financing the reserves, 
as these  institutions enjoy the  benefits of them,  including  better credit 
ratings and lower foreign financing costs. The worst that we could do in 
this context would be to sacrifice the long-term benefits of price stability 
and economic equilibrium in order to increase the Central Bank’s profits 
in the short-term.  
 
 
The monetary policy framework 
 
I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  two  related  topics:  the  pros  and  cons  of 
independent monetary policy, on the one hand, and possible changes to 
the monetary policy framework and implementation, on the other. I must 
be  brief  because  the  clock  is  ticking,  but  I  am  more  than  willing  to 
answer questions about this and other points later on.  
 
“Is independent monetary policy too costly?” is the topic of this meeting. 
Presumably,  the  question  implied  is  whether  the  benefits  of  such 
monetary policy are outweighed by the costs. To my mind, this question 
can  hardly  be  answered  without  reference  to  the  various  options 
available because we must have some sort of currency regime, and all of 
them have pros and cons. If there is a currency union, it is the monetary 
policy of the union’s central bank that carries the day. In the case of the 
eurozone, that is the European Central Bank. The pros and cons of such 
cooperation were outlined in detail in a report published by the Central 
Bank in autumn 2012, and I do not have time to cover them here.1 If we 
continue  with  our own  currency,  the  question  of  exchange  rate  policy 
arises: should the króna be pegged against one currency or a basket of 
currencies, should it float freely, or should it be somewhere in between? 
If the exchange rate is pegged, it is not possible to apply monetary policy 
to  mitigate  economic  fluctuations  by  responding  to  shocks.  The 
adjustment  will  therefore  take  place  more  through  fluctuations  in 
employment and output and less through fluctuations in real wages than 
is  the  case  with  independent  monetary  policy  and  a  flexible  exchange 
rate. What do we want in this context? A good stylised example of how 
independent monetary policy and a flexible exchange rate could mitigate 
the impact of shocks on employment and output can be found in the most 
recent issue of Monetary Bulletin, which describes what would happen  
if the past few years’ improvement in terms of trade should reverse with  
                                                 
1 http://www.cb.is/publications-news-and-speeches/publications/special-publications/special-
publication-7/ 
9 
a reduction in marine product prices.2 
 
There are many things to consider in this respect. Experience shows that 
in  small,  open  economies  with  unrestricted  capital  flows  and  a  free-
floating  currency,  the  exchange  rate  has  a  tendency  to  fluctuate 
excessively  and  irregularly,  with  possible  negative  implications  for 
financial  stability.  And  as  is  discussed  in  the  aforementioned  Central 
Bank report, such exchange rate volatility can sometimes be a source of 
economic  volatility.  Furthermore,  as  examples  have  shown,  lack  of 
fiscal discipline together with overly loose financial regulation and lax 
supervision  can  undermine  independent  monetary  policy  with  either  a 
floating or a fixed exchange rate, even if the latter takes the form of a 
currency board. 
 
The  “capital  flow  problem”,  as  we  could  call  it,  lies  in  capital  inflow 
surges based on excessive optimism and underpricing of risk  – capital 
inflows that then stop and reverse, with  fire and brimstone and severe 
repercussions  for  economic  and  financial  stability.  Experience  shows 
that this problem is not limited to countries with a floating exchange rate 
– quite the contrary, in fact. Countries with a pegged exchange rate have 
suffered severely from just such a scenario, as have countries within the 
euro  area.  This  problem  was  a  key  player  in  the  crises  in  Greece  and 
Spain, to give two examples. As a consequence, there is no less need for 
so-called macroprudential tools in countries with a pegged exchange rate 
or  countries  in  a  currency  union  than  there  is  in  countries  with 
independent  monetary  policy  and  a  floating  currency.  Some  view 
foreign exchange reserves as the cost of pursuing independent monetary 
policy.  This  is  not  entirely  correct  because  any  country  with  its  own 
currency  must  hold  foreign  exchange  reserves,  and  it  is  easy  to 
demonstrate that the reserves must be larger under a pegged exchange 
rate than under a floating exchange rate.  
 
I could continue to beat the drum on simplifications and magic solutions. 
The main thing, though, is that selecting a currency and monetary policy 
regime is not as simple as it is sometimes made out to be. And it is not 
merely  a  question  of  which  policy  is  best  if  implemented  perfectly  – 
because implementation is never perfect. Mistakes are made, and then it 
matters  how  robust  the  systems  are  in  the  face  of  such  mistakes,  and 
what scope there is to correct them without overstraining the systems.  
 
    
                                                
2 Monetary Bulletin 2016/4, p. 12-14. 
http://www.cb.is/publications/publications/publication/2016/11/16/Monetary-Bulletin-2016-4/ 
10 
Conclusion 
 
In  view  of  the  discussion  of  monetary  policy  that  has  taken  place 
recently – not least during the run-up to the Parliamentary elections – I 
consider  it  necessary  to  engage  in  continued  thoughtful  discussion  of 
what type of monetary policy framework will be most appropriate once 
the capital controls have been lifted, as we are not members of a currency 
union.  Many  attempts  have  been  made  in  this  regard,  and the  Central 
Bank has published a range of material on the topic. In my opinion, the 
monetary  policy  that  has  been  developing  in  Iceland  during  the 
aftermath of the crisis – a monetary policy framework that is quite unlike 
its pre-crisis counterpart – has delivered good results in the recent past 
and is a viable candidate for the future. But perhaps it is like Groundhog 
Day: with each new beginning, we come closer to the solution. Let us 
hope so.  
 
If we play our cards right, the benefits of independent monetary policy 
could outweigh the costs. That does not necessarily mean that it is the 
best of all possible options. Some type of peg is also a possibility that 
could  be  explored,  although  it, too,  has  pros  and cons,  like  all  others. 
The Swedes raised their policy rate to a high double-digit figure in order 
to defend their peg, and at one point the policy rate was raised to 500%. 
The  British  raised  their  interest  rates  to  15%  for  the  same  reason.  In 
neither instance was this sufficient, however, because other foundations 
were no longer in place. Hong Kong managed to defend its peg during 
the Asian crisis but had to raise rates significantly and resort to a range 
of  unconventional  measures,  including  large-scale  intervention  in  the 
equity market.  
 
The  main  conclusion  is  that  neither  a  pegged  exchange  rate  nor 
independent monetary policy with a flexible exchange rate will generate 
the  intended  results  unless  several  other  things  are  in  place:  policy 
instruments designed to achieve those results must be applied as needed, 
other  economic  policies  should  be  aligned  with  monetary  policy 
objectives,  and  prudential  policy  regarding  the  financial  sector  must 
support rather than undermining economic stability.  
 
11 
