  29.11.2016 
 The challenges of the European resolution framework 
Closing address of the Conference “Corporate governance and credit 
institutions’ crises”, Mercantile Law Department, UCM (Madrid) 
Fernando Restoy 
Deputy Governor 
 
  1  Introduction  
 
Let  me  begin  by  thanking  the  organisers  for  the  invitation  to  close  this  conference  on 
corporate governance and credit institutions’ crises staged by the Law Faculty of the Madrid 
Complutense University. It is always a pleasure to return to the University where I was an 
undergraduate and a lecturer for several years, even if it is to a different Faculty from mine 
back then.  
 
The  recent  financial  crisis,  like others  before  it,  has  been  marked  by  the  use  by  national 
authorities  of  sizeable  public  funds  assigned  to  preventing  the  bankruptcy  of  numerous 
credit  institutions  in  situations  of  non-viability.  To  minimise  systemic  risk  and  prevent  a 
serious  deterioration in  financial  stability,  substantial State  aid  in  the  form of  capital was 
granted across the EU from 2008 to 2014. In countries such as Spain, Belgium and United 
Kingdom, the figures were around 5% of GDP, in Germany and the Netherlands between 
2% and 3.5%, while in Greece and Ireland aid was in excess of 20% and 30% of GDP, 
respectively.  
 
Given  the  severity  and  high  public  cost  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  response  by  the 
international  authorities  has  been  most  resolute.  First,  solvency  requirements  have  been 
appreciably  strengthened,  which  will  increase  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  and, 
therefore, reduce the likelihood of similar crises in the future. Further, measures have been 
set in place to mitigate the effects of banking crises, when they occur, on the public coffers 
and the economy in general.  
 
As  regards  solvency  requirements,  the  reform  agenda  has  practically  concluded,  while 
awaiting the Basel Committee’s final agreement on the so-called Basel III accord. Today I 
shall focus on the second objective of the international reform agenda, i.e. on the package 
of measures aimed at smoothing the management of bank crises while preserving financial 
stability and minimising the use of public funds.  
 
At the base of the regulatory reform in this area is the work of the Financial Stability Board 
(FSB) conducted at the behest of the G-20 following the Lehman Brothers debacle. In 2011 
the  FSB  published  the  Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  for  Financial 
Institutions,  which  lay  down  the  principles  for  ensuring  an  orderly  resolution  of  banking 
institutions.  
 
Indeed, the Key Attributes specify the powers and tools the administrative authorities should 
have to see through the orderly resolution of non-viable banks, ensuring the maintenance 
of their core functions and their restructuring at the least possible cost to the taxpayer.  
 
The Key Attributes further envisage the availability of recovery and resolution plans for each 
institution that set out a roadmap ahead of a potential crisis situation.  
 
Lastly, they establish the principle whereby bank shareholders and creditors are those who 
should bear the bulk of the costs of the crisis. Using the parlance of the profession, the 
“bail-out” (or rescue of the bank with public funds) disappears and is replaced by the “bail-
in” (generation of own funds, capable of absorbing losses, converting debt instruments into 
capital).  
 3/10 
  
The  internationally  agreed  principles  have  been  passed  through  to  European  regulations 
through  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD).  This  framework  has  been 
completed  within  the  Banking  Union  with  the  establishment  of  the  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism, a system comprising a central authority, the Single Resolution Board (SRB) – 
which adopts the relevant decisions for significant banking institutions  – and the national 
resolution authorities that participate in the SRB and retain direct responsibility for the less 
significant  institutions.  This  Mechanism  has  a  Single  Resolution  Fund,  endowed  with 
contributions from the industry, that will enable financial support to be afforded to resolution 
processes.  
 
Despite  the  undeniable  progress  that  the  new  resolution  framework  adopted  in  Europe 
entails,  its  practical  implementation  is  subject  to  major  challenges  that  I  would  like  to 
highlight today, drawing on the fact that the BRRD will shortly be revised on the basis of a 
recently submitted legislative proposal by the European Commission. Accordingly, I shall 
first refer to the general aspects of the European resolution regulations. Next, I shall look at 
the loss-absorption requirements for bank creditors, which is one of the central aspects of 
the regulations. And I will conclude with some brief comments of a more strategic nature.  
 
 
2  General aspects of the European regulations  
 
The European Union, as reflected in the FSB’s second Peer Review on Resolution Regimes 
published  in  2016,  is  one  of  the  jurisdictions  where  the  Key  Attributes  have  been  most 
rigorously implemented. Allow me to highlight some of the main features.  
 
First, the regulations consider resolution as an alternative mechanism to ordinary insolvency 
procedures  in  the  mercantile  realm,  applicable  to  banks  only  in  specific  circumstances 
pertaining to the public interest. In particular, resolution shall only be applicable to those 
banks whose failure may generate risks to financial stability, given that they perform critical 
functions.  
 
Second, the use of public funds to support vulnerable institutions is severely restricted. The 
contribution of any form of State aid – except that received in connection with a stress test 
–  is  understood  to  be  a  symptom  of  the  institution’s  non-viability  and,  therefore,  it  may 
precipitate  resolution  or,  where  appropriate,  the  liquidation  in  mercantile  terms  of  the 
institution. Once the institution has been declared in resolution,  the regulations require a 
bail-in  for  creditors.  The ensuing  assumption  of  losses  must  exceed  a  minimum  amount 
equivalent  to  8%  of  the  bank’s  liabilities  as  a  prerequisite  for  attaining  access  to  public 
funds, which includes the Single Resolution Fund.  
 
Lastly,  so  as  to  be  able  to  carry  out  the  bail-in,  all  institutions  liable  to  be  subject  to 
resolution, i.e. those which, given their significance, would not be wound up in the event of 
insolvency,  are  required  to  hold  a  minimum  volume  of  loss-absorbing  instruments  in  the 
event  of  resolution.  This  is  known  as  the  MREL  (Minimum  Required  Eligible  Liabilities) 
requirement.  
 
4/10 
  Accordingly, the European regulations are precisely tailored to the new resolution principles 
and contain provisions that minimise the likelihood of crises resulting in the disbursement 
of sizeable public funds. That said, the challenges posed by the practical implementation of 
these provisions are manifold.  
 
For example, the relative rigidity with which it is stated that receiving public aid generally 
implies  the  non-viability  of  an  institution  and,  therefore,  facilitates  the  activation  of  the 
resolution  (or,  where  appropriate,  winding-up)  process,  considerably  constrains  the 
supervisor’s management of financial crises. It might be advisable to make this aspect of 
the regulations more flexible, albeit maintaining, in any event, the subjection of any public 
support to the prevailing State aid arrangements managed by the European Commission.  
 
Yet the main challenge for the industry and its supervisors stems, to my understanding, from 
the potential implications of the new resolution framework for banks’ business models and 
for the structure of the banking sector. Allow me to expand on this.  
 
The demands of the regulations would point, in principle, to a configuration of the financial 
system that, in simple terms, would comprise two groups of relatively differentiated banks.  
 
On one hand, there would be a group made up of relatively small institutions, which would 
not perform functions critical to the industry as a whole. In situations of non-viability these 
institutions would be subject to liquidation under an ordinary insolvency procedure and not 
resolution, given that the bankruptcy of the institution would  be deemed not  to generate 
harmful effects for the stability of the financial system as a whole.  
 
As a result, these institutions would not be obliged to hold minimum loss-absorbing liabilities 
and  nor,  naturally,  would  they  have  access  to  the  Single  Resolution  Fund.  Hence  the 
insolvency of the institution would precipitate insolvency proceedings whereunder only the 
holders of deposits covered by the Deposit Guarantee Fund would enjoy protection beyond 
that provided by the institution’s net worth.  
 
Given the likelihood that, in the future, ordinary insolvency procedures will be applied more 
frequently than in the past to financial institutions that are not systemic, it may be advisable 
to consider specific adjustments to mercantile regulations when they are applied to these 
cases. The formal involvement of the Deposit Guarantee Fund in the management of the 
insolvency process might be an option worth considering.  
 
On  the  other  hand,  there  will  be  a  second  group  of  institutions,  normally  bigger  in  size, 
whose potential failure would be considered to be of public importance given the harmful 
effects for the stability of the financial system that might ensue. This group would, therefore, 
be liable to pursue resolution processes.  
 
To this end, under the regulations, the resolution plans for these institutions should ensure 
the continuity of their critical functions under any  circumstances. Thus, in general, these 
plans  envisage  business  reorganisation,  restructuring  or  segregation  measures  if  the 
institution reaches the point of non-viability and they provide for the availability of a sufficient 
minimum volume of own funds and eligible liabilities (the aforementioned MREL), that enable 
losses to be absorbed and the institution’s capital base to be shored up, if necessary.  
 5/10 
  
Indeed, the degree of stringency ultimately adopted in respect of the MREL requirement 
may determine the relative size of the two groups of banks indicated, i.e. those that may be 
wound up and those that may be resolved. In particular, demanding MREL requirements 
that  were  to  entail  the  need  for  susceptible  banks  subject  to  resolution  to  issue  large 
volumes  of  eligible  liabilities  on  the markets  might not  be  assumable  by  certain types  of 
banks. This might be the case for banks pursuing a traditional retail banking model, funded 
essentially  by  capital  and  through  the  raising  of  deposits,  and  with  little  tradition  of 
participation in the capital markets.  
 
What is involved is a potentially numerous group of banks, not necessarily very small in size. 
Consider that, in the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), 70% of significant institutions 
are not listed on the markets, almost 60% have never issued convertible instruments and 
almost one-quarter of them do not finance themselves with subordinated debt.  
 
Allow me to focus on this important aspect of the European regulations, namely the MREL, 
which will foreseeably be subject to discussion in the forthcoming passage of the revised 
Directive.  
 
 
3  Loss-absorption requirements (MREL) 
 
The stringency of the MREL requirement will be determined both by the nature of the eligible 
instruments and the minimum required volume thereof.  
  
Regarding  the  nature  of  the  eligible  instruments,  for  the  MREL  to  fulfil  the  objective  of 
providing for the orderly absorption of losses by creditors and the recapitalisation of the 
bank,  the  eligible  instruments  must  conceivably  be  consistent  with  the  seniority  of  the 
bank’s liabilities as stipulated in national insolvency regulations, and they must evidence a 
sufficient degree of stability should the bank undergo serious difficulties.  
 
That would suggest a definition of MREL that essentially includes capital instruments plus 
debt instruments that have a less privileged status than deposits in the insolvency pecking 
order. The consideration of  wholesale deposits at over one year as eligible, which is not 
excluded in the European Commission’s proposal, will undoubtedly be much discussed in 
the  legislative  proceedings,  given  the  special  nature  of  these  instruments  and  their 
debatable availability to absorb losses in a resolution process.  
 
Yet at present the seniority of the liabilities as established in the regulations differs from one 
Member  State  to  another,  specifically  as  regards  the  status  of  senior  debt  in  relation  to 
deposits.  That  hampers  the  homogeneity  of  MREL  requirements  and  prevents  the 
development of an integrated market for senior debt convertible into equity in the event of 
resolution. Accordingly, the European Commission’s recent proposal, which introduces a 
new  category  of  senior  debt  instruments,  subordinate  to  deposits,  is  a  step  in  the  right 
direction.  
 
In any event, the most critical element of the MREL-setting policy is the determination of the 
minimum volume of eligible liabilities and own funds. Under the current regulations, within 
6/10 
  the Banking Union, it is for the Single Resolution Board (SRB) to determine, case by case, 
this volume for all significant institutions (which are supervised directly by the SSM), as well 
as for non-significant institutions engaging in cross-border activity or whose supervision has 
been assumed by the SSM, following consultation with the prudential supervisor.  
 
For  the  moment,  the  SRB  has  publicly  voiced  its  inclination  for  a  stringent  approach, 
ensuring an extensive availability of loss-absorbing instruments on bank balance sheets.  
 
Indeed, by way of indication, it has been advocated that the institution subject to resolution 
should  have  loss-absorbing  capacity  of  a  volume  equivalent  to  its  regulatory  capital 
requirements  (the  so-called  loss-absorption  component)  and  the  ability  to  restore 
immediately the minimum level required (or recapitalisation component).  
 
However, MREL requirements like those arising from the mechanistic formula indicated may 
entail  very  high  needs  in  respect  of  the  issuance  of  eligible  instruments  –  such  as 
subordinated  debt  or  convertible  bonds  –  for  numerous  banks,  owing  to  the  above-
mentioned  reasons.  Further,  these  issuance  requirements  would  be  concentrated  in  the 
same period of time for all the institutions concerned, hampering market take-up.  
 
But, moreover, the cost for banks of issuing these instruments may, in many cases, prove 
most burdensome. By way of illustration we can consider the following example.  
 
Let us take a bank financed only with capital and deposits and  that comfortably meets – 
e.g. with a surplus of 2 pp – its regulatory capital requirement, which we will place in this 
example  at  10%  of  its  risk-weighted  assets  (RWAs).  If  the  MREL  stands  at  twice  the 
regulatory capital, i.e. at 20% of RWAs, this bank, whose position would not differ greatly 
at present from that of a large number of banks with a traditional business model, would 
need  to  issue  eligible  instruments  equivalent  to  8%  of  its  RWAs  in  order  to  meet  the 
requirement set. Assuming, somewhat optimistically at present, that the issuance cost were 
not greater than the return on equity (ROE), the additional financial expense that compliance 
with the new MREL requirement would entail would account for almost half the bank’s profit 
after tax. 
 
This example illustrates that maintaining excessively demanding requirements would exert 
significant  pressure  on  the  profitability  of  a  portion  of  the  banking  industry,  calling  into 
question the business model of a by no means negligible number of institutions.  
 
Hence, it is worthwhile rigorously adjusting the MREL-setting policy so as to avoid a non-
desirable  impact  on  the  viability  of  specific  institutions  or  business  models,  without  of 
course distorting the rationale behind this requirement.  
 
A  reasonable  approach  would  be  to  adjust  the  MREL  requirement  –  in  both  its  loss-
absorbing and recapitalisation components – so that it takes into consideration at least three 
factors. First, a balanced assessment of the volume of losses banks will foreseeably post at 
the time of going into resolution; second, the ensuing change in the level of capital required 
of  banks  that  have  undergone  a  resolution  process,  owing  to  changes  in  the  size  of  the 
balance sheet and in its risk profile; and, lastly, the very resolution strategy of the bank in 
question. 
 7/10 
  
Concerning the first point, the volume of MREL required to absorb the bank’s losses might 
be adjusted downwards if it is taken into account that, generally, banks are declared to be 
in  resolution  when  they  fail  to  meet  the  regulatory  requirements  and,  therefore,  before 
depleting – due to losses – all the capital they hold.  
 
Secondly,  the  restructuring  required  in  a  resolution  typically  involves  an  appreciable 
reduction  in  the  size  and  in  the  latent  risk  of  the  bank’s  balance  sheet.  It  is  therefore 
reasonable to think that regulatory capital subsequent to resolution should be lower than 
that required beforehand.  
 
Thirdly, the bail-in tool (loss absorption and recapitalisation through the conversion of debt 
into capital) is only one of the resolution strategies of banks. Resolution plans may envisage 
measures such as the sale of the business or the creation, through the segregation of certain 
assets and liabilities, of so-called bridge banks, which perform, after resolution, the bank’s 
critical  functions  with  a  significantly  smaller  balance  sheet.  Some  of  these  resolution 
measures other than a bail-in might be potentially appropriate in the case of commercial 
banks pursuing a traditional business model. The bank resulting from a resolution process 
where these strategies are implemented will generally have lower capital requirements than 
the original institution and, therefore, a lower MREL might be required of it.  
 
I thus believe there is substantial leeway for adjusting MREL requirements on the basis of 
more accurate assessments of capital needs during the resolution process and, in particular, 
of the strategies foreseen in each bank’s resolution plans.  
 
4  Transition  
 
In light of the foregoing, even if the minimum volume of the loss-absorbing instruments that 
banks should have is revised downwards, the new MREL demands may undeniably only be 
assumed by a large number of banks if they have a sufficiently lengthy transition period to 
comply with the requirements. This transition period will, moreover, be necessary so that 
the market should not have to absorb a large number of issues over a limited period of time. 
Indeed, the European Commission’s recent proposal includes the possibility of setting for 
each bank a time margin for compliance with the MREL requirement, although this margin 
would be decided on a case-by-case basis by the resolution authority, i.e. the SRB, in the 
case of the Banking Union.  
 
Admittedly, setting a relatively long transition period may add complexity to the resolution 
processes  that  have  to  be  managed  during  that  period.  As  stated,  current  regulations 
require  that  resolution  funds  should only  be  activated  when  the  institution  has  absorbed 
losses for an amount equivalent to 8% of liabilities. Evidently, if the bank did not yet have 
sufficient loss-absorbing debt instruments because the transition period were not over, the 
established  requirement  would  only  be  met  if  haircuts  were  imposed  on  other  creditors, 
such as deposit-holders. While the deposits covered by national guarantee schemes would 
be excluded from loss-bearing, there is no doubt this step might prove destabilising.  
 
Thus, in the ongoing revision of the Directive, it might be wise to add a flexibility clause in 
respect of the requirements established for the use of funds external to the banks concerned 
8/10 
  in  their  resolution  processes,  at  least  for  the  duration  of  the  transition  period  set  for  the 
fulfilment of the MREL requirements.  
 
Lastly, before concluding this section, a  remark on the need for coordination among the 
different  Banking  Union  authorities.  The  current  regulations  and 
the  European 
Commission’s proposals for their revision afford the SRB extensive discretion for deciding, 
case by case, on questions as important as the objective volume of MREL, the nature of the 
eligible instruments and the transition regime. These decisions interact appreciably with the 
solvency requirements set by the prudential supervisor and they give shape to a series of 
regulatory  demands  that  may  affect  the  viability  of  institutions  and  the  structure  of  the 
industry. A fruitful framework of collaboration between the SRB and the SSM is thus needed 
and, specifically, the criteria the SRB develops to exercise the discretion afforded it by the 
regulations should be properly discussed with the prudential authority.  
 
 5  Final remarks  
 
In conclusion, I have referred in my address to the intense work in all jurisdictions to amend 
the  bank  crisis  management  framework  so  that  it  strengthens  the  capacity  available  to 
maintain  financial  stability  without  this  requiring  the  massive  use  of  public  funds,  as 
occurred in the recent financial crisis. The progress made in Europe has been considerable, 
having incorporated the most demanding international standards into the regulations.  
 
The  new  resolution  regulations  pose  most  considerable  constraints,  which  are  in  many 
cases  weightier  determining  factors  than  solvency  requirements  themselves  for  financial 
institutions. It is thus necessary to harness the ongoing revision of European legislation and 
the subsequent re-definition of the policies to be pursued by the resolution authorities so as 
to fine-tune demands in a way that provides for the orderly adjustment of the industry to the 
new  regime.  As  earlier  discussed,  adding  flexibility  to  some  requirements  and  setting 
transitional  arrangements  for  others  may  be  of  help  here,  while  also  reinforcing  the 
authorities’ ability to manage crises in the short and medium term.  
 
All told, institutions should be mindful that the new resolution framework will require those 
banks that exceed a certain size and are liable to generate systemic risk to ensure that their 
balance  sheet  structure  allows  their  resolution  at  the  expense,  essentially,  of  their 
shareholders  and  creditors.  They  should,  therefore,  ensure  that  their  business  model  is 
compatible with the issuance of loss-absorbing instruments on the capital markets and that 
their income statements allow for the remuneration of the supplementary risk that the new 
resolution regime entails for holders of bank debt.  
 
It thus seems likely that several institutions will face objective difficulties adjusting to the 
recently established resolution framework. These new regulations, therefore, contribute to 
reinforcing  the  perception  of  excess  capacity  in  the  sector  and,  foreseeably,  they  will 
contribute to promoting a change in the industry structure that will correct such excess by 
means  of  consolidation  processes  giving  rise  to  banks  more  capable  of  comfortably 
complying with the new demands. The supervisor’s role essentially consists of setting in 
 9/10 
 place the means needed for this seemingly inevitable adjustment process to unfold in as 
orderly a fashion as possible.  
 10/10 
 