Andreas Dombret: "The new normal" in banking - perspectives for
regulators
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at  the  Bundesbank  reception  as  part  of  Eurofinance  Week  2016,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  15
November 2016.
1. "The new normal” in banking – orientation through regulation?
 Ms Danièle Nouy
Vice-President Sabine Lautenschläger
Ladies and gentlemen
The “new normal” is the big topic of this year’s Euro Finance Week here in Frankfurt.
To me, the term “new normal” carries negative undertones. It reminds us that many aspects of
banking business – from the relationship between a bank and its customers, via political risks, to
sources  of  income  –  have  changed,  all  at  the  same  time  –  and  for  good.  This  can  certainly
engender frustration and fear.
Still,  I  don’t  believe  that  change  and  uncertainty,  in  themselves,  are  necessarily  a  cause  for
complaint. After  all,  they  are  the  foundations  of  economic  activity  in  general,  and  of  banking
business  in  particular.  But,  as  so  often  in  life,  it  is  a  matter  of  degree.  What  many  people
undoubtedly want from banking business’s new normal is an adequate amount of orientation.
Banks  and  savings  institutions  want  orientation  for  regulation,  as  well.  All  eyes  are  now  on
Basel III. Two essential questions arise today: what is the current status of the reforms? And
what  can  we  regulators  do  to  provide  banks  with  suitable  orientation  for  the  “guide  rails”  of
banking business?
Allow me to make a preliminary remark. In my opinion, there is no such glaring conflict between
banks and regulators about the need for a planning horizon. The Basel Committee central bank
governors  have  specified  the  timeframe  in  good  time  and  stipulated  that  capital  requirements
should not increase significantly overall. Such a voluntary commitment surely did not and does
not make the Committee’s job any easier. But it gives the institutions some orientation and helps
them  to  establish  a  planning  horizon.  Financial  institutions  receive  clear  guidelines  through  a
globally harmonised regulatory framework which sets incentives for careful bank management
while being, at the same time, as simple as possible. For me, that is the essential principle of the
forthcoming Basel reforms.
Where do we stand today? The Basel Committee’s all-important meeting in Santiago is just over
two weeks away, and I think we’ve already made good progress; but that certainly doesn’t mean
we’ve  reached  our  destination.  We  still  have  to  bring  three  objectives  of  the  Basel  reform
package into alignment.
First, we wish to reduce excessive fluctuations in the calculation of risk-weighted assets by
internal models;
second, we wish to hold onto risk sensitivity; 
and third, the new rules must not lead to any significant increase in the currently applicable
overall capital requirements.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
From  today’s  perspective,  I  think  these  three  objectives  could  well  be  at  risk.  Felix  Hufeld
expressed a similar opinion. This is because provisional impact assessment studies point to a
significant increase in overall capital requirements. There is, therefore, definitely some latitude for
lowering requirements. We have pledged to use this latitude. And we should use it in such a way
that it will serve the goals I have just mentioned.
From a German perspective, there are two essential areas of action for the negotiations at the
end of November.
First, preservation of internal credit risk models, and therefore of a risk-sensitive approach –
even at the cost of constraints resulting from input floors;
and second, not introducing an output floor. 
 
2.  Is  the  regulatory  framework  appropriate  from  a  risk  perspective?  The  case  of  real
estate loans
Let  me  explain  the  first  point  by  taking  the  example  of  real  estate  loans  –  a  topic  that  is
particularly  dear  to  us  in  Germany.  Real  estate  loans  are  an  important  business  area  –
worldwide. Even a high level of property collateral cannot rule out losses in the credit business.
To  what  extent  should  banks  therefore  be  allowed  to  claim  collateral  as  being  risk-mitigating
when calculating their regulatory capital? A typical approach is to take the market price of the
collateral.  But  market  prices  are,  of  course,  prone  to  overvaluations  and  price  bubbles.  The
regulatory framework should take such risks into account. In Basel, there is a clear consensus
on this matter.
In some countries, such as Germany, additional risk-mitigating rules are in place. For example,
banks and savings banks are obliged to apply conservative value calculations when valuing real
estate. These are more cautious and less volatile than valuations based on the market value.
They have led to very low loss rates for as long as they have been in place. In other countries in
Europe and the rest of the world, less restrictive valuation standards are often used.
The Basel Committee would now like to see all valuation methods being treated equally. We, as
the German supervisory authority, will be objecting to this proposal in the Basel negotiations, as
this  would  distort  global  and  regional  competition.  Furthermore,  each  institution  would  feel
penalised  for  making  a  contribution  towards  ensuring  a  more  cautious  management  of  the
financial risks resulting from property finance.
What, then, needs to be done? In the case of real estate loans, we want the Basel framework to
take  due  account  of  reliable  data  series  on  low  loss  ratios,  as  they  result  from  conservative
valuation methods in Germany.
This, of course, affects all methods of calculating regulatory capital for credit risks. Above all,
internal  models  are  already  able  to  convert  data  on  low  loss  ratios  into  low  risk  weights.  We
therefore call for the following.
1
First, the Basel Committee should apply far fewer restrictions to the advanced approach, A-
IRBA , than originally intended.
Second, the input floors, ie the restrictions on model parameters, which are estimated using
loss data, should not be set as high as in the current proposals.
Third, the same logic applies to the F-IRB , a less comprehensive internal model in which
certain loss ratios are already stipulated by regulation. The Bundesbank therefore proposes
that  the  capital  requirements  should  be  lowered  when  both  the  institutions  and  the
supervisors can provide reliable past data on low losses and stable markets. This method is
2
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
known among experts as the hard test.
Fourth, the hard test should be kept in the standard approach for calculating credit risks.
 3. Risk sensitivity as a measure for the conclusion of negotiations
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  part  of  the  negotiation  process,  the  Bundesbank  is  committed  to
ensuring that these regional differences are given due consideration. At the end of the day, the
ultimate  objective  of  the  reforms  needs  to  be  ensuring  the  risk  sensitivity  of  the  framework,
meaning that the capital requirements reflect the actual risks of an institution as accurately as
possible. For the Basel Committee, this also means looking at more than just the global average
increase  in  capital  requirements  and  focusing  on  a  regional  balance  as  well.  The  German
representatives  in  Basel  are  not  alone  in  this  quest,  but  work  in  close  cooperation  with  other
negotiating parties. We are grateful to have the strong support of the ECB on this matter. That is
why I am very pleased that Danièle Nouy will be giving the Dinner Speech tonight.
Specifically, we will be bringing the following points to the negotiations.
1.  The supervisory LGD under F-IRBA needs to be reduced from 45% to 40%.
2.  The scaling factor of 1.06, a remnant of the Basel II rules, should also be abolished.
3.  The Bundesbank is against the general implementation of an output floor. In theory, it acts as
a way of putting a stop to the frivolous calculation exercises associated with using internal
models. In practice, however, it works against the focus on risk. This is something we’re not
prepared  to  accept.  We  have  no  interest  in  banks  taking  on  additional  unwanted  risks.
Basel III has developed other instruments, such as the leverage ratio, to fight against risks of
modelling and misuse.
4.  Internal models for calculating operational risks, known as AMAs, should be done away with
as planned and an appropriate standard solution used instead.
 4. Outlook for Basel III
Though there is still much work to be done in Basel, before I close, I’d like to take this opportunity
to emphasise just how much progress has already been made at the Basel Committee meetings
thus  far.  The  changes  that  are  yet  to  be  implemented  likewise  need  to  align  with  the  original
objectives – they should adequately cover risks and set the right incentives, for example.
In summary, we mustn’t lose sight of how valuable an international agreement like Basel III can
be. It combats regulatory arbitrage and the shifting of risks. Beyond the regional level, effective
international  standards  are  in  everyone’s  interests.  In  this  way,  Basel  sets  the  standard  for
effective international cooperation that benefits everyone.
That is more important than ever. Currently, we are seeing many citizens calling our globalised
world into question, with more and more looking for answers in separation or regionalisation. I
very much hope that with the new administration in the United States, the cooperation on the
Basel Committee will continue to be based on mutual trust. It must be said, however, that the
Bundesbank is not prepared to reach an agreement at any price.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
Advanced internal ratings-based approach.
Foundation internal ratings-based approach.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
