9 November  2016 
Martin Flodén 
West Sweden  Chamber of Commerce,  Göteborg 
  SVER IG ES  R IK SB AN K  
SE-103  37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergst org  11) 
 
Tel  +46  8 787  00 00 
Fax  +46  8  21 05 31 
registratorn @ riks ban k .se 
www.riksb ank .s e 
SPEECH 
     DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
   The Riksbank’s bond purchases affect 
government finances 
Prior to the financial crisis  of 2008, the Riksbank could  make profits  without taking 
any actual risks. The assets on our balance sheet mainly consisted  of foreign debt 
securities while the main liability items were outstanding  banknotes and coins and 
our equity. The assets generated a reliable return, although their value fluctuated 
with foreign exchange rates, while the liabilities  were interest-free. The Riksbank 
could therefore easily fund  the bank’s operations as well as distribute a surplus  to the 
government. 
But the current picture of the Riksbank’s financial  position  and risks  is entirely 
different, something that, in part, can be illustrated by how the balance sheet has 
grown and changed in nature (see Chart 1). One important change is that the decline 
in the use of cash and the low interest rates have impaired our earning capacity, 
something which my colleague Kerstin af Jochnick  has previously  highlighted. 1 
Another important change is that the Riksbank  has purchased large volumes  of 
Swedish  government bonds  since the beginning of 2015. These purchases  have 
increased the risks  on our balance sheet and made our profits  and dividends  more 
sensitive  to interest rate changes. The bonds  have so far increased in value but there 
is every indication that they will lead to a loss in the future, and hence contribute to a 
period of lower or zero dividends  to the government. 2 Today, I would like to outline 
how the bond  purchases have created these interest-rate risks  and how future 
interest-rate developments  will affect the Riksbank’s  profits and dividends. 
                                                                   
 Thanks to Carl-Johan Belfrage, who has helped me write the text, and to Jan Alsterlind, Heidi Elmér, Henrik 
Erikson, Rickard Eriksson, Ola Melander, Marianne Sterner, Ulf Söderström and Anders Vredin, who have 
contributed valuable comments and observations. 
1 See af Jochnick (2015).  
2 Another change is that the Riksbank has built up a larger foreign exchange reserve. This larger reserve does not, 
however, involve any actual increase in the currency or interest-rate risks as it is funded by foreign exchange 
loans with approximately the same maturities as the new assets. But the larger foreign exchange reserve will still 
lead to the Riksbank’s reported profit being more sensitive to interest rates. This is because the Riksbank’s assets 
but not its liabilities are reported at market value. The lower interest rates have therefore improved the 
Riksbank’s reported profit via value increases in the foreign exchange reserve, but will contribute to lower 
reported profit a few years ahead. 
  1 [12] 
  Chart 1. The Riksbank’s balance sheet 
SEK billion 
 Source: The Riksbank 
 The Riksbank purchases government bonds to support the upturn in 
inflation ... 
To begin with, I would like to remind you  that the aim of the Riksbank’s operations  is 
not to make a profit and deliver dividends  to the government. Our task is to maintain 
price stability, and bond purchases  are one component of the expansionary  monetary 
policy  we are conducting  in order to safeguard the credibility  of the inflation target. 
The Riksbank  started purchasing government bonds  in February 2015. At that time, 
inflation  had been low for a long time, long-term inflation expectations had fallen to a 
record-low level and a period of falling oil prices risked pushing  down inflation 
expectations even further (see Chart 2). In this situation, the Riksbank  needed to 
safeguard continued confidence  in its ability and willingness  to stabilise inflation 
around the inflation  target. As we know, a credible inflation target lays the foundation 
for efficient price-setting and wage formation and hence promotes  good growth in 
the economy.3 
At the same time, the problems  of falling inflation  and inflation  expectations also 
became increasingly  apparent in the euro area. This led to the European Central Bank 
signalling the need for even more expansionary  monetary policy  in the period  ahead, 
with low interest rates for even longer, supplemented  by extensive  asset purchases. 
The increasingly  expansionary  monetary policy  in the euro area also led to monetary 
policy  reactions from several smaller countries on the outside. 
                                                                   
3 The significance of the inflation target for the economy is explained in detail in Sveriges Riksbank (2015a) and 
Flodén (2015). 
  2 [12] 
  Chart 2. Inflation and inflation expectations have picked up 
  Note. Annual percentage change and per cent. The CPIF is the CPI with a fixed mortgage rate. Inflation 
expectations 5 years ahead according to money market participants. The broken line indicates the time of the 
monetary policy decision in February 2015. 
Sources: TNS Sifo Prospera and Statistics Sweden 
 
For the Riksbank, this development  led us during the spring of 2015 to reduce the 
Swedish  policy  rate, the repo rate, to negative levels and to start purchasing 
government bonds.  One purpose  of the bond  purchases  was to push  down interest 
rates on longer maturities.4 
My assessment  is that this monetary policy has, on the whole, been successful.  The 
bond  purchases seem to have pushed  down interest rates more or less in the way we 
expected.5 And the monetary policy also seems  to have had the intended  effect on 
inflation  and inflation  expectations. The downward trend has been reversed and both 
are now on significantly higher levels than at the end of 2014 (see Chart 2). At the 
same time, the Swedish  economy  has developed  positively,  with high growth and 
falling unemployment. 
… but the effects on the Riksbank’s finances must nevertheless be taken 
into account 
The purpose  of the Riksbank’s  bond  purchases is thus to support  the inflation  target’s 
role as nominal  anchor for price-setting and wage formation, and thereby to 
contribute to a positive  development  in the Swedish  economy. How the Riksbank’s 
financial position  is affected is therefore of subordinate, but not negligible, 
importance. I see at least two reasons to monitor  how the Riksbank’s finances 
develop. First, the Riksbank’s finances  are part of public  finances. The size of the 
Riksbank’s  profits and losses  affect the dividends  we can deliver to the government. 
The Riksbank’s  annual dividends  to the government have been SEK 5 billion  on 
average over the past five years. This is a considerable  sum, albeit small in relation to 
total tax revenues.   
Second, the Riksbank, like other central banks, needs to have a balance sheet that 
does not undermine  its financial independence. 6  Central banks differ from other 
banks and companies, of course, in that they can always create new money  to fund 
their expenditure  and because they are not subject to normal bankruptcy  legislation. 
                                                                 
4 Alsterlind et al. (2015) describe how bond purchases can affect interest rates via several different mechanisms.  
5 See De Rezende, Kjellberg and Tysklind (2015) and De Rezende (2016). 
6 A detailed review of the research and discussion of the view of central banks’ finances can be found in Archer 
and Moser-Boehm (2013). Stella and Lönnberg (2008), Del Negro and Sims (2015) and Sims (2016) discuss the 
importance of the balance sheet for the ability of central banks to pursue an effective monetary policy. See 
Ernhagen, Vesterlund and Viotti (2002) for Swedish perspectives. 
  3 [12] 
   But a central bank that is forced to create money in order to fund its expenditure 
cannot simultaneously  pursue a monetary policy that safeguards price stability. 
Neither is it desirable  for central banks  to rely on funding  from the government as 
there is then a risk of the funding  being linked to conditions  being put on the bank’s 
management or actions. This is exactly why EU legislation requires a central bank to 
have adequate financial resources to be able to carry out its tasks independently. 7 
This reasoning does  not necessarily  mean that a central bank must have positive 
equity. Negative equity can be compensated  for by a large amount of outstanding 
banknotes  and coins, at least if there is confidence  in the bank’s continued earning 
capacity.8 But in Sweden, the demand for cash is low and continues  to fall. Therefore, 
the Riksbank  can hardly count on having sufficient earning capacity in the future 
unless  its equity remains positive. 
But how does this reasoning about the Riksbank’s  financial position  relate to the bond 
purchases? 
Bond purchases increase the risks on the Riksbank’s balance sheet 
When the Riksbank purchases  a government bond, both the assets and the liabilities 
on our balance sheet increase. The bonds  purchased  by the Riksbank  are of course 
reported as an asset. But we fund  the purchases  by simultaneously  selling Riksbank 
certificates with a maturity of one week. And these certificates become a liability on 
the Riksbank’s  balance sheet, and the interest rate on the liability is the repo rate. As 
the bonds  we buy  have a much longer maturity (about five years on average) than the 
certificates, the Riksbank has to renew the borrowing every week by selling new 
certificates.  
 
It is this maturity transformation  that poses  an interest-rate risk  for the Riksbank.  If 
we hold  the bond until it has matured, we know  exactly how many Swedish  kronor 
the Riksbank  will receive in interest on it. And we also know how much it cost to buy. 
But we don’t know  what the funding  cost for the bonds  will be. Because the cost 
depends  on how the repo rate develops  up until the bond matures. 
This maturity transformation  is actually quite similar to operations  pursued by 
commercial banks to make a profit, i.e. holding long-term assets funded  by short-term 
borrowing. And even if such  operations are associated with an interest-rate risk which 
makes for an uncertain return, one can normally  count on making a profit more often 
than making a loss. This is because short-term rates (such as the repo rate that has a 
one-week maturity) are usually  on average slightly lower than long-term rates (e.g. 
the rate for five-year government bonds).  In economics  jargon, this is referred to as 
term premiums  on the financial markets normally  being positive. 
In practice, however, it is very difficult to determine how large these term premiums 
are at any one particular time. The premiums  cannot be directly observed  on the 
financial markets but must either be estimated based on a forecast for future short-
term rates or estimated using statistical methods  based on historical connections 
between interest rates at various  maturities and different asset-types. 
                                                                 
7 The ECB’s (2012) interpretation of this is that central banks should avoid prolonged periods with negative 
equity. 
8 For example, the central banks in Chile, the Czech Republic, Israel and Mexico have been able to fulfil their tasks 
despite having worked with negative equity for long periods of time (Archer and Moser-Boehm, 2013). 
  4 [12] 
   Both the Riksbank’s  own interest rate forecasts and the statistical methods suggest 
that the term premiums  are now very low, and maybe even negative. Chart 3 shows 
the Riksbank’s  and the Swedish  National Debt Office's  estimations of the term 
premium on ten-year government bonds  based on similar statistical methods. These 
statistical methods, as I have said, produce  fairly uncertain results, but they clearly 
indicate that premiums  have fallen sharply  in the last decade. 9 Both the Debt Office's 
and the Riksbank’s estimates indicate that the term premium  is negative. If the 
premium really is negative, the Riksbank  is expected to lose money on purchasing 
bonds  and funding them at the repo rate. The Riksbank’s estimate points  to the term 
premium currently being around -0.7 per cent on bonds  with long maturities. 10 This 
would mean that the loss is expected to be around  0.7 per cent of the purchase price 
for each year of maturity. Since the average maturity on the bonds  is about five years, 
this would mean that the losses  are expected to be 3.5 per cent of the purchase price.  
Chart 3. Estimated term premium 
Percentage points 
Note. The Swedish National Debt Office's estimate is based on swap rates while the Riksbank’s estimate is based 
on government bond rates. 
Sources: Swedish National Debt Office and the Riksbank 
                                                                  
9 One uncertainty factor is how well these methods can capture changes in the interest rate’s n ormal level. There 
are some signs that the fall in the estimated term premium has been caused by a decline in interest rate 
expectations, rather than by an actual change in the premium.   
10 In this assessment, it is actually not a question of only the premium, but also of a difference in valuation 
between Riksbank certificates and government securities, where the market has valued government securities 
higher in the past year. The interest rate on government securities with a maturity of one week is now almost 0.4 
percentage points lower than the repo rate despite them referring to the same maturity. 
  5 [12] 
   So far, interest rates and the Riksbank’s costs have been lower than 
expected 
As the statistical estimates of the term premium are uncertain in many ways and have 
several possible  sources  of error, I think we obtain a clearer picture of the effects of 
bond  purchases on the Riksbank’s  balance sheet by studying different  interest rate 
scenarios. 
Let us begin with the situation in February 2015 when we started purchasing bonds. 
The interest rate on five-year government bonds  fell to just under zero after our 
monetary policy announcement.  But Chart 4 shows  that those of us on the Executive 
Board of the Riksbank  as well as the money  market participants in Prospera’s survey 
thought at the time that the repo rate would be brought back into positive  territory 
towards the end of 2016 and then continue  to increase. One can say that the Riksbank 
purchased  government bonds  that gave a return of approximately zero but that were 
expected to be funded  according to the repo rate forecast. The chart shows  that the 
Riksbank  therefore expected to make a loss, as the funding  costs were expected to be 
higher than the yield.11 
Chart 4. Actual and expected interest rate developments 
Per cent 
 Note. Survey responses show the mean value for the repo-rate expectations of money market participants in 
February 2015. “MPR” refers to the Riksbank’s forecast for the repo rate in its monetary policy reports. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and TNS Sifo Prospera 
 
But Chart 4 also shows  that the repo rate has so far turned out to be much lower than 
the interest rate forecasts. The bonds  have therefore risen in value and the funding  of 
the bond  purchases  seems to become cheaper than expected, something which, at 
least in the short term, has led to higher profits than expected for the Riksbank. This is 
                                                                 
11 An alternative measure of the future repo rate is provided by the market’s pricing of certain derivatives. This 
pricing suggested that the repo rate would increase more slowly than in the Riksbank’s forecast, but the bond 
purchases would realise losses also according to these market-based expectations. 
  6 [12] 
   reflected in, for example, the forecast for the Riksbank’s  dividend-qualifying  profit in 
2015 and 2016.12 At the end of 2014, a total loss  of just over SEK 10 billion  was 
expected for those two years.13 In March 2015, when bond purchases  had begun on a 
small scale, the expected loss had risen to almost SEK 14 billion.  The latest forecast, 
from October this year, has the benefit of hindsight  and indicates that the outcome 
will instead be a profit of almost SEK 13 billion.   
Losses likely in the period ahead 
The fact that the Riksbank’s bond  purchases  have so far been profitable does  not 
mean that this will always be the case. For example, the ever-lower interest rates 
have made bond  purchases after the spring of 2015 increasingly costly. The Riksbank 
has now purchased bonds  for about SEK 275 billion  and several bonds  have a long 
remaining maturity. How expensive  it will be to fund  this portfolio  will therefore 
depend  on the development  of the repo rate for a long time to come. 
According to the current assessments  made both by ourselves  and others, it is more 
likely that the bonds  that we have purchased in recent months  will lead to losses 
rather than profits for the Riksbank. For example, the yield on ten-year government 
bonds  is now 0.2 per cent. The Riksbank  does not make forecasts for the repo rate for 
more than three years in the future. Even within this limited time horizon, interest 
rate developments  are very uncertain, but let us in any case assume that the repo 
rate develops  in line with the forecast. And let us assume that the repo rate then 
continues  to rise slowly  towards 4 per cent (see Chart 5). 14 The average interest rate 
level up until the bond  matures in 2026 will then be 1.2 per cent. Paying on average 
1.2 per cent in interest and receiving on average 0.2 per cent in interest represents a 
loss  of 1 per cent a year. Overall, this would be about 10 per cent up until the bond 
matures. This loss  can be seen in Chart 5 as the difference  between the repo rate, i.e. 
the funding  cost, and the forward curve that follows  from the pricing of the bonds. 
This difference increases  from about 0.3 percentage points on short-term maturities 
to about 2 percentage points on the ten-year horizon, and is hence on average 1 per 
cent. 
The example shows  that the interest rate risk  and the possible  loss  are particularly 
large when we purchase bonds  with long maturities. But ten-year bonds  are not, as I 
have said, representative of the bonds  purchased by the Riksbank. A more 
representative bond has a maturity of five years. For a five-year bond purchased 
today, the loss  will be between 3 and 4 per cent of the purchase sum if the interest 
rate develops  as in this example. This is of a similar  magnitude to the calculations 
based on the estimated term premium. 
                                                                  
12 This forecast is based on the National Institute of Economic Research’s interest rate forecasts. The low interest 
rates have also led to an increase in the market value of the foreign exchange reserve, which has contributed 
significantly to an improvement in the Riksbank’s reported profit. This improvement is however almost entirely 
an accounting illusion that will be counterbalanced by lower profit in the period ahead even if interest rates 
remain at their current low level. 
13 af Jochnick (2015) described why income was expected to be negative. 
14 The Riksbank has communicated that the interval of 3.5 – 4.5 per cent is a reasonable assumption for the level 
of the long-term normal repo rate (Sveriges Riksbank, 2010). There is a great deal to suggest, however, that the 
normal level of interest rates has fallen (see, for instance, Armelius et al., 2014, and Holston, Laubach and 
Williams, 2016). For example, members of the US central bank’s monetary policy committee, the FOMC, have 
recently lowered their assessment of the level of the long-term US policy rate from just over 4 per cent to just 
under 3 per cent. 
  7 [12] 
  Chart 5. Yield in accordance with the forward curve but funding at the repo rate   
Per cent 
 Note. Projection of the repo rate extended from the forecast in the Monetary Policy Report in Oc tober 2016. The 
forward curve is estimated on 26 October 2016. 
Source: The Riksbank 
 Changed interest rate environment directly impacts the Riksbank’s profit 
and dividend 
Up to now, the bond  purchases  have thus been profitable for the Riksbank. There are, 
however, good reasons  to anticipate counteracting losses  in the period  ahead, but it is 
still unclear what the total effects on the Riksbank’s  financial position  will be. The 
effects depend, of course, on how the interest rate develops  in the long term. What is 
clear, however, is that the interest rate risk  on our balance sheet has increased 
substantially. 
The interest rate risk will also be reflected in major fluctuations  in the Riksbank’s 
profit and its dividends  to the government. This is due to the practice of market 
valuation of the assets on the Riksbank’s  balance sheet. 15 I mentioned  earlier that the 
forecast for the dividend-qualifying  income for 2015 and 2016 has been transformed 
from a loss of SEK 14 billion  into a profit of SEK 13 billion  over the last year or so. A 
major part of this improvement  can be explained by the increase in the market value 
of the bond  portfolio  due to interest rates being lower than expected.  
A back-of-the-envelope  calculation shows  how interest rate changes now have a 
considerable  impact on the Riksbank’s  profits. The bond  portfolio  has a market value 
of just under SEK 300 billion  and an average maturity of five years. The value of the 
bonds  then increases by about SEK 15 billion  if interest rates suddenly  fall by one 
                                                                 
15 The Riksbank’s dividend-qualifying profit is calculated as the Riksbank’s profit adjusted for changes in the price 
of gold and in exchange rates. Changed market prices of Swedish bond holdings hence have an immediate effect 
on the dividend-qualifying profit. 
  8 [12] 
   percentage point on all maturities.16 And correspondingly,  the value of the bonds  falls 
by SEK 15 billion  if interest rates instead rise. Such changes in value immediately 
affect the Riksbank’s  dividend-qualifying  profit, but the impact on the dividends 
delivered by the Riksbank  to the government is dampened  by the fact that the 
dividend  is calculated as 80 per cent of the average dividend-qualifying  profit over the 
last five years. 
Lower borrowing costs for the government 
The bond  purchases  affect government finances in ways other than via dividends  from 
the Riksbank. They are supposed  to push  down interest rates in order to push  up 
inflation. If this works, it reduces the government’s costs for both its outstanding  debt 
and new borrowing. This is because lower interest rates reduce the nominal  cost of 
the government’s new borrowing, while inflation  reduces the real cost of both the 
outstanding debt and new borrowing when the policy  rate is restricted by its effective 
lower bound. 
It is difficult  to determine what effect the Riksbank’s  monetary policy has had on 
interest rates and the development  of inflation, and it is of course even more difficult 
to say how much the bond  purchases have contributed to this development. 
Nevertheless, I would like to try to calculate how monetary policy  may have affected 
the costs of government borrowing. Due to the high level of uncertainty, these 
calculations should  mostly be seen as providing  a ball-park figure. 
The underlying  inflation  rate, the CPIF excluding energy, was 0.7 per cent in 2014 but 
rose to 1.4 per cent in 2015 and is expected to remain on the same level this year and 
next year. Of course, we do not know how inflation  would have developed  with a 
different monetary policy, but let us assume that all this inflation upturn  of 0.7 
percentage points can be explained by the unconventional  monetary policy with bond 
purchases  and a negative repo rate. Since the repo rate has been and is expected to 
remain close  to its effective lower bound  during 2015-2017, we further assume  that 
the upturn in inflation  has not affected the repo rate in this three-year period. If this is 
true, the unconventional  monetary policy  has led to lower real interest on both the 
outstanding debt and new borrowing. With a bond stock of SEK 700 billion,  the result 
is that the monetary policy, by avoiding  excessively  low inflation in 2015-2017, has 
reduced the real borrowing costs for the outstanding  debt by 0.007*700*3 = SEK 15 
billion.   
According to some studies,  central bank bond  purchases  in Sweden  and other 
countries have also had a significant  impact on nominal interest rates when policy 
rates have been restricted by their effective lower bounds.  De Rezende, Kjellberg and 
Tysklind’s  (2015) study  indicates that Swedish  interest rates may have been pushed 
down by 0.4 to 0.7 percentage points of the purchases. 17  I find  it a little hard to 
believe that the effects are in the upper region of this interval, but the lower figure 
does not seem at all unreasonable. As the Riksbank  has purchased  an increasingly 
large share of the outstanding government bonds,  the interest rate for treasury bills 
(government securities with short maturities) has fallen to almost 0.4 percentage 
                                                                 
16 The increase in value will be approximately Bond value × Maturity in years × Change in rate = SEK 30 bn × 5 
× 1 % = SEK 15 bn, which can also be described as the change in funding cost for the bond portfolio, i.e. 1 per 
cent lower interest on SEK 300 billion over 5 years. 
17 The results in their study are of a similar magnitude to the results in studies based on central bank asset 
purchases in other countries. Their study is based on data from bond purchases in the spring of 2015 and my 
calculation is based on the assumption that bond purchases since then have had a similar effect.  
  9 [12] 
   points  below the repo rate. As a result, the interest rate for these is now close to the 
Swedish  National Debt Office's  “repo facility” which allows the Debt Office’s dealers 
to borrow bonds  from the Debt Office at a cost of the repo rate minus 0.4 percentage 
points. It gives market participants the opportunity  to make secure profits at even 
lower interest rates and hence sets a lower bound  for how low the interest rate on 
short-term government securities can fall. 18 It seems reasonable that this price 
development  has been caused by our bond  purchases and that the interest rate on 
government securities with short maturities has been pushed  down by at least 0.3 
percentage points, and that a similar price effect has also been exerted on 
government bonds  with longer maturities. 
As the public  sector budget is more or less  balanced, the government’s  total 
borrowing requirement does  not increase over time, but the government must 
nevertheless  take out new loans when older ones mature. In other words, new 
government bonds  and treasury bills  need to be issued  on a continuous  basis. 
According to the Debt Office’s latest forecast, bond  borrowing will amount to about 
SEK 90 billion  a year in 2015-2017 while borrowing via treasury bills  is expected to 
amount to just over SEK 110 billion  a year. Government bonds  have an effective 
maturity of just over 7 years while all treasury bills  by definition  mature within a year. 
If the Riksbank’s  bond purchases  push  the nominal  interest rate down  by 0.3 
percentage points on average, this produces  a total profit in terms of lower interest 
expenditure of approximately 0.003*(7*90+110)*3  = SEK 7 billion  for these three 
years. 
These calculations indicate that the bond purchases  and other unconventional 
monetary policy in recent years have reduced the government’s borrowing costs quite 
considerably,  compared to a monetary policy that had not kept interest rates down 
and avoided excessively  low inflation  in the same way. But the calculations should  be 
taken with a large pinch  of salt as they take a very narrow perspective  on government 
finances. They ignore, for example, the fact that the government has other assets and 
liabilities, as well as other commitments, that are also affected by the development of 
nominal  and real interest rates. The calculations  also ignore the fact that bond 
purchases  also stimulate GDP growth and employment  in the short term and that by 
strengthening confidence  in the inflation target, also contribute to healthy, long -term 
growth. This benefits Swedish  households  and strengthens public  finances by 
boosting  tax revenues  and reducing expenditure.   
The Riksbank’s finances are strong but sensitive to interest rate changes, 
and dividends will be lower  
Concern  has sometimes  been expressed over the fact that bond purchases  are 
expensive  and lead to losses  for the Riksbank. 19 This concern is hardly unwarranted, 
even though it is not certain that the purchases  actually do lead to losses. The 
Riksbank’s  balance sheet, profit and equity are now being affected more by interest 
rate adjustments  than before purchases began. Dividends  will therefore fluctuate 
considerably  more year on year in the future than they have done in recent decades. 
So far, the bond purchases  have generated a profit but our interest rate forecasts 
indicate future losses  and thereby lower or zero dividend  payments to the 
                                                                 
18 Sveriges Riksbank (2010). 
19 See, for instance, my own reasoning in the minutes of the monetary policy meeting in February 2015 (Sveriges 
Riksbank, 2015b) and Annika Alexius in Svenska Dagbladet (2016). 
  10 [12] 
   government. Despite the increased risks, my assessment  is that the Riksbank’s 
financial position  remains healthy. The Riksbank’s  equity has increased from just over 
SEK 70 billion  before the financial  crisis to its current level of just over SEK 120 billion. 
Even though it is likely that equity will shrink substantially  in the coming years, it is my 
opinion  that profit fluctuations  are unlikely  to be large enough to cause equity to fall 
to worryingly  low levels. 
Finally, I would like once again to remind you that the aim of the Riksbank’s 
operations  is not to make a profit and deliver dividends  to the government. Our task 
is to maintain price stability, and we do that by safeguarding the credibility of the 
inflation  target. In this way, we promote efficient price-setting and wage formation in 
the economy, which forms  the basis of sustainable  economic development  with high 
employment. 
References 
af Jochnick,  Kerstin (2015), “Does the Riksbank  have to make a profit? Challenges  for 
the funding  of the Riksbank", speech, 23 January 2015, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Alsterlind  Jan, Henrik Erikson, Maria Sandström  and David Vestin (2015), “How can 
government bond  purchases make monetary policy  more expansionary?”, Economic 
Commentaries, No. 12, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Archer, David and Paul Moser-Boehm  (2013), “Central bank finances”, BIS Papers No 
71, Bank for International Settlement. 
Armelius, Hanna, Paolo Bonomolo, Magnus Lindskog, Julia Rådahl, Ingvar Strid and 
Karl Walentin, (2014), “Lower neutral interest in Sweden?”, Economic  Commentaries, 
No. 8, Sveriges Riksbank. 
De Rezende, Rafael (2016), ”The interest rate effects of government bond  purchases 
away from the lower bound”, Sveriges Riksbank  Working Paper No. 324. 
De Rezende, Rafael B., David Kjellberg and Oskar  Tysklind  (2015), “Effects of the 
Riksbank's  government bond  purchases on financial prices”, Economic Commentaries, 
No. 13, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Del Negro, Marco and Christopher  Sims  (2015), “When  does a central bank’s balance 
sheet require fiscal support?”,  Journal of Monetary Economics, 73. 
ECB (2012), Convergence Report, May 2012. 
Ernhagen, Tomas, Magnus Vesterlund and Staffan Viotti (2002), "Central banks’ equity 
needs”, Economic Review 2/2002, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Flodén, Martin (2015), “Sweden needs its inflation  target,” speech, 13 October 2015, 
Sveriges Riksbank. 
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach and John  Williams  (2016), “Measuring the natural 
rate of interest: international trends and determinants”, Working  Paper 2016-11, 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 
Sims, Christopher  (2016), “Fiscal policy, monetary policy and central bank 
independence”,  Jackson  Hole Symposium,  Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Stella, Peter and Åke Lönnberg (2008), “Issues in central bank finance and 
independence”,  IMF Working Paper WP/08/37. 
  11 [12] 
  Svenska  Dagbladet (2016), “Professor:  Riksbanken agerar dumt och verktygslådan är 
tom” [Professor:  The Riksbank is acting stupidly  and the tool-box  is empty], 1 February 
2016. 
Sveriges Riksbank  (2010), “What is a normal repo rate?” Article in Monetary Policy 
Report, February 2010. 
Sveriges Riksbank  (2015a), “Why is it important that inflation  rises towards the 
target?”, Article in Monetary Policy Report, July  2015. 
Sveriges Riksbank  (2015b), “Minutes of the monetary policy  meeting held on 11 
February 2015”. 
    12 [12] 
