  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: The changes in Malaysia’s insurance sector 
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia 
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the 6th Malaysian Insurance Summit, Kuala Lumpur, 18 October 
2016. 
 Reaching the point of inflection on the “S-curve” 
Over a decade ago in the Insurance Annual Report 2000, Bank Negara Malaysia projected 
that  Malaysia’s  insurance  sector  would  expand  following  the  trajectory  of  an  “S-curve”. 
Growth  in  both  the  life  and  general  insurance  markets  would  significantly  outpace  the 
economy,  ascending  the  steep  slope  up  the  “S-curve”.  Since  then,  total  assets  of  the 
insurance and takaful sector have expanded at an annual rate of 13.3%, more than tripling in 
value  from  RM52  billion  in  2000  to  RM181  billion  in  2010.  Life  insurance  penetration 
increased from 33% to 51% of the Malaysian population over the same period. 
In  the  more  recent  years  however,  this  growth  has  started  to  plateau.  Life  insurance 
penetration  has  remained  stagnant  at  55%  for  the  past  3  years,  while  in  the  general 
insurance  sector,  domestic  capacity  for  larger  and  more  specialised  risks  appears  to  be 
reaching its limits. This in turn has contributed towards sustained reinsurance outflows which 
have an impact on the country’s long term current account balances. 
Based on our observations, the industry appears to be approaching the point of inflection in 
the “S-curve”. Yet we know that its growth potential remains significant, with Malaysia still a 
long  way  from  being  a  saturated  market.  This  suggests  that  the  industry  is  ripe  for 
transformation  to  a  new  growth  trajectory.  The  industry  in  essence  has  not  delivered  the 
required results. 
Jumping the “S-curve”: The need for positive feedback loops 
Successfully jumping the cusp of the “S-curve” is the only way to realise the aspiration of a 
deeper  and  more  diverse  insurance  market.  This  calls  for  transformational  change,  driven 
and reinforced by positive drivers that will revitalise the industry. 
In  the  context  of  financial  services  today,  these  drivers  focus  on  three  “T”s  –  talent, 
technology and trust. These three factors can be harnessed to catapult the industry onto a 
path of new and stronger growth, or they can precipitate its decline over time. The industry 
must secure the former for its future expansion or else it will continue plateauing. 
Let me speak briefly on these three factors. 
Firstly, we must grow the talent we need to bring our insurance and takaful sector to 
the next level. 
As  our  economic  structure  evolves,  we  will  need  a  deep  pool  of  insurance  and  takaful 
professionals who can develop and support new solutions for managing risks. 
Unfortunately, talent shortage has been a persistent issue which, if not resolved, will not only 
hold back the industry from gaining new ground; it could lead to a further retrenchment of 
business  growth.  The  industry  needs  to  make  further  efforts  to  attract  and  nurture  new 
talents. 
For example, the lack of underwriting expertise is a major reason why we have yet to stem 
the outflow of insurance for large and specialised risks. Over the last five years, the amount 
of direct and reinsurance premiums ceded overseas for the Marine, Aviation & Transit (MAT) 
and  Energy  risks  amounted  to  over  RM5  billion,  with  the  retention  ratio  for  these  classes 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  remaining below 30% for the last 10 years. With our world-class oil and gas industry and one 
of the largest airline fleets in the region, having the requisite insurance underwriting expertise 
in  these  sectors  is  not  only  a  logical  business  extension  for  the  industry;  it  is  also  an 
important economic imperative for the country. 
With more than 200 actuarial science graduates coming into the market annually, a healthy 
talent pipeline exists to support a whole range of functions from pricing to risk management 
and financial reporting. To leverage this resource, more needs to be done by the industry. In 
a recent survey of 20,000 graduates in Malaysia, the insurance and takaful sector lags other 
financial institutions in attractiveness, with only three positions among the top 100 employers 
in  Malaysia,  compared  with  the  banking  sector  which  has  16  names.  The  industry, 
collectively, ought to do better than this. We cannot be complacent when it comes to talent 
development. 
The  hunt  for  talent  is  a  continuous  affair.  Therefore,  a  strategic  focus  and  investments  to 
attract, retain and develop this talent must be prioritised. This cannot be left to random and 
piecemeal  initiatives;  strong  leadership  at  the  industry  level  is  required  to  drive  a  more 
organised  industry  effort  to  develop  and  strengthen  core  competencies  of  the  industry 
workforce across the board. 
As a way to accelerate the breadth and depth of our talent pool, the Bank would support the 
establishment  of  regional  functions  and  centres  of  excellence  by  insurers  and  takaful 
operators  in  Malaysia  to  serve  the  regional  and  international  markets.  In  addition  to 
deepening  the  domestic  insurance  market,  this  will  have  positive  spillovers  in  lifting  the 
quality  of  jobs  in  the  industry  more  generally  and  reversing  the  brain  drain  of  insurance 
talent. 
Secondly, insurers need to stay ahead of the curve in leveraging new technologies to 
be more accessible, more efficient and more agile. 
Many  forces  will  be  driving  insurers  to  be  more  innovative.  The  removal  of  tariffs  and 
changes  introduced  under  the  LIFE  Framework  will  drive  the  growth  of  new  products  and 
delivery  channels.  As  social  media  and  other  forms  of  communication  change  the  way 
insurance is accessed, traditional business models will be at risk of being “Uberised”. Even 
where face-to-face contact remains important, for example in the purchase of long term life 
insurance,  the  effectiveness  and  cost  efficiency  of  agents  will  be  transformed  by 
enhancements in productivity arising from better data analytics. 
The Bank will continue to pursue the innovation agenda. Technology advancement is here to 
stay. Revolution in business brought about by technological advancements will change the 
way we live and do business. As a catalyst for such innovations, I am pleased to announce 
that  following  a  public  consultation  process,  the  Bank  has  today  issued  details  of  the 
Financial  Technology  Regulatory  Sandbox.  Effective  immediately,  financial  institutions  and 
fintech companies will now be able to pilot innovations in a controlled, live-test environment 
with appropriate flexibilities accorded. This will  include flexibilities under  existing regulatory 
requirements  that  apply  to  outsourcing  arrangements  and  access  to  customer  information, 
subject to compensating safeguards. 
The  experience  from  the  sandbox  will  provide  input  into  formulating  more  proportionate 
regulations  that  will  spur  the  orderly  growth  of  new  innovations  in  the  financial  industry, 
including  insurance.  We  see  significant  potential  for  positive  disruptions  to  transform  the 
business  of  insurance  and  takaful  in  Malaysia  –  from  the  way  insurance  is  consumed,  to 
opportunities for addressing leakages to drive insurance costs lower. 
Indeed,  the greatest gains from  technological  innovations  may  well  be  reaped  in  the  more 
mundane  aspects  of  running  a  business  efficiently.  Today,  money  is  still  being  left  on  the 
table  from  inefficiencies  and  leakages  in  the  insurance  system.  From  inefficient  manual 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  processes  to  the  slow  take-up  of  electronic  payments,  there  are  large  gaps  in  the  supply 
chain that unduly increase the cost of insurance and limit efforts to combat insurance fraud. 
The insurance industry needs to accelerate its pace in terms of its technological adoption or 
else events will dictate the shape of the industry’s future. 
I  urge  the  industry  to  come  together  and focus on  the  long  term  benefits,  and  give  its  full 
support  to  initiatives  such  as  ISM’s  Fraud  Intelligence  System,  and  collaborate  on  other 
innovations such as the electronic reporting of motor accidents to bring the cost of insurance 
closer  to  its  “true  cost”.  Such  collective  effort  is  critical  to  make  insurance  and  takaful 
accessible to many, and to promote its sustainability over the long term. Individual insurers 
should also adopt the longer term view and invest in innovation. Much more can still be done 
by  insurers  that  are  part  of  global  insurance  groups  to  bring  new  technologies,  product 
designs  and  process  improvements  into  the  Malaysian  market.  The  undue  focus  on  short 
term profitability driven at the group level have often come at the expense of certain market 
segments  being  underserved  and  customers  being  denied  best  value  for  money.  Foreign 
insurers need to contribute more to justify their presence in the Malaysian market. 
Thirdly, insurers and takaful operators need to cultivate and continuously affirm 
society’s trust in the industry. 
Insurance  and  takaful  products  have  become  more  complex  with  the  result  that  most 
consumers do not fully understand what they have purchased. A larger number of players 
chasing  the  same  pool  of  customers,  result  in  intense  competition  that  gives  rise  to  poor 
sales practices. Pressure to improve underwriting results by controlling claims costs can also 
have unintended effects on the consumer experience. 
Cumulatively,  these  factors  can  undermine  consumer  confidence  and  trust  in  the  industry, 
with important implications for business growth and persistency. 
Globally,  financial  institutions  need  to  get  serious  about  addressing  the  trust  deficit  in  the 
financial  industry. The  hallmark  of  an  industry  that  engenders  trust  often  goes  back to  the 
basics of serving its core purpose, and doing it well. This begins with product innovations that 
should be aimed at increasing the level of public engagement and interest. The industry must 
abandon  the  mindset  that  “insurance  is  sold  not  bought”,  and  design  products that  people 
actually need and want to buy. Such products must also be able to afford protection to the 
underserved  segments  of  society  through  affordable  and  simple  product  solutions.  Such 
products  will  be  easier  to  sell,  lowering  distribution  costs  and  contributing  to  even  lower 
prices in a virtuous circle that delivers benefits to all parties. 
The industry also needs to explore new cost-efficient delivery channels. The industry has not 
done well in this respect. As a catalyst, beginning next year, insurers will be required to offer 
pure  protection  products  through  a  direct  channel  without  commissions.  The  high  internet 
and mobile phone penetration in Malaysia suggests that internet or mobile insurance makes 
good sense. Other untapped channels include banking agents, retail chains, employers and 
cooperatives. We  expect  the  industry  to  fully  adopt  these  channels  to  diversify  delivery  of 
services. 
New  products  and  delivery  channels  that  enhance  outreach  ultimately  contribute  towards 
expansion  of  a  larger  industry,  and  pool  of  customers  for  all  participants  in  the  insurance 
sector as a whole. In other words, it is not a zero sum game. Everybody will gain. Insurance 
agents and financial advisers will continue to provide a valuable service as households and 
businesses  move  up  the  income  ladder  and  require  more  personalised  advice  on  product 
options.  It  is  important  that  this  evolution  is  accompanied  by  a  strong  focus  on  raising 
standards of professional competence. Increasing the proportion of full time agents from the 
current 40% in the life sector and 30% in the general sector will be a vital component of this 
agenda.  Equally  important  is  ensuring  that  remuneration  structures  are  aligned  with  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  interests of consumers. The implementation of the balanced scorecard is an important step 
in this direction and should not be further delayed or diluted. 
There  is  no  question  that  the  potential  for  growth  in  the  insurance  and  takaful  industry  is 
significant,  with  estimates  placing  the  life  and  medical  insurance  protection  gap  alone  in 
Malaysia at between RM550,000 and RM723,000 per household. Closing this protection gap 
is ultimately the moral responsibility of the industry. Microinsurance and microtakaful should 
be further developed to improve access to the underserved segment of society. 
Charles Handy who conceived the concept of the “S-curve”, has this to say, “It is one of the 
paradoxes of success that the things and the ways which got you where you are, are seldom 
those that keep you there”. A reminder that is worth heeding. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
