Christopher Kent: Australia's economic transition - state by state
Address  by  Mr  Christopher  Kent,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of
Australia,  at  the  Australian  Business  Economists  Conference  Dinner,  Sydney,  22  November
2016.
 I  thank  Sean  Langcake  and  Merylin  Coombs  for  invaluable  assistance  in  preparing  these
remarks.
Introduction
I am grateful for the opportunity to address you all this evening. It is fitting for my final speech in
my  capacity  as  the  Bank’s  chief  economist  to  be  in  front  of  such  a  pre-eminent  group  of
Australia’s business economists.
I want to talk about Australia’s economic transition following the end of the resources boom. My
focus  will  be  on  developments  affecting  broader  economic  conditions,  and  the  labour  and
housing markets more specifically. A key theme of my discussion is that aggregate, economy-
wide variables – such as investment, unemployment or housing prices – often mask important
differences across the states. Understanding those differences can give us a better appreciation
of how the Australian economy is performing and is likely to evolve.
Before focusing on those differences, though, I’ll start with an overview of the overall economy.
About two weeks ago, we published our updated forecasts. The flow of data over recent months
had been broadly in line with our earlier expectations and so the forecasts were generally little
changed.
The economy continues to adjust to the end of the resources boom (Graph 1). Our expectation is
that GDP growth will be close to potential growth over the next few quarters and pick up to be a
little above potential thereafter. The unemployment rate, which has declined over the past year by
more than expected, is likely to edge just a little lower over the next two years. That implies that
there will be some spare capacity in the labour market for a time. Inflation is low. In year-ended
terms, we expect underlying inflation to remain around 1½ per cent for a few quarters before
gradually increasing to more normal levels. That profile follows from the forecast for the growth of
labour costs to rise gradually and is consistent with the medium-term inflation target.
 1 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Two  key  forces  shaping  developments  over  recent  years  have  been  the  large  fall  in  mining
investment and commodity prices. Mining investment has a bit further to fall, but by our estimates
about  80  per  cent  of  the  adjustment  is  now  behind  us.  Resource  exports  still  have  further  to
grow.  Meanwhile,  growth  of  activity  in  the  non-mining  sector  has  risen  gradually  over  recent
years.  That  improvement  has  been  fostered  by  low  interest  rates  and  the  depreciation  of  the
exchange  rate  since  2013.  Growth  of  non-mining  economic  activity  is  expected  to  be  around
average over the next two years.
One notable aspect of our latest forecasts was the upward revision to the outlook for Australia’s
terms of trade. Prices of bulk commodities have risen this year and contributed to a rise in the
terms of trade of about 6 per cent in the June and September quarters. That’s the first rise in the
terms of trade in some time. Our forecasts are for the terms of trade to remain above the low
point  reached  earlier  this  year  (and  about  25  per  cent  above  the  average  of  the  early  2000s
before the boom). While our forecasts are uncertain and subject to various risks, the upward
revision represents a marked change from the pattern of the past five years. Our assessment,
based in part on liaison information, is that the improved outlook for commodity prices is not likely
to lead to a noticeable pick-up in mining investment (in the near term at least). Even so, if our
forecasts are right, the terms of trade will shift from the substantial headwind of recent years to a
1
slight tail breeze providing some support to the growth of nominal demand.
Having set the scene on the national economy, I now want to switch attention to the differences
across the states. Outcomes across the country have varied in large part because the effects of
the  end  of  the  resources  boom  are  quite  different  across  industries.  The  economies  of  the
 2 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
mining states – Western Australia and Queensland – have been most directly affected by the
sizeable  declines  in  mining  investment  and  commodity  prices  over  recent  years.  Mining
investment is relatively intensive in its use of labour. Putting the mining infrastructure in place
drew upon workers with a range of construction and engineering skills. It also employed people
with  skills  that  we  wouldn’t  normally  associate  with  mining,  in  industries  such  as  business
services, transport and manufacturing. Many of those people didn’t work on site, but were based
in other parts of the state (and in some cases, beyond that).  Whether or not they were on- or
off-site, people were well rewarded for their work on mining-related projects. In response to those
opportunities,  there  was  a  large  rise  in  population  growth  in  the  mining  states.  Much  of  the
spending undertaken by the new and highly paid workers found its way into the local economies,
further boosting economic activity.
2
However, mining production does not require much labour, so it has not been surprising that the
shift from the investment to the production phase of the resources boom has seen a decline in
the growth of nominal income in the mining states and a sharp decline in population growth. Also,
the large fall in commodity prices (since the peak in 2011) weighed on mining profits, wages and
fiscal  revenues,  further  dampening  the  growth  of  nominal  incomes  in  the  mining  states  (and
beyond).
At  the  same  time,  states  with  less  exposure  to  mining  –  New  South  Wales,  Tasmania  and
Victoria  –  have  seen  an  improvement  in  their  economic  conditions;  and,  in  Victoria’s  case,  a
persistent rise in population growth. Those states have clearly benefited from the effects of low
interest  rates,  which  have  boosted  conditions  in  their  housing  markets  and  helped  to  support
demand more generally. The decline in the exchange rate since 2013 has also aided their trade-
exposed  industries,  including  tourism,  education,  business  services  and  agriculture.  South
Australia’s performance lies somewhere between the large mining and non-mining states. More
recently,  the  Queensland  economy  has  fared  better  than  that  of  Western  Australia,  in  part
because  the  fall  in  mining  investment  has  been  more  advanced  in  Queensland.  In  addition,
Queensland  has  had  the  advantage  of  its  sizeable  exposure  to  the  education  and  tourism
industries.
Economic conditions and business investment
This  ranking  of  the  states  I  have  just  described  is  evident  in  the  NAB  survey  of  business
conditions (Graph 2). Starting around four or so years ago, surveyed conditions in most states
have been on an upward trend. They are now generally above average, with conditions strongest
in  the  south-east  of  the  country.  Western Australia  is  the  obvious  exception;  conditions  there
have declined from above average, when mining investment and commodity prices were on the
rise, to well below average of late.
 3 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
A  similar  ranking  of  economic  conditions  is  apparent  in  the  growth  rate  of  household
consumption. Consumption growth has generally been stronger in the south-east over the past
few years and weaker in the mining states (Graph 3).
 4 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Considering these sorts of differences across the states can enhance our understanding of the
behaviour of some economy-wide aggregates. Non-mining business investment provides a good
example of this point.
For the country as a whole, non-mining business investment has been little changed since the
onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis  (Graph  4).  Growth  of  non-mining  business  investment  had
been relatively strong prior to that, averaging about 10 per cent per annum over the six years to
2007/08.  It  has  increased  a  little  since  the  peak  in  mining  investment  –  by  an  average  of
3  per  cent  per  annum.  But  growth  has  been  less  than  might  have  been  expected  given  the
support to overall demand provided by low interest rates and the depreciation of the exchange
rate.
 5 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
We have gone to some lengths to try to understand why non-mining business investment has
been subdued over recent years.  Prominent among the list of explanations are: a high level of
uncertainty  and  a  low  appetite  for  risk  taking  within  the  business  community;  low  productivity
growth; and the growing importance of service industries (which are less capital intensive). While
such explanations all have some merit, there’s an additional perspective that becomes apparent
once we look at the differences across the states.
3
The ABS  survey  of  firm’s  capital  expenditure  provides  a  sense  of  how  non-mining  business
investment  has  varied  across  the  states  (Graph  5).   It  shows  that  non-mining  business
investment has been growing over the past three years in New South Wales (by an average of
about 10 per cent per annum). Victoria has also seen some growth of late. The outcomes in
these states accord with information from the Bank’s business liaison program; firms in these
states  appear  willing  to  invest  in  response  to  stronger  business  conditions.  Meanwhile,  non-
mining business investment has been little changed in Queensland for some years, while it has
declined in Western Australia since the peak in the resources boom. This is broadly consistent
with the behaviour of demand across the states.
4
 6 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
So while non-mining business investment overall has been subdued, it is not right to say that
Australian businesses have been reluctant to invest. Investment has increased to some extent in
parts of the country, aided by favourable financing conditions and in response to strengthening
demand. But firms have not been willing to increase investment in the mining states, and have
even reduced investment in Western Australia, where demand has been particularly weak.
Labour market
The unemployment rate has declined over the course of this year, to be about ½ percentage
point below the peak in 2015. However, that decline is likely to have overstated the extent of the
improvement in labour market conditions. That is because, over the same period, employment
growth  has  moderated  and  part-time  jobs  have  accounted  for  all  the  growth  in  employment
(Graph 6). Moreover, the rate of underemployment has increased a little over the past year. That
is, there has been a rise in the share of employees who would like to work more hours than they
do. They represent additional spare capacity.
A rising share of part-time employment has been a structural feature of the economy over recent
decades,  reflecting  both  demand-  and  supply-side  factors.   But  the  growth  of  full-time
employment has been quite subdued since 2012, rising only briefly above its 20-year average of
1.3 per cent per annum.
5
 7 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Once again, the national outcome obscures contrasting experiences across the mining and non-
mining  states.  During  the  mining  investment  boom,  full-time  employment  grew  strongly  in  the
mining states, whereas it was little changed across the rest of the country (Graph 7).  Labour
was going to where it was in greatest demand and being paid relatively handsomely – in both
mining and non-mining sectors in the mining states (see below).
6
 8 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Since 2012, however, the situation has reversed. Full-time employment in Western Australia and
Queensland  hasn’t  increased  and  the  unemployment  rate  across  those  two  states  has  risen
noticeably.  That  makes  sense.  From  2012,  mining  investment  and  commodity  prices  were  in
sharp decline. In addition to the retrenchment of mining-related employment, those forces have
also had a noticeable knock-on effect to non-mining industries in those states, as the buoyant
effects  of  strong  growth  of  the  population  and  household  expenditure  have  been  unwound  in
concert  with  conditions  in  the  mining  industry.  The  decline  in  full-time  employment  over  2016
appears to reflect a further decline in demand conditions within the Western Australia economy.
One important part of that, the property market, has become progressively weaker, as I’ll discuss
in a minute. Moreover, wages appear to be adjusting to bring wage levels back towards those of
the  other  states  (Graph  8).  Part  of  that  adjustment  is  occurring  via  a  decline  in  wages  in  the
mining sector relative to wages in other sectors. Liaison reports suggest that wage pressures
will be quite subdued in the mining states for a time. As that adjustment occurs, it will weigh on
the growth of nominal demand in the mining states.
 9 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Interestingly, full-time employment in the non-mining states remained weak up until about 2014.
Thereafter, those states have benefited not only from the decline in interest rates, but also from
the  positive  effect  on  their  tradable  industries  from  the  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  that
started from early 2013. The forward-looking indicators for employment – job advertisements and
job vacancies – suggest that employment will grow moderately in the non-mining states in the
months  ahead  but  remain  weak  in  the  mining  states. Again,  like  non-mining  investment,  the
aggregate picture of employment masks some important divergences across the states.
7
To a certain extent, the different employment outcomes across the states have been mirrored in
the  behaviour  of  unemployment  rates.  However,  population  growth  has  also  responded  to
changes in demand conditions in the labour market.  Population growth slowed quickly in the
mining states from what had been quite rapid rates (Graph 9). Some of that slowdown was the
natural result of temporary workers – who had helped to build the new mining infrastructure –
taking their skills elsewhere as projects were completed. The other margin of adjustment wasn’t
so much an outflow of residents, but rather a halting of the inflow, including from New Zealand. In
any case, the slowdown in the growth of the population in the mining states has meant that the
unemployment  rates  there  have  gone  up  by  less  than  would  otherwise  have  been  the  case.
Meanwhile, population growth has picked up over recent years in the south-eastern states, in line
with the improvement in measures of business conditions and demand. Changes in population
growth have also had important implications for conditions in the housing market.
 10 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Housing market
As we noted in the latest Statement on Monetary Policy, conditions in the established housing
market have eased relative to a year ago. Let me be clear though: that doesn’t mean that the
risks  associated  with  high  levels  of  house  prices  and  housing  debt  have  diminished.  It  does
mean that those risks are not building to the same extent as last year. That’s because housing
prices  are  growing  less  quickly  than  they  were  in  2015  and  housing  credit  growth  has  also
slowed.  Importantly,  much  of  that  change  followed  from  the  earlier  actions  of  the  Australian
Prudential  Regulation  Authority  and  the  Australian  Securities  and  Investments  Commission,
8
which led to an appreciable tightening in lending standards.
The  November Statement  also  discussed  some  indicators  that  suggest  that  conditions  in
housing markets may have strengthened over recent months. In particular, housing price growth
has picked up in Sydney and Melbourne, where auction clearance rates have increased to high
levels. In addition, loan approvals to investors have increased over recent months.
In contrast to Sydney and Melbourne, housing market conditions remain subdued in Perth. Prices
of  apartments  and  detached  dwellings  there  have  declined  further  and  are  around  8  per  cent
below the peak. Rents in Perth have also declined by about the same amount. Those changes
are  consistent  with  the  weakening  in  general  economic  conditions  in  Western  Australia.
Moreover,  as  the  graph  above  shows,  population  growth  in  Western  Australia  has  declined
significantly since the peak of mining investment in 2012. And yet the full extent of the decline in
population growth may not have been readily appreciated by buyers and builders of housing. That
would be consistent with the fact that building approvals in Western Australia actually picked up
noticeably  from  2012  and  did  not  peak  until  2014,  which  was  also  about  the  same  time  that
housing prices and rents reached a peak in Perth. This meant that the housing supply was still
 11 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
ramping  up  at  the  same  time  that  population  growth  was  declining.  This  is  apparent  in  the
following  graph,  which  shows  the  growth  in  the  number  of  people  in  each  of  the  large  states
relative to the number of new dwellings completed at that time (Graph 10). The ‘dashes’ show
9
the average number of people per household from the various censuses.
In Western Australia, this ratio has fallen sharply to about one additional person in the state per
new dwelling completion. That’s well below the average number of inhabitants per dwelling. In
other  words,  there  are  a  lot  of  dwellings  being  completed  relative  to  the  needs  of  the  slower
growing  populace.  That  is  consistent  with  the  sharp  rise  in  vacancy  rates  in  Perth  and  the
adjustment  to  rents  and  housing  prices.  It  also  suggests  that  dwelling  construction  and
construction employment are likely to remain subdued for some time. That is having a knock-on
effect to other industries linked to the property market. These linkages are one way in which the
decline  in  the  resource  sector  has  been  extended  and  amplified  through  to  other  parts  of  the
economy.
10
Before concluding, I’ll make a brief observation on the difference between the strong (and rising)
population growth in Victoria over recent years and the lower population growth in New South
Wales. Victoria is now the beneficiary of net inward migration from each of the other states and a
larger contribution from net overseas immigration, compared with its past and compared with
New  South  Wales  currently.  It  strikes  me  that  it’s  possible  that  these  contrasting  outcomes
across Australia’s two most populated states owe in part to the relatively high cost of housing
 12 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
11
times 
in  Sydney  (and 
longer  commute 
its  surrounding  areas)  compared  with
and 
Melbourne.
 Also,  as  Graph  10  suggests,  the  housing  supply  in  Victoria  has  expanded  at  a
relatively  brisk  pace,  enabling  the  state  to  accommodate  the  relative  strong  growth  of  its
population over recent years.
Conclusion
12
In a country as large and diverse as Australia, the behaviour of the economy as a whole often
misses important differences across the country:
The  modest  growth  of  non-mining  business  investment  over  recent  years  masks  the
stronger growth in some parts of the country and declines in others.
The weakness in full-time employment nationally over the past few years owes much to the
subdued demand for labour in the mining states.
And housing market conditions are far from uniform. Prices are falling in Perth after a ramp
up  in  supply  combined  with  a  fall  in  population  growth.  Meanwhile,  Melbourne  is  seeing
stronger population inflows, perhaps benefiting from strong growth of supply for some years
and lower prices than in Sydney.
These  are  a  few  examples  of  how  the  experiences  of  the  different  states  and  industries  can
provide  useful  insights  into  the  behaviour  of  the  overall  economy.  The  Bank  puts  time  and
resources  into  understanding  these  sorts  of  differences  across  regions  and  industries.  We
examine  a  range  of  publicly  available  data  and  build  on  that  knowledge  through  our  extensive
liaison  program.  While  the  Bank  sets  monetary  policy  for  the  nation,  an  appreciation  of  the
different parts gives us more confidence about our understanding of the behaviour of the whole.
A key reason for the differences across the states over recent years has been the effect of the
large declines in mining investment and commodity prices. These have contributed to weaker
economic  conditions  in  the  mining  states  and,  therefore,  weighed  on  economic  conditions
nationally.  But  those  forces  are  waning;  indeed,  the  terms  of  trade  have  even  risen  of  late.
Hence,  there  are  reasonable  prospects  for  stronger  growth  of  nominal  demand  in  the  mining
states and, by extension, for the economy overall. That would contribute to a rise in domestic
inflationary pressures and a gradual return of inflation to more normal levels. In conclusion, a
close examination of the differences across the states can shed some light on the outlook for the
Australian economy.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
See, for example, the November 2014 Statement on Monetary Policy.
In 2013, the G7 economies accounted for about 25 per cent of Australia’s exports directly, compared with about
40 per cent in 2000. And while Australia trades with these economies less than in the past, they still have an
important bearing on global demand and supply conditions, thereby influencing the prices of our imports and
exports.
Kelly G and G La Cava (2014), ‘International Trade Costs, Global Supply Chains and Value-added Trade in
Australia’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2014–07.
Until the September quarter national accounts are released in early December, we won’t know though what the
revision to the annual figure implies for the quarterly pattern of growth.
The downward revision to exports reflected shifting the reference year forward (to 2012/13). Given the decline in
commodity prices, this has the effect of reducing slightly the contribution of resources exports to growth.
This requires an estimate of imports used in mining investment. This is a rather imprecise exercise and so the
estimates for non-mining activity should be considered as rough.
The low growth of non-mining activity seen over the second half of the 2000s was not a sign of weakness in the
economy overall, at least prior to the global financial crisis. Rather, the economy was growing strongly – as
 13 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
9
10
11
12
evidenced by the declining unemployment rate – with slower growth of non-mining activity offset by rising mining
activity, particularly mining investment.
Kent, C (2014), ‘Non-mining Business Investment – Where to from here?’, Address to the Bloomberg Economic
Summit, Sydney, 16 September.
This is not to say that there hasn’t been a deepening in capital over time – that is, more capital per worker in
both  goods  and  services  sectors.  Rather,  for  a  given  increase  in  the  number  of  workers,  we  need  less
investment just to keep the capital-to-labour ratio constant if a greater share of those workers are in the services
sector than in the past.
In Brisbane, the cooling of the property market has to date been less pronounced than in Western Australia,
which probably owes to the Queensland economy being a bit more diversified than that of Western Australia as
well as its geographic proximity to Sydney and Melbourne. Brisbane apartment prices have fallen of late, but
house prices have continued to rise. Like Western Australia, completions in Queensland are currently running
ahead of the needs of the growing population based on the recent average number of inhabitants per dwelling.
Median  housing  prices  in  Melbourne  are  currently  about  $770,000  versus  $1.077  million  in  Sydney.  These
differences don’t appear to be accounted for by differences in incomes; data from the HILDA survey show that in
2014, median annual household incomes were $89,865 and $87,913 in the two cities, respectively. ABS data
suggest income per capita is higher in New South Wales than Victoria, but the ratio of New South Wales to
Victorian income per capita is lower than the ratio of median house prices in their respective capital cities (1.16
against 1.40). Furthermore, Sydneysiders, on average, also spend a bit longer commuting to work; HILDA data
from 2014 show that the average time spent commuting to work per week is 5 hours 13 minutes in Sydney and
4 hours 56 minutes in Melbourne.
In part, the strength of dwelling completions in Victoria might reflect that fact that Melbourne does not have the
same geographic constraints that Sydney does. Also, inner-city Melbourne (but not the next ring of suburbs out)
has had more liberal building regulations. For a further discussion, see RBA (2015), ‘Submission to the Inquiry
into Home Ownership’, House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, 25 June. 
 14 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
