Peter Praet: Long-run saving and monetary policy
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
Parliamentary evening on "Challenges for long term savings products in the context of the zero-
interest rate policy", Brussels, 14 November 2016.
Accompanying slides
 The European Central Bank (ECB) has carried out a number of unconventional monetary policy
measures since the crisis to bring about a return of inflation to our objective. These measures
include targeted long-term repos, negative deposit facility rates since 2014 and large-scale asset
purchases.  We  have  received  criticism  of  these  unconventional  policies  from  some  quarters
surrounding  their  potential  negative  consequences.  In  the  light  of  that  criticism,  I  wanted  to
answer three crucial questions tonight relating to our unconventional measures: Why have we
implemented them? Have they been successful in their aims? And, finally, have they had unduly
large negative side effects on the distribution of wealth and income?
The determination of long-run interest rates
First of all, I would like to spend a few moments discussing the determination of interest rates
and what has happened to long-run interest rates over the past three decades. These two things
have significant bearing on the rest of my remarks.
Put  most  simply,  saving  is  the  decision  to  forgo  consumption  today,  in  return  for  higher
consumption in the future. Since people are by nature impatient, they require compensation for
delaying  consumption,  compensation  usually 
interest  payments.  That
compensation is paid for by those seeking to spend more today than their current income, such
as people buying houses, or firms investing in new capital, who in return will not consume all
their income in the future to repay the debt. There are two parts to interest payments – the real
component which is the extra amount of goods and services you can buy in the future relative to
today and the inflation component which compensates for the changes in the prices of goods
and services in the future.
form  of 
the 
in 
Long-run nominal interest rates have been falling across major advanced economies for more
than three decades. In major part, this is due to the success of central banks in taming inflation.
The expected inflation rate and the inflation risk premium incorporated into long-run interest rates
have fallen. Yet changes in expected future inflation that are in turn realised are benign for savers
– it is changes to the amount of goods and services that can be purchased in the future that
matter, not changes in nominal prices.
it 
just 
is  not 
But 
long-term nominal  interest  rates  which  have  been  declining;  long-
term real interest rates have also fallen. Factors beyond monetary policy have played a role in
driving real rates lower, which are less benign. There has been a secular decline in productivity
growth rates in advanced countries, and increased pessimism about future growth. With lower
expected return on capital, firms are more reluctant to invest.
There  has  also  been  a  savings-investment  imbalance  beyond  that  explained  by  the  fall  in
productivity growth, often referred to as a “global savings glut”. In part, this is explained by the
ageing populations of advanced countries, driving up the demand for safe assets at a time when
they have become increasingly scarce.
This  falling  real  rate  is  bad  news  for  savers  since  it  means  lower  future  returns  in  terms  of
consumption of additional goods and services. And in the long run it is the concept of the natural
rate that determines the return to saving, not short-term movements in monetary policy.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  concept  of  a  natural  rate  of  interest  represents  the  real  rate  consistent  with  saving  and
investment  being  in  balance,  output  being  at  its  potential  and  neither  upward  nor  downward
pressure on inflation. While the natural rate may change over time, it is unobserved and can only
be  estimated.  Such  estimation  is  relatively  imprecise,  with  different  models  giving  a  range  of
estimates making it uncertain as to the true level of the natural rate.  Nonetheless, the natural
2
rate does appear to be lower than in the past.
Why unconventional measures have been necessary
1
Developments in the natural rate matter for the conduct of monetary policy in the euro area. To
stimulate the economy, central banks steer short-term real interest rates below the natural rate
to  encourage  the  public  to  bring  forward  spending,  be  it  in  the  form  of  consumption  or
investment. As  the  natural  rate  falls,  so  does  the  rate  that  stimulates  the  economy.  With  the
natural  rate  now  lower  in  the  euro  area,  and  the  significant  downward  shock  to  output  and
inflation from the crisis, negative rates, and our other policy measures, have been necessary to
stimulate demand and drive inflation towards our objective.
There is a limit to how low short-term rates can go. Since the return on cash is zero, at some
point the public will switch to using cash and disintermediate the banking sector. Of course, there
are costs involved in holding large quantities in cash, so the crossover point lies a little way below
zero.
Given that there is a limit to how low interest rates can go, other unconventional measures have
to  come  into  play.  There  is  not  just  one  short-term  interest  rate  that  matters  for  saving  and
borrowing  decisions.  Our  asset  purchase  and  targeted  long-term  repo  programmes  seek  to
influence  the  entire  constellation  of  rates  that  affect  economic  conditions.  We  have  provided
guidance that we will not withdraw stimulus until output and inflation are on sustainable paths.
But let me emphasise once more, these measures were necessary given the size of the crisis
and the already low natural rate.
Effectiveness of the unconventional measures
That brings me to my second question, have the unconventional measures been successful?
The short answer is yes. The euro area economy is recovering steadily. Unemployment is falling,
reaching  10%  in  the  third  quarter.  Youth  unemployment  fell  to  20.6%  in  the  third  quarter  and
continues  to  decline  more  rapidly  than  the  overall  unemployment  rate.  Bank  lending  to
households and companies is growing, while demand for loans is rising.
ECB simulations showed that euro area GDP would be cumulatively at least 1.5% lower between
2015 and 2018 without the expansionary policy measures, with worse outcomes for inflation. And
more than that: by acting timely and decisively we preserved future growth prospects. There is a
growing  awareness  of  the  potential  permanent  negative  effects  of  prolonged  downturns,  a
process termed hysteresis.
There  are  a  number  of  channels  through  which  hysteresis  works.  Unemployed  people  lose
valuable  human  capital  and  skills  that  may  take  time  to  recover.  They  may  also  become
permanently discouraged from working, reducing long-run participation in the labour force. The
distressingly  high  rates  of  youth  unemployment  witnessed  in  many  euro  area  economies  are
likely to cause some labour market “scarring”.
Prolonged downturns may also cause businesses to become increasingly uncertain about future
prospects,  causing  them  to  delay  investment.  This  has  the  dual  effect  of  depressing  current
economic activity, which reinforces the downturn, and reducing the amount of capital available
for  future  production.  Lower  future  growth  translates  directly  into  lower  natural  rates  today,
something I shall return to shortly.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Other potential consequences of unconventional measures
While our measures have been successful in their aim of stabilising output and inflation, they
also  carry  risks  in  terms  of  allocation  of  resources  and  distribution  of  wealth  and  income.
Potential  risks  include  blunting  the  creative  destruction  of  the  crisis  by  allowing  unproductive,
zombie firms to remain in business and permitting the inflation of asset bubbles. Some have also
raised  concerns  that  low  interest  rates  have  reduced  incentives  for  governments  to  carry  out
difficult fiscal and structural reforms.
These topics are complex and deserve a greater depth of comment than I have time to cover
today.  Given  the  audience  here  tonight,  I  wanted  to  focus  on  two  particular  potential
consequences  of  our  unconventional  measures:  the  impact  on  the  distribution  of  wealth  and
income, and the impact on bank profitability.
To an extent, monetary policy always works through a redistribution of activity. Lowering interest
rates  encourages  households  to  bring  forward  to  today  some  consumption  planned  for  the
future. Some have argued that negative rates have the perverse effect of forcing savers, such as
those with a fixed savings target for retirement, to save more.
But such an argument is not borne out by the data. Since the introduction of the negative rate on
our  deposit  facility,  saving  rates  across  the  euro  area  have  remained  broadly  stable,  or  have
fallen. The only major country to have some rise is Germany. However, the profile of the German
saving rate also reflects the ongoing recovery in the residential investment sector.
But before I analyse more deeply the distributional impact of monetary policy action by the ECB,
let me first consider the distributional impact of monetary policy inaction. These effects are clear.
Economic activity would have been lower and unemployment – particularly youth unemployment
– higher. This would have had a disproportionately higher impact on the incomes of the poor and
the young. At the same time, inflation would have been lower, which research shows transfers
3
wealth from younger households to older households, who are more likely to be savers.
So  the  ECB  not  acting  also  carried  distributional  implications.  Further,  the  deeper  and  more
prolonged recession would likely bring about greater hysteresis, depressing future growth and
hence  returns  for  savers.  Overall,  households  would  have  been  worse  off  had  the  ECB  not
acted.
Counterfactual discussions aside, how have households fared across the euro area? To gauge
the effect on different euro area households, we can draw upon results from the Eurosystem’s
Household  Finance  and  Consumption  Survey  (HCFS),  conducted  in  2010  and  2014.  Even
though these surveys do not cover the period since the introduction of the negative deposit facility
rate, they do coincide with declines of 2-year euro area benchmark bond yields by 130 basis
points and 10-year bonds by 110 basis points.
Euro area net financial income as a fraction of total household income fell slightly. When looking
more closely at households grouped by wealth quintiles, we find that households with the lowest
net  wealth,  whose  debt  payments  are  higher  than  their  financial  income,  had  an  unchanged
position. Households with the highest net wealth, whose financial income is much higher than
their debt, had the most marked fall in income.
But while net financial income has fallen for the wealthiest households, the same is not true for
wealth. Wealthier households tend to have a greater amount of housing wealth and house prices
have risen since the introduction of negative interest rates. Extrapolating the HFCS forward using
changes in equity, bond and house price data shows increases in the net wealth for every wealth
quintile.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  ECB’s  policy  measures  have  been  unambiguously  positive  for  euro-area  governments.
Germany  alone  saved  approximately  28  billion  euro  in  2015  in  lower  than  expected  interest
payments. Such payments would ultimately have been financed from lower spending or higher
taxes.  Broadly  speaking,  the  lower  income  the  household  sector  has  received  from  income
payments from government bonds, either directly or intermediated through the banking sector
needs to be offset against lower tax liabilities now or in the future.
4
Indeed, research by Deutsche Bank  shows that the impact of low and negative interest rates on
the returns of German household financial assets has been limited so far. This was in part due to
revaluation  gains  on  the  back  of  the  ECB’s  asset  purchase  programme  as  well  as  interest
income from investment funds and insurance and pension products. It is still possible for savers
to  gain  positive  real  returns  by  holding  a  diversified  portfolio  of  assets.  Bank  deposits  may
currently  be  giving  a  negative  real  return,  but  as  research  by  the  Bundesbank  also  shows,
5
negative real returns on bank deposits is the norm, not the exception in Germany.
But savers are not the only sector potentially affected by negative rates. Low and negative rates
depress net interest margins for banks since lending rates fall, but there is a floor to deposit rates
caused by the effective lower bound. To date, ECB staff estimates show the impact of our policy
6
measures has been net positive for banks.
Net interest margins have certainly been compressed, but that has been offset by a greater flow
of lending as economic activity is higher, lower incidence of non-performing loans, again due to
lower servicing costs and greater levels of activity, and revaluations of fixed income portfolios.
Over  time,  the  revaluation  effects  will  fade  and  the  squeeze  on  net  interest  margins  may
intensify. Future expected profitability may also suffer if banks react to lower overall returns by
extending riskier loans, which in turn may sour. Overall, potential negative side effects from low
rates  on  banking  sector  profitability  are  likely  to  intensify  the  longer  they  are  used,  which  is
precisely why they are envisaged as short-term measures.
7
But our unconventional measures are not the only headwind for financial sector profitability in the
euro area.  The overhang of non-performing loans from the financial and sovereign debt crises
continue to weigh on banks’ profits. At the same time, a number of jurisdictions are marked by
overcapacity  in  banking  and  have  average  cost  to  income  ratios  markedly  above  those  seen
elsewhere  in  Europe  and  other  advanced  economies.  Finally,  banks  are  under  increasing
competition from non-banks and the FinTech sector. It is certainly a challenging time on many
fronts for euro area banks, and many will have to consider carefully their business models.
Such efforts need to go hand-in-hand with further steps towards closer cross-border integration:
completing banking union is crucial to allow banks to compete internationally as euro area banks
and not only as national champions. We need a single euro area regulatory approach that will
facilitate cross-border mergers, acquisitions and investment, thereby enhancing diversification,
risk-sharing and efficiency. Only by completing what we started can we reap the full benefits of
banking union.
Changes are also likely needed from savings products frequently used in the past. I believe that
the really important question to debate tonight is not quite the published title, but instead: what are
the challenges for long-term saving products in the presence of a low natural rate.
Conclusion
Let  me  sum  up.  The  ECB’s  unconventional  policy  measures  over  recent  years  have  been
necessary  to  react  to  the  severe  negative  shock  arising  from  the  crisis.  They  differ  from
conventional  policy  measures  taken  before  the  crisis  in  part  because  of  impairments  to  the
transmission mechanism caused by the crisis. But in major part the measures are a result of the
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
ECB  adapting  to  the  secular  downward  shift  in  equilibrium  interest  rates  over  the  past  three
decades.
The measures have been successful in stabilising output, helping to reduce unemployment and
have  begun  to  help  steer  inflation  back  towards  our  objective.  We  will  keep  the  measures  in
place until output growth and inflation are back on sustainable paths. While some redistribution
between households is inevitable with monetary policy actions, it is clear that to date there has
not been an inequitable redistribution in the euro area. Indeed, the distributional consequences of
policy inaction would have been worse.
The  ECB  will  continue  to  use  appropriate  measures  available  in  our  mandate  to  achieve  our
inflation objective. This includes the temporary use of the unconventional measures introduced
since  the  crisis  until  growth  and  inflation  are  once  more  self-sustaining.  In  enhancing
macroeconomic stability and inhibiting the short-term effects of the crisis from weighing on long-
term  economic  prospects,  monetary  policy  is  providing  its  best  possible  support  to  long-run
saving.
And  it  is  important  to  view  the  contribution  of  monetary  policy  in  the  wider  context  of
macroeconomic policy. Fiscal policy can play a greater role in stimulating demand, reducing the
burden on monetary policy. Public investment as a share of GDP has declined for a number of
years. It is vital that fiscal authorities re-balance towards more growth-friendly policies.
Furthermore,  the  secular  decline  in  rates  is  not  inevitable.  Structural  reforms  are  needed  to
unleash the productive potential of the euro area economy. Such reforms fall beyond the remit of
the  ECB  and  are  the  responsibility  of  other  national  and  European  policymakers.  Now  is  the
perfect  time  for  such  reforms,  since  the  current  accommodative  policy  of  the  ECB  can  help
offset any short-term adjustment costs of their implementation. This is a window of opportunity
that  needs  to  be  seized.  Doing  so  will  raise  future  income  in  the  euro  area,  supporting  an
increase in the natural rate and boosting the returns to saving.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
See  Orphanides,  A  and  J.  Williams,  (2002),  “Robust  Monetary  Policy  Rules  with  Unknown  Natural
Rates”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol.2, 63–145, Laubach, T and J. Williams (2003), “Measuring
the  Natural  Rate  of  Interest”, Review of Economics and Statistics 85, No4, pp 1063–70, Laubach, T and J.
Williams,  (2015),  “Measuring  the  real  natural  interest  rate  redux”, Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco
Working Paper, No. 2015–16 and Taylor, J.B, and V. Wieland, (2016), “Finding the Equilibrium Real Interest
Rate in a Fog of Policy Deviations”, Economics Working Papers 16109, Hoover Institution, Stanford University.
Notwithstanding the uncertainty over estimates of the natural rate, key drivers of long-term interest rate in a
standard Solow growth model such as productivity and population growth have been slowing for decades in
advanced economies, suggesting that the natural interest rate may have indeed declined. See Gordon, R.J.,
(2016), “The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War”, Princeton U.P.
and Goodhart C., P. Pardeshi and M. Pradhan, (2015), “Workers vs pensioners: the battle of our time”, Prospect
Magazine, December.
Adam, K and J. Zhu, (2014), “Price level changes and the redistribution of nominal wealth across the euro
area”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 14 : 871–906.
Deutsche Bank Research, Focus Germany – Difficult times for German savers, 4 October 2016.
Bundesbank monthly report October 2015.
Rostagno M., Bindseil, U., Kamps, A., Lemke, W., Sugo, T. and T. Vlassopoulos, Breaking through the zero line –
The ECB’s Negative Interest Rate Policy, Brookings Institution, Washington DC, 6 June 2016.
For a more detailed discussion of the challenges for euro area banks and the interlinkages with monetary policy
see Praet, P. (2016), “Monetary policy and the euro area banking system”, Speech at ECMI Annual Conference,
Brussels, 9 November 2016.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
