R Gandhi: Pioneering best practices in banking – India’s record
Text  of  the  33rd  Sir  Purshotamdas  Thakurdas  Memorial  Lecture  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy
Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 24 November 2016.
Good evening!
 2. In the post-crisis era, the international thinking on banking and finance stands fundamentally
changed.  Not  only  did  the  crisis  shake  the  confidence  of  all  stakeholders  in  the  international
financial  system  but  also  compelled  the  regulators  and  policy  makers  to  review  whether  their
policy  framework  was  sound  enough  to  prevent  the  outbreak  of  another  crisis  of  a  similar
magnitude. From the global consultations, emerged newer and more refined norms of prudential
regulations and supervision that may appear onerous at the present moment but are expected to
make  the  global  financial  system  reasonably  resilient  in  the  long  term.  When  all  these
consultations about reforming the global financial architecture have been on, I have increasingly
felt that India has been leading in many of what we now term as the international best practices in
banking and finance.
3. India’s lead in economics is, of course, well known and well accepted. Kautilya’s Arthashastra
written by Chanakya during 300 BC is regarded as a master piece in diplomacy and economic
principles. Kautilya describes the primary role of a ruler and regulator as good governance. He
alludes  to  people-centric  and  particularly  the  poor-centric  policies  that  would  enhance  welfare
and lead to stability in any country. He emphasises on the role of infrastructure, particularly public
investment in roads and transport, as an important responsibility of the ruler and also highlights
the  role  of  private  enterprise,  suggesting  a  mixed  economic  framework.  When  we  study  the
Arthashastra,  we  are  amazed  by  the  vision  of  Chanakya  in  laying  down  the  best  practices  in
economic administration that continue to be relevant even 2300 years later!
4. Coming back to the recent times, I am equally impressed by the sagacity of our policy makers
and  legislators,  who  built  in  certain  practices  in  the  functioning  of  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the
Indian banking system. We see similar practices being recommended now by the international
standard setting bodies as international best practices. First, the fact that we have had these
practices  in  place  has  helped  us  wither  the  crises  which  have  shaken  the  rest  of  the  world.
Secondly, these practices have also made our transition to the contemporary international best
practices fairly easier.
5. Most of the issues that I discuss today relate to banking sector regulation. However, there is
another area relating to the banking sector that we cannot overlook when we compare Indian
banking practices with the rest of world and that relates to ‘financial inclusion’. Stepping beyond
the banking sector and looking at other core areas of functioning of the central bank, such as
foreign  exchange  reserves  management  and  payments  systems  also  suggest  several  home-
grown practices which are now being regarded as the international best practises.
6. Let me begin with prudential regulations.
2
Statutory liquidity ratio  and liquidity coverage ratio
1
7.  In  the  wake  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  2007–08,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision (BCBS) initiated the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) in an effort to strengthen the
liquidity  framework  of  the  financial  systems  of  the  world.  Bank  portfolios  generally  consist  of
illiquid  assets  (longer-term  loans)  that  are  funded  by  liabilities  (shorter-term  borrowings)  that
must be renewed continuously until the longer-term customer loans are fully repaid. Episodes of
uncertainty, however, can cause increases in short-term rates relative to long-term rates, which
can translate into a run on and insolvency for financial institutions. To prevent such run on a daily
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
basis, banks need to hold unencumbered, marketable assets that would find buyers at a short
notice. A reserve requirement alone may not help enough as a prudential measure for managing
liquidity risk; banks world-wide, for lack of incentives to hold up funds in unremunerated reserves,
have often resorted to circumventing the statute by veering away from one form of funding to
other in an effort to modify the base for calculating the ratio. The extensive use of short term
wholesale funding to fund long term assets in the recent crisis being a case in point.
8.  Before  the  global  crisis,  USA  in  particular  did  not  have  any  concept  of  liquidity  asset  ratio
requirement from either prudential or monetary control point of view. More recently, liquidity risk
management  has  been  manifested  in  various  stress-testing  methods  as  per  supervisory
guidance.  Other  developed  countries  that  never  had  or  abolished  liquidity  asset  ratios  or
traditional reserve requirements so far were Canada, France, Sweden, and New Zealand.
9. Indian banks, however, have always had in place a liquidity risk management system in the
form  of  the  Statutory  Liquidity  Ratio  (SLR).  According  to  Section  24  (2-A)  of  the  Banking
Regulation Act, 1949, all Scheduled Commercial Banks in India are required to maintain, a) in
cash,  or  b)  in  gold  valued  at  a  price  not  exceeding  the  current  market  price,  or  c)  in
unencumbered approved securities valued at a price as specified by the RBI from time to time an
amount of which shall not, at the close of the business on any day, be less than 25 per cent and
not exceed 40 per cent of the total of its demand and time liabilities in India as on the last Friday
of  the  second  preceding  fortnight.  Following  the  amendment  of  the  Banking  Regulation  Act
(1949) in January 2007, the floor rate of 25 per cent for SLR was, of course, removed. However,
even as at present, all Scheduled Commercial Banks are required to maintain a uniform SLR of
20.75 per cent of their total demand and time liabilities in India as on the last Friday of the second
preceding fortnight.
3
10. SLR, although focusses on maintaining a static stock of assets out of a stock of liabilities vis-
à-vis  LCR’s  emphasis  on  pre-empting  net  cash  outflows  on  an  ongoing  basis,  has  always
served India well during crises because the RBI allowed banks to utilize the assets therein to
draw  on  LAF  and  MSF  funds .  Financial  systems  across  the  world  now  have  to  modify  their
lending behaviour to create such buffers of liquid assets. A Quantitative Impact Study by BIS on
the implementation of these liquidity ratio norms find that some banks in developed countries, to
be able to implement these norms, might have to exit some businesses altogether because their
liquid assets get tied up there. The assets categorized as liquid under LCR are by and large the
ones that Indian banks have always held for calculation of their SLR requirements. Indian banks
will  not  find  the  implementation  of  LCR  as  tedious  especially  because  RBI  has  now  allowed
Indian banks to include 11 per cent of their SLR securities for the purpose of calculating LCR.
Finally, as suggested by stress tests conducted by RBI, the LCR is not a substitute for SLR. It
will only add on to the function that SLR was already meant to perform, i.e., to fill the liquidity gap
of Indian banks under stress.
Credit Management Techniques
11. Another area which has drawn the attention of policy makers and standard setting bodies has
been  the  flow  of  credit  in  the  economy  and  the  resultant  risk  that  can  build-up  in  the  system
overtime if left unchecked. The basic premise of macro-prudential and micro-prudential policies
is  early  detection  of  such  build-ups  and  initiation  of  suitable  corrective  action.  Two  types  of
techniques, i.e., quantitative and qualitative credit controls have been used by the central banks
world-wide to achieve their objective of managing flow of credit in the economy. The former or
traditional method includes banks rate policy, open market operations and variable reserve ratio.
Qualitative  also  called  selective  credit  control  instruments  work  through  regulation  of  margin
requirement, credit rationing, regulation of consumer credit and direct action.
12. As per the Reserve Bank of India Act, Reserve Bank was constituted to regulate the issue of
bank notes and the keeping of reserves with a view to securing monetary stability in India and
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
generally to operate the currency and credit system of the country to its advantage. Thus, the
use of credit management techniques to the country’s advantage has been enshrined in our Act.
Towards this objective Reserve Bank has consistently emphasized on diligent monitoring of the
health of loan portfolios of credit institutions and remained pro-active in tightening risk weights
and  provisioning  requirements  particularly  during  rapid  credit  growth  phases.  With  a  view  to
preventing  speculative  holding  of  essential  commodities  with  the  help  of  bank  credit  and  the
resultant  rise  in  their  prices,  Reserve  Bank ,  has  issued,  from  time  to  time,  directives  to  all
commercial banks, stipulating specific restrictions on bank advances against specified sensitive
commodities.
4
13. The Reserve Bank introduced selective credit control for the first time in May 1956 in the
context of multiplication of banks’ advances. The continued loss of foreign reserves towards plan
financing again forced the Bank to use an additional credit restraint measure viz., ‘quota-slab’
system,  instituted  in  October  1960.  This  was  in  the  form  of  credit  rationing  through  a  price
instrument. Under this system, each scheduled bank was assigned a quarterly quota equal to
half of the average volume of reserves, which it had to maintain under Section 42(1) of the RBI
Act  during  each  week  of  the  preceding  year.  The  quota  slab  system  could  be  liberalised  or
tightened  as  necessary  for  effective  quantitative  check  on  credit  expansion.  The  quota-slab
system,  where  availability  of  credit  was  the  key  control  variable,  was  replaced  in  1964  by  a
scheme of accommodation based on banks’ net liquidity ratio (NLR), which was considered to
be a less discretionary form of central bank control over the expansion of commercial bank credit
than the quota-slab system. The NLR formula envisaged using a variant of the statutory liquidity
ratio to regulate the cost of the Bank’s loans to scheduled commercial banks.
14.  The  credit  authorisation  scheme  as  an  instrument  of  credit  control  was  introduced  in
November  1965  to  align  credit  policies  closely  with  the  Five  Year  Plans.  Under  the  scheme,
scheduled commercial banks were required to obtain the Reserve Bank’s authorisation before
sanctioning any fresh credit of Rs.1 crore or above to any one borrower or any fresh limit which
would  take  the  total  limits  engaged  by  the  borrowers  from  the  entire  banking  system  to  Rs.1
crore. This scheme helped in preventing the problem of pre-emption of scarce bank reserves by
a few large borrowers and enforcing a measure of financial discipline on them.
15. As is evident from the above, in the initial phase of scarce credit, Reserve Bank used credit
management  techniques  to  ensure  efficacious  use  of  credit.  In  the  recent  years,  credit
management measures have been  used  to  discourage  excessive  risk  build-up  in  a  sector.  In
view of significant rise in bank credit to the commercial real estate sector in conjunction with that
in  the  prices  of  real  estate,  risk  weights  for  banks’  exposure  to  commercial  real  estate  were
increased from 100 per cent to 125 per cent in July 2005, and further to 150 per cent in May
2006. The risk weights on housing loans extended by banks to individuals, were also increased
from 50 to 75 per cent in December 2004. The provisions for standard assets were also revised
upwards progressively in November 2005, May 2006 and January 2007, in view of the high credit
growth  in  select  sectors.  These  measures  stood  us  in  good  stead  during  the  global  financial
crisis.  Thus  Reserve  Bank  in  pursuance  of  the  objective  outlined  in  the  RBI  Act  has  been
diligently monitoring the flow of credit in the economy and taking appropriate steps to ensure that
flow of credit is used to the betterment of the economy.
Regulation of non- banking financial sector
16. The idea that shadow banking should be regulated is of recent origin in most of the countries
and has found credence in the aftermath of the global financial crisis when the role of shadow
banks was brought in sharp focus. However, in India, the scheme of regulation of non-banking
financial  companies  (NBFCs)  originated  in  mid-sixties  when  sudden  upsurge  in  deposit
mobilisation  by  Non-Banking  Companies  was  noticed.  The  provisions  of  Chapter  III  B  of  the
Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act,  1934,  which  regulated  the  deposit  acceptance  activities  of  Non-
Banking  Companies  has  been  in  existence  since  mid-sixties.  The  focus  of  regulation  was  to
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
ensure that the segment serves as an adjunct to banking system and also provides an indirect
protection  to  the  depositors.  The  objective  of  this  legislative  frame  work  was  to  regulate  the
deposit acceptance activities of NBFCs. As per the provisions of this framework, the Reserve
Bank  was  empowered  to  regulate  or  prohibit  issue  of  prospectus  or  advertisement  soliciting
deposit, collect information on deposits and to give directions on matters relating to receipt of
deposits. For violation of directions, RBI could issue orders prohibiting erring companies from
accepting further deposits. The legislative intent and the focus were thus mainly to moderate the
resource  mobilisation  exercise  by  way  of  deposits  by  NBFCs  and  thereby  providing  indirect
protection to the depositors by linking the quantum of deposit to their Net Owned Funds (NOF).
The focus continued to be the same till early 90s. Over a period of time, especially during late
80s and early 90s, NBFCs penetrated into the main stream of financial sector and established
themselves as complements of banking industry. In light of this, an Ordinance was promulgated
by the Government in January 1997, effecting comprehensive changes in the provisions of RBI
Act. Over the period the regulation for the NBFCs has been modified and made in conformity with
the banks. Thus, because of history of regulatory best practices, shadow banking has not posed
any problem for the financial sector in India.
Sector Specific Refinance Facilities
17. One of the most important features of the global financial crisis was the aggravation of the
problem of bank liquidity, credit market crisis, and to put it simply, the lack of money. This was
addressed  through  various  measures  undertaken  by  the  central  banks  to  widen  access  to
central  bank  financing.  Objective  of  the  refinance  facility  by  central  bank  is  to  provide  further
comfort  on  liquidity  and  to  impart  flexibility  in  liquidity  management  to  banks.  Refinancing
operations  were  undertaken  by  most  of  the  central  banks  to  ensure  credit  flow  to  the  real
economy. Some central banks undertook specific measures to ensure smooth flow of credit to
exporters, small businesses and entrepreneurs.
18.  Reserve  Bank  has  been  following  several  sector-specific  refinance  facilities.  These  have
been reviewed from time to time based on the evolving macroeconomic and market conditions.
Under Section 17(3A) of the Reserve Bank of India Act 1934, RBI first introduced the scheme of
export financing in 1967 which was intended to make short-term working capital finance available
to exporters at internationally comparable interest rates. The ECR scheme has been reviewed
from time to time based on the stance of monetary policy. It has been merged with the system
level liquidity provision with effect from the fortnight beginning on February 7, 2015.
19. In response to recent global crisis, a special refinance facility was introduced under Section
17(3B) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 under which all SCBs (excluding RRBs) were
provided refinance from the Reserve Bank equivalent to up to 1.0 per cent of each bank’s NDTL
as on October 24, 2008 at the LAF repo rate up to a maximum period of 90 days. Banks were
encouraged  to  use  this  facility  for  the  purpose  of  extending  finance  to  micro  and  small
enterprises. The eligible limit of the ECR facility for scheduled banks (excluding RRBs) was also
increased from 15 per cent to 50 per cent of the outstanding export credit eligible for refinance at
the prevailing repo rate under the LAF. In order to provide liquidity support to housing, export and
MSE  sectors,  the  Reserve  Bank  also  provided  refinance  facility  to  the  National  Housing  Bank
(NHB), Export and Import  Bank  (EXIM  Bank)  and  Small  Industries  Development  Bank  of  India
(SIDBI).
20. Now, in place of Reserve Bank, financial institutions such as National Bank for Agriculture
and Rural Development (NABARD), SIDBI, and NHB, extend refinance to banks as well as non-
banking  financial  institutions.  MUDRA  Bank,  new  institution  for  development  of  micro  units  is
refinancing through State level institutions, and delivering loans to NBFCs, MFIs, Rural Banks,
District  Banks,  Nationalized  Banks,  Private  Banks,  Primary  Lending  Institutions  and  other
intermediaries.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Financial Inclusion
21. The concept of “financial inclusion” gained global attention during the 2000s through its link
with the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) set by the United Nations
(UN). The Reserve Bank of India has however been undertaking various initiatives over the last
five decades to help the underprivileged participate in the country’s economic development.
22.  On April  2012,  India  became  the  first  BRIC  member  to  join  CGAP ,  the  policy  research
centre housed at the World Bank dedicated to improving financial access for the world’s poor. An
analysis done in a 2015 RBI committee report on financial inclusion finds that access to finance
is,  on  average,  0.14–0.16  percentage  points  higher  in  India  compared  with  its  EMDE   peers.
These facts uphold India’s position as a pioneer and an innovator for many years for a range of
financial access initiatives.
6
5
23. Globally, about 38 per cent of the adult population has no or very limited access to formal
financial services. This makes a strong case for poor households to penetrate the boundary of
formal finance. Loans or savings can help them to accelerate consumption, absorb unforeseen
shocks  such  as  health-related  issues,  make  households  investment  in  durable  goods,  home
improvements  or  school  fees  (Collins  et  al.,  2009).  Indian  policy  makers  have  always
emphasized the significance of inclusive finance. Our policies like the nationalization of banks,
priority sector lending, setting up of Regional Rural Banks and encouragement to co-operatives
date back to 1960s and 1970s underlining the fact that inclusive finance was always a national
priority. The “Financial Inclusion Policy‟ introduced by the Reserve Bank of India in the year 2005
helped launch a 100 per cent financial inclusion drive.
24. In doing this, India stands out as one of the few EMDEs for which the government has a
documented  financial  inclusion  strategy  that  contains  specific  commitments. As  per  the  2016
Brookings  Financial  and  Digital  Inclusion  Project  Report  on  Advancing  Equitable  Financial
Ecosystems,  countries  like  Philippines,  Peru  and  Colombia  have  only  now  formalized  their
commitments  towards  financial  inclusion  and  a  big  part  of  the  recent  progress  in  financial
inclusion in these countries is due to this formal setting of inclusion targets. Countries like USA
have begun to recognize the impediments to using financial services in the form of expensive
minimum  balance  requirements  and  high  fees  (e.g.,  for  cashing  checks).  Increasing
consideration  is  now  being  given  to  the  promotion  of  an  inclusive  financial  ecosystem  by
development of regulations to limit the costs associated with access to credit among low-income
populations in the U.S.
25. The launch of the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) program in 2014, one of the
world’s  largest  financial  inclusion  initiatives  to  date  that  promotes  no-frills  accounts,  is  one
prominent example of India’s national-level commitment to advancing financial inclusion.
Foreign Exchange Reserves Management
26. Official foreign exchange reserves are maintained in any country in order to achieve a set of
objectives such as support and maintain confidence in the monetary and exchange rate policies,
limit  external  vulnerabilities  by  maintaining  foreign  currency  liquidity  to  absorb  shocks  during
times of crisis, to provide a level of confidence to markets, demonstrate the backing of domestic
currency  by  external  assets  and  meeting  its  foreign  exchange  needs  and  external  debt
obligations.
27.  However,  the  design  of  investment  portfolios  varies  widely  across  countries,  reflecting
essentially the exposure to liquidity, currency, interest rate and counterparty credit risks and the
scope of active management thereof. Portfolio design takes into account a host of factors such
as exchange rate regime adopted by the country, the extent of openness of the economy, the
size of the external sector in a country’s GDP and integration of financial markets.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
28.  India  has  been  frontrunner  in  terms  of  international  best  practices  in  the  management  of
foreign  exchange  reserves.  According  to  latest  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  guidelines,
reserve management should seek to ensure that (1) adequate foreign exchange reserves are
available for meeting a defined range of objectives; (2) liquidity, market, credit, legal, settlement,
custodial, and operational risks are controlled in a prudent manner; and (3) subject to liquidity and
other risk constraints, reasonable risk-adjusted returns are generated over the medium to long
term on the funds invested. The broad objectives of reserve management in India runs on similar
lines. While liquidity and safety constitute the twin objectives of reserve management in India,
return optimisation is kept in view within this framework. It can be found even in the Preamble of
the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  Act  1934,  ‘to  use  the  currency  system  to  the  country’s
advantage  and  with  a  view  to  securing  monetary  stability’.  Here  monetary  stability  may  be
interpreted as internal as well as external stability, implying stable exchange rate as one of the
overall objectives of the reserve management policy. While internal stability implies that reserve
management cannot be isolated from domestic macroeconomic stability and economic growth,
the phrase ‘to use the currency system to the country’s advantage’ implies that maximum gains
for the country as a whole or the economy in general, could be derived in the process of reserve
7
management .
29.  The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act,  1934  provides  the  overarching  legal  framework  for
deployment  of  reserves  in  different  foreign  currency  assets  (FCA)  and  gold  within  the  broad
parameters of currencies, instruments, issuers and counterparties. The relevant provisions are
contained in Section 17 and 33 of the Act. The investment universe for FCA comprises deposits
with other central banks, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and overseas branches of
commercial banks, debt securities issued by sovereigns / sovereign – guaranteed with residual
maturity not exceeding 10 years and any other instruments or institutions as approved by the
Central  Board  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  Thus  the  parameters  and  boundaries  for  managing  the
credit risk and liquidity risk of the foreign exchange reserve assets have been delineated in the
law itself, that too long years before.
Payment System
30. A robust payment system is an essential element of financial inclusion. As per various recent
Global  Payments  Reports,  India  stands  among  the  select  few  countries  who  have  already
undertaken  about  50  per  cent  of  the  journey  towards  modernizing  and  digitizing  its  payment
infrastructure.
31.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  at  the  forefront  in  adoption  of  technology  and  modernising
payment systems. In adoption of certain technologies and safeguards we have been ahead of
many  countries  world-wide,  including  even  advanced  countries.  Two  Factor Authentication  for
the ‘card not present’ transaction, while making payments was the first of its kind in the world. In
the  same  vein,  introduction  of  National  Unified  Unstructured  Supplementary  Services  Data
(USSD)  platform  for  providing  an  interoperable  USSD  based  mobile  banking  system  is  an
important innovation in payment technologies as it links all telcos and all major banks. Similarly,
Unified  Payments  Interface  (UPI)  eliminates  the  need  of  adding  payee  details  such  as  bank
name, branch, IFSC code and full name of the recipient while making payments and requires
only to create a Virtual Payment Address (VPA) to send and receive payments. It leverages on
trends  such  as  increasing  smartphone  adoption  and  mobile-app  usage,  Indian  language
interfaces and increasing access to internet. These are further examples of adoption of frontier
technologies to improve the choice set of consumers and are significant step towards moving
into a cashless economy. Many other counties are showing interest in these technologies and
trying to emulate.
32.  Bharat  Bill  Payment  System  (BBPS)  seeks  to  integrate  bill  payments  for  various  utility
services  which  are  repetitive  in  nature  and  bring  interoperability  in  bill  payments  eco-system
bringing  both  banks  and  non-banks  under  its  fold.  It  will  provide  the  convenience  of  anytime,
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
anywhere, any bill payment facility to the users. Similarly, setting up of the Trade Receivables
Discounting System (TReDS) platform is another initiative which will facilitate the discounting of
both invoices as well as bills of exchange, is another example of adoption of modern payments
systems to bring about faster financing of MSMEs and improve their liquidity conditions.
33.  Payment  System  Vision  Document  2016–18  further  aims  at  ‘less-cash  society’  with
reduction  in  the  share  of  paper-based  clearing  instruments,  consistent  growth  in  individual
segments of retail electronic payment systems, viz., NEFT, IMPS, card transactions and mobile
banking,  increase  in  the  registered  customer  base  for  mobile  banking,  significant  growth  in
acceptance infrastructure and accelerated use of Aadhaar in payment systems.
Conclusion
34.  To  sum  up,  Reserve  Bank  has  been  pioneering  several  policies  which  have  now  been
termed as international best practices by the standard setting bodies. I have briefly talked about
some of these but this list is not exhaustive. Some of these policies when initiated by Reserve
Bank  were  termed  too  conservative  or  were  taken  as  over-regulation  by  the  central  bank.
However  the  far-sightedness  of  our  policy  makers  ensured  that  Reserve  Bank  followed  the
prudent path howsoever less trodden.
35. With these observations, I conclude my talk.
36. Thank you very much for your patient attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
SLR rate = (liquid assets / (demand + time liabilities)) × 100%.
LCR rate = Stock of high quality liquid assets/ Total net cash outflow over the next 30 calendar days.
LAF = Liquidity Adjustment Facility; MSF = Marginal Standing Facility.
In exercise of powers conferred by Section 21 & 35A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949
The Consultative Group to Assist the Poor.
Emerging Market Developing Economies.
IMF (2005)
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
