 Keynote Speech  
International Workshop on Credit Reporting System 
“Strengthening CRS in Indonesia:  
Role, Challenge, & Future Development”  
 Bismillahirrahmanirrahim, 
Distinguished Speakers, 
a)  Mr.  Yudi  Permana,  Head  of  Licensing  and  Banking  Information 
Department, Otoritas Jasa Keuangan; 
b) Ms.  Fredesvinda  Fatima  Montes,  Senior  Financial  Specialist;  World  Bank 
Group; 
c)  Mr.  Humberto  Panuco  Laguette,  Senior  Economist  in  Directorate  of 
Financial System Analysis, Banco de Mexico; 
d) Ms.  Megan  Cox, Bureau  of  Consumer  Protection,  Federal  Trade 
Commission, USA; 
e)  Ms. Teh Sew Mei, Deputy Registrar in Registrar Office of Credit Reporting 
Agencies, Ministry of Finance, Malaysia. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Assalamualaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh, 
Very good morning to all of you, 
1.  Allow  me  to begin by  thanking  Allah SWT  who  has  blessed  us  with  the 
opportunity  to  rare  but  beneficial  event.  I  would  like  to  express  my 
sincere gratitude towards our distinguished speakers who have travelled 
a long way to be with us today.  On behalf of Bank Indonesia, I would 
like  also  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  appreciation  to  World 
Bank for arranging the speakers to join this event. 
 1 
 Ladies and gentlemen, < Overview of Credit Reporting System > 
2.  We  have  witnessed  the  transformation  of  credit  reporting  system  in 
Indonesia.  Since  1969,  Bank  Indonesia  has  been  collecting  information 
from  regulated  entities  and  managing  the  credit  reporting  system.  In 
June  2006,  Bank  Indonesia  has  launched  Debtor  Information  System 
(SID)  that  gather  positive  and  negative  information  on  both  individual 
and  business,  provided  by  banks  and  other  creditors.  With  the 
establishment of the SID, the growth of Non-Performing Loan (NPL) can 
be prevented and financial system stability can be maintained.  
3.  Between  2010-2016,  Indonesia  has  made  structural  reform  including 
simplified  rules  and  regulations  to  support  Ease  of  Doing  Business.  In 
2010,  BI  has  developed  basic  report  which  contains  historical  credit 
information  for  the  last  24  (twenty  four)  months,  called  Historical 
Information 
Individual  Debtor 
(Informasi  Debitur 
Individual 
Historis/IDIH).  
4. 
In 2013, Bank Indonesia enacted BI Regulation concerning Credit Bureau 
(LPIP) that covers certain aspects of credit bureau operations, especially 
on  the  LPIP  licensing  and  the  transfer  of  SID  data  to  licensed  credit 
bureaus (LPIPs). With this regulation, Indonesian management of credit 
reporting  system  is  transforming,  from  single  credit  reporting  to  dual 
credit  reporting,  that  synergize  Public  Credit  Registry  operated  by  BI, 
with Private Credit Bureaus. 
5. 
Indonesia EoDB’s indicator of improvement reflected by rating upgrades, 
which is in 2011 Indonesia rating was 126 then in 2016 upgrade to 109. 
The  rating  upgrades  supported  by  Getting  Credit  aspect  –  Depth  of 
Information Index rating which is in 2011 Indonesia rating was 116 and 
in 2016 upgrades to 70.  
 2 
 6.  Based  on  OJK  Law,  since  December  2013,  the  authority  of  Credit 
Reporting System has been transferred from Bank Indonesia to Otoritas 
Jasa  Keuangan.  Both  Bank  Indonesia  and  Otoritas  Jasa  Keuangan 
realized  that  the  transfer  process  wouldn’t  be  easy  and  need 
preparations.  Bank  Indonesia  and  Otoritas  Jasa  Keuangan  were  agreed 
to  collaborate  and  to  share  the  responsibilities  during  certain  time  of 
transition period.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, <The Background of the Workshop>  
7.  The  Workshop on Credit Reporting  System (CRS) is held in cooperation 
between  Bank  Indonesia,  the  Indonesia  Financial  Services  Authority 
(OJK),  and  the  World  Bank  under  the  framework  of  the  Financial 
Inclusion  Support  Framework  Program  (FISF);  a  multiyear  program  to 
support Indonesia in enhancing financial inclusion, start from 2015.  
8. 
In  this  opportunity,  please  allow  me  to  reveals  the  conditions  we  face 
today  as  the  basis  and  background  of  why  we  need  to  support  FISF 
program.  
9.  Based  on  Doing  Business  survey  in  2015,  World  Bank,  with  assumption 
that data in credit registry reflects  number of adult that have  access to 
finance,  then  number of  adult in  Indonesia  that  have  access  to  finance 
only  68%  from  total  adult  population  or  82,2  billion  from  120,8  billion 
people.  A  similar  situation  faced  by  the  SME  sector  which  is  based  on 
data  from  the  Ministry  of  Cooperatives  and  SMEs  in  2013  amounted  to 
more than 57.8 million units. From that number, only 10 million units or 
around 17% of them are able to access to finance.  
 3 
 10.  In general, financial institutions in Indonesia had asymmetric information 
and  had  struggled  to  identify  potential  credit  risk  and  creditworthiness 
for  both  the  individual  and  the  MSME  sector.  As  the  result,  the  credit 
interest rate charged to them tends to be high because of the high risk 
premium. 
11.  One  component of the FISF program is Credit Reporting System (CRS). 
With  the  CRS,  it  is  expected  that  the  classic  problem  of  asymmetric 
information that has become the critical issue in the provision of funds, 
can be solved. With the CRS, the financial institutions are able to know 
and analyze the profile of prospective debtors, can assess possible risks, 
can streamline the cost, can lower NPL and create sound credit culture. 
In  the  end,  it  will  support  the  financial  inclusion,  and  support  the 
ultimate  goal  of  macro  economy,  namely  financial  sector  stability  and 
economic growth. 
 Ladies and gentlemen < The Purpose of the Workshop > 
12.  In September 2013, World Bank issued  The General Principles of Credit 
Reporting (GPCR). The GPCR intends to provide an international agreed 
framework  in  the  form  of  international  standards  for  credit  reporting 
systems’  policy  and  oversight.  These  Principles  suggest  the  key 
characteristics  that  should  be  satisfied  in  order  to  ensure  that  credit 
reporting systems are safe, efficient and reliable. 
13.  As  part  of  FISF  Indonesia  program,  an  assessment  against  the 
implementation  of  General  Principles  of  Credit  Reporting  (GPCR)  in 
Indonesia  was  conducted  in  2015,  involving  associations,  financial 
institutions, public utilities institutions, and the relevant authorities.  The 
 4 
 assessment  found  that  there  are  some  critical  issues  that  need  to  be 
addressed  by  Indonesian  authorities,  which  includes  legal  gaps, 
oversight function and consumer protection aspects. 
14.  This  workshop  is  expected  to  provide  knowledge  about  the  current 
condition,  the  development,  and  challenges  of  the  implementation  of 
CRS  in  Indonesia  while  learning  from  the  experience  of  other  relevant 
countries.  Such  knowledge  will  provide  input  to  the  authorities  in 
defining  implementable  actions  on  the  management  of  CRS  in line  with 
the GPCR. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
15.  Before closing my speech, I would like to give thanks to  the committee 
which  have  thoroughly  initiated  and  prepared  such  a  great  event.          
I  would  also  like  to  thank  all  the  speakers  and  partcipants  for  the 
willingness and enthusiasm to participate in this event.  
16.   With that final note, I hope this event provides us with an understanding 
of the role and contribution that we can give in order to  implement the 
GPCR,  particularly  with  regards  to  the  Indonesian  context.  I  strongly 
believe  it  will  be  beneficial  for  the  industry  and  related  authorities. 
Henceforth, I would like to invite all of us here to share thoughts in what 
I hope would be a spirited discussions filled with fruitful conclusions. May 
Allah bless and lighten our steps forward. Thank you. 
  Erwin Rijanto 
Deputy Governor 
5 
