Stephen S Poloz: Engaging Canadians – a #bankNOTEable process
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the Canadian Museum of
History, Gatineau, Quebec, 8 December 2016.
 Distinguished guests, welcome.
Welcome everyone.
What a great day. A historic day.
I would like to give a warm thanks to the young people who came this morning to take part in this
event.
I am very proud to be here with the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Status of Women to
announce who will be the Canadian woman who will appear on one of our bank notes.
The Bank of Canada is responsible for the design, production and distribution of Canadian bank
notes. And on bank notes, we can celebrate the diversity of Canada’s culture and society.
As Governor of the Bank, and along with Carolyn Wilkins, our Senior Deputy Governor, I have
long believed that it was time for a woman, in addition to Her Majesty, to be on one of Canada’s
bank notes. And we also heard from Canadians who told us that it was long overdue. So I was
very pleased when the Minister asked the Bank to move forward in our search to find the iconic
woman for our bank notes.
We started by asking Canadians.
And let me tell you. They told us. The response was amazing. Within two days we received more
than 10,000 nominations.
It became clear that this search for an iconic woman was engaging Canadians in a very personal
way.
Some people looked within their own profession: Engineers googled women engineers. Some of
my economist colleagues searched for economists, computer scientists and statisticians. Some
people  looked  at  their  alma  maters—notable  women  of  Queens,  or  Mount  Allison  or  the
University  of  British  Columbia.  Other  people  looked  geographically,  finding  women  who
represented their part of the country. Teachers used the nomination process as a way to teach
children about Canada’s history. School kids told us who they thought should be on the money.
With  every  mouse  click  or  turn  of  a  book’s  page,  with  every  kitchen  table  discussion  or
classroom debate, Canadians learned more about the women who built Canada.
We received more than 26,300 submissions, resulting in 461 eligible candidates.
Then we turned it over to an independent Advisory Council. This Advisory Council, made up of
eminent Canadian academic, sport, cultural and thought leaders, carefully went through all the
nominations.  After  much  research  and  deliberation,  they  narrowed  down  the  list  of  eligible
Canadian women from 461 to 12.
What a task they had! Several of the members are here today, so please let me thank you for all
your hard work. Your role in this process has been critical.
With that list of 12, we consulted Canadians again. We then gave the Advisory Council another
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
difficult task, whittling down the list to 5 extraordinary Canadian women.
I was very proud of the list of finalists that we provided to the Minister. It was the result of a very
extensive process of consultation. We engaged Canadians and we listened to them. I know that
this new bank note will inspire us all, but especially young Canadians. They will be sure that the
contributions of Canadian women and men are recognized and valued.
And now let me turn it over to the Minister.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
