Philip  R  Lane:  Ireland's  banking  sector  -  overview,  developments
and challenges
Introductory statement by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, before the
Joint Oireachtas (National Parliament) Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform,
and Taoiseach (Head of Parliament), Dublin, 20 December 2016.
Chairman, Committee members,
 Thank you for the opportunity to update you on conditions in the Irish banking sector. I will first
provide a brief overview of developments in the banking system. I will then discuss some specific
challenges  for  banks  operating  in  Ireland  and  the  structure  of  the  Irish  banking  system.
Thereafter, I will outline current ECB thinking on the European banking system and supervisory
priorities.  I  will  conclude  by  turning  to  some  of  the  other  issues  that  you  have  invited  me  to
discuss.
Overview of Banking System
The  Irish  banking  sector  can  be  partitioned  between  domestically-focused  banks  and
internationally-focused  banks.  The  domestic  sector  continues  the  process  of  repair  and
recovery.  Sustained  progress  has  been  made.    Banks  operating  in  Ireland  are  much  better
capitalised  and  have  more  stable  funding  models,  but  there  remains  more  to  do.  The
international  banking  sector  is  also  continuing  to  evolve.    Having  shrunk  materially  in  the
aftermath of the crisis, it is starting to expand again and this trend may be reinforced by Brexit. 
The aggregate total assets of the domestically-focused banks stood at €274 billion in Q3 2016,
down 7 percent on the previous year. This contraction reflects the fact that asset disposals and
loan redemptions more than offset increases in new lending.
The  decline  in  balance  sheet  size  has  reduced  reliance  on  market-based  funding,  which  has
significantly  contributed  to  the  increased  resilience  of  the  banks  to  liquidity  shocks.  The  low
interest rate environment has also helped reduce funding costs, but together with shrinking loan
books, has a negative overall effect on net interest income. While sovereign bond market yields
remain compressed at present, the senior unsecured debt issued by Irish banks continues to be
more expensive compared with euro area and European peers.  This is important in the context
of the requirement under the new resolution framework for banks to raise debt that can be ‘bailed
in’ (i.e. converted to equity) in the event of failure.
At present, the capital instruments of Irish banks are in the top quartile of peer group EU banks in
terms of market yield, indicating higher relative risk. In this context, although Irish retail banks
continued to generate profits through the first half of 2016, profits were 6 percent lower than in
the same period in 2015, reflecting the challenging operating environment.
We are starting to see some signs of increased competition and a strong desire from the banks
to start to grow their loan books once more, both in Ireland and in the UK.  This is welcome,
provided lending is prudent, and provides evidence of the continuing return towards normalisation
of the domestic banking sector.
Non-Performing Loans (NPLs)
Irish  banks  continue  to  work  out  non-performing  loans  and  much  progress  has  been  made. 
Indeed,  Irish  banks  are  somewhat  ahead  of  European  banks  in  addressing  these  issues.  In
absolute terms, NPLs have declined by just over €48.5bn or 57 percent since their peak in 2013,
now representing 17.3 percent of all loans. Although decreasing – due in large part to a range of
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
intensive supervisory actions, progress within institutions, as well as the improving economy –
the outstanding numbers remain high both in absolute and relative terms. Retail mortgages are
the largest component of total NPLs, accounting for 57 percent, and are falling more slowly than
other  categories,  despite  the  clear  momentum  in  their  reduction.    SME/Corporate  loans
represent 17 percent of NPLs, Commercial Real Estate (CRE) loans amount to 22 percent, and
consumer loans account for approximately 3 percent of total NPLs.
Financial Strength
In terms of the ability of the banks to absorb shocks or unexpected losses, all of the retail banks
exceed  the  regulatory  capital  minima. As  banks  move  towards  new  (‘fully-loaded’)  regulatory
capital requirements, capital ratios on this basis are 15.2 percent on average. The recent EU-
wide  stress  test  included  two  of  the  domestic  retail  banks  (AIB  and  BOI),  and  illustrated  that
these  banks  would  have  enough  capital  over  three  years  to  withstand  the  adverse  economic
scenario. However, their key capital ratios would have declined to 7.4 and 7.7 percent under this
adverse  scenario.  The  main  driver  of  this  outcome  was  a  projected  increase  in  credit
impairments, consistent with recent loss history in Ireland. It is noteworthy that the stress testing
assumptions and method were particularly challenging for those banks and countries that had
suffered the most significant losses during the crisis and were most reliant on interest income.
Nonetheless it is a timely reminder that much remains to be done to improve the resilience of the
domestically focused banks operating in Ireland. Financial strength will remain a focus for the
Central Bank together with the ECB in our ongoing engagement with the banks.
Main Challenges
 Although  the  domestically-active  banks  in  Ireland  have  continued  to  recover,  significant  risks
remain on the horizon.  All have relatively concentrated business models, focused primarily on
Ireland  and  to  some  extent  the  UK.    This  makes  them  especially  vulnerable  to  any  shocks
affecting the Irish economy.
Legacy issues also remain material.  This is particularly evident with regard to NPLs, but also in
the need for significant investment in IT and data infrastructure, where investment has not been
sufficient in recent years. 
The long-term sustainability of the business models of the banks, and therefore their ability to
intermediate  effectively,  depends  on  their  ability  to  generate  sufficient  net  income  to  meet
regulatory obligations and support intermediation. To date, there has been a mixed performance: 
some banks are still contracting, while others are growing slowly in certain areas like consumer
lending or fixed-rate mortgages. This is reflected in recurring pre-provision net revenue remaining
unsustainably low for some banks. This is driven, in part, by institution-specific challenges; part
is  also  due  to  aggregate  trends  as  their  main  customers  –  households  and  firms  –  are  in
aggregate  continuing  to  pay  down  debt,  which  should  be  welcomed  from  a  financial  stability
perspective.
In keeping with our supervisory priorities, it remains critical that banks manage risks prudently,
price  credit  risk  sustainably,  and  remuneration  and  incentive  structures  are  appropriately
governed to support a resilient business model going forward.
As I noted earlier, mortgage NPLs constitute the largest share of system-wide NPLs. Since the
onset of the crisis, many mortgage holders have had difficulty in repaying their mortgages. While
the situation is improving, its resolution is critical, for individual borrowers in distress, banks, and
the  system  as  a  whole.  The  Central  Bank  has  worked  hard  to  ensure  that  the  appropriate
protections are in place for these borrowers who are in difficulty, and ensure that the banks have
the financial and operational capacity to resolve the problems.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  terms  of  the  progress,  we  published  a  report  last  week  which  gives  an  overview  of  recent
developments and the wider issues involved.  The latest data show there were 738,506 primary
dwelling house (PDH) mortgage accounts in Ireland.   Of these, 56,350 are in greater than 90
days  past  due;  and  of  these  in  turn,  34,551  are  greater  than  two  years  past  due.  Mortgage
arrears  have  now  fallen  for  13  successive  quarters  and  by  44  percent  from  peak,  with  over
121,000 mortgage accounts restructured, and 88 percent meeting the terms of their restructured
arrangement.
1
2
As  discussed  at  this  Committee  two  weeks  ago,  the  scale  of  mortgage  distress  means  that
mortgage lending is inherently riskier in Ireland than other euro area member states. Aside from
default, due to the economic and social policy choices that have been made, the ability to effect
loan security is more challenging, and loss given default in Ireland is higher than in many other
Eurozone countries.  Longer recovery times are also associated with lower availability of credit,
3
and higher interest rates.
The other significant challenge for the domestic banking sector is Brexit. As the Central Bank is
also tasked with assessing the long term resilience of the financial system, we see this as a key
risk in 2017. The implications of Brexit for the configuration of the Irish and European financial
system depends on the agreement that will be reached. Should the UK-EU negotiations result in
an agreement that retains the single passport for UK-resident entities selling into the EU, the net
impact  of  Brexit  on  the  structure  of  the  European  financial  system  may  be  limited.    In  other
less  favourable  scenarios  in  which  UK  firms  do  not  retain  passporting  rights,  it  is  likely  that
significant  migration  of  financial  activity  from  the  UK  to  the  EU  will  occur.    Depending  on  the
outcome, the UK’s exit from the EU could have long-term structural consequences for those Irish
banks with a significant presence there. This will become clearer during the next two years, as
the elements of the EU-UK relationship take shape. We will keep this and other risks continually
under  review  and,  where  relevant,  take  the  necessary  risk-mitigating  actions  in  line  with  our
mandate.
Banking Union
 The  advent  of  ‘Banking  Union’  and  the  establishment  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism
(SSM)  in  2014  materially  changed  the  supervisory  landscape.    The  ECB  took  over  ultimate
responsibility for the supervision of all banks across the Eurozone and direct supervision of the
largest 120 or so banks, including the five domestically active banks in Ireland (the ‘Significant
Institutions’).
Whilst  still  in  its  early  years,  ECB  Banking  Supervision  is  a  critical  institutional  step  towards
deeper integration in the euro area. As is evident from the presence of international banks here,
banking does not stop at national borders and therefore a harmonised supervisory approach is
necessary  to  reduce  financial  fragmentation  and  ensure  a  level  playing  field  across  the  euro
area.
The Central Bank is part of the SSM, both in terms of the day-to-day work and the Bank having a
seat  at  the  ECB  Supervisory  Board,  which  is  responsible  for  supervision.  My  colleague  here
today,  Ed  Sibley,  attends  the  Supervisory  Board  with  our  Deputy  Governor  for  Financial
Regulation, Cyril Roux. Staff in the Bank are committed and strive to be influential at every level
to ensure the right supervisory outcomes are delivered for all euro area banks, and particularly
those operating in Ireland.  Staff engage in direct supervision via Joint Supervision Teams (JSTs)
and in inspection teams composed of staff from the Central Bank of Ireland, based in Dublin, and
ECB staff, based in Frankfurt. We also contribute to analytical work on risk assessments and
policy development. Under the new supervisory architecture, regardless of the jurisdiction, banks
operate  under  the  same  methodology,  processes,  standards  and  quality  assurance  that  are
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
applied.
Both  since  the  crisis,  and  since  the  establishment  of  the  SSM  in  November  2014,  we  have
conducted  35  inspections  of  Irish  banks  supervised  by  the  SSM.  These  inspections  last  on
average 13 weeks. This intensive action, on-going supervision, and supervisory priorities reflect
the risks I have already mentioned: NPLs, business model sustainability, and the quality of risk
management in an uncertain world. These are also the key areas for the ECB and euro area
4
banks more broadly as we move into 2017.
In terms of specifics, the ECB is undertaking a thematic review regarding the sustainability of
bank business models.   Following the publication of the ‘ECB Guidance to Banks on NPLs’, the
ECB will – via its taskforce on NPLs – continue its review of institutions with high levels of NPLs
and initiate actions for Joint Supervision Teams to follow-up.  It is noteworthy that the Central
Bank  of  Ireland  has  been  leading  this  work,  which  reflects  the  high  level  of  expertise  and
capability we have in the Central Bank in dealing with NPLs.
Throughout  ECB  Banking  Supervision,  there  is  a  focus  on  several  aspects  of  banks’  risk
management. Various strands of work include assessments of the ability of banks to aggregate
and measure their risks effectively, calculate risk weights prudently, and continue to improve on
their own internal processes for capital, liquidity, and associated risks.  
Turning to the second pillar of Banking Union, the Single Resolution Mechanism is now also up
and running. The 2016 resolution plans for the Irish Significant Institutions have been completed
and endorsed by the Single Resolution Board (SRB) in Brussels. The third pillar – the European
Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  (EDIS)  –  is  less  advanced,  with  the  proposals  published  by  the
Commission in November 2015 still under discussion at the EU level.
Current Issues
 Compared with the pre-crisis situation, the domestic banking sector is now slimmed down. This
has also resulted in a more concentrated banking sector, notwithstanding the decline in lending
volumes since the start of the crisis.
Three of the five retail banks are majority state-owned (Irish and UK), with the State an important
minority shareholder in a fourth. This is atypical compared to most other euro area members.
The  banking  system  and  more  specifically  the  mortgage  market  have  seen  a  material
improvement  over  recent  years.  Within  our  mandate,  the  Central  Bank  remains  focused  and
committed  to  putting  in  place  measures  to  address  the  fundamental  causes  of  the  ongoing
issues.
As  I  have  noted  earlier,  once  risks  have  been  identified,  the  JSTs  both  require  firms  to  take
corrective actions and take supervisory measures to mitigate risks and enhance resilience. In
addition to these micro-supervisory actions, systemic risks can be addressed through macro-
prudential  measures  taken  by  the  Central  Bank.  Examples  of  the  former  are  the  range  of
supervisory actions taken on mortgages that I have referred to earlier; examples of the latter are
the borrower-based mortgage measures enacted in 2015, and recently reviewed in November
2016.
The  mortgage  measures  have  helped  to  ensure  that  those  who  buy  homes  now  are  better
prepared to manage their mortgage payments in the event of a future downturn in the economy.
Following the review, the framework is broadly unchanged, with some limited refinements. The
3.5  times  ceiling  on  the  loan  to  income  (LTI)  ratio  remains  the  anchor  of  the  framework.
Requirements  for  buy-to-let  borrowers  and  the  exemptions  for  negative  equity  mortgage
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
borrowers from the measures also remain unchanged.
Mortgage arrears and how the market is currently functioning are consequences of the crisis,
and while a significant part of our work is focused on this, the Bank is also mitigating emerging
risks and enhancing resilience. One example is identifying weaknesses in new lending practices
in some of the retail banks.  Among these weaknesses found during recent supervisory activity
were:
a  need  for  better  oversight  and  challenge  from  boards  in  relation  to  the  risk  appetites  of
banks,  which  are  used  to  govern  and  quantify  lending  decisions  across  sectors  and
borrower types;
strategies  focused  on  driving  increased  volumes  without  sufficient  consideration  of  risk
associated with long-term lending; and 
the use of league tables to incentivize staff to drive lending volume without consideration of
quality.
While  these  weaknesses  are  concerns,  they  have  been  identified  and  banks  are  required  to
implement  remediation  measures.    I  would  note  that  the  banks  are  more  resilient  and  the
supervisory  regime  much  more  robust  compared  with  the  pre-2008  period.  Nonetheless,  the
Central Bank needs to maintain its vigilance.
In  line  with  our  risk-based  approach  to  supervision,  our  engagement  with  lenders  has  been
intrusive  in  relation  to  the  treatment  of  tracker  mortgage  borrowers.    Since  2010,  we  have
identified  and  pursued  a  number  of  lender-specific  issues  in  relation  to  transparency  for
borrowers who opted to switch from their tracker rates or who had the right to revert to a tracker
rate  at  the  end  of  a  fixed  rate  period.    This  has  resulted  in  the  use  of  supervisory  powers,
including the Administrative Sanctions Procedure, redress and compensation schemes for those
borrowers who suffered detriment or loss.
The fair treatment of tracker mortgage borrowers has been a key supervisory and policy focus
for the Central Bank and our consumer protection framework requires all lenders to act in the
best interests of consumers and, in particular, requires lenders to disclose material information
to consumers to enable them to make informed decisions.
Put frankly, there are far too many cases where it turns out there was a misapplication. This is
absolutely  unacceptable,  and  it  is  the  reason  why  we  decided  that  a  broader  examination  of
tracker-related  issues  was  warranted  and  why  we  are  ensuring  such  a  comprehensive
examination is being undertaken. Let me assure you, the Central Bank will take all necessary
action  to  hold  regulated  firms  and  individuals  to  account  for  failures  in  relation  to  tracker
mortgages. The process we are overseeing is exhaustive but takes time.
In conclusion, while the banking sector has undergone considerable restructuring since the onset
of the crisis and has benefited from the wider economic recovery, managing the legacy effects of
the  crisis  continues  to  be  a  major  priority  for  the  Central  Bank,  cutting  across  our  financial
stability, supervisory and consumer protection mandates.  In addition, the major domestic banks
now operate under the common supervisory regime led by the ECB and must comply with the
SSM’s  regulatory  standards,  together  with  the  resolution  planning  policies  of  the  Single
Resolution Board.  The further development of European Banking Union has great potential to
deliver a fundamentally more stable banking system over the medium term.
Thank you.
1
2
Report 
research/report-mortgage-arrears-2016
available 
at www.finance.gov.ie/what-we-do/banking-financial-services/publications/reports-
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
3
4
"Residential  Mortgage  Arrears  and  Repossessions  Statistics:  Q3  2016"  available  at
See 
www.centralbank.ie/polstats/stats/mortgagearrears/Documents/2016q3_ie_mortgage_arrears_statistics.pdf
See  for  example  the  Central  Bank  Research  Technical  Paper  ‘The  distribution  of  debt  across  Euro Area
countries:  The 
individual  characteristics, 
institutions  and  credit  conditions’  available  at
www.centralbank.ie/publications/Documents/04RT14.pdf
role  of 
www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/ecb/pub/pdf/publication_supervisory_priorities_2017.en.pdf
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
