Peter Praet: The future of global financial integration
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  Global  Research  Forum  on  International  Macroeconomics  and  Finance,  Federal  Reserve
Bank of New York, New York City, 17 November 2016.
 I would like to thank Arnaud Mehl for his contributions to this speech.
I. Backlash against financial globalization since the global economic and financial crisis
Financial  globalization  was  a  salient  phenomenon  of  the  past  three  decades,  but  since  the
financial crisis of 2007–2009 there are increasing signs of a backlash against globalization.
The evidence for such a trend reversal is mixed.
Quantity-based measures of global financial integration, such as gross external assets relative to
world output, have flattened out, and would merely point to a pause.
levels 
1
Flow measures provide a gloomier picture: international capital flows are now down to half their
pre-crisis 
to  world  output,  and  are  especially  weak  among  mature
economies.   Internationally  active  banks  have  increased  domestic  lending  faster  than  foreign
lending.   Several  emerging  markets  have  erected  barriers  to  global  finance  and  introduced
controls against capital inflows and, more recently, outflows.
relative 
2
Price-based  measures  of  global  financial  integration,  meanwhile,  present  a  different  picture:
international equity market co-movements, for example, remain strong. By some estimates, they
remain as high as ever in more than a century.
It is not just the extent of financial globalization, which might have changed since the financial
crisis, though. Its perceived benefits and costs in academic and policy debates have changed,
too.  Before  the  crisis  several  studies  already  called  for  a  “reappraisal”  of  the  net  benefits  of
financial globalization.  This has taken place along two main dimensions: (i) re-assessing the
stability of capital flows, and (ii) re-examining whether financial integration leads to a productive
allocation of savings and to agglomeration effects in certain geographic areas.
3
As regards the first dimension, the notion that financial integration which is based on long-term
instead of short-term capital flows is more resilient has become increasingly persuasive. For the
second,  it  has  been  recognised  that  financial  integration  typically  only  delivers  lasting  positive
effects  on  growth  if  countries  meet  certain  thresholds  of  institutional  development.   In  the
absence  of  sufficient  institutional  development,  capital  flows  would  most  likely  be  used
unproductively,  feeding  unsustainable  lending  booms  and  encouraging  excessive  short-term
capital inflows.  This can in turn leave countries vulnerable to sudden stops once optimism fades
due to local or global shocks.
4
5
Indeed  financial  cycles  tend  to  have  a  global  component,  and  hence  the  discussion  about
financial globalisation has evolved into one about the “global financial cycle”, which is driven by
US  monetary  policy.  The  assumption  is  that  non-US  central  banks  have  lost  their  ability  to
influence domestic long-term interest rates, even in the presence of flexible exchange rates, due
to the existence of “US-driven” global financial cycles.  As a result, the classic trilemma  may
have  morphed  into  a  dilemma  between  financial  openness  and  monetary  policy  autonomy.  In
addition to risks related to unsustainable lending booms, which can be fueled by capital flows,
policy  makers  and  academics  recently  also  stressed  risks  stemming  from  disruptive  capital
outflows, which can endanger financial stability, for example if large amounts of bank deposits
6
7
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
are pulled out of a country.
In the context of this debate on financial integration, academic papers on the welfare optimality of
taxation of international capital flows have also thrived since the crisis.  Moreover, the standard
international  policy  consensus  on  financial  globalization  has  been  shattered  by  the  crisis.  For
example, the IMF adopted in 2012 an institutional view that said temporary and targeted capital
flow  management  measures  can  be  useful  in  certain  circumstances,  i.e.  when  the  room  for
manoeuvre  for  macroeconomic  adjustment  is  limited.   The  Fund  is  now  reviewing  this
institutional  view.  It  is  expected  that  the  effectiveness  of  capital  flow  management  measures,
which have been recently used in emerging and some advanced economies, will be assessed in
a balanced way, taking into account all intended and unintended effects, which such measures
may generate.
8
9
In  parallel,  the  OECD  is  reviewing  its  code  of  liberalization  of  capital  movements.  With  the
review,  the  OECD  aims  to  facilitate  collective  action  by  boosting  transparency  and  shared
understandings on good practices related to managing and liberalising capital flows. A particular
area  of  interest  is  the  treatment  of  capital  flow  measures  that  are  used  as  macro-prudential
measures. For policy makers, this is important since at times there may be tradeoffs between
financial integration and financial stability.
II. Effective financial risk sharing rests on the soundness of institutions and policy rules
As part of this policy discussion, I would like to underline that openness to international capital
flows should continue to help diversify country-specific shocks. This would help to smooth cross-
border consumption between good and bad states of the world through international borrowing
and  lending. Admittedly,  the  economic  magnitude  of  gains  from  financial  risk  sharing  remains
 In monetary unions, financial risk sharing remains an essential channel for leveling
debatable.
out the effect of asymmetric shocks across regions.
 Risk-sharing traditionally works through
two  main  channels:  cross-border  lending  to  households  and  companies;  and  cross-border
holdings of productive and financial assets.
10
11
In  a  monetary  union  like  the  euro  area,  which  has  no  central  fiscal  authority,  both  channels
should  have  contributed  to  containing  the  fallouts  from  economic  shocks  in  member  states.
What we have experienced is the opposite: financial flows amplified the crisis when some euro
area countries faced a sudden stop. This followed years of increasing cross-border lending and
borrowing and excessive risk-taking, mainly through bank-based financial intermediation. When
panic  led  to  an  abrupt  reversal  of  financial  flows  and  fragmentation  of  the  euro  area  banking
system, the central bank had to take over the role of the interbank market in providing liquidity to
banks in stressed countries.
The  Great  Moderation  masked  the  fault  lines  in  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union’s  financial
architecture. The Great Recession revealed all the cracks, including the pernicious link between
euro  area  banks  and  sovereigns.  The  sovereign  debt  crisis  resulted  in  capital  controls  in  two
euro area countries, leading to a temporary reversal of financial integration in Europe.
This  proves  that  expected  benefits  of  risk  sharing  can  turn  sour ex  post,  for  example  if  the
composition of flows is too risky and too vulnerable to abrupt changes in international investor
sentiment.  The  key  policy-relevant  question  is,  which  institutions  and  rules  are  necessary  for
financial risk sharing to achieve all the benefits it has in theory?
Financial risk-sharing benefits and, more broadly, financial integration are deeply rooted in the
soundness of institutions and policy rules. This is in line with the already mentioned empirical
findings on the lasting growth effects of capital flows, which depend on institutional thresholds.
Sound institutions and policy rules are necessary to guarantee clear definitions of property rights
and  procedures  in  case  of  financial  stress,  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  domestic  financial
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
system through regulation, supervision and resolution frameworks, to mitigate the cost of cross-
border  and  cross-currency  transactions,  and  to  create  a  level  playing  field  for  financial  tax
regimes.  In  addition,  the  benefits  from  financial  integration  will  only  materialise  if  underlying
economic stability prevails.
The institutions and policy rules in question vary in their extent and reach, depending on whether
one considers the national level, the euro area level or the global level. At the national level, for
instance,  the  existence  of  a  national  currency  guarantees  that  there  is  no  exchange  rate  risk
hampering  capital  flowing  from  one  region  to  another;  tax  rules  are  usually  applied  uniformly
across  a  nation,  which  prevents  arbitrage;  and  the  regimes  for  regulation,  supervision  and
resolution are identical, at least for specific parts of the financial sector, such as banks, which
strengthens depositors’ confidence.
At the global level, financial stability arrangements naturally differ across countries. There has
been significant progress in aligning global frameworks for regulation, supervision and resolution,
but more still needs to be achieved. There is no global jurisdiction for cross-border and cross-
currency  transactions  across  countries  and  tax  regimes  differ  widely  from  one  country  to
another, offshore financial centers and non-cooperative jurisdictions being extreme cases. Last
but not least, underlying economic conditions and policies widely differ across countries, which
affect incentives for cross-border capital flows and for financial integration to deepen or weaken.
And at the euro area level, financial stability arrangements before the crisis were not in line with
the requirements of monetary union. While Member States shared a single currency, there was
no single framework for supervision and resolution. There was also a general lack of awareness
of  the  risks  that  such  a  fragmented  institutional  framework  could  pose  for  area-wide  financial
stability.  This  led  to  a  general  misperception  of  financial  risk,  and  short-term,  uni-directional
financial flows.
III. Strengthening the necessary institutions and policy rules is essential for the euro
area to reap the full benefits of financial integration
The financial crisis of 2007–2009 and the sovereign debt crisis of 2011 were wake-up calls for
our  continent.  They  exposed  the  incompleteness  of  our  monetary  union,  the  fragility  of  our
financial integration, and the limited scope for action of institutions other than the ECB.
In  short,  they  strongly  underscored  the  need  to  move  to  a  genuine  Economic  and  Monetary
Union. Euro area leaders have since launched the Banking Union, to be complemented over time
with the Capital Markets Union, to deepen financial integration within the euro area. The Banking
Union will help strengthen cross-border lending to households and companies within the euro
area. The Capital Markets Union aims to strengthen integration of capital markets within the area.
This, in turn, will help strengthen cross-border holdings of productive and financial assets. The
Banking Union and the Capital Markets Union involve the creation of new institutions and policy
rules, which will help the euro area to reap the full benefits from financial risk-sharing.
Some of the key ingredients of the Banking Union are already in place: the Single Supervisory
Mechanism  was  created  in  2014,  the  same  year  as  the  Directive  on  Deposit  Guarantee
schemes was adopted, which harmonises the level of deposit protection and payout periods in
the European Union. A Single Resolution Mechanism has been operational since 1 January 2016.
It implements the EU-wide Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive in the euro area.
Banking Union, however, remains work in progress. Further steps are under discussion, such as
a  fiscal  backstop  for  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  and  the  creation  of  a  European  Deposit
Insurance Scheme. These aspects will no doubt remain high on the European policy agenda,
because  our  continent  needs  to  strengthen  the  integration  of  its  banking  and  capital  markets
substantially in the absence of alternative risk-sharing mechanisms, at least for the time being.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
To sum up, sound economic policies as well as policy rules and institutions that are necessary
to oversee their implementation at a European level, remain a prerequisite for financial integration
to support financial stability. They benefit not only to the euro area, but to the global economy at
large.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
See  Matthieu  Bussière,  Julia  Schmidt  and  Natacha  Valla  (2016),  “International  Financial  Flows  in  the  New
Normal: Key Patterns (and Why We Should Care),” CEPII Policy Brief, 2016-10, CEPII research centre.
See Caroline Van Rijckeghem and Beatrice Weder di Mauro (2014), “Deglobalization of Banking: The World is
Getting Smaller,” CEPR Discussion Papers, 10139.
For instance, it was argued that a critical reading of the empirical literature lent some “qualified support to the
view that developing countries can benefit from financial globalization, but with “many nuances”; see Ayhan
Kose, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth S. Rogoff and Shang-Jin Wei (2006), “Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal“,
NBER Working Paper No. 12484.
See Kose et al. (2009), op. cit.
See  Caballero,  J. A.  (2014),  “Do  surges  in  international  capital  inflows  influence  the  likelihood  of  banking
crises?” Economic Journal.
See Hélène Rey (2013), “Dilemma not trilemma: The global financial cycle and monetary policy independence”.
In: Jackson Hole Economic Symposium 2013.
According to the trilemma, in a financially integrated world, fixed exchange rates export the monetary policy of the
centre  country  to  the  periphery.  The  corollary  is  that  if  there  are  free  capital  flows,  it  is  possible  to  have
independent monetary policies only by having the exchange rate float; and conversely, that floating exchange
rates enable monetary policy independence (see e.g. Obstfeld and Taylor (2004)).
See e.g. Olivier Jeanne and Anton Korinek (2010) “Excessive Volatility in Capital Flows: A Pigouvian Taxation
Approach”, American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 100(2), pp. 403-407 and Emmanuel Farhi and
Ivan  Werning  (2014),  “Dilemma  not  Trilemma?  Capital  Controls  and  Exchange  Rates  with  Volatile  Capital
Flows,” IMF Economic Review 62, pp. 569-605.
Under the IMF new institutional view, CFMs should not substitute for warranted macroeconomic adjustments.
Circumstances which allow for CFMs on capital inflows include for example a situation in which the economy is
overheating, the exchange rate is overvalued and reserves are at adequate levels. Similarly, CFMs could be
applied  on  capital  outflows  if  the  economy  is  stagnating,  FX  exposures  are  high,  and  reserve  levels  are
inadequate.
In  many  studies  gains  are  of  second  order  of  magnitude  as  financial  integration  enables  a  reduction  of
consumption volatility but does not affect output (see Nicolas Coeurdacier, Hélène Rey and Pablo Winant, 2015
“Financial Integration and Growth in a Risky World”, NBER Working Paper, No. 21817).
One estimate suggests that the standard deviation of income growth uncertainty is reduced through financial
markets by as much as 35% across U.S. states (see Stefano G. Athanasoulis and Eric van Wincoop, (2001),
“Risk Sharing Within The United States: What Do Financial Markets And Fiscal Federalism Accomplish?,” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(4), pp. 688-698. According to a recent IMF paper, cross-country risk
sharing in the euro area is not only more limited (roughly half that seen in existing federations), but also falls
sharply  in  severe  downturns.  See  “Fiscal  Risk  Sharing:  New  Evidence  for  the  Euro Area”,  IMF  Technical
Background Note, September 2013. This is largely in line with recent evidence contained in the ECB’s annual
report  on  financial  integration,  which  stresses  that  risk  sharing  in  the  euro  area  has  increased  with  the
introduction of the euro, but remains at relatively low levels. It also suggests that risk sharing is particularly
fostered through various forms of equity holdings, underlining the importance of the capital markets union and
its emphasis on equity markets. See ECB (2016), “Financial Integration in Europe”, April 2016.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
