Haruhiko Kuroda: The Bank's Semiannual Report on Currency and
Monetary Control
Statement  by  Mr  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  before  the  Committee  on
Financial Affairs, House of Councillors, Tokyo, 22 November 2016.
Introduction
 The  Bank  of  Japan  submits  to  the  Diet  its Semiannual  Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary
Control  in  June  and  December.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  today  to  talk  about
developments  in  Japan’s  economy  and  present  an  overall  review  of  the  Bank’s  conduct  of
monetary policy.
I. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan
At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held on November 1, the Bank released the Outlook for
Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (Outlook  Report),  which  presents  its  projections  for  Japan’s
economic activity and prices through fiscal 2018. Based on this, I will first explain economic and
financial developments in Japan.
Japan’s economy has continued its moderate recovery trend, although exports and production
have  been  sluggish  due  mainly  to  the  effects  of  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies.  With
regard  to  the  outlook,  it  is  likely  to  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  its  potential  through  the
projection period — that is, through fiscal 2018 — with a virtuous cycle from income to spending
being  maintained  in  both  the  corporate  and  household  sectors,  on  the  back  of  highly
accommodative  financial  conditions  and  the  effects  of  the  government’s  large-scale  stimulus
measures, as well as the recovery in overseas economies.
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, all items
less fresh food) has been slightly negative due to the effects of the decline in energy prices. As
for the outlook, it is likely to be slightly negative or about 0 percent for the time being, and as the
aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  (the  output  gap)  improves  and  medium-  to  long-term
inflation expectations rise, it is expected to increase toward 2 percent — the price stability target
— in the second half of the projection period. The timing of the year-on-year rate of change in the
CPI reaching around 2 percent will likely be at the end of the projection period — that is, around
fiscal 2018. Thus, the momentum toward achieving the price stability target of 2 percent seems
to be maintained. However, it is somewhat weaker than the previous outlook made in the July
Outlook Report, and thus developments in prices warrant careful attention going forward.
II. Conduct of Monetary Policy
At  the  September  2016  MPM,  the  Bank  conducted  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the
developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  as  well  as  of  the  policy  effects  since  the
introduction of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE). Based on its findings, with a
view  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  at  the  earliest  possible  time,  the  Bank
introduced  “QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control,”  which  is  a  new  framework  for  strengthening
monetary easing. This framework consists of two major components.
The first is “yield curve control.” QQE, which was introduced in April 2013, has brought about
improvements in economic activity and prices mainly through the decline in real interest rates,
and  Japan’s  economy  is  no  longer  in  deflation,  which  is  commonly  defined  as  a  sustained
decline in prices. With “yield curve control,” the Bank seeks to bring about such a decline in real
interest  rates  by  controlling  short-term  and  long-term  interest  rates.  It  will  work  toward  the
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
formation of the most appropriate yield curve with a view to maintaining the momentum toward
achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  while  taking  account  of  developments  in
economic  activity  and  prices  as  well  as  financial  conditions.  Specifically,  in  the  guideline  for
market operations — which is decided at and released after every MPM — the Bank will set two
interest rate levels: the short-term policy interest rate to be applied to current accounts held by
financial institutions at the Bank, and the target level of yields on 10-year Japanese government
bonds (JGBs). It will conduct JGB purchases aiming to achieve the target level of the long-term
interest rate specified by the guideline, while indicating the approximate amount of JGBs to be
purchased.
The  second  is  an  “inflation-overshooting  commitment.”  In  order  to  achieve  the  price  stability
target of 2 percent, it is necessary to drastically convert the deflationary mindset among people
and  raise  inflation  expectations.  On  this  point,  inflation  expectation  formation  in  Japan  is  still
largely adaptive, and thus tends to be strongly affected by the observed inflation rate. Against this
backdrop, the Bank introduced a very powerful commitment to “continue expanding the monetary
base  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  observed  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)
exceeds the price stability target of 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable manner.” By
presenting its strong determination to achieve the price stability target, the Bank aims to enhance
the  credibility  of  achieving  2  percent  among  the  public  and  to  raise  inflation  expectations  in  a
more forceful manner.
At  the  MPM  held  on  November  1,  the  Bank  decided  to  maintain  the  guideline  for  market
operations in which the short-term policy interest rate is set at minus 0.1 percent and the target
level  of  10-year  JGB  yields  is  set  at  around  zero  percent.  It  will  make  policy  adjustments  as
appropriate, taking account of developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial
conditions, with a view to maintaining the momentum toward achieving the price stability target.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
