 December  1,  2016
Bank  of  Japan
Economic Activity, Prices,
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Shiga 
Makoto Sakurai 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
  I. Economic Activity at Home and Abroad: Recent Developments and the Outlook 
A. Overseas Economies 
Let me start my speech by talking about developments in overseas economies.   
 
The  global  economy  had  been  on  a  gradual  decelerating  trend  for  the  past  few  years, 
recording  3.2  percent  growth  in  2015  on  a  year-on-year  basis  from  4.2  percent  in  2011. 
During  this  period,  advanced  economies  maintained  growth  of  around  1  to  2  percent, 
whereas  emerging  economies  slowed  to  a  fair  extent,  from  6.3  percent  in  2011  to  4.0 
percent  in  2015.  This  suggests  that  the  global  economic  deceleration  was  largely 
attributable to the slowdown in emerging economies. Amid the heightening uncertainty over 
emerging  economies,  global  financial  markets  have  shown  volatile  movements  since 
summer  2015,  with the  depreciation  of  currencies and  the  decline  in  stock prices mainly 
being seen in emerging economies. 
 
Recently,  this  decelerating  trend  in  the  global  economy  has  been  staved  off.  Among 
advanced  economies,  the  U.S.  economy  has  maintained  its  stable  growth,  led  mainly  by 
solid consumption. The employment situation -- which underpins consumption -- has been 
steadily  improving,  with  the  unemployment  rate  declining  to  around  5  percent,  the  level 
close to full employment. While the entering administration's policy management and the 
Federal Reserve's monetary policy conduct have been attracting much attention, I expect the 
economy to continue to grow for the time being at a rate of around 1.5 to 2.0 percent on a 
year-on-year  basis  --  which  is  close  to  its  potential  growth  rate  --  in  a  situation  where 
accommodative financial conditions will be maintained.   
 
The  European  economy  has  continued  to  recover  moderately,  mainly  in  the  household 
sector. As for the outlook, it is highly likely that this moderate growth will continue under 
accommodative  financial  conditions,  although  uncertainty  --  mainly  associated  with  the 
United Kingdom's vote to leave the European Union (EU) -- is still a drag on the economy.   
 
Among  emerging  economies,  the  Chinese  economy  is  likely  to  broadly  follow  a  stable 
growth  path  as  the  government  proactively  implements  both  fiscal  and  monetary  policy 
measures to underpin economic activity, although the pace of growth has somewhat slowed, 
 1 
 structural 
reform.  So 
the  process  of 
in  manufacturing,  during 
mainly 
far, 
commodity-exporting economies have experienced downward pressure from the decline in 
commodity  prices,  but  they  are  likely  to  gradually  pick  up  going  forward  as  commodity 
prices hit the bottom. Other emerging economies are also expected to gain momentum for 
growth as the effects of their governments' economic stimulus measures, as well as those of 
economic recovery in advanced economies, permeate them. 
 
According  to  the  October  2016  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO)  released  by  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), emerging economies are projected to register relatively 
high growth of 4.2 percent for 2016 and 4.6 percent for 2017 and continue to moderately 
increase their pace of growth thereafter. Reflecting such recovery in emerging economies, 
the global economy is projected to grow at 3.1 percent for 2016, 3.4 percent for 2017, and 
gradually accelerate its pace thereafter.   
 
That said, it is difficult to dispel uncertainties currently surrounding the global economy in a 
short  period  of  time.  Regarding  the  entering  U.S.  administration,  expectations  for 
expansionary fiscal policies and unwinding of financial regulations seem to be heightening 
in the markets. However, details of the policy measures are still unclear, and therefore their 
effects should be carefully monitored. Regarding the United Kingdom's vote to leave the 
EU, due attention should continue to be paid to developments in the negotiations between 
the United Kingdom and the EU as well as any influences spreading to other EU member 
states. Other new global concerns include uncertainty in the banking sector in Europe and 
the increasing protectionist movements across the globe. It is unlikely that geopolitical risks 
will  diminish  anytime  soon.  Although  the  global  economy  has  been  gradually  entering  a 
recovery process, considering the high uncertainty at present, the recovery path is not rock 
solid. 
 
B. Japan's Economy 
Next, I will touch on economic activity in Japan. 
 
The economy has continued its moderate recovery trend, although exports and production 
have been sluggish, due mainly to the effects of the slowdown in overseas economies. The 
 2 
 real  GDP  growth  rate,  which  was  0.6  percent  on  average  during  the  period  from  2013 
through 2015, marked 2.1 percent, 0.7 percent, and 2.2 percent, respectively, for the first 
through  the  third  quarter  of  2016  on  an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  registering 
positive growth for three consecutive quarters for the first time since 2013. These rates may 
not seem so high compared to those of other countries, but Japan's economy has continued 
to grow at a pace above its potential, which is estimated to be in the range of 0.0-0.5 percent. 
As for the outlook, the relatively high growth is expected to continue given the pick-up in 
overseas economies and the government's large-scale stimulus measures. 
 
Let us look at growth components by expenditure item. Net exports have remained more or 
less at the same level amid the continuing slowdown in overseas economies. Going forward, 
the growth momentum in net exports is likely to gradually accelerate as overseas economies 
-- mainly emerging economies -- start to pick up. 
 
Growth in private consumption has been slow after the consumption tax hike to 8 percent in 
2014  when  people  in  Japan  substantially  front-loaded  purchases,  particularly  of  durable 
goods,  bearing  in  mind  the  subsequent  raise  to  10  percent  that  had  been  scheduled  in 
October 2015. Even before then, demand in durable goods had been brought forward by a 
tax  reduction  for  environmentally 
the  eco-point  system  for 
energy-efficient household electrical appliances. Reflecting these factors, the slowdown in 
demand  following  the  front-loaded consumption  seems  to  be  somewhat  prolonged.  Since 
summer  2015,  amid  highly  volatile  global  market  movements,  private  consumption  has 
been pushed down by the weakening of consumer sentiment and the negative wealth effects 
brought  about  by  the  decline  in  stock  prices.  As  for  the  outlook,  I  expect  that  private 
consumption  will  gradually  become  robust  as  such  negative  external  factors  gradually 
dissipate, and as the employment and income situation continues to improve, mainly on the 
back of the government's large-scale stimulus measures. 
 
Business fixed investment has continued to increase, albeit moderately, as corporate profits 
have  been  at  high  levels.  It  is  likely  to  maintain  its  increasing  trend,  supported  by 
accommodative financial conditions and heightening of Olympic Games-related demand. 
 
friendly  cars  and 
 3 
 Public  investment  is  projected  to  expand,  due  mainly  to  the  government's  large-scale 
stimulus  measures,  and  thereafter  remain  at  a  relatively  high  level  as  Olympic 
Games-related  demand  heightens.  The  stimulative  effects  of  the  fiscal  measures  are 
expected to be maximized with financial conditions remaining accommodative. The Cabinet 
Office  estimates  that  the  fiscal  measures  can  push  up  real  GDP  by  about  1.3  percentage 
points. 
 
In  the  Bank's  October  2016  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter  the 
Outlook Report), the real GDP growth rate is projected to continue growing at a pace above 
its  potential,  with  the medians  of  the  Policy  Board  members'  forecasts  at  1.0  percent  for 
fiscal 2016, 1.3 percent for fiscal 2017, and 0.9 percent for fiscal 2018, although there are 
differing views on this among the members. 
 
C. Prices 
The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh 
food has declined to a level slightly below 0 percent. The effects of the decline in energy 
prices  have  continued  to  make  a  relatively  large  negative  contribution,  and  prices  for 
durable goods, such as household electrical appliances, have turned to a decline, reflecting 
the yen's appreciation since the middle of 2015. The sluggish private consumption has led 
firms' price-setting behavior to become cautious. Going forward, the effects of the decline 
in energy prices are likely to dissipate through the beginning of 2017 and those of the yen's 
appreciation are also expected to gradually wane. If private consumption starts to recover as 
the economy continues to grow at a pace above its potential and as the employment and 
income situation improves further, firms are expected to take a more aggressive stance on 
setting  prices.  In  this  situation,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is  likely  to 
gradually start picking up. According to the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts 
in the October 2016 Outlook Report, the CPI for all items less fresh food is projected to see 
a steady acceleration in its rate of increase from minus 0.1 percent for fiscal 2016 to 1.5 
percent for fiscal 2017, and 1.7 percent for fiscal 2018. 
 
In the longer run, prices tend to move almost in parallel with nominal wages: firms try to 
pass on rises in cost, which are due to wage increases, to sales prices and households try to 
 4 
 maintain real purchasing power by demanding wage increases in line with price increases. 
With  the  growing  expectations  that  wages  will  be  raised  continuously  amid  continued 
improvement in the employment situation, the underlying rate of increase in the CPI will 
likely accelerate gradually with such interactive effects between rises in wages and prices. 
In  this  sense,  I  am  paying  particularly  close  attention  to  the  labor-management  wage 
negotiations in spring 2017 in forecasting future price developments. 
 
II.  Monetary  Policy:  Comprehensive  Assessment  and  New  Monetary  Policy 
Framework 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on September 20 and 21, 2016, the Bank decided to 
introduce Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control as 
a  new  framework  for  strengthening  monetary  easing.  At  the  meeting,  it  conducted  a 
comprehensive  assessment  of  the  effects  of  past  policy  measures  and  factors  that  have 
hampered the achievement of the price stability target.   
 
Next, I would like to give an outline of the Comprehensive Assessment and then explain the 
new policy framework with my own view. 
 
A. Comprehensive Assessment 
The  Bank  introduced  QQE  in  April  2013.  Since  then,  the  employment  situation  has 
significantly  improved  with  the  unemployment  rate  having  declined  to  3  percent,  and 
corporate  profits  have  reached  a  record-high  level  with  stock  prices  having  risen.  As  for 
prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items less fresh food and energy -- 
for  which  prices  tend  to  fluctuate  widely  --  turned  positive  in  autumn  2013  and  has 
remained  in  positive  territory  for  three  years.  Japan's  economy  is  no  longer  in  deflation, 
which  is  commonly  defined  as  a  sustained  decline  in  prices.  Thus,  QQE  has  served  to 
improve economic activity and price developments. 
 
However, the price stability target of 2 percent has not yet been achieved. When the Bank 
introduced  QQE,  it  had  envisioned  a  main  transmission  mechanism  of  the  policy  effects 
through  which  QQE  would  lower  real  interest  rates  by  raising  inflation  expectations  and 
pushing down nominal interest rates. The main factors behind the delay are as follows. First, 
 5 
 since  the  second  half  of  2014,  the  observed  inflation  rate  has  stalled  due  to  exogenous 
developments including the decline in crude oil prices, weakness in demand following the 
consumption tax hike in April 2014, and volatility in financial markets. Second, amid this 
situation,  inflation  expectations  weakened,  reflecting  the  fact  that  they  have  a  strong 
tendency to move in line with the observed inflation rate in Japan. 
 
Meanwhile, the Bank's large-scale purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) under 
QQE, in combination with the negative interest rate policy introduced in January 2016, have 
been significantly effective in pushing down nominal interest rates across the entire yield 
curve.  Given  this  experience,  the  Bank  judged  that  it  was  possible  to  control  short-  and 
long-term  interest  rates  under  the  new  policy  framework.  At  the  same  time,  there  was 
concern,  such  as  over  the  possibility  that  deterioration  in  the  business  environment  for 
financial  institutions  might  negatively  affect  the  financial  intermediation  going  forward. 
This was because, since the introduction of the negative interest rate policy, the declines in 
banks' lending rates had been significant compared to those in deposit interest rates, which 
already had little room to fall, and because long- and super-long-term interest rates also had 
declined significantly. The Bank considered it necessary to take these points into account 
when introducing the yield curve control.   
 
B. New Monetary Policy Framework 
Based on the Comprehensive Assessment, the Bank decided to introduce QQE with Yield 
Curve  Control  as  a  new  framework  for  strengthening  monetary  easing.  The  framework 
consists  of  the  two  components  of  yield  curve  control  and  an  inflation-overshooting 
commitment. 
 
Under  yield  curve  control,  the  Bank  controls  short-  and  long-term  interest  rates  through 
open market operations, such as purchases of JGBs. It sets the short-term policy interest rate 
applied  to  part  of  financial  institutions'  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  (the  Policy-Rate 
Balances) and the target level for 10-year JGB yields. In the past, many central banks have 
conducted  monetary  policy  by  controlling  short-term  interest  rates.  Controlling  the 
long-term interest rate is a new challenge, but it seems to be functioning smoothly so far. By 
adding  long-term  interest  rate  control  to  the  tools  of  monetary  policy,  I  think  that  it  has 
 6 
 become possible for the Bank to implement monetary easing measures more flexibly, taking 
account,  for  example,  of  the  effects  on  the  financial  intermediation,  and  that  the 
sustainability of these measures has been enhanced. 
 
Under  the  inflation-overshooting  commitment,  the  Bank  commits  itself  to  continuing  to 
expand the monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI for all 
items less fresh food exceeds the price stability target of 2 percent and stays above the target 
in  a  stable  manner.  In  general,  central  banks  have  conducted  monetary  policy  in  a 
forward-looking manner, given that the effects of monetary policy spread to the economy 
with a certain time lag. In this regard, the Bank's new framework, which is linked to the 
observed  CPI,  is  an  extremely  strong  commitment.  Through  this  commitment,  the  Bank 
aims to enhance the credibility of achieving the price stability target among the public, and 
to raise inflation expectations. 
 
In this manner, the new policy framework consists of measures that could be regarded as 
extraordinary  for  a  central  bank,  including  control  of  the  long-term  interest  rate  and 
commitment  linked  to  the  observed  CPI.  The  Bank  has  considered  such  flexible  and 
decisive policy conduct as necessary in order to dispel people's deflationary mindset that 
has taken hold due to deflation that has lasted for a long period, and to push up the inflation 
rate amid a variety of exogenous factors.   
 
With this framework, the Bank has shifted the operating target for its monetary policy from 
the quantitative to the interest rate aspect. However, needless to say, these are two sides of 
the  same  coin.  Under  QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control,  the  Bank  will  continue  with  its 
large-scale purchases of JGBs in order to control interest rates. On this point, I would like to 
reiterate  that  there  is  no  change  in  the  Bank's  stance  that  it  will  continue  with  monetary 
easing from both the quantitative and interest rate aspects. 
 
III. Challenges Facing Japan's Economy and Monetary Policy 
Next,  I  would  like  to  elaborate  on  my  own  thinking  regarding  challenges  facing  Japan's 
economy and the Bank's monetary policy conduct from a somewhat long-term perspective. 
 
 7 
 Over many years, the economy continued to see low growth under a moderate decline in 
prices. In January 2013, the government and the Bank released a joint statement, and they 
have worked together since then to achieve sustainable economic growth with price stability. 
The economy is no longer in deflation, which is commonly defined as a sustained decline in 
prices, but the price stability target of 2 percent has not yet been achieved. Although the 
economy has been on a moderate recovery trend, it has not yet fully succeeded in achieving 
sustainable growth as the potential growth rate has remained at a low level. 
 
Under  these  circumstances,  firms  and  households  seem  to  be  conducting  their  economic 
activities on the assumption that prices and the economic growth rate will not rise so much 
going  forward.  Firms have maintained their cautious stance toward expanding their fixed 
costs, because they have not been confident regarding whether sales will increase steadily in 
the future. Growth in business fixed investment and wages -- particularly in base pay, which 
leads  to  a  permanent  increase  in  wages  --  has  been  slow  relative  to  the  improvement  in 
corporate  profits  and  the  employment  situation.  Households  have  also  been  cautious  in 
increasing  their  spending,  despite  the  rise  in  their  incomes,  as  they  see  that  it  seems 
impossible to project a permanent expansion in income and/or a rise in prices. 
 
I  view  this  current  situation  as  a  sort  of  equilibrium.  In  general,  a  virtuous  cycle  from 
income  to  spending  among  firms  and  households  promotes  sustainable  economic  growth 
and price stability. An increase in business fixed investment raises the potential growth rate 
through accumulation of capital and improvement in labor productivity. Wage growth exerts 
upward pressure on prices mainly through expansion of firms' costs, as I have mentioned 
earlier, and an increase in household spending brings about improvement in the output gap, 
also  leading  to  price  rises.  Currently,  however,  it  seems  that  the  expectations  for  low 
inflation and low economic growth that have taken hold among firms and households have 
been hampering the operation of such a virtuous cycle, thereby constraining the economic 
growth rate and price rises in a self-fulfilling manner.   
 
What then, is required to get out of such equilibrium? My answer is that it is not a magical 
wand, but instead strenuous efforts to be made by a wide range of entities. I think that it is 
all the more important that the Bank, for its part, pursue price stability through pushing up 
 8 
 inflation expectations and maintaining accommodative financial conditions under the new 
monetary policy framework. At the same time, the government and the private sector should 
play key roles with regard to moving forward. Their actions toward raising wages strongly 
support  the  achievement  of  price  stability.  Moreover,  in  order  to  achieve  sustainable 
economic growth, I think that efforts such as the following are also essential; namely, the 
government's promotion of a growth strategy and structural reforms, and the private sector's 
innovations  in  areas  including  human  resource  development  as  well  as  research  and 
development.  The  Bank  will  underpin  these  initiatives  by  maintaining  accommodative 
financial conditions, thereby contributing to strengthening Japan's growth potential in the 
long term. Also, I expect that the Bank's measures such as purchases of exchange-traded 
funds (ETFs) composed of stocks issued by firms that are proactively making investment in 
physical  and  human  capital,  as  well  as  loan  disbursement  under  the  Fund-Provisioning 
Measure  to  Support  Strengthening  the  Foundations  for  Economic  Growth,  will  assist 
initiatives by the private sector. 
 
If the outlook for prices and economic growth in Japan brightens, the effects of monetary 
easing will heighten through a decline in real interest rates and a rise in the natural interest 
rate. I expect that the endeavors that the government, the private sector, and the Bank are 
making together as one will bear fruit, and the virtuous cycle of the economy will start to 
operate vigorously on the new outlook for sustainable economic growth with price stability. 
 9 
