Kevin Stiroh: Opening remarks at the GARP Global Risk Forum
Remarks  by  Mr  Kevin  Stiroh,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution  Supervision
Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York /
GARP Global Risk Forum, New York City, 2 November 2016.
 Good Morning. I’m Kevin Stiroh, the head of the Supervision Group at the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York. I’d like to extend a warm welcome from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
which is co-hosting the Global Risk Forum with the Global Association of Risk Professionals. I’d
like to thank the many organizers of this meeting—as you can imagine, considerable time and
resources  went  into  planning  this  conference  and  that  is  what  makes  it  so  valuable  for  the
participants and the risk management profession.
First, let me state that my comments today are my own and do not necessarily represent those
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
Looking Back at the Global Risk Forum
When I was asked to speak at today’s session, I realized that it’s been five years since I served
on the planning committee that developed the Global Risk Forum program in 2011. I wondered
how our risk priorities and risk management issues have evolved over those five years as the
world has changed around us.
Over the period since 2011, we’ve witnessed a number of fundamental changes in the banking
sector:
The  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  has  substantially  raised  requirements  and
expectations  around  capital,  liquidity  and  risk  management  including,  for  example,  more
rigorous stress testing and capital surcharges for systemically important firms;
The  macro/finance  environment  of  sluggish  growth  and  low  rates  is  putting  pressure  on
bank business models. We are now in the eighth year of interest rates near zero in the U.S.,
which has hurt bank profits and affected risk-taking and business model choices.
Ongoing technological innovations have altered both the opportunities and the threats facing
financial  institutions.  Marketplace  lending,  distributed  ledger,  and  robo-advisers  promise
great  opportunity,  while  cyber  threats,  data  privacy  issues,  and  IT-related  vendor
management issues are legitimate concerns.
With that idea in mind, I thought it would be useful to look at the last five years of this Forum’s
program in order to identify key themes and common topics. I’d like to discuss three specific
issues: systemic risk, governance, and regulatory reform.
First, systemic risk has been a central topic of discussion at each Global Risk Forum over the
past five years. Given the acute trauma of the financial crisis and its systemic nature, that is not
surprising. I did find it interesting to see how the discussions of systemic risk have shifted over
these  five  years.  Initially,  the  discussions  were  primarily  focused  on  defining  systemic  risk,
including the underlying shocks and propagation channels. During these initial conversations, the
concept of macroprudential supervision was introduced as a means of mitigating systemic risk,
but the discussion largely centered on defining what macroprudential supervision might entail,
and how it differs from more traditional microprudential supervision. More recently, the systemic
risk  discussions  have  become  increasingly  technical  and  practical  in  nature—focusing  on  the
details  of  the  resolution  regime,  monitoring  shadow  banking  and  considering  implications  of
shifting activity, and on actual approaches for conducting macroprudential supervision.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Second, governance has been a frequent topic. Again, this is understandable given its central
importance  for  private  sector  risk  management  and  the  official  sector  reform  agenda.  It  is
interesting that the assortment of discussion topics under the governance agenda item has been
remarkably stable over the years. The agendas examined the appropriate roles of the board of
directors  and  senior  managers,  the  degree  to  which  the  official  sector  should  prescribe  risk
management practices and principles, and the need to tailor such expectations depending on an
institution’s  business  models  and  risk  profiles.  We  should  also  think  beyond  the  traditional
governance  topics  to  determine  if  other  key  risk  types  should  be  covered  within  these
frameworks. I’ll return to this latter point.
The third theme is the changing nature of the discussions around regulatory reform. In 2011 and
2012,  much  of  the  agenda  focused  on  the  “what”  and  the  “how”  of  the  reform  package
—what should be included in the reforms and how would these mechanisms work in practice.
Discussion questions were geared toward concerns about the feasibility of these new policies
and regulations, and the need for global coordination and cooperation. In recent years, as you
know, the global regulatory community has made significant progress on finalizing the post-crisis
reforms and the conversation has naturally shifted to the impact of these regulatory reforms; for
example,  a  desire  for  consistency  across  firms,  business  models  and  jurisdictions  and  an
assessment of factors driving changes in market liquidity.
In raising these three frequently discussed topics – systemic risk, governance, and regulatory
reform—I also wonder what topics have emerged that we are not discussing, but perhaps should
be. Since the financial crisis, I think we are all more aware of the importance of actively looking
for  our  blind  spots.  Gillian  Tett,  writer  for  the Financial  Times  and  author  of The  Silo
Effect recently visited the NY Fed, and reminded us to look broadly. In her case, when trying to
understand social dynamics, it is important to look not just in the middle of the dance floor, but
also  at  the  “non-dancers”  outside  of  the  spotlight.  In  our  case,  it  is  what  other  factors  might
create either idiosyncratic or systemic distress.
So,  with  that  perspective  in  mind,  I  noticed  two  surprising  omissions  from  prior  Global  Risk
Forum agendas. The first is cybersecurity. Over this time period, there has been an increasing
awareness among risk professionals about the constant and present danger that cyber-threats
pose to the financial sector. Cyber-threats are a vital concern for the supervisors responsible for
the safety and soundness of the financial system and for individual risk managers. In the U.S.,
the Department of Treasury, our intelligence agencies, financial regulators and supervisors, and
risk professionals across the financial sector are working to defend against cyber-attacks and to
minimize the potential disruption resulting from a successful attack. U.S. authorities are working
to finalize objectives-based supervisory expectations for risk management around cyber threats.
I’m encouraged that this year’s Forum includes an expert panel on “Technology Risks” that will
explore the cyber-threat landscape and approaches to mitigate the associated risks.
A  second  noteworthy  omission  relates  to  a  specific  component  of  governance.  While  some
governance  topics  have  been  remarkably  stable,  in  my  view,  risks  associated  with  business
misconduct  at  financial  institutions  have  not  received  adequate  attention  in  these  Forums.
Through initiatives like the annual conference on “Reforming Culture in the Financial Services
Industry,” the New York Fed has been challenging the financial industry to consider the many
factors that have contributed to recent, widespread instances of misconduct.
In concert with the industry, I believe that supervisors can help the industry improve governance,
culture  and  behavioral  outcomes  through  supporting  the  development  of  effective  internal
governance regimes, prudent risk management policies, incentives, and strong compliance and
control  structures,  all  within  a  framework  of  effective  oversight  from  the  board  of  directors.  In
today’s  Forum  and  in  the  future,  I  welcome  other  participants’  thoughts  on  approaches  for
developing, measuring, and maintaining a strong, ethical culture within the industry.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion 
As risk professionals, it’s important to be forward-looking and to continually ask ourselves: are all
risks being captured, measured, and monitored? What is missing? Are we focused on the right
areas?
So, here is another question: When we look back at this conference five years from now, what
will we view as a major blind spot? I expect there will be issues that we will be surprised we
missed, and part of the purpose of discussions like this is to lower the likelihood and impact of
those inevitable blind spots.
Thanks for your attention, and I’m looking forward to hearing the discussion throughout the day.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
