Pentti  Hakkarainen:  Finnish  economy  –  success,  challenges  and
outlook
Presentation by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, to the mission of
the Wallonia Foreign Trade and Investment Agency, AWEX, Helsinki, 12 October 2016.
Original presentation is on the Bank of Finland’s website: Slides (PDF).
Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen
 Let me start by welcoming you all to Finland also for my part. It is a pleasure for me to have this
opportunity to introduce you to some aspects of the Finnish economy and its present prospects.
We at the Bank of Finland monitor the Finnish economy closely. We also contribute, with our
analyses of the Finnish economic outlook, to the forecasts of the Euro area economy which are
regularly published by the ECB. So what I am going to say today is based on the work we do in
that context.
The central bank also takes part in the economic policy discussion in Finland, in the role of a
non-political expert – hoping to advance the level of the economic policy debate in the country. As
central banks are independent, we think that this gives us a niche where we can add value to the
policy discussion.
Finland and Belgium are similar countries in some respects: Small EU countries, both members
of the euro area, bilingual (in our case, the national languages are Finnish and Swedish), and
both have almost exactly the same level of GDP per capita. Economically, both countries have
only limited natural resources so we both have to rely on the know-how of our people to succeed
in the world.
One of the biggest differences between the countries, and this is reflected in our infrastructures,
is in population density: Belgium’s population density is much higher, about 23 times more than
in Finland! The overall picture is a bit misleading however because in Finland the population is
quite concentrated in the south.
But even in the most southern province of Finland, Uusimaa, where we are right now, and where
almost a third of the population lives, the population density is less than half of the Belgian one.
So Finns are accustomed to long distances.
Another  difference  between  our  countries,  which  is  also  reflected  in  the  infrastructure,  is
historical: Belgium was the first country on the European continent to experience the industrial
revolution.  Because  of  that,  it  also  urbanized  early.  Finland,  by  contrast,  experienced  this  big
transformation only after the war, although our forest industries have a long history too.
But our infrastructure and our big towns are much younger than their Belgian counterparts.
Let me now turn to the survey of the Finnish economy.
[Slide  2]  Finland  is  a  small  open  economy,  where  trade  has  shaped  the  key  trends  of  our
economy. Even if the exports have been falling recently, they still represent about 40% of GDP. 
Finland’s trade with euro area economies has been increasing since the global financial crisis,
Germany being currently the largest trading partner. Russia’s share of our exports has fallen to
6%,  notably  because  of  weak  growth  performance  in  Russia  since  2013,  after  the  drop  in  oil
prices.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Finland’s  goods  exports  consist  mainly  of  paper  and  wood  products,  metal  and  engineering
products, and electronics equipment.
In recent years, the structure of the Finnish economy has undergone radical changes in the wake
of  difficulties  encountered  by  the  forest  and  electronics  industries.  Export  earnings  from  the
mobile  phone  business,  which  had  long  supported  our  economy,  have  disappeared,  the
significance  of  Russia  has  diminished,  while  importance  of  countries  such  as  Germany  have
increased. Despite the difficulties of the recent past, the forest industry is still one of the pillars of
Finnish  exports  alongside  the  heavy  engineering  metal  industry,  and  high  tech  electronics.
Software industry, like online games, creates a lot of revenue, but employ relatively few people.
[Slide 3] Finland’s growth performance was exceptional between 1995 and 2007. It was fueled by
Finland’s  long  tradition  of  investing  heavily  on  human  capital  and  education.  The  focus  on
engineering helped too.
Finland was in the good position to ride on the global trend of ICT and mobile phones after the
exceptionally  deep  recession  in  the  early  1990s.  Finnish  export  firms  managed  to  create
products enjoying widespread demand and capable of capturing new geographical market areas.
By the turn of the millennium, the electrical engineering and electronics industry had outstripped
the forest industry as the largest export sector, its products accounting for about a third of total
export value.
EU accession also helped to set up the credible fiscal framework and push through important
structural reforms at the time.
[Slide  4]  Unfortunately,  the  tide  changed  rapidly  around  the  global  financial  crises.  Finland
suffered  from  the  decline  in  foreign  markets  during  the  global  financial  crises.  Initially,  the
recovery was fast, but it lasted only until about 2011. After that Finland entered a period of low
growth (or even no growth) and increasing unemployment.  This period of low growth was due to
a unique mix of asymmetric shocks.
They all contributed to falling productivity growth, low investments and exports. Shocks like this
could have had much larger impact on the Finnish economy, but the fortune was that financial
sector has been resilient and the balance sheets of households, firms and government were in
good shape. Finland had sufficient buffers to overcome large part of these large shocks.
At the same time, one lesson to learn is that labour and product markets should have been much
more flexible to adapt to such shocks: This requires more flexible prices and more competition in
the domestic markets in particular.  This is actually true for many other countries in the European
monetary union, too.
[Slide 5] But the period of stagnation may be over. Since late 2015 Finland has however returned
back to growth, after very difficult years. In the June forecast, it was projected that Finland GDP
will grow around 1% during the next years.
The strongest recovery is observed in domestic investment, especially the construction sector. It
is  benefiting  from  the  low  interest  environment  and  also  the  continuing  migration  within  the
country to the Helsinki Capital Region and other growth poles in the country.
The new data is fairly consistent with this outlook. Upside risk to this forecast arise from the fact
that our June forecast did not fully take into account the competitiveness pact, an agreement
between  employees,  employers  and  the  government,  which  will  significantly  improve  the
competitiveness of Finland and remove some uncertainties in the labour markets.
Downside  risks  mainly  relate  to  external  environment  and  the  world  economy,  which  has
developed somewhat weaker than was foreseen in June.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
[Slide 6] The weak performance of the last years was puzzling for our economists, since the
institutional features that are known to be important for growth in the long run are all there: a
reliable legal system, a good health and education system, good innovation potential, a resilient
banking sector and relatively healthy public finances.
There are of course important weaknesses too. Small countries suffer from small market size,
for instance. It is something that Finland cannot do much about.  Population growth is stagnant.
Other  weakness  listed  here  are  something  where  the  policy  can  make  a  difference,  such  as
labour  and  product  market  efficiency,  macroeconomic  environment,  and  business
sophistication. 
Business  sophistication  concerns  the  two  elements  that  are  closely  linked:  the  quality  of  a
country’s overall business networks and the quality of individual firms’ operations and strategies.
Traditionally, the share of R&D investment in our Gross National Product has been very high by
international standards, and it still is. However it has been declining a bit in the recent years but it
is important that this decline be temporary.  
[Slide 7] On the policy front, some important steps have been taken to bolster growth.
These include e.g. the competitiveness pact which I mentioned, significant deregulation of trade,
and a new transportation code which can open up new possibilities for private companies and
strengthen the incentives for infrastructure investments.
The government is working on many other areas too, such as improving the functioning of the
labour  market,  education,  the  conditions  for  bio-economy  and  clean-tech  sectors  as  well  as
digititalization.
 All in all, the Finnish economy has both problems and strengths. After a long recession, there is
now reason for optimism as economic activity is picking up and especially in construction the
recovery is strong.
On the other hand, there are structural problems still, which have to do with the ageing population
and  the  need  to  accelerate  productivity  growth.  Also,  our  economy  is  quite  dependent  on
international markets, and the outlook for the world economy is not without risks at this time as
you well know.
However, despite these challenges, I would say that in Finland the fundaments for a sustained
recovery  are  well  in  place.  The  two  strongest  points  of  the  Finnish  economy,  according  to
international  competitiveness  barometers,  are  our  good  education  system  and  good  public
institutions.  Both  are  regularly  classified  among  the  world’s  best  by  outside  observers.  They
serve well the firms operating in Finland.
These strengths give Finland a good starting point for the coming years, and I trust that your visit
to our country will convince you of the forward-looking dynamism and potential of our economy.
Thank you very much for your interest.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
