Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Efimerida ton Syntakton
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
in Efimerida ton Syntakton, conducted by Mr Vasilis Georgas, and published on 26 November
2016.
 Is  it  realistic  to  expect  that  the  second  review  of  Greece’s  economic  adjustment
programme will be completed by the end of the year, so that, in combination with the
short-term  measures  on  debt,  the  ECB  can  include  Greek  bonds  in  the  quantitative
easing (QE) programme?
The conclusion of the review is something that is eventually decided by the Eurogroup and by the
Board  of  Directors  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  in  line  with  the  assessment  of  the
European Commission and in liaison with us. The review is still ongoing and discussions are
making  good  progress  but  are  still  under  way  on  all  different  policy  areas.  The  Eurogroup
meeting on 5 December will be a useful opportunity to take stock of the progress made and set
the timeline for the conclusion of the review.
It is in the interest of the Greek economy that the review is completed in a timely way. As for
including Greek government bonds in the Public Sector Purchase Programme (PSPP), we don’t
have a precise timeline. This is a decision taken independently by the Governing Council of the
ECB. Programme developments and clarity on debt measures are an important input given our
concerns about debt sustainability, but they are not the only determinant of the final decisions.
The  Governing  Council  will  base  its  assessments  also  on  internal  analysis  and  will  take  into
account other risk management considerations before making its final decision.
Is inclusion in the QE enough for one to argue that Greece is turning the page? Many
believe that it will be the short-term speculative funds that will benefit from this, while
the  country  will  continue  to  be  burdened  with  high  public  debt  and  extremely  high
unemployment.
The inclusion of Greek bonds in the PSPP could be an important signal that reforms are on track
and debt is being put on a more sustainable footing. But again, we do not have a precise timeline
yet  and  any  decision  will  be  based  on  internal  analysis  taking  into  account  risk  management
considerations.
Is  the  Greek  programme  workable?  Do  you  believe  that,  in  2018,  Greece  will  have
returned to the markets successfully and will be able to be entirely funded by them?
The  explicit  aim  of  the  financial  assistance  programme  is  to  restore  Greece’s  full  access  to
international capital markets by mid-2018. Clearly, this objective cannot be achieved without a
strong  commitment  from  the  Greek  authorities  to  continue  implementation  of  the  reforms
necessary to bring the fiscal stance on a sustainable path and to support growth.
Over the past years, Greece has achieved a significant adjustment in terms of reversing the twin
deficit of fiscal and trade balance. Greece is moving towards a more outward-oriented economy
with a prudent fiscal stance. The challenges, however, remain considerable, and it is essential to
maintain the momentum and persist with the reform efforts to have a sustained improvement.
Regaining market access needs to be also based on restoring debt sustainability. To this end,
the full implementation of the programme needs to be complemented by a set of debt-mitigating
measures in accordance with the Eurogroup agreement of 25 May 2016. This in turn can provide
the assurance that markets require for financing the future needs of the Greek economy.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
What will happen to Greece if this programme is not successful either? Is there a plan
B? There are already rumours and scenarios of a fourth Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU).
This is not an option that anyone is considering. It is vital for Greece that the third programme is a
success.
What do you believe will be the final outcome of the discussions on Greek debt? Will the
interventions  that  will  be  decided  now  be  enough  to  ensure  the  much  talked-about
“sustainability”?
The ECB supports the need for debt measures in line with the Eurogroup agreement of 25 May
2016. The nature of the measures is for the euro area Member States to decide.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) argues that Greek debt is not sustainable and
that the primary surpluses foreseen in the July agreement will be difficult to achieve.
Greece’s  EU  creditors  take  a  different  view.  Doesn’t  this  disagreement  between  the
institutions send mixed signals to the international markets and to investors?
All  the  institutions  have  voiced  concerns  about  the  sustainability  of  Greek  debt.  There  are
different views on the primary surplus which the measures included in the MoU can deliver, but
diversity of views is in itself useful: risks should be highlighted and accounted for by specific debt
measures. Let me say again that I consider IMF participation to be a factor of credibility for the
programme.
Do you agree with the view that the policy mix applied in Greece, with successive tax
increases,  spending  cuts  and  high  targets  for  primary  surpluses,  is  “deadly”  for
economic growth?
Bringing public finances back into surplus is a necessity for Greece given its high debt level, with
or  without  debt  measures.  Of  course,  consolidation  itself  should  be  carried  out  in  a  growth-
friendly  way  and  tilted  towards  a  reduction  in  expenditure  rather  than  an  increase  in  taxation.
Fiscal policies are embedded in a wider reform strategy comprising labour and product market
reforms, measures to fight tax evasion and the reduction of non-performing loans (NPLs) to allow
banks  to  lend  again  to  Greek  households  and  companies.  These  measures  will  help  reduce
unemployment, increase investment and support growth. This will accelerate the lifting of capital
controls and reduce fiscal constraints over time. Greece is starting to reap the benefits of these
reforms. Economic sentiment is improving and we expect real GDP growth to increase in 2017.
Why is it that, after three MoUs and five governments since 2011, Greece has not yet
managed to turn the page? What has been done wrong under the MoUs all these years?
Greece has been through a painful adjustment, which could not have been avoided given the high
imbalances  it  built  up  until  2010.  And  the  adjustment  took  longer  because  of  the  lack  of
implementation and prevailing uncertainty (including in the rest of the euro area). With hindsight,
the programme could have been designed to be more conducive to growth. For example, the
opening-up of the product market has lagged wage cuts, protecting rents and making the burden
of adjustment fall heavily on workers. Greece still lacks a comprehensive social safety net and
had  to  protect  the  most  vulnerable  using  taxes  and  pensions,  making  the  tax  structure  very
distortive.  And  Europe  had  only  limited  instruments  to  support  social  safety  nets  during  the
adjustment  phase.  But  let’s  also  not  forget  that  Europe  had  to  build  its  own  crisis  resolution
architecture out of nothing when the crisis hit.
How do you explain the fact that, after the last recapitalisation of Greek banks and the
relaxation of capital controls, we have witnessed neither a significant return of deposits
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
nor more liquidity in the economy nor a reduction in non-performing loans?
Even  though  confidence  levels  as  evidenced  by  a  return  of  deposits  and  hoarded  cash  have
strengthened  following  the  successful  completion  of  the  first  review  of  the  programme,
confidence  still  remains  fragile.  We  expect  that  market  and  depositor  confidence  will  further
improve following the successful completion of the second review and the steady, successful
implementation of the programme. Several of the measures to be implemented in the context of
the second review will contribute to the return of confidence. For example, the establishment of
the  out-of-court  workout  framework  is  expected  to  restore  the  financial  viability  of  healthy
enterprises and support investment and growth. At the same time, it will contribute to improving
the balance sheets of banks and of the state.
Is the target of reducing non-performing loans by €40 billion by 2019 attainable? Doesn’t
managing the problem aggressively entail risks for the capital adequacy of banks?
ECB Banking Supervision, in cooperation with the Bank of Greece, has recently agreed with the
four banks it supervises on bank-specific NPL resolution targets, with the aim of reducing NPLs
to sustainable levels in the medium term. The Bank of Greece will soon publish an aggregated
summary  report  on  the  agreed  targets  and  developments  in  selected  key  performance
indicators.
It is important that banks make swift progress with the resolution of the unprecedentedly high
stock  of  NPLs  and  the  restructuring  of  viable  but  distressed  companies,  thereby  improving
banks’ ability to support the economic recovery. These efforts also require the development of an
active market for non-performing loans. To this end, the law regulating the sale of loans needs to
be fully implemented. Therefore, we look forward to the Bank of Greece issuing the first licences
for loan servicing companies, which will play a key role in the sale of loans.
Besides NPL resolution, it is also important to make progress in the area of bank governance. To
ensure arm’s length decisions that are in the best interest of its stakeholders and of the Greek
economy, bank management needs to be free of political interference and vested interests.
The results of the expansionary monetary policy followed by the European Central Bank
are  being  strongly  criticised.  Many  argue  that  QE  is  responsible  for  a  bubble  in  the
equity  and  bonds  markets  and  that  the  negative  interest  rates  ultimately  benefit  the
affluent north and not the poor south, and that QE masks the structural problems of the
euro area. What is your view after nearly two years of the programme?
Growth is returning in the euro area and this is largely due to monetary policy measures, notably
our  asset  purchases,  low  interest  rates  and  targeted  lending  operations.  They  have  improved
funding costs for banks and financing conditions for companies and households throughout the
euro area. For example, lending rates for firms have fallen by over 100 basis points since June
2014. In peripheral countries, lending rates have fallen even further. Loans to small and medium-
sized  companies  that  are  the  backbone  of  our  economy  and  are  often  family-run  micro-firms
have improved even more strongly; since May 2014, bank lending rates on very small loans to
corporations declined by around 170 basis points. They are now converging towards those of
large-scale borrowers. As for the structural challenges, they are many and they of course need
to be addressed by governments. Monetary policy cannot create sustainable growth.
Is the vision of banking integration in Europe still alive? Why is the EU-wide deposit
guarantee scheme not advancing?
The banking union is an essential project for Europe to help match savings with investments and
to  improve  the  safety  of  European  banks,  avoiding  that  taxpayers  have  again  to  pay  for  risks
taken by bankers. The ECB is committed to building a single supervision at arm’s length from
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
political interference and from vested interests, which was not always the case in the past. This
way banks can work in the interest of the economy.
We continue to believe that a European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS) is the necessary third
pillar  of  the  banking  union.  However,  you  are  right  that  political  negotiations  on  EDIS  are  not
making  much  progress.  There  is,  however,  an  understanding  that  risk  sharing  across  banks
needs to be complemented by appropriate measures to reduce risks in banks. In our view, both
work strands should progress in parallel.
Proposals  for  a  two-tier  euro  have  been  made  from  time  to  time. At  the  same  time,
euroscepticism is on the rise, as evidenced by the growing support for political parties
of  the  extreme  right  or  by  citizens  distancing  themselves  from  developments  taking
place in Brussels. Can Europe, as we know it today, continue to exist?
European  citizens  are  understandably  frustrated  because  Europe  and  national  governments
have not been able to create growth and jobs in a meaningful way since the crisis. There are
three challenges in my view. First, national governments should undertake the reforms which will
create  jobs  and  investment.  Second,  European  institutions  should  contribute  to  create  growth
and stability at European level. This is what the ECB has been doing, within its mandate, with a
visible impact on growth. And third, it is up to Member States’ governments to reform jointly our
monetary  union  to  make  it  more  resilient.  To  provide  security  to  its  citizens,  Europe  needs  a
stronger economy, and a stronger economy requires a more resilient monetary union.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
