Gent Sejko: Aligning monetary policy with financial stability - their
objectives, responses and interaction in times of uncertainty
Welcome address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Annual Conference
2016 "Aligning monetary policy with financial stability - their objectives, responses and interaction
in times of uncertainty", Tirana, 27 October 2016.
 Your Excellency Prime Minister,
Your Excellencies Ambassadors,
Honourable Members of the Government,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Mr Anastasakis,
Dear guests,
It’s my great pleasure to welcome you to the Annual Conference of the Bank of Albania 2016. The
conference is organised in cooperation with the European Studies Centre of St Antony’s College,
University of Oxford.
This year’s conference will focus on two main topics that prevail in the analyses and debates
among policymakers, academia and professionals circles:
First, possible implications from the Brexit; and
Second,  determining  the  modalities  for  coordinating  the  monetary  policy  with  the
macroprudential policy and measures, in the new reality we are facing.
Together  with  guests  from  European  and  regional  central  banks,  international  institutions  and
academia,  we  will  be  discussing  about  the  current  challenges,  and  appropriate  policies  and
instruments central banks need to employ.
I am confident the proceedings of this Conference will produce more clarity for all participants,
policy makers and private sector representatives alike.
Let me elaborate in greater details the perspective of the Bank of Albania on these two topics.
- Initially, I would like to present the backdrop of the current economic and financial situation.
- Next, I would like to share the Albanian and regional perspective on the possible implications
from Brexit.
- Concluding, I would like to present an overview of challenges facing the two main central bank
policies: the monetary policy and the macroprudential policy.
1. Albania and Western Balkans in the post-crisis period
The  last  global  crisis  affected  the  economic,  financial  and  social  dimensions  of  the  human
activity.  By  size  of  shock,  complexity  of  challenges  and  interdependence  of  transmission
channels,  the  crisis  was  unprecedented,  for  decades.  It  started  as  turbulence  in  certain
segments  of  the  financial  system  to  later  transform  into  a  fully-fledged  crisis  of  the  system;
before long, it was transferred to the real sector. This shock caused immense loss in production
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  employment  levels,  reduced  the  welfare  and  put  to  test  the  stability  of  growth  and
development models in many countries.
Western Balkan countries were not at the eye of the cyclone of the global crisis. Yet, while at the
periphery,  the  effects  of  the  crisis  became  increasingly  stronger  on  the  region,  as  well.  The
decline  in  foreign  demand,  increased  uncertainties,  tightening  of  financing  conditions  and
deleveraging in the region decelerated the economic activity and evidenced a series of structural
problems.
I would rather not list all the channels and consequences of the global crisis, but I would like to
say that withstanding the crisis required revising many conventional policies and practices.
First, central banks were obliged to explore untrodden paths. The intensity of the accommodative
monetary policy was unimaginable a few years ago. Oftentimes, this policy relied on employing
non-conventional instruments, which had not been tested before, but now have a legitimate claim
to be enlisted in the arsenal of central banks.
Second,  to  guarantee  the  sustainable  and  long-term  development  of  the  economy,  special
attention was paid to the financial stability aspect, both at system and institutional level. In this
regard, a series of supervisory and regulatory policies were adopted.
Third,  interaction  between  fiscal  soundness  and  economic  and  financial  stability  became
necessary, thus conditioning the space for action and reaction by public finances.
Lastly,  many  development  models  –  relying  more  on  debt  and  consumption,  rather  than  in
investments and productivity – proved to be short lived. These models have required and still
require  the  continuation  of  radical  structural  reforms  to  reconceptualise  business  models  in
many countries and guarantee sustainable and long-term growth.
While debates continue on the suitability and efficiency of the instruments used to withstand the
crisis, it is unquestionable that – overall – these instruments managed to prevent the worst and
gradually create premises for further growth of the global economy.
The situation described above is true for the Western Balkans as well. The stimulating economic
policies, structural reforms and adjustment of internal and external imbalances have yielded their
effects. The economies in the region seem to be set on the growth path, and are now based on a
better  understanding  of  the  determining  factors  for  the  long-term  development,  and  a  more
comprehensive framework of endorsing policies. The experience gained and the lessons learnt
are undoubtedly elements that will help us steer safely, as we navigate our way into the future.
As a typical Western Balkan country, Albania is in a similar development stage to its peers.
Our analyses and forecasts confirm that the Albanian economy is on a positive track. Economic
growth is expected to improve progressively over the next three years. Such growth continues to
be fuelled by the recovery of the domestic private demand.
The accommodative monetary policy of the Bank of Albania, the improved financing conditions
and strengthening of private agents’ confidence are considered as the main elements underlying
the  recovery.  The  gradual  return  of  the  economy  to  equilibrium  will  help  improve  economic
indicators across the board, more specifically:
increase in employment;
return of inflation to target;
reduction of public debt; and
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
further strengthening of private sector balance sheets.
The acceleration of economic growth in Albania attests the private sector dynamism. This is an
encouraging development given that the fiscal policy implemented over this period focused on
showing  prudence  and  rendering  public  finance  healthy,  while  the  macroprudential  policy  and
measures of the Bank of Albania have sought to further strengthen financial stability. As a result
of our measures, the Albanian banking sector is sound, with high degree of capitalisation and
liquidity, and positive levels of profitability.
The  conditions  for  lending  in  Albania  have  improved  and  are  on  the  course  of  constantly
improving. In the light of its mission, the banking sector should translate these positive premises
in more lending:
showing far-sighted decisions;
assessing properly the development perspective of the Albanian reality;
utilising the potential from various sectors of the economy.
On the other hand, the phenomenon of non-performing loans – which reflects to a large extent
the retroactive effect from the crisis shocks – is being addressed, although a lot remains to be
done until its eventual solution.
Dear guests,
 When we discuss about the development perspectives, as policy makers, we may not ignore the
risks and challenges we face. Relations with our economic and financial partners in the euro
area have been and continue to be a source of progress as well as an open channel of shocks.
As a region, we have generated and consumed crisis, but recently the balance has been notably
on the consumption side.
Beyond economic and financial problems, the global crisis was also reflected in notable social
problems. These problems have materialised in different forms in different countries, but the anti-
globalisation movement is a common thread of tension in global economic developments. This
movement  has  produced  various  results:  in  some  places  it  has  been  reflected  in  increased
protectionist barriers, in other places in isolationist policies, in others in repatriation of capital and
refocusing of activity in home countries. The result of the 23 June referendum on the relationship
between the UK and the European Union is one of them.
The  anti-globalist  movement  and  barriers  to  the  free  movement  of  goods,  people  and  capital
appear  as  harmful  to  the  overall  global  economy.  However,  their  negative  effects  fall
disproportionally on emerging countries, such as Albania, and the Western Balkans in a broader
sense.
Let me know outline our assessment on the potential negative implications resulting from Brexit
and the relevant effects on the central banks in the region.
2. Potential implications resulting from Brexit for Albania and the region
Brexit is certainly a determinant factor for the European Union and the euro area. As such, it has
left its mark in Albania and the region. It may be accompanied by direct or indirect, short-term or
long-term negative effects in the labour, goods and services markets.
Overall, the direct implications for Albania and the region are assessed as minor ones, given that
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
trade  exchange  with  the  United  Kingdom  is  low.  To  illustrate  my  point,  the  export  of Albanian
goods to the UK accounts for only 0.2% to the total over the past ten years, whereas the share of
imports amounted to around 1.1%.
The  stock  of  British  foreign  investments  in Albania  shows  low  rates,  whereas  the  impact  of
emigration and remittances indicators is somewhat higher, but still a non-determinant factor.
On the other hand, indirect effects would depend on Brexit’s impact on the European economy
and banking system. Brexit may also translate into institutional developments that will affect the
rules of European economic and financial market development, as well as European integration
processes. In other words, implications for Albania and the region potentially exist, but still remain
difficult  to  identify.  I  would  rather  not  dwell  very  long  on  this  topic;  however,  I  do  believe  that
today’s  discussions  will  help  us  understand  these  processes  and  assess  in  advance  the
potential political and economic implications and consequences for our countries.
I  would  like  to  stress  that  all  of  us  in  the  Western  Balkans  remain  hopeful  that  Brexit  will  not
generate  centrifugal  forces,  which  harm  our  European  integration  processes,  initiate  setting
barriers  to  free  trade  and  movement  of  people,  and  encourage  further  fragmentation  of  the
European financial system.
3. Monetary policy and financial stability in the post-Brexit period
The coordination of the monetary policy with the necessary measures for safeguarding financial
stability remains a challenging issue for policy makers even in better days. The challenges to this
coordination may only strengthen, if Brexit implications assume the negative dimensions listed
above.
Let me emphasise that, in Bank of Albania’s vision, the monetary policy oriented toward price
stability, and the supervisory and regulatory policy oriented toward financial stability contribute to
the sustainable and long-term development, and are complementary to each other. This creed is
fully tested by experience, both in the world and in Albania.
In the long-term horizon, the Bank of Albania is confident that the investment we have made in
promoting  financial  stability  will  bear  its  fruit  with  regard  to  sustainable  development,  and  will
increase  the  space  for  monetary  policy  manoeuvring.  In  addition,  accomplishing  our  price
stability  objective  would  enhance  the  confidence  in  the  national  currency,  reduce  volatility  and
foster transparency in financial markets, thus contributing to the sustainable development of the
financial system.
Meanwhile,  in  the  short-term,  the  coordination  of  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  often
present  challenges  and  compromises.  In  this  context,  setting  clear  priorities,  using  the  right
instruments,  and  communicating  transparently  central  bank  actions  and  objectives  are  key
elements for the success of our work.
Concluding, I would like to reiterate that I am fully confident that in the course of the day, all the
issues I posed above will be elaborated in greater detail. I do believe that the contribution of the
eminent panellists and active input from all participants will be an added value in this regard.
I  wish  the  best  of  success  look  forward  with  the  greatest  interest  to  the  outcome  of  your
deliberations.
Thank you for your attention!
  4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
