Yannis Stournaras: Greece and the eurozone at a crossroads
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at an event organized by the
Young Presidents' Organization, Athens, 23 September 2016.
 It is a great pleasure to be here today and have the chance to share with you my thoughts on the
policy steps that Greece and the euro area should take in order to address crisis legacies and to
ensure the long-term prosperity of our people. 
1. Brief overview of the Greek and euro area crisis 
The euro area crisis can be regarded as a current account crisis. Before 2008, capital flows from
euro  area  core  countries  were  invested  in  non-tradable  sectors  (public  consumption  and
residential sector) in the periphery. The increase in domestic spending, whether public or private,
caused  upward  pressures  on  wages  and  prices  harming  competitiveness  and  export
performance and further worsening the current account of peripheral countries. Over time, stock
imbalances accumulated with private and/or public sectors becoming over-leveraged. The fallout
from  the  international  financial  crisis  of  2008  was  a  sudden  stop  in  inflows  to  the  periphery,
triggering a sovereign debt crisis in Greece and banking crises in Spain and Ireland as property
markets  collapsed.  In  Greece,  the  sovereign  crisis  weakened  banks,  resulting  in  increased
financial fragility and a banking crisis. In Ireland, and to a lesser extent Spain, the banking crisis
weakened the sovereign. 
As  banks  and  sovereigns  lost  market  access,  private  sector  capital  was  replaced  by  official
sector financing, accompanied by strict adjustment programmes to correct the flow imbalances
– the current account and fiscal deficits. For Greece, at least, the consequences were severe –
a  fall  in  GDP  of  over  25%  and  a  sharp  rise  in  unemployment.  This  deterioration  in  the
macroeconomic  environment  caused  debt  servicing  problems  in  households  and  companies
with  the  consequence  that  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  rose,  weakening  the  asset  quality  of
banks. Similar, if less severe, consequences were observed in the rest of the periphery. 
Hence, the root causes of the euro area crisis and the delayed and interrupted recovery reflect
failures  in  the  area  of  what  we  call  today  macroprudential  supervision,  government  failures,
especially on the fiscal front, and several structural weaknesses at the level of individual Member
States, as well as in the design of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). Many analysts have
said that if in the pre-crisis period we had the instruments of macroprudential supervision that we
have today, then the crisis would, most likely, not have occurred. Structural weaknesses include,
among others, the excessive reliance on bank credit in the euro area which, due to a weakened
banking  system  because  of  the  crisis,  has  delayed  recovery. At  the  same  time,  labour  and
product  market  rigidities  in  euro  area  countries,  as  well  as  institutional  deficiencies  in  the
management  and  resolution  of  NPLs  (e.g.  lengthy  judicial  procedures,  inadequate  insolvency
laws) delayed the much needed adjustment. 
There were also deficiencies in the initial design of the monetary union. First, the Stability and
Growth Path (SGP) failed to avert the burgeoning public debt in the pre-crisis period. Second,
there  was  no  monitoring  and  control  over  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  the  evolution  of
private debt. Finally, at the outbreak of the Greek crisis in 2010, euro area crisis management
and resolution tools were poor or non-existent on account of concerns over moral hazard, and
due to the lack of an appropriate institutional setting. There was no provision for risk-sharing in
the setup of the EMU.
2. Policy steps taken by the Greek and euro area authorities 
In recent years, both Greece and the euro area have gone a long way towards addressing the
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
causes  of  the  crisis,  while  the  ECB  has  taken  decisive  action  to  maintain  price  and  financial
stability and support economic recovery in the euro area. 
2.1 Greece: economic adjustment over the past six years 
The economic adjustment programmes implemented in Greece since 2010 have succeeded in
eliminating the major macroeconomic and fiscal imbalances, in spite of delays and missteps. In
more detail: 
The high primary deficit, which in 2009 was above 10% of GDP, has turned into a surplus. 
The external deficit, the loss of competitiveness and labour market rigidities and constraints
have been addressed through structural reforms in labour and product markets as well as in
public administration. 
In  addition,  there  has  been  a  sectoral  reallocation  towards  tradable  goods  and  services.
Moreover,  bank  recapitalization  and  considerable  consolidation  have  been  implemented  amid
difficult conditions, while various policy steps to address non-performing exposures (NPEs) have
been taken. 
2.2 The euro area: steps taken to strengthen the governance of the EMU and to address
the crisis 
After the ad hoc Greek Loan Facility that financed the first Greek bailout programme, the euro
area  set  up  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  to  provide  financial  assistance  to
distressed  Member  States.  The  EFSF  was  replaced  by  the  more  powerful  European  Stability
Mechanism (ESM) in October 2012. 
In response to the strong negative feedback loops between banks and sovereigns as well as
contagion  among  national  financial  markets,  European  leaders,  in  2012,  initiated  the  Banking
Union. Its three pillars are: the Single Supervisory Mechanism, the Single Resolution Mechanism
and the still-to-be completed common Deposit Insurance Scheme. 
Significant  progress  has  also  been  made  as  regards  fiscal  and  economic  surveillance.  The
Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) was substantially strengthened by the adoption of the so-called
“Six Pack”, and surveillance and coordination were enhanced through the so–called “Two Pack”.
The  European  Semester,  the  Macroeconomic  Imbalance  Procedure  and  the  Country  Specific
Recommendations contributed to stronger macroeconomic surveillance. 
Last but not least, the ECB has been addressing the severe and persistent disinflationary forces
in the euro area economy with a broad set of non-standard measures. To a great extent, these
measures have helped to improve financial conditions and boost the recovery in the euro area.
Macroprudential policy tools are also now available to secure financial stability. 
3. The way forward 
Current  forecasts  point  to  gradual  recovery  in  both  Greece  and  the  euro  area.  However,  the
recovery faces several headwinds, relating both to political risks linked to the rise of populism
and anti-EU rhetoric, the refugee crisis, Brexit and the crisis legacy, namely high unemployment,
high public and private debt. 
In view of these risks and challenges, the way forward should involve structural reforms in order
to improve the growth potential and to make Greece and the euro area more resilient to future
shocks, as well as greater economic policy coordination, convergence and risk-sharing inside
the EMU. 
3.1  Improve  the  growth  outlook  and  make  Greece  and  the  euro  area  more  resilient  to
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
future shocks 
As noted in the Five Presidents’ Report, euro area economies should be able to absorb shocks
internally. Building such a capacity implies removing rigidities in the labour, product and capital
markets,  so  that  the  relative  price  adjustment  mechanism  can  work  in  a  flexible  and  timely
manner  (in  the  absence  of  exchange  rate  adjustment)  and  for  resources  to  be  re-distributed
rapidly to their most productive uses. 
Structural reforms in the labour and product markets, as well as improvements in the business
environment  and  the  functioning  of  the  public  sector  will  attract  private  investment,  increase
employment,  productivity,  and  long-term  growth,  and  will  ensure  more  resilience  to  future
adverse shocks. 
Furthermore,  some  of  these  structural  reforms  (for  example  cutting  red  tape)  will  raise
expectations  of  future  income,  and  thus  boost  confidence  and  demand  in  the  short  term,
supporting  the  recovery.  In  addition,  policies  that  raise  labour  force  participation  and  reduce
structural unemployment are essential in order to boost future growth and employment. 
In Greece, the unwavering implementation of the structural reforms described in the new ESM
programme  is  a  prerequisite  for  economic  recovery.  Structural  reforms  are  expected  to
encourage  innovation  and  the  introduction  of  new  technologies  by  increasing  competition  in
various sectors and attracting new investment, both domestic and foreign. 
These  developments  will  improve  the  quality  of  Greek  exports,  expand  the  export  base  and
strengthen  the  non-price  competitiveness  of  the  economy.  In  this  way,  the  elimination  of  the
current  account  deficit  that  has  occurred  over  the  last  six  years  will  prove  sustainable  and
potential output will rise in the medium to long term. 
In addition, putting idle public property to good use and speeding up privatisation processes are
strong  tools  not  only  to  boost  investment  activity  and  foster  sustainable  growth,  but  also  to
support  fiscal  adjustment,  insofar  as  they  reduce  public  debt.  The  Greek  State,  for  historical
reasons, owns real estate, the development of which could attract investment and reduce public
debt.  This  is  an  opportunity,  which  has  not  been  exploited  yet,  but  necessitates  appropriate
legislation for land use.
 Alongside structural reforms, and in order to facilitate the current euro area recovery through a
stronger pick-up in lending, it is urgently needed to address the private debt overhang problem.
On  the  one  hand,  the  high  stock  of  NPLs  reduces  bank  profitability  and  thus  constrains  the
supply of credit, which primarily affects bank dependent SMEs. On the other hand, high NPLs
delay corporate restructuring and thus thwart the ability of viable firms to finance new investment
projects. 
Tackling  the  high  stock  of  non-performing  loans  is  the  greatest  challenge  facing  the  Greek
banking system and the Greek economy. Greece has the second highest NPE ratio in Europe
(after Cyprus), with non-performing exposures at the end of the first half of 2016 reaching 45% of
total exposures or €108.7 billion. 
A  number  of  initiatives  are  underway  with  the  goal  of  setting  up  an  accelerated  and  efficient
framework of private debt resolution. These initiatives, amongst others, include: (a) the recently
voted amendment of Law 4354/2015, which paves the way for the development of a secondary
market  for  non-performing  loans;  (b)  the  establishment  of  an  enhanced  framework  for  out-of-
court  workouts  and  the  pre-bankruptcy  procedures;  (c)  the  elimination  of  a  series  of  tax
obstacles both for borrowers and lenders; (d) the recently revised Code of Conduct for Banks for
the  transparent,  effective  and,  where  appropriate,  flexible  treatment  of  cooperating  borrowers
facing difficulties in servicing their debt obligations; (e) amendments to legislation to ensure the
cooperation of old shareholders in the restructuring of the underlying businesses; (f) the launch
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
of  a  comprehensive  monitoring  framework  in  relation  to  banks’  non-performing  exposure
resolution activities, and, finally, (g) a series of targets and key performance indicators that aim at
reducing overall non-performing exposures by 40% by the end of 2019. 
3.2  Reforms  in  the  institutional  setting  of  the  EMU  to  improve  economic  policy
coordination, convergence and risk sharing 
The adjustment mechanism within the EMU should be facilitated by ensuring that it works both
for countries with sustained external deficits and for those with sustained external surpluses. To
this end, the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure should be strengthened and foster reforms in
countries  that  have  been  accumulating  large  and  sustained  current  account  surpluses.  Crisis
stricken countries have improved their external positions on account of both higher exports driven
by structural reforms and lower imports due to the economic recession. By contrast, countries
that  had  high  pre-crisis  current  account  surpluses  have  not  contributed  to  the  much  needed
rebalancing due to insufficient domestic demand and low growth potential. 
Risk-sharing in the EMU should be enhanced along the lines proposed in the Five Presidents’
Report. Private risk-sharing can take place through actions that lead to a true financial union with
fully  integrated  financial  and  capital  markets.  These  involve  completing  the  Banking  Union,  by
creating  a  common  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  and  by  setting  up  a  credible  common  fiscal
backstop to the Single Resolution Fund that underlies the Single Resolution Mechanism. Such
steps are necessary to improve confidence in the banking system and break the bank-sovereign
feedback loop. 
A  genuine  Capital  Markets  Union  can  be  promoted  through  legislative  changes  that  impose
harmonization  towards  best  practices  on  securitization,  accounting,  insolvency  and  corporate
law,  property  rights  etc.  Such  changes  will  allow  for  deeper  integration  of  bond  and  equity
markets  and  will  ensure  that  companies  (and  in  particular  SMEs)  can  gain  access  to  capital
markets on top of bank funding. The Capital Markets Union will enhance cross-border investment
and consequently strengthen private sector risk-sharing across countries, as returns on assets
and  access  to  credit  become  less  correlated  with  domestic  economic  conditions  in  each
Member State. 
Besides enhancing the channels of private risk-sharing, a fiscal stabilization tool to cushion large
macroeconomic shocks i.e., public risk-sharing, is warranted in the euro area as a whole. Such
a  tool  would  provide  essential  insurance  to  asymmetric  shocks,  while,  in  case  of  symmetric
shocks, it would complement the single monetary policy, in particular, when the policy rates are
at the zero lower bound. 
Whilst there appears little appetite at present for full fiscal union, there are alternative ways to go
ahead  as  proposed  both  by  policy  makers  and  academics.  For  example,  building  on  the
European  Fund  for  Strategic  Investments  (Juncker’s  Plan)  and  as  proposed  in  the  Five
President’s Report, a common pool of EU funds for financing EU wide investment projects could
provide  the  impetus  for  closer  integration  in  the  future.  These  EU  funds  could  possibly  come
from  Eurobonds  issued  by  the  ESM.  Alternative  options  involve  a  common  unemployment
insurance scheme, financed through social insurance contributions, or an all-purpose “rainy day”
fund financed by annual contributions of Member States in good times. 
To avoid moral hazard, public risk sharing has to go hand-in-hand with greater coordination of
economic  policies  and  could  be 
implementation  of  country  specific
recommendations  and  structural  reforms,  as  well  as  sound  and  responsible  fiscal  policies  in
compliance with the existing EU rules. 
4. Conclusions and final remarks 
linked 
the 
to 
Concluding,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  indeed  both  Greece  and  the  euro  area  are  at  a
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
crossroads, as they face several challenges and risks ahead. Some of the challenges are of a
political nature, related to populistic and anti-EU views driven by the refugee surge, while others
are  related  to  the  euro-area  crisis  legacies.  Significant  progress  has  been  achieved  in  recent
years both in Greece and the euro area, while the accommodative monetary policy is supporting
the recovery. 
However,  further  action  is  imperative,  aiming  at  stepping  up  structural  reform  efforts  and
incentivizing investment, in order to sustain the recovery and boost medium to long-term growth
and employment. 
As  regards  Greece,  the  gradual  relaxation  of  capital  controls,  along  with  improvements  in
confidence and liquidity, are expected to contribute to the normalisation of economic and financial
conditions.  In  addition,  the  commitment  of  our  European  partners  to  take  action,  in  order  to
ensure the sustainability of public debt in the short and medium-to-long term, is a positive step
forward.  However,  the  envisaged  public  debt  management  measures  need  to  be  specified,
quantified  and  frontloaded.  This  would  enhance  the  credibility  and  acceptance  of  the  policies
pursued,  thereby  helping  to  further  consolidate  the  climate  of  confidence  and  strengthen
economic recovery. 
In this context, a lowering of the medium-term fiscal target from a primary surplus of 3.5% of
GDP from 2018 onwards, to 2% of GDP, without affecting public debt sustainability prospects is
feasible,  if  coupled  by  mild  debt  relief  measures.  Such  fiscal  relaxation  would  have  beneficial
effects for the Greek economy, as it would allow taxation to be lowered, freeing up resources for
supporting economic activity, while making fiscal targets economically and socially feasible. 
The actions described above will attract foreign direct investment and set in motion a virtuous
circle signaling the exit from recession and a gradual recovery of the economy. 
The  completion  of  the  EMU  along  the  lines  of  the  Five  Presidents’  Report,  by  allowing  more
economic policy coordination and greater private and public risk sharing, is a prerequisite for its
long-term viability and the long-term prosperity of its Member States. 
Last but not least, the euro area along with other areas of the world should confront certain of the
undesirable  consequences  of  globalization  and  technical  progress.  The  failure  to  tackle
unemployment,  reduction  of  wages,  worsening  income  distribution  and  tax  evasion  –  mostly
related to uncontrolled offshore activities – give rise to what we call failure of elites and worldwide
populism. 
Sources:  
Baldwin, R and Giavazzi, F, 2015, The Eurozone crisis: A consensus view of the causes and a
few possible solutions, 7 September 2015. w w w .voxeu.org/article/eurozone-crisis-consensus-view -causes-
and-few -possible-solutions  
Baldwin,  R  and  Giavazzi,  F,  2016,  How  to  fix  the  Euroze:  Views  of  leading  economists,  12
February 2016. w w w .voxeu.org/article/new -voxeu-ebook-how -fix-eurozone  
Bank of Greece, 2016 Monetary Policy Report 2015–2016, June. 
CEPR, 2015, Rebooting the Eurozone: Step I – agreeing a crisis narrative, Policy Insight, No. 85,
November. 
Cœuré,  B.  2015,  “Towards  a  political  convergence  process  in  the  euro  area”,  Speech  at  the
Interparliamentary Conference “Towards and Progressive Europe”, Berlin, 16 October 2015. 
w w w .ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp151016.en.html  
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Cœuré, B. 2016 “Rebalancing in the euro area: are we nearly there yet?” Speech at the Danish
Economic Society,Kolding 15 January 2016. 
w w w .ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160115.en.html  
Cœuré, B. 2016, “Time  for  a  new  Lamfalussy  moment”  Speech  at  the  Professor  Lamfalussy
Commemorative Coinference, Budapest, 1 February 2016. 
w w w .ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160201.en.html   
Cœuré, B. 2016, “The future of the euro area”, Speech at Le Cercle Europartenaires, Paris, 21
March 2016. w w w .ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160321.en.html  
Constâncio  V.  2015,  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  euro  area  problem”  Speech  at  the  18th  Euro
Finance Week, Frankfurt, 16 November 2015. 
w w w .ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp151116.en.html  
Draghi,  M.  2015,  “Monetary  policy  and  structural  reforms  in  the  euro  area”,  Speech  at
Prometeia40, Bologna, 14 December 2015. 
w w w .ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp151214.en.html  
ECB, 2016, “Increasing resilience and long-term growth: the importance of sound institutions and
economic structures for euro area countries and EMU, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, Art.3. 
ECB, 2016 “Update of economic and monetary developments”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 5. 
European Commission, 2015, Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union, Report by
Jean-Claude  Junker  in  close  cooperation  with  Donald  Tusk,  Jeroen  Dijsslbloem,  Mario  Draghi
and Martin Schulz, 22 June. 
European  Commission,  2016,  The  Economic  Outlook  after  the  UK  Referendum:  A  First
Assessment for the Euro Area and the EU, Institutional Paper 032, July. 
European  Commission,  2016, An  Economic  Take  on  the  Refugee  Crisis: A  macroeconomic
Assessment for the EU, Institutional Paper 033, July. 
IMF, 2016 Article IV consultation on Euro area politics, IMF Country report, No 16/219, July. 
IMF,  2016,  “Uncertainty  in  the  Aftermath  of  the  UK  Referendum,  World  Economic  Outlook
Update, July 16. 
Mersch,  Y.  2015,  “Advancing  Monetary  Union”,  Speech  at  the  Euro  Exhibition,  Osnabruck,  25
January 2015. w w w .ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp150125.en.html  
OECD, 2016, Euro Area, OECD Economic Surveys, June. 
Stournaras, Y. 2016 “Financial stability and policy intervention by Central Banks in Europe: where
do we stand and what challenges lie ahead” Speech at the Croatian National Bank in Zagreb, 23
March 2016. 
w w w .bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/New s/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?Item_ID=345&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–
4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b  
Stournaras,  Y.  2016  “The  Greek  Economy:  Developments,  Opportunities  and  Prospects”
Speech at the Federation of Industries of Northern Greece, Thessaloniki, 13 May 2016. 
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
w w w .bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/New s/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?Item_ID=361&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–
4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b  
Stournaras, Y. 2016 “The impact of the Greek sovereign crisis on the banking sector: challenges
to financial stability and policy responses by the Bank of Greece” Speech at the American School
of Classical Studies in Athens, 8 June 2016. 
w w w .bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/New s/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?Item_ID=362&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–
4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b  
Stournaras, Y. 2016, Monetary Policy Report 2015–2016, Speech to the Standing Committee on
Economic Affairs of the Hellenic Parliament, Athens, 11 July, 2016. 
w w w .bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/New s/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?Item_ID=373&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–
4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b  
in’t Veld, J. 2016, Public investment stimulus in surplus countries and their euro area spillover,
European Economic, Economic Brief 016, August.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
