Sharon Donnery: The outlook for the Irish economy
Remarks by Ms Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Global
Interdependence Center (GIC) "Central Banking Series: Dublin, Ireland", Dublin, 29 September
2016.
Introduction
 Your Excellency Ambassador O’Malley, former Governor Honohan, President Harker, members
of  the  Irish-American  Business  Chamber  and  Network,  esteemed  guests,  on  behalf  of  the
1
Central Bank of Ireland it is a pleasure to welcome you today.
The mission of the Central Bank of Ireland is ‘safeguarding stability, protecting consumers’. Our
mandate is broad and varied.  As part of the Eurosystem, our primary objective is price stability,
defined by the ECB’s Governing Council as aiming for inflation rates of below, but close to, 2%
over the medium term.     
The Bank is both the macroprudential authority and national resolution authority for Ireland. These
responsibilities, conferred on us after the financial crisis, give us a key role in the overall financial
stability of the State.
In  addition,  the  Bank  is  the  regulator  and  supervisor  of  most  financial  institutions  operating  in
Ireland. This broad mandate covers both prudential and consumer protection aspects and covers
a wide range of firms including inter alia, banks, insurers, stockbrokers, investment funds, credit
unions  and  intermediaries.        Much  of  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  work  is  carried  out  in  a
European context for example as part of Banking Union and the European System of Financial
Supervision.
An important part of the Bank’s role is the provision of forward-looking, independent economic
advice and commentary. We provide both commentary and analysis based on: a significant and
increasing  range  of  analytical  activities;  the  further  development  of  our  economic  models  and
tools; and the growing volume of financial statistics we collect.  
The provision of high quality statistics and analysis are essential in informing evidence based
policy  decisions  both  at  domestic  and  international  levels  and  in  explaining  financial  market
developments.  In this context, today I would like to share our view on the outlook for the Irish
economy, the impact of monetary policy and highlight some of the risks to the economic outlook,
notably the decision by the United Kingdom to leave the European Union.
The Irish economic outlook
The Irish economy is performing well. This is confirmed by a wide range of indicators – from the
labour market to consumer and underlying investment spending. 
However, two factors in particular have made it more difficult to get a clear picture of both the
performance and the outlook for the Irish economy. 
The first of these is the recent very large revisions to the Irish National Accounts, in particular the
large  upward  revisions  to  the  value  of  GDP  and  GNP  in  2015.  Second,  is  the  fact  that  the
outcome of the UK referendum on membership of the European Union has introduced significant
risk and uncertainty to the outlook for the Irish economy.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Angus Deaton the winner of the 2015 Nobel Prize in Economics recently noted that “Headline
statistics often seem simple but typically have many moving parts…, we must always work from
2
multiple sources, and look deep into the cogs and wheels”.
I think that we can all agree that the workings of the clock in the case of Irish macroeconomic
and financial headline statistics are becoming more and more complicated.
This  was  most  recently  observed  in  the  national  accounts  data  which  showed  a  26  per  cent
increase in GDP. Although compiled in full accordance with international manuals, these data
revisions make it difficult for policy makers and analysts, both domestically and internationally to
interpret.
Rather  than  giving  an  accurate  picture  of  the  actual  level  of  domestic  economic  activity,  the
numbers  reflect  the  statistical  ’on-shoring’  associated  with  a  level  shift  in  the  size  of  the  Irish
capital stock. 
This  has  arisen  from  corporate  restructurings  and  balance  sheet  reclassifications  in  the
multinational sector and also growth in aircraft leasing activity.
As a result, National Accounts data now include a very significant amount of activity carried out
elsewhere, but formally and correctly recorded as part of Irish GDP and GNP.
To get a more accurate measure of the level of activity in the domestic economy it is necessary
to look beyond the headline GDP and GNP figures to other more reliable spending and activity
indicators.    These  suggest  that,  while  not  growing  at  a  rate  of  26  per  cent,  economic  activity
continues to expand at a reasonably healthy pace.
In  particular,  consumer  spending  has  recovered  strongly,  supported  by  solid  gains  in
employment  and  rising  earnings.  Underlying  domestic  demand  –  that  is,  the  sum  of  personal
consumer spending, net government spending on goods and services and investment excluding
in aircraft and intangible assets, grew by close to 5 per cent in 2015.
Together with employment growth of 2.5 per cent and wage increases of a similar magnitude,
this points to growth in domestic activity broadly in the region of 5 per cent.
This rate of expansion is far removed from the measured increase in GDP of over 26 per cent
last year, but is over twice the average rate in the Eurozone.
The availability of good statistics is paramount from the Bank’s perspective, as we are not only
intensive users, but also significant producers.  However, solving these issues is not easy or
straightforward.  Nonetheless,  it  is  imperative  that  we  explore  ways  of  overcoming  these
challenges. In this context, a consultative group has been established by the Central Statistics
Office in Ireland, chaired by Governor Lane, to develop supplementary statistical information that
will generate more comprehensive insight to the dynamics of the Irish financial and economic
system.
Unconventional monetary policy and the Irish economy
A central ‘cog’ supporting the economic outlook is the current accommodative monetary policy
stance of the ECB.
A  sequence  of  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  has  been  implemented  by  the
Eurosystem, since mid-2014. The stimulus package comprises a number of tools, including:
the introduction of a negative interest rate on the ECB’s deposit facility,
a credit-easing package in the form of targeted long-term refinancing operations (TLTROs),
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
an asset purchase programme consisting asset-backed securities (ABS),
the re-ignition of the covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3), and
a forward guidance strategy.
Further  deterioration  of  the  inflation  outlook  in  late  2014  motivated  the  Governing  Council  in
January 2015 to announce  the  extension  of  this  asset  purchase  programme  to  include  public
sector  securities.  This  is  collectively  known  as  the  expanded  asset  purchase  programme
3
(EAPP).
The  portfolio  rebalancing  channel  is  frequently  considered  to  be  the  most  effective  channel
through  which  central  bank  asset  purchases  affect  the  real  economy.  Investors  that  sell
securities  to  the  central  bank  can  retain  the  proceeds  of  their  sales  on  deposit  or  they  may
reallocate  their  portfolios  towards  other  assets,  for  example  corporate  bonds  and/or  equity
securities. Increased demand for relatively riskier assets drives up their prices and lowers their
yields,  leading  to  positive  wealth  effects  for  investors  and  reducing  the  borrowing  costs  of
corporates. Both increased wealth and compressed credit costs have the potential to improve
the prospects for the real economy, by boosting spending and investment.
The bank lending channel is also associated with central bank asset purchases.
As a result of asset purchases a bank may receive a positive shock to its liabilities in light of
sales to the central bank by its customers.  These deposits offer banks a new source of funding,
thereby having the potential to facilitate expanded credit supply to the real economy. 
4
The  announcement  and  implementation  of  an  asset  purchase  programme  by  a  central  bank
demonstrates its intention to meet its inflation objective and signals that it expects to maintain
interest  rates  at  a  low  level  for  a  sustained  period.  Increased  confidence  and  certainty  in  the
economic  outlook,  alongside  reduced  long-run  real  interest  rates  should  not  only  encourage
spending but could also increase credit demand. Finally higher inflation expectations could cause
firms to raise prices in anticipation, leading to a more direct impact on inflation. 
Relative to the US credit market, the financial structure of the euro area is one in which banks
play  a  prominent  role.  The  credit  easing  package  strengthens 
the  pass-through  of
accommodative monetary policy by incentivising banks to lend to non-financial corporates and
households.  Furthermore  the  TLTROs  provide  banks  with  the  opportunity  to  ease  their
refinancing  conditions  by  substituting  comparatively  more  expensive  legacy  wholesale  funding
with funding obtained via the TLTROs.
In  this  context,  the  recent  modifications  to  the  package  of  non-standard  measures  should
contribute  further  to  have  a  positive  impact  on  economic  and  financial  conditions  in  the  Irish
economy.
For example, over the second quarter of 2016 Irish banks reported improved access to retail and
wholesale funding. Nearly two thirds of Irish retail banks participated in the first operation of the
5
modified credit easing package (TLTRO II).
Moreover,  the  introduction  of  the  package  of  non-standard  measures  has  also  supported  the
improvement in capital ratios of Irish banks. In the context of favourable funding conditions for
banks,  supported  by  improved  economic  growth,  in  2015  Irish-owned  banks  refinanced
preference shares and expanded their fully-loaded capital base. Capital ratios are also expected
6
to increase further over the next 6 months, due to retained earnings and capital issuance.
7
  Non-performing  loans
However, impaired assets continue to weigh on Irish  banks’  portfolios.
contribute  to  banks’  balance  sheet  fragility,  impinge  on  profitability  and  strain  capital  buffers,
impeding bank lending.  Therefore, the continued deliberate and determined work-out of NPLs
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
coupled with ongoing improvements in the Irish economy, will reduce the burden they pose and
support the extension of new loans to the real economy. 
The pass-through of reductions in policy interest rates is evident at the euro area aggregate level.
However, lending rates continue to be higher for many countries. For example, in Ireland interest
rates on mortgages have declined since 2014 but remain comparatively high.  Interest rates for
SMEs  vary  significantly  across  Europe  and  are  driven  by  a  number  of  factors  including  firm
characteristics (such as size and turnover), as well as country-level differences.  One challenge
faced by Irish SMEs is the relatively higher cost of credit compared to those in other euro area
countries. Since the start of 2014 SME interest rates have declined across the euro area but
have remained stubbornly high in Ireland.
10
8
9
High  levels  of  household  and  SME  debt,  a  hangover  from  the  Irish  credit  boom,  continue  to
remain a source of vulnerability in terms of both of net worth and servicing costs. Higher debt
levels  negatively  affect  consumption  and  investment  decisions,  compress  demand  for  bank
credit, thereby reducing the effectiveness of unconventional monetary policy measures on the
real economy.
In the household sector, for example debt stood at €148.5bn in Q1 2016 and remains high when
compared  to  our  European  counterparts.
  However  declines  in  key  indicators  suggest  an
improvement in the sustainability of household balance sheets.
12
  
11
As the deleveraging process in the household sector continues, the combined effect of the re-
formulated  credit  easing  package  (TLTRO  II)  with  the  suite  of  non-standard  measures
implemented since 2014 should continue to enhance the availability of credit and reduce the cost
of funding for both Irish households and SMEs.
13
Increased demand for loans for both house purchases and consumption was reported by Irish
households in the second quarter of 2016.  For example, in July growth in credit for consumption
of 2 per cent was the highest annual growth rate of credit supply to households since February
2009.
14
  
Year-on-year  declines  in  lending  of  6.4  per  cent  in  July  reflect  the  on-going  balance  sheet
correction of Irish corporates. Although the accommodative monetary policy stance is envisaged
to facilitate increased demand for loans, given corporates desire to fund investment.
Immediately  following  the  Governing  Council’s  announcement  in  March  of  this  year  to
supplement its asset purchase programme to include purchases of corporate bonds, spreads
between a wide range of corporate bond yields and the risk free rate tightened. Since then, a
number of Irish private and semi-state companies already availed of the opportunity to access
bond markets, locking in lower interest rates and benefiting from the opportunity to retire more
expensive legacy debt.
In  addition  to  these  impacts  on  the  banking  system,  households  and  SMEs,  non-standard
monetary policy has clearly influenced developments in government bond markets.
Over  recent  months,  yields  on  Irish  government  bonds  continued  their  downward  trajectory
across the curve, notably following the expansion of the asset purchase programme to include
purchases  of  public  sector  bonds  in  January  last  year.  This  also  reflects  the  continued
improvement in the public finances.
15
Yesterday, for example the yield on the 10 year Irish government bond was 0.34 per cent. This
equates  to  a  spread  of  47  basis  points  over  the  equivalent  German  bund,  and  the  narrowest
spread relative to other euro area countries most exposed to the sovereign debt crisis.
16
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is a far cry from July 2011, when in the midst of the European sovereign debt crisis yields stood
at 13.9 per cent.
In  terms  of  volumes,  the  National  Treasury  Management Agency  (the  Irish  Debt  Management
Office) issued €13 billion of bonds in 2015. The weighted yield was 1.51% with weighted average
maturity of just under 18 years. This compares with a weighted average yield of 2.84% in 2014
and  an  average  maturity  of  just  under  12  years. This is also reflected in Ireland’s recent
issuance of treasury bills at –0.36 per cent.
Ensuring the public debt burden continues on a sustainable trajectory is essential to the ongoing
economic recovery.
Forward guidance has been an important policy tool employed by the Governing Council as a
part  of  its  communication  strategy.  From  a  monetary  policy  perspective  the  asset  purchase
programmes “are intended to run until the end of March 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any
case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent
with its aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.” 
Furthermore in the context of interest rates “the Governing Council expects the key ECB interest
rates  to  remain  at  present  or  lower  levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  and  well  past  the
horizon of our net asset purchases.” Therefore monetary policy should remain supportive to the
domestic recovery.
However, the outlook for the Irish economy is complicated by a number of risks, particularly the
outcome of the Brexit referendum in the UK. 
The economic impact of Brexit on Ireland is difficult to estimate with any precision.  It is clear,
however, that the impact will be negative and material, both in the short-term and in the longer
term.
The  long-run  economic  impact  of  Brexit  on  Ireland  will  be  influenced  by  the  nature  of  the
withdrawal  agreement  between  the  EU  and  the  UK  and  the  subsequent  evolution  of  both
economies.
The eventual macroeconomic impact for the Irish economy will reflect the extent to which the exit
arrangements  bring  about  any  change  to  the  free  movement  of  goods,  services,  capital  and
labour.
Trade, FDI and the labour market are the key channels for the macroeconomic effects of Brexit.
Any agreement which keeps the UK access to the single market largely intact would have a more
limited  impact  but  the  scale  of  the  impact  could  be  much  more  significant  under  a  more
restrictive agreement.
In  the  short-term,  downside  risks  for  the  Irish  economy,  the  UK  and  the  broader  European
economies,  arise  mainly  from  the  macroeconomic,  financial  and  currency  market  effects  of
Brexit related uncertainty.
An important element of this uncertainty revolves around the terms of the relationship between
the UK and the EU, how long it will take to work out that relationship and how it will impact in the
interim.  This heightened uncertainty could act to dampen consumer demand and investment
decisions by firms.
While the Irish economy has become less reliant on the UK for trade over recent decades, the
UK remains a particularly important market for many indigenous firms.   Some sectors, including
agri-food, clothing and footwear and tourism continue to have a relatively high dependency on
exports, consequently could be affected disproportionately.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Banks most recently published forecast for the Irish economy and an updated projection to
be published next week have taken account of the potential negative Brexit effect. Compared to a
no-Brexit baseline, projected GDP growth has been revised down by 0.2 per cent in 2016 and by
about a half of one percent in 2017. 
Nevertheless even after these revisions, the outlook for the economy remains positive.  Ireland
remains on track to be the fastest growing economy in the EU this year, for the third year running
and a similar outcome is in prospect for next year.
To conclude, against a backdrop of balance sheet repair for Irish banks’ combined with on-going
deleveraging  by  Irish  households  and  SMEs,  the  Irish  economy  continues  to  deal  with  the
legacies arising from the crisis. Risks and uncertainties remain, notably from the UK’s decision
to  leave  the  European  Union.  Nonetheless,  economic  activity  continues  to  expand  at  a
reasonably healthy pace.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
 I would like to thank Mary Everett, Mary Cussen, Terry Quinn and Mícheál O’Keeffe and for their contribution to
this speech. The views expressed in this speech are personal and do not reflect the views of the Commission
of the Central Bank of Ireland, or the Eurosystem.
 See Deaton Angus, (2015) ‘Statistical objectivity is a cloak spun from political yarn’ Opinion, Financial Times,
2nd November, 2015 available here.
 The Governing Council noted in January 2015 that since ‘potential second-round effects on wage and price-
setting  threatened  to  adversely  affect  medium-term  price  developments,  this  situation  required  a  forceful
2015:
monetary 
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2015/html/pr150122_1.en.html
response’. See 
introductory 
statement, 
January 
policy 
22 
 See Butt, Nicholas & Domit, Silvia & McLeay, Michael & Thomas, Ryland & Kirkham, Lewis, (2012), “What can
the money data tell us about the impact of QE?,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Bank of England, Vol. 52,
No.4, pp. 321–331 for a detailed discussion of how an asset purchases programme affects money supply.
 Irish responses to the ECB’s Bank Lending Survey, July 2016.
 Irish responses to the ECB’s Bank Lending Survey, July 2016.
 See Macro-Financial Review, H1 2016, Central Bank of Ireland.
 The interest rate for new house purchase loans in Ireland stood at 3.38 per cent as of February 2016. See
Central Bank of Ireland, Household Credit Market Report, H1 2016, available here.
 See Carroll, James. & McCann, Fergal, (2016) Understanding cross-country interest rate variation in Europe
Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin, 2016, 2, April.
 SME lending rates, proxied by rates on loans to NFCs of up to €1 million, were 4.71 per cent in Ireland in July
2016, substantially higher than the euro area average SME interest rate of 2.36 per cent.  
 See Central Bank of Ireland, Household Credit Market Report, H1 2016.
  Household  debt  sustainability  continues  to  improve  with  both  debt-to-income  and  debt-to-assets  levels
decreasing. As of Q1 2016 household debt as a proportion of disposable income was 149.4 per cent. Debt as a
portion of household total assets, is also on a downward trend, falling from a peak of 28 per cent in 2012 to 19
per cent in early 2016.
 Under TLTRO II, eligible net lending by banks includes loans to euro area non-financial corporations (NFCs)
and  households,  excluding  loans  to  households  for  house  purchase.  Banks  whose  eligible  net  lending
exceeds a benchmark can avail of this funding at an interest rate as low as that on the deposit facility.
 Growth in medium term (with a maturity of 1 to 5 years) consumption credit provided the largest contribution to
these growth developments. 
 Exchequer tax revenue grew by 9.2 per cent on an annual basis in the year to June, with strong gains across
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
most tax categories.
16
 Such euro area countries include Ireland, Italy, Spain, Portugal and Greece.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
