Carl-Ludwig  Thiele:  Blockchain  technology  -  opportunities  and
challenges
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Carl-Ludwig  Thiele,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the 6th Central Banking Workshop 2016, Eltville, 21 November 2016.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
I would like to warmly welcome you to the 6th Central Banking Workshop. I am delighted that we
have been able to attract such top-class speakers and participants to this event, who, given their
experience and knowledge, are able to provide valuable contributions on what is a highly topical
subject. This year, the workshop is about blockchain technology, which has generated a large
swell of public interest, or even hype, one could say.
With our workshop, entitled “Blockchain technology – opportunities and challenges", we want to
enable  a  lively  exchange  between  researchers,  practitioners  and  regulators.  Each  of  these
groups, in its own right, has a keen interest in this topic. But, as Ernst Ulrich von Weizsäcker
once said: "An exchange of views requires people to talk to each other, not about each other". In
this spirit, I hope that we will have a stimulating exchange of views over the coming days.
Blockchain  technology  is  currently  generating  almost  exuberant  enthusiasm  among  banks,
enterprises  and  public  bodies.  New  initiatives  and  cooperation  agreements  on  blockchain
applications are being announced in the financial press on a near daily basis. This is not limited
solely  to  banks  and  private  enterprises,  but  also  encompasses  projects  by  governments  and
central banks.
Examples of such cooperation agreements can be found on all of the world’s continents. Beside
Fintechs and other startups, participants include the Bank of England, stock exchanges in the
United States, Australia and Japan, as well as numerous commercial banks, to name only a few.
Even  an  aircraft  manufacturer,  Airbus,  is  exploring  blockchain  for  the  purpose  of  process
optimisation.
 2. Structure and objectives of the workshop
How  is  it  that  a  relatively  complicated  form  of  technical  processing  is  generating  such
enthusiasm?
In  this  workshop  we  want  to  address  this  question  by  talking  about  the  possibilities  that
blockchain technology opens up and the challenges this presents.
This is anything but a trivial undertaking. Indeed, views on these possibilities and challenges vary
greatly from person to person, but also among institutions. At present, there is no telling whether
blockchain will supersede existing technology in a few years’ time. All the more reason, therefore,
is to examine this technology and its implications in detail and gather key insights about it. This is
true, not least, for central banks and regulators. So what lies behind this technology?
Even when it comes to a basic definition, we see that the word blockchain is not always used to
mean the same thing. Often, the term “distributed ledger technology” is used as a synonym for
blockchain.  If  we  regard  distributed  ledger  technology  as  the  principle  behind  distributed
databases, blockchain represents a sub-category thereof. However, there is, as yet, no uniform
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
definition of the term.
An  elementary  understanding  of  the  technology  is  a  prerequisite  for  discussing  its  potential,
which is why module 1, entitled “Blockchain – basics, technological achievements and general
potential", is dedicated to this question.
Blockchain became known, above all, as the technology behind the bitcoin cryptocurrency. The
term is derived from the fact that transactions are grouped together in “blocks". These blocks are
chained  together  through  a  complex  mathematical  procedure  that  is  unforgeable  and  tamper-
proof.
Essentially, blockchain allows a ledger of transactions to be run on a decentralised basis within a
network. The technology therefore enables the safe transmission of all manner of assets (not
just  bitcoin),  without  the  need  for  confirmation  from  a  central  institution.  With  blockchain,
reconciliation  between  participants  occurs  automatically.  But  what  are  we  to  do  with  this
technical innovation?
Plato once said that: "Necessity is the mother of invention". But in the case of blockchain, we are
seeing the exact opposite. The invention, ie blockchain, has already been born. Now people in
many places are searching for the necessity – for the specific cases where it can be applied in
practice.
Blockchain-based  technologies  offer  up  the  chance  of  simplifying  complex  intermediation
processes  for  payment  and  settlement  activities.  Virtually  all  payment  service  providers  are
therefore currently looking for ways to apply this technology. Its use in payment transactions is an
obvious choice, as the cryptocurrency bitcoin has already been created for this purpose.
But does it make sense to use blockchain in this of all areas? And in what form should it be used
in  the  area  of  payment  transactions?  These  questions  will  be  addressed  in  module  2  of  the
workshop: “Possible business cases for payments".
Payment  transactions  based  on  blockchain  inevitably  also  raise  the  question  of  virtual
currencies. Bitcoin was created shortly after the outbreak of the financial crisis and was intended
to serve as a countermodel to the prevailing financial system. At first, bitcoin fired many people’s
imagination and led some to expect a revolution in the financial system. It seemed conceivable
that banks or even central banks could be bypassed and that a genuine “gold standard” could be
created, based on bitcoin and independent of politicians and central banks. In addition to bitcoin,
over 700 other virtual currencies have been created. However, none of these virtual currencies
have managed to move beyond a niche existence.
The blockchain used to transmit bitcoins needs to be considerably altered to make it suitable for
financial  transactions.  It  is  unclear  whether  the  core  problems  of  blockchain  in  terms  of
performance, scalability and security can be solved to allow a broad market rollout.
The question of the future of bitcoin and digital currencies in general will be examined in more
detail in module 3: “Bitcoin – a promising alternative for payments?"
It is interesting to see how the public debate has developed since the early days of bitcoin. Efforts
are now centred on evolving blockchain into a basic technology capable of facilitating allocation
processes across companies. The potential users of this technology are often precisely those
institutions which the creation of bitcoin was originally designed to make superfluous.
In addition to its application in payment transactions, numerous blockchain-based applications
are being developed for securities settlement. Possible advantages from the use of blockchain
technology arise not only from the technology itself, but also through process optimisation and
potential disintermediation in this area.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Securities settlement has improved considerably in recent years, especially in Europe. However,
this  development  is  not  yet  complete,  as  the  settlement  landscape  remains  complex  and  is
characterised, 
trade  securities  within
nanoseconds, we need several days to settle these transactions.
in  part,  by  convoluted  processes.  Although  we 
We will take a closer look at securities settlement in module 4, entitled “Possible applications and
its potential in the post-trade industry".
These numerous questions and potential radical changes on the financial markets present us, as
a central bank, with particular challenges – in payment transactions, securities settlement and
beyond.  The  workshop  therefore  focuses  on  the  special  role  of  central  banks  in  module  5,
entitled “Blockchain – a central bank perspective".
As a central bank, we are faced with the question of how to deal with blockchain technology. In
settlement,  we  are  affected  in  two  ways.  As  an  operator  of  central  payment  and  securities
settlement systems, we also need to think about the future development of these infrastructures,
despite  the  high  performance  systems  already  in  existence.  Blockchain-based  technologies
must be integrated in such a way that they provide added value. Indeed, as entrepreneur and
politician Philip Rosenthal once said: "He who ceases to be better, ceases to be good".
From the perspective of oversight, we need to keep a careful watch on current developments
and  intervene  if  necessary. A  deep  technical  understanding  is  necessary  in  order  to  respond
appropriately to new business models from a regulatory perspective.
The two decisive criteria that we need to measure distributed ledger and other new technologies
by are the following.
First, does using the new technology improve the security of the systems or at least not
make it worse?
And second, does the use of new technologies increase the efficiency of financial market
infrastructures?
 3. Current developments and outlook
Many enterprises and institutions currently working on blockchain-based solutions expect to reap
great  benefits  from  them.  Blockchain  technology  holds  out  the  promise  of  cost  savings,  de-
risking potential and efficiency gains. This includes, among other things, the automation of work-
sharing processes as well as faster processing and the fulfilment of contractual obligations via
smart contract solutions.
One  positive  effect  that  can  already  be  seen  is  industry-wide  cooperation.  Dialogue  between
various market participants on future market developments can foster mutual understanding and
facilitate  the  harmonisation  of  processes.  This  makes  it  possible  to  adequately  react  to  the
challenges  posed  by  new  technologies.  This  is  of  importance  in  the  financial  industry,  in
particular, which is characterised by network effects.
That  said,  one  should  not  simply  gloss  over  the  challenges  and  weaknesses  posed  by  the
technology.
The  requirements  imposed  on  regulated  providers  cannot  currently  be  met  by  blockchain
technology, or can only be met with difficulty. This concerns, for example, the question of how to
engineer  absolute  finality.  Furthermore,  the  know-your-customer  requirements  need  to  be
observed and the confidentiality of transaction data must be ensured. This is also a reason why
the regulatory status of blockchain technology in many countries is still unclear.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Furthermore, despite the supposedly greater resilience of its decentralised structure, blockchain
still  has  high  obstacles  to  surmount  before  it  can  be  applied  across  the  board,  owing  to  its
susceptibility to manipulation. Recent hacker attacks are a case in point.
This  is  another  reason  why  the  debate  has  largely  shifted  from  open  blockchain  applications,
such as bitcoin, to closed networks with a limited circle of participants.
 4. Conclusion
Inefficiencies  are  often  perpetuated  not  by  a  lack  of  technology,  but  by  (historical)  structures.
Blockchain  technology  is  therefore  not  a  patent  solution  for  change,  but  it  does  provide  an
opportunity to make change.
Disruptive technologies require time to develop, mature and unfurl their full potential. Not every
innovation  succeeds,  though,  and  it  remains  to  be  seen  how  the  application  of  blockchain
technology will develop.
Following  the  revolutionary  beginnings  with  bitcoin,  the  prevailing  view  now  seems  to  be  that
blockchain applications will spread rather more gradually. One might therefore speak of evolution
rather  than  revolution.  Before  we  can  even  ask  questions  about  the  broader  use  of  this
technology, we must first be sure that using this new technology is at least as secure, efficient
and cost-effective in financial transactions as conventional technology.
Blockchain technology could become a game changer, in the financial industry and, perhaps in
particular,  beyond.  The  potential  of  blockchain  technology  is  often  compared  to  that  of  the
internet. It should be remembered that it took some time before the truly beneficial applications of
the  internet  emerged.  With  blockchain,  we  are  only  at  the  very  beginning  of  a  potential
development of this kind.
Innovations are the lifeblood of a continually developing economy. Moreover, evolution processes
are never linear. The first great wave of euphoria, which was also seen in the media, is being
followed  by  a  phase  of  checking,  weighing-up  and  consolidation,  before  new  offers  and
technologies are rolled out on a broad scale.
Ladies and gentlemen, Goethe once said: "We know accurately only when we know little; with
knowledge doubt increases."
My impression is that with the increasing efforts being devoted to blockchain technology, doubts
will also increase as to whether this technology can meet the expectations being placed on it,
which in some cases are extremely high. The question that we want to examine in more detail in
this workshop is what specific doubts we have and whether the technology can overcome them.
I would like to conclude by wishing you all an interesting and, above all, informative workshop.
Thank you very much for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
