 “Central Bank Independence Revisited in the Era  
of Unconventional Monetary Policy” 
Speech by  
Professor John (Iannis) Mourmouras  
Deputy Governor, Bank of Greece 
Former Finance Minister 
at the SEACEN1 - OMFIF Joint Policy Summit entitled 
“Financial stability in an uncertain global environment”*2 
 
Sasana Kijang, Bank Negara Malaysia 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
Wednesday, 23 November 2016 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great honour for me to be back to this part of the world. It’s certainly warmer over here! 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  for  inviting  me  to  give  a  speech  at  this  Joint  Policy 
Summit on a topic that I have been revisiting lately, that of central bank independence. My 
earlier research on the subject goes back 20 plus years.  
My speech today revolves one single important question: if and how the concept of an 
independent  central  bank  has  been  challenged,  or  perhaps  even  undermined,  in  an  era  of 
unconventional monetary policies, including their own exit strategies.  
Quite a few examples come to mind, especially looking at the latest developments. US 
President-elect Donald Trump criticised Fed Chair Janet Yellen for the Fed’s policy of low 
interest rates. In particular, the Fed has been accused of bias by President-elect Trump. British 
Prime  Minister  Theresa  May  came  openly  against  the  Bank  of  England’s  policy  under 
Governor Mark Carney saying that low interest rates deprive savers of interest income. Also, 
Germany’s  “five  wise  men”  (Council  of  Economic  Experts)  and  German  Finance  Minister 
Wolfgang  Schäuble  criticised  ECB  President  Mario  Draghi  for  his  negative  interest  rate 
policy. Against this background, the ultimate question is quite straightforward: is central bank 
independence  sufficient  for  price  stability  when  the  tail  risk  of  deflation  is  visible  and 
unconventional monetary policies last too long? Opinions differ on this and I will give you 
my own view on this question in a minute, but before that let me make my view clear that 
                                                           
1 The South East Asian Central Banks Research and Training Centre. 
* Disclaimer: Views expressed in this speech are personal views and do not necessarily reflect those of the 
institutions I am affiliated with. 
 1 
central  bank  independence  is  a  necessary  condition  for  price  stability  both  in  terms  of 
mitigating  a  political  business  cycle,  but  also  in  terms  of  reducing  the  inflationary  bias 
inherent in monetary policy. 
 
Central bank independence: theory 
The intellectual roots of central bank independence (or CBI) can be traced back to the 
rational  expectations  revolution,  pioneered  by  the  Chicago  School  in  the  1970s.  Rational 
expectations played a vital role in breaking the intellectual deadlock in the effort to address 
the stagflation phenomenon of the 1970s. With regard to monetary policy, seminal work by 
Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Barro and Gordon (1983) showed that under discretionary 
monetary policy the interaction of rational private agents with an equally rational government 
optimising a non-linear loss function whose arguments are deviations of inflation and output 
from socially desired target-levels, generates a Nash equilibrium involving an inflation bias 
whose size increases with the degree of output-gap aversion and which does not entail any 
sustainable output gains.  
To address the problem of inflation bias, monetary policy should be conducted under a 
technology  of  credible  commitment  to  low  future  inflation  rates  so  that  private  inflation 
expectations are anchored to equally low levels. Initially, this commitment took the form of 
intermediate policy targets, such as targets for money supply growth, introduced in the early 
1980s  by  the  Reagan  and  Thatcher  governments  in  the  US  and  the  UK  respectively;  or 
exchange rate targets implemented, among others, by European countries in the context of the 
European  Monetary  System.  Intermediate  targets  were  successful  in  lowering  inflation  in 
major  industrialised  economies,  thus  introducing  the  Great  Moderation  era.  However,  the 
instability of money demand and the opaqueness of money supply targets rendered the latter’s 
implementation operationally difficult (see Mourmouras and Arghyrou, 2000). On the other 
hand,  exchange  rate  targets  rarely  stood  the  test  of  time,  thus  preserving  questions  of 
credibility, as demonstrated by the literature on currency crises (see Obstfeld, 1996).  
CBI,  along  with  the  introduction  of  inflation  targeting,  was  largely  the  profession’s 
response to the shortcomings of intermediate targets. Specifically, delegating monetary policy 
to an independent central bank, with a formal mandate to achieve price stability and granting 
discretion in the choice of instruments necessary to meet this objective, reduces the inflation-
bias  problem  as  a  result  of  the  central  banker’s  objective  function  including  an  inflation-
aversion parameter higher than the government’s. Theoretically, this inflation gain may come 
at the cost of higher output volatility (see Rogoff, 1995). Empirical evidence, however, (see 
 2 
e.g. Alesina and Summers, 1993 and Cuckierman, 2008) suggests that CBI may operate as 
free-lunch, in the sense that it involves an obvious gain without causing an equally obvious 
loss. Empirical measures of central bank independence are found to be negatively correlated 
with the first and second moment of inflation, showing little, if any, correlation with output 
variability. Furthermore, CBI can be beneficial in ensuring sustainable public debt dynamics, 
as theoretically shown by Mourmouras and Su (1995) in a dynamic game set-up. As a result 
of  its  theoretical  and  empirical  advantages,  CBI  was  widely  adopted  (particularly  in  the 
1990s) in major industrialised economies and beyond. The form of independence, however, 
varies between instrument (economic) and goal (political) independence (see Fischer, 1995). 
Under the former, the operational goals of the central bank are exogenously determined, either 
by  legislation  or  by  another  official  body  such  as  the  finance  ministry.  Under  instrument 
independence, the central bank is free to choose without external interference the means (the 
policy instruments) best suited to meet its given goals: the Bank of England is an example of 
this form of independence. Under goal independence, the central bank chooses independently 
both  the  goals  of  its  policy,  as  well  as  the  instruments  best  suited  to  meet  its  self-selected 
goal: the ECB is an example of this type of independence.  
Delegating monetary policy to an independent central bank raises important questions 
of  democratic  checks  and  balances,  i.e.  questions  of  transparency  and  accountability. 
Accountability, in turn, is related to at least two dimensions. First, the type of central bank 
independence:  the  closer  we  move  towards  the  independence  goal,  the  higher  the  need  for 
transparency  and  accountability.  The  second  dimension  is  the  number  of  goals  set  for  the 
independent central bank. Perhaps non-intuitively, accountability declines with the number of 
policy goals, as given a set of policy instruments, increasing the number of goals results in 
trade-offs  between  goals.  As  the  welfare  ordering  of  policy  outcomes  under  trade-offs  is 
intrinsically  more  difficult  than  performance-ordering  under  a  single  policy  objective,  the 
scope for accountability increases when the central bank focuses on one policy objective. This 
accountability  enhancement,  combined  with  the  theoretical  and  empirical  advantages  of 
inflation-averse  monetary  policy,  resulted  in  the  majority  of  the  countries  adopting  central 
bank independence to define price stability  as the overriding objective  of monetary  policy. 
The ECB is a characteristic example of this trend. On the other hand, the Fed, whose dual 
mandate includes price stability and maximum employment (plus moderate long-term interest 
rates), is a notable exception.  
 
 
 3 
Monetary policy in the post-crisis period  
The  global  financial  crisis  of  2008/2009  and  the  ensuing  European  sovereign  debt 
crisis have fundamentally changed the operational framework of independent central banks. 
These  changes  relate  to  three  levels.  The  first  is  methodological:  We  now  have  an 
appreciation of the potential real economic costs of financial crises that we previously lacked. 
This  has  motivated  the development  of  a  niche  literature  introducing  a  banking  sector  into 
DSGE models, thus allowing for financial crises (see e.g. Gertler et al., 2012 and Boissay et 
al.,  2013).  This  literature  promises  to  enhance  the  information  available  to  policy-makers 
designing and implementing monetary policy. 
 The second change is that central banks have been given new macro-prudential tasks, 
such as the supervision of systemic banks in the EMU, conducted by the ECB since 2014. On 
this  frontier,  central  banks  don’t  know  if  they  have  failed  until  is  too  late.  The  costs  of 
confusion  and  policy  conflicts  with  multiple  objectives  may  be  too  high,  damaging  the 
credibility of the central bank. And I refer to both types of costs: the costs of taking measures 
to avoid bank failures or the costs of doing nothing.   
The  third  change  is  the  situation  on  the  ground:  Rather  than  preventing  excessive 
inflation,  price  stability  in  the  post-crisis  era  is  about  preventing  deflation.  Under  low 
inflation,  central  banks  largely  lose  the  main  policy  instrument  of  conventional  (standard) 
monetary policy, namely targeting short-run interest rates through open market operations, as 
short-term  rates  are  restricted  by  the  zero  lower  bound  limit.  As  a  result,  all  major  central 
banks have employed non-standard monetary policy tools in recent years. These include the 
provision of emergency liquidity and credit support to banks and other financial institutions, 
extending  the  definition  of  assets  accepted  as  eligible  collateral  when  providing  financial 
institutions loans on a short- or medium-term basis; and introducing quantitative easing (QE) 
programmes in the context of which central banks have been buying from the private sector 
sovereign bonds, corporate bonds and other corporate assets.  
Let me quickly remind you of the ECB’s monetary policy stance over the last nine years 
as  a  response  to  the  worst  financial  crisis  since  the  Great  Depression,  leading  to  negative 
interest rates and entering practically unchartered territory. 
 
   4 
Table 1. ECB’s non-standard measures 
Year 
Non-standard measures 
Oct-Dec 2008 
2009  
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
ECB  cuts  the  base  interest  rate  from  4.25%  to  2.50%,  provides  US  dollar  liquidity 
through  foreign  exchange  swaps,  expands  the  list  of  assets  eligible  as  collateral  in 
Eurosystem  funding  operations,  introduces  the  6-month  longer-term  refinancing 
operations  (LTROs)  and  decides  the  main  refinancing  operations  to  be  carried  out 
through a fixed-rate tender procedure with full allotment. 
ECB cuts the base interest rate from 2.50% to 1.00%, and introduces the first Covered 
Bond Purchase Programme (CBPP1). 
ECB activates the Securities Markets Programme (SMP). 
The  ECB  launches  the  second  Covered  Bond  Purchase  Programme  (CBPP2)  and 
introduces the 3-year LTROs. 
The ECB announces the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs). 
The ECB cuts the base interest rate to 0.25% and introduces forward guidance.  
The  ECB  cuts  the  base  interest  rate  to  0.05%  and  the  deposit  facility  rate  to  -0.20%, 
bringing  it  for  the  first  time  in  negative  territory  and  introduces  the  Targeted  Longer-
Term Refinancing Operations (TLTRO) with a 4-year maturity. 
ECB  introduces  the  expanded  Asset  Purchase  Programme  (APP)  and  cuts  the  deposit 
facility rate to -0.30%. 
ECB  accelerates  the  expanded  Asset  Purchase  Programme  (APP)  and  cuts  the  Main 
Refinancing Operations (MRO) rate to 0.00% and the deposit facility rate to -0.40%. 
 
Indeed, the 10 largest central banks now own assets totaling $21.4 trillion, accounting 
for  29%  of  the  world  economy,  up  by  10%  from  end-2015,  double  what  it  was  in  mid-
September 2008 and almost half the value of all debt in Bloomberg’s global bond index (as 
shown in Chart 1)!  
 
  5 
Chart 1. The combined assets of the 10 largest central banks 
Finally, almost 75% of the world’s central bank assets are controlled by policy-makers 
in four regions: China, the US, Japan and the eurozone. The following six – that is, the central 
banks of England, Brazil, Switzerland, Saudi Arabia, India and Russia – each account for an 
average of 2.5%. The remaining 107 central banks tracked by Bloomberg, mostly with IMF 
data, hold less than 13% (see Chart 2). 
  Chart 2. Central banks’ combined assets 
   6 
Chart 3. Stock of assets purchased by the four major central banks as a percentage of 
national GDP 
 
Source: Bank of Greece, European Central Bank, Fed, Bank of England and Bank of Japan. Note: The ECB’s 
purchased assets in the context of the SMP, CBPP1, 2 & 3, ABS and PSPP. 
 As a result, central bank balance sheets expanded considerably: since 2008 the Fed’s balance 
sheet has more than doubled; the Bank of England’s balance sheet trebled; while the ECB’s 
balance sheet has also expanded considerably, particularly since the introduction of the ECB’s 
QE programme in 2015.  
QE programmes are designed to prevent deflation mainly through three distinct channels (see 
Demertzis and Wolff, 2016). First, the interest rate channel: this operates through lowering 
long-term interest rates to improve investment conditions and disincentivise savings. Second, 
the  portfolio  rebalancing  channel:  this  operates  through  the  purchase  of  relatively  low-risk 
assets of long-term maturity, thus incentivising investors to take long positions in higher-risk 
(and thus higher expected return) assets. Third, the exchange rate channel, which as its name 
suggests works through a demand-boosting weaker domestic currency. The degree of success 
of  QE  programmes  is  under  active  research  investigation  Existing  evidence,  however, 
suggests that they have  been successful in preventing large-scale deflation conditions, with 
the  announcement  effect  of  QE  programmes  being  stronger  than  the  effects  of  actual 
implementation (see e.g. Demertzis and Wolff, 2016 and Altavilla et al., 2015).  
 
Challenges for central bank independence in the low-inflation period  
The legacy of the great financial crisis of 2008 and the low inflation conditions that 
 
have  since  been  observed  bring  new  challenges  for  central  bank  independence.  These 
challenges fall into two categories. First, the instruments’ independence of central banks has 
 7 
been put into question by external parties. Second, even if the instruments’ independence is 
not  formally  challenged,  it  may  be  effectively  compromised  as  a  result  of  the  changed 
conditions. The two kinds of challenges are obviously interconnected. A formally independent 
central  bank  facing  effective  constraints  in  the  conduct  of  its  policy  may  find  it  harder  to 
deliver on its mandate and may subsequently face calls for restricted independence. On the 
other  hand,  a  central  bank  whose  independence  is  under  threat  may  be  constrained  in  its 
policy  (instruments)  choices.  All  in  all,  current  circumstances  pose  challenges  for  the 
successful regime of monetary dominance paradigm established in recent years.  
External  challenges  to  the  instrument’s  independence  mainly  stem  from  political 
pressure. In the US, for example, proposals have been tabled to subject the monetary policy of 
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to unlimited congressional policy audits; adopt 
a specific equation in setting monetary policy and require from the FOMC to justify, through 
congressional  hearings  and  investigations,  deviations  from  the  policy  dictated  by  that 
equation; and use the Fed as a source of finance to monetize specific government initiatives 
(see  Fischer,  2015).  In  the  euro-area,  on  the  other  hand,  the  QE  programme  has  been 
challenged both for being too expansive, as well as for being too limited. Similar criticism has 
been voiced regarding the effects of monetary policy in the UK.  
My own verdict is that the challenge should not be in the very concept of independence, 
but rather in the current economic policy mix: loose monetary policy plus tight fiscal policy. 
By  keeping  interest  rates  in  negative  territory  for  too  long,  the  redistribution  effects  of 
monetary  policy  and  the  perceived  degree  of  success  of  meeting  the  mandated  objectives 
become more pronounced.  
Starting with the former, low interest rates redistribute wealth from savers to borrowers; 
and result in higher asset prices. Reduced real returns on savings have caused reactions from 
circles  representing  the  savers’  constituency,  both  within  and  across  countries,  a  point 
particularly  relevant  within  the  EMU;  and  as  the  distribution  of  asset  holdings  is  highly 
uneven among sections of the population, the benefits of QE programmes may also be seen to 
be uneven. On the other hand, CBI independence may be questioned as long as recovery in 
major economies remains fragile; or is perceived as not achieving equally good performance 
across the board of its extended set responsibilities including, for example, financial stability.  
The independence of central banks may be scrutinised due to concerns as to whether a 
central bank with an extended mandate of objectives can operate transparently and with an 
 8 
appropriate  degree  of  accountability  in  the  context  of  a  democratic  political  and  economic 
system. 
All in all, an independent central bank that is subject to democratic accountability needs 
broader support from the public. Clearly, with persistent negative rates you are bound sooner 
or later to lose major parts of the broad constituency that you need as an independent central 
banker. 
Central banks have resisted challenges to their independence, pointing to the fact that 
political pressure onto monetary policy, mainly stemming from the fact that political cycles 
are shorter than the cycles faced by monetary policy design and implementation, introduces 
into macro-performance exactly the kind of pressure CBI was initially meant to address. For 
example,  in  the  US,  despite  low  inflation,  survey-based  measures  of  longer-term  inflation 
expectations  remain  in  the  area  of  2%  (see  Fischer,  2015).  In  the  euro-area,  the  ECB’s 
decision  to  extend  its  QE  programme  has  been  taken  in  full  independence,  with  a  view  to 
achieving the medium-term price stability objective within an environment of decentralised 
national  fiscal  and  structural  policies  (see  Cœuré,  2015).  Similar  clear  statements  of  intent 
have  been  recently  expressed  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England  in  the  wake  of 
questions raised at high political level regarding the present course of UK monetary policy. 
Central banks’ opposition to calls for formally restricting their independence does not 
ensure  that  monetary  policy  may  not  face  effective  restrictions  in  its  choice  of  monetary 
policy instruments. This risk mainly comes from the interaction of monetary policy with other 
policies, namely fiscal, structural and financial. Separate authorities charged with the conduct 
of these policies may be formally independent, they are, however, also interdependent. The 
risk raised by such interdependence is that if one independent policy authority does not take 
appropriate action to meet its mandated objectives, the remaining independent authorities may 
be  obliged  to  over-react  in  a  persistent  manner  in  order  to  meet  their  own  objectives.  To 
provide an example, a direct way of identifying such a policy interdependence failure is in the 
field  of  nominal  demand:  e.g.  in  the  eurozone,  nominal  demand  in  Q2/2016  was  only  7% 
higher  than  in  Q2/2008  (real  domestic  demand  was  1%  lower  than  it  had  been  in  the 
abovementioned periods), but much lower than the potential increase in its trend rate (roughly 
at 24% cumulatively, assuming a trend rate of real growth of 1% and a target inflation rate of 
2%). Compare this number (7%) with the one for the US 23% of nominal demand growth 
during the same period. In brief, this may result in a regime of “weak dominance” of other 
policies  over  monetary  policy,  effectively  destabilising  the  regime  of  monetary  dominance 
that CBI is meant to establish. Another example of such potential weak dominance relates to 
 9 
the expansion of the balance-sheets of central banks in the context of QE programmes. This 
expansion  may  increase  as  a  result  of  imperfections  in  the  response  of  other  policies  to 
negative economic shocks. Such imperfections might pre-commit future monetary policy to 
lower than optimal for business cycle management interest rates, to prevent the central bank 
from registering large losses on its balance sheet caused by increased interest rates. This may 
have an important second round effect, as a low-interest rate bias in monetary policy could 
potentially  render  public  budgets  constraints  less  binding,  causing  a  deficit  bias  in  fiscal 
policy, threating price stability as explained by the fiscal theory of the price level.  
It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  ability  of  central  banks  to  exercise  optimally  their 
instruments independence and deliver their mandated objectives crucially depends on policy 
co-ordination  between  monetary  policy  and  other  policies,  namely  financial,  fiscal  and 
structural (see Cœuré, 2015). The importance of such co-ordination cannot be understated in 
the present conditions. The financial crisis of 2008/2009 has left a legacy of debt overhang 
and  bank  undercapitalisation,  hindering  the  ability  of  banking  systems  to  finance  the  real 
economy. To the extent that these undercapitalisation problems are not resolved satisfactorily, 
monetary authorities may need to take extra steps to increase liquidity (such as, for example, 
the LTRO programmes), thus creating a regime of financial-policy dominance over monetary 
policy.  Fiscal  policy  may  also  be  subject  to  the  same  financial  dominance:  If  bank 
undercapitalisation  problems  result  into  direct  or  indirect  banking  support  programmes 
(through, for example, the establishment of bad banks), fiscal space is reduced; and the ability 
of  fiscal  policy  to  operate  as  a  shock  absorber  declines,  placing  even  greater  pressure  on 
monetary  policy  to  operate  as  such.  European  Banking  Union  (EBU),  with  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) at the heart of 
its operation, was designed precisely to offer a governance framework to separate fiscal and 
banking risks, so that the framework of monetary dominance is preserved in the euro-area, 
reverse the process of financial fragmentation observed following the global financial crisis 
and the European debt crisis; and restore the smooth operation of the transmission channels of 
the single monetary policy.  
Similar arguments apply to the field of structural policy. As suggested by the theory of 
optimum currency areas, limited flexibility in the goods, services and labour markets, restricts 
the ability of the  economy to adjust towards its natural output following economic shocks, 
thereby increasing the pressure on fiscal and monetary policies to offset to operate as shock 
absorbers.  This  pressure  is  particularly  strong  under  negative  shocks,  due  to  downward 
rigidities  in  prices  and  wages.  Limited  flexibility  may  therefore  result  into  a  structural-
 10 
dominance regime, resulting into sub-optimal, fiscal and monetary over-reactions in the event 
of shocks. In the context of the eurozone in particular, the problem of shock stabilisation takes 
an extra dimension, given that second-best fiscal responses may not be available at national 
level, due to the existence of rules restricting national fiscal policies, not to mention market 
constraints following the increase in government bond yields at the height of the European 
debt  crisis.  This  has  led  to  calls  to  revise  fiscal  rules,  allowing  greater  fiscal  discretion  at 
national level. These calls have been partially endorsed following the revision of the Stability 
and Growth Pact, which compared to its original version now places greater emphasis on the 
stock  rather  than  flow  of  fiscal  liabilities;  and  has  shifted  the  emphasis  of  the  rules’ 
application from the short- to the medium-term.  
 
 
Concluding remarks  
In closing, it is true that during the Great Moderation period, central bank independence 
proved  a  highly-successful  institutional  innovation,  primarily  responsible  for  delivering  the 
highly-valued public good of price stability. This policy objective, and the independence of 
central bank in its pursuit, should be maintained in the current period of low inflation, posing 
multiple challenges for central bank independence.  
Having said that, the lessons from the destabilising effect of financial crises cannot be 
ignored. Without any doubt, the information set under which central banks operate should be 
enhanced to consider risks to financial stability. Whether, however, central banks should be 
primarily responsible for ensuring financial stability is less clear - the jury on this question is 
still out. Some may call it independence, others may view it as autonomy; some may want to 
think of it as a misnomer, others may view it as something deeper in the end which affects a 
central  bank’s  operational  independence.  However,  on  the  balance  of  existing  theory  and 
empirical  evidence,  I  maintain  that  an  independent  central  bank  focused  on  price  stability, 
along with structural adjustments, appropriate and sustainable fiscal policies and an enhanced 
technology  ensuring  macro-prudential  stability  offer  the  most  promising  path  for  restoring 
normal  growth  conditions  and  the  creation  of  jobs,  which  is  the  ultimate  objective. 
Independent  central  banks  can  exercise  optimal  policies  towards  delivering  their  mandated 
objectives  only  when  they  are  well-coordinated  with  other  policies,  including  fiscal  and 
structural ones. 
Thank you very much for your attention! 
  11 
    12 
REFERENCES  
Altavilla  C.,  Carboni  G.,  Motto  R.  (2015).  Asset  purchases  programmes  and  financial 
markets: lessons from the euro area. ECB Working Paper Series No 1864, European 
Central Bank.  
Barro,  R,  Gordon,  D.  (1983).Rules,  Discretion,  and  Reputation  in  a  Model  of  Monetary 
Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, pp. 101-22.  
Beetsma, R. and Guiliodori, M. (2010). The macroeconomic costs and benefits of the EMU 
and  other  monetary  unions:  An  overview  of  recent  research.  Journal  of  Economic 
Literature, 48, pp. 603-641.  
Boissay F., Collard F., Smets F. (2013). Booms and Systemic Banking Crises. ECB Working 
Paper Series No 1514, European Central Bank.  
Cœuré, B. (2015). Lamfalussy was right – independence and interdependence in a monetary 
union.  Speech  at  the  Lamfalussy  Lecture  Conference,  organised  by  the  Magyar 
Nemzeti Bank (the central bank of Hungary), Budapest, 2 February 2015.  
Cuckierman  A.  (2008).  Central  Bank  Independence  and  Transparency:  Evolution  and 
Effectiveness. European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 24, pp. 722-736.  
De Grauwe, P., Yeumei, J. (2015). Quantitative Easing in the Eurozone. It’s possible without 
fiscal transfers. CESifo Area Conference on Money, Macro and International Finance, 
20-21 January 2015. 
Demertzis  M.,  Wolff  W.  (2016).  The  effectiveness  of  the  European  Central  Bank’s  Asset 
Purchase Programme. Bruegel Policy Contribution 2016/10.  
Dotsey M., Ireland P., (1996). The welfare cost of inflation in general equilibrium. Journal of 
Monetary Economics, vol. 37, pp. 29-47. 
Driffill  J.,  Mizon,  G.E.,  and  A.  Ulph  (1990).  Costs  of  Inflation.  Handbook  of  Monetary 
Economics, vol. 2, pp. 1013-1066. 
Fischer,  S.  (1995).  Modern  Approaches  to  Central  Banking.  NBER  Working  Paper  Series 
5064. Cambridge, National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Gertler, M., Kiyotaki N., and A. Queralto (2012). Financial Crises, Bank Risk Exposure and 
Government Financial Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 59, pp. 517-534. 
Kydland,  F.E,  Prescott,  E.C.  (1977).  Rules  rather  than  discretion:  The  inconsistency  of 
optimal plans. The Journal of Political Economy, 85, pp. 473-492.  
Leeper,  E.  (1991).  Equilibria  under  “active”  and  “passive”  monetary  and  fiscal  policies. 
Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 27, pp. 129-147.  
 13 
Mourmouras,  I.  and  M.G.  Arghyrou  (2000),  Monetary  Policy  at  the  European  Periphery: 
Greek Experience and Lessons for EU Candidates, Berlin, Germany and New York, 
USA: Springer-Verlag. 
Mourmouras  I.  and  D.  Su  (1999).  Central  Bank  independence,  policy  reforms  and  the 
credibility of public debt stabilizations. European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 
11, pp. 189-204.  
Mourmouras, I. (1994), Towards granting political and economic independence to the Bank 
of Greece [in Greek], To Vima, Athens 
Obstfeld,  M.  (1996).  Models  of  currency  crises  with  self-fulfilling  features.  European 
Economic Review vol. 40, pp. 1037-1047  
Rogoff, K. (1985). The optimal degree of commitment to an intermediate monetary target. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 100, pp. 1169-89.  
Svensson, L. (1995). Optimal inflation targets, conservative central banks and linear inflation 
contracts. CEPR Discussion Paper No 1249.  
Vujčić, B. (2016). The role of central banks and how to insure their independence. Speech by 
at  the  Symposium  on  “Central  Banking  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe:  Policy 
Making,  Investment  and  Low  Yields”,  organized  by  the  Czech  National  Bank  and 
OMFIF (Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum), Prague, 10 June 2016. 
  14 
