Navigating the Great Transition: An Emerging Market Perspective 
Speech by Dr. Veerathai Santiprabhob 
Governor of the Bank of Thailand 
School of International and Public Affairs, Columbia University 
October 5, 2016 
  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to be here in New York and to have a chance 
to participate in the policy discussion at SIPA. Given the increasingly 
complex policy challenges facing the global community, the contribution 
that  SIPA  makes  in  educating  future  leaders  to  serve  the  global 
public  interest  is  critical.  I  would  like  to  thank  Professor  Ito  for 
inviting me. He was one of my early mentors at graduate school and 
I have benefitted from his many insights ever since.  
This  coming  weekend  I  will  be  attending  the  Annual  Meetings  of 
the IMF and the World Bank. As you know, this is one of the biggest 
global forums for addressing issues related to the global economy 
and  world  financial  market.  The  discussions  will  be  especially 
pertinent this year given the complex and highly unpredictable state 
of  the  world  that  we  face.  Former  premier  Wen  Jiabao  once 
described  China’s  growth  performance  as  “unstable,  unbalanced, 
uncoordinated, and unsustainable”. This seems like an apt description 
of the global economy at this juncture.  
Unstable because the proliferation of popular discontent fueled by 
rising income inequality amidst ongoing international conflicts have 
greatly elevated geopolitical uncertainty. Unbalanced because with 
anemic  recovery  of  advanced  economies,  much  of  the  growth  in 
 1 
the  global  economy  continues  to  be  driven  by  emerging  markets. 
In  many  cases,  most  prominently  in  China,  this  growth  has  been 
fueled  by  increasing  leverage.  Uncoordinated  because  in  a  highly 
integrated  world,  monetary  policy  and  financial  regulatory  policy 
generate  substantial  cross-border  spillovers  yet  they  are  being 
conducted  with  almost  exclusive  focus  on  domestic  mandates. 
And finally, unsustainable because a world in which up to a third of 
all government bonds in some advanced economies are held by their 
own  central  bank  and  over  a  third  of  all  developed-country 
government  bonds  trade  at  negative  nominal  yields  cannot  be 
a viable long run equilibrium. 
This precarious state of affairs is, to a large extent,  a reflection of 
key  fundamental  forces  that  have  been  at  play  for  some  time, 
with their impact now becoming increasingly self-evident. What I 
want to do today is to set out these underlying forces, draw out their 
implications  for  monetary  policy,  and  offer  some  tentative 
suggestions  of  how  central  banks  may  respond.  In  doing  so,  I  will 
focus from the perspective of emerging markets.  
As the old saying goes, the only constant is change. But the speed 
of that change is not constant. The pace of change tends to pick up 
around major transitions before settling down again when some sort 
of  equilibrium  is  reached.  The  Great  Moderation  was  a  period  of 
relatively  steady  change  during  which  world  output  grew  steadily 
and inflation was low and stable. The global financial crisis created 
a major upheaval that led to the Great Recession. The subsequent 
recovery has been remarkably drawn out and almost 10 years on, 
you could say that we have been living through a Great Transition. 
 2 
I would like to highlight three pivotal transitional forces that have 
shaped our economic and political landscape.  
First,  after  decades  of  rapid  expansion,  world  trade  has  slowed 
down considerably. During 2012 to 2015, world trade volumes grew 
at  around  3  percent  per  annum,  much  less  than  the  pre-crisis 
average of 7 percent for 1987-2007.  Cyclical factors have certainly 
been at work, but the slower pace of growth relative to world GDP 
points  to  deeper  structural  forces  at  work.  Chief  among  these  is  
the  waning  impact  from  the  integration  of  China  and  central  and 
eastern  European  countries  into  the  world  economy,  as  well  as  
the  diminished  room  for  further  international  fragmentation  of 
production  through  global-value-chain  trades.  More  speculatively, 
rising protectionism may have also dampened trade in recent years. 
Nevertheless,  the  level  of  trade  integration  across  the  world  is  
as high as it has ever been.  
Second, economies the world over have seen a rising contribution 
of the service sector to growth. A key driver of this transformation 
has been technological innovation, especially in digital communication. 
For the world as a whole, the share of services  as a proportion of 
GDP is now as high as 70 percent. This shift has not been confined 
to advanced economies but can also be seen in emerging markets. 
In China, for example, the service sector has grown to more than half 
of GDP in 2015, much of it driven by a surge in e-commerce and the 
expansion in logistical services required to support it. Moreover, as 
the cost of digital technology declines, a wider range of services are 
becoming  more  tradable  including  design,  marketing,  business 
processes,  and  education.  Thus  not  only  has  the  service  sector 
 3 
become more important within a country, the share of international 
trade in services has also increased markedly. 
The  third,  and  perhaps  most  unsettling  transitional  force,  is  the 
ultra-accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  adopted  by  major 
advanced economies. What started out as extraordinary responses 
to  a  precipitous  crisis,  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures 
have not only been maintained, but in many cases have been applied 
more intensively with ever greater degree of experimentation and 
radicalism. It is striking that  after all this time, the crisis mentality 
among policy circles has yet to fully abate.  
The  agglomeration  of  these  transitional  forces  has  had  profound 
impacts on economies the world over. Together, the slowdown in 
world trade and the shift to services have underpinned important 
changes in inflation and growth dynamics.  
In terms of inflation, globalization has for many years increased the 
importance  of  foreign  factors  in  price  dynamics.  Persistently  low 
and more synchronized inflation is partly attributable to the effects 
of rising competitive pressures in world markets as well as common 
forces  such  as  falling  energy  prices.  As  global  trade  adjusts,  
the 
influence  of  external  factors  has  regained  prominence. 
At the same time, the rising importance of services has impinged on 
the  inflation  process.  Services  prices  tend  to  be  more  rigid  than 
goods prices because they embody a larger share of labor input, and 
wages  tend  to  be  sticky.  This  may  have  contributed  to  inflation 
having  become  more  persistent.  At  the  same  time,  the  digital 
revolution has driven the prices of many modern services, such as 
telephone  calls,  news,  and  entertainment  to  essentially  zero. 
 4 
The upshot is that the link between inflation and domestic measure 
of  economic  slack,  as  traditionally  captured  in  the  Phillips  curve, 
has weakened and disappeared altogether in some cases.  
less  capital 
In  terms  of  growth,  slowing  global  trade  and  the  rise  of  services 
implies  slower  and 
intensive  economic  growth.  
For  highly  open  economies,  slowing  world  trade  has  undermined 
export as a growth engine. At the same time, the transition to services 
has also contributed to the growth headwinds given that modern services 
is  less  labor  and  capital  intensive  than  manufacturing.  Think  of 
Google’s  40,000  workforce  compared  to  General  Motors’  800,000.  
Or the fact that Uber is the world’s largest provider of auto transport 
without owning any cars. Or that AirBNB is one of the world’s biggest 
provider of accommodation without owning a single hotel. Given that 
investment is a relatively interest rate sensitive activity, to the extent 
that the transition to services has dampened investment, it may have 
also made the economy less responsive to monetary policy.  
Finally,  the  ultra-accommodative  monetary  policy  stances  of 
advanced  economies  have  contributed  towards  greater  global 
asset  price  co-movements  and  increased  cross-border  financial 
spillovers.  In  the  context  of  a  highly  globalized  financial  system, 
extreme  monetary  easing  has  ‘pushed’  capital  to  other  parts  of 
the world, particularly emerging market economies where yields are 
higher,  and  boosted  asset  prices  globally.  The  exceptionally  long 
period  of  zero  interest  rates  has  also  led  to  a  buildup  of  financial 
positions  that  are  attractive  or  justified  only  if  yields  remain  low.  
As  a  result,  global  bond  yields  and  exchange  rates  have  become 
acutely  sensitive  to  shifting  expectations  about  monetary  policy 
 5 
changes in advanced economies.  Such excessive sensitivity has put 
global markets on a knife edge with frequent bouts of volatility. 
These developments have critical implications for the transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy and its conduct. On the one hand, 
the  greater  influence  of  global  factors  and  structural  growth 
headwinds may have made inflation and output less responsive to 
monetary policy. On the other hand, financial markets and asset prices 
globally  have become  more  sensitive  to monetary  policy  actions  and 
communication. 
This  raises  a  dilemma.  With  inflation  and  output  below  targets, 
monetary  policy  is  eased.  Against  the  tide  of  global  factors  and 
growth  headwinds,  inflation  and  output  fail  to  respond,  and 
the temptation is to do more and more. In the meantime, financial 
markets respond vigorously to low interest rates and the search for 
yield accumulates in the form of greater financial fragility over time. 
Something  will  eventually  have  to  give.  The  relevant  monetary 
policy  trade-off  at  this  juncture,  then,  is  not  the  traditional  one 
between  inflation and growth  but  between  inflation and  growth 
on the one hand, and financial stability on the other.  
How,  then,  should  central  banks  respond  to  this  new  trade-off? 
I see three main avenues.  
First,  central  banks  need  to  expand  their  set  of  policy  tools. 
Measures to limit excessive risk-taking in the boom and limit losses 
in the bust, such as counter-cyclical capital requirements, leverage 
limits,  and  stable  funding  ratios  are  the  most  obvious  additions. 
These fall under the heading of macroprudental tools. For emerging 
markets where the brunt of the impact from excess global liquidity 
 6 
has been felt in exchange rates, capital flow management measures 
would  help  to  alleviate  these  pressures.  Moreover,  central  bank 
operational frameworks – such as collateral rules that dictate which 
types  of  securities  can  be  pledged  for  central  bank  liquidity, 
the types of assets central banks choose to hold, or the structure of 
liabilities that they choose to issue – offer ways to influence certain 
segments of financial markets directly. The challenge going forward 
is to operationalize these micro and more targeted policy tools in 
a systematic way. 
Here  it  is  important  to  stress  that  any  one  set  of  instruments 
working  alone  is  unlikely  to  be  sufficient.  Interest  rate  policy, 
macroprudential levers, and capital flow management measures all 
interact  and their  application  should  be  viewed  as  a  whole  rather 
than in isolation. More broadly, the underlying institutional and legal 
frameworks  that  govern  financial  markets  must  be  taken  into 
account.  These 
include  financial  product  regulations,  deposit 
guarantee systems, as well as the resolution framework for troubled 
financial institutions. A national financial stability framework that 
brings  together  and  assesses  the  whole  spectrum  of  financial 
regulation serves this important function.  
The  second  response  to  the  more  complex  monetary  trade-off  is 
greater policy coordination. The underlying rationale for coordination 
is that  in certain  situations,  the  collective  outcome  of  central  banks 
acting  individually  according  to  their  mandates  may  be  inferior 
because  cross-country  spillovers  are  not  internalized.  The  current 
aggressive  monetary  easing  of  advanced  economies  are  a  case  in 
point.  Whether  intended  or  simply  a  by-product,  the  outcome  has 
the semblance of competitive devaluations.  
 7 
As a starting point, it is important that advanced economies acknowledge 
the potential spillovers of their policy. The Federal Reserve, in particular, 
wields outsized influence given the dominance of the US dollar in global 
trade  and  finance.  Emerging  market  countries  need  to  coordinate  in 
voicing  their  concerns  and  engage  in  dialogue.  At  a  minimum, 
consultation  minimizes  surprises  and  the  exchange  of  views  helps 
to narrow differences in perceptions. But there is a more implicit form of 
coordination that I believe holds much potential. That is the coordination 
of monetary policy frameworks.  
This brings me to the third and perhaps most profound avenue for 
dealing  with  the  new  monetary  policy  trade-off.  And  that  is 
the adoption of a monetary policy framework that systematically 
takes  financial  stability 
into  account.  Successive  boom-bust 
financial  cycles  have  made  it  clear  that  unsustainable  buildups  of 
credit  and  leverage  lies  at  the  heart  of  financial  fragility.  It  is  hard 
to  deny  the  critical  role  that  monetary  policy  plays  in  this. 
Monetary policy sets the price of leverage and hence has first order 
implications for the pricing of all financial assets and the evolution 
of the financial cycle.  
A  framework  in  which  monetary  policy  reacts  systematically  to 
the  financial  cycle,  in  addition  to  traditional  inflation  and  output 
developments,  will  help  to  keep  the  economy  on  an  even  keel. 
This differs from an approach in which policy leans against the wind 
only  when  financial stability risks  become  evident.  Given  the  long 
and drawn-out nature of financial cycles, such an approach would 
inevitably lead to doing too little too late, as the cumulative impact 
of policy over the whole financial cycle is ignored.  
 8 
Just as the proliferation  of inflation targeting frameworks  starting in 
the  1990s  helped  to  bring  down  the  level  and  volatility  of  inflation 
rates worldwide, a general trend towards a more systematic leaning 
against  the  financial  cycle  approach  to  monetary  policy,  especially 
among  advanced  economies,  could  yield  significant  benefits. 
I believe  that if central  banks  coordinate  on  such  a framework,  and 
thereby adopt a longer through-the-cycle perspective in policymaking, 
the  problems  from  cross-border  spillovers  and  perceptions  of 
competitive devaluations will be significantly diminished. 
The key challenge will be one of communication. As is well known, 
the  long  lags  of  policy  creates  a  need  for  central  banks  to  
“take the punch bowl away when the party gets going”. Given the 
longer duration of financial cycles, the need to act well before the 
risks  become  obvious  may  mean  that  central  banks  will  have  to 
“take  the  punch  bowl  away  even  before  the  party  gets  started”. 
But that is a political economy challenge that needs to be resolved 
and  managed  through  careful  redesign  of  central  bank  mandates. 
Heed must be paid also to institutional arrangements, especially for 
central  banks  where  the  financial  supervision  authority  lies  with 
another body as coordination will be harder.   
This will take time. But the risks to financial stability is immediate.  
In the interim, central banks may need to interpret their mandates 
more flexibly and avoid overly narrow and zealous interpretations 
of price stability. Inflation targets need to be implemented flexibly 
and  over  longer  horizons.  All  the  while  explaining  clearly  and 
consistently the logic of policy. In doing so, it should be stressed that 
fundamentally, macroeconomic and financial stability are two sides 
of the same coin. Macroeconomic trajectories cannot be sustainable 
 9 
if the  financial sphere  is  out  of  equilibrium. And  the  avoidance  of 
financial boom-bust cycles leads to better economic outcomes over 
the long run. The perceived trade-off between growth, inflation, and 
financial  stability,  therefore,  is  to  a  large  extent  an  artifact  of  
the short horizon focus of policy.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The history of economic thought in the twentieth century has seen 
macroeconomics evolve through a series of intellectual transformations 
from  the  Keynesian  Revolution  to  Monetarism,  and  finally  to 
the  New  Classical  or  Rational  Expectations  paradigm.  Likewise, 
monetary  policy  has  shifted  through  successive  frameworks. 
From  the  system  of  fixed  exchange  rates  under  Bretton  Woods, 
to  monetary  targeting  during  the  Great  Inflation  in  the  1970s, 
to  inflation  targeting  in  the  context  of  the  Great  Moderation,  and 
finally  to  an  assortment  of  unconventional  monetary  policies  in  
the wake of the Great Recession. Today, as we navigate our way through 
the Great Transition, the search for a new framework is ongoing.  
The  limitations  of  prevailing  approaches  focused  on  short-term 
stabilization  of  output  and  inflation  gaps  has  become  clear.  
The onus on our generation is to ensure that the transition leads 
us  to  a  new  and  better  place,  rather  than  to  more  of  the  same. 
My contribution to that end today has been to hopefully steer you 
towards  the  relevant  and  pressing  questions.  At  an  institution  of 
learning as esteemed as this, it is your role to undertake meticulous 
scholarship that moves us towards the right answers.  
Thank you very much. 
 10 
