  Øystein Olsen: A flexible inflation targeting regime 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
Centre for Monetary Economics (CME) / BI Norwegian Business School, Oslo, 11 October 
2016. 
The accompanying charts can also be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 Introduction 
Inflation targeting was formally introduced in Norway 15 years ago. The changeover to a new 
monetary policy regime was a consequence of the fact that the exchange rate regime had 
outlived its role. It no longer yielded the desired result for a small open economy in a world of 
free capital movements. Through the 1990s, a number of central banks were mandated to 
aim for low and stable inflation. Since then, many countries have followed suit. 
Inflation targeting has become more flexible with time, both in Norway and other countries. In 
the conduct of monetary policy, greater weight is now given to achieving a reasonable trade-
off between the path for inflation and the path for output and employment. Monetary policy 
cannot  be  strictly  rule-based  –  it  must  be  flexible  and  robust.  At  the  same  time,  we  are 
continuously mindful of the main objective of monetary policy – low and stable inflation over 
time. 
The  evolution  of  inflation  targeting  reflects  the  practical  experience  gained  since  it  was 
introduced.  The  trade-offs  have  been  challenging  at  times.  In  these  past  15  years,  the 
economy  has  been  exposed  to  different  types  of  shocks.  The  supply  side  has  been 
influenced by increased labour immigration following EU enlargement in 2004. The financial 
crisis and its still prevailing legacies have posed challenges that monetary policy has had to 
address. And not least, the Norwegian economy has had to contend with wide fluctuations in 
the terms of trade – in both a positive and a negative direction. 
Chart: Performance 
Inflation  targeting  has  performed  well  over  the  past  15  years  taken  as  a  whole.  When 
inflation  targeting  was  introduced,  inflation  had  already  come  down  after  years  of  high 
inflation and has since been low and relatively stable. At the same time, monetary policy has 
contributed  to  moderating  fluctuations  in  the  real  economy.  Flexible  inflation  targeting  has 
functioned well. The monetary policy framework has provided sufficient flexibility to address 
the shocks that have hit the economy. 
Long-term interest rates have fallen 
Chart: International interest rates 
In recent years, monetary policy has faced a new challenge in many countries. The interest 
rate level that is consistent with balanced developments in the economy has fallen. This is 
reflected in the low level of global interest rates. The decline in real interest rates has been 
particularly  marked  over  the  past  15–20  years.  In  2001,  when  inflation  targeting  was 
adopted, real long-term interest rates were around 3 percent. Now, those same interest rates 
are around zero. 
Chart: Forces driving the fall in the global real interest rate 
The  causes  of  the  decline  in  interest  rates  are  complex.  In  recent  years,  extraordinary 
measures  by  many  central  banks  have  pushed  down  long-term  rates.  Over  a  longer  time 
horizon,  the  factors  behind  the  decline  in  interest  rates  are  more  structural  in  nature.  The 
savings glut in emerging economies, particularly China and oil exporting countries, has been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  one important factor. In many countries, savings have probably also increased as a result of 
demographic  developments  and  a  more  uneven  distribution  of  income.  At  the  same  time, 
investment in many advanced economies has been low. A factor may be prospects for low 
returns on investment in productive capital. In the wake of the financial crisis, conditions of a 
more cyclical nature have also contributed to the fall in interest rates. While deleveraging has 
pulled up savings, greater uncertainty may have dampened the willingness to invest. 
These developments have consequences for monetary policy. The level of the real interest 
rate that is consistent with balanced developments in the economy has fallen in pace with 
increased  savings  and  lower  demand  for  capital.  This  level  is  usually  referred  to  as  the 
neutral interest rate. 
The difference between the actual real interest rate and the neutral real interest rate provides 
an  indication  of  whether  monetary  policy  is  expansionary  or  contractionary.  A  real  interest 
rate that is below the neutral interest rate stimulates economic growth, while a higher real 
interest rate dampens growth. 
The neutral interest rate is not fixed, but will over time move around a level determined by 
long-term productivity, population growth and saving preferences.1 Fluctuations around this 
level may be partly attributable to factors such as transient changes in saving and investment 
behaviour. 
The neutral interest rate is not directly observable. Central banks must nevertheless form a 
perception of how expansionary or contractionary monetary policy is and of the interest rate 
that  is  consistent  with  balance  in  the  real  economy.  The  forecasts  for  the  key  policy  rate 
move towards this level as different economic shocks unwind. 
In the past few decades, international estimates of the neutral real interest rate have fallen 
and are now at 1 percent or below in many countries (see Rachel et al (2015), Laubach et al 
(2015), Hamilton et al (2015), Constâncio (2016) and Zhu (2016)). Norway is part of a global 
market,  and  international  interest  rate  developments  affect  interest  rate  setting  at  home, 
particularly  through  the  exchange  rate  channel.  Norges  Bank’s  estimate  of  the  neutral 
interest rate has been gradually revised down in pace with international developments. The 
Bank’s forecasts are now based on the assumption that a neutral nominal money market rate 
in Norway will be between 2½ percent and 3½ percent in the coming years. The associated 
neutral nominal key policy rate is somewhat lower.2  
Norges Bank’s projections imply that the key policy rate at the end of 2019 will be lower than 
the  estimate  for  the  neutral  interest  rate.  This  partly  reflects  the  shocks  to  which  the 
Norwegian economy has been exposed in recent years, primarily the pronounced fall in oil 
prices.  Prospects  for  continued  expansionary  monetary  policies  abroad  pull  in  the  same 
direction. 
The  low  level  of  the  neutral  interest  rate  raises  a  number  of  issues  that  I  want  to  discuss 
today. First, I would like to focus on two aspects that have been given weight in recent years 
in Norges Bank’s assessment of a robust interest rate path. The first concerns the effect of 
changes in the policy rate, which are more uncertain when the rate falls to levels where our 
experience is very limited. The second relates to the challenge persistently low interest rates 
pose to financial stability. I will then touch upon the ability of monetary policy to address a 
future downturn against the backdrop of global economic developments. 
                                                
1  This level is often referred to in the literature as the “long-term equilibrium interest rate”, which can be thought 
of as the equilibrium real interest rate generated by theoretical economic growth models. Examples include 
variations of the Ramsey model (see Rachel et al (2015) and Baker et al (2005)). 
2  The spread between the money market rate and the expected key policy rate (the interest rate premium) can 
vary somewhat over time (see Lund et al (2016) for a discussion of the premium in the Norwegian three-month 
money market rate). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Greater uncertainty about the effect of the policy rate? 
Monetary  policy  decisions  are  made  under  uncertainty.  Central  banks  operate  in  an 
environment of uncertainty regarding the current situation, the driving forces in the economy 
and the functioning of the economy. 
Much  of  this  uncertainty  is  associated  with  conditions  beyond  the  influence  of  monetary 
policy, such as the oil price and economic developments among trading partners. In recent 
years, the uncertainty related to these conditions has at times been higher than normal, as 
was the case this summer, when the UK vote to leave the EU fuelled uncertainty regarding 
the  EU  economic  outlook.  When  faced  with  this  type  of  uncertainty,  the  policy  rate  will 
normally be based on projections of economic variables as if they were known with certainty, 
an approach that is supported by economic theory.3  
The uncertainty associated with the effect of monetary policy is of a different nature in that it 
relates to the functioning of the economy – and the effect of the policy rate in particular. 
For monetary policy to function normally, changes in the policy rate must pass through to the 
bank lending and deposit rates faced by households and enterprises. In Norway, the latest 
policy rate cuts have had a broad impact on banks’ interest rates. Lending and deposit rates 
for households are both approximately one percentage point lower now than when the key 
policy rate was reduced in December 2014. Rates facing enterprises have also fallen. Banks’ 
profitability and net interest income have remained solid in the same period. 
At the same time, given the current low interest rate level, we are navigating in uncharted 
waters. Banks’ response to changes in the policy rate may differ from their usual behaviour. 
In normal times, when the policy rate is well above zero, changes in the policy rate can pass 
through  fully  to  lending  rates  without  affecting  banks’  margins  as  banks  can  then  change 
deposit rates in tandem with lending rates. The pass-through is more uncertain when interest 
rates are already low. Banks risk losing deposits if deposit rates are lowered in tandem with 
the policy rate. If banks do not hold back on lending rates at the same time, an important 
source of banks’ income will be affected. 
Households  and  enterprises  may  also  respond  differently  to  interest  rate  changes  when 
interest rates are already at a low level. Our empirical models are quantified on data from a 
period  when  the  interest  rate  level  was  higher.  So  far,  there  is  no  clear  indication  that 
historical relationships have collapsed, but nor do we have experience of such low interest 
rates  over  such  a  long  period  of  time.  The  relationship  between  the  interest  rate  and 
consumption may change when interest rates approach zero. Households that save will find 
that  their  savings  yield  a  lower  return.  This  may  provide  incentives  to  increase  saving  to 
secure a sufficiently high pension. 
It may also be difficult to predict financial market reactions to very low and negative interest 
rates. With the growing realisation that bank savings yield a negative real return, the interest 
in alternative investments may increase. Financial market volatility may increase. 
As  early  as  1967,  US  economist  William  Brainard  discussed  how  central  banks  should 
respond to economic shocks when there is uncertainty about the impact of the policy rate on 
the economy. He concluded that the policy rate should be used with greater caution when 
uncertainty about its effect increases (Brainard (1967)). 
The result can be illustrated within a simple model where the central bank sets the policy rate 
with the objective of minimising the deviation of inflation from the target. 
                                                
3  Under the precondition that interest rates are set by minimising a quadratic loss function and that the economy 
can be approximated using a linear model, the certainty-equivalence theorem applies: Interest rates are set as 
if  projections  for  economic  variables  included  in  the  model  (additive  uncertainty)  were  not  associated  with 
uncertainty. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Chart: Uncertain effect of policy rate 
In  the  model,  as  shown  in  the  chart, the  central  bank minimises  a quadratic  loss function. 
Under a flexible inflation targeting regime, the inflation gap and the output gap will both be 
included in the loss function. For the sake of simplicity, we use only one target variable, y. 
With the help of a little algebra, we can rewrite the loss function. We then see that both the 
expected deviation from the target and increased uncertainty surrounding the target variable 
result in a higher loss. The uncertainty is represented by the variance of the target variable. 
The relationship between the target variable, the policy rate (r) and the part of the economy 
that  is  not  affected  by  the  policy  rate  (x)  may  be  described  using  a  linear  model  –  also 
simplified. If a shock to the economy leads to a change in x, the policy rate is adjusted to 
counteract the shock. The effect of the policy rate on the economy is given by parameter α. 
In  this  model,  there  is  uncertainty  about  the  effect  of  the  policy  rate.  The  effect  will  vary 
around a level, here denoted α0. The total effect of the policy rate depends on the size of ε, 
which is uncertain. The uncertainty is given by the variance in the effect of the policy rate, 
represented by σ^2. As shown in the chart, the interval within which the effect of the policy 
rate varies will increase with the degree of uncertainty. 
Within this framework, uncertainty about the effect of a change in the policy rate will influence 
how a central bank is to react to economic shocks. For the sake of comparison, the chart 
shows the monetary policy response with and without uncertainty about its effect. 
The model illustrates two important points. 
First,  the  higher  the  uncertainty  about  the  effect  of  the  policy  rate,  the  more  cautious 
monetary policy should be, as illustrated by the more cautious monetary policy response in 
(a), where there is uncertainty, compared with (b), where there is no uncertainty. The intuition 
behind the result is that uncertainty about the effect of an interest rate change will introduce 
additional uncertainty into the economy. This warrants a cautious approach. 
Second,  the  uncertainty  that  is  introduced  into  the  economy  must  be  weighed  against  the 
benefit that can be achieved. If the effect of the policy rate is expected to be limited, greater 
weight should be given to the uncertainty. 
The model results rest on an important trade-off: the expected size of the target variable’s 
deviation from the target is weighed against the uncertainty of the target variable estimate. 
This central trade-off is expressed by the loss function. 
Chart: Monetary policy and uncertainty – active response 
The  trade-offs  can  be  illustrated  graphically.  The  next  charts  show  a  situation  where  the 
policy  rate  is  used  to  counteract  the  effect  of  a  negative  shock  to  the  real  economy.  The 
effect  of  rate  cuts  is  associated  with  uncertainty.  In  this  instance,  it  is  assumed  that  the 
central  bank  does  not  explicitly  take  this  into  consideration.  The  uncertainty  has  been 
illustrated using relatively broad bands around the expected paths for inflation and the output 
gap. 
Chart: Monetary policy and uncertainty – a more cautious response 
A  slightly  more  cautious  monetary  policy  response  as  a  result  of  the  central  bank’s 
recognition of the uncertainty results in a different path. This chart describes a path where 
the  key  policy  rate  is  reduced  by  somewhat  less.  The  assumed  real  economic  costs  –  as 
measured  by  the  output  gap  –  are  somewhat  higher,  and  inflation  moves  further  from  the 
target. In that respect, this is a less appropriate path for the policy rate. But there is also a 
benefit  –  the  uncertainty  about  the  future  path  is  substantially  reduced.  When  choosing 
between the two paths, the benefits must be weighed against the costs. 
A robust monetary policy should take account of uncertainty regarding the functioning of the 
economy.  The  policy  rate  in  Norway  has  come  down  to  a  low  level,  approaching  a  lower 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  bound. This has increased the uncertainty about the effect of monetary policy. Over the past 
year,  Norges  Bank  has  therefore  reacted  somewhat  less  to  new  information,  whether  the 
information has pulled in the direction of a lower or a higher policy rate, than it would have 
done in a more normal situation. It has been appropriate to proceed with caution. 
Low interest rates could be a precursor to financial instability 
The neutral interest rate level will likely remain low for several years ahead. This has brought 
to  the  fore  the  question  of  how  far  monetary  policy  should  go  in  taking  responsibility  for 
financial stability. For Norges Bank, the consideration of restraining the build-up of financial 
imbalances has long been an element of a robust monetary policy. The aim is to mitigate the 
risk of particularly adverse economic outcomes further ahead. 
A  period  of  low  interest  rates  can  engender  financial  imbalances.  The  risk  that  growth  in 
property prices and debt will become unsustainably high over time is increasing. With high 
debt ratios, households are more vulnerable to cyclical downturns. In the event of a reduction 
in  household  income,  debt  burdens  may  become  heavy  to  bear,  forcing  households  to 
reduce spending on consumption, with a deeper downturn as a result. 
Chart: Estimated path for total consumption during recessions 
A recently published study by Norges Bank examines developments in private consumption 
during recessions. The analysis is based on data from 61 international recessions in the past 
four decades (see Hansen et al (2015)). An important outcome is shown in this chart. The 
chart compares two different paths for consumption during a recession. The blue line shows 
the average path, while the yellow line shows the path following a period of high debt growth. 
The results confirm that high debt growth ahead of a recession leads to a deeper downturn. It 
also takes longer for the economy to recover. 
Chart: Monetary policy and financial stability – financial imbalances give rise to tail risk 
The next chart illustrates the tail risk that can arise when financial imbalances build up. The 
uncertainty  bands  around  inflation  and  the  output  gap  are  highly  asymmetrical.  The 
probability of a deep recession increases later in the projection period. 
Chart: Monetary policy and financial stability – consideration of financial imbalances reduces 
tail risk 
When  financial  imbalances  are  building  up,  monetary  policy  can  contribute  to  dampening 
vulnerabilities by keeping the interest rate somewhat higher than would otherwise have been 
the case. The risk of a deep economic downturn is reduced. The benefit can be illustrated 
graphically.  The  uncertainty  bands  become  narrower  and  the  tail  risk  diminishes  when  the 
key policy rate follows the purple line and not the blue line. But, as we can see, this policy 
also entails a short-term cost. Capacity utilisation is lower, and it takes somewhat longer to 
stabilise inflation around the target.4  
In  Norway,  household  debt  ratios  have  been  increasing  for  several  years.  House  price 
inflation  has  accelerated  recently.  High  house  price  inflation  could  fuel  debt  accumulation 
and  make  households  more  vulnerable.  This  suggests  in  isolation  a  somewhat  higher  key 
policy  rate  than  would  otherwise  have  been  the  case.  The  aim  is  to  achieve  an  improved 
path for inflation, output and employment over time. “Leaning against the wind” is therefore in 
line with our central bank mandate. Flexible inflation targeting with a sufficiently long horizon 
should take financial stability into account if the situation so allows and so warrants. 
                                                
4  Gerdrup et al (2016) present a model where the costs of allowing monetary policy to take account of financial 
imbalances are weighed against the benefits. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  But  it  is  not  the  primary  responsibility  of  monetary  policy  to  head  off  an  emerging  storm. 
Regulation  and  surveillance  of  financial  institutions  are  the  first  line  of  defence  against 
shocks  to  the  financial  system.  In  the  years  following  the  financial  crisis,  the  regulatory 
framework has been strengthened. That does not mean that our work is done. The financial 
system  is  in  constant  flux.  Economic  agents  in  search  of  yields  will  seek  out  new 
opportunities.  Today’s  regulations  are  not  necessarily  well  suited  to  meet  tomorrow’s 
challenges.  We  still  need  more  knowledge  about  the  use  of  macroprudential  tools.  The 
prospect of a persistently low neutral interest rate has made this work even more important. 
In the work on constructing an appropriate interest rate path, Norges Bank uses advanced 
models. They are useful and necessary tools for arriving at a good decision. But even with 
steadily improved models, no model is capable of fully capturing the complexity of the trade-
offs. It is particularly demanding to model and quantify how the risk of a build-up of financial 
imbalances  may  influence  developments  in  inflation,  output  and  employment  over  time.  In 
coming to our policy decision, we also take into account the uncertainty associated with the 
functioning of the economy, including the effect of the policy rate. Given this uncertainty, it is 
neither possible nor desirable to fine-tune economic developments. Any attempt to actively 
fine-tune the economy could do more harm than good. The choice of interest rate path must 
therefore be based on judgemental assessments, which reflects the fact that the world and 
the trade-offs are more complex than even the most advanced models can reproduce. 
The role of monetary policy 
I will now turn to the role of monetary policy and take a look at international developments. 
Several  observations  can  be  made.  First,  many  countries  have  experienced  the  heavy 
burden of undoing the damage caused by the financial crisis. The interest rate level among 
many of our trading partners has been very low for a long time. Additional ammunition in the 
form of unconventional measures has also been needed, which reflects the fact that the real 
economic  challenges following  the  crisis  have  been far greater than those  associated  with 
more normal cyclical downturns. 
Though  the  headwinds  have  been  strong,  other  policy  areas  have  provided  little  support. 
Fiscal  leeway  has  been  limited  by  high  debt  levels.  Monetary  policy  has  become 
overburdened. Despite stretching the limits of monetary policy, central banks have not been 
able  to  underpin  growth  and  inflation.  Monetary  policy  in  many  countries  has  sought  to 
prevent an even deeper and more persistent downturn. 
A  number  of  international  studies  indicate  that  the  overall  growth  potential  of  advanced 
economies has weakened. The fall in the neutral interest rate is one of the consequences. 
An expansionary monetary policy has required a lower interest rate level than earlier. 
The  structural  challenges  associated  with  low  underlying  growth  cannot  be  addressed  by 
monetary policy. Long-term economic growth is determined by labour input and productivity. 
Both factors are beyond the control of central banks. 
This  does  not  mean  that  monetary  policy  is  without  importance  for  economic  activity.  A 
credible  monetary  policy  that  delivers  low  and  stable  inflation  sets  the  stage  for  stable 
economic developments. By conducting a monetary policy that stimulates employment in the 
short  term,  we  can  also  avoid  unemployment  becoming  entrenched  at  high  levels.  But 
monetary policy easing and low interest rates do not pave the way for durably higher growth. 
Emergence  from  a  situation  of  low  growth,  low  inflation  and  low  interest  rates  requires  an 
improvement  in  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy.  Leading  central  banks  and  key 
institutions,  such  as  the  IMF  and  the  BIS,  have  highlighted  the  urgency  of  implementing 
structural reforms (see Carney (2016), Draghi (2016), Praet (2015), IMF (2016), BIS (2015)). 
Structural reforms could boost the growth potential of many economies. At the same time, 
many factors suggest that the period of low interest rates is far from over. Many of the forces 
that  have  pulled  down  the  interest rate  level  will  continue  to  prevail.  A  low  neutral  interest 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  rate  level  implies  a  lower key  policy  rate  also  in  more  normal  times,  limiting the  scope for 
reducing the interest rate in order to counter a downturn. The question has been raised as to 
whether monetary policy will have sufficient capacity to cope with a severe downturn. 
In  recent  years,  central  banks  have  moved  into  unknown  territory.  Many  countries  have 
experienced that the effect of rate cuts does not necessarily end at the zero bound. Where 
the lower bound lies and how fast the effect unwinds is uncertain. The experience gained so 
far shows that the lower bound depends on the prevailing situation and that it varies across 
countries, partly as a result of differences in banking systems. 
Recent years have also shown that central banks’ toolkits can contain more than policy rates. 
We  have  gained  new  insights  into  the  effect  of  quantitative  easing,  liquidity  provision  and 
policy rate guidance. The measures have been implemented both to maintain the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism and to loosen monetary policy as the room for further rate 
cuts has gradually narrowed. 
Loose monetary policies have contributed to pushing up growth in advanced economies. The 
US  economy  has  been  recovering for  some  time,  and  unemployment  has  declined.  In  the 
euro  area,  the  upturn  remains  moderate.  As  cyclical  conditions  improve  in  more  countries 
and  the  after-effects  of  the  financial  crisis  unwind,  the  international  interest  rate  level  will 
move upward, but most likely to a new and lower “normal”. This gives rise to a number of 
challenges, partly because it affects the room for manoeuvre in monetary policy. 
Conclusion 
In spite of the demanding task monetary policy has faced in many countries, it is difficult to 
find  alternative  strategies  to  today’s  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework.  A  lower  neutral 
interest  rate  level  does  not  stand  in  the  way  of  monetary  policy’s  role  as  the  first  line  of 
defence  in  managing  the  economy.  Monetary  policy  has  been  able  to  respond  rapidly  to 
cyclical  variations.  The  framework  did  not  hinder  a  powerful  response  when  the  financial 
crisis  erupted.  Inflation  expectations  were  firmly  anchored.  This  enabled  central  banks  to 
reduce  the  amplitude  and  length  of  the  downturn.  Here  in  Norway,  the  monetary  policy 
regime also functioned effectively in the face of the sharp fall in oil prices. 
But what is viewed as a good monetary policy framework is not static and can change with 
experience and research. The Ministry of Finance will now assess the need for modernising 
the  regulation  on  monetary  policy  in  Norway.  After  15  years  of  the  current  regulation,  a 
review is in order. I would, however, emphasise that our experience of the current framework 
is positive. This suggests a need for adjustments rather than a regime change. 
Inflation targeting was introduced in 2001 and has functioned effectively. Confidence in low 
and stable inflation is firmly anchored. The primary task of monetary policy must always be 
price stability. When inflation is firmly anchored, monetary policy can also contribute to stable 
developments  in  the  real  economy.  The  flexibility  and  room  for  the  exercise  of  judgement 
provided by our mandate has strengthened monetary policy and the Norwegian economy. 
References 
Baker, D., J. B. Delong and P. R. Krugman (2005): «Asset returns and economic growth», 
Brookings Papers on Economics Activity, 1/2005, 289–330. 
BIS (2015): «85th Annual Report». 
Brainard,  W.  (1967):  “Uncertainty  about  the  effectiveness  of  policy”,  American  Economic 
Review 57, 411–425. 
Carney, M. (2016): «Redeeming an unforgiving world», Bank of England, speech delivered 
on 26 February 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Constâncio, V. (2016):«The challenge of low real interest rates for monetary policy», speech 
delivered on 15 June 2016. 
Draghi, M. (2016): «On the importance of policy alignment to fulfil our economic potential», 
ESB, speech delivered on 9 June 2016. 
Gerdrup, K., Hansen, F., Krogh T. and J. Maih (2016): «Leaning against the wind when credit 
bites back», Norges Bank Working Paper 9/2016. 
Hamilton, J. D., J. Hatzius, E. S. Harris and K. D. West (2015): «The equilibrium real funds 
rate: Past, present, and future», Hutchins center on fiscal & monetary policy at Brookings, 
Working Paper 16. 
Hansen,  F.  and  K.  Torstensen  (2016):  «Does  high  debt  growth  in  upturns  lead  to  a  more 
pronounced fall in consumption in downturns?», Economic commentaries 8/16, Norges Bank 
IMF (2016): «IMF Note on Global Prospects and Policy Challenges», Group of Twenty IMF 
Note – Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors’ Meetings, 23- 24 June 2016. 
Laubach,  T.  and  J.  C.  Williams  (2015):  «Measuring  the  natural  rate  of  interest  redux», 
Hutchins center on fiscal & monetary policy at Brookings, Working Paper 15. 
Lund,  K.,  K.,  K.  Tafjord  and  M.  Øwre-Johnsen  (2016):  «What  drives  the  risk  premium  in 
Nibor?», Economic commentaries 10/2016, Norges Bank. 
Praet,  P.  (2015):  «Structural  reforms  and  long-run  growth  in  the  euro  area»,  ESB,  speech 
delivered on 15 June 2015. 
Rachel,  L.  and  T.  D.  Smith  (2015):  «Secular  drivers  of  the  global  real  interest  rate»,  Staff 
Working Paper 571, Bank of England. 
Zhu, F. (2016): «Understanding the changing equilibrium real interest rates in Asia-Pacific», 
BIS Working Papers 567. 
 
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9 
       10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
