  Stefan Ingves, 
Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, in his capacity as 
Chairman of the  
ESRB Advisory Technical Committee 
 First ESRB Annual Conference 
22-23 September 2016 
 Keynote Address 
“It takes all sorts…” - macroprudential oversight in the EU  
 “It takes all sorts to make a world” is a common expression when confronted with something odd, but 
at the same time recognizing that diversity is essential. I think it also “takes all sorts”, or at least plenty 
of different sorts,  to make a functional  macroprudential  body.  Especially  one at  an  international  level 
like our host – the European Systemic Risk Board, the ESRB. The ESRB’s macroprudential mandate 
is  mirrored  by  its  broad  composition,  bringing  together  central  bankers  and  financial  supervisors; 
national and EU-wide perspectives; sectoral experts and academics. Certainly we may look at various 
issues  differently.  We  may  indeed  find  each  other’s  perspectives  odd  at  times.  But  that  is  also  the 
point.  With  the  right  set-up,  differences  in  perspectives  and  expertise  enrich  our  assessments  and 
become a strength. And the ESRB uses that strength to handle its rather daunting task of overseeing 
the EU financial system as a whole. So let me elaborate a little on what the ESRB has achieved so far 
and why I think the EU needs a strong ESRB with a broad membership as we move forward. 
Designed for oversight of a diverse, interconnected financial system  
It  is  quite  an  impressive  journey  that  the  ESRB  has  undertaken  since  its  launch  in  2011.  And  I  am 
proud to have been along for the ride, not least in my role as Chair of the ESRB’s Advisory Technical 
Committee. The beginning of the road, in terms of when “a blueprint” of the ESRB reached the public 
eye,  was  back  in  2009.  A  high  level  group  chaired  by  Jacques  de  Larosière  recommended,  among 
other  things,  that  a  Union-level  body  be  established  with  a  mandate  to  oversee  risk  in  the  financial 
system. The aim was to address one of the fatal flaws revealed by the financial crisis  – the lack of a 
truly  macroprudential  approach  for  safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  diverse  and  interconnected  EU 
financial system.  
Before the crisis, the quality of supervision varied substantially between countries, and its coordination 
within Europe was anything but sufficient. The concepts of macroprudential oversight and policy were 
largely unheard of and it is probably fair to say that most supervisors (or anyone else for that matter) 
|1 
 could  not  see  the  woods  for  all  the  trees,  let  alone  knowing  how  they  were  connected  to  the 
“vegetation” in other countries. Part of the remedy  would be an EU body that in a holistic way brings 
together  a  representation  and  expertise  as  broad  as  its  system  encompassing  mandate.  The  ESRB 
was created more or less on the basis of this blueprint. 
Today, almost seven  years after the so called De Larosière Report, we have reached a stage where 
the European Commission is assessing the current macroprudential framework in the Union, including 
the role of the ESRB. There are a number of areas  where the Commission wants to shed some light 
before  drawing  final  conclusions  about  possible  improvements.  One  such  area  is  what  would  be  the 
best  composition  of  the  ESRB’s  decision  making  body,  the  General  Board,  and  also  most  of  its 
substructures.  In  this  context  suggestions  to  reduce  the  size  of  the  General  Board  have  been 
mentioned. This would in my view not only reduce the number of people around the meeting table, but 
also  take  away  one  of  the  ESRB’s  main  strengths.  As  somebody  who  has  seen  the  ESRB  at  work 
from the inside pretty much since it saw the light of day, I wanted to take this opportunity to talk about 
the experiences so far and how we can use them as we move ahead. 
The ESRB brings together “all sorts” within its remit, and voting modalities 
pave the way for efficient decision making 
The  ESRB  is  unique  in  that  it  brings  together  representatives  from  central  banks  and  financial 
supervisory  authorities  from  all  28  Member  States,  representatives  from  the  three  European 
Supervisory  Authorities,  the  ECB,  the  European  Commission  and  the  Economic  and  Financial 
Committee as  well  as  the “independent  voice”  of  the  ESRB  Advisory  Scientific  Committee, the  ASC. 
As  some  of  you  here  have  experienced  in  person,  the  General  Board  usually  has  over  70  members 
seated  around  the  table,  most  of  them  central  bank  governors  or  heads  of  national  supervisory 
authorities.  Such  a  crowd  around  a  meeting  table  could  have  been  a  practical  nightmare  and  an 
impediment  to  efficient  decision-making.  But  so  far  it  actually  works. We  have  had  candid  and  open 
discussions in this composition and we have been fully capable of taking decisions. As I touched upon 
earlier, we may not always unanimously agree on everything, not even after many iterations between 
the  parties  involved  and  at  different  levels.  Such  processes  may  indeed  require  a  bit  of  patience, 
especially when a new process is being established. But in the end the arguments from all sides have 
been heard and when we need to make decisions in the General Board, ultimately we simply vote. 
Legally,  the  ESRB  is  an  independent  EU  body  tasked  with  macroprudential  oversight  of  the  EU 
financial system and the prevention and mitigation of systemic risk. It is chaired by the President of the 
ECB. The ESRB has no binding powers but has “soft tools”. To fulfill its mandate, the ESRB identifies, 
monitors and assesses potential systemic risks and, where appropriate, issues so called warnings, or 
recommendations  to  mitigate such risks  according  to  the  principle “comply  or  explain”.  This  principle 
simply  says  that  either  you  do  as  recommended  or  you  explain  why  you  have  chosen  not  to. 
Recommendations can be addressed to the EU as a whole, to one or more individual Member States, 
European  Supervisory  Authorities,  national  supervisory  authorities,  and  to  the  Commission.  As  I 
|2 
 mentioned,  the  General  Board  makes  decisions  by  voting.  And  several  of  the  votes  that  have  taken 
place these almost six years have concerned issuing ESRB recommendations. 
The ESRB recommendations have contributed to reducing risks in different 
fields 
The very first ESRB recommendation targeted risks generated by lending to EU households in foreign 
currency, proposing measures to mitigate those risks. Although it is always hard to assess something 
against  a counterfactual,  I  think  it  is  fair  to say  that the recommendation  in question  is  likely  to have 
been  both  timely  and  important.  Mitigating  policy  actions  undertaken  by  national  authorities  reduced 
the risks at hand. If this had not happened, events such as the sharp appreciation of the Swiss franc in 
2015  –  the  Swiss  franc  being  one  of  the  currencies  in  which the  relevant  loans  were denominated  – 
could  have  generated  severe  problems  for  many  EU  households.  This  would  in  turn  have  affected 
other  financial  and  economic  developments  negatively,  with  the  potential  to  spread  beyond  the 
countries directly affected.  
Other  recommendations  have,  much  in  line  with  the  ESRB’s  macroprudential  mandate,  targeted  a 
wide  range  of  issues  in  different  areas  such  as  money  market  funds;  funding  of  credit  institutions; 
national  macroprudential  mandates;  intermediate  objectives  and  instruments  of  macroprudential 
policy;  and  the  assessment  of  cross-border  effects  of,  and  voluntary  reciprocity  for  macroprudential 
policy  measures.  Naturally,  these  policy  actions  have  been  underpinned  by  assessments  conducted 
by specialists with expertise in very different areas, this in cooperation with the broader membership.  
Inclusive working methods and broad expertise  
I  think  the  ESRB  has  a  good  work  process  in  the  sense  that  it  combines  two  features:  First,  all 
members  are free  to send participants  to an  ESRB  workstream. This  is  an  inclusive  working  method 
where different perspectives meet, where there is a “buy-in” for the members and where peer pressure 
is exerted. Second, there is the procedural aspect which I mentioned earlier, that the decision-making 
body eventually votes on what road to take.  
Notably,  the  ESRB  has  been  able  to  publish  a  quite  extensive  amount  of  work  and  has  contributed 
actively to the general debate. This is, in my view, very important for implementing a macroprudential 
culture in a broader sense, reaching outside the circle of the ESRB membership. Simply by shedding 
light on some of the macroprudential issues we are dealing with, and explaining why we see a need to 
tackle  them,  may  contribute  to  managing  expectations;  making  the  job  of  safeguarding  financial 
stability just a little easier.  
The ESRB’s contributions also cover very complex, and in some respects sensitive, issues where the 
parties involved may have started from views that are very far apart from one another. Being capable 
of getting results even  when dealing  with difficult tasks like that is  an important  quality of a body like 
the  ESRB.  I  should  mention  that  the  ASC,  with  its  composition  of  distinguished  academics  with 
different expertise, and in a sense more independent views, has been a catalyst in some of the work I 
|3 
 just  mentioned.  Some  of  the  topics  on  which  the  ESRB  has  produced  and  published  valuable 
contributions  include,  for  instance,  the  regulatory  treatment  of  sovereign  exposures;  macroprudential 
assessments  of  various  issues  related  to  shadow  banks,  an  area  where  there  is  still  a  lot  of  new 
ground to cover; the insurance sector; and commercial and residential real estate markets in the EU, 
to name just a few. I am also thinking of the work on structural issues regarding the banking sector, for 
instance in a report called “Is Europe overbanked?” by the ASC. This is a very relevant question in my 
view,  and  one  that  we  will  most  likely  get  back  to  in  the  first  panel  today,  where  the  ECB  Vice 
President  will  lead  the  panel  discussion  addressing  the  effects  of  the  low  interest  rate  environment. 
The latter is another topic which benefits from being assessed from a macroprudential viewpoint, and 
which is naturally also on the ESRB’s agenda. 
The regular identification and monitoring of potential systemic risks also 
benefits from the ESRB’s broad composition 
I  would  like  to  mention  another  core  task  for  the  ESRB,  namely  identifying  potential  risks  to  the  EU 
financial  system  at  an  early  stage  and,  as  mentioned,  issuing  warnings  or  recommendations  about 
policy actions to mitigate such risks when deemed appropriate. Much of the work just mentioned was 
naturally  initiated  through  the  ESRB’s  regular  discussions  on  risks  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial 
system. Here, the ESRB  benefits immensely from its  broad composition of members, as these tasks 
must  be  underpinned  by  a  truly  holistic  assessment  of  national,  sectoral  and  overarching  aspects, 
including  how  all  the  individual  components  interact.  The  ECB’s  support  on  the  analytical  and  the 
statistical  side  is,  of  course,  particularly  important  here,  but  also  the  inputs  from  national  authorities 
and other bodies are essential. We have come a long way in terms of issues such as access to and 
comparability  of  data,  for  instance  as  regards  national  banking  systems,  which  is  a  benefit  not  only 
within the ESRB membership. And products like the ESRB Risk Dashboard makes a broad set of risk 
indicators  easily  accessible  for  the  Members  as  well  as  the  general  public.  Furthermore,  the  risk 
discussions often generate further assessments that are eventually communicated in one form or the 
other, such as the reports and recommendations I just mentioned.  
A  main  strength  in  the  ESRB’s  risk  assessments  is,  in  my  view,  that  they  capture  both  a  top-down 
perspective on risks as well as national  assessments where the members make self-assessments of 
the  risks  at  hand  and  what  issues  they  expect  to  tackle  down  the  road.  These  assessments  are 
discussed together with all the other inputs to the risk discussions. Moving forward, one area where I 
hope  the  ESRB  will  make  further  progress  is  in  developing  the  processes  for  making  country 
assessments. That would enhance the abilities of the members to exert peer pressure, which may in 
turn help reduce “inaction bias”.   
When it comes to identifying, analysing and monitoring financial stability risks at EU level, many pieces 
of  information  are  necessary.  The  processes  for  handling  all  the  diverse  inputs  as  well  as  our 
assessment  tools  have  developed  more  or  less  of  necessity.  To  really  get  the  big  picture  we  must 
understand  how  the  individual  pieces  connect  to  each  other  and  we  must  be  able  to  put  them  all 
|4 
 together.  All  in  all,  I  think  the  ESRB  nowadays  makes  good  use  of  the  broad  scope  of  inputs  from 
members  with  different  expertise,  connecting  all  the  dots  and  their  inherent  dynamics  from  a  truly 
system-wide point of view.  
A new supervisory and regulatory landscape for the EU…  
Of course, the  ESRB  was  not  the  only  response to the structural  flaws  in the  supervisory  framework 
which  were  exposed  by  the  financial  crisis.  A  whole  new  financial  supervisory  and  regulatory 
landscape  has  by  now  at  least  roughly  found  its  shape  and  form  in  the  EU,  although  there  are  still 
some pieces of the puzzle that have not yet fallen into place. I should also say that I do not think that 
the landscape will ever be completely finalized. That would be a bad idea. These frameworks need to 
evolve and adjust as we move ahead, as we  learn from our experiences and as the financial system 
which they target is constantly evolving. But I would still say that the rough contours we now have on 
the map are fairly stable and will stay in place for quite some time. And that is very positive! 
Important landmarks in this landscape include, of course, the macroprudential oversight by the ESRB, 
and  the  Banking  Union  which  focuses  on  the  euro  area.  The  Banking  Union  has  three  pillars;  the 
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  which  is  a  big  leap  forward  on  the  microsupervisory  side;  the 
single resolution mechanism (SRM); and a European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS), which when 
it is implemented is meant to weaken the link between banks and their national sovereigns and deliver 
greater trust in the safety of retail bank deposits.  
…including national macroprudential frameworks 
In addition, national frameworks for macroprudential oversight and policy have been put into place all 
across  the  Union.  The  ESRB  has  played  an  important  role  in  that  work,  not  least  through  its 
recommendations  regarding  national  macroprudential  mandates  and  intermediate  objectives  and 
instruments for macroprudential policy. The latter breaks down the overall objective of macroprudential 
policy into a number of intermediate objectives, making it more clear what types of risks it is aiming at 
mitigating.  This  recommendation  also  provides  an  indicative  list  of  instruments  that  Member  States 
may  assign  to  relevant  authorities  in  order  to  pursue  the  objectives  of  macroprudential  policy.  The 
formal recommendations have most certainly been vital in providing a benchmark for the EU Member 
States when setting up their national macroprudential frameworks. But I also think that the day-to-day 
work  in producing  the formal  recommendations  may  have been almost  as  important. This  interaction 
is, of course, always a key component but especially in this case I think the positive side-effects may 
have been particularly large. Macroprudential policy was still very much in its infancy at this time and 
there was a need to find some common language or common ground if one will. I think the work and 
many  discussions  at  various  levels  that  took  place  were  a  catalyst  in  developing  what  one  could 
perhaps call a macroprudential culture in the EU. 
  |5 
 The introduction of macroprudential instruments 
Another  landmark,  not  least  in  terms  of  operationalizing  macroprudential  policy,  was  passed  in  2014 
when  the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation  and  Directive,  CRR/CRDIV  entered  into  force.  The 
CRR/CRD provided the macroprudential authorities in all EU countries with a set of policy instruments 
to  mitigate  financial  stability  risks  in  the  banking  sector  more  efficiently  than  the  previous  toolboxes 
had  allowed  for.  The  ESRB  also  took  on  an  important  role  here,  in  terms  of  supporting  the  Member 
States  as  they  were  to  operationalize  macroprudential  policy.  In  particular,  the  ESRB  produced  two 
reports to this aim: the so called Flagship report, providing an overview of the macroprudential policy 
framework  in  the  EU  banking  sector;  and  a  more  detailed  Handbook  which  provides  assistance  for 
macroprudential  authorities  on  how  to  use  the  CRR/CRD  instruments  for  the  banking  sector.  The 
ESRB also has a formal role in the CRR/CRD, among other things through  opining on some national 
macroprudential measures.  
A macroprudential framework extending beyond the banking sector 
But the ESRB’s macroprudential mandate extends beyond the banking sector, and not every spot on 
the map over the financial system is as well-known and covered from a macroprudential viewpoint as 
the  EU  banks  in  the  remit  of  the  CRR/CRD.  The  financial  landscape  is  constantly  evolving  and 
subsequently  the  potential  sources  of  systemic  risks.  One  aspect  reflecting  this  is  that  the  share  of 
credit  provided  by  other  financial  institutions  than  banks  has  grown  over  the  past  few  years.  Hence, 
after making the macroprudential framework for the EU banking sector operational, targeting the parts 
of the map where we find the non-bank financial institutions, and working on how to provide a holistic 
view regarding all parts of the financial system, is a natural and important next step.  
The  ESRB  recently  published  a  strategy  paper  on  macroprudential  policy  “beyond  banking”,  which 
complements  the  guidance  already  provided  on  the  policy  framework  for  the  banking  sector.  That 
strategy  paper  is  meant  to  provide  a  point  of  reference  as  we  now  move  on  to  further  enhance  the 
macroprudential  policy  strategy,  regulatory  data  and  instruments  for  addressing  risks  in  non-bank 
financial  sectors.  I  should  mention  that  other  work  related  to  non-bank  financial  institutions  has  also 
been  conducted,  where  the  recently  published  annual  ESRB  Shadow  Banking  Monitor  will  hopefully 
provide important insights. The Monitor provides an overview of developments in the shadow banking 
sector, with focus on assessing potential risks to financial stability. It is intended to foster progress of 
the debate on related issues and hence targets a broad readership.  
The overall mission is to eliminate potential blind spots on the macroprudential map and to connect all 
the  dots.  To  achieve  that,  we  need  both  an  analytical  framework  underpinned  by  sufficiently  high 
quality data, and a policy framework which enables us to target risks in different parts of the financial 
system  in  a  consistent  manner.  The  resilience  of  a  specific  part  of  the  financial  system  needs  to  be 
linked to its potential impact in terms of the systemic risk it could generate for the financial system as a 
whole. We may also need to develop a wider financial stability toolkit. This would, for instance, include 
|6 
 top-down  stress  tests  for  asset  managers  and  central  counterparties,  and  recovery  and  resolution 
frameworks for the insurance sector and central counterparties. The ESRB is very well placed to play 
one  of  the  leading  roles  here,  due  to  its  mandate,  the  broad  expertise  of  its  membership  and  its 
inclusive working methods with a wide range of the relevant stakeholders interacting.  
The long and winding road from global to national regulation 
I  have  been  speaking  about  CRR/CRD  on  and  off  here  for  the  past  few  minutes,  but  let  me  just 
elaborate a little bit more from another angle. The CRR/CRD started out after a global framework had 
been  agreed  in  Basel,  and  this  EU  level  framework  was  in  turn  implemented  at  national  level  in  the 
Member  States.  In  my  day-to-day  work  I  deal  with  financial  stability  issues  on  different  levels  if  one 
will; As Chair of the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision the scope is global, while as Governor 
of  the  Swedish  Central  Bank  I  have  a  national  perspective on  financial  stability  although, admittedly, 
the  international  agenda  and  developments  play  a  key  role  there,  too.  Being  Chair  of  the  Advisory 
Technical Committee of the ESRB and a member of its decision making body, the General Board, of 
course provides an EU-level perspective on macroprudential policy and systemic risk. These levels or 
perspectives are in my view becoming increasingly intertwined, especially after the financial crisis and 
the lessons learned there.   
Much of the agenda is indeed set at the global level first. And the way financial markets function today, 
this is also quite natural. We need at least minimum requirements at the global level. But we also need 
to  strike  a  balance  between  common  rules  of  the  game  in  terms  of  minimum  requirements  and  the 
need for national flexibility, not least in the EU, which to put it mildly is far from a homogenous group of 
countries.  In  fact,  the  economic  and  financial  conditions  differ  substantially  between  the  Member 
States. While these differences are quite likely to generate different risks, the structure of the national 
financial system may also in itself contribute to either mitigating or further fuelling them.  
One size will not fit all – national flexibility is needed 
It  is  not  very  long  since  the  CRR/CRD  entered  into  force,  but  we  have  already  enough  practical 
experience to be thinking about developing it further. In my view, that should include simplifying it. We 
really  had  very  limited  experience  of  conducting  macroprudential  policy  in  practice  at  the  time  the 
CRR/CRD  was  drafted.  In  principle,  the  Commission’s  starting  point  was  to  transform  the  Basel  III 
minimum  capital  regulation 
into  a  maximum  harmonization 
framework.  And 
the  somewhat 
cumbersome procedures  when  using  some of  the  instruments  under  the  CRR/CRD  are  probably  the 
result of the pretty tough negotiations which took place before the current framework saw the light of 
day. Today,  with some more experience and a fair amount of “learning  by  doing”, I think most would 
agree that national flexibility is necessary for efficient policy implementation.   
Furthermore,  as  I mentioned  earlier,  the circumstances  under  which macroprudential  policy  operates 
are not static. Therefore, in terms of the macroprudential framework it is unlikely that one size fits all, 
and fits at all times. Rather, the appropriate macroprudential policy set-up, naturally including the use 
|7 
 of its instruments, will to some extent need to be tailored. The national flexibility, which is already part 
of  the  current  CRR/CRD  framework,  is  in  my  view  key  for  efficient  macroprudential  policies.  As  we 
move forward, we may need to strengthen that flexibility even further. We do not have perfect foresight 
as  regards  what  risks  we  will  have  to  tackle  further  down  the  road.  Nor  do  I  think  that  we  will  ever 
develop the perfect tool for every conceivable financial stability risk out there.  
One thing to bear in mind in all this, is that whether the perspective is global, regional or national, it all 
boils down to the same thing - safeguarding the stability of the financial system. And in today’s highly 
interconnected world, it is quite obvious that we to some extent are all in this together. This brings me 
to a related issue where the ESRB has played a leading role. 
Reciprocation of macroprudential measures – key for their effective 
implementation  
An important prerequisite for effective implementation of macroprudential policy in a financially highly 
integrated  world  is  that  the  measures  in  question  can  affect  all  financial  actors  which  influence  the 
specific  risk  that  authorities  are  trying  to  mitigate.  This  is  not  always  the  case.  For  example,  foreign 
branches  are  regulated  by  authorities  in  the  home  country  of  the  parent  company,  and  may  not  be 
affected  by  measures  taken  in  the  country  where  they  are  active.  Reciprocation  may  in  such  a 
situation  help  mitigate  the  risks,  minimize  potential  regulatory  arbitrage  and  also  provide  a  level 
playing  field. In 2015  the  ESRB  issued  a recommendation  which provides  guidance for  a systematic 
assessment of the cross-border effects of macroprudential  policy, and a coordinated policy response 
in 
terms  of  voluntary  reciprocity 
for  macroprudential  policy  measures  when  needed.  The 
recommendation  provides  the  basis  for  implementing  voluntary  reciprocity  in  the  EU  and  sets 
guidelines for the analysis, notifications and requests to be carried out.  
The  reciprocity  framework  is  still  relatively  new  but  it  is  a  very  important  part  of  a  macroprudential 
approach  for  the  reasons  just  mentioned.  I  think  the  ESRB’s  follow-up  assessment  of  the 
recommendation in this area  will provide  important insights on how  we might develop this framework 
further in the future.   
The EU needs a strong ESRB as we move ahead 
So what about the future role of the ESRB? The financial crisis brought with it new rules of the game 
for  financial  markets  from  a  systemic  risk  perspective.  We  have  a  new  regulatory  landscape  and 
framework for financial supervision, and the ESRB is a pillar in that framework. Not only is the ESRB 
central  in  identifying  and  warning  against  risks  to  the  EU  financial  system,  and  recommending 
measures to mitigate such risk if needed. It has played a key role by providing a benchmark when the 
new macroprudential policy frameworks were implemented across the EU. The ESRB continues to be 
vital  in  developing  that  framework  further,  and  with  that  I  mean  for  both  banks  and  for  non-bank 
financial  institutions.  There  is,  of  course,  also  the  ESRB’s  role  in  the  new  regulatory  framework 
connected to the CRD/CRR. In addition, I also think that the ESRB more or less by construction is well 
|8 
 placed  to  help  its  members  tackle  mainly  national  problems,  by  using  peer  pressure  and  working 
against  inaction  bias  in  various  ways.  This  may  be  very  important,  not  least  when  vulnerabilities 
emerge due to problems that are mainly  beyond an individual authority’s  own control. One may  wish 
that we would have come even a little bit further in this area at this point, but it is important to realize 
that  it  takes  some  time  to  set  up  the  necessary  internal  framework  and  processes.  But  by  now  the 
ESRB has that kind of machinery in place. The next step is to start using it. 
Even if we have a much more complete supervisory framework in place today, both nationally and at 
the  EU  and  euro  area  levels,  I  think  the  role  for  the  ESRB  as  the  EU’s  macroprudential  overseer  is 
becoming more and more important. At a high level, there is in particular an increasing need to keep a 
truly  systemic  perspective,  capturing  all  financial  sectors,  their  interlinkages  and  dynamics.  The  EU 
banking  sector  is  facing  structural  problems,  non-bank  financial  institutions  are  becoming  more 
important, CCPs have taken on a systemically important role and the low interest-rate environment is, 
among other things, challenging the insurance industry, and the EU financial sector does not seem to 
become less interconnected. All these issues must be tackled with the impact on the  financial system 
as a whole in mind. And I think the ESRB is key in that endeavour.  
For every challenge we face and overcome, we learn. We learn and that makes us better prepared for 
tackling even more difficult challenges further down the road. That is in my view certainly true for the 
ESRB.  We  learned  from  the  financial  crisis  and  there  has  been  a  substantial  amount  of  learning  by 
doing since. I must say that the blueprint was good to begin with; pretty much all the necessary nuts 
and  bolts  were  already  in  place  to  create  a  macroprudential  body.  Having  central  banks  and 
supervisors  around  the  same  table  as  European  institutions,  and  not  least,  adding  the  independent 
views of the Advisory Scientific Committee to the mix, is in my view a good set-up. Furthermore, I think 
that  the  plan  for  how  all  those  nuts  and  bolts  and  other  components  should  be  connected  and  work 
together has proven to be a good one too.  
While  many  probably  doubted  that  the  ESRB’s  somewhat  complex  set-up  with  so  many  members 
could function well in practice, the institution has gone all the way from that original blueprint in 2009 to 
where  it  stands  today  as  the  EU’s  macroprudential  watchdog.  Its  machinery  brings  together  all  the 
components  that  its  founding  fathers  had  in  mind,  with  a  set-up  that  has  allowed  the  broad 
composition and large membership to,  in my  view,  become main strengths  rather  than  impediments. 
The road we have travelled these almost six years has formed an institution which has developed with 
the challenges it met. It has fine-tuned its processes and its machinery and I think it is well placed to 
face challenges today and further down the road. 
|9 
