Stephen  S  Poloz:  25  years  of  inflation  targets  –  certainty  for
uncertain times
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Business Council of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, 1 November 2016.
Introduction
 These  are  uncertain  times  in  the  global  economy,  and  anything  that  can  be  done  to  lessen
uncertainty  is  welcome.  Last  week,  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  federal  government  took  an
important step to provide some certainty, to both companies and consumers, by signing a five-
year renewal of our inflation-targeting agreement.
This year marks the 25th anniversary of inflation targeting in Canada. That is a long time—so
long that a whole generation of business leaders and consumers has not had to deal with the
uncertainty  associated  with  high  and  variable  inflation.  It  is  human  nature  to  take  for  granted
things that have been around for a while. The Bank of Canada will never take for granted the
benefits of inflation targeting, and last week’s renewal makes it timely to remind people of the
benefits that inflation targeting has delivered, as well as the difficult journey we took to get here.
Finding an Anchor
Twenty-five years is the silver anniversary, but inflation targeting has truly been golden. As an
approach  to  monetary  policy,  inflation  targeting  has  proven  its  worth  repeatedly,  both  in  good
economic times as well as turbulent ones. Canada was just the second country to adopt this
approach.  Now,  inflation  targeting—narrowly  defined—is  being  practised  by  36  central  banks
representing 37 per cent of the world’s economy. When you add the US Federal Reserve, which
has  inflation  control  as  one  of  its  mandates,  and  the  European  Central  Bank,  which  has  a
mandate to keep inflation below 2 per cent, 64 per cent of the world economy is following some
form of inflation targeting.
But to understand how important an advance this system represents, you need to look back to
the bad old days of the 1970s and 1980s. Inflation was not only much higher than today, but it
was also much more variable. Annual inflation reached more than 12 per cent in 1974, dropped
to less than 6 per cent two years later, then jumped back to over 12 per cent in 1981.
It was impossible to predict with confidence what the inflation rate would be from one year to the
next. From an employer’s point of view, high and variable inflation made it extremely difficult to do
the  hard  math  required  to  run  a  business.  High  inflation  meant  companies  constantly  faced
“menu costs” associated with having to regularly adjust prices. Those costs would typically be
passed on to consumers, who also faced uncertainty about the future purchasing power of their
savings.
The situation was bad enough in the 1970s that the federal government implemented wage and
price controls—a drastic measure usually reserved for times of war. They did not work. What
ultimately did work were extreme monetary measures—interest rates that would make your head
spin  today.  Mortgage  rates  rose  above  20  per  cent  in  the  late  1970s.  That  must  be  hard  to
imagine  for  the  current  generation  of  borrowers,  who  are  accustomed  to  five-year  mortgages
below 3 per cent and zero per cent financing at car dealerships.
That necessary monetary medicine was painful, and it worked. By 1983, inflation had settled into
a range of around 4 to 5 per cent. Back then, it would have been easy to proclaim the mission
accomplished. Lowering inflation was no longer a high priority for governments, or for employees
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
—particularly unionized workers—who could protect themselves with cost-of-living adjustments
built into contracts.
It was about this time that I first came to work at the Bank of Canada. We knew that settling for 4
to 5 per cent inflation was not good enough. Canadians would still have their purchasing power
eroded, just not as quickly. At an inflation rate of 5 per cent, prices still double in 15 years—which
means that prices would more than double over someone’s retirement horizon.
Back  in  the  late  1970s,  there  was  a  near-absolute  consensus  among  economists  and
academics about how central banks should fight inflation. Control the supply of money and you
control inflation, or so the theory went. Monetary targets would give clarity—a nominal anchor to
help  explain  your  actions—and  provide  the  inflation  outcome  you  want.  Everyone  understood
that. The only problem was, it did not work quite as the theory predicted.
We worked hard at the Bank to try to save the idea of monetary targets, but the economy was
changing  rapidly,  and  new  types  of  bank  deposits  were  being  introduced.  As  a  result,  the
relationship between money supply and inflation proved too unpredictable to rely on. It was quite
a  blow  to  the  economics  profession  when,  in  1982,  then-Governor  Gerald  Bouey  famously
dropped the bombshell that we would no longer target the money supply. The Bank went off into
uncharted academic territory, searching for a new way to control inflation.
We knew all along that interest rates and inflation are connected through a complex series of
relationships, with money somewhere in the middle. So, the Bank focused its efforts on refining
its  understanding  of  the  linkages  between  interest  rates,  economic  growth  and,  ultimately,
inflation—in short, a macroeconomic model. In 1988, then-Governor John Crow announced that
monetary policy should aim at “achieving and maintaining stable prices.” Although the precise
definition of price stability was left open, the anchor for monetary policy would be inflation itself,
not an intermediate variable such as money.
It  is  fair  to  say  that  the  concept  of  directly  targeting  inflation  was  met  with  a  fair  degree  of
skepticism, including from the government. After all, a central bank does not control how prices
are  set.  What  made  us  think  we  could  achieve  an  inflation  target?  Well,  we  had  done  the
research and improved our ability to use economic models, so we knew the logic was sound. In
the end, the federal government was persuaded—we reached a formal agreement that said our
monetary  policy  would  be  directed  at  controlling  inflation  and  that  gave  us  the  operational
independence to carry out policy as we saw fit.
And so, in 1991, Canada became an inflation-targeting pioneer. Over time, the broad parameters
of our approach have not changed. For the first three years, we had inflation-reduction targets,
with a goal of bringing inflation down to 2 per cent. We succeeded. Since 1995, we have aimed
to keep inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range. Importantly, we approach
the target symmetrically. Given the experiences of countries who have struggled with deflation,
we are just as concerned about inflation below our target as above it. We want businesses and
consumers to be able to make long-term plans with certainty.
Reaping the Rewards
As it turned out, the framework worked better than we could have reasonably hoped. Check the
numbers. Inflation averaged about 7 per cent between 1975 and 1991, including the 1983 to 1990
period when it stabilized around 4 to 5 per cent. Since then, inflation has averaged almost exactly
2 per cent and become much more stable, and expectations have become solidly anchored on
the target.
Inflation  targeting  has  also  provided  economic  benefits  that  went  beyond  those  we  were
expecting.  Canadian  businesses  and  households  have  reaped  the  rewards  of  reduced
uncertainty, helping them make spending and investment decisions with more confidence. It has
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
also led to improved economic performance across a number of dimensions—both in terms of
higher levels of activity and lower variability.
The  agreement,  which  has  been  renewed  every  five  years  since  2001,  gives  our  approach
legitimacy—that  is  crucial  in  a  democratic  society. And  having  an  explicit  number  for  a  clear
target  like  the  inflation  rate  makes  it  easy  to  judge  our  work.  Importantly,  the  agreement  also
gives inflation targeting additional credibility, which has made it more effective. This credibility has
grown with our success in hitting the target.
The combination of inflation targeting with a floating exchange rate has given Canada scope to
pursue a truly independent monetary policy, suited to our specific conditions. The framework has
also given us flexibility to respond to economic shocks. We could act aggressively during the
global financial crisis, for example, because inflation expectations were so well anchored. And,
during the crisis, our framework provided an anchor that helped explain our actions.
It was not just Canada that benefited from improved economic performance. This outcome was
shared by many countries as inflation targeting spread, contributing to a period known as the
“Great Moderation.” That success had a downside—the extended period of positive economic
performance  spawned  rising  financial  imbalances.  In  short,  we  learned  that  while  inflation
targeting can bring about economic stability, that is not a sufficient condition for financial stability.
Let me mention one more important benefit of our framework. Inflation targeting has made the
Bank of Canada much more transparent.
From the beginning, we knew that inflation expectations would be important. If people believed we
would bring about low and stable inflation, they would behave in a way that would help make that
happen. It has become clear over 25 years that it is easier to anchor inflation expectations when
people understand what the central bank is doing, and why. This has led to a steady evolution in
our approach to communications—in short, more and deeper communications around monetary
policy decisions.
In  Governor  Bouey’s  day,  communication  with  the  public  was  not  a  high  priority.  One  or  two
public speeches a year was normal, with an occasional one by a Deputy Governor. So far this
year, Governing Council members have given 17 public addresses, like this one, each broadcast
live over the Internet and posted on our website for future reference.
There have been many other changes that make us more transparent and accountable. Four
years after moving to inflation targets, we began publishing our Monetary Policy Report (MPR),
which  explains  in  detail  how  we  interpret  developments  in  the  economy  and  spells  out  our
economic and inflation forecasts. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I hold press conferences
after  the  publication  of  each  issue  of  our  MPR  and Financial  System  Review,  and  we  offer
opening statements that highlight the key issues that figured in our policy deliberations. The two
of us also appear before House of Commons and Senate committees twice a year. The Bank
now publishes more research and has become active on social media. The overarching goal of
all this activity is to help Canadians understand what we are doing, and why.
Of course, Canada is not alone in this move toward transparency. My belief is that the additional
accountability  that  comes  with  a  formal  inflation  target  has  been  the  main  driver  of  the
transparency trend seen here and at other central banks.
Adjusting the Paradigm
Now,  just  because  inflation  targeting  has  worked  very  well,  that  does  not  mean  it  cannot  be
improved.  At  each  renewal,  we  have  asked  ourselves  fundamental  questions  to  make  sure
inflation  targeting  is  delivering  economic  benefits  most  effectively.  For  example,  in  2011,  we
clarified that the framework gives us the flexibility to adjust the time we need to return inflation to
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
target, if moving too quickly or slowly would worsen financial stability concerns.
During the five years leading up to this renewal, we looked into three issues. The first was about
as  fundamental  as  you  can  get:  Is  2  per  cent  the  right  target?  This  has  been  a  live  issue
throughout  our  experience  with  inflation  targets.  Five  years  ago,  our  research  considered
whether we should lower the target. This time, given our experience with low inflation and the risk
of deflation, we took a good look at the idea of raising the target.
We considered this possibility seriously because central bank policy rates in many economies
have been near, or at, historic lows, reaching the effective lower bound in some places. The idea
is that interest rates would generally be higher if we had a higher inflation target, so we would
have more room to lower rates in the future before we hit that effective lower bound.
However,  we  have  learned  from  recent  experience  that  there  are  unconventional  monetary
policies that give us more room to manoeuvre than previously believed. These include pushing
interest rates below zero or buying longer-term bonds to compress long-term yields. A higher
inflation  target  would  mean  higher  nominal  interest  rates  and  more  room  to  manoeuvre,  on
average, but also would entail imposing a higher inflation tax on the economy. I think of this as
paying  dearly,  every  day,  for  insurance  against  the  low-probability  risk  that  another  very  large
macroeconomic shock could occur in the future. Besides, pushing inflation up from 2 per cent to
3 per cent might be quite difficult to do, and might require some significant economic fluctuations,
given how well inflation expectations appear to be anchored at 2 per cent.
The  second  issue  we  focused  on  was  our  measure  of  core  inflation.  Prices  can  move  for
reasons beyond the control of monetary policy. For example, a drought can lead to higher food
prices. We try to look past those movements to focus on the underlying trend of inflation, so that
we  do  not  oversteer  our  policy.  Previously,  we  used  one  particular  measure  of  core  inflation.
Now, we will use three different measures that get at the underlying trend in different ways. You
can find more information about these measures in the renewal document that is posted on our
website.
The third issue we took on is how monetary policy decisions should take into account concerns
about the stability of the financial system. Once again, we drew heavily on the experience of the
past  five  years.  We  have  now  seen  successive  moves  by  federal  authorities  to  mitigate  the
threat posed by imbalances in our housing market and high levels of household debt. Our view is
that  these  so-called  macroprudential  policies  are  best  placed  to  deal  with  threats  to  financial
stability  because  they  can  be  designed  to  target  specific  financial  vulnerabilities.  In  contrast,
adjusting interest rates is a very blunt tool with widespread effects. Given all the work done to
strengthen the global financial system over the past few years, it makes even more sense to
separate monetary policy from efforts to stabilize the financial system.
That  does  not  mean  our  monetary  policy  ignores  financial  stability  issues.  For  one  thing,
monetary  policy  is  transmitted  through  the  financial  system,  so  we  want  it  to  work  well.  For
another, we know that financial system vulnerabilities can magnify the impact of negative shocks,
such as a large rise in unemployment. So, at the Bank of Canada, we take a risk-management
approach  to  monetary  policy.  We  acknowledge  that  there  is  always  uncertainty  around  the
outlook  for  inflation,  and  developments  in  the  financial  system  bring  uncertainties  for  financial
stability. These uncertainties generate a zone within which we can tolerate variations in either the
risks to our inflation outlook or risks to financial stability. Because there are many possible paths
for monetary policy that can lead us to our inflation target, and because we have flexibility around
the time it takes to hit the target, we can use monetary policy to manage those risks, while still
keeping the pursuit of our inflation target as our main priority.
The Future of Inflation Targeting
For me, renewing the inflation target is a cause for celebration. And, I think Canada’s inflation-
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
targeting framework is stronger than those in many other countries, for a few reasons.
First, the five-year renewal cycle gives us a regular opportunity to do a thorough examination of
our  policy  in  light  of  experience  and  new  research,  and  to  adjust  it  if  necessary.  Without  the
regular renewals, it would be much more difficult to introduce new thinking into the framework.
Second,  the  renewal  cycle  brings  an  obligation  to  demonstrate  to  the  government  and  to
Canadians that we have the right policy. This requirement means that the framework has strong
credibility.
Third, because the framework takes the form of an agreement between the government and the
central bank, there is an explicit commitment from the government to support our pursuit of low,
stable  and  predictable  inflation.  The  agreement  therefore  means  that  all  economic  policies—
including monetary, fiscal and macroprudential—can work together in a complementary fashion.
But at the same time, I recognize that even after years of very low interest rates, the economic
recovery  in  many  economies  remains  weak.  So  it  is  not  really  surprising  that  some  are
questioning  whether  policy-makers,  including  central  bankers,  are  doing  the  right  thing.  Has
monetary policy lost its effectiveness? Is inflation targeting passé?
We  take  these  debates  seriously.  We  have  studied  the  research  and  the  theory  behind
frameworks  such  as  price-level  targeting  and  targeting  the  growth  of  nominal  gross  domestic
product. But, to date, we have not seen convincing evidence that there is an approach that is
better than our inflation targets.
I am in no way suggesting that inflation targeting is perfect. We will never stop looking for ways to
make  our  framework  better,  and  to  provide  greater  certainty  to  Canadian  businesses  and
consumers.  This  goes  beyond  the  targets  themselves  to  include  the  tools  we  use  to  pursue
them. Economic models remain at the core of the entire inflation-targeting process, and models
require investments to capture many new complexities in today’s economies. In short, the next
generation of economic models needs to be under construction now—after all, the main model
used at the Bank today is the culmination of nearly 30 years of research effort.
Conclusion
It  is  time  for  me  to  conclude.  The  renewal  of  our  inflation-targeting  agreement  is  good  news.
Whether you remember the bad times or not, high, variable and unpredictable inflation is deadly
for confidence. It is a source of uncertainty that would be brutal in today’s economic climate.
We will not let that happen. We have a record of more than 25 years as a successful inflation-
targeting central bank. This has helped businesses and individuals make financial decisions with
certainty and confidence. It has led to an environment that is conducive to sustained economic
growth.
The  renewal  of  the  inflation-targeting  agreement  sets  us  up  to  extend  this  track  record  of
success  for  another  five  years.  But  our  framework  is  not  set  in  stone.  We  will  continue  to
observe and learn, ask questions, and make sure our monetary policy is truly doing its best until
the  next  renewal  in  2021.  We  will  be  looking  for  new  ways  to  engage  with  Canadians  in  a
discussion about our framework, and would very much like to hear your ideas as we continue to
promote the economic well-being of Canadians.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
