Stephen  S  Poloz:  From  hewers  of  wood  to  hewers  of  code  -
Canada's expanding service economy
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the CD Howe Institute,
Toronto, Ontario, 28 November 2016.
 I would like to thank Robert Amano, Jing Yang, André Binette, Brigitte Desroches and Stefano
Gnocchi for their help in preparing this speech.
Introduction
Some clichés never die. The last time the number of Canadians employed in the goods sector
exceeded  those  working  in  the  service  sector  was  the  mid-1950s.  For  about  60  years  now,
growth in services employment has persistently outpaced employment in goods production. We
have been much more than a nation of hewers of wood and drawers of water for a long time, yet
the cliché lives on.
The same story of an expanding service sector has played out for all advanced economies. But
that does little to allay an emerging sense of unease about the economic forces at work.
Here in Canada, this sense of unease has been compounded by two significant shocks to the
economy. The first was a steady loss of export capacity in the years prior to—and in the wake of
—the global financial crisis. Our export recovery since 2009 has been impressive but remains
incomplete,  as  at  least  $30  billion  worth  of  export  capacity  was  lost  in  the  process  and
competitiveness  challenges  continue.  The  second  shock  was  the  sudden  drop  in  resource
prices,  particularly  for  oil,  which  represented  a  significant  loss  of  income  for  the  nation  as  a
whole—something in the range of $50 billion to $60 billion per year.
Together, these two shocks have created an $80 billion to $90 billion hole in our economy, which
is more than 4 per cent of GDP, and have set in motion a complex series of adjustments. It is
natural to wonder: What will replace the economic losses due to these shocks? Where will the
new jobs be created?
These  are  difficult  questions,  so  it  is  no  wonder  that  people  are  worried  about  the  future,
particularly  those  employed  in  the  goods  sector.  In  the  circumstances,  skepticism  about  the
benefits of technological change, globalization and international trade is understandable.
We  need  a  strong  and  open  dialogue  on  these  issues,  and  I  hope  to  contribute  to  that
conversation  this  evening.  But  let  me  start  with  my  conclusion:  I  strongly  believe  that  the
continued expansion of our service sector is pointing the way toward full economic recovery and
the return of sustained, natural growth.
The long-term rise of services
The  phrase  “hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water”  comes  from  the  Bible,  but  it  was  the
Canadian  economist  Harold  Innis  who  used  it  in  his  1930  book, The Fur Trade in Canada,  to
describe our traditional economic dependence on resource production.
Obviously, there has always been, and always will be, some truth behind the cliché. Resource
production,  particularly  agriculture,  dominated  our  economy  in  the  years  immediately  after
Confederation.  But  by  the  end  of  the  1920s,  Canada  had  become  primarily  an  urban,
industrialized economy. By the mid-1950s, the share of manufacturing employment had reached
about  one-third  of  the  workforce.  This  share  has  been  declining  ever  since,  while  the  service
sector has continued to grow, both in absolute and relative terms.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Today, more than 80 per cent of working Canadians are employed in services, while fewer than
20 per cent produce goods. Manufacturing now makes up less than 10 per cent of the workforce.
The question is: How far can these trends go?
Well, we shouldn’t forget that Canada is fortunate to be endowed with a wide range of natural
resources  that  represent  an  important  source  of  future  income.  We  all  know  that  economic
diversification is a good thing, but people sometimes seem to lose sight of the fact that it is much
better for a diversified economy to have a significant endowment of natural resources than not.
The fact is there will always be global demand for our food products, our forest products, our
energy, our metals and minerals, and so on. And there will always be a market for innovative,
high-quality  manufactured  products  from  Canada.  Canadians  are,  and  will  continue  to  be,
competitive in these markets.
However, that leaves open the question of how many Canadians are likely to be working in the
goods  sector  in  the  future.  I  am  not  sure  we  can  forecast  such  things.  Since  2001,  total
employment in goods production has fallen overall, even though output of goods has risen by 14
per cent within that time frame. Furthermore, for every job lost in the goods sector since January
2001, about 30 jobs have been created in the service sector. Here are the numbers: looking at
the  latest  data,  goods  employment  has  dropped  by  about  100,000  since  2001,  while  service
sector jobs have grown by nearly 3 million.
Now, it is at this point in the conversation when we often hear some other clichés. One is that the
only workers who actually create value are those who produce tangible goods—things that hurt
when you drop them on your foot. Another is that service jobs are generally low-skill and low-
paying.
The reality, of course, is quite different. The service sector is widely diverse in both skills and
pay, even though the average wage in services is lower than in goods production. It probably will
not surprise you that the average wage in the finance and insurance industry is higher than that in
manufacturing. But so is the average wage in the transportation and warehousing industry. And,
together,  those  two  industries  employ  more  Canadians  and  produce  more  output  than  all  of
Canada’s manufacturers.
Creative destruction at work
Economists’  understanding  of  the  evolution  of  economies  is  based  on  hundreds  of  years  of
history.
Advances in technology lead to higher productivity and greater production, which in turn permit
the development of new economic activities and increased specialization in jobs. Over time, the
lion’s share of these new activities has arisen in the service sector. Joseph Schumpeter called
this process “creative destruction,” because improving how we do things destroys the old while
creating  the  new. And  the  key  facilitator  of  this  growth  process  is  trade,  both  domestic  and
international; otherwise, we would all have to be jacks-of-all-trades.
Let  me  illustrate  with  the  Canadian  experience.  At  the  time  of  Confederation,  about  half  of
working  Canadians  were  employed  in  agriculture  in  one  form  or  another.  Of  course,
technological  advances  led  to  enormous  increases  in  productivity,  creating  opportunities  for
people  to  move  away  from  farms  and  into  cities.  New  technologies,  coupled  with  the  newly
available workforce, sparked the creation of whole new activities, both in manufacturing and in
services.
By the 1920s, only one-third of Canadians were still involved in agriculture. By the 1950s, that
figure was down to 15 per cent and, today, it is less than 2 per cent. And, yet, agricultural output
today is more than three times what it was 80 years ago.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Clearly,  agricultural  employment  fell  because  technological  advances  and  scale  economies
allowed for greater output with fewer employees. And this freed up the labour that allowed for the
industrialization of Canada and fuelled the development of the service sector.
The same process is continuing today with the decline in employment in goods production. New
technologies, automation and robotics are allowing for higher productivity and output with fewer
workers. Canadian factories are about five times more productive today than they were in 1955.
This  means  more  output  per  worker,  not  necessarily  fewer  workers.  Indeed,  improved
productivity  is  essential  to  compete  internationally,  which  is  itself  essential  to  maintaining  or
growing a business. In other words, without increases in productivity, the business itself and all
of the associated jobs can be lost.
This  is  the  creative  destruction  process  at  work.  Specific  jobs  lost  to  automation  are  gone.
Exporting companies who closed their doors in the wake of the global recession in 2007–09 are
unlikely to return. Rather, surviving companies will expand, and other, new companies will grow
in their place.
Naturally, I am oversimplifying the matter. The real world is far more complex than our economic
models suggest. Even the distinction between goods and services is a blurry one. Consider the
smartphone  in  your  pocket.  Yes,  its  manufacturer  used  circuits,  wire,  plastics  and  other
materials.  But  it  also  needed  research  and  development,  engineering,  design,  software,
transportation,  trade,  finance,  legal,  sales  and  accounting  services. And  certainly  your  phone
would be totally useless without telecommunications services, not to mention after-sales service,
including a call centre to help with problems.
Rather  than  a  dichotomy  between  goods  and  services,  it  is  much  more  useful  to  think  of  a
spectrum—from raw commodities at one end to pure services at the other. In general, the further
up the value-added chain the manufactured product, the more services are embedded in it.
There is reason to believe that the Canadian economy has a comparative advantage in some of
the  service  categories  I  just  mentioned,  as  well  as  others,  such  as  tourism.  We  have  the
necessary  ingredients:  a  highly  educated  labour  force  supported  by  strong  universities  and
colleges; entrepreneurs with access to business incubators; a beautiful and interesting country
that  many  would  like  to  visit;  a  multicultural  workforce  that  helps  us  to  serve  domestic  and
international markets. And, that comparative advantage has been strengthened by the decline in
the Canadian dollar in the past couple of years—a symptom of falling resource prices, and a
facilitator of the rotation of growth from resource production to other sectors.
Filling the hole
So, how can we fill the economic hole I spoke of earlier? Of course, monetary and fiscal policies
are doing their part to support the recovery. But can growth in the service sector play a role? It
already is, and we can expect its contribution to grow in the years ahead.
Since  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  growth  in  Canada’s  service  sector  has  been
stronger on average than in the goods sector. Most of the employment growth seen in Canada
since late 2014 has been in service industries that pay above-average wages, helping to support
national income.
Services are also a bright spot in the export picture. Exports of services have continued to grow,
both relative to goods and in absolute terms. In the first half of 2016, Canada was on pace to
export more than $100 billion in services, almost $25 billion more than five years earlier. At a time
of  sluggish  trade  growth  worldwide,  exports  of  Canadian  commercial  services  such  as
engineering, research and development, and financial services have grown by more than five per
cent annually since 2000. And tourism exports are now generating about $17 billion per year,
over $2 billion more than five years ago.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
We’re particularly excited by recent developments in information technology (IT) services. We
are seeing increasing numbers of foreign companies locating the IT service components of their
supply chains in Canada. The publication fDi Markets reported that during 2015 and the first half
of  this  year,  65  projects  were  announced  or  launched  by  foreign  companies  employed  in
knowledge-intensive  services  such  as  smartphone  applications  and  custom  computer
programming.  It  is  worth  noting  that  last  year,  the  average  wage  across  highly  digitalized
industries, which includes IT services, was 17 per cent higher than the average Canadian wage.
The Bank recently conducted an in-depth survey of about 50 exporting companies and industry
associations in the IT service sector. Bank staff asked many of the same questions we ask in
our Business Outlook Survey. They found that IT service exporters were more optimistic than
the average Canadian company. Many of these firms, which are located right across the country,
reported double-digit sales growth.
Most of them said they expected sales growth to continue to be strong, particularly export sales,
and fully three-quarters of them are expecting to hire more people. None said they are looking to
cut employees. A large majority said they are looking to invest in research and development. And
nearly half said they are planning to boost spending on physical investment. But the companies
are not typically planning to invest in what one would traditionally think of as industrial machinery;
rather, they are investing in equipment such as computers and software.
And, of course, the other place where these companies are planning to invest is in people. The
companies in the survey who said they would have difficulty meeting an unexpected increase in
demand  almost  unanimously  cited  a  shortage  of  skilled  workers.  In  fact,  the  idea  of  physical
capacity is almost irrelevant in this industry. To increase sales, these firms need to hire, and
possibly train, sales and support staff, programmers, developers and computer engineers.
The data are limited, but evidence suggests firm creation in this industry is above the average of
the rest of the economy. Output has grown by more than 15 per cent since the start of 2011—a
faster  pace  than  the  rest  of  the  service  sector  and  more  than  double  the  pace  of  the  goods
sector. In the past five years, the industry has grown by close to $8 billion and now represents
more than 3 per cent of our economy. This is the kind of creation that follows the destruction.
These are just some of the channels of growth that we expect will replace what we have lost in
the past few years. There will also be contributions from our more traditional exports. Agricultural
exports, for example, have grown by more than 13 per cent in the past five years, including $2.4
billion in canola and pulse crops. Pharmaceutical exports have grown by $7 billion; machinery
and  equipment,  $3  billion;  furniture,  $2  billion.  Even  the  “other”  export  category  is  more  than
$1 billion higher than it was five years ago. When you put all of these examples together, you can
see that we are making real progress in filling that hole I talked about earlier.
This process has been gradual, more gradual than we would like, but based on the progress
recorded to date, we have every confidence that the economy will find its way back to full output.
As these new sources of growth add up, we will gradually absorb our excess capacity sometime
around mid-2018, and inflation will converge on our 2 per cent target from below.
Implications for policy-makers
Now, I’m not suggesting that this complex adjustment process is automatic, and that there’s no
role for policy-makers to facilitate the adjustment—on the contrary.
The conduct of monetary policy must manage uncertainty as a matter of routine—uncertainty
about the economic outlook, about unobservable variables such as potential output, and so on. It
is  the  nature  of  economics  and  economic  models  that  we  should  always  express  our
expectations  in  probabilistic  terms—that  is,  a  number  surrounded  by  a  margin  of  error—and
make policy decisions that carefully weigh and manage those risks. In short, monetary policy is
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
not like engineering.
It  is  the  job  of  the  central  bank  to  understand  and  monitor  these  new  growth  channels  very
carefully. Doing so is essential to providing a stable and low-inflation environment in which new
businesses can thrive.
The evolution of our economy poses issues for both economists and statisticians. The American
economist  Robert  Gordon  has  written  extensively  about  the  challenges  involved  in  measuring
concepts  such  as  output  and  productivity  after  advances  in  technology  change  the  nature  of
work. Statistics Canada is devoting a great deal of effort and resources to these challenges, and
I have no doubt that we will have the best data possible.
In terms of economic models, it is worth considering whether the relationship between inflation
and economic growth could change as the economy evolves. Certainly, the concept of an output
gap is gradually changing, as services capacity depends mainly on people and skills rather than
industrial capacity, while some parts of our old industrial capacity could become redundant in the
face of major structural changes. The concept of investment is shifting away from plants and
machinery toward human capital. Even the concept of inventories is changing.
Economic  models  are  just  that—highly  simplified  constructs  meant  to  capture  the  broad
behavioural  linkages  in  the  economy.  At  the  Bank,  we  are  in  a  constant  state  of  model
redevelopment, adapting to evolution in the economy. The economics profession needs to be
thinking hard about what the next generation of economic models will look like because it can
take a long time to make a new model operational.
From  a  broader  policy  perspective,  we  need  to  develop  new  ways  to  help  people  cope  with
technological  and  structural  change  in  order  to  improve  our  economic  performance  over  time
and to allay the economic fear and skepticism we are seeing across the advanced economies.
Historically, technological advances have always meant disruption as well as progress—creative
destruction,  as  Schumpeter  put  it. And  while  the  benefits  of  the  advances  are  spread  widely
throughout  the  economy,  the  costs  of  the  disruption  are  concentrated  among  relatively  few
people.
These issues lie beyond the remit of the central bank. But our policy framework does help to put
such issues into context. Policies that improve the ability of people to adjust to the demands of
the new economy will help raise our economic capacity, our long-term potential growth rate and
our  productivity,  and  will  make  the  job  of  maintaining  our  inflation  targets  easier.  From  the
macroeconomic point of view, I can say that our economy is far more adaptable today than it has
been  in  the  past.  But  that  performance  can  be  enhanced  by  finding  ways  to  ensure  that  our
various educational, apprenticeship, immigration and employment insurance programs all work
well together with the on-the-job training commitments of employers.
Conclusion
Allow me to conclude. The rise of the new economy in Canada represents the latest chapter in a
long story—the ascent of the service sector. Over time, this has been a good news story, with
technological advances leading to rising incomes and higher standards of living.
Every  generation  of  Canadians  has  faced  similar  stresses—and  similar  opportunities.  It  is
obviously the role of policy-makers like me to help people understand the economic forces they
face  and  the  importance  of  technology  and  international  trade  to  their  well-being.  But  no  one
understands  the  importance  of  these  things  to  a  typical  Canadian  worker  better  than  their
employer.
I  cannot  think  of  an  audience  that  understands  these  issues  better  than  those  who  are  here
tonight. I ask you to join with me in helping explain these forces to your employees and the public
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
at  large. And  I  ask  that  you  consider  innovative  ways  of  matching  good  people  with  good  job
opportunities.  These  are  some  of  the  ingredients  of  the  confident  future  that  Canadians  all
deserve.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
