  Yves Mersch: The challenge of low interest rates for banks within the 
banking union 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Public Roundtable at the University of Luxembourg on “Banking Union – Quo Vadis?”, 
Luxembourg, 3 October 2016. 
 We are sitting here tonight in a room that was named after the first president of the University 
of Luxembourg, the late Professor François Tavenas. He once said “change is mandatory, 
survival is optional; choose wisely”1. 
Even though Tavenas was speaking about the impact of globalisation on universities, what 
he said also holds true for the euro area and its recent history. 
When the financial crisis struck, it was clear that things could not go on as they had in the 
past. Change was mandatory. The banking union was the euro area’s response – the most 
significant step towards closer integration in Europe since the creation of the single currency. 
This means that the euro area now has common banking supervision and a single resolution 
mechanism with harmonised rules and procedures. A European deposit insurance scheme is 
still under discussion. 
Establishing the banking union has made the euro area financial system safer, but since it 
was  proposed  in  2012  its  implementation  has  been  challenging  for  banks,  especially  as  it 
coincided with unprecedented monetary policy action and regulation. 
Tonight,  my  fellow  speakers  will  discuss  the  design  and  the  achievements  of  the  banking 
union  in  greater  detail.  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  other  challenge  banks  are  facing:  an 
environment of low and negative interest rates. 
Costs and benefits 
Over the past eight years, central banks worldwide have had to go to extremes to honour 
their mandates to safeguard price stability and shield their economies from the fallout of the 
financial crisis. 
In the euro area, the ECB started providing banks with abundant liquidity, also through long-
term refinancing operations. We launched an asset purchase programme of unprecedented 
size,  cut  interest  rates  to  record-low  levels  and  embarked  on  forward  guidance  to  give 
markets a clearer signal about our future policy path. 
Among the major central banks, the ECB was the first to introduce negative interest rates on 
its deposit facility in June 2014. It now stands at –0.4%. No other central bank has gone as 
low without putting a multi-tier system in place. These very decisive policy measures have 
one objective: to fulfil our legal obligation, i.e. to ensure price stability defined as an inflation 
rate below, but close to, 2% in the medium term. 
Our  policy  is  working.  Lending  is  gradually  increasing  as  a  result.  In  August,  lending  to 
companies  grew  by  1.9%  year-on-year  while  household  lending  grew  by  1.8%,  both 
unchanged from July’s reading. A broader measure of money circulating (M3) rose to 5.1% 
from an upwardly revised 4.9% in July. 
                                                
1  François Tavenas, “Universités et globalisation: à la recherche de nouveaux équilibres”, in Gilles Breton and 
Michel Lambert, Globalisation et universités : nouvel espace, nouveaux acteurs, Presses de l’Université Laval, 
2003, p. 255. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Also,  banks  have  considerably  eased  access  to  financing  for  the  private  sector.  Between 
June 2014 and July 2016, the composite cost-of-borrowing indicator for new corporate loans 
fell by 152 basis points in Italy, 130 basis points in Spain, 40 basis points in Luxembourg, 
and 95 basis points in the euro area as a whole. 
Although  slow,  economic  recovery  is  under  way.  Unemployment  is  decreasing,  economic 
growth is picking up, and inflation is expected to rise to 1.6% in 2018. When our next set of 
projections, which includes 2019, is published in December we might be broadly in line with 
our mandate of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. We are on the right track. 
We are aware, however, that in particular our non-standard policy measures come with side 
effects. Therefore, it is important to consider the combined effect of the full package of our 
policy measures when assessing the impact of our monetary policy action on banks. 
Low rates put pressure on banks’ profitability, particularly on banks which are very reliant on 
net  interest  income.  Analysts  forecast  that  negative  interest  rates  will  significantly  reduce 
banks’ profitability over the next five years, with the return on equity in some cases falling 
from 6.5% to 2%. 
Obviously, our monetary policy package consists of other measures as well and ECB staff 
estimates show that the overall impact on bank profitability of recent monetary policy actions 
is  net  positive,  compared  with  a  scenario  with  no  monetary  policy  action2.  But  we  cannot 
ignore such analyses. And yet, one also has to ask if a bank that cannot weather headwinds 
over a few years still has a sufficiently robust business model to stay in the market. 
A  negative  outlook  for  banks  weighs  on  banks’  share  prices,  thereby  raising  their  cost  of 
capital and ultimately decreasing the net return on lending. This may cause banks to become 
more conservative in their lending to euro area companies and households, which is key for 
the transmission of our monetary policy. 
We already  see  that the  low  interest  rate  environment  has  sparked  increasing  competition 
from the non-banking sector. “Shadow banks” – an unfortunate label – or non-banks have 
increasingly  moved  into  financial  intermediation  in  the  euro  area  since  the  financial  crisis. 
Between the end of 2008 and the fourth quarter of 2015, non-banks expanded their share of 
financial  assets  held  by  euro  area  financial  corporations  from  42%  to  57%3.  This  may 
suggest an improvement in the transmission of our monetary policy as these institutions are 
to  some  extent  more  flexible  than  banks  because  they  are  less  strictly  regulated  and 
supervised. But at the same time, we need to be mindful that non-banks are also likely to 
retrench more rapidly in times of crisis. 
Moreover, technological innovation and the search for yield in a low-interest environment are 
likely to intensify competition for credit and deposit-like savings products. The risk is that this 
will lead to lower lending standards, higher leverage and insufficient shock-absorbing buffers. 
Last  but  not  least,  a  protracted  phase  of  very  low  interest  rates  weighs  heavily  on  the 
profitability  and  solvency  of  financial  companies  which  promise  minimum  nominal  returns 
over the longer term, e.g. life insurers and pension funds. If this phase lasts for too long, it 
could challenge the viability of return guarantee business models. There is evidence that the 
insurance  and  pension  sectors  have  already  been  moving  from  guaranteed-return  to  unit-
linked business models. This shows that the industry is adjusting. 
We need to monitor such risks, the side effects and the long-term impact of our monetary 
policy  measures  carefully.  And  we  need  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  longer  our  non-standard 
policy  measures  remain  in  place,  the  more  pronounced  their  side  effects  will  become. 
                                                
2  See Rostagno M. et al., “Breaking through the zero line: The ECB’s Negative Interest Rate Policy”, Brookings 
Institution, Washington DC, 6 June 2016. Presentation available on the Brookings website. 
3  ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 4 / 2016, Article 1. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Interest  rates  have  to  stay  low  until  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  has  gained 
sufficient  momentum  to  lift  the  inflation  rate  to  a  level  in  line  with  our  definition  of  price 
stability. This is, however, taking longer than we had hoped, mainly because the necessary 
political changes to make economies more competitive and flexible are lagging behind. The 
sooner these reforms are implemented, the stronger and more sustainable the recovery will 
be. 
Although  the  notion  of  a  “zero  lower  bound”  no  longer  stands,  there  is  a  limit  to  how  low 
interest rates can go – the point at which the costs of lower rates incurred by the banking 
sector  outweigh  the  benefits.  Many  consider  that  we  have  reached  the  “effective  lower 
bound” or that it might be not that far from the current deposit facility rate of –0.4%4. 
This level I would still deem to be “mildly negative” – but I would shy away from moving into 
“wildly negative” territory. Cutting interest rates even more would come with increasing risks 
as reactions to such cuts might not always be linear5. This needs to be taken into account 
when doing a cost-benefit analysis. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Over the course of the crisis, the ECB acted decisively and in line with its 
mandate. Change was mandatory and the path we chose is helping the euro area economy 
to return to growth and price stability. But interest rates can only stay very low over the short 
term.  The  longer  they  remain  low,  the  more  pronounced  the  negative  side  effects  will 
become. 
So far, we do not see any developments that could give rise to major concern. The positive 
impact on the economy outweighs any drawbacks there may be. But we need to be mindful, 
even as the upsides of our monetary policy prevail, because of the multi-pronged approach 
of our unconventional, and by definition temporary, monetary policy. 
Our  unprecedented  policy  reaction  to  the  crisis  has  clearly  added  to  the  list  of  challenges 
banks are facing today. But what we did was necessary to preserve price stability in the euro 
area, which is what we have been mandated to do. As such, we are fully aware of the crucial 
role  banks  play  in  transmitting  monetary  policy  to  the  real  economy.  That  is  why  we  pay 
close attention to how banks are coping with all the challenges they face. 
The banking union marks a significant change in the euro area financial system and it comes 
with  a  series  of  one-off  adjustments  for  banks.  Unlike  the  banking  union  though,  our 
monetary policy measures lead to constant adjustments by the banking sector, especially the 
longer the current measures stay in place. It is  therefore in everybody’s interest to ensure 
that we can leave this period of low interest rates behind sooner rather than later. But it’s not 
solely the responsibility of the ECB. It will also require courageous, far-sighted and sensible 
action  by  other  policymakers  to  bring  the  euro  area  back  to  sustainable  growth.  May  they 
choose wisely. 
                                                 
4  Cœuré  B.,  Assessing  the  implications  of  negative  interest  rates,  speech  at  the  Yale  Financial  Crisis 
Forum, July 2016. 
5  Mersch  Y.,  Unkonventionelle  Geldpolitik  –  eine  ordnungspolitische  Würdigung,  speech  at  the  Albert-
Ludwigs-University in Freiburg, Germany, June 2016 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
