  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Sound macrofundamentals – a steady anchor 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  lunch  meeting  of  the  Rotary  Club  of  Makati  West, 
Makati-City, 29 September 2016. 
 Thank you for your kind invitation to speak at your meeting today. The Rotary Club has long 
been  a  driving  force  of  service  and  goodwill  in  the  Philippines,  and  your  Club  has  always 
been known to be a gathering of the country’s best professionals and business leaders. 
When I was thinking about how to share my message with you this afternoon, my mind was 
drawn to an HR Ocampo painting that used to hang in the hallway on the way to my office. 
Many of you will recall that HR Ocampo paintings are abstract, with strong base colors (often 
brown and deep red), and with sprinkling of bright strokes (often yellows and oranges). I told 
myself, an HR Ocampo painting somehow parallels my message today. That is, just like the 
strong brown and red base of the painting, our resilient economy is the foundation for a solid 
macroeconomic  outlook  going  forward  but  there  are  risks  on  the  horizon  that  threaten  to 
break that solid base, just like the bright oranges break the levelness of the dark browns. 
The macroeconomy 
Let me go directly to the heart of my message: that is, the Philippine macroeconomy remains 
strong. 
The  second  quarter  GDP  growth  rate  of  7  pct  brings  to  70  the  number  of  consecutive 
quarters of positive economic growth. Such growth dynamics is supported by solid domestic 
demand, underpinned by strong private consumption and investment, continued productivity 
growth and favorable demographics. In recent separate reports, the IMF and the ADB both 
raised their GDP growth outlook on the Philippines . 
Inflation has been low and stable, and inflation expectations continue to be well-anchored. 
The banking system is characterized by strength in balance sheets and profitability, serving 
as an efficient intermediator of funds in the economy. Our external position is likewise robust, 
with  current  account  surpluses  for  13  years  now  and  our  gross  international  reserves 
reaching US$85.8 billion as of end-August. 
While other emerging markets experience moderation in growth prospects and falter from the 
tough global headwinds, the engines of the Philippine economy are in good shape to create 
value. 
But there are shifting sands 
We do not wish to nor can we downplay these headwinds. In fact, shifting sands seem to be 
the “permanent” character of the global economy today. 
Most of these headwinds are of external origin. For example, the subpar global recovery, and 
that any upside could be limited by possible spillovers during the transition to Brexit on the 
economies of the UK and EU area. According to the IMF, the global economy is projected to 
grow by 3.1 percent in 2016, which was a downward revision to earlier forecasts. 
There is also high uncertainty regarding the timing when the US Fed will continue its stalled 
normalization  of  monetary  policy,  in  contrast  to  the  continued  accommodative  policies  of 
other  major  central  banks,  namely  the  ECB  and  the  Bank  of  Japan.  Monetary  policy 
divergence fosters an environment of volatility in capital flows, which can ultimately hamper 
global recovery. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Further,  the  instability  in  commodity  prices,  in  particular  crude  oil,  also  contribute  to  the 
uncertainty and fiscal pressures on oil-producing nations, which could eventually spillover to 
other economies via lower demand and investment. 
There  are  also  salient  non-economic  risks,  which  further  complicate  the  growth  prospects. 
These include terrorism, political divisions within advanced economies, and armed strife. 
In the domestic setting, we also need to contend with frequent natural disasters and climate 
change, as well as recent headline risks. 
These headwinds continue to motivate policy makers to build buffers to shield any economic 
gains that have so far achieved, from being chipped. 
Reforms provide anchor through shifting sands 
Over  the  years,  the  efforts  and  actions  of  policymakers  focused  not  only  on  making  the 
economy  work  today,  but  also  on  laying  down  the  foundation  for  durable  and  sustainable 
progress.  Over  the  years,  we  have  created  buffers  by  building  good  institutions,  being 
committed to reform, and ensuring policy is consistent. 
Good institutions are essential and indispensable because they enable our macroeconomic 
fundamentals  to  be  self-sustaining,  allowing  markets  to  thrive  even  through  negative 
surprises.  Good  institutions  that  emphasize  anti-corruption,  uphold  good  governance  and 
that improve the cost of doing business have helped secure the confidence of the public and 
other stakeholders. 
Commitment to reform continually enhances and improves the way we do things. Over the 
years,  we  have  liberalized  important  industries  such  as  telecommunications  and  power  as 
well  as  the  banking system to  seize  the  advantages  of  competitive  markets  and  ultimately 
upgrade standards and the quality of living in the Philippines. The BSP has also just recently 
further  liberalized  the  country’s  FX  regulatory  environment  by  further  rationalizing  the 
approval process for FX purchases, so that these transactions return to the formal banking 
system. 
The reform pipeline reflects our desire to set the right and smooth conditions for business 
and investment, and allow the Philippine economy to achieve its growth potential. On many 
occasions,  third  party  observers  such  as  credit-rating  agencies  and  think  tanks  have 
recognized  the  Philippine  growth  story  as  a  narrative  grounded  on  reform,  and  therefore 
sustainable. 
Policy thrusts of the BSP 
Finally, policy consistency. Markets look for this as an anchor for planning and investment. 
And, the BSP has endeavored to precisely provide this. In this environment where the sands 
are shifting, there is need for an anchor. This is similar to the role the browns and deep reds 
provide  to  HR  Ocampo  painting.  The  browns  and  reds  define  the  bounds  of  where  the 
occasional oranges could play. 
Ladies and gentlemen, you can look to the strong macrofundamentals for this “fixed point”. At 
the BSP, we steadily and consistently aim only to deliver on our mandate of ensuring price 
and financial stability in the Philippine economy. This is not to say that the BSP operates in a 
mechanistic manner. Instead, the BSP takes all the information and impulses and processes 
these in order for us to make refinements to policy as and when appropriate. All these, with 
our mandate clearly in mind. 
 Specifically,  we  will  continue  to  calibrate  monetary  policy  consistent  with  the  outlook  for 
inflation. At the moment, our assessment is that inflation will be manageable over the policy 
horizon. We forecast that for 2016, full year inflation will average 1.7 pct, slightly below the 
national government’s target range of 2–4 pct. Nevertheless inflation is seen to rise to within 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  target  in  2017–2018. Thus,  there  is  not  a  strong  reason  to modify  the  stance  of  monetary 
policy for now. Interest rates therefore could be seen to remain at current levels. 
As  for  the  exchange  rate,  I  am  sure  you  have  seen  that  the  peso  has  been  under  some 
pressure  of  late.  And  pundits  attribute  this  to  current  events  that  hog  the  media.  Without 
doubt,  the  FX  market  is  driven  by  sentiment.  But  negative  sentiment  towards  the  regional 
currencies, including the peso, has really also been largely affected by the market views on 
the actions of the AE central banks, especially the Fed, so externally induced. It is difficult to 
precisely dissect how much of the FX movements is due to the global environment and how 
much is idiosyncratic. Nevertheless, the BSP policy on the exchange rate remains the same. 
As we have said in the past, we will allow the exchange rate to be broadly determined by the 
market,  but  we  will  step  in  when,  in  our  view,  the  moves  are  excessive.  Markets  must 
remember  that  the  country’s  underlying  fundamentals  are  sound,  and  therefore  it  would 
serve market players well, if they do not allow themselves to be driven by sentiment alone. 
On banking, we will continue to align our regulations to international standards and closely 
monitor  the  conduct  of  our  banks  and  supervised  institutions,  including  their  credit  and 
market  operations,  to  make  sure  that  in  all  these  the  financial  consumer  is  adequately 
protected.  
Tying it together 
What  do  these  insights  tell  us  about  moving  forward?  The  future  is  not  completely 
decipherable. But we will continue to implement policies and calibrate our actions to maintain 
the strength of our macroeconomic fundamentals. 
Our actions will always espouse the development of sound institutions, implementation of a 
proactive  economic  reform  agenda,  and  achievement  of  stability  and  sustainability  in  the 
economy. This also includes our continuous conversation and engagement with stakeholders 
like  you,  to  help  us  be  attuned  to  the  reality  on  the  ground  and  synergize  with  your  own 
efforts to push the economy forward. 
There  will  always  be  challenges,  but  we  believe  that  our  unrelenting  collaboration  and 
engagement  will  keep  us  achieving  the  best  results.  In  the  end,  it  is  our  belief  that  the 
Philippines can remain an economic strongman and the challenges ahead will be definitely 
conquerable. 
Thank you and I wish everyone a good day! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
