   03.10.2016 
Second Financial Education Day 
Banco de España/CNMV 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Good morning 
I would like to begin by saying how pleased I am to be participating in this celebration of the 
Financial Education Day. The purpose of this event is to raise society’s awareness of the 
importance  of  improving  and  broadening  financial  and,  more  generally,  economic 
knowledge, helping people take decisions that affect many aspects of our lives.  
At times like the present, characterised by the constant evolution and development of saving 
and borrowing instruments, the ability to correctly assess the risk and profitability of different 
financial products is particularly important. Indeed, different products may be more or less 
appropriate depending on an individual’s risk exposure profile, age and income. The role of 
experience  when  choosing  products  is  limited,  since  we  are  frequently  faced  with  new 
products or products with features that are not well known.  
I would like to stress that the main purpose of financial education is not to train experts in 
how  to  understand  complex  products,  but  to  help  ordinary  people  with  their  spending, 
saving and investment decisions.  
Particular  prominence  is  given  in  financial  education  to  aspects  such  as  preparing  a 
household budget, prudence when taking decisions, the assumption that higher returns are 
generally associated with higher risks, and, no less importantly, the time profile of economic 
decisions,  and,  specifically,  preparation  for  retirement,  which is  obviously  very  important 
given current demographic trends and the challenges of population ageing.  
 Background and current situation of the Financial Education Plan 
The gestation and promotion of financial education started in 2008 with a project initiated 
by  the  National  Securities  Market  Commission  and  the  Banco  de  España,  joined 
subsequently by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Competitiveness. After its renewal in 
June 2013, a plan of activities was drawn up for the period 2013-2017, demonstrating a 
clear intention of continuity.  
The plan addresses two closely related aspects: the assessment and measurement of the 
financial literacy of young people and of adults.  
 Activities in the education system 
Financial literacy consists of knowledge and skills that enable individuals to take informed 
decisions.  
One indication of the level of competence relates to young people (15-16 years old), and 
was obtained in 2012 within the framework of the PISA study of financial literacy. From this 
test, which reflects skills related to the use of means of payment and the understanding of 
risk, a number of conclusions were drawn, two of which I wish to highlight: 
 3/5 
  In  every  country  for  which  information  is  available,  the  financial  literacy  of  the 
youngest generation is not significantly better than that of the rest of the population.  
  Spain is the country with the lowest proportion of students who receive some basic 
financial education at school.  
With  the  aim  of  promoting  financial  education  in  schools,  the  National  Securities  Market 
Commission and the Banco de España signed a collaboration agreement with the Ministry 
of  Education  in  September  2009  to  implement  the  Financial  Education  Plan.  Since  then, 
high quality educational materials have been provided free of charge under this programme, 
to enable teachers to include the basic principles of budgeting, means of payment, saving 
and borrowing in compulsory secondary education.  
In the 2014-2015 academic year an initiative was launched to evaluate the extent to which 
the  Financial  Education  Plan  is  achieving  its  objectives.  This  was  based  on  the  valuable 
collaboration of the teaching staff, administrators and students of 77 schools in 12 regions, 
which taught the content of the programme to their students in steps, as established by the 
Banco de España.  
The  results  indicate  that the  programme  has  increased  students’  financial knowledge,  in 
particular with regard to the use of means of payment provided by banks, and also – which 
is no mean feat – their readiness to save.  
 Activities relating to adults  
Can the results for young people be extrapolated to the adult population? Unfortunately, we 
know  little  about  the  level  of  financial  knowledge  of  the  adult  Spanish  population.  It  is 
generally thought that Spanish people are not well informed, but much of the evidence for 
this is based on unrepresentative information.  
Accordingly, as part of a highly ambitious project, the Banco de España and the National 
Securities Market Commission are preparing one of the most extensive surveys undertaken 
at  international  level:  the  financial  competence  survey,  which  forms  part  of  the  National 
Statistical Plan.  
This study, which we expect to be completed by the end of 2017, will include various original 
aspects to address the special characteristics of the Spanish case.  
First, educational skills are decentralised. Given the nature of financial competence, which 
varies  significantly  according  to  the  level  of  education  of  the  individual  concerned,  the 
project will use representative samples of the different levels in the various regions.  
Second, the financial knowledge of each individual may not reflect that of the persons who 
actually  take  household  decisions.  For  example,  in  Spain,  important  financial  decisions 
regarding house purchase and mortgage borrowing are taken at different ages than they are 
in other European countries, as a high proportion of young people live with their parents. As 
a result, information is sometimes needed on the financial competence of those members 
of the household who take saving and borrowing decisions affecting the whole household. 
4/5 
  Apart from its financial knowledge, we have little evidence regarding the general economic 
knowledge of the Spanish population. Given this situation, questions have been included in 
the financial competence survey that aim to measure, inter-alia, knowledge of certain key 
concepts, such as inflation and money.  
In 2018 we will have the results of the survey, which will enable us to analyse on a sound 
basis the financial knowledge of the adult population in Spain and to identify those areas on 
which the Financial Education Plan needs to focus. Future activities will be based on this 
information.  
To conclude, I should like to join the Chairman of the National Securities Market Commission 
in expressing my sincere and deep gratitude for the work and effort over the past eight years 
of  all  those  persons  and  institutions  who  have  collaborated  directly  or  indirectly  on  the 
Financial Education Plan. 
Thank you very much your attention and I hope you will enjoy this event. 
 5/5 
