  Mario Draghi: Interview with ARD Tagesthemen 
Interview  with  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and  ARD 
Tagesthemen, conducted by Mr Thomas Roth and broadcast on 28 September 2016. 
 Mr Draghi, today when you talked to the members of the German parliament did you 
feel like a defendant at court? 
Draghi:  No  not  really,  not  at  all.  First  of  all  I  was  thankful for  this  opportunity  to  exchange 
views  with  people  who  actually  are  in  contact with  the  rest  of the  people  and  also  I  really 
enjoy the exchange. 
Now do you have the feeling that the members of parliament also were accepting your 
course and thinking that’s the right one? 
Draghi: Now, of course, it’s not up to me to say that I convinced them but my perception was 
that most of the questions were generally trying to understand how our work and our policies 
work, whether they are effective, what consequence they have and the real criticisms were 
very, very few. It was a quite widespread support, rather, for the policies we undertake. 
Mr Draghi, what do you tell the normal savers who practically do not get any interest 
any  more  on  their  savings  account  and  feel  almost  expropriated?  What  do  you  tell 
them? 
Draghi: Well let me first say that both my colleagues in the Governing Council and myself 
take these concerns very seriously. There is only one honest answer to give with several sort 
of nuances around it but the honest answer is that we need to return to strong growth. We 
need to have more growth. With more growth, we’ll have lower unemployment all over the 
euro  zone.  Of  course,  now  I  am  speaking  for  the  whole  of  the  euro  zone,  not  only  for 
Germany where conditions are definitely better than in the rest of the euro zone. And when 
this will happen we will have also higher nominal wages and ultimately a return of inflation 
towards our objective of being close to but below 2%. And at that point in time interest rates 
will rise again and the return on savings will also go up. Now, of course, one can also say 
that if we look at the households in their aggregate, we see that the savings they had from 
less  payments,  in  other  words  those  households  that  have  a  mortgage,  would  pay  less. 
These  savings  from  lower  payments  are  bigger  than  the  loss  of  interest  on  their  savings 
accounts. But we are talking about the aggregate and within this figure, we have savers that 
have nothing but a deposit account, or a checking account or a savings account, and in that 
case of course the lower rates mean lower income. 
Mr  Draghi, the  banks have  to  pay  negative  interest if they  deposit  their money with 
you, with the ECB – and this, although many banks are already suffering anyway – and 
Deutsche  Bank  accuses  you  of  even  worsening  the  problems  in  Europe.  So  are  we 
heading for a new banking crisis? 
Draghi: Let me say that I won’t comment on individual institutions and also let me say that 
bank business models should be able to withstand periods of low interest rates. Within the 
banks category we have banks that are weaker and we have banks that are actually doing 
quite well. The Sparkassen, the cooperative banks, have rates of return that are well above 
the average both in Germany and the euro zone. And let’s never forgot that the measures we 
have taken, of lower interest rates, are always measures that will produce and are producing 
the objective that we are pursuing, namely higher growth and higher inflation. So ultimately 
this will prove beneficial to the banks themselves. Furthermore, when we look at the banks 
all over the euro zone, we see that their profits last year actually went up and this is the first 
year  when  interest  rates  have  been  negative;  and  even  the  return  they  had  from  the  net 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  interest income also increased. Which says basically that the category overall did well and 
within the category of course we have weak banks and strong banks. But having said that, I 
think the negative interest rate is not something that can go on forever. So I never said about 
interest rates, and about negative interest rates, that it’s a yes or no question. But the answer 
is the extent and for how long. 
Mr Draghi, the Federal Minister of Finance Mr Schäuble has called the low interest rate 
policy one of the reasons for the growing popularity of right wing populists in Europe. 
Now, if that is true, isn’t that a very high price to be paid? 
Draghi: Well, I wouldn’t want to judge political statements. There are similar statements being 
made  in  the  south  of  Europe  where  they  say  that  austerity  is  actually  the  reason  for  the 
increase  in  the  popularity  of  populist  movements  in  Spain,  in  Italy  and  elsewhere.  One 
cannot really  judge. The  point  is that  we  have  different jobs. The  policy,  the  job  of  central 
banks is to do the right things to reach the objective. The policy of politicians is rather to deal 
with perceptions and explain the actions of central banks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
