 September 30, 2016
Bank  of  Japan
Opening Remarks at the 3rd Bank of Canada and   
Bank of Japan Joint Workshop 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan
I am pleased to welcome all our distinguished guests to the 3rd Bank of Canada and Bank 
of  Japan  Joint  Workshop.  In  particular,  it  is  our  great  honor  to  have  the  presence  of 
Professor  Gianluca  Benigno,  Professor  Marvin  Goodfriend,  and  Professor  Lawrence  H. 
Summers as speakers. Last but not least, representing the Bank of Japan, I would also like 
to thank the Bank of Canada team headed by Mr. Gregory Bauer and Mr. Rhys Mendes for 
their participation and cooperation right from the organizing phase of the workshop. 
 
At  the  Monetary Policy Meeting  held  last  week,  the  Bank  of  Japan  decided  to  introduce 
"Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Monetary  Easing  (QQE)  with  Yield  Curve  Control"  by 
strengthening  the  previous  policy  framework  with  a  view  to  achieving  the  price  stability 
target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. The new policy framework consists of two 
major  components:  the  first  is  "yield  curve  control"  in  which  the  Bank  will  control 
short-term  and  long-term  interest  rates;  and  the  second  is  an  "inflation-overshooting 
commitment" in which the Bank commits itself to expanding the monetary base until the 
year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  observed  consumer  price  index  exceeds  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable manner. 
 
In the run-up to the new decision, the Bank conducted a comprehensive assessment of the 
developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices  under  "QQE"  and  "QQE  with  a  Negative 
Interest Rate." The assessment includes a number of solid econometric analyses, showing 
the importance of interaction between policy analysis and policy action, as a basis for better 
policy making. 
 
If  you  look  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  web  site,  it  is  saying,  "The  Governor  of  a  country's 
central bank must have a thorough understanding of financial markets and the economy and 
possess wide experience in international finance." While I greatly respect the high standard 
set by Canadian people, we recognize that even today central banks are being faced with a 
number of challenges in fulfilling their given mandates and central bankers are, admittedly, 
not omnipotent. It is why we hold and cherish opportunities like today's workshop to meet 
for discussion and to exchange views and wisdom with each other. Today, we will discuss 
"Challenges  to  Central  Bank  Policies  for  Price  Stability  and  Financial  Stability"  in  this 
 1 
workshop. I am expecting to learn a lot from the four cutting-edge research papers and three 
insightful lectures to be presented. 
 
In the face of many challenges for central bankers, let me quote from Anne of Green Gables 
by  the  Canadian  writer  Lucy  Maud  Montgomery.  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  it  is  a 
well-known masterpiece not only in Canada but here in Japan. Anne says to her stepfather, 
old Matthew, "Isn't it splendid to think of all the things there are to find out about? . . . It 
wouldn't be half so interesting if we knew all about everything." Anne's words sound very 
encouraging to all economists and central bankers who are making numerous efforts to find 
out new ideas, solutions, and policy tools. 
 
With  Anne's  encouragement  in  mind,  I  am  hoping  that  all  the  participants  in  today's 
workshop  will  be  able  to  find  out  something  --  or  many  things  --  that  are  interesting, 
inspiring, and helpful in tackling the challenges ahead. 
 
Thank you. 
 2 
