William C Dudley: The US economic outlook and the implications for
monetary policy
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the ABNY (Association for a Better New York) Breakfast, New York City, 5
December 2016.
 Jason Bram, Andrew Haughwout, Joseph Tracy and Luis Uranga assisted in preparing these
remarks.
It is a great pleasure to be here and have the opportunity to talk about the U.S. economic outlook.
 I want to thank the Association for a Better New York (ABNY) for sponsoring today’s event.  This
is  an  excellent  venue  to  speak  about  what  we  can  do  to  improve  our  country’s  economic
performance.  As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.
The  U.S.  economy—supported  by  solid  gains  in  household  spending—has  expanded  at  a
moderate rate in 2016.  Job gains have been sturdy, and we have seen some firming in wage
growth as the labor market has continued to tighten.  Moreover, as the effects of earlier declines
in energy prices have dissipated, the overall inflation rate has begun to move up closer to our 2
percent  objective.    As  a  consequence,  economic  conditions  are  not  far  from  the  Federal
Reserve’s dual mandate of maximum sustainable employment and price stability.  And, I expect
that we will make further progress toward these goals in 2017.  So, from a cyclical perspective,
the economy is in reasonably good shape.
Over the longer term, however, the U.S. economy faces significant challenges.  On the positive
side, economic expansions don’t die of old age, and there appear to be few imbalances in the
economy that could lead to the current expansion ending.  But, in order for this to remain the
case, it is important that fiscal policy and monetary policy are well aligned going forward.
It is also important that the United States retains sufficient fiscal capacity so that fiscal policy can
support the economy when the next cyclical downturn does occur.  If fiscal policy can play a
greater role in promoting macroeconomic stability, it would likely reduce the need for monetary
authorities to take extraordinary actions to support economic activity.
There  are  other  structural  issues  worth  noting.    In  particular,  productivity  growth  has  been
anemic  over  the  past  few  years,  while  income  inequality  has  increased  and  income  mobility
remains low.  As a consequence, the gains in living standards generated by the current business
expansion have been modest compared to previous expansions, and these gains have not been
widely shared.  Much more could be done both locally and nationally to increase the economy’s
potential to perform better for a broader array of our citizens.
The outlook for growth and inflation
The U.S. economy has been expanding at a moderate rate.  Growth has averaged about 1.8
percent this year and seems likely to continue at or slightly above this pace in 2017.  The main
driver  of  growth  in  2016  has  been  the  consumer,  as  real  personal  consumption  expenditures
have  increased  at  a  2.9  percent  annual  rate  during  the  first  three  quarters.    This  solid
consumption growth has been supported by sturdy job gains and rising nominal wages.  Payroll
gains have averaged about 180,000 per month this year.  While this is down somewhat from
2015’s monthly pace of nearly 230,000, it is still considerably higher than the 75,000–110,000
monthly  pace  consistent  with  the  likely  long-term  growth  in  the  labor  force.   And  wage  gains,
while still relatively muted, have begun to rise more rapidly as the labor market has continued to
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
tighten.
Another positive factor for the economy is that household finances generally are in good shape. 
The household saving rate is 5.9 percent, which is a bit higher than one would expect based on
historical relationships between household net worth and disposable income.  And, after a long
period of deleveraging, household debt has been growing, but very slowly.  Over the last four
quarters,  household  debt  has  risen  by  2.4  percent.    This  slow  pace,  combined  with  low
borrowing rates and an improving labor market, has pushed down the ratio of household debt
service to income close to its lowest level since at least 1980.  This suggests that households
have the financial capacity to sustain their spending.
In contrast to consumer spending, many other areas of the economy have been considerably
softer.  Residential investment, after experiencing strong gains in 2015 and in the first quarter of
2016, fell during the past two quarters.  However, increases in single-family housing starts and
permits in October suggest that we are likely to see a reversal of this trend in the fourth quarter
and into next year.
Business fixed investment has also been weak for some time.  Part of this weakness reflects the
collapse in oil and gas drilling activity following the plunge in crude oil prices during the second
half of 2014.  This adjustment now appears to be over, as oil and gas prices have recovered
somewhat.  But, even outside of this area, business fixed investment has been disappointing. 
Several factors may be at play here—including earlier uncertainty surrounding the presidential
election outcome and the fact that capacity utilization rates remain unusually low at this point in
the economic business cycle.  While the election uncertainty has been resolved, I would expect
business fixed investment to only rise slowly in the year ahead. 
In contrast, the trade sector has performed surprisingly well in 2016.  This sector had to contend
with headwinds created by weak growth in final demand by our major foreign trading partners, as
well as the impact of earlier dollar strength on the nation’s export competitiveness.  However, I’m
not sure that I would take much signal from this performance.  The improvement in trade seems
to have been driven mainly by weakness in imports, particularly for capital goods, and by some
one-off factors, such as the surge in soybean exports last quarter—both of which are unlikely to
continue.
With respect to inflation, we are making progress in pushing toward our 2 percent objective.  In
particular,  headline  inflation  has  risen  this  year  as  the  earlier  declines  in  energy  prices  have
dropped  out  of  the  year-over-year  figures.   And,  core  inflation  has  remained  broadly  steady,
running  at  1.7  percent  over  the  past  year—as  measured  by  the  personal  consumption
expenditures deflator that excludes food and energy.  This stability is noteworthy, because one
might  have  anticipated  that  lower  energy  prices  and  a  firmer  dollar  would  have  pushed  core
inflation a bit lower.  Also, household inflation expectations—which at times in 2015 appeared to
be at risk of becoming unanchored to the downside—have been broadly stable.  The University of
Michigan long-term inflation expectations measure has generally remained in the 2.5-2.8 percent
range  of  recent  years.    In  addition,  the  New  York  Fed’s  Survey  of  Consumer  Expectations
measure  of  3-year  median  inflation  expectations  has  stabilized  in  2016  in  a  range  of  2.5-2.8
percent, after declining modestly over the course of 2014 and 2015.
Implications for monetary policy
If the economy grows at a pace slightly above its sustainable long-term rate, as I expect, the
labor  market  should  gradually  tighten  further,  and  the  resulting  pressure  on  resources  should
help  push  inflation  toward  our  2  percent  objective  over  the  next  year  or  two.   Assuming  the
economy  stays  on  this  trajectory,  I  would  favor  making  monetary  policy  somewhat  less
accommodative over time by gradually pushing up the level of short-term interest rates.
Following this year’s election, we have seen relatively large movements in financial asset prices. 
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
In particular, the stock market has firmed, bond yields have risen and the dollar has appreciated. 
On balance, it appears that financial market conditions have tightened modestly.  My personal
interpretation of these developments is that market participants now anticipate that fiscal policy
will turn more expansionary and that the FOMC will likely respond by tightening monetary policy a
bit more quickly than previously anticipated.  Assuming this expectation is realized, the recent
modest tightening in financial market conditions seems broadly appropriate. 
Let me emphasize here that I do not view the recent shift in financial market conditions as one
that should prompt great concern.  It is important to distinguish between a tightening of financial
conditions  that  is  driven  by  an  increase  in  risk  aversion  from  one  that  is  driven  by  a  greater
likelihood of stronger near-term aggregate demand and less downside risk to the growth outlook.
We experienced the former at the beginning of 2016, while the latter reflects current expectations
of greater fiscal policy stimulus.
Obviously, there is still considerable uncertainty about how fiscal policy will evolve over the next
few years.  At this juncture, it is premature to reach firm conclusions about what will likely occur. 
As we get greater clarity over the coming year, I will update my assessment of the economic
outlook and, with that, my views about the appropriate stance of monetary policy.
Monetary and fiscal policy in a low-rate environment
I also would like to highlight the limitations of monetary policy.  One important factor contributing
to such limits is that the real short-term interest rate consistent over the longer run with a neutral
monetary policy stance appears to be very low, and is expected to remain so for some time.
 This has been helping to keep real inflation-adjusted interest rates lower than they have been
historically.  In part, this reflects anemic productivity growth as well as the slowing of labor force
growth due to the aging of the population.  An implication of this environment is that there will
likely be less scope than there has been historically for the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates
when needed in the face of an economic downturn.  All else equal, this means a greater risk for
short-term interest rates to be pinned at their effective lower bound and for inflation expectations
to  become  unanchored  to  the  downside.    Although  forward  guidance  and  large  scale  asset
purchase  programs  have  expanded  the  ways  in  which  the  Federal  Reserve  can  provide
additional  accommodation,  these  unconventional  monetary  policy  tools  also  have  their  own
limits.  These limits suggest that fiscal policy may need to play a greater role in stabilizing the
economy than has been the case in past decades.
What I have in mind here is putting in place stronger, more robust automatic fiscal stabilizers that
would  provide  income  support  during  economic  downturns.    By  reducing  fluctuations  in
disposable  incomes,  these  types  of  fiscal  actions  would  stabilize  aggregate  demand,  thereby
limiting the risk of monetary policy getting pinned at the zero lower bound for an extended period
and the need for extraordinary monetary policy measures. 
I favor automatic, rather than discretionary, fiscal actions because they would typically go into
effect  more  quickly  and  would  be  better  anticipated.    Expectations  matter  greatly  in  affecting
economic behavior.  For example, if the economy were to weaken, the anticipation that strong
fiscal stabilizers would kick in to support incomes should lead workers to be less fearful about
losing their jobs, and businesses to be less concerned that demand for their products might fall
precipitously.    This,  in  turn,  would  make  workers  more  confident  that  they  could  sustain  their
spending,  and  would  make  businesses  more  confident  that  they  could  keep  workers  on  their
payrolls. 
What type of fiscal stabilizers would be most effective?  I would turn first to those that Congress
has implemented on a discretionary basis during past economic downturns, such as extensions
of  unemployment  compensation  and  cuts  in  payroll  taxes.    For  example,  when  the
unemployment  rate  climbs,  extensions  of  the  duration  of  eligibility 
for  unemployment
compensation could be triggered automatically, helping to stabilize household income.  Similarly,
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
when the unemployment rate breaches certain thresholds, payroll tax cuts could be triggered,
helping to support the disposable income of workers facing reductions in hours.  Payroll tax cuts
also  have  the  advantage  of  skewing  more  toward  low-  and  moderate-income  workers,  who
typically have a higher propensity to consume out of current income.
Obviously,  it  is  up  to  the  incoming Administration  and  Congress  to  decide  on  the  appropriate
fiscal measures.  But, the point that I want to highlight is that robust automatic fiscal stabilizers
would  complement  monetary  policy,  and  take  some  pressure  off  of  the  Federal  Reserve  to
undertake extraordinary measures in situations where there is little scope for cutting short-term
interest rates.  This approach might also be superior to other proposals—such as raising the
Federal  Reserve’s  inflation  objective—that  are  designed  to  reduce  the  risk  of  monetary  policy
being trapped at the zero lower bound. 
For such fiscal actions to be sustainable over time, it is important that the United States retain
sufficient fiscal capacity.  This would also ensure that automatic fiscal stabilizers are viewed as
fully  credible.    On  this  score,  while  significant  progress  has  been  made  in  recent  years  in
stabilizing the country’s fiscal situation, circumstances are likely to grow more challenging in the
years  ahead.    There  are  three  areas  that  I  would  highlight.    First,  the  earnings  that  Federal
Reserve  returns  to  the  U.S.  Treasury  Department  each  year  are  likely  to  fall  in  the  future,  as
rising short-term interest rates narrow the gap between what the Federal Reserve pays on its
liabilities—primarily currency and bank reserves—and what it earns on its portfolio of Treasuries
and agency mortgage-backed securities.  In recent years, the Federal Reserve’s remittances to
the Treasury have averaged about $90 billion per year, far above the $20–30 billion average prior
to  the  Great  Recession.    Although  the  precise  trajectory  of  future  reimbursements  is  highly
uncertain, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projects that Federal Reserve payments to
the Treasury will drop from around 0.6 percent of GDP in fiscal 2016 to 0.3 percent of GDP by
2026.
Second, the Treasury’s debt-service costs will likely grow as interest rates rise and the amount
of outstanding debt held by the public continues to increase.  While net outstanding Treasury
debt held by the public has risen to $14.2 trillion from $4.8 trillion over the past decade, annual
debt-service  costs  have  only  increased  very  modestly.    Looking  ahead,  the  CBO’s  baseline
projection  is  that  debt-service  costs  will  rise  from  1.4  percent  of  GDP  in  fiscal  2016  to  2.6
percent of GDP in 2026.
Third, the retirement of the baby boom generation will put significant upward pressure on Social
Security and Medicare expenditures.  Although the trend in Medicare expenditures has flattened
out in recent years as healthcare inflation has moderated and utilization growth has slowed, the
CBO nevertheless projects that such expenditures will rise from 3.2 percent of GDP in 2016 to
about 4.0 percent of GDP in 2026.  Consequently, significant pressures on the federal budget are
still very much in train.  It will be important that fiscal policy be managed so it retains the capacity
to be used for macroeconomic stabilization.
Structural challenges
While  we  have  made  steady  progress  over  the  past  year  toward  our  twin  goals  of  maximum
sustainable employment and price stability, significant challenges remain for the economy that
lay  largely  beyond  the  scope  of  monetary  policy.    The  three  I  would  highlight  are  the  sharp
slowdown  in  labor  productivity  growth,  the  increase  in  income  inequality  and  the  low  rate  of
income mobility.
I  draw  attention  to  the  slowdown  in  productivity  growth  for  two  reasons.    First,  productivity
ultimately drives living standards and how people assess their economic well-being.  Second,
beyond  ensuring  a  stable  macroeconomic  and  financial  environment,  monetary  policy  can  do
little to improve productivity growth.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Annual productivity growth has averaged only 0.7 percent during the past five years, near the
lowest 5-year pace since the early 1980s.  There are a number of competing explanations for the
slowdown.  These include weak capital investment, a flattening out of educational attainment by
new 
formation,  understatement  of  quality
improvements and, hence, output, and fewer ground-breaking innovations.  I suspect that all of
these factors play a role.
labor  market  entrants, 
less  new  business 
What public policy can do to address this issue is to ensure that the economy operates closer to
the frontier of what is achievable.  For example, more efforts to improve job skills would prove
beneficial—through retraining and apprentice programs, and better alignment of education and
training  with  business  needs.    Also,  encouraging  small  business  start-ups  would  help—by
removing barriers for entrepreneurs to establish new businesses, and by creating more start-up
incubator  programs.    I  also  suspect  that  well-targeted  infrastructure  spending  would  be
advantageous if it addresses logistical bottlenecks and enables people to commute to areas with
good job opportunities.  For example, in the New York City metropolitan region, mass transit is
old, slow and crowded.  As a New Jersey resident, I’m still waiting for that second set of rail
tunnels into New York City that should have been built years ago. 
While higher productivity growth could support better living standards, the benefits for low- and
middle-income  households  depend,  in  part,  on  how  those  gains  are  distributed  between
business and labor, and on how labor income is distributed across the workforce.  Moreover,
income distribution shouldn’t be viewed as a static concept.  It is important that people are able to
move upward in income through their careers, regardless of their starting point.
Over the past several decades, three developments have been discouraging.  First, the share of
labor income relative to business income has fallen.  Since 1970, the labor share of GDP in the
United  States  has  declined  about  5  percentage  points.    Similar  declines  are  evident  in  most
developed  and  emerging  market  economies.    Second,  the  distribution  of  labor  income  has
become more skewed.  Since 1970, the top 1 percent of households in the income distribution
has  more  than  doubled  its  share  of  the  nation’s  income.    Third,  despite  the  notion  of  the
American dream, income mobility in the United States remains relatively low compared to many
other countries.  Also, the potential for income mobility is not evenly distributed. Research has
shown that where you are born and raised in the United States still has significant implications for
your future prospects.  
As  a  country,  we  need  to  address  these  issues.    With  respect  to  the  labor  share  of  income,
maintaining the U.S. economy at full employment should help.  As the unemployment rate has
fallen over the past two years, the labor share of income has moved up almost 1.5 percentage
points.  Supporting maximum sustainable employment is part of the Fed’s dual mandate, so we
can play an important role here. 
With respect to the rising concentration of income and the low level of income mobility, I think
considerable improvements are also achievable.  Income distribution can be influenced by tax
policy and by educational opportunities.  Income mobility can be influenced by local policies on
education  and  housing.    As  Raj  Chetty’s  pathbreaking  work  makes  clear,  income  mobility
depends on where one is born and lives.  This suggests quite strongly that improved access to
good education, childcare and affordable housing would help.
As I noted in a recent speech, an important aspect of a city’s vitality is the ability of its residents
to develop the skills necessary to be successful and achieve their dreams.  A big asset for New
York  City  is  its  access  to  affordable  education.    Each  year,  tens  of  thousands  of  low-to-
moderate-income New Yorkers send their children to one of the city’s specialized high schools.
  When  it  comes  time  for  college,  many  of  these  same  students  have  access  to  the  City
University of New York (CUNY) and State University of New York (SUNY) systems.  A recent
highly regarded study assessed how much of an opportunity children born to less advantaged
1
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
families in different parts of the United States have of moving up in the world.  New York City
ranked 10th out of the 50 largest U.S. metro areas.   This is a better than average performance,
but I think New York City should aspire to do even better.
2
To  conclude,  while  the  near-term  outlook  for  the  U.S.  economy  is  reasonably  good,  there  is
considerable work to do over the longer term to improve our nation’s productive capacity and
foster an environment in which the gains are spread more evenly.  Monetary policy is limited in
what it can do to address these broader structural issues.  However, monetary policy will do its
part to ensure the macroeconomic and financial stability that can help in achieving progress in
these areas.  Moreover, even with respect to macroeconomic stability, monetary policy could use
an assist from fiscal policy.  It is important that monetary policy and fiscal policy work together
and not at cross purposes to be able to bolster the economy when it needs support. 
Thank you for your kind attention.  I would be happy to take a few questions.
1
2
See New York City’s Return from the Brink, Remarks at the Lotos Club, October 19, 2016.
Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline and Emmanuel Saez. “Where is the Land of Opportunity? The
Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 129, No. 4,
2014.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
