Benoît Cœuré: Sovereign debt in the euro area - too safe or too
risky?
Keynote address by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank,  at  Harvard  University's  Minda  de  Gunzburg  Center  for  European  Studies,  Cambridge,
Massachusetts, 3 November 2016.
 Debt is integral to the functioning of a market economy. The vast majority of money we use for
transactions  today  is  the  debt  of  banks,  bank  deposits.  Cash  itself,  that  is,  coins  and  notes
circulating in the economy, is a debt of the central bank which used to be redeemable against
gold  or  against  the  Treasury. And  the  counterpart  of  debt  –  credit  –  facilitates  the  productive
investment through which market economies grow over time, in turn increasing transactions and
demand for money.
Seen another way, debt and credit help avoid what economists have called “double coincidence
of wants” along two dimensions: by allowing buyers and sellers to transact at any point in time,
and  by  allowing  future  earnings  to  be  brought  forward  for  current  transactions  –  so across
time.   None  of  the  accomplishments  of  market  economies  are  imaginable  without  debt-as-
money and its credit counterpart.
1
But if this is the most common understanding today, it is far from being the only one. In many
cultures and languages, the notions of money, debt and credit have a much broader – and more
normative  –  meaning. As  Keith  Hart  famously  noted,  there  are  two  sides  to  a  coin.  Heads  is
money as a unit of account, means of payment and store of value: the Aristotelian functions of
money, taught in undergraduate economics. But tails is money as a token of trust in society and
2
its political institutions.
As  for  debt,  as  is  well-known,  in  most  Indo-European  languages  there  is  a  close  connection
between “debt” and “guilt”.  But perhaps more importantly, there is an affinity between “credit”
and “trust”, since all monetary systems, going back to the earliest times, have ultimately been
built  on  trust.   And  I  find  this  relevant  because  “trust”  is  at  the  heart  of  the  crisis  we  have
experienced in the euro area in recent years.
3
4
Indeed,  more  than  any  other  advanced  economy,  the  euro  area  has  experienced  how  quickly
trust in the sustainability of public debt can form and then transform, and with it perceptions of
“creditworthiness”. In our case, it has shifted from one pole to the other. Public debt has been
seen as both too safe and too risky.
Too safe,  because  the  widespread  belief  before  the  crisis  that  the  debt  of  different  euro  area
sovereigns was interchangeable fuelled an unwarranted spread compression and contributed to
major financial and macroeconomic imbalances.
And too  risky,  because  the  rapid  unwinding  of  those  beliefs  cascaded  through  the  financial
system and government finances, pushing the euro area into a deeper and more prolonged crisis
than other advanced economies.
Accordingly, there is a rift in Europe between those economists and politicians who want public
debt to be safe again, and those who want it to be riskier. But looking forward, neither extreme is
sustainable.
This is because we need public debt to be safe in the euro area. It is vital to the functioning of the
financial  system,  analogous  to  the  function  of  money  in  the  real  economy.  And  it  allows
governments  to  play  their  proper  role  in  stabilising  the  economy,  which  is  essential  in  the
1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
institutional design of our monetary union. So if sovereign debt is too risky, it will place the full
burden  on  other  actors  to  provide  safe  assets  for  the  financial  sector  and  safe  liabilities  for
governments.
And because unsustainable fiscal policy can ultimately create pressure on the central bank to
monetise debt, what is known by economists as "fiscal dominance", even in a fiat money system
impaired creditworthiness of governments ultimately creates the risk of an eroding trust in the
ultimate safe asset: central bank money.
Yet at the same time, we also do not want public debt to be perceived as too safe, since that
would eliminate the role of market discipline in delivering sustainable policies and create a false
belief that governments cannot fail.  However strong our fiscal rules, our political systems cannot
credibly deliver the promise that governments will never default on their debt – unless the central
bank  would  commit  to  bailing  them  out  no  matter  what,  which  the  euro  area  by-laws  have
6
formally excluded .
5
What I would like to discuss today is how we might go about squaring the circle between risk and
safety.
Risk and safety in the euro area
What is the fundamental difference between “safe” and “risky” assets? It is ultimately about how
they behave in financial crises. The prices of safe assets correlate negatively with risk aversion:
in financial crises, demand for them soars, driving up their prices and pushing down their yields.
This is because they contain no uncertainty about future payments, which means that holders of
safe assets have no reason to pass judgement about their probability of default in difficult times.
Admittedly, the definition is partly self-referential. In the end, assets are just as safe as they are
expected  to  be  and  as  a  consequence  they  are  prone  to  abrupt  shifts  in  confidence.  Yet
perceptions  of  safety  can  be  established  by making  assets  intrinsically  safe  (or  safer),
by guaranteeing their safety through government or central bank action, or labelling them safe to
confirm their safety (e.g. using credit ratings or regulatory labelling – a less convincing option, as
the failure of credit ratings has shown in the Great Financial Crisis).  Safety is, in other words, an
8
outcome of an institutional and legal framework.
7
In  most  advanced  economies,  the  institutional  framework  has  been  designed  to  ensure  that
certain types of assets are always perceived as safe given their importance to the functioning of
the economy.
The  most  important  is  the  ultimate  safe  asset, base  money  (or  cash),  where  safety  is
guaranteed by two factors: trust in the central bank that protects its value and trust in the rule of
law – the security of contract, the fairness of the judicial process, and so on. These institutions
help us understand why, even as trust in some euro area sovereigns waned during the crisis,
trust in the euro as a currency remained high across the Union and beyond.  There was never
any question that the central bank would sacrifice price stability or that the rule of law would be
compromised.
9
The same logic applies to private bank money. States have ensured the safety of bank money by
guaranteeing the share most relevant for transactions, i.e. deposit insurance, and in exchange
they  hold  banks 
through  a  high  degree  of  supervision  and
regulation.
 What we have learned in the euro area, however, is that this contract depends on a
uniform institutional framework across the area of jurisdiction, otherwise bank money is liable to
fragment. The response in 2012 was Banking Union, which re-establishes the contract at the
level of the Union.
to  a  “social  contract” 
10
11
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
And  in  most  advanced  economies,  as  well  as  in  most  macroeconomic  models, government
debt  is  always  perceived  to  be  safe,  too.  There  is  (effectively)  full  consolidation  between  the
balance sheet of the central bank and that of the fiscal authority, making government debt risk-
free in nominal terms. The central bank can guarantee its payment in cash and at par in all states
of the world. As such, there is no credit risk attached to sovereign bonds, although they may still
carry inflation risk if the central bank is pressured by the government into financing inflationary
deficits.
In the euro area, however, the same institutional relationships cannot apply. There is one central
bank  and  nineteen  different  fiscal  authorities,  the  member  countries  do  not  assume
responsibilities  for  each  other’s  debt,  and  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  for  very  good
reasons, is forbidden by the Treaty from “monetary financing” – which means purchasing directly
the debt of governments or directly lending to them.
This ensures that fiscal transfers do not take place through the central bank that have not been
authorised  by  euro  area  citizens,  and  it  avoids  fiscal  dominance  over  monetary  policy,  which
would jeopardise the pursuit of price stability. Yet it also means that euro area government bonds
are equivalent, in some ways, to “sub-sovereign” issues, since the different fiscal authorities and
the central bank cannot be consolidated within a single “federal” balance sheet.
German and Greek government bonds are not guaranteed by any European authority, just as
bonds issued by California or Arkansas are not guaranteed by the federal government or by the
Federal Reserve. And while the establishment of a permanent crisis resolution mechanism, the
European Stability Mechanism (ESM), has created a backstop for national budgets, it is limited in
size,  conditional  on  adjustment  programmes,  and  is  an  inter-governmental,  not  a  federal,
instrument.  Sovereign  debt  in  the  euro  area  is  thus  exposed  to  credit  risk  in  a  way  other
advanced economies are not.
And  this  is  indeed  by  design.  The  construction  of  the  euro  area  –  the  monetary  financing
prohibition  enshrined  in  the  EU  Treaty,  the  “no  bailout  clause”
  –  is  deliberately  intended  to
encourage  markets  to  differentiate  between  euro  area  sovereigns  based  on  their  fiscal
sustainability.  The  idea  is  that  the  exercise  of  market  discipline  will  provide  a  continuous
assessment of government actions, which will in turn lead to sounder policies.
12
This  is  necessary  because,  in  a  monetary  union,  unsound  national  fiscal  policies  have  major
spillovers  to  other  countries  and  to  the  single  monetary  policy.  And  insuring  against  that
risk across countries would entail a degree of sovereignty-sharing which the European people
are  not  willing  to  concede.  Decision-making  on  fiscal  policies  in  the  euro  area  is  therefore
decentralised  among  sovereign  states,  guided  only  by  a  set  of  fiscal  rules  –  the  Stability  and
Growth Pact – which the centre – the European Commission, the Council of Ministers – has
limited power to enforce.
So just as for the states in the US with their balanced budget rules, the possibility that creditors
might take losses is crucial to add credibility to the fiscal framework. Or put another way, it is
important  that  debt  is  not  “too  safe”  in  the  euro  area  –  meaning  that  losses  are  excluded  –
otherwise  the  full  burden  for  ensuring  fiscal  sustainability  would  end  up  on  the  fiscal  rules,  a
promise which experience has shown not to be credible, or on the expectation that the central
bank will eventually bail out governments, which the Treaty has explicitly ruled out.
The fact that euro area sovereign bonds are exposed to credit risk in this way does not mean, in
principle,  that  they  cannot  also  serve  as  safe  assets.  The  difference  is  that  they  have  to
be made  safe  through  sound  fiscal  policies,  rather  than assumed to be safe. And it is indeed
clear from the structure of euro area government bond yields that credit risk is partly responsive
to the outcome of fiscal policies.
Yet  what  we  have  seen  in  the  euro  area  is  that, ex post,  sound  fiscal  policies  alone  are  not
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
sufficient to make sovereign bonds safe. This is because the application of market discipline,
when it comes, is often imperfect. Credit risk premia tend not to increase in a continuous way
that  leads  endogenously  to  better  fiscal  and  economic  policies,  but  are  instead  non-
linear.
 Credit risk is under-priced in good times when risk aversion is low, and then rapidly re-
priced in bad times when risk aversion spikes. The result is excessive price volatility.
13
And in situations where such non-linearities arise, it may also lead to self-fulfilling dynamics –
what  economists  call  “multiple  equilibria”.  When  sovereign  bond  yields  rise  and  prices  fall,
demand for bonds should normally rise. But if yields rise steeply to a point that calls into question
solvency,  demand  actually falls,  producing  a  vicious  circle.  And  if  there  is  any  correlation
between credit risk perceptions acrossgovernment borrowers, this process in one country can
create contagion to others.
Indeed, while eight euro area governments entered the crisis with AAA-rated sovereign issues,
today only three have that status.
 Market discipline has destroyed safe assets more than it has
created them.
14
One  response  to  this,  which  is  now  being  fiercely  discussed  in  the  euro  area,  is  to  apply
regulatory  constraints  and/or  risk  weights  to  sovereign  bonds,  thus  encouraging  systemic
sectors – banks, pension funds, insurers – to appropriately consider their risk of default. This
would in principle make market discipline more linear  and  effective ex ante. And  coupled  with
proposals  for  mechanisms  for  orderly  sovereign  default
,  it  might  also  help  attenuate  the
severity of crises.
15
Yet it would also be a partial equilibrium solution, since it would reduce the ability of domestic
banks to act ex post as a contingency liquidity buffer to their sovereigns, and that may leave bond
markets even more at risk of multiple equilibria. In the absence of an alternative fiscal backing,
sovereign yields might in other words increase morein times of financial stress. All in all, however
desirable it may be from a prudential perspective, it seems odd to discuss this proposal without
considering its fiscal consequences.
Taken in isolation, such proposals are therefore unlikely to resolve the tension between market
discipline and safe assets in the euro area. And this matters, for two reasons.
First,  because  sovereign  debt  provides  a  safe asset  for  the  financial  system,  which  is
increasingly dependent on a sufficient supply of such assets. And if sovereigns are not supplying
safe assets, then someone else has to.
Second, because sovereign debt provides a safe liability for the government through which it can
stabilise the economy. And if governments are unable to perform this role in the euro area, there
is  insufficient  stabilisation  at  the  national  level,  and  by  implication  also  for  the  euro  area  as  a
whole.
Sovereign debt as a safe asset
Sovereign debt is highly prized in the financial system for its function as a safe asset, and safe
assets  in  turn  perform  two  vital  roles  in  the  system,  which  make  them  a  close  substitute  of
money.
First, they provide a low-risk and liquid store of value, which is key for long-term investors, such
as pension and insurance funds, and more generally for meeting regulatory liquidity and solvency
requirements. And demand for both functions has increased significantly due to recent regulatory
changes in the EU which translate the global financial regulatory overhaul.
Changes  to  capital  requirements  for  insurers  and  pension  funds,  for  example,  have  been
specifically  designed  to  encourage  them  to  match  the  duration  of  their  assets  and  liabilities,
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
raising  demand  for  long-dated  sovereign  issues.  The  new  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  induces
banks to increase holdings of high quality liquid assets, of which government bonds are major
part. And the shift of a large number of OTC derivatives transactions to central counterparties
(CCPs) elevates demand for safe assets for use in initial margin and guarantee funds.
Second, safe assets act as a means of exchange, especially for the non-bank financial system
which cannot settle claims with central bank money.
 Market-based finance is, by and large,
organised around collateralised lending, which creates high demand for safe and therefore low-
price-volatility (or information insensitive) collateral. In this context safe sovereign bonds play a
special role. And such “transaction demand” for safe assets is also structurally increasing as
financial intermediation shifts from the bank to the non-bank sector.
16
17
For these reasons, if the net supply of safe sovereign bonds suddenly contracts, as we saw in
the euro area, it is extremely disruptive for the financial system – analogous to expansions and
contractions  in  the  supply  of  cash. And  such  disruptions  are  obviously  something  that  public
policymakers have to be sensitive to.
The  ECB,  like  other  central  banks,  has  therefore  responded  to  the  reduction  in  safe  assets
during  the  crisis  –  both  euro  area  sovereigns  and  AAA-rated  asset-backed  securities  –  by
swapping  central  bank  money  for  assets  with  duration  and  credit  risk.  Since  central  bank
reserves are perceived as the ultimate safe assets, this has increased the relative supply of risk-
free assets in private portfolios.
Central  banks’  role  here  is  justified,  for  the  time  being,  since  if  safe  assets  are  becoming
increasingly important as both stores of values and media of exchange, then one could argue
that they increasingly have “moneyness”. And stabilising money is what central banks are for –
insofar, in the ECB's case, as we do not breach the prohibition of monetary financing.
Yet such policies are clearly not fully satisfying safe asset demand. In the euro area demand for
sovereign bonds provided by highly rated issuers has remained high, visible for instance in the
high  cost  of  borrowing  through  repurchase  agreements  against  German  Bunds.  Borrowing
against bonds issued by lower rated sovereign issuers has by contrast cheapened, reflecting a
higher pricing of safety. So the question is: who should take responsibility in the medium-term for
increasing the supply of safe assets to meet this demand?
First and foremost, euro area governments should make their outstanding stock of debt safer by
running fiscal policies which are more responsible and friendlier to growth, so that the public-
debt-to-GDP  ratio  is  seen  to  be  on  a  declining  path. Another  possible  solution  is  for  market
participants  to  find  ways  to  generate  more  safe  assets  out  of  the  existing  debt  stock  by
diversifying the idiosyncratic risks in sovereign issues, for instance through so-called European
Safe Bonds.
18
Yet  if  governments  do  not  provide  more  safe  assets  or  markets  do  not  construct  them
synthetically, a second-best answer, as I have discussed elsewhere , is for central banks to
operate  with  permanently  higher  balance  sheets  to  compensate  for  structural  changes  in  the
supply of and demand for safe assets – and potentially to adjust their counterparty frameworks
and capital structures so as also to service the non-bank sector more directly.
19
The Fed, for example, now allows money market funds access to its balance sheet through its
Reverse  Repo  Operations,  while  the  Bank  of  England  grants  access  to  CCPs.  It  is  also
conceivable, as Jeremy Stein and his co-authors have suggested, for central banks to issue bills
to satisfy safe asset demand in the non-bank system.
 And central banks can meet demand for
special collateral by re-lending their bond portfolios, which the ECB is already doing, although this
could be scaled up.
20
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
In other words, it is well within central banks’ operational capacity to play a more structural role in
supplying safe assets to the financial system. That would however suppress a crucial incentive
for governments to improve the safety of their debt.
Sovereign debt as a safe liability
While  synthetic  bonds  or  central  bank  operations  might  be  able  to  help  meet  demand  for
s afe assets,  they  cannot  replicate  the  other  vital  function  of  sovereign  bonds:  to  provide
safe liabilities  for  the  government.  Neither  option  helps  shield  governments  from  the  types  of
distortions in sovereign bond markets that I described above which can constrain their ability to
access financial markets.
And this matters because governments must have recourse to their own safe liabilities to be able
to issue debt and stabilise their economies through downswings in the cycle. If instead sovereign
debt  becomes positively  correlated  with  risk  aversion,  their  marginal  cost  of  borrowing  will
increase precisely when they most need to issue. That constrains the ability of fiscal policy to
stabilise the economy.
And this point is particularly relevant for the euro area given its institutional setup at the supra-
national  level.  The  euro  area  is  a  monetary  union  with  no  joint  instruments  to  absorb  local
shocks, like a federal budget. The single monetary policy by definition has to focus on the area as
a  whole  and  cannot  address  local  developments  unless  they  have  a  proven  impact  on  the
transmission  of  monetary  policy  –  such  as  under  our  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)
programme,  which  is  explicitly  conditioned  on  governments  being  solvent  under  a  financial
assistance programme.
Therefore shock absorption within each member country has to take place either via the private
sector,  through  financial  risk-sharing,  or  by  each  national  government  individually  through  its
fiscal  policy.  There  is  no  doubt  that  financial  market  shock  absorption  must  be  enhanced  in
Europe, which is one aim of the new Capital Markets Union project.
 Encouraging cross-border
financing  through  equity  flows  instead  of  debt  flows  would  clearly  make  the  euro  area  more
resilient.  But  no  one  imagines  that  we  will  live  in  a  world  where  risk-sharing  through  financial
markets can absorb all idiosyncratic shocks.
21
Hence the capacity to use fiscal policy counter-cyclically is key, which means that governments
must have access to some form of asset that acts as a safe haven in crisis times. Otherwise,
debt-financed fiscal policy will in fact be destabilising, since it will depress sovereign bond prices
and trigger ratings downgrades, feeding back into the financial system through the channels I
already described.
So  how  can  we  guarantee  that  sovereigns  retain  such  market  access,  while  preserving  the
market discipline on which the euro area depends?
Again,  it  goes  without  saying  that  the  solution  starts  with  governments  improving  their  fiscal
frameworks, at the national and at the European level. Indeed, if markets are confident in medium
term fiscal sustainability, then debt issuance at the bottom of the cycle should not increase credit
risk perceptions, but should rather be seen as supporting a faster return of the economy to full
employment and hence a stronger fiscal position over time. And again, this has to do with the
growth-friendliness of fiscal policies as well as with compliance with European rules.
Yet it is also clear that we are not starting today from a blank slate. Several euro area countries
already have high public debts as a result of the crisis, which leaves them vulnerable to losing
market access. So we need some form of mutualisation which does not compromise market
discipline.  Many  ways  to  address  this  have  been  discussed  in  the  literature,  but  there  are
basically two possible models.
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
22
The  first  model  is  that  we  accept  domestic  sovereign  debt  as  inherently  risky,  just  as  for  US
states. It is in my view unlikely that this model would deliver the amount of fiscal space needed to
stabilise the economy, meaning that we would then have to allow the Union to borrow and spend
for local fiscal stabilisation.
 This “common fiscal capacity” would not necessarily have to be
very large. Its desirable size relative to national budgets, and to euro area GDP, is an empirical
issue which I do not intend to solve here. As I have remarked elsewhere , I see merits in such a
model  so  long  as  it  is  created  under  the  veil  of  ignorance,  meaning  that  risks  are  distributed
equally ex ante. Our monetary union was not designed as a transfer union. Therefore any step in
this direction would have to be accompanied by a convergence process towards more resilient
economic structures.
23
A  move  towards  more  fiscal  risk-sharing  would  also  require  a  commensurate  shift  towards
increased joint decision-making within strong common institutions accountable to the European
Parliament.
The second model is that we split sovereign debt into a “safe” part and a “risky” part, thereby
facilitating both fiscal stabilisation and market discipline at the national level. In such a set-up,
senior debt would be issued in constrained amounts for counter-cyclical purposes, in line with
cyclical deficits allowed by the fiscal rules, and would be risk-free from a regulatory perspective.
But debt over and above the amount required for stabilisation (i.e. the structural deficit) would be
subordinated  and  with  clear  risks  to  holders  –  higher  capital  ratios  and  strict  exposure  limits
would apply to it – thus maintaining market discipline at the margin.
 Governments, like private
companies, would therefore be able to default “by degree”.
24
Both models would, over time, lead to a greater supply of safe assets as well, but that is not
primarily the point. Safe assets are a stock concept which can be created in various ways. But
safe  liabilities  are  about flow  –  the  ability  to  run  counter-cyclical  deficits  when  needed  –  and
hence depend on market access, be it at the federal or national level. It is important that, in the
current discussion on safe assets, this vital aspect of safety does not get forgotten.
Conclusion
To conclude, let me come back to the “other side of the coin”.
Europe needs reforms if its debt is to meet the multiple expectations society attaches to it: as a
means  of  payment  and  store  of  value  for  capital  market  participants,  as  a  safe  liability
empowering governments to perform their stabilisation role, and as a gauge of sovereign default
risk, setting incentives right for governments and market participants. The alternative – making
government  debt  safe  by  providing  a  blanket  central  bank  guarantee  –  is  popular  among
economists  but was firmly rejected by the European Treaties, in my view for good reasons.
25
Reconciling these different expectations may require a degree of fiscal risk-sharing at euro area
level. But there is a common point to both approaches to risk-sharing I have just outlined – the
common fiscal capacity and the “blue/red” bond proposal. Although their features are different,
both need to be underpinned by a set of rules at euro area level, mutually agreed and enforced by
common institutions.
Safe assets are only as safe as they are expected to be, and they are ultimately backed by legal
and institutional commitments. As the Minister of Finance under the French Restoration, Baron
Louis,  once  famously  said:  “If  you  give  me  good  politics,  I  will  give  you  good  finances.”  Only
adherence to a common political project centred on the euro can secure such commitments in a
sustainable manner.
 And as long as this project is under strain, it is no wonder that the safety
of assets will remain under question.
26
  7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
David  Graeber  has  debunked  the  myth  promoted  by  economists  that  money  emerged  from  barter:  in  all
societies  money  has  emerged  from  debt  and  credit  and  barter  occurs  only  accidentally.  See  Graeber,  D.
(2011), Debt: The First 5,000 years, Melville House Publishing, Chapter 2.
See Hart, K. (1986), “Heads or Tails? Two Sides of the Coin”, Man, Vol. 21, No 4, pp. 637–656. The “Cartalist”
approach to money which relates trust in the currency to the power of the issuing authority is a minority view
among economists but has received broad support in other social sciences. See Goodhart, C. (1998), “The two
concepts  of  money”, European Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 14, pp. 407–432. For a discussion of the
institutional  underpinnings  and  the  religious  origins  of  money,  see  Aglietta,  A.  and  Orléan,  A.  (2002),  La
monnaie entre violence et confiance, Éditions Odile Jacob.
See Paik, P.Y. and Wiesner-Hanks, M. (eds.) (2013),  Debt: Ethics, the Environment, and the Economy (21st
Century Studies), Indiana University Press.
The correspondence between the financial and moral vocabularies extends much further: “fiduciary” comes
from the Latin word “fides”, meaning faith, and a lot of the religious vocabulary was initially drawn from finance,
including concepts such as “redemption”. See Graeber (2011, op. cit.) for a discussion.
Some have argued more generally that information-insensitive assets can aggravate crises by blurring the
awareness  of  tail  risk;  see  Hanson,  S.G.  and  Sunderam, A.  (2013),  “Are  there  too  many  safe  securities?
Securitization and the incentives for information production”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 108, No 3,
June, pp. 565–584.
Ben Bernanke and his co-authors made a similar argument concerning private safe assets: market participants
have invested in assets (e.g. securitised ones) falsely labelled as safe not because they trusted the labels, but
because  they  expected  government  support  in  the  event  of  bad  outcomes.  See  Bernanke,  B.,  Bertaut,  C.,
Pounder DeMarco, L. and Kamin, S. (2011), “International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets in the
United  States,  2003–2007”, Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  International  Finance
Discussion Paper, No 1014, February.
This  taxonomy  comes  from  Gelpern,  A.  and  Gerding,  E.  (2016),  “Inside  Safe  Assets”, Yale  Journal  on
Regulation, Vol. 33, Issue 2, Summer.
Regulation acknowledges assets as safe because they are less risky, as is the case of the “high quality liquid
assets” constituting banks’ liquidity buffers. But regulation also makes assets safe because their default would
create  disruptions  against  the  public  interest:  repurchase  agreements  are  bankruptcy-remote  because
impairing the repo market would compromise liquidity provision to the economy.
According  to  the  Spring  2016  Eurobarometer  published  by  the  European  Commission,  27%  of  European
citizens trust their own government and 33% trust the European Union, while support for the euro is stable at
68% in the euro area.
For a theory of banking supervision as the delegated monitoring of banks in the interest of depositors, see
Dewatripont, M. and Tirole, J. (1994), The Prudential Regulation of Banks, MIT Press.
On the importance of banking union for a Union with “stateless money”, see Klotz, H.H. (2016), “Monetary union,
banking  union:  Money  and  credit,  inexorably  linked”,  SAFE  Policy  Center,  Goethe  Universität,  Frankfurt,  and
Center for European Studies, Harvard University.
Articles 123 and 125 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union respectively.
One  reason  for  this  is  explained  by  Holmstrom  (2015).  Sovereign  debt  is  widely  used  as  collateral  and
collateralised lending obviates the need to discover the price of the collateral. Little information is needed to
reach an agreement on the price of the collateral, because the collateral has no use value in this transaction.
Debt becomes information-sensitive only when it is close to default, with a rapid drop in price. See Holmstrom,
B. (2015), “Understanding the role of debt in the financial system”, BIS Working Paper, No 479, January.
Based on Fitch ratings.
See, for example, Corsetti, G. et al. (2015), A New Start for the Eurozone: Dealing with Debt,  CEPR  Press,
March.
See Gorton, G. and Ordoñez, G. (2013), “The Supply and Demand for Safe Assets”, NBER Working Paper, No
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
18732, January.
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
For a discussion of the global supply and demand for safe assets, see IMF (2012), “Safe assets: Financial
system cornerstone?”, Global Financial Stability Report, Chapter 3, April.
See Brunnermeier, M. (2016), “ESBies: Safety in Tranches”, ESRB Working Paper Series, No 21, September. A
related  initiative  in  the  private  asset  universe  is  the  creation  of  “simple,  transparent  and  comparable”
securitisation, which can produce senior tranches with the characteristic of safe assets.
See Cœuré, B., “The ECB’s operational framework in post-crisis times”, speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City’s 40th Economic Policy Symposium , Jackson Hole, 27th August 2016.
Greenwood, R., Hanson, S. and Stein, J. (2016), “The Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet as a Financial-Stability
Tool”, mimeo,  presented  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  40th  Economic  Policy  Symposium,
Jackson Hole, August.
See  Cœuré,  B.  (2012),  “Risk-sharing  in  EMU:  Before,  during  and  after  the  crisis”,  speech  at  the  inaugural
conference “European crisis: historical parallels and economic lessons”, Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public
Policy and Finance, Princeton University, 20 April. For a recent analysis of the risk-sharing channels from the
perspective of the Capital Markets Union, see European Central Bank (2016), “Financial integration and risk-
sharing in a monetary union”, in Financial Integration in Europe 2016, Special Feature A, pp. 80–98, April.
Aizenmann  and  Pasricha  (2013)  have  shown  how  the  expansion  in  US  federal  spending  during  the  Great
Recession  helped  counteract  the  procyclical  impact  of  balanced  budget  rules  at  state  and  local  level.  See
Aizenmann,  J.  and  Pasricha,  G.K.  (2013),  “Net  fiscal  stimulus  during  the  Great  Recession”, Review  of
Development Economics, Vol. 17, Issue 3, pp. 397–413. For a defence of the “pure” decentralised approach,
see Sandbu, M. (2015), Europe’s Orphan, chapters 7 and 8, Princeton University Press.
See Cœuré, B. (2016), “A budgetary capacity for the euro area”, introductory remarks at a public hearing of the
European Parliament, Brussels, 2 March.
See, for example, Marès, A. (2010), “Curing Demotion Sickness", Morgan Stanley Research, and von Weizacker,
J. and Delpha, J. (2010), “The Blue Bond Proposal”, Bruegel Policy Brief, May.
For a different view, see for example de Grauwe, P. (2011), “Managing a Fragile Eurozone,” CESifo Forum, Vol.
12, No 2, pp. 40–45. Gourinchas and Jeanne have argued that the trade-off between a higher interest rate and a
higher inflation rate may still justify the central bank acting as lender of last resort to the government (see
Gourinchas,  P.O.  and  Jeanne,  O.  (2012),  “Global  Safe Assets”,  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Working
Paper, No 399, December.
A conclusion which echoes Goodhart (1998, op. cit.).
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
