  Vítor Constâncio: Securing sustained economic growth in the euro area 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
G30 Meeting, Washington DC, 9 October 2016. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me here today and for giving me the opportunity to be part of such a 
distinguished panel. 
The subject matter of our panel is a demanding one. Nine years after the beginning of the 
crisis, advanced economies are apparently settled in a regime of low growth and low inflation 
with no end in sight. In many places, a weary complacency seems to be reconciled with the 
“new  normal  long-term economic  equilibrium”. However,  in  our  democratic  societies  this  is 
not a stable social equilibrium. It is not even a sustainable long-term economic equilibrium. 
Our economies need a higher level of nominal growth to work properly: to absorb overhangs 
from  the  crisis,  to  spur  investment  and  productivity,  to  generate  enough  return  for  the 
pensions  of  an  ageing  population.  The  OECD  referred  to  the  present  situation  as  a  “self-
reinforcing  low  growth  trap”  and  the  IMF”s  Maurice  Obstfeld  stated  “Without  determined 
policy action to support economic activity over the short and longer terms, sub-par growth at 
recent levels risks perpetuating itself – through the negative economic and political forces it 
is  unleashing.”.  The  self-perpetuating  nature  of  the  present  dynamics,  underlined  by  both 
institutions, has to be broken by new significant policy initiatives that can lift confidence and 
“animal spirits” in our economies. 
Following  the  initial  broad-based  policy  reaction,  monetary  policy  has  done  most  of  the 
expansionary  effort to  support the  recovery.  Yet,  securing  sustained  economic growth  and 
employment cannot be dependent on monetary policy alone. At the national and European 
levels, a much more comprehensive policy response is needed, especially now that markets 
have  started  to  show  scepticism  about  what  monetary  policy  can  continue  to  do  going 
forward. 
This  underpins  the  urgency  of  both  a  meaningful  implementation  of  targeted  structural 
reforms and the adoption of growth friendly fiscal policies. 
Prospects for the euro area economy 
Turning to recent euro area developments, the recovery is continuing its moderate but steady 
pace,  supported  mainly  by  the  ECB’s  expansionary  policies,  which  have  significantly 
improved  financial  conditions,  reduced  financial  fragmentation  and  supported  economic 
activity and inflation. In the absence of our measures, both growth and inflation in the euro 
area would have been significantly worse, as our models calculate that inflation and growth 
would be lower by 0.8 and 0.7 percentage points, respectively, than the forecast values of 
0.2% and 1.7% for this year. 
For three years now, inflation has been quite low with a level of 0.4% in 2014, 0% last year 
and 0.2% forecast for this year. However, the recent flash estimate for September at 0.4% 
may  indicate  a  movement  compatible  with  our  baseline  scenario  that  foresees  a  gradual 
increase to levels above 1% by next spring, if no major downward movement in commodity 
prices  takes  place.  Additionally,  the  normalisation  of  inflation  depends  on  the  continued 
closing of the negative output gap and more dynamic wage behaviour. 
In the first half of 2016 the euro area grew at an annualised rate of 1.7%, similar to last year’s 
growth  rate.  This  figure  is  far  from  being  impressive,  especially  considering  that  the  euro 
area is in the early phase of a recovery after the second recession in 2012 and 2013. On the 
other hand, the unemployment rate, albeit falling, still remains above 10% amid a continuous 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  increase in the participation rate in the labour force since the crisis. One positive aspect is 
that  our  policies  have  contributed  to  a  decrease  in  financial  fragmentation  and  that  the 
dispersion of GDP growth and inflation across euro area countries is at the lowest level since 
the beginning of monetary union in 1999. Another positive note is that the recent growth was 
largely driven by domestic demand. Moreover, the recovery has proved resilient to a series 
of adverse shocks over the past year: the slowdown in China last summer, the acute stock 
market turbulence in the early part of this year and, most recently, the uncertainty created by 
the UK referendum. 
At the same time, this resilience reflects to a large degree the amount of monetary expansion 
– actual and expected – that is embedded in financial prices. Indeed, with the five packages 
of  measures  we  have  adopted  since  June  2014,  we  have  reduced  the  cost  of  capital, 
produced rebalancing effects in other asset markets, improved credit supply conditions and 
restored  credit  volume  growth  since  the  latter  part  of  2014,  after  two  years  of  negative 
developments. 
Figure 1 
 Yields on bank and non-financial bonds have eased by 90 and 100 basis points, respectively, 
in  response  to  the  measures  taken,  testifying  to  the  effectiveness  of  the  current  policy 
package. Funding conditions for banks improved as wholesale money market rates became 
negative  and  as  banks  received  direct  support  from  new  liquidity  facilities  with  four-year 
maturities and low rates (TLTRO-I and II). These developments have stimulated the pass-
through of this funding cost relief to borrowing costs for both firms and households. 
As a consequence, bank lending rates to non-financial corporations (NFCs) and households 
are now at historical lows, and there has been a significant reduction in the fragmentation of 
lending rates across euro area countries as well as for large and small loans (see Figures 2 
and  3).  It  is  also  important  to  note  that  the  establishment  of  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM) in November 2014 helped put the banking sector in a stronger position to 
transmit our monetary impulses. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Figure 2 
Figure 3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    3 
  The capital position of euro area significant banks has been improving from a common equity 
capital  ratio  (CET1)  of  7%  in  2008  and  9%  in  2012,  and  now  stands  14.4%,  with  a  total 
capital  ratio  of  18%.  The  problem  for  European  banks  lies,  however,  in  the  present  low 
profitability  levels  resulting  from  legacy  non-performing  loans,  excess  banking  capacity, 
growing competition from non-banks and slow adjustment to new business models. Return 
on equity in the first half of 2016 was just 5.8%, against 5.5% for the whole of last year. The 
low profitability has driven a poor performance of stock prices, leading to quite low price-to-
book ratios. Contrary to some perceptions, our monetary policy has had a positive effect on 
the  profitability  of  banks  since  2014,  by  reducing  their  funding  costs,  by  ensuring  capital 
gains  related  to  higher  prices  of  financial  assets  affected  by  QE,  by  reducing  impairment 
costs  and  by  increasing  credit  volumes  as  a  result  of  a  strengthening  recovery.  We  are 
aware that some of these effects will wane with time and that the banking sector will have to 
undergo structural reforms to overcome the challenges of a low profitability environment that, 
looking  forward,  is  not  sustainable.  Public  policy  initiatives  are  necessary  to  foster  the 
restructuring efforts. 
In spite of the present headwinds, banks have resumed credit expansion since late 2014 to a 
present growth rate of 1.9%. This improvement is also evident from the latest bank lending 
surveys (BLS), which reveal a continued easing of credit supply standards on loans to firms 
which is largely driven by increasing competition among banks. This increased competition 
has  been  one  of the  main  mechanisms  through  which  our  measures  –  notably  TLTROs  – 
have been operating and has squeezed bank margins, causing bank lending rates to fall and, 
consequently,  net  demand  for  borrowing  to  increase.  As  banks  begin  attracting  additional 
borrowers, this leads to a gradual easing of credit standards and an additional strengthening 
of competitive pressures which lower lending rates and increase loan demand further. This in 
turn  supports  macroeconomic  conditions  and  reduces  non-performing  loans,  thereby 
validating ex post the lower lending rate and creating a positive feedback loop. In effect, our 
credit easing measures have stimulated banks to start competing again for good credit. This 
evidence  is  supported  by  the  findings  of  model-based  analysis  carried  out  by  ECB  staff, 
which suggests that credit supply restrictions are no longer dampening loan growth to NFCs. 
Furthermore, according to the ECB survey on the access to finance of enterprises (SAFE), 
credit  conditions  are  also  improving  for  euro  area  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises 
(SMEs),  which  constitute  the  backbone  of  the  euro  area  economy  and  represent  the  vast 
majority of firms. 
Staff economic projections 
Overall,  the  impact  of  our  measures  has  been  significant,  but  the  euro  area  recovery  has 
certainly not been as fast as we had hoped. This is in part due to the headwinds stemming 
from  the  global  economy,  the  structural  slowdown  in  world  trade  and  the  financial  crisis 
legacies lingering in many euro area countries which continue to dampen economic activity. 
These factors explain why the risks to the outlook remain to the downside. 
Nevertheless,  the  narrative  of  a  continued  yet  moderate  recovery  is  largely  echoed  in  the 
latest (September 2016) ECB staff macroeconomic projections for euro area activity, which 
are almost unchanged compared to June 2016. Real GDP is projected to grow at an annual 
rate of 1.7% in 2016, 1.6% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018. Since the projections cut-off date, the 
flow  of  high  frequency  data  has  been  consistent  with  the  materialisation  of  this  baseline 
scenario. Crucially, this projection is predicated on the current supportive financial conditions 
persisting.  In  fact,  it  is  estimated  that,  cumulatively,  the  impact  of  our  measures  will 
contribute  more than  one  and  a  half  percentage  points  to  real GDP growth  between  2015 
and 2018. 
Regarding inflation, the latest ECB staff projections foresee a rise to 1.2% in 2017 and 1.6% 
in 2018. The contribution of our measures to this projected increase in inflation, is significant, 
representing,  on  average,  an  impact  on  the  inflation  rate  of  about  half  a  percentage  point 
each year between 2016 and 2018. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  sum,  the  recovery  has  shown  resilience  in  the  face  of  a  sequence  of  adverse  shocks 
affecting  the  economy,  although  inflation  dynamics  have  remained  weak.  In  addition,  the 
envisaged return of inflation over the next couple of years to levels more consistent with our 
aim of below but close to 2% is very much dependent on the full implementation of our policy 
package. Last March we took a powerful set of measures by increasing our asset purchase 
programme  and  extending  it  to  corporate  bonds.  We  also  introduced  a  new  medium-term 
liquidity  facility  with  interest  rates  that  can  go  as  low  as  our  negative  deposit  facility  rate, 
contingent on the banks reaching a credit growth benchmark. As the ECB Governing Council 
has committed itself to pursuing the present set of policies, particularly the QE component, 
until  we  attain  “a  sustained  path  towards  our  inflation  objective”  and  “at  least  until  March 
2017”, we will have to decide closer to that date the final timeline of the programme and its 
conditions. We have not yet started any discussion about this issue, but we have become 
aware that market developments have raised increasing implementation challenges for asset 
purchases in the future. On account of this, in September the Governing Council tasked the 
relevant  Eurosystem  committees  to  evaluate  the  options  that  will  ensure  a  smooth 
implementation  of  our  purchase  programme  until  March  2017,  or  beyond,  if  needed.  The 
committees will report back to the Governing Council by December 2016. 
It  should  be  noted  that  the  parameters  of  the  programme  can  be  adjusted  at  any  time  to 
achieve  the  intended  amount  of  purchases,  and  it  should  be  stressed  that  the  Governing 
Council  will  continue  to  implement  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  to  fulfil  its  price 
stability objective. 
Other policies 
Monetary  policy  is  effective  in  correcting  cyclical  fluctuations,  but  it  also  contributes  to 
medium-term  growth  by  increasing  capacity-building  investment  and  by  accelerating  the 
closing of the output gap, thereby avoiding hysteresis effects in the labour market and in the 
capital  stock  that  are  detrimental  to  potential  growth.  Nevertheless,  it  is  indisputable  that 
long-term economic growth is mostly determined by supply-side factors such as productivity, 
technological innovation, the business environment and the quality of public institutions. In all 
euro area countries there is room for improvement in these areas. This requires governments 
to continue to implement a comprehensive and focused suite of structural reforms. 
Fiscal policy also needs to play a larger role in supporting the recovery. Fiscal expansion can 
contribute to increased interest rates by expanding the supply of safe assets. Conceptually, 
in terms of overlapping generations models with small Ricardian effects, this would also push 
upwards the real equilibrium interest rate. 
While many euro area countries have very limited fiscal room for manoeuvre, those that have 
some should use it. All countries, however, should look at ways to enhance the composition 
of their fiscal policies with a view to making it more growth-friendly, particularly in the area of 
taxation and the share of public investment. Only with the right combination of structural and 
fiscal policies is it possible to fully reap the benefits of our accommodative monetary policy 
and increase the euro area’s potential growth. 
At the European level, firms and households need more clarity over the future institutional 
set-up of the euro area, which is incomplete in key areas, such as banking union and capital 
markets  union.  This  uncertainty  is  detrimental  to  investment,  increases  the  precautionary 
saving of households and undermines our monetary policy effectiveness. As I mentioned at 
the  beginning,  we  need  governments  to  activate  an  assertive  three-pronged  strategy  of 
growth  initiatives  that  can  break  the  self-reinforcing  mechanisms  mentioned  by  the  OECD 
and the IMF that seem to be condemning the advanced economies to a mediocre regime of 
socially unsustainable low nominal growth. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
