  Carolyn Wilkins: Economic trends and monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Ms  Carolyn  Wilkins,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the 
University of Quebec, Trois-Rivières, Quebec, 6 October 2016. 
I would like to thank Eric Santor for his help in preparing this speech. 
 Introduction 
It is a pleasure to be here in Trois-Rivières. It is a city that has a long and vibrant history. It 
has also gone through profound transformation. For a long time, pulp and paper mills were 
the economic engine of the region. 
Today,  Trois-Rivières’  economy  is  more  diversified.  You  may  be  surprised  to  hear  that 
Ottawa, where the Bank of Canada is based, was also at one time an important centre of 
Canada’s timber trade. I am sure many of you may recall that the last one-dollar note the 
Bank issued even featured a tugboat amid logs on the Ottawa River. 
 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
I mention this common past not to reminisce about the good old days, but rather to marvel at 
how  much  the  Canadian  economy  has  changed  over  the  years.  Industries  have  risen  and 
declined, and new ones have appeared. 
These changes have at times been painful. Those who lived through hard times in the 1990s 
know it well. As mills closed, unemployment rose above 10 per cent. The unemployment rate 
in  the  region  has  fallen  and  is  now  close  to  the  average  for  Québec  and  for  the  rest  of 
Canada. Trois-Rivières has come a long way, with an unemployment rate that is below those 
averages.  I know  that  the  city  is  now  counting  on  an  expansion  of  its cultural  and tourism 
sector and that your new amphitheatre has already had more success than expected. 
Today, the Canadian economy continues to face pressures to adapt. Not only has it been 
recovering  from  the  global  financial  crisis  of  eight  years  ago,  it  has  also  been  affected  by 
headwinds from the European debt crisis, fiscal consolidation in the United States and, more 
recently,  Brexit.  These  events  have  all  undermined  confidence.  Further,  Canada  is  still 
confronting the collapse in oil prices. Remember that oil was trading at higher than $100 per 
barrel in June 2014, compared with around $45 now. That directly affects roughly 10 per cent 
of our GDP. And the prices of other commodities that are important for Quebec, such as iron 
ore and nickel, have also fallen significantly. 
Anything that affects Canada’s economy is important to us because, as you know, one of the 
Bank  of  Canada’s  main  functions  is  to  keep  inflation  low,  stable  and  predictable.  This 
provides the foundation for the economy to adapt as smoothly as possible to a new reality, 
such as a future with oil prices lower than in the past. We target an inflation rate of 2 per 
cent, inside a range of 1 to 3 per cent, so that families, investors and business owners can 
make  long-term  decisions  with  more  confidence  than  if  inflation  were  volatile  and 
unpredictable. 
To  make  the  right  monetary  policy  decisions,  we  need  to  have  a  good  sense  of  what  is 
happening  now  in  the  economy  and  where  it  is  headed  over  the  next  couple  of  years, 
because  growth  and  inflation  are  connected.  In  simple  terms,  inflation  tends  to  be  higher 
when  the  economy  is  operating  at  a  level  higher  than  its  potential.  Why?  Because  firms 
facing capacity constraints tend to raise prices by more for their products and services. And 
because workers tend to demand higher wages when labour is scarce. Conversely, inflation 
tends to be lower when economic resources such as labour and capital are underutilized, as 
they are today. 
What I want to do now is to give you a window into how we analyze the Canadian economic 
situation as we seek to achieve our target for inflation. I will start by outlining the major shifts 
that have been affecting the Canadian economy. I will then go over the main adjustments we 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  are watching closely as our economy returns to its potential. I will end by explaining how we 
incorporate all this into the decision-making process for monetary policy. 
A two-track post-crisis economy 
If  the  years  since  the  crisis  have  been  difficult  for  the  Canadian  economy,  it  is  largely 
because of two profound shifts that are taking place at the same time. 
The first shift is caused by population aging and a slowdown in productivity growth. These 
two factors are reducing how fast our economy can grow. 
Population  aging  slows  the  growth  rate  of  the  economy’s  potential  because  it  reduces  the 
number of workers entering the labour market. As well, people work less as they get older – 
either  by  retiring  or  by  reducing  the  number  of  hours  they  work.  The  bottom  line  is  that 
companies face a lower growth rate of available workers. To give you a sense of scale: in 
Canada, the annual population growth for prime-age workers was just below 3 per cent in the 
late 1980s, compared with barely more than zero today.1 In Quebec, this is happening a bit 
faster than in other provinces. At the global level, growth in the working-age population will 
be cut in half over the next two decades. Even China’s labour force has started declining.2 
So clearly, this is a worldwide phenomenon. 
At the same time, workers’ productivity has been growing more slowly since the crisis began 
(Chart 1). Some of this slowing could be because companies are not investing as much as 
before  to  make  each  worker  more  productive.  As  well,  the  benefits  to  productivity  growth 
from earlier developments in information technology are waning. 
                                                 
1  Prime-age workers are workers aged 25 to 54. 
2  According to United Nations population projections of the 15–64 age group, as published in the 2015 Revision 
of World Population Prospects. For access to the database, go to https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Adapting  to  these  underlying  trends  would  have  been  a  challenge  at  the  best  of  times. 
Overall,  potential  output  growth  in  Canada,  as  is  the  case  in  many  other  countries,  is 
considerably lower than it was in the not-so-distant past. It is around 1 1/2 per cent today, 
compared with almost 4 per cent in 2000. That represents a lot of money, about $50 billion in 
foregone  output  in  2016.  So,  all  things  being  equal,  disinflationary  pressures  are  lower 
because excess supply is lower than it otherwise would have been. 
The second shift is the steep decline in commodity prices, especially oil, which we have seen 
in  the  past  two  years.  The  result  is  a  two-track  economy.  The  industries  that  depend  on 
commodities have suffered a considerable downturn. The other sectors that are not directly 
dependent  on  commodities  and  make  up  about  87  per  cent  of  our  economy  have  made 
steady  progress  (Chart  2).  This  improvement  is  due  to  a  more  accommodative  monetary 
policy, US economic growth and the weaker Canadian dollar. 
 Economic models give us a framework for analyzing how the economy should be adjusting to 
these  shifts.  The  framework  tells  us  there  are  several  interconnected  adjustments  that  we 
should be seeing. 
In the face of the oil price collapse, we would expect firms to cut investment spending and 
employ fewer workers. Over time, this drop in activity would be felt by other companies and 
consumers in the region. 
Another  adjustment  concerns  activity  in  the  non-resource  sector,  particularly  exports.  We 
would expect the drop in commodity prices to cause the Canadian dollar to fall, which would 
support  companies  that  export  non-commodity  goods  and  services.  Of  course,  we  are 
always looking to see how well the United States, our biggest trading partner, is doing. 
The  final  adjustment  I  will  talk  about  relates  to  a  further  broadening  in  economic  activity 
outside the resource sector. As firms see their business improve, we would expect them to 
invest  and  to  hire  workers  to  take  full  advantage  of  new-found  opportunities.  Government 
infrastructure spending would also be a contributing force. 
Let us see how each adjustment is unfolding. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Stabilization in the energy sector 
Adjustments in the oil and gas sector have been dramatic (Chart 3). Investment in the sector 
is expected to drop cumulatively in 2015 and 2016 to about 60 per cent lower than it was in 
2014. And tens of thousands of jobs have also been cut. When we talk to company leaders, 
they tell us that the pace of the investment cuts may be easing. And while it appears that oil 
rig activity has troughed, it is too early to say that the cuts to investment are behind us. The 
adjustment in employment and wages may also continue for some time as firms adjust to the 
reality of lower oil prices. 
 Sustained pickup in exports 
As  the  energy  sector  stabilizes,  we  have  been  expecting  growth  in  other  parts  of  the 
economy to start dominating. One area in which we are looking for growth is non-commodity 
exports.  These  sectors,  such  as  aerospace,  transportation  equipment,  and  machinery  and 
equipment,  are  all  important  sources  of  exports  for  Quebec.  Here  in  the  region,  wood 
products  manufacturing  is  particularly  important.  Exports  should  benefit  from  two  factors: 
solid US economic growth and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar. 
Our southern neighbour is important, since it buys around three-quarters of the goods and 
services we export. Now, relative to most other advanced economies, the United States has 
done quite well, with growth in the 2 to 2 1/2 per cent range for several years. And, let us 
keep in mind as well that the Canadian dollar has depreciated almost 20 per cent since the 
oil price shock. 
Our  expectations  were  being  realized  as  our  exports  were  improving.  While  data  can  be 
uneven,  there  is  a  clear  upward  trend  in  non-commodity  exports  over  the  past  six  years 
(Chart 4). And, generally speaking, those that have improved the most are non-commodity 
exports  that  are more sensitive  to  the  exchange  rate. We  can  expect  the  weaker  dollar to 
support the level of exports, even though its influence on their growth rate has faded for the 
most  part.  Meanwhile,  we  expect  US  activity  to  recover  over  the  next  few  quarters,  as 
household spending and the labour market remain robust. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    
Unfortunately, Canada’s non-commodity exports had an unexpected setback in the second 
quarter.  This  is  explained  in  part  by  weaker-than-expected  US  growth,  particularly  in 
investment, which is significant for our exports. 
There was an uptick in July and August, which is encouraging, but uncertainty lingers. This 
uncertainty comes in part from the future growth of US investment. It is also possible that the 
effect of lower oil prices on the US economy is less positive than anticipated. It appears that 
the  drop  in  oil-sector  investment  so  far  is  largely  offsetting  the  positive  effects  on 
consumption.3  
We also cannot forget that competition effects are still playing an important role. We face stiff 
competition from other countries, such as Mexico, whose currency has depreciated by more 
than  ours  has.  And,  as  Governor  Poloz  noted  last  week,  some  Canadian  companies  are 
growing their businesses outside of Canada to directly serve those markets.4  
So it will take time to fully determine what is temporary and what is permanent for exports. That 
is  why  we  noted  in  our  September  policy  rate  announcement  that  the  risks  to  our  inflation 
outlook have tilted somewhat to the downside relative to the July Monetary Policy Report. 
Sustained non-resource growth 
Further broadening in economic activity should, over time, prompt existing firms to expand 
capacity and new firms to be created. This should happen as non-commodity exports, fiscal 
stimulus and a strong service sector create new sources of growth and take up some of the 
excess capacity that is now in the economy. 
We note that firms have not been inclined to invest in recent years. Last year, investment 
subtracted around 1 1/2 percentage points from growth, and we expect it to subtract another 
                                                
3  C.  Baumeister  and  L.  Kilian,  “Lower  Oil  Prices  and  the  U.S.  Economy:  Is  this  Time  Different?”  Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity (10 September 2016). 
4  S. S. Poloz, “The Paul Storer Memorial Lecture – Cross-Border Trade Integration and Monetary Policy,” Bank 
of Canada Staff Discussion Paper No. 2016–20 (September 2016). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  percentage point this year. The drop in non-residential investment has been largely driven by 
the  oil  price  shock  –  the  60  per  cent  drop  that  I  mentioned  earlier.  At  the  same  time,  the 
lethargy in business investment is broad-based and started before the oil price shock. For 
example, intellectual property investment – such as research and development – has been 
declining  for  the  past  four  years.  Businesses  tell  us  that  uncertainty  about  global  growth 
plays  an  important  role  here.  Weaker-than-expected  exports  have  also  contributed,  since 
business investment and trade go hand-in-hand. 
While  the  spotlight  has  rightly  been  on  exports,  I  want  to  highlight  other  areas  that  will 
contribute  to  stronger  and  more  balanced  growth.  In  its  most  recent  budget,  the  federal 
government announced roughly $25 billion of additional spending over the next two years. This 
includes  infrastructure  spending  and  measures  for  households  such  as  the  Canada  Child 
Benefit. The effects of this stimulus will become more prominent as the year progresses. 
The  service  sector  more  generally  has  also  been  contributing  to  the  stronger  growth  of 
household incomes. This is important, since services account for about 70 per cent of the 
economy  and  four  of  every  five  jobs.  Some  high-value-added  sectors  have  grown  quite 
nicely. The cultural sector is an interesting example, with more movies being shot in Canada. 
The air transportation sector is also improving, as new  international routes are added. We 
export about $100 billion worth of services, or one dollar out of six from our export total. I 
know that tourism and professional and scientific services are two sectors that are expanding 
nicely in this region. 
As the composition of demand and production changes, many Canadians have to make hard 
choices,  such  as  whether  to  move  to  find  work.  It  is  good  news  that  we  now  are  seeing 
interprovincial migration in line with the adjustment that is needed. In fact, the willingness of 
people to move to regions with more dynamic labour markets has increased over the past 
decade and a half.5  
This has helped keep the overall unemployment rate relatively stable at around 7 per cent 
despite the oil price shock, although it still varies widely across provinces (Chart 5). 
                                                
5  D.  Amirault  and  N.  Rai,  “Canadian  Labour  Market  Dispersion:  Mind  the  (Shrinking)  Gap,”  Bank  of  Canada 
Staff Analytical Note No. 2016–3 (March 2016). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   Moreover,  there  continues  to  be  more  slack  in  the  labour  market  than  the  overall 
unemployment rate would suggest. This is due to modest wage growth and involuntary part-
time work, as well as the number of discouraged workers. 
Despite the weakness in the energy-producing provinces, nationally, the growth of household 
spending has held up (Chart 6). 
 Returning inflation to the target 
Progress has been made with respect to the adjustments I have just described, but there is 
still material slack in the economy. 
In September, Governing Council decided to leave the Bank’s target for the overnight rate at 
1/2  per  cent. We  will  revisit  our  projection  when  we  release  our  quarterly  Monetary  Policy 
Report, together with a rate announcement, on 19 October. We are currently working on this. 
As a matter of course, we monitor the data as they come in, but we prepare an update of our 
projection four times  a  year. This  decision-making  process  serves  us  well.  To  achieve  our 
policy  objectives,  we  do  our  projections  often  enough  to  have  a  good  sense  of  how  the 
economy  is  evolving,  but  not  so  often  as  to  become  overly  influenced  by  month-to-month 
fluctuations in the data. And when tragic events such as the Alberta wildfires inject volatility 
into the data, this longer perspective is doubly important. 
As our discussions take place, we always keep in mind that the economic adjustments under 
way are forcing people to make difficult, long-term decisions. The one thing they should not 
have  to  worry  about  is  whether  their  money  will  lose  its  value.  In  this  context,  the  best 
contribution the Bank can make to Canada’s prosperity is to ensure that we have low and 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  stable inflation. Empirical studies have shown that low and stable inflation helps create the 
necessary conditions for steady economic growth and job creation.6  
The Bank of Canada has been successful at controlling inflation since we began targeting 
2 per cent in 1995.7 Headline inflation may be variable, but it has averaged just shy of 2 per 
cent  (Chart  7). While  it has  taken  time for  the  economy  to  return to  its potential  since  the 
financial crisis, we have managed to keep inflation within our target range, with the exception 
of a few brief episodes. The monetary stimulus we are providing has been helping with the 
adjustment. Inflation is now in the lower half of our target range in large part because of the 
temporary effect of lower consumer energy prices. 
We are mindful that low interest rates can lead to a buildup in financial vulnerabilities. As part 
of our financial stability mandate, we are monitoring very closely the high level of household 
indebtedness and housing sector activity. We think that, over time, the measures announced 
by the federal government on Monday will help mitigate risks to the financial system posed 
by household imbalances. 
Our approach to monetary policy is based on a risk-management framework. That is to say 
we consider both the risks to the outlook for inflation and those related to financial stability. 
                                                 
6  R. J. Barro, “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, no. 2 
(1991):  407–443;  S.  Fischer,  “Inflation  and  Growth,”  NBER  Working  Paper  No.  1235,  National  Bureau  of 
Economic Research (1983); Bank of Canada, Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target Background Information 
– November 2011. 
In February 1991, the Government and the Bank introduced targets aimed at reducing the rate of inflation. The 
objective was to achieve a 3 per cent inflation rate by the end of 1992 and to gradually reduce the rate of 
inflation to 2 per cent by the end of 1995. 
7 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Conclusion 
Let me wrap up. My goal today was to give you the Bank’s perspective on the conduct of 
monetary policy in the current context. 
Canada is going through important and complex adjustments. There has been progress, but 
also a few setbacks. As we said in September, with the recent setback in exports, the risks to 
the profile for inflation have tilted somewhat to the downside. 
The Bank is providing monetary stimulus in order to meet its inflation target. The adjustments 
are clearly under way. But it will take time before the economy has fully adjusted to the oil 
price shock, the US economy strengthens and the effects of fiscal stimulus take hold. 
Governing Council looks forward to providing you with an update on our outlook, as well as 
an interest rate announcement, in a couple of weeks. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
