Peter  Praet:  The  importance  of  a  genuine  banking  union  for
monetary policy
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
EMU Forum 2016, Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Vienna, 24 November 2016.
 financial 
that  deep 
integration  would  be  key 
It  was  always  understood 
to  effective
macroeconomic  stabilisation  in  Monetary  Union.  The  cross-border  integration  of  credit  and
capital markets would facilitate a smooth transmission of the single monetary policy across the
union, allowing the central bank to stabilise area-wide shocks. And the risk-sharing benefits of
financial integration would help absorb local macroeconomic shocks that could not, by definition,
be  addressed  through  monetary  policy  –  nor,  by  design,  through  a  federal  euro  area  budget.
Indeed,  financial  risk-sharing  would  be  crucial  to  prevent  national  budgets  from  being
1
overburdened in severe local downturns.
These benefits are one reason why, 15 years ago, the topic of this conference was “The Single
Financial Market – Two Years into EMU”. At that time, however, it was widely believed that the
elimination of intra-EMU currency risk, coupled with a process of broad economic and regulatory
convergence, would foster a market-led process of financial integration. And indeed, following the
launch of the euro, financial markets did steadily integrate, in particular the money market but
also bond markets. The integration of the banking sector deepened too. According to the ECB’s
financial  integration  indicators,  euro  area  interbank  markets  became  almost  completely
2
integrated prior to the crisis.
3
Yet,  as  is  well-known,  the  state  of  pre-crisis  financial  integration  was  shallow  and  largely
illusory.   Under  stress,  the  euro  area  financial  market  fragmented,  providing  little ex post  risk
sharing. This was made possible by the composition of cross-border flows – based more on
short-term debt than on equity – which limited the potential for capital-market risk-sharing. And
the  integration  of  interbank  markets  was  not  matched  by  retail  banking  integration,  hindering
consumption smoothing through credit markets. Financial fragmentation in turn disrupted both
monetary and fiscal stabilisation as public and private sector borrowers suffered the effects of
the so-called “bank-sovereign nexus”.
This failure of financial integration, and its effect on shock absorption, is an important reason why
the crisis has been more protracted in the euro area than in other advanced economies. Hence a
strong  policy  response  has  been  needed.  First,  to  make  the  financial  sector  safer  by
strengthening the regulatory and supervisory framework – what has been termed “risk reduction”.
And  second,  to  deepen  risk-sharing  by  creating  the  institutional  conditions  for  more  robust
financial integration, which has been one key aim of the banking union. It is this latter aspect, and
why it matters for monetary policy, that I would like to focus on in my remarks today.
The main point I would like to make is that we need a more integrated banking sector in the euro
area  to  achieve  greater  macroeconomic  stability.  But  to  achieve  this,  private  and  public  risk-
sharing have to be seen as complementary – that is, we cannot expect to have a fully integrated
banking  sector  that  can  share  risks  without  common  institutions  that  can  also  share  risks,
namely  for  deposit  insurance  and  bank  resolution.  Without  such  institutions,  there  is  a  real
prospect that the banking system will remain fragmented, and that is ultimately to the benefit of
no one in the euro area.
Financial integration and monetary policy transmission
Why is financial integration in the euro area, especially in the banking sector, and the resulting
degree of risk-sharing so important for monetary policy? The financial system helps smooth out
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
temporary  fluctuations  in  economic  conditions.  Companies  and  households  can  resort  to
financial intermediaries – in the euro area, typically banks – to accommodate their temporarily
higher  financing  needs  and  reduce  fluctuations  in  spending  patterns.  This  leads  to  a  higher
degree  of  macroeconomic  stabilisation.  A  sound  financial  system  reduces  the  burden  on
monetary policy, which would otherwise have to step in to stabilise the economy. While banks in
principle  help  to  stabilise  investment  and  consumption  patterns,  they  can  also  contribute  to
procyclicality by becoming shock  amplifiers  or  even  trigger  financial  shocks.  One  of  the  main
lessons of the crisis was that in order to effectively transmit monetary policy impulses to the real
economy,  banks  need  to  be  well  capitalised  through  the  cycle  and  conduct  maturity
transformation in a prudent manner.
The euro area consists of a diverse group of countries with different degrees of specialisation in
different economic sectors and in different segments of the value chain. Short-term fluctuations
as  well  as  the  long-term  shifts  in  the  global  economy  can  have  very  different  contrasting
implications  for  individual  euro  area  economies.  These  disparities  have  at  times  been
compounded by diverging policy stances, for instance overly loose fiscal policies in countries that
were  already  overheating  compared  with 
In  addition,  varying
macroeconomic  dynamics  are  to  some  extent  unavoidable  in  a  currency  union  –  and,  as  a
matter of fact, in any major economy composed of structurally diverse regions.
their  euro  area  peers. 
How  should  such  differences  be  addressed?  This  is  where  the  interplay  between  financial
integration  and  monetary  policy  comes  in.  Monetary  policy  is  not  well  suited  to  cater  for
asymmetric shocks, which affect some countries more than others.
In a monetary union, banks or other financial intermediaries may also prove unable to absorb
country-specific  shocks,  if  they  are  themselves  overly  exposed  to  their  respective  economy.
They risk facing financing constraints at the same time as everyone else. In such a situation, the
financial system will not avert, but rather amplify, the retrenchment in the real economy. And, if
the  shocks  are  as  violent  as  they  were,  for  example,  during  the  last  crisis,  financial
intermediaries  may  face  threats  to  their  own  solvency,  with  pernicious  effects  on  bank-based
monetary policy transmission.
As I mentioned earlier, for an effective transmission of monetary policy, banks need to be in a
position to pass on changes in financial conditions set by the central bank, for example in money
and  longer-term  credit  markets,  to  households  and  companies.  But  if  solvency  is  their  chief
concern, banks will retrench rather than generate new, or at least maintain existing, business.
This means that the central bank’s efforts to stabilise the economy cannot work as effectively as
they should. So not only will banks fail in their macroeconomic stabilisation efforts, they will also
obstruct the efforts of monetary policy to play that role.
In fact, this is what we saw during the crisis. To avoid that happening again, we need a deeply
integrated  financial  system  with  well-capitalised  intermediaries  that  are  active  across  borders
and  benefit  from  the  risk  diversification  options  that  the  economic  diversity  of  the  euro  area
offers.  Sound  risk  diversification  within  the  euro  area  financial  system  will  make  the  task  of
monetary policy easier even when confronted with common shocks.
Public and private risk sharing
Having discussed the importance of financial integration for the transmission of monetary policy, I
would now like to turn to the issue of risk sharing. There is an ongoing debate on the broader
need  for  public  risk  sharing  in  monetary  unions,  and  even  on  the  need  for  fiscal  capacity  to
strengthen  macroeconomic  stabilisation  at  euro  area  level.  Clearly,  more  private  risk  sharing
through the financial system should not be seen as a substitute for public risk sharing, but to be
fully  effective,  private  risk  sharing  through  the  financial  system  needs  not  only  common
supervision, regulation and resolution, but also a common fiscal backstop. In the debate about
public risk sharing in the euro area, the question of the fiscal backstop to the banking union is
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
essential.
Let me be clear: it is not the task of the public sector to backstop private banks’ risk taking. This
would be the very definition of moral hazard. Public policy is responsible for creating the right
framework for a sound and integrated European banking system so that taxpayers do not end up
footing the bill for bank failures. In this regard, significant progress has been made over the past
four years: we have common institutions for supervision and resolution at European level, we
have a Single Rulebook and European supervisory authorities to ensure that the rules are applied
in  a  harmonised  manner  across  the  Single  Market.  However,  rules  and  institutions  are  not
enough to create a genuine banking union. Let me highlight two points:
First,  the  present  institutional  architecture  of  the  banking  union  is  one  where  supervisory
responsibilities are shared, while the consequences of supervisory failures are not.
Second, the banking union appears at times more like a collection of national banking systems
than a single entity, especially when we consider banks’ balance sheet exposures. As long as
this  is  the  case,  country-specific  shocks  cannot  be  absorbed  via  integrated  markets  and
procyclicality will prevail.
Barriers to cross-border banking
So what is holding back financial integration? And what are the barriers to more cross-border
banking in Europe? The answer isn’t simple. A comprehensive explanation would probably need
to  include  not  only  institutional  and  regulatory  aspects  but  also  non-regulatory  barriers,  and  it
would go far beyond the scope of my speech. However, one of the key reasons for the lack of
cross-border integration, on which I would like to focus now, is that capital and liquidity are not yet
fully fungible in our banking union.
Let me explain. Many aspects influencing banks’ decisions to engage in cross-border activities
remain under the purview of national authorities rather than European ones. And even where this
is no longer the case in principle, national options and discretions still provide for distinct cross-
country differences. This ranges from financial regulation and accounting to insolvency practices.
Take, for example, a banking group that operates across different countries. Where should this
group’s  prudential  safeguards,  such  as  capital  and  liquidity,  be  located?  Should  each  local
subsidiary of the banking group hold a minimum of liquid assets, irrespective of whether they are
needed for its business model? Or is it sufficient to fulfil liquidity requirements at the consolidated
level?  Centralised  liquidity  management  at  group  level  seems  clearly  beneficial  from  the
perspective of financial integration.
However,  there  are  also  risks  associated  with  closer  integration  in  the  banking  union.  As
supervisor, the ECB can grant waivers for liquidity requirements at national as well as cross-
border level on a case-by-case basis. While the creation of a truly European banking system is
certainly  in  the  ECB’s  interest,  its  supervisory  mandate  calls,  above  all,  for  the  safety  and
soundness  of  the  institutions  under  its  supervision.  Waiving  liquidity  requirements  and  large
exposure  limits  could  increase  the  interconnectedness  within  the  banking  group  and  lead  to
possible contagion effects  in a banking union which has no common deposit insurance scheme
and where the Single Resolution Fund (SRF) still lacks a fiscal backstop.
4
The  current  incomplete  banking  union  is  asymmetric:  while  decisions  on  liquidity  waivers  are
taken at European level, the relevant risk-sharing mechanisms are still national. In each country,
bank depositors are protected by the national guarantee scheme. If a bank fails and the Single
Resolution Fund does not have sufficient resources available to finance its resolution, which may
well be the case for some time, until the common element of the SRF is sufficiently advanced, it
is a national credit line that backs the SRF. In this context, the ECB’s Supervisory Board decided
this spring that there should always be a floor on the liquidity coverage ratio for those subsidiaries
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
that are significant on a stand-alone basis. This is to ensure that they hold a sufficient level of
high-quality  liquid  assets  to  respond  to  liquidity  needs  at  national  level.   Liquidity  ring-fencing
reflects the absence of a common fiscal backstop in the banking union.
Completing the banking union
5
It  would  be  unfair  not  to  acknowledge  the  progress  that  we  have  made  towards  the  banking
union. My main point is that we have to be more ambitious. Completing the union is not a long-
term project. If the aim is to foster cross-border integration of banks, finalising the union has to be
done within a timeframe that banks can work with when they make their strategic decisions on
how to adjust their business models.
In the political debate, completing the banking union is sometimes framed in terms of a trade-off
between risk sharing and risk reduction. In the banking sector, however, risk sharing and risk
reduction are often closely linked. A lack of risk sharing can trigger panic and contagion, which
has in the past led to the establishment of fiscal backstops and deposit insurance arrangements.
Well- functioning risk-sharing arrangements  are  based  on  controlling  the  degree  of  risk  in  the
banking system. I believe both routes need to be followed and to move forward in parallel – and
they need to be pursued ambitiously. I am convinced that leaving the banking union unfinished
would be the opposite of risk reduction.
A  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  would  enhance  overall  depositor  confidence  by
protecting deposits in a uniform manner wherever they are in the EU. It would thus reduce the
probability of depositor payouts or the probability of resorting to other risk-sharing mechanisms,
such as the European Stability Mechanism. This is the very foundation of insurance: by pooling
resources  and  risks  across  a  larger  and  more  diverse  group,  the  overall  shock-absorbing
capacity  of  the  system  increases.  In  this  sense,  risk  sharing  turns  into  risk  reduction.  Take
another example: tackling legacy issues by cleaning up banks’ balance sheets will increase trust
between banks and facilitate cross-border lending, possibly even cross-border mergers, thereby
fostering private risk sharing, independently of the discussion on how to progress with public risk
sharing.
On the risk-reduction side, we still have important elements of the international regulatory agenda
to implement in the EU, including the binding leverage ratio requirement, the net stable funding
ratio  or  the  Financial  Stability  Board’s  total  loss-absorbing  capacity.  With  this  in  mind,  I  am
looking forward to the discussions on the risk-reduction package that the Commission adopted
very recently.
Completing  the  banking  union  requires  a  comprehensive  approach:  a  symmetric  institutional
architecture, where liability and control are aligned, harmonisation of the rules, strengthening of
the regulatory framework where needed to control the escalation of risks, and also a certain level
of  public  risk  sharing  to  underpin  confidence  in  the  area-wide  financial  system.  The  Single
Resolution  Fund  was  created  in  2016,  with  national  compartments  and  a  mutualised
compartment  available  to  fund  capital  and  liquidity  needs.  Currently,  the  backstop  for  national
compartments consists of national credit lines. Looking ahead, it will be essential to establish a
common  fiscal  backstop  in  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  to  ensure  that  the  SRF  has
sufficient resources to support any necessary resolution measures.
Conclusion
15 years ago the topic of this conference was the Single Financial Market – and by the way, the
keynote  speaker  back  then  was  Wim  Duisenberg. As  he  noted,  “The  gradual  dismantling  of
regulatory  obstacles  to  remaining  market  integration  in  Europe  will  contribute  to  enhancing  its
depth and efficiency, in turn contributing to an improved allocation of funds to the most profitable
investment  opportunities,  and  thus  supporting  economic  growth.”  This  vision  is  still  relevant
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
today.  But  to  take  it  forward,  it  is  crucial  to  be  more  ambitious  and  thus  to  ensure  a  better
balance between risk reduction through implementation of the regulatory agenda and supervisory
priorities, and risk sharing through the establishment of a common fiscal backstop in the banking
union.
1
2
3
4
5
I would like to thank Malte Jahning and Fédéric Holm-Hadulla for their contributions to this speech.
ECB (2008), Financial Integration in Europe, April 2008.
See  Special  Feature  A  entitled  “Financial  integration  and  risk  sharing  in  a  monetary  union”  in  Financial
integration in Europe report, April 2016.
See Special Feature B entitled “National options and discretions in the prudential regulatory framework for
banks” in Financial integration in Europe report, April 2016.
See pages 10–14 of the ECB Guide on options and discretions available in Union law.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
