  Sabine Lautenschläger: Interview in Süddeutsche Zeitung 
Interview with Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, 
in  Süddeutsche  Zeitung,  conducted  by  Ms  Meike  Schreiber  and  Mr  Markus  Zydra  and 
published on 2 November 2016. 
 Ms Lautenschläger, you have been supervising banks for 20 years, first at BaFin, then 
at the Bundesbank and now for nearly three years at the ECB. What has changed in 
that time? 
Supervision  has  become  more  objective  and  more  intensive.  We  benefit  on  a  daily  basis 
from the fact that knowledge, experience and supervisory traditions from 19 countries come 
together  to  form  a  new  supervisory  approach.  That  sharpens  our  focus  and  makes 
supervision better. But it’s now also become more complex, as we don’t have just one legal 
system to take into account. A supervisor usually has considerable room for manoeuvre, and 
in our case this room for manoeuvre can, for certain topics, be based on up to 19 different 
legal frameworks. Everything thus has to be well-founded. 
So you can pretty much do what you want as long as you can explain it properly? 
That’s  putting  it  too  simplistically.  But  let  me  give  you  an  example:  German  law  requires 
banks to have appropriate risk management measures in place, and the term “appropriate” is 
defined in more detail. These German requirements do not necessarily have to correspond 
with the ideas of national legislators in other countries. 
And? 
This sometimes complicates our task of treating banks with similar risk profiles in a similar 
way. 
Was it easier when you were at BaFin? 
It  was  different.  The  decision-making  process  was  that  of  a  typical  German  authority: 
individual  people,  or  a  small  number  of  people,  took  the  most  important  decisions  and 
determined  the  approach  to  be  followed.  Within  a  European  body  that  combines  different 
traditions and points of view, things are – and should be – different. 
When you were at BaFin you often used to pop into the offices of your staff and see 
how things were going. Do you still do that? 
I still like to speak directly to colleagues and staff, but this has unfortunately become a rarer 
occurrence because I spend a lot more time in meetings. 
One of the issues is how stable Europe’s banks are. Hand on heart, how many German 
banks would take the global financial system down with them if they were to go 
bankrupt? 
It depends not just on the bank, its size and its interconnectedness with other banks, but also 
on  the  sentiment  of  market  participants.  I’m  sometimes  surprised  at  how  stock  market 
investors take certain pieces of news calmly that I consider to be relevant, and then at other 
times information that I consider to be fairly harmless or only relevant for an individual bank 
or a handful of banks pushes down stock prices for many. Do you remember Lehman? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Yes, absolutely. 
You see, the failure of Lehman in 2008 did not just affect those market participants that had a 
business relationship in the broadest sense with the company; whole segments of the market 
were  affected  and  became  illiquid.  Hardly  anybody  expected  the  effects  to  be  so  far-
reaching.  So  if  anyone  tells  you  now  that  they  know  exactly  how  the  markets  will  react  in 
such circumstances, I would start to get sceptical. 
So it can’t be ruled out that there might be another financial crisis of the kind we saw 
in 2008? 
A  financial  crisis  can  never  be  ruled  out  entirely.  But  much  has  been  done  since  2008  to 
make the banking system more stable and to give us greater scope for action. Banks now 
have greater capital and liquidity reserves and better risk management than in 2008. 
So no need to worry? 
Banks  are  now  much  more  resilient,  and  we  as  supervisors  are  able  to  take  more  far-
reaching action in dangerous situations now that we have more instruments at our disposal. 
The IMF recently described Deutsche Bank as the most dangerous bank in the world. 
As the responsible supervisory authority, you surely can’t stand for that, can you? 
You’d have to ask the IMF what criteria they applied in coming to this conclusion. The IMF 
also put it differently. 
It said that Deutsche Bank appeared to be the most important contributor to systemic 
risks. 
You see, that means something different from saying that it’s the “most dangerous” bank in 
the world. The Financial Stability Board has published a ranking of the large, globally active 
banks according to their systemic relevance – that serves as a good guide. 
So Deutsche Bank doesn’t have any problems? It isn’t dangerous? 
I don’t comment on individual banks. 
Let’s talk about Europe instead. Doesn’t Italy’s banking crisis, for example, 
demonstrate that many legacy problems are now emerging that were overlooked by 
your predecessors, namely the national supervisors? 
A bank which is in the traditional lending business can by and large only do as well as its 
customers are doing. Transactions that were deemed safe when they were concluded can 
for various reasons, such as an environment of persistently weak economic growth, end up 
being anything but, turning into non-performing loans that are expensive for the bank. The 
supervisory  authority  cannot  influence  economic  developments,  but  what  we  can  do  is 
ensure  that  the  affected  banks  make  appropriate  loan  loss  provisions  for  non-performing 
loans,  improve  their  processes  for  dealing  with  such  loans  and  find  sustainable  solutions. 
This we have done and will continue to do. 
Do you have a vision of what an ideal stable banking market should look like? Should 
there be fewer banks? 
There is no European banking market as such – there are too many differences between the 
banks and the environments in which they operate for that – and so there is no single vision 
either. For us it is important that banks are in a strong position – with regard to both business 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  model  and  profitability  –  in  terms  of  capital  and  liquidity.  That  is  why  we  are  constantly 
reviewing their business models and the conditions under which they need to be viable. And 
there are certainly differences within the euro area in this respect. Some banks have to deal 
with  non-performing  loans  and  large  loan  loss  provisions,  while  others  are  competing  with 
many other banks for the same customers. And so the question of consolidation does then 
arise, and rightly so. But please not in the form of a merger of two weak banks. It would be 
better to see two strong banks come together, maybe in a cross-border merger – that would 
have many advantages. 
This obstinacy is not popular with the banks, and many politicians also fear that banks 
will no longer be able to lend sufficient volumes as a result of all the regulation. What 
political pressure do you face? 
As supervisors, we want to have banks that are able to finance the real economy not just in 
the  short  term,  but  also  in  the  medium  and  long  term.  Some  see  a  contradiction  between 
banks  granting  loans  and  at  the  same  time  meeting  tough  regulatory  requirements,  but  I 
don’t see a contradiction here. Quite the opposite: a bank that has to fulfil strict supervisory 
conditions will be able to service the economy not just for the next few years, but also in the 
longer term. 
The current business strategy of most banks mainly involves raising fees. Doesn’t that 
mean that consumers are also paying for the ECB’s zero interest rate policy in this 
way? 
I have a question for you: would you like to give away your newspaper for free? 
Not really... 
Quite! But you would like your bank to manage your account, say, for nothing? I think that we 
need  fair  prices for  services  in  the  banking  sector  just  like  in  any  other  sector.  Everything 
cannot always be free. And that has nothing to do with low interest rates, it is a general truth. 
Are you saying that the low interest rates are not a problem for the banks? 
In the long term, the low interest rate environment can represent a considerable challenge, in 
particular for banks in the traditional lending business. But I would like to point out two things. 
First, the low interest rates are the result of persistently weak growth and structural factors 
such as demographic change. So many factors, both national and global, play a role here, 
not just the central bank’s key interest rate. And second, the period of low interest rates also 
has  benefits  for  the  banks.  They  can  obtain  refinancing  at  better  rates,  and  expansionary 
monetary policy also supports the economic recovery, which is also beneficial for banks. 
Yet banks now even have to pay a penalty rate if they deposit money with the central 
bank. Is the ECB not putting the stability of banks at risk in this way? 
It  isn’t  easy  at  present,  but  banks  have  to  find  a  way  of  dealing  with  the  economic 
environment  in  which  they  find  themselves.  The  banking  business  means  constant 
adjustment. And a large number of the banks that have clear weaknesses in their business 
models had income that was too low and costs that were too high even before interest rates 
were low. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
