10 November 2016 
Governor Stefan Ingves 
The Swedish Bankers’ Association bank meeting, Grand Hôtel, Stockholm  
  SVERI GES RIKSBANK 
SE-103 37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergstorg 11) 
 
Tel. +46 8 787 00 00 
Fax +46 8 21 05 31 
registratorn@riksbank.se 
www.riksbank.se 
SPEECH 
     DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
   Necessary reforms for a more stable finan-
cial sector 
Crises are expensive and should be avoided 
When financial crises afflict us it becomes obvious to all how much damage they 
cause. Unfortunately, this insight is often temporary, as it is easy – even a human sur-
vival instinct – to forget problems and leave them behind us. As a representative of 
the Basel Committee I therefore see it as an important task to remind you of how 
costly financial crises are to the national economy and how important it is that we 
have robust regulatory frameworks that reduce both the cost of crises and the proba-
bility that they will occur.  
Although we often see a return in the growth rate of the economy, crises usually lead 
to a permanent fall in GDP, which takes a very long time to recover from. Even today, 
almost 10 years after the financial crisis broke out, many countries are struggling with 
low growth, high unemployment and low inflation. In several cases they also have 
high sovereign debt. And in the case of Sweden, there is no other event since the Sec-
ond World War that has affected Swedish GDP as negatively as financial crises. There 
are two clear dents in Swedish GDP post-war development: during the financial crisis 
in the 1990s and during the global financial crisis 2008-2013.  
The most acute problems are remedied but some work remains 
A crucial cause of the most recent financial crisis was that banks around the world had 
taken on too much risk. This was possible for two reasons. Firstly, the regulatory 
framework applying at the time did not sufficiently influence the banks’ risk taking. 
Secondly, the banks themselves evidently did not have the will or ability to manage 
their risks on their own. The answer was the Basel III Agreement - a comprehensive 
package of reforms with the main purpose of strengthening the banks’ capital base to 
ensure that they can manage losses in a better way and improve the banks’ liquidity 
management.  
But even if Basel III dealt with the most acute shortcomings, work remains to be done 
to ensure that banks around the world are well capitalised. I intend to spend a little 
  1 [5] 
   time here talking about the reform work the Basel Committee is currently involved in 
and why it is important that the new reforms are put into place. 
The global capital regulations will become more reliable and easier to 
compare between banks 
A basic idea behind the design of Basel II -the global capital regulations that were 
completed a few years before the financial crisis - was to create a stronger link be-
tween capital requirements and the banks’ risks. This is largely attained by the banks 
having the opportunity to calculate their risk-weighted assets, and thus capital re-
quirements, using internal models. When the financial crisis broke out, however, it 
became clear that these models often underestimated the risks in the banks’ expo-
sures. This meant that the capital requirement was lower than was appropriate. Many 
actors, both regulators and market participants, have therefore expressed doubts as 
to how well these models actually reflect the risks. 
In 2013, the Basel Committee therefore published a number of reports analysing what 
capital requirements the banks’ internal models generated. The reports show that 
there are major differences in the banks’ capital requirements. They also show that 
these differences cannot be explained by the differences in the underlying risk in their 
assets, but are instead due to the way the banks measure risk. The fact that this is so 
not only makes it difficult to compare capital requirements between the banks, it also 
reduces the credibility of the international capital regulations. The Committee’s cur-
rent work therefore concerns to a large extent ensuring that the models used by the 
banks are reliable and reflect the risks in their operations in a correct manner.   
This work includes revising and to some extent limiting the banks’ scope to use inter-
nal models to calculate their risk-weighted assets and thereby their capital require-
ments. For instance, the Basel Committee is planning to introduce floors for a number 
of the parameters the banks estimate themselves. The result of this is that we will see 
less difference in the banks’ capital requirements for assets with similar risk profiles. 
Let me make myself clear: The idea is not that we shall return to Basel I. The banks 
will be able to continue using internal models in their risk management. What the 
Committee's current work concerns is instead bringing order to the risk-based system 
to increase the credibility of the capital requirements the banks have and to make it 
easier to compare them. Without this work, there is a risk of further erosion of confi-
dence in the regulations.  
Another important part of the Committee's work involves modernising and develop-
ing standard methods so that they become more risk sensitive and thereby better 
adapted to banks with international operations. For many types of exposure, such as 
lending with property as collateral, the current standard measures often give the 
same risk weight regardless of the loan-to-value ratio. This will probably be changed 
so that the capital requirement varies according to the loan-to-value ratio. This work 
also covers trying to reduce the mechanical dependence on external credit ratings, 
which is in line with the objectives stated by G20.  
Supplementary requirements will increase the banks’ resilience 
On the basis of the revised standard methods, the Basel Committee is also working on 
new floors to limit how low the banks’ risk weights can fall. In this way, one also limits 
how low their capital requirements can be. It means in practice that the banks’ future 
  2 [5] 
   capital requirements must amount at least to a certain percentage of the capital re-
quirements the banks would have if they instead used standard methods to calculate 
their capital requirements. Similar regulations already exist in the form of the old Ba-
sel I floor. The Basel Committee introduced the Basel I floor for the specific purpose of 
avoiding a situation where the banks’ capital requirements decline too much and too 
quickly when the Committee decided to introduce Basel II. The new regulations are 
not at all revolutionary in themselves, but focus on bringing the existing framework 
up-to-date. It is also reasonable to link together the standard methods and the inter-
nal models in this way, from both risk and competition perspectives. The fact that 
there is some relationship between standard methods and the banks’ own models en-
sures that the capital requirements do not differ too much. 
In addition to the floor regulations, the Basel committee will decide on the final form 
and calibration of the leverage ratio requirement. The Basel Committee is planning, as 
announced earlier, to introduce an international minimum requirement in the year 
2018 of three per cent, and possibly somewhat higher for systemically-important in-
stitutions. 
Having a leverage ratio requirement is an important step forwards, as this gives us a 
commonly agreed highest level as to how much the banks can debt finance their oper-
ations , regardless of the level of risk in their operations. Excessive debt is namely a 
common denominator in most financial crises. Even before the crisis, a number of 
banks expanded their operations substantially with the aid of debt financing. When 
the markets became shaky it turned out that many banks lacked sufficient capital to 
cover their losses. The idea of the leverage ratio requirement is that it should be a rel-
atively simple and transparent supplementary capital requirement that sets an upper 
limit as to how much leverage the banks can take on. Basel II created too much free-
dom for the banks, with well-known results. We need to put this right. We will there-
fore now have a system with many different types of constraints. 
Government exposures are also risky  
Another question discussed by the Basel Committee is if and how the banks should 
maintain capital to cover their exposures to governments and other public bodies. To-
day it is in practice possible for the financial supervisory authorities to completely ex-
empt such exposures from the capital adequacy requirement. We know from experi-
ence, however, that the banks’ exposure to governments is not risk free. The Basel 
Committee has therefore decided to review whether and how the regulations need to 
be changed.  
Almost 10 years on from the crisis – time to complete reforms 
The international regulatory work has been in progress since the global financial crisis 
broke out in 2007. It is important to many parties, not least banks, investors and pol-
icy-makers, to clarify how the global regulatory framework for banks will function. The 
Basel Committee is therefore working intensively on completing the current reform 
work by the end of the year1.  
 
                                                           
1 However, it is still not clear when the review of the exposures to governments and public bodies will be com-
plete.  
  3 [5] 
   Critics have expressed fears that the reforms I am talking about now will lead to mini-
mum capital for certain banks increasing radically, which in turn risks resulting in a 
real economic decline. Here I would like to point out that the Basel Committee’s on-
going reform work does not aim to significantly increase the total global capital re-
quirements. Instead, it concerns ensuring that all banks around the world have ade-
quate resilience to manage financial crises and that risks are covered by capital in a 
uniform way in all banks and all countries. One result of this exercise is that banks 
that currently have very low risk weights will probably face higher capital require-
ments, while banks with very high risk weights may face lower capital requirements. 
Designing a uniform global regulatory framework is not an easy task, particularly as 
banking systems differ from country to country, but also because we are living in a 
changing world. The Basel Committee's work is therefore largely a question of finding 
compromises that all member countries can support and which will stand the test of 
time. 
 Naturally, the Basel committee is also evaluating very carefully the effects of the pro-
posals now under negotiation. This applies to the effects on the banks as well as on 
society. Following the financial crisis, a number of studies have been made regarding 
which capital levels are most appropriate from a socioeconomic perspective 2. Many of 
them have shown that the macroeconomic advantages of increasing the resilience of 
the financial system clearly outweigh the costs of the reforms, both in the short term 
and the long term.3 It is not in any way so that the necessary reforms now being dis-
cussed threaten general economic developments. On the contrary, economic research 
has shown that well-capitalised banks tend to lend more than banks with little capital 
do. 4  This is because banks that are well-capitalised also face lower funding costs. We 
have experience of this in Sweden, where the relatively higher capital requirements 
have contributed to the financial markets having considerable confidence in Swedish 
banks. This in turn has increased the banks’ access to cheap funding.   
 
With regard to the effect for banks, I would like to point out that the forms the Basel 
Committee is working with concern how the minimum capital requirement, also 
known as the Pillar 1 requirement, should be calculated. Banks with crossborder oper-
ations benefit from Basel III now containing this type of joint minimum standard. But 
Pillar 1 is only a part of the total capital requirement. The amount of capital a bank 
needs to hold in total is also determined by Pillar 2 and by national buffers, that is, re-
quirements set by  national authorities. Now that the Basel Committee is completing 
Basel III and the minimum requirement will thus have better cover, it is also reasona-
ble that national authorities where necessary review their national capital require-
ments.  
 
That being said, I would like to stress that the Basel Committee’s work involves estab-
lishing a global minimum standard that ensures that banks around the world are bet-
ter equipped to manage losses. Having a regulatory framework that is robust and that 
is implemented will play a decisive role in reducing the risk that we will have to expe-
rience further financial crises that result in large production losses, high unemploy-
ment and permanently lower growth. 
                                                            
2 See, for instance, BIS (August 2010), The long-term economic impact of stronger capital and liquidity require-
ments 
3 See, for instance, BIS (December 2010), Assessing the macroeconomic impact of the transition to stronger capi-
tal and liquidity requirements 
4 Gambacorta and Shin (2016) 
  4 [5] 
  References 
BIS (August 2010), The long-term economic impact of stronger capital and liquidity re-
quirements 
BIS (December 2010), Assessing the macroeconomic impact of the transition to 
stronger capital and liquidity requirements 
Gambacorta, Leonardo and Hyun Song Shin (2016), Why bank capital matters for 
monetary policy, BIS Working Paper No. 558 
   5 [5] 
