December  7,  2016 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 Japan's Economy and Monetary Policy 
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Nagasaki 
Kikuo Iwata 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative, 
financial,  and  business  leaders  in  Nagasaki  Prefecture.  I  would  also  like  to  take  this 
opportunity  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with the activities  of  the 
Bank of Japan's Nagasaki Branch. 
 Today, I would like to have your views on the actual situation of the local economy, as well 
as your candid opinions about the Bank's policies and activities. 
 Before exchanging views with you, I will briefly explain the recent economic developments 
at home and abroad, and then touch on some points regarding monetary policy. 
 I. The Current Situation of Economic Activity and Its Outlook 
To begin with, Japan's economy is likely to expand moderately, with a virtuous cycle from 
income  to  spending  being  maintained  in  both  the  corporate  and  household  sectors,  on  the 
back  of  highly  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  the  effects  of  the  government's 
large-scale  stimulus  measures,  as  well  as  the  recovery  in  overseas  economies  (Chart  1). 
Real  GDP  is  likely  to  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  the  potential  growth  rate  through 
the projection period -- that is, through fiscal 2018 -- at around 1 percent. With regard to the 
outlook for prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all 
items less fresh food is likely to be slightly negative or about 0 percent for the time being 
mainly due to the effects of the decline in energy prices. As the output gap improves -- as 
will  likely  be  seen  in  a  further  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate  --  and  medium-  to 
long-term  inflation  expectations  rise  thereafter,  the  rate  of  change  is  expected  to  increase 
toward 2 percent in the second half of the projection period. In what follows, I would like to 
explain the background to this outlook and the issues that warrant attention going forward. 
 A. Developments in Exports and Overseas Economies 
Overseas  economies  have  continued  to  grow  at  a  moderate  pace,  particularly  in  advanced 
economies  such  as  the  United  States,  but  the  pace  of  growth  in  emerging  economies  has 
decelerated  somewhat.  In  terms  of  the  outlook,  overseas  economies  are  expected  to  see  a 
gradual increase in their growth rates, as it is likely that advanced economies will continue 
 1 
to  realize  steady  growth  and  emerging  economies  will  be  positively  influenced  by  the 
developments in advanced economies and emerging economies' policy effects (Chart 2). In 
this  situation,  exports  are  projected  to  remain  more  or  less  flat  for  the  time  being,  due  to 
downward  pressure  exerted  by  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies  and  the  past 
appreciation  of  the  yen,  but  to  moderately  increase  from  the  turn  of  fiscal  2017  as  the 
effects of the slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen are expected 
to gradually wane. 
 With regard to the economic policies to be implemented under the new administration in the 
United States, market  participants seem to view that the U.S. economy will be boosted by 
proactive  fiscal  management.  The  U.S.  economic  measures  exert  great  influence  not  only 
within the economy but also on the global economy and global financial markets; therefore, 
the  new  administration's  policy  directions  and  their  influence  warrant  close  attention.  In 
assessing overseas economic developments, it is necessary to closely monitor developments 
in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  particularly  China,  as  well  as  the 
consequences stemming from the United Kingdom's vote to leave the European Union (EU) 
and their effects. 
 B. Developments in the Corporate Sector 
Profits  for  all  industries  and  company  sizes  have  been  at  a  level  close  to  the  record  high, 
although those of large manufacturing firms have been negatively affected by the slowdown 
in  overseas  economies  and  the  yen's  appreciation  (Chart  3).  In  this  situation,  business 
sentiment  has  generally  been  favorable,  and  business  fixed  investment  has  been  on  a 
moderate increasing trend. According to the September 2016 Tankan (Short-Term Economic 
Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan),  firmness  has  continued  to  be  seen  in  business  fixed 
investment  plans  for  fiscal  2016  as  a  whole,  including  those  of  large  manufacturers,  for 
which profit projections have deteriorated as the expected exchange rate has shifted toward 
appreciation  of  the  yen.  As  the  background  to  these  developments,  we  can  point  to 
anticipation  of  firms  undertaking  fixed  investment  from  a  relatively  longer  perspective, 
such  as  that  (1)  for  growth  areas,  in  view  of  the  2020  Tokyo  Olympics,  and  (2)  in 
labor-saving machinery and equipment in order to deal with labor shortages. 
  2 
C. Developments in the Household Sector 
Next,  I  would  like  to  turn  to  developments  in  the  household  sector.  Supply-demand 
conditions in the labor market have improved steadily and employee income has increased 
moderately  (Chart  4).  A  perception  of  labor  shortage  suggested  by  the  diffusion  index  for 
employment  conditions  in  the  September  Tankan  has  heightened,  showing  a  tightening  at 
almost  the  same  levels  seen  around  1991-1992.  The  unemployment  rate  has  been  about  3 
percent, which is close to virtually "full employment." Wages have been rising moderately, 
albeit  with  fluctuations,  on  the  back  of  the  tightening  of  labor  market  conditions.  The 
year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  hourly  cash  earnings  of  part-time  employees,  which  are 
responsive to labor market conditions, has seen a relatively high increase, being in the range 
of  around  1.5-2.0  percent.  Summer  bonuses  of  full-time  employees  also  have  increased 
clearly, mainly in nonmanufacturing firms. 
 Private  consumption  has  been  more  or  less  flat  recently,  despite  being  affected  by  bad 
weather  conditions  such  as  typhoons  (Chart  5).  Confidence  indicators  related  to  private 
consumption  have  been  picking  up,  and  such  consumption  is  expected  to  increase 
moderately  on  the  back  of  the  continued  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and 
income situation. 
 D. Price Developments 
Next, I would like to touch on price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI for all items less fresh food has been slightly negative due to the effects of the decline 
in  energy  prices.  This  is  largely  attributable  to  the  decline  in  energy  prices,  as  that  for  all 
items less fresh food and energy has remained positive for three years (Chart 6). 
 However, the rate of increase in the CPI for all items less fresh food and energy has slowed 
recently. This is mainly because firms have become cautious about raising prices compared 
to  2015,  reflecting  the  effects  of  the  yen's  appreciation  since  the  middle  of  2015  and 
weakness in private consumption in the first half of 2016. 
 The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  is  likely  to  be 
slightly  negative  or  about  0  percent  for  the  time  being,  and  gradually  increase  toward  2 
 3 
percent.  The  following  three  points  can  be  highlighted  as  the  background  to  this  outlook. 
The first point is that the negative contribution of the decline in energy prices to the annual 
CPI inflation rate for all items less fresh food is expected to dissipate and almost no effects 
of this are projected to be seen  in early 2017. The  second point is that  firms' price-setting 
stance  is  expected  to  revert  to  raising  prices  as  private  consumption  heads  toward  a 
moderate  recovery.  The  third  point  is  that  upward  pressure  on  wages  is  expected  to  rise 
further as labor market conditions tighten. Inflation expectations are likely to increase again 
if the observed inflation rates rise with these factors. 
 That  being  said,  a  wage  increase  is  extremely  important  with  a  view  to  realizing  an 
environment in which prices follow a rising trend. The Bank -- in pursuing monetary easing 
to achieve its price stability target of 2 percent  -- aims to realize a virtuous cycle in which 
prices  rise  moderately  accompanied  by  increases  in  corporate  profits,  employment,  and 
wages. In fact, when we take a look at the relationship between prices and nominal wages, 
there  is  a  stable  relationship  between  the  CPI  and  hourly  cash  earnings,  in  that  they 
generally move in parallel from a longer-term perspective. In the United States and Europe, 
it  is  often  the  case  that  negotiated  wages  apply  for  several  years,  and  central  banks'  price 
stability targets are thereby the crucial factor that determines wages. In Japan, on the other 
hand,  base  pay  increase  is  determined  considering  the  actual  price  developments, 
particularly  the  observed  CPI  in  the  previous  year  (Chart  7).  In  order  to achieve  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent in a stable manner, it is important that people share the view that 
annual  inflation  will  be  around  2  percent,  and  that  the  price-setting  and  the  annual 
labor-management wage negotiations are conducted based on such view. 
 II. Thinking behind the Conduct of Monetary Policy 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  Bank's  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Since  the  introduction  of 
quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE)  in  April  2013,  Japan's  economic 
activity and prices have improved significantly, and the economy is no longer in deflation. 
There is no room for doubt that this policy was effective in overcoming deflation. However, 
it is true that the price stability target of 2 percent has not been achieved yet, unfortunately, 
despite the unprecedented large-scale monetary easing. 
  4 
Based on such recognition, the Bank, at  the  September  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  (MPM), 
conducted a comprehensive assessment of developments in economic activity and prices as 
well as policy effects over the three years since the introduction of QQE, and, based on its 
findings, decided to introduce "QQE with Yield Curve Control," which is a new framework 
for strengthening monetary easing. In what follows, I will elaborate on this point. 
 A. Comprehensive Assessment 
Although  the  content  of  the  Bank's  "Comprehensive  Assessment"  is  wide-ranging,  I  will 
now touch on three points that I consider to be particularly important. 
 The first point is the effects of QQE. In more than three years since its introduction, Japan's 
economic activity and prices have improved significantly, and the economy is no longer in 
deflation, which is generally defined as a sustained decline in prices. Corporate profits have 
been at record high levels, and the labor market is in a state that is close to virtually "full 
employment," as evidenced by the fact that the unemployment rate has declined to 3 percent. 
Against  the  backdrop  of  such  tightening  of  labor  market  conditions,  wages  have  been 
increasing moderately. Base pay increases, which had not taken place for many years under 
deflation, were achieved for three consecutive years. In the financial markets, excessive yen 
appreciation  was  corrected  and  stock  prices  have  risen  significantly.  It  is  certain  that  the 
Bank's monetary easing has played a large role in economic recovery. 
 In order to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in a stable manner, it is necessary to 
drastically change people's deflationary mindset and raise their inflation expectations -- that 
is, people's perception of future price developments -- to 2 percent. On this point, QQE has 
been  effective  in  raising  such  expectations.  As  mentioned  in  the  Bank's  "Comprehensive 
Assessment,"  inflation  expectations  rose  significantly  through  summer  2014,  after  the 
introduction  of  QQE  in  April  2013.  Furthermore,  the  expansion  of  QQE  in  October  2014 
played a role in supporting inflation expectations (Chart 8). These facts indicate that, under 
QQE, the expansion of the monetary base in combination with the commitment to achieving 
the  price  stability  target  have  affected  people's  perception  of  prices  by  bringing  about  a 
regime change in monetary policy, and have contributed to raising inflation expectations. 
  5 
Second, the main reason for not being able to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent 
despite  such  a  positive  turnaround  in  economic  and  price  developments  is  that  inflation 
expectations, which had increased significantly due to a regime change in monetary policy, 
weakened again. After the introduction of QQE, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI 
reached 1.5 percent in April 2014 and inflation expectations increased steadily. Thereafter, 
however, mainly reflecting weak  aggregate demand following the consumption tax hike, a 
decline in crude oil prices, and the global economic slowdown as well as turmoil in global 
financial markets, inflation expectations started to decline after having been flat for a while, 
with  the  observed  inflation  rate  decreasing.  The  mechanism  of  formation  of  inflation 
expectations in Japan has tended to be largely adaptive after the prolonged deflation, in that 
such expectations are influenced by the course of the past inflation rate. Going forward, in 
order  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  inflation  expectations  need  to  be 
raised once again by adopting more powerful measures. 
 Third,  it  was  made  clear  that,  with  a  combination  of  large-scale  purchases  of  Japanese 
government  bonds  (JGBs)  and  a  negative  interest  rate,  central  banks  can  exert  strong 
downward pressure on the entire yield curve. What used to be regarded as the most effective 
monetary  policy  measure  after  the  short-term  policy  interest  rate  facing  the  zero  lower 
bound  was  the  central  banks'  large-scale  purchases  of  government  bonds  that  directly 
influence long-term interest rates. Based on this recognition, the Bank has been conducting 
JGB  purchases  as  the  main  easing  measure  under  QQE.  Thereafter,  the  European  Central 
Bank  (ECB)  introduced  the  negative  interest  rate  policy  in  2014,  and  other  central  banks 
such as those in Switzerland and Sweden followed suit. This policy seeks the possibility of 
monetary  policy  that  can  lead  to  overcoming  the  zero  lower  bound.  After  analyzing  the 
experiences  of  these  European  economies,  the  Bank  introduced  "QQE  with  a  Negative 
Interest Rate" in January 2016. The experience since then proves that the combination of a 
negative  interest  rate  and  purchases  of  government  bonds  is  effective  in  influencing  the 
entire yield curve. 
 Meanwhile, declines in long- and short-term interest rates to unprecedented levels revealed 
related  side  effects.  One  is  the  effects  on  the  profits  of  financial  institutions.  A  decline  in 
lending rates accompanying monetary easing has been brought about by reducing financial 
 6 
institutions'  lending  margins.  The  other  is  that  an  excessive  decline  in  interest  rates  -- 
especially at the long and super-long end -- will likely lower the rates of return on pension 
and  insurance  products,  leading  to  uncertainty  regarding  the  sustainability  of  financial 
functioning in a broader sense, thereby exerting a negative impact on economic activity and 
inflation expectations through a deterioration in people's sentiment. Against this background, 
with  a  view  to  pursuing  monetary  easing,  it  is  necessary  for  the  Bank  to  facilitate  the 
formation  of  a  yield  curve,  which  is  deemed  most  appropriate  for  achieving  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent, taking account of developments in economic activity and prices 
as well as financial conditions. 
 B. QQE with Yield Curve Control 
In light of these findings of the comprehensive assessment, the Bank introduced "QQE with 
Yield Curve Control." This new policy framework consists of two components. 
 The  first  is  an  "inflation-overshooting  commitment."  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  inflation 
expectations  increased  significantly  after  the  introduction  of  QQE  but  have  remained  in  a 
weakening  phase  since  last  summer  amid  the  headwinds  of  various  developments  in 
domestic and overseas economies. In order to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, 
inflation expectations need to be raised through more powerful means. As described earlier, 
the  comprehensive  assessment  suggested  that  the  combination  of  an  expansion  of  the 
monetary  base  and  a  strong  commitment  is  effective  in  raising  inflation  expectations.  In 
light of this finding, the Bank decided to introduce a more powerful commitment that it will 
continue  expanding  the  monetary  base  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the 
observed CPI exceeds 2 percent and stays above that level in a stable manner. 
 Achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  means  attaining  a  situation  in  which  the 
observed CPI is 2 percent on average over the business cycle. Thus, it naturally is assumed 
from  the  outset  that  there  will  be  phases  when  the  observed  CPI  overshoots  2  percent. 
However,  given  that  there  is  a  time  lag  before  monetary  policy  takes  effect,  it  is  an 
exceptional  and  very  strong  commitment  by  a  central  bank  to  continue  with  monetary 
easing  until  the  observed  inflation  rate  exceeds  2  percent  and  stays  above  that  level  in  a 
 7 
stable manner. The Bank believes that such a clear commitment to expanding the monetary 
base going forward can work on people's perception of prices to a more powerful degree.   
 The  second  component  is  yield  curve  control.  The  Bank  will  facilitate  the  formation  of  a 
yield curve, which is deemed most appropriate for achieving the price stability target of 2 
percent.  Specifically,  in  the  guideline  for  market  operations,  which  is  decided  at  every 
MPM,  the  Bank  sets  the  short-term  policy  interest  rate  and  the  target  level  of  the  10-year 
JGB yields. At present, the former is at minus 0.1 percent and the latter is around 0 percent. 
The  Bank  conducts  JGB  purchases,  aiming  to  achieve  the  target  level  of  the  long-term 
interest  rate  specified  by  the  guideline,  while  providing  the  approximate  annual  pace  of 
increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings. Currently, the approximate amount 
is about 80 trillion yen.   
 On  this  point,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  the  Bank  will  continue  expanding  the 
monetary  base  in  the  future  under  the  new  policy  framework.  The  control  of  long-term 
interest  rates  under  yield  curve  control  is  achieved  through  large-scale  JGB  purchases  by 
the Bank. Moreover, with the inflation-overshooting commitment, the Bank commits itself 
to  continuing  to  expand  the  monetary  base  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the 
observed CPI exceeds 2 percent and stays above that level in a stable manner. Some argue 
that the Bank's policy focus has shifted from quantity to interest rates under the new policy 
framework, but such an understanding is inappropriate. Since the introduction of QQE, the 
Bank  has  been  consistently  pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing  both  in  terms  of  quantity 
and interest rates, and there is no change in its stance. 
 The  Bank  will  continue  with  powerful  monetary  easing  under  "QQE  with  Yield  Curve 
Control," aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. 
Taking  account  of  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices  as  well  as  financial 
conditions, it will take additional easing measures without hesitation if judged necessary to 
maintain the momentum toward achieving the 2 percent target. 
   8 
Concluding Remarks 
In conclusion, let me touch on the economy of Nagasaki Prefecture. Tracing its history, the 
prefecture  has  functioned  for  a  long  time  as  a  foothold  for  cultural  interaction  between 
many  countries,  as  evidenced  by  the  history  of  Dejima,  and  thus  represents  a  variegated 
history  and  culture.  The  prefecture  takes  advantage  of  the  tradition  of  manufacturing, 
particularly of heavy industry including shipbuilding, and distinguished skill and technique. 
It  also  is  endowed  with  tourist  attractions  including  islands,  hot  springs,  and  fresh 
agricultural and fishery products, as well as a fascinating food culture. 
 The  shipbuilding  industry,  which  is  the  key  industry  of  the  prefecture,  is  facing  a  severe 
environment surrounding orders, brought about by chronic excess of vessels globally and by 
sluggishness in the shipping market. There seems to be no influence on business operations 
for the time being as there is a backlog of orders for the upcoming three years or so, but I 
have heard that the local companies, including those engaged in shipbuilding, have started 
to take actions so as to change their business operations. In terms of tourism, the effects of 
the Kumamoto Earthquake have waned from summer, and I have heard that the number of 
visitors to major tourist facilities have picked up. Moreover, efforts have been made steadily 
toward  future  developments  of  the  prefecture,  such  as  the  proposal  of  "Churches  and 
Christian Sites in Nagasaki" for inscription on the UNESCO World Heritage List, Nagasaki 
City  being  chosen  as  a  "tourism  nation  showcase"  by  the  Japan  Tourism  Agency,  and 
initiatives  to  establish  Destination  Management/Marketing  Organizations  for  sightseeing. 
On  the  financial  front,  changes  in  the  business  environment  --  such  as  consideration  on 
integrating  regional  financial  institutions  --  have  emerged  under  the  idea  to  contribute  to 
stimulating the region and vitalizing the local economy amid the situation of a declining and 
aging population. 
 As  for  economic  and  financial  communities  of  Nagasaki  Prefecture,  I  believe  that 
forthcoming  changes  must  be  addressed  appropriately  and  strategically  while  gaining  a 
strong footing. The Bank anticipates that determined efforts will be made in the prefecture, 
and would like to provide as much support as possible going forward as the central bank. 
 Thank you. 
 9 
Japan's Economy and Monetary Policy
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Nagasaki
December 7, 2016
Kikuo Iwata
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices
(as of October 2016)
Chart 1
Note: Figures indicate the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts (point estimates).
Source: Bank of Japan.
1
World Economic Outlook Released by the IMF
Chart 2
Projections for Major Economies
Real GDP Growth Rate
(as of October 2016)
Notes: 1. ASEAN5 are Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Viet Nam.
Notes: 2. Figures in parentheses are the differences from the July 2016 WEO projections.
Source: IMF.
2
Current Profits
Chart 3
Note: Figures for current profits exclude "Finance and Insurance."
Source: Ministry of Finance.
3
Employment and Income Situation
Unemployment Rate and
Job Openings-to-Applicants Ratio
Employee Income
Chart 4
Notes: 1. Q1 = March-May, Q2 = June-August, Q3 = September-November, Q4 = December-February.
Figures for 2016/Q3 are September-October averages. 
Notes: 2. Figures for "employee income" are calculated as the "number of employees" (Labour Force Survey) times "total cash earnings"
(Monthly Labour Survey).
Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare.
4
Private Consumption
Chart 5
Note: Figures for the Consumption Activity Index exclude inbound tourism consumption and include 
outbound tourism consumption. 
Sources:  Cabinet Office; Bank of Japan; Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry; Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, etc.
5
Consumer Prices
Chart 6
Note: Figures for the CPI (all items less fresh food and energy) are calculated by the Research and Statistics Department, Bank of Japan. 
Figures for the CPI are adjusted to exclude the estimated effects of changes in the consumption tax rate. 
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications.
6
Inflation Expectations and Wages
Japan
United  States
Chart 7
Notes: 1. Figures for the CPI in Japan are adjusted to exclude the estimated effects of changes in the consumption tax rate.
2. Figures for the medium- to long-term inflation expectations are the expectations for the CPI 6 to 10 years ahead and are based
on the "Consensus Forecasts."
Sources: Central Labour Relations Commission; Japanese Trade Union Confederation (Rengo); 
Ministry of Internal Affairs and  Communications; BLS; Consensus Economics Inc., "Consensus Forecasts." 
7
Inflation Expectations after the Introduction of QQE
Chart 8
Notes: 1. Inflation expectations of firms, households, and economists are represented by the Tankan, the "Opinion Survey," 
and the "Consensus Forecasts," respectively.
Notes: 2. Semiannual data from the "Consensus Forecasts" up through 2014/Q2 are linearly interpolated. "Opinion Survey" figures exclude 
inflation expectations by respondents whose annual inflation expectations were +5% percent or greater and -5% percent or smaller. 
The output prices DI in the Tankan represents the difference between the share of firms that raised prices in the preceding three months
and the share of firms that lowered prices.
Sources: Consensus Economics Inc., "Consensus Forecasts"; Bank of Japan. 
8
