Jacqueline  Loh:  Shanghai  and  Singapore  -  synergies  amidst  a
dynamic Asian financial landscape
Keynote address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of
Singapore, at the Second Shanghai-Singapore Financial Forum, Shanghai, 30 November 2016.
 Ladies and Gentlemen
Introduction
1     Good afternoon, it is my pleasure to join you at the 2nd Shanghai-Singapore Financial Forum
(SSFF).
2          In  November  last  year,  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  (MAS)  and  the  Shanghai
Municipal Financial Services Office (Shanghai FSO) launched the inaugural SSFF. That was a
significant  and  important  milestone.  As  the  Chinese  saying  goes,  二人同心，其利断金.  The
SSFF  is  more  than  just  a  forum.  It  is  a  reflection  and  commemoration  of  the  longstanding
relationship and cooperation between Shanghai and Singapore. Following last year’s success,
both sides are keen to build on the good momentum achieved and bring our relationship to a
higher plane.
3     The aspirations of both the MAS and Shanghai FSO are reflected in the theme for this year:
“Shanghai  and  Singapore  – A  Partnership  for  a  New Asian  Financial  Landscape” .  Our
hope  is  that  both  cities  can  work  together  to  forge  a  stronger,  more  future-ready  partnership
ahead.  This  is  important  for  both  Shanghai  and  Singapore,  which  are  international  financial
centres in the midst of a rapidly evolving Asian financial landscape.
4     Let me outline briefly what we have achieved together so far and highlight the synergies that
we see ahead for both Shanghai and Singapore.
I. A Strong Foundation for Shanghai – Singapore Partnership
5     Over the years, China and Singapore have developed a strong bilateral relationship. Trade
and economic ties are robust and strong. This is a firm foundation for the Shanghai – Singapore
relationship to grow from strength to strength:
In 2015, Sino-Singapore bilateral trade rose 1.6% year-on-year to SGD 123.5 billion or about
USD  90  billion.  For  the  third  consecutive  year,  China  was  Singapore’s  largest  trading
partner.  Singapore  was  China’s  3rd  largest  trading  partner  in ASEAN .  During  the  same
period, Shanghai – Singapore  bilateral  trade  saw  steady  growth  to  reach  almost  USD  13
billion.
In 2015, Singapore’s investments into China amounted to about USD 7 billion, an increase of
18.5%  from  2014.  For  the  third  consecutive  year,  Singapore  was  China’s  largest  foreign
investor .  Singapore  was  China’s  5th  largest  investment  destination.  Singapore’s  actual
investments into Shanghai expanded an impressive 160% year-on-year to reach USD 2.2
billion in 2015.
1
2
6     In particular, financial cooperation between both countries has thrived. In September this
year,  President  Xi  Jinping  met  PM  Lee  Hsien  Loong  at  the  side-lines  of  the  G20  meetings  in
Hangzhou.  Both  leaders  noted  the  positive  progress  achieved  in  the  latest  government-to-
government (G-to-G) project in Chongqing. Financial cooperation was highlighted as an area that
has  made  strong  headway.  China  and  Singapore  also  achieved  several  new  financial
cooperation milestones in 2016. I would now like to highlight the key initiatives that both sides
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
have delivered this year:
        First, Singapore took key measures to deepen our commitment to China’s markets:
In January this year,  MAS  was  amongst  the  first  group  of  central  banks  and  sovereign
wealth  funds  to  sign  up  to  participate  in  China’s  inter-bank  foreign  exchange  market.  In
addition,  the  third  China-Singapore  government-to-government  project  was  launched  in
Chongqing.
In June this year, MAS announced the inclusion of RMB investments as part of Singapore’s
Official  Foreign  Reserves.  This  was  done  in  recognition  of  the  steady  and  calibrated
liberalisation of China’s financial markets, and the growing acceptance of RMB assets in the
global portfolio of institutional investors.
        Second, we have strengthened supervisory cooperation:
In April, the inaugural China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC)–MAS Supervisory
Roundtable was held to exchange views and perspectives on supervision of capital markets
activities.
In July this year, the China Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC) and MAS organised
our first exchange session to facilitate deeper bilateral discussions in the area of insurance.
        Third, we continued to broaden financial cooperation:
In March,  the  existing  cross-border  RMB  initiatives  in  Suzhou  Industrial  Park  and  Tianjin
Eco-city were expanded to the cities of Suzhou, Tianjin and Chongqing.
In July, MAS’ Managing Director Mr Ravi Menon hosted the Singapore-China (Chongqing)
Financial Conference. The event saw a good response of more than 400 participants.
7          Built  upon  a  bedrock  of  strong  financial  cooperation  ties,  the  Shanghai  –Singapore
partnership has flourished over the years. I foresee that our partnership will receive a boost under
a more dynamic Asian financial landscape.
II. Evolving New Asian Financial Landscape
8     Many observers have expressed their opinion that in recent years, a gradual shifting of the
world’s economic centre of gravity to Asia has taken place. With the shift, many expect a new
Asian Financial Landscape to emerge, presenting tremendous new opportunities ahead. Let us
look at how this financial landscape is expected to evolve:
Asia’s economic size and rate of growth will pack a much stronger punch in the new
era.
In  1990, Asia’s  share  of  global  GDP  was  23.2%.  By  2014,  this  had  increased  to
38.8%, much larger than the shares of the U.S. and the E.U. If current growth trends
3
continue, Oxford Economics forecast that Asia’s share will reach nearly 45% by 2025 .
OECD estimates  that the size of the global middle class will increase to 4.9 billion by
2030. The bulk of this growth will come from Asia. By 2030, Asia will represent almost
two-thirds  of  the  global  middle-class  population  and  almost  60%  of  middle-class
consumption.
4
With increasing economic weight, Asia is expected to play a leading role in global
financial markets. I made similar observations in a speech last week at the ASIFMA Annual
Conference in Singapore:
Equity markets in Asia recorded strong growth over the past ten years. Today, four out
5
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
of the top 10 global exchanges are in Asia  and Asia contributes nearly half of the total
6
number of IPOs globally . 
During the same period, Asia’s bond market has grown at an annualized growth rate of
24%  to  reach  USD  4.7  trillion  in  2015,  accounting  for  9%  of  global  corporate  bond
7
market outstanding volumes .
Some analysts   estimate  that  the size  of  the  financial  system  in Asia  could  reach
USD 200 trillion by 2030. This is four times its current size and more than double the
projected size of the U.S. financial system.
8
Developments  in  global  markets  will  be  increasingly  driven  by  Asia’s  growing
economic and financing needs.
9
10
This is well-evidenced in the wealth management  space. In 2015, as global high net-
worth  individual  (HNWI)  wealth  grew  at  a  modest  4%  globally  and  just  2%  in  North
America, Asia-Pacific wealth expanded by 10%. 2015 also became the year that Asia-
Pacific overtook North America for the first time to become the region with the most
HNWI wealth and population globally . HNWI growth in Asia-Pacific has doubled over
the decade and if the trend persists, Asia-Pacific will represent two-fifths of the world’s
HNWI wealth by 2025.
In infrastructure financing, Asian financial institutions will be well placed to meet the
significant financing needs of around USD 8 trillion of infrastructure projects in Asia, as
estimated by the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
In commodity markets, Asia’s influence has also grown stronger. Demand from the
U.S. used to be the key driver for global oil prices. This is no longer the case. Research
has  shown  that  the  Asia-Oceania  region  is  now  the  world’s  leading  consumer  of
petroleum  and  other  liquid  fuels .  Recognising  this,  CSRC  Vice  Chairman  Fang
Xinghai accurately reflected in May 2016 that China is now “facing a chance of a lifetime
to become a global pricing centre for commodities”
12
.
11
9          The  emerging  trend  highlights  that  Shanghai  and  Singapore  are  facing  an  important
crossroad  ahead.  As  international  financial  centres  in  Asia,  we  can  strategically  position
ourselves  to  play  key  roles  in  shaping  the  new Asian  financial  landscape.  Both  cities  are  the
gateways to two of the most important economic regions in Asia – China and ASEAN:
The China story is a familiar and also fascinating one.
By  2050,  China  could  account  for  one-third  of  the  world’s  economy.  China’s  banking
5
system could grow to become the largest in the world within 4 years by 2020 .
Today,  global  financial  institutions  are  paying  close  attention  to  China’s  increasing
importance in global markets. As China’s financial markets progressively liberalise, their
global influence will likely extend further.
For a start, China’s 10 trillion stock market and 9 trillion interbank bond market, and this
is in USD, will likely be included into global stock and bond indices over the next two
years. Re-balancing of portfolios by global investors will lead to an upsurge of financial
flows into China, enhancing the internationalisation of China’s financial markets.
The ASEAN story is equally compelling as the region transforms into an economic
powerhouse.
With  a  combined  GDP  of  USD  2.4  trillion  in  2015,  ASEAN  was  the  third-largest
13
economy in Asia and the sixth largest in the world . 
ASEAN is the second-fastest growing economy in Asia after China, expanding by 300%
since 2001 . It is the 3rd largest market in the world with 622 million people in 2014
14
15
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
15
16
behind only China and India  and has the third-largest labour force in the world.
Mckinsey  estimates that there are currently 67 million households in ASEAN which
are part of the “consuming class ”. This number could grow to 125 million by 2025.
This means that ASEAN will be a pivotal consumer market of the future.
17
III. Seizing Synergies between Shanghai and Singapore
10          Against  this  backdrop,  Singapore  sees  greater  opportunities  for  collaboration  with
Shanghai. As  international  financial  centres  serving  different  but  complementary  parts  of  the
Asian  financial  system,  there  is  much  scope  for  both  sides  to  explore  common  interests  for
synergies.
11     Shanghai remains at the forefront of China’s financial reforms. Continuous strong pace of
financial development and innovation is a hallmark of Shanghai’s success. To cite a few note-
worthy  initiatives:  (i)  a  Shanghai  Free  Trade  Zone  (FTZ)  bonds  pilot  scheme  was  recently
19
announced ; (ii) the Shanghai Insurance Exchange was successfully launched in June 2016 ;
20
and (iii) the China Internet Finance Association was established in Shanghai in March 2016 .
These initiatives demonstrate that Shanghai is a role model in pioneering financial innovation in
China.
18
12          Going  forward,  I  see  strong  potential  for  Shanghai  and  Singapore  to  synergize  and
collaborate in a few areas:
(i)  Collaborating  with  Shanghai Authorities  on  Free  Trade  Zone  and/or  Pilot  Financial
Policies
During  their  meeting  in  Hangzhou,  President  Xi  remarked  to  Prime  Minister  Lee  that
Singapore could play “a useful role” in China’s newly announced FTZs. Singapore could also
be a strategic partner to pilot financial policies implemented in the Shanghai FTZ.
As a key offshore RMB centre, Singapore has always been supportive of China’s financial
liberalisation  and  internationalisation  policies.  Singapore  financial  institutions  are  keen  to
work with Shanghai authorities and financial institutions. Their deep international and ASEAN
experiences could contribute to effective calibration of the pilot schemes.
Some  good  examples  of  Singapore’s  involvement  in  implementing  pilots  include  the
following:
In  February  2014,  shortly  after  PBOC  announced  its  support  for  more  cross-border
RMB transactions in the Shanghai FTZ, ICBC Singapore made two cross-border RMB
loans to firms based here in the Shanghai FTZ.
In October 2015, DBS China was among the first batch of banks selected to participate
in the Shanghai-based Cross-Border International Payment System (CIPS).
Beyond banking, Singapore capital market players can also work with Shanghai authorities
to pilot financial policies related to the asset management and securities sectors.
(ii) Belt-and-Road Partnerships
China’s Belt-and-Road Initiative (BRI) offers another important area of collaboration between
Shanghai  and  Singapore.  This  will  also  contribute  to  the  fulfilment  of  China’s  national
objectives. Shanghai could tap on Singapore’s role as a regional infrastructure-financing hub
in  ASEAN  to  jointly  access  infrastructure  opportunities  in  the  region.  Additionally,  both
financial  centres  can  work  together  to  develop  innovative  capital  market  solutions  for
infrastructure projects in China, ASEAN and in third countries.
Key financial institutions in China are already working closely with Singapore on this front.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
They have significantly scaled up their BRI-related activities in Singapore over the past two
years. China and Singapore financial institutions are tapping on each other’s strengths to
help Chinese firms “go out”. For example:
In  June  2015,  Bank  of  China  (BOC)  issued  four  currency  “Silk  Road”  bonds  in
Singapore, which included a SGD 500 million tranche and a RMB 5 billion tranche.
In  August  2016,  China  Construction  Bank  (CCB)  listed  its  first  RMB  1  billion  BRI
infrastructure bond on the Singapore Exchange (SGX).
In  September  2016,  Industrial  and  Commercial  Bank  of  China  (ICBC)  signed  an
agreement with the Singapore Exchange (SGX) to support Chinese companies looking
to  list  equities  or  bonds  on  SGX.  Both  parties  will  also  explore  collaboration  in
derivatives  trading,  bond  trading  and  market  making  of  RMB-denominated  contracts
listed on SGX.
Since November 2015, three  of  China’s  top  four  banks  (ICBC,  CCB  and  BOC)  have
signed  MOUs  with  International  Enterprise  Singapore  to  deepen  BRI  partnerships  in
ASEAN. These MOUs brought in more than SGD 90 billion worth of financing for BRI-
related  projects  and  to  support  Chinese  and  Singapore  firms  investing  into  BRI
countries.
I am confident that opportunities abound for Shanghai and Singapore to deepen collaboration
on  this  front.  I  believe  that  BRI-related  cooperation  between  both  financial  centres  will
become a distinguishing mark of the new Asian financial landscape ahead.
(iii)  Working  Together  on  Future-Ready  Initiatives  in  the  area  of  Financial  Technology
(FinTech):
21
22
Both  Shanghai  and  Singapore  recognise  the  vital  importance  of  harnessing  new  financial
technologies for sustainable growth of their financial sectors. This is a critical ingredient for
future-ready international financial centres in Asia. Shanghai is already home to some of the
largest FinTech firms in the world . It is proactively taking measures to achieve its vision of
becoming a global centre of innovation, science and technology (IST), which will also bring
synergies between the financial and IST sectors.
Singapore, meanwhile, is committed to building a Smart Financial Centre where technology
and digitisation is pervasive in the financial sector and beyond . MAS has rolled out a range
of initiatives with strong government support designed to grow and anchor a rich and diverse
FinTech  ecosystem  in  Singapore.  There  are  now  more  than  200  FinTech  start-ups  in
Singapore and a vast majority of them have opened in the past two years. According to a
KPMG report in July, this was the fastest growth rate in Asia. In September, Singapore tied
with London for pole position as a FinTech hub in a Deloitte report
There  is  much  that  Shanghai  and  Singapore  can  work  together  on  in  terms  of  FinTech.
While  some  start-ups  or  tech  companies  aim  to  disrupt  or  dis-intermediate  the  financial
services industry, there are many others that want to work alongside financial institutions.
Singapore, being home to more than 20 global financial institutions’ innovation labs, offers a
window for these companies to work with these institutions and gain global market access.
Singapore, as a gateway to ASEAN and India and as a leading FinTech hub, is an ideal place
for Shanghai-based FinTech firms to expand into as part of their internationalisation plans.
Finally,  Shanghai  and  Singapore  authorities  can  also  share  knowledge  in  relation  to
balancing  FinTech  innovation  with  prudent  regulation,  governance  and  importantly,  risk
management, while nurturing progressive FinTech communities in both centres.
23
.
IV. Conclusion
13     MAS and Shanghai FSO are honoured that a distinguished line-up of panel speakers from
Singapore  and  Shanghai  have  agreed  to  join  us  today.  I  am  confident  that  you  will  enjoy  the
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
interesting and important topics for discussions, presented with insightful perspectives. Let me
end here with another Chinese saying 双轨并进，共创前程. I look forward to MAS working closely
together  with  the  Shanghai  FSO  and  the  industry  to  make  the  Shanghai-Singapore  Financial
Forum even better in the future. On this note, I wish you a very fruitful forum ahead. Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Singapore was China’s 10th largest trading partner in 2015, globally. 
Singapore was China’s 2nd largest external investor (after Hong Kong) in 2015.
Oxford Economics, Global Economic Databank, November 2015
oecdobserver.org/news/fullstory.php/aid/3681/An_emerging_middle_class.html
WFE 2015 and 2006 data
EY global IPO Trends 2015 and PWC Asia IPO Survey Report 2007–2011
Dealogic data
Based on a March 2014 report by ANZ Research titled “Caged Tiger: The Transformation of the Asian Financial
System”. bluenotes.anz.com/posts/2014/03/unleash-the-tiger/
Statistics are based on Capgemini’s 20th World Wealth Report released in June 2016.
Asia-Pacific held USD 17.4 trillion in wealth with a 5.1 million HNWI population compared to North America’s
USD 16.6 trillion in HNWI wealth and 4.8 million in population.
US Energy Information Administration, Short-term energy outlook (Table 3d), November 10, 2015.
CSRC Vice Chairman Fang Xinghai made these remarks at the Shanghai Futures Exchange annual conference
in May 2016.
asean.org/storage/2015/11/AECat-a-glance-2016_web_version2.pdf
www.usasean.org/why-asean/asean-economy 
“Fact Sheet on ASEAN Economic Community (AEC)” published by ASEAN Secretariat, December 2015.
www.mckinsey.com/industries/public-sector/our-insights/understanding-asean-seven-things-you-need-to-
know 
Households  with  incomes  exceeding  the  level  at  which  they  can  begin  to  make  significant  discretionary
purchases.
Recently, Shanghai FTZ launched a pilot scheme to give foreign investors greater access to RMB-denominated
bonds in the FTZ. The Shanghai government will soon issue the first batch of FTZ bonds worth RMB 3 billion.
The Shanghai Insurance Exchange, China’s first insurance asset trading platform was launched in June 2016.
With an aim of improving insurance asset management channels, its first two insurance asset products were
launched a few weeks ago.
In March 2016, the China Internet Finance Association was established in Shanghai by the People’s Bank of
China. This is the highest-level national self-regulatory organisation for the burgeoning internet finance sector in
China. 
3 of the top 5 FinTech companies globally (ranked by FinTech Innovators) are based in or near Shanghai. Top-
ranked Ant Financial is based in Hangzhou, while 4th ranked Lu.com and 5th ranked ZhongAn Insurance are
based in Shanghai itself.
For example, one strategic thrust is to help businesses digitise their processes and integrate them with electronic
payments solutions, so as to maximise productivity and efficiency gains.
Based on Deloitte’s report released in September 2016 titled “Connecting Global FinTech: Hub Review 2016”.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
