  Sabine Lautenschläger: Two years and three days of European banking 
supervision – what has changed? 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, 
at  the  Banking  and  Corporate  Evening  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s  Regional  Office  in 
Bavaria, Munich, 7 November 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Do you remember 28 June 2012? 
On  that  day  –  which  was  a  Thursday,  by  the  way  –  a  new  parliament  was  elected  in 
Mongolia,  while,  in  Berlin,  the  Bundestag  approved  a  draft  law  on  the  taxation  of  sports 
betting.  Forest  fires  were  raging  in  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  was  being 
battered by storms. Here in Munich it was close to 26°C with intermittent clouds. 
You probably don’t remember any of that. But perhaps you do remember what happened in 
Brussels on 28 June 2012. There, the EU Heads of State or Government were meeting to 
discuss  the  crisis  in  the  euro  area,  which  had  then  reached  a  new  climax.  This  meeting 
resulted  in  a  decision  to  create  a  European  supervisory  authority  –  a  “single  supervisory 
mechanism” as it was called in the summit statement. 
Things  moved  quickly  after  that.  Barely  two  years  later,  on  4  November  2014,  the  ECB 
officially  assumed  responsibility  for  banking  supervision  in  the  euro  area.  Today,  it  is 
therefore two years and three days since European banking supervision was established. 
And the question this evening is: what has changed since then? 
European banking supervision has arrived 
What  has  fundamentally  changed  is  that  banks  in  the  whole  of  the  euro  area  are  now 
supervised  based  on  the  same  high  standards  –  as  objectively  as  possible,  not  through 
national lenses, and following the principle of “same business, same risk, same supervision”. 
That  increases  the  stability  of the  banking  sector  over  the  long  term,  helps  rebuild  trust  in 
European banks and contributes to fair competition. 
Have we already achieved everything that European supervision was supposed to achieve? I 
think  we’ve  come  a  long  way  in  the  last  two  years  and  three  days,  but  we  have  not  yet 
reached our goal. 
I’d  like  to  go  into  two  important  topics  in  more  detail,  since  here  in  Munich,  the  capital  of 
Bavaria, it’s also okay to blow your own trumpet sometimes. 
First, we have developed a common methodology for the most important banking supervision 
tool:  the  Supervisory  Review  and  Evaluation  Process,  referred  to  by  the  experts  as  the 
SREP. 
We currently carry out the SREP for the 129 biggest banking groups in the euro area. These 
are the banks that are directly supervised by the ECB. We scrutinise each and every one of 
these banks and determine their risk profile. We are extremely thorough and comprehensive: 
we  look  not  only  at  the  amount  and  quality  of  capital  and  liquidity,  but  also  at  the 
corresponding risk management, as well as the business model and governance. 
Based on this, we determine how much supervisory capital the bank should hold – this is in 
addition  to  the  regulatory  capital  already  required.  We  also  set  the  bank’s  supervisory 
liquidity requirement. And if necessary, we can take additional, specially tailored measures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Bank  supervisors  across  the  whole  euro  area  are  therefore  now  working  using  the  same 
methodology  –  a  methodology  which  combines  the  knowledge  and  experience  of  the 
supervisor with the analysis of hard data. 
This  is  where  we  benefit  from  the  fact  that,  as  European  supervisors,  we  are  supervising 
more banks and therefore have access to a wider set of data than the national supervisors 
had for their national banking sector. 
For example, we can create groups of comparative institutions for almost all banks and lines 
of  business,  across  the  whole  euro  area.  This  makes  it  possible  to  conduct  comparative 
analyses,  which  help  us  to  assess  business  activities,  such  as  leveraged finance,  and the 
related  internal  bank  management more quickly  and  accurately  as  well  as  to  identify  risks 
early on. We made great progress in this last year. 
And we have not only developed a single SREP methodology. We have also harmonised the 
way in which euro area supervisors exercise the national options and discretions provided for 
in the banking regulation. We have agreed to use this room for manoeuvre in a uniform way. 
Anything else would be unthinkable for a European supervisory body which has the principle 
of equal treatment in its mandate. 
That was an important step, but we still need to do more. In many cases, banking regulation 
continues to be very nationally focused. This is partly because quite a number of European 
rules still need to be transposed into national law and the way in which this is done can look 
quite different in France compared with Germany or Spain, for instance. 
Differences in the regulation applicable to systemically important banks, such as differences 
in  risk  management  requirements  for  investment  banks  depending  on  their  home  country, 
don’t make sense. It only makes sense to have different rules if national specificities create 
risks that need to be assessed differently. Because the principle of “the same supervision for 
the same business and the same risk” does not mean taking a “one size fits all” approach 
just for the sake of it. 
By way of illustration, let me give you an example of differences that do not make sense and 
that  make  our  lives  as  European  supervisors  very  difficult.  Banking  supervisors  assess 
whether  candidates  for  banks’  governing  bodies  are  “fit  and  proper”.  This  is  an  important 
task, but the rules underpinning it vary considerably across countries. 
In  some  countries,  for  example,  it’s  not  only  candidates  for  the  governing  bodies  that  are 
assessed, but also those for key positions at the levels below. 
In  some  countries,  a  candidate  is  not  considered  fit  and  proper  if  he  or  she  has  been 
convicted  in  the  court  of  first  instance  of  offences  against  property;  in  other  countries  this 
only applies to convictions for specific offences against property and only if it is a judgement 
from the court of last resort. 
In  some  countries,  the  candidate  is  not  allowed  to  take  up  the  new  position  until  the 
supervisor has approved it; in other countries, the candidate can take up the position even 
before the documents needed for the assessment have been provided. 
These  regulatory  differences  are  an  obstacle  to  a  common  market.  Not  only  that,  it  also 
means we are obliged to take into account 19 different procedures instead of one common 
one. That is bureaucratic and expensive. If politicians are serious about the banking union 
and the single banking market, they must commit to removing these “unjustified” differences 
in banking regulation. 
So  much  for  regulation,  let’s  come  back  to  supervision.  Of  course,  European  banking 
supervision  first  and  foremost  affects  the  129  large  banking  groups  that  are  directly 
supervised by the ECB – for them, quite a few things have changed. 
For the roughly 3,200 smaller banking groups, at first glance it would seem that not so much 
has changed; they continue to be supervised by the national supervisors. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  If  you  look  again,  though,  you’ll  see  that  progress  has  been  made  in  the  supervision  of 
smaller banks as well. Together with the national supervisors, we have developed a range of 
common standards that provide a kind of tool set that all supervisors can use and which are 
intended to help them in their daily work. 
We are currently working with the national supervisors on developing a SREP methodology 
for smaller banks. We are building on some of the experiences gained and solutions found 
during the harmonised SREP for the large, internationally active banks, though of course this 
will be a much slimmed-down version that takes the features of smaller banks into account. 
Of course, national supervision can also benefit from the additional knowledge provided by 
European supervision. This ranges from the exchange of information on acute risks, through 
to the question of how smaller banks in other countries have developed structurally and what 
that could potentially mean for the domestic banking sector. 
There are two things about the supervision of small and medium-sized institutions I’d like to 
clarify, though. 
First: we are not trying to make one size fit all by replacing national supervisory approaches 
with  a  European  one.  We  are  more  interested  in  making  sure  that  there  are  minimum 
standards in place for the core elements of supervision. 
Second: we are also not trying to make one size fit all by making national supervisors treat 
small  banks  in  the  same  way  as  large  ones.  The  principle  of  proportionality  is  absolutely 
sound; smaller banks generally represent a smaller risk and therefore do not need to be as 
strongly regulated or intensively supervised as large banks. 
So European banking supervision has changed a few things for banks – a bit more for the 
large ones and a little less for the smaller ones. But what about the bank supervisors? The 
world has also changed for them. They have been thrown into an international environment; 
they  have  to  bring  together  different  supervisory  cultures  and  become  familiar  with  new 
processes and ways of working. 
This is a challenge and a lot of work, but it is also a wonderful opportunity. We are seeing a 
European  supervisory  culture  gradually  form,  supported  by  a  community  of  European 
supervisors. In my view, banking supervision is already a good example of how cooperation 
in Europe can work. 
Without question, we can and must improve our methods and processes even further, and 
we are currently working on doing that. But if you consider the fact that European banking 
supervision has only just celebrated its second anniversary, it has already made quite some 
progress in its early years and has had to grow up quickly. As part of the banking union, it 
contributes to creating a level playing field for banks. These are the foundations on which a 
European banking market can be built. That’s our vision. 
The European banking sector – still in the making 
In a European banking market, banks would offer their products and services across borders 
and enjoy the benefits of a large marketplace. At the same time, borrowers and savers could 
choose  from  banks  across  the  entire  euro  area  and  be  sure  that  all  of  these  banks  are 
supervised  according  to  the  same  high  standards.  Risks  would  be  spread  more  widely, 
making the banking sector more stable. It would also be better at allocating capital to where it 
is of the most benefit, which would in turn help the economy. 
In  any  case,  we’re  not  there  yet.  During  the  crisis,  the  banking  markets  in  the  euro  area 
drifted apart somewhat and have not really come back together since then. That being said, 
they appear to have started moving closer together again since the end of 2012. But we can’t 
yet speak of a single banking market in the euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  One indication of this is, for example, the fact that interest rates on savings still vary across 
countries – even if they are gradually adjusting. We see a similar picture if we look at quantity 
rather than prices. Only a small part of all loans are extended across borders, and savings 
are rarely deposited across borders. 
The banking union is laying the groundwork for a European banking sector, but in order for it 
to  flourish,  more  needs  to  be  done.  Think  about  all  the  other  areas  of  legislation  that  are 
important for the banking business – insolvency law, for example, or tax law. Here, there are 
still many differences that stand in the way of a European banking market. And even if all of 
these obstacles are eliminated at some point, a European banking market won’t be created 
overnight. 
So, currently there is no truly European banking market and it looks set to stay that way for 
the foreseeable future. There is European banking supervision, however; and that is already 
a substantial achievement. 
The situation in the banking sector – challenges... 
Prior to November 2014, bank supervisors for the most part only looked at their respective 
national  banking  sector.  Now  we  look  across  national  borders  at the  entire  euro  area. We 
see  the  whole  picture  –  we  can  compare  banks  and  their  business  activities  and  identify 
common problems. 
But  what  is  the  current  state  of  the  banking  sector?  Let’s  look  first  at  the  positive 
developments. In the past few years, euro area banks have become more resilient. The most 
important safety buffer for institutions – namely, equity capital – has increased significantly in 
recent years. The core capital ratio of the large European banks has increased by half in just 
four years – from 9% in 2012 to 13.5% today. 
Banks therefore have a bigger and better buffer to protect themselves against losses. The 
most  recent  stress  test  confirmed  again  that  European  banks  would  be  able  to  withstand 
even a severe economic crisis. 
But  that  doesn’t  mean  that  bankers  and  supervisors  can  put  their  feet  up  and  close  their 
eyes. Then they would lose sight of all the challenges banks must face. 
And this is where it is clear how fragmented the European banking market still is. Some of 
the imminent challenges affect all banks, others affect banks with certain business models or 
mainly affect banks in certain countries. 
What  many  euro  area  institutions  are  suffering  from  is  an  almost  chronic  weakness  in 
earnings. 
The  average  return  on  equity  of  the  large  euro  area  banks  is  just  under  6%,  while  the 
estimated cost of equity is above 8%. This barely sustainable ratio of returns to costs is the 
reality in most euro area countries, including Germany – here, returns are even below the 
European average. 
These weak earnings are not only a cause for concern for bankers, but for us supervisors, 
too,  because  only  profitable  banks  can  conclude  enough  new  business,  build  up  sufficient 
buffers for the risks they take on and still be attractive to investors. 
So why is it that banks’ returns are so low? Many in this country – bankers as well as some 
politicians – would answer “because of strict regulation and low interest rates”. Let me say 
immediately  that  anyone  who  is  satisfied  with  this  answer  is  overlooking  a  few  things  – 
intentionally or not. 
Let’s start with regulation. It is indeed true that regulation has become stricter since the crisis. 
And it’s true that banks have to put in a lot of effort to adapt to the new rules. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  And yet: as a supervisor I look at the new regulatory framework in a rather favourable light – 
as do taxpayers and all those who suffered during the recent crisis. Because if we talk about 
the cost of regulation for banks, we also have to speak about the cost of crises for others. 
That  throws  a  different  light  on  the  discussion  and  even  gives  reason  to  believe  that  the 
banks themselves ought to look a bit more favourably on the regulation. Because they, too, 
suffered as a result of the crisis. In addition, better regulation helps them to rebuild the trust 
that was lost in the crisis. 
But  one  thing  is  clear:  the  regulatory  framework  cannot  be  so  tight  that  banks  suffocate. 
What we need are rules that provide stability without making it impossible to finance the real 
economy at prices that take adequate account of the risk. That is a key criterion – especially 
in a country like Germany, where so many companies rely on bank loans for funding. 
We have been working on this regulatory framework, referred to at the global level as Basel 
III, for several years now. In order to give banks certainty about the future rules, we should 
complete this work now. 
And  we  must  complete  it  at  the  global  level.  Markets  and  market  participants  are 
interconnected. The resulting risks do not stop at national borders. That’s why  we need to 
agree  on  minimum  standards  at  global  level,  at  least  for  systemically  important  banks. 
Moreover,  investors  in  European  banks  are  guided  by  compliance  with  global  rules.  The 
banking system is global and needs a global regulatory framework – anything else would be 
a step backwards. 
So much for regulation. Let’s turn now to the low interest rates. 
The  discussion  around  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  has  been  particularly  loud  and 
emotional in Germany. There are two reasons for this. 
First of all, Germany has a particularly large number of banks whose business models are 
very dependent on interest rates. For the smaller institutions, net interest income makes up 
almost 60% of their operating result – though the figure for large banks is not much lower. 
Second, German savers usually put their money in bank accounts and rarely invest in the 
capital market – meaning that savers’ business model is also very dependent on the interest 
rate. 
That  being  said,  in  my  opinion,  the  debate  in  Germany  has  been  rather  one-sided.  The 
prevailing view here seems to be that the ECB is wilfully implementing a monetary policy the 
only effect of which is to harm banks and savers – especially German banks and savers. 
I’m not really known to be particularly doveish; quite the opposite, in fact. However, when it 
comes to “low interest rates”, I need to clarify three things that have been neglected in the 
German debate. 
First, the ECB does not set interest rates arbitrarily. The rates always reflect the economic 
situation,  which  is  influenced  by  things  outside  the  scope  of  monetary  policy,  such  as  tax 
policies,  fiscal  policy  and  structural  reforms,  which  secure  the  future  sustainability  of  the 
national economy. It is therefore short-sighted to hold the ECB alone responsible for the low 
interest rates. That’s a bit like blaming the dentist because he has to give you another root 
canal. 
Second,  what  would  happen  if  interest  rates  were  to  go  up  now?  The  recovery  would  be 
stifled, unemployment would increase and inflation would fall. Would that help savers, most 
of whom are also employees? Would that help banks, whose returns and impairment losses 
depend on how well the economy performs? I don’t think so. 
Third, low interest rates are only partly a cyclical, or temporary, phenomenon. In fact, interest 
rates have been falling for several decades now, worldwide. This is the result of structural, or 
long-term,  developments.  One  example  is  demographics:  ageing  societies  save  more,  the 
supply of savings increases, the interest rate falls. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  In  summary,  the  phenomenon  of  low  interest  rates  is  more  complex  than  the  debate  in 
Germany would suggest. 
But that doesn’t change the fact that I’m very sceptical as far as further interest rate cuts or 
additional expansionary monetary policy measures are concerned – over time, the benefits of 
these measures decrease, while the risks increase. 
And of course it doesn’t change the fact that low interest rates, just like stricter regulation, 
represent a challenge and a strain for the banks. 
But  –  and  this  is  the  next  important  point  –  they  are  not  the  only  challenges.  The  weak 
earnings of several European banks are down to more than just stricter regulation and low 
interest rates. 
In addition to interest income, fee income is the most important source of income for most 
banks.  And  this  part  of earnings,  which  is  not  dependent  on  interest rates,  is  also  coming 
under pressure – since last year the net fee income of large euro area banks has fallen by 
almost 7%. 
Structural  developments  are  playing  a  role  here,  too.  One  example  is  the  capital  market 
business:  institutional  investors  are  becoming  increasingly  interested  in  simple,  passive 
investment  strategies.  From  the  banks’  perspective,  this  is  of  course  a  problem,  since  the 
simpler the product requested by the customers, the lower the commission for the bank. 
And while we’re on the subject of banks’ earnings, we must also speak about their costs. As 
every businessman or woman knows, a company’s profits don’t depend only on turnover, but 
also on costs. And costs for European banks are still comparatively high. For each euro they 
earn, they must spend almost 65 cent – for German banks, it is as much as 72 cent. 
Banks’ earnings are therefore relatively low, while their costs are relatively high. 
At  the  same  time,  some  banks  in  Europe  are  still  encumbered  with  legacy  assets  –  non-
performing loans, for instance. Non-performing loans not only weigh on banks’ earnings, they 
also limit their ability to extend new loans. So in some parts of the European banking sector, 
such loans are contributing to the weakness in earnings as well as limiting investment and 
economic growth. 
If  we  look  beyond  individual  banks,  we  can  identify  another  cause  of  the  weakness  in 
earnings. European banks have to survive in a market characterised by overcapacity – there 
is often talk of “overbanking”. That doesn’t necessarily mean there are too many banks or 
that banks are too big. What it means in general is that there is an oversupply of banking 
products. Competition is therefore tough, which puts pressure on earnings. 
This is clearly not sustainable – especially if banks’ earnings are coming under pressure from 
other  directions.  In  a functioning market,  overcapacity  should  disappear  over  time  –  either 
because weaker banks exit the market, or because banks merge. 
We  can  thus  expect  the  market  to  consolidate.  We  are  already  seeing  some  initial, 
sometimes  tentative,  signs  of  this,  especially  in  countries  whose  banking  systems  are  still 
very fragmented, namely Germany, Austria and Italy. 
But the market is also changing for other reasons. Digitalisation has set off a technological 
transformation  that  could  fundamentally  change  the  banking  business  and  the  banking 
market. 
The  former  chairman  of  the  US  central  bank,  Paul  Volcker,  once  said  the  last  meaningful 
invention in the financial sector was the ATM. In some ways, digitalisation is now taking the 
principle of ATMs a step further. Thanks to ATMs, we have access to cash around the clock. 
Thanks to new digital products, we now have access to almost all banking services, from all 
over the world, around the clock. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Digitalisation  is  therefore  changing  customers’  behaviour  and  expectations,  just  like  ATMs 
did.  Today,  would  you  open  an  account  with  a  bank  from  which  you  could  only  get  cash 
during its opening hours and only from the counter? Now, like then, banks do well to adapt to 
their customers’ expectations. 
And  the  competition  doesn’t  sleep.  With  digitalisation,  new  providers,  referred  to  as 
“fintechs”, are making advances in the banking market. They have the technical knowledge 
and the necessary IT systems to both take advantage of and drive forward the digitalisation 
trend. 
A Chinese proverb says: “when the winds of change blow, some people build walls, others 
build windmills”. The fintechs are clearly building windmills; perhaps the banks should too. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  European  banks  are  suffering  from  weak  earnings,  the  causes  of 
which go far beyond stricter regulation and low interest rates. Banks must clear their balance 
sheets of legacy assets and get their costs under control. But most of all, they need to adjust 
their business models. 
Only then will they be able to restore their profitability, which is in their own interests, in the 
interests of their customers and in the interests of the economy. 
... and risks 
Banks’  business  models  continue  to  be  one  of  the  most  important  topics  for  us  as 
supervisors.  We  are  also  of  the  view  that  some  institutions  urgently  need  to  adjust  their 
business models. 
And when I talk about “adjustment”, I mean sustainable adjustment. Banks could of course 
embark on a search for yield by taking ever greater risks, but this type of adjustment would 
lead straight to new problems – for the bank itself and quite possibly for the banking system 
as a whole. 
Against this backdrop, we take a close look not just at the banks’ business models, but also 
at  their  risk  management.  Good  risk  management  is  crucial  and  it  only  works  if,  first,  the 
decision-making process is properly structured and, second, the decision-makers have the 
right information at their disposal. Governance therefore has to be right, and so does data 
quality. 
We carried out an assessment of the governance of the large euro area banks, the results of 
which were published in June. The banks have already made some improvements, but most 
of them are still a long way from international best practice, so there is some catching-up to 
be done. 
On the issue of data quality, guidance is provided by the principles of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision. We are also taking a close look at this area to assess the extent to 
which banks are following these principles. 
In addition to business models and risk management, there is a third topic that concerns us 
as supervisors, and that is credit risk. I have already mentioned the issue of non-performing 
loans in some euro area countries. This issue urgently needs to be resolved, not only in the 
interests of the banks themselves, but also in the interests of the economy. 
However, non-performing loans cannot be disposed of overnight. It is clear that some banks 
need to clean up their balance sheets, but the speed at which they can do so depends on a 
number of factors. Things like national insolvency law, national rules on realising collateral 
and the effectiveness and efficiency of the judicial system all play a significant role, and they 
do  not  always  foster  the  speedy  reduction  of  non-performing  loans.  Such  a  reduction  can 
also be hampered by a lack of mature markets for non-performing loans. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  For our part, in September we launched a public consultation on guidance for dealing with 
non-performing  loans.  This  guidance  brings  together  recommendations  for  banks  and  a 
number of best practices, and will constitute our supervisory expectations in the future. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, I started my remarks by asking what has changed in the two years 
and  three  days  since  European  banking  supervision  began.  In  answering  this  question,  I 
went  far  beyond  the  topic  of  European  banking  supervision,  as  you  no  doubt  will  have 
noticed. 
The world of banking has indeed changed fundamentally since the crisis, and is still changing 
now.  Banks  have  to  adapt  to  these  changes:  to  European  banking  supervision,  stricter 
regulation, lower interest rates and digitalisation. 
That  is  not  easy,  but  there  is  no  way  around  it.  As  Charles  Darwin  discovered,  it  is  not 
necessarily  the  strongest  or  the  most  intelligent  that  survive,  but  those  who  are  most 
prepared to adapt. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
