   Yves Mersch: Speaking points for an event organised by MNI Connect 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at an event organised by MNI Connect, New York City, 11 October 2016. 
 Euro area economy 
The euro area recovery continues yet remains moderate – with some loss of momentum over 
the third quarter – and uneven. In the first half of 2016, the euro area grew at an annualised 
rate  of  1.7%,  similar  to  last  year’s  growth  rate  and  has  for  the  most  part  been  driven  by 
domestic demand.  
At the same time, the recovery has consistently proved resilient to a series of adverse shocks 
over the past year and so far the flow of data and business confidence indicators suggest that 
any slowdown in growth emanating from the UK referendum should be contained. 
This resilience reflects to a large degree the amount of actual and decided monetary expansion 
that is priced into financial markets. In fact, ECB staff analysis indicates that in the absence of 
our policies, the euro area economy would be notably weaker.  
Propagation mechanism of our recent non-standard monetary policy measures  
The ECB introduced its most recent monetary policy measures starting in June 2014, when 
inflation expectations gave their first initial indication of destabilisation. 
The overarching motivation underpinning their introduction – as well as for all our non-standard 
monetary  policy  measures  -  has  been  to  ensure  the  integrity  of  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism and thereby, deliver on our mandate of an inflation rate of below, but 
close to 2%. 
The  transmission  of  these  nonstandard  measures  through  the  financial  system  to  the  real 
economy  essentially  occurs  via  three  interrelated  channels:  direct  pass-through,  portfolio 
rebalancing and signalling, with each of these three channels re-enforcing each other.  
In terms of the first channel, specific credit easing measures such as the TLTRO I and II as 
well as the ABS and Covered Bond purchase programmes were introduced with the objective 
of directly affecting the funding cost of banks.  
The TLTRO I and II allow all euro area banks to borrow at very low rates – negative at present 
– provided they attain their loan issuance targets. By allowing all euro area banks to take part 
in the TLTRO, it increases competition in the market for bank loans and consequently lowers 
the  borrowing  costs  for  firms  and  households.  The  ABS  and  Covered  Bonds  purchase 
programmes reduce the interest rate paid by the banks on the securities that they originate 
with  a  view  to  incentivising  them  to  issue  more  loans  so  that  they  can  be  subsequently 
packaged into ABS or used as collateral for covered bonds. Overall, these three credit easing 
measures narrow the gap between the cost of borrowing for firms and households and the cost 
of borrowing for banks in financial markets. 
Turning to the portfolio rebalancing channel, the Eurosystem asset purchases compress the 
term  premium  on  long-dated  securities.  This  encourages  a  generalised  shift  out  along  the 
maturity ladder, and down the risk spectrum. In a bank-centred system like the euro area’s 
such a shift takes place primarily on banks’ balance sheets, as the coupon on the securities 
holdings  is  reduced  relative  to  the  risk-adjusted  return  that  banks  can  extract  from  loan 
creation, thus promoting an expansion of credit for the real economy. Our negative deposit 
facility rate enhances a bank’s incentive to reduce its cash holdings in favour of longer-dated 
securities and loans. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   In relation to the third channel, the signalling channel, our purchase programmes and forward 
guidance  have  certainly  influenced  expectations.  In  addition,  the  introduction  of  these 
measures corroborated our reaction function and as a result emphasised our commitment to 
deliver on our mandate of price stability. 
Impact of our measures on financing conditions and growth  
Since their introduction in summer 2014, the impact of our measures on financing conditions 
has been material.  
The GDP-weighted euro area 10-year government bond yield has declined by about 150 basis 
points since June 2014, and the ECB staff estimate that approximately 80% of that decline can 
be attributed to our policy measures. At the same time, yields on bank and non-financial bonds 
have declined notably in response to our measures. Yields on bank bonds have declined by 
about 80 basis points while non-financial bonds have declined by around 100 basis points. 
Credit  spreads  of  sovereigns  are  not  addressed  though,  they  remain  fully  the  outcome  of 
markets’ pricing. 
As a result, bank lending rates to non-financial corporations (NFCs) as well as households are 
now at historical lows and there has been a significant reduction in the fragmentation of lending 
rates across euro area countries as well as for large and small loans. For example, since May 
2014, the cost of borrowing for NFCs in Italy and Spain has declined by more than 160 basis 
points and 140 basis points, respectively. We calculate that a change in lending rates of that 
magnitude in such a compressed period of time would have required a reduction in policy rates 
by  about  110  basis  points  on  average  in  normal  times,  given  the  particularly  inertial 
transmission of policy innovations through the bank lending channel. The euro area banking 
sector is now in a much stronger position to transmit our monetary impulses on account of the 
establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) in 2014. 
The  improvements  are  not  just  visible  on  the  price  side,  loans  to  NFCs  and  households 
continue  to  recover,  notably  in  so-called  core  jurisdictions,  albeit  remaining  weak  from  an 
historical  perspective.  The  latest  Bank  lending  Survey  (BLS)  indicates  that  the  persistent 
easing  of  credit  standards  on  loans to firms  and  households  is to  a  large  extent  driven  by 
increasing competition among banks for good credit, which in turn to a large extent is the result 
of our measures having eased banks’ access to funding and liquidity conditions in general. 
Also encouraging is the ECB survey on the access to finance of enterprises (SAFE) which 
points towards improving credit conditions for euro area SME’s, the bedrock of the euro area 
economy. 
While the impact of our policies on financing conditions has surpassed our expectations, the 
euro area recovery has been sluggish. This can be explained in part with the considerable 
global headwinds, weak world trade and the high public and private sector debt levels sapping 
confidence and eroding especially the elasticity of investment to the borrowing conditions faced 
by  companies. In term of  risks to  the  outlook, they  remain  on the  downside.  However, the 
economy is in far better shape now than it was some quarters ago and it should be noted that 
the risk of deflation today is very low. 
The outlook for a continued yet moderate recovery is largely reflected in the latest ECB staff 
September 2016 macroeconomic projections for euro area activity. Real GDP is projected to 
grow at an annual rate of 1.7% in 2016, 1.6% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018 with this projection 
based on the assumption that the current supportive financial conditions persist. ECB analysis 
suggests that the impact of the measures taken since mid-2014 on euro area real GDP growth 
has  been  sizeable,  increasing  real  euro  area  GDP  growth  by  more  than  one  and  a  half 
percentage points cumulatively between 2015 and 2018. 
The hesitant pace of recovery has weighed on inflation dynamics which remain subdued. We 
expect headline inflation to pick-up in the coming months on account of the base-effects in the 
annual rate of change of energy prices. According to the latest ECB staff projections, inflation 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   is expected to rise to 1.2% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018 with a significant contribution coming 
from our measures taken since June 2014, namely 0.5 percentage points per year.  
Overall, the implementation of our measures has been smooth.  
Some considerations regarding our measures 
Notwithstanding the effectiveness of our measures, we also need to consider their potential 
side-effects. 
A  protracted  period  of  low  interest rates  weigh on  banks’  profitability  via  lower  net  interest 
income and this can potentially impinge on the transmission of monetary policy given the key 
role played by banks. Although, banks on the whole, have been able to weather the declining 
margins by increasing lending volumes, lowering provisioning needs and attaining capital gains 
from their fixed income holdings. That being said, euro area banks need to do their part in 
terms of improving profitability. Such measures include reducing operational costs, a greater 
use  of  financial  technology  and  addressing  the  stock  of  non-performing  loans  in  a  more 
resolute manner.  
We also need to be mindful of the risk that a protracted period of low-interest rate environment 
may create financial imbalances and foster asset price bubbles, particularly in the real estate 
market. While there is no single metric to assess the sustainability of real-estate valuations, to 
date there is no indication suggesting overheating in this sector. 
Role of other policies 
Monetary policy aims to put the economy on a sustainable growth trajectory where cyclical 
slack is reabsorbed. But it is supply-side factors- such as productivity and high quality public 
institutions - which will determine long-run economic growth. Therefore, it is imperative that 
euro  area  governments  implement  a  focused  suite  of  policies  to  boost  long-term  growth 
prospects.  
Fiscal policy needs to play a larger role in countries with fiscal space in supporting the recovery 
than it has to date. All countries should explore ways to enhance the composition of their fiscal 
policies with a view to making it more growth-friendly, especially in the area of taxation and the 
share of public investment.  
There also needs to be greater clarity over the future institutional set-up of the euro area, which 
remains incomplete in key areas, such as banking union.  
Finally, by implementing these policies it will complement our monetary policy measures in 
supporting the recovery and accelerating the return of inflation to values more consistent with 
our aim of price stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
