Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Vítor
Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 8 December 2016.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council,
which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis.
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we today conducted a comprehensive
assessment of the economic and inflation outlook and our monetary policy stance. As a result,
the Governing Council took the following decisions in the pursuit of its price stability objective:
As  regards non-standard monetary policy measures,  we  will  continue  to  make  purchases
under the asset purchase programme (APP) at the current monthly pace of €80 billion until the
end  of  March  2017.  From April  2017,  our  net  asset  purchases  are  intended  to  continue  at  a
monthly pace of €60 billion until the end of December 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any
case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent
with  its  inflation  aim.  If,  in  the  meantime,  the  outlook  becomes  less  favourable,  or  if  financial
conditions become inconsistent with further progress towards a sustained adjustment of the path
of inflation, the Governing Council intends to increase the programme in terms of size and/or
duration.  The  net  purchases  will  be  made  alongside  reinvestments  of  the  principal  payments
from maturing securities purchased under the APP.
To  ensure  the  continued  smooth  implementation  of  the  Eurosystem’s  asset  purchases,  the
Governing Council decided to adjust the parameters of the APP as of January 2017 as follows.
First,  the  maturity  range  of  the  public  sector  purchase  programme  will  be  broadened  by
decreasing the minimum remaining maturity for eligible securities from two years to one year.
Second, purchases of securities under the APP with a yield to maturity below the interest rate on
the ECB’s deposit facility will be permitted to the extent necessary.
The key ECB interest rates were kept unchanged and we continue to expect them to remain at
present or lower levels for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset
purchases. 
Today’s extension of the asset purchase programme has been calibrated to preserve the very
substantial degree of monetary accommodation necessary to secure a sustained convergence
of inflation rates towards levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Together with the
sizeable  volume  of  past  purchases  and  forthcoming  reinvestments,  it  ensures  that  financial
conditions in the euro area will remain very favourable, which continues to be crucial to achieve
our  objective.  In  particular,  the  extension  of  our  purchases  over  a  longer  horizon  allows  for  a
more  sustained  market  presence  and,  therefore,  a  more  lasting  transmission  of  our  stimulus
measures. This calibration reflects the moderate but firming recovery of the euro area economy
and still subdued underlying inflationary pressures. The Governing Council will closely monitor
the evolution of the outlook for price stability and, if warranted to achieve its objective, will act by
using all the instruments available within its mandate.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Real
GDP in the euro area increased by 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter of 2016, following
similar  growth  in  the  second  quarter.  Incoming  data,  notably  survey  results,  point  to  a
continuation of the growth trend in the fourth quarter of 2016. Looking further ahead, we expect
the economic expansion to proceed at a moderate but firming pace. The pass-through of our
monetary  policy  measures  to  the  real  economy  is  supporting  domestic  demand  and  has
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
facilitated  deleveraging.  Improvements  in  corporate  profitability  and  very  favourable  financing
conditions  continue  to  promote  a  recovery  in  investment.  Moreover,  sustained  employment
gains, which are also benefiting from past structural reforms, provide support for households’
real disposable income and private consumption. At the same time, there are indications of a
somewhat stronger global recovery. However, economic growth in the euro area is expected to
be dampened by a sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms and remaining balance
sheet adjustments in a number of sectors.
This assessment is broadly reflected in the December 2016 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.7% in 2016 and
2017,  and  by  1.6%  in  2018  and  2019.  Compared  with  the  September  2016  ECB  staff
macroeconomic projections, the outlook for real GDP growth is broadly unchanged. The risks
surrounding the euro area growth outlook remain tilted to the downside.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation in November 2016 was
0.6%, up further from 0.5% in October and 0.4% in September. This reflected to a large extent an
increase in annual energy inflation, while there are no signs yet of a convincing upward trend in
underlying inflation. Looking ahead, on the basis of current oil futures prices, headline inflation
rates are likely to pick up significantly further at the turn of the year, mainly owing to base effects
in the annual rate of change of energy prices. Supported by our monetary policy measures, the
expected economic recovery and the corresponding gradual absorption of slack, inflation rates
should increase further in 2018 and 2019.
This  pattern  is  also  reflected  in  the  December  2016  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 0.2% in 2016, 1.3% in 2017,
1.5%  in  2018  and  1.7%  in  2019.  By  comparison  with  the  September  2016  ECB  staff
macroeconomic projections, the outlook for headline HICP inflation is broadly unchanged.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) growth moderated in October 2016, with
its annual rate of growth decreasing to 4.4%, after 5.1% in September. As in previous months,
annual  growth  in  M3  was  mainly  supported  by  its  most  liquid  components,  with  the  narrow
monetary  aggregate  M1  expanding  at  an  annual  rate  of  7.9%  in  October,  after  8.4%  in
September.
Loan dynamics followed the path of gradual recovery observed since the beginning of 2014. The
annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations increased to 2.1% in October 2016,
from 2.0% in the previous month. The annual growth rate of loans to households remained at
1.8%. Although developments in bank credit continue to reflect the lagged relationship with the
business  cycle,  credit  risk  and  the  ongoing  adjustment  of  financial  and  non-financial  sector
balance  sheets,  the  monetary  policy  measures  put  in  place  since  June  2014  are  significantly
supporting borrowing conditions for firms and households and thereby credit flows across the
euro area.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from the monetary analysis confirmed the need to take today’s monetary policy decisions so as
to preserve the very substantial amount of monetary support that is necessary in order to secure
a return of inflation rates towards levels that are below, but close to, 2% without undue delay.
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its
accommodative stance supports economic activity. As emphasised repeatedly by the Governing
Council, in order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas
must  contribute  much  more  decisively,  both  at  the  national  and  at  the  European  level.  The
implementation  of structural  reforms  in  particular  needs  to  be  substantially  stepped  up  to
reduce structural unemployment and boost potential output growth in the euro area. Structural
reforms  are  necessary  in  all  euro  area  countries.  The  focus  should  be  on  actions  to  raise
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
productivity and improve the business environment, including the provision of an adequate public
infrastructure, which are vital to increase investment and boost job creation. The enhancement of
current  investment  initiatives,  progress  on  the  capital  markets  union  and  reforms  that  will
improve the resolution of non-performing loans will also contribute positively to this objective. In
an  environment  of  accommodative  monetary  policy,  the  swift  and  effective  implementation  of
structural  reforms  will  also  make  the  euro  area  more  resilient  to  global  shocks. Fiscal
policies  should  also  support  the  economic  recovery,  while  remaining  in  compliance  with  the
fiscal rules of the European Union. Full and consistent implementation of the Stability and Growth
Pact  over  time  and  across  countries  remains  crucial  to  ensure  confidence  in  the  fiscal
framework. At the same time, it is essential that all countries intensify efforts towards achieving a
more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
