Claudia Buch: The Deutsche Bundesbank's 2016 Financial Stability
Review
Speech  by  Prof  Claudia  Buch,  Deputy  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  press
conference to unveil the Deutsche Bundesbank's Financial Stability Review, Frankfurt am Main,
15 November 2016.
Ladies and gentlemen
 I would like to welcome you, on my behalf and on behalf of Andreas Dombret, to the unveiling of
the 11th edition of the Deutsche Bundesbank’s Financial Stability Review.
The stability of the financial system has been the topic of much discussion over the past year.
Interest rates, which have remained low for years, are currently in the focus of the debate. These
low interest rates reflect weak global economic growth. At the same time, they are encouraging
increased risk-taking and an expansion of borrowing.
It is impossible to pinpoint exactly when interest rates will go back up again. Market players are
capable of getting it wrong when it comes to assessing risks and future economic growth. To
illustrate the point, let’s compare this with election forecasts.
Most forecasts got the outcome of the US presidential election wrong: only 11 out of 96 forecasts
predicted  the  election  outcome  correctly.   The  election  forecasts  took  into  account  average
“standard”  forecast  errors  from  the  past.  However,  these  errors  were  exceeded  by  a
considerable margin in the actual election. This is not actually anything to worry about if isolated
errors (eg in individual US states) cancel each other out. However, if all the individual forecasts
are  systematically  biased  in  the  same  direction,  they  won’t  cancel  each  other  out. And  if  all
observers rely on forecasts, this can lead to false certainties.
1
At  this  moment,  if  we  look  at  the  financial  markets,  we  see  a  danger  of  market  participants
holding false certainties – and thus, expecting interest rates to stay low, and asset prices to stay
high,  over  the  long  term,  taking  excessive  risks.  On  the  whole,  risks  could  be  systematically
underestimated, and the value of collateral for lending operations could be overstated.
The surprise that sets in when the opposite occurs is all the greater. In the financial markets,
surprise news leads to abrupt price corrections – as was shown by the markets’ response to the
Brexit vote. Market interest rates can jump up, leading to a significant need for adjustment with
the potential for adverse consequences for the real economy.
Financial stability considerations therefore warrant the build-up of risk buffers so that losses from
unforeseen  events  can  also  be  cushioned.  The  larger  the  risk  buffers  in  the  financial  system
themselves,  the  lesser  the  contagion  effects  and  self-reinforcing  mechanisms  that  are  set  in
motion  whenever  unexpected  events  occur. An  adequate  capital  ratio  thus  will  not  weigh  on
financial institutions and the economy but is instead a precondition for enabling financial markets
to  perform  their  function  for  the  real  economy  and  to  promote  real  economic  growth.  Better
capitalised banks are more competitive and tend to grant more loans.  
1.   Key statements of the Financial Stability Review
Against this background, allow me to summarise the key statements of our report.
1.  In the current macroeconomic setting, there is a danger of risks being underestimated. Low
interest rates, low risk premiums and high valuation levels are affecting all sectors of the
economy  –  firms,  households  and  general  government.  The  incentive  is  there  to  amass
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
more debt. This increases vulnerability to future changes in prices or interest rates.
2.  The current macroeconomic setting can favour a credit-financed real-estate boom. Prices
are rising in the German real-estate sector, and lending is on the rise. However, there are no
acute signs of an easing of credit standards. Preventive measures can mitigate future risks,
though.
3.  Risks are accumulating in financial institutions’ balance sheets. The amount of low-interest
long-term  loans  is  rising,  while  the  share  of  low-yielding  assets  has  increased.  This  is
leading to increased liquidity and interest rate risks. Persistently low interest rates would hit
precisely  those  financial  institutions  whose  business  models  depend  heavily  on  interest
rates.
2.   In the current macroeconomic setting, there is a danger of risks being
      underestimated.
Low interest rates are not a new phenomenon. A trend towards falling nominal and real interest
rates has already been visible since the 1980s. This reflects weak aggregate productivity growth,
the real economic fallout from the financial crisis and the attendant low inflation.  A decisive factor
in the stability of the financial markets is whether yields adequately reflect the underlying risks.
There are signs that risk premiums are too low – thus providing an incentive to take excessive
risks.
Firms’ profits are a reflection of the weak global real economic growth. By comparison, equity
market valuations in Europe are currently close to, and those in the United States above, their
average over the past 10 years. Firms’ weak profitability therefore does not seem to be feeding
sufficiently into market valuations.
If we look at the risk premiums on corporate bonds, we come to a similar conclusion: these, too,
currently do not seem to be sufficiently reflecting the actual risks – measured here in terms of
default rates.
Developments in the German corporate sector are departing from these global trends to some
extent. Gross domestic product (GDP) is forecast to grow by 1.7% in 2016, which is higher than
the country’s potential growth rate.   Insolvency  ratios  are  at  an  all-time  low.  Credit  risks  from
domestic  business  on  German  banks’  balance  sheets  are  commensurately  low. At  the  same
time, liquidity risk and interest rate risk are mounting. Mr Dombret will go into more detail on this
shortly.
2
If assets are mispriced, there is a risk of an abrupt correction. The severity of the consequences
of such a correction correlates with high debt. Debt trends and levels vary considerably between
sectors and regions:
across the globe, sovereign debt has risen since the crisis.
corporate  debt  has  risen  dynamically  over  the  same  period,  especially  in  the  emerging
economies. Household debt here has risen, too, albeit from a low initial level.
whereas households in the United States have deleveraged, household debt in Europe has
fallen only slightly. Germany has also been seeing a trend decline in household debt, which
currently stands at 53% of GDP. The bulk of this debt – around 70% – is for loans for house
purchase.
3.    Low interest rates can fuel a credit-financed real-estate boom.
Loans for house purchase not only make up a major portion of household debt. They are also
significant for banks, as they make up around 50% of lending to domestic households and firms.
At  the  same  time,  international  experience  has  shown  that  credit-driven  real-estate  market
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
overvaluation  –  depending  on  the  structural  situations  in  those  markets  –  has  often  triggered
systemic financial crises.
It is for this reason that our macroprudential oversight pays particular attention to the German
real-estate market. Our first step is to identify the target: to reduce the likelihood and extent of
future  crisis-like  developments.  The  earlier  we  can  detect  distress,  the  earlier  every  individual
player can take countermeasures – by adjusting contractual terms appropriately or by building up
risk buffers.
In a second step, the appropriate indicators have to be identified. Risks to financial stability can
arise if a sharp rise in real-estate prices, a strong expansion of credit volume and an easing of
credit  standards  all  coincide.  This  kind  of  situation  can  occur  particularly  if  many  market
participants have Pollyannaish expectations about the future development of debt sustainability
and do not adequately take into account the possibility of prices falling and interest rates rising.
It is often very difficult for individuals to assess these macroeconomic risks, which can lead to a
diminishing awareness of risk. Under these circumstances, it can be necessary to set minimum
standards for real-estate lending. Before such a – third – step is taken, however, it is necessary
to  assess  the  risk  situation  as  accurately  as  possible.  To  this  end,  the  Bundesbank  regularly
publishes a set of indicators on its website.  Minimum debt sustainability standards should be
imposed only once these indicators begin to show signs of a threat to the stability of the financial
system. In order for such requirements to meet their target and to mitigate side effects, a careful
assessment of the consequences will be necessary. Potential consequences must be assessed
ex ante and, in a fourth step, the impact of these measures has to be analysed as precisely as
possible ex post.
3
However, we’re not quite there yet, which means that priority should be given to observing the
risk situation.
4
Where  is  the  real-estate  sector  in  Germany  headed?  Residential  property  prices  in  Germany
have  risen  sharply  over  the  last  few  years,  particularly  in  the  big  cities,  climbing  by  just  over
5%  in the first half of 2016 alone, and thus more strongly than the general price level, which was
up by +0.3% during the same period (half-year value, measured in terms of the consumer price
index). Inflation was regionally more broad based than in previous years. Since the beginning of
the property market upswing, real-estate prices in the (large) cities have been rising faster than
everywhere else. The disparity between urban and rural areas has been narrowing visibly since
2014, however.
At last report (September 2016), loans to households for house purchase grew by an annual rate
of 3.7%, and thus less sharply than their average since the early 1980s, which is just under 5%.
By comparison, households’ income rose in 2015 by 3.1% – and by 2.3% on an annual average
since 1991. The margin to the rise in households’ income has thus narrowed.
With regard to the last indicator on the list – the development of credit standards for real-estate
loans  –  the  Eurosystem’s  quarterly  Bank  Lending  Survey  is  showing  a  slight  tightening  since
2010. However, a growing percentage of German banks’ loans for house purchase is long-term.
Although this reduces the risks to households of possible changes in interest rates during the
interest rate lock-in period, banks’ interest rate risk increases inversely.
It is impossible to predict when the favourable lending conditions – which are not confined to the
area  of  real-estate  financing  –  will  reverse  themselves. A  hike  in  interest  rates  would  entail  a
decline  in  valuations  and  prices  in  the  financial  markets.  Funding  which,  under  the  current
conditions, seems adequate could prove no longer sustainable.
Each  and  every  individual  market  participant  can  hedge  against  this  scenario  –  through  an
adequate capital ratio and by structuring contractual terms in a forward-looking manner. Financial
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
stability  concerns  also  make  it  necessary,  however,  to  identify  risks  which  could  affect  the
financial system as a whole. These risks are not always visible to individual banks or market
participants. This is the case if, in cases of distress, individual market players are regarded as
being  either  “too  big  to  fail”  or  “too  interconnected  to  fail".  Another  risk  to  financial  stability,
however, can arise if multiple financial institutions are exposed to similar macroeconomic risks
(too-many-to-fail).
Capital  adequacy  is  therefore  the  foundation  of  the  financial  system  and  a  prerequisite  for
cushioning risks – akin to the ability of a bridge to bear a certain load provided it is built out of
stable materials. At the same time, a bridge cannot be too stiff, and it must be supple enough to
offset heavy loads. By  the  same  token,  financial  stability  considerations  make  it  necessary  to
bolster resilience and at the same time maintain the ability to respond to change.
One  type  of  change  addressed  in  this  report  is  the  growing  importance  of  fintechs,  new
technologies  which,  for  instance,  facilitate  direct  lending  through  platform-based  brokerage  or
investment  advice.  New  technologies  can  help  make  the  financial  system  more  stable  by
improving lending and risk dispersion. However, they can also encourage herding behaviour. This
is  why  we  are  keeping  a  very  close  eye  on  these  markets  and  developing  regulatory  criteria
which  strike  a  proper  balance  between  competition  policy,  financial  stability  and  technological
neutrality.
Derivatives trading is another area in which the financial markets are witnessing change. In 2009,
the G20 decided that standardised over-the-counter derivatives should henceforth be traded only
via central counterparties (CCPs). They assume the role of contracting party between the buyer
and seller in a financial transaction and take on the direct counterparty credit risk of their trading
partners.  By  doing  so,  they  can  mitigate  the  potential  for  interbank  contagion.  The  regulatory
focus is on CCPs’ resilience and developing tailor-made recovery and resolution regimes. We
therefore believe it is necessary to further enhance the macroprudential framework for CCPs and
to take suitable measures to ensure sufficient protection against systemic risks.
Much like with bridge-building, it is impossible to calculate the exact level of strain at which the
stability of the system is in danger. But, as early as the construction stage, the engineer will use
a mathematical model and assumptions regarding certain environmental conditions to calculate
plausible values before then factoring in a given safety buffer on either side of these values. The
financial system likewise needs such a safety margin in order to ensure its resilience.
There is a huge incentive to create a stable financial system: the goal is to curtail systemic risk in
order to make financial crises less probable and less severe. Stable financial markets are, above
all,  a  precondition  for  improving  monetary  policymakers’  ability  to  pursue  their  mandate  of
ensuring price stability without conflicting agendas. And, by funding productive investment and
diversifying risk, stable financial markets are particularly conducive to an efficient allocation of
resources.
1
2
3
4
Based  on  the  forecasts  listed  on  the  RealClearPolitics  website  since  the  beginning  of  September
(www.realclearpolitics.com/).
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Monthly Report, June 2016.
See  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  “System  of  indicators  for  the  German  housing  market",  available  online  at
www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Statistics/Enterprises_and_households/System_of_indicators/system_of_indicators.html
Based on information published by the Association of German Pfandbrief Banks; for more information, visit
www.pfandbrief.de/cms/_internet.nsf/0/3E8C426DD5F01DE5C1258067004780AC/$FILE/vdp_Immobilienpreisindex-
vdp_Property_Price_Index_QI2003-QIII2016.xlsx
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
