Yannis  Stournaras:  The  Greek  economy  and  the  contribution  of
tourism to growth
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Conference  of  the
Greek  Tourism  Association  (SETE)  "The  Greek  economy  and  the  contribution  of  tourism  to
growth", Athens, 17 October 2016.
*   *   *
Taking stock of the programme implementation 
We are now a third of the way through the extent of the programme agreed in July 2015 and
ending in June 2018. 
This  agreement  reoriented  economic  policy  towards  realistic  goals  and  came  up  as  the  only
solution in view of the major risks that hanged over Greece in the summer of 2015. 
As an interim stocktaking of programme implementation, our assessment is that progress has
been slow, but with expected positive results: 
The completion of the first review and the recent enactment of the second set of prior actions
have  strengthened  confidence  and  the  prospect  of  economic  recovery.  This  development
brought multiple benefits, which have a positive impact on liquidity and should boost economic
activity in the second half of 2016. 
In particular, following the reinstatement of the eligibility of Greek government bonds as collateral
for Eurosystem operations, Greek banks can now have access to lower-cost refinancing from
the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  which,  combined  with  changes  in  the  domestic  banking
system,  can  translate  into  lower  borrowing  costs  for  businesses.  Moreover,  the  dissipation  of
uncertainty,  the  stabilisation  of  private  sector  deposits  and  the  progress  made  with  the
restructuring of Greek banks have enabled since early June 2016 successive reductions of the
emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) ceiling for Greek banks, by €16.3 billion in total, so that the
ceiling currently stands at €51.8 billion. 
The above developments, coupled with the lifting of restrictions on cash withdrawals when the
funds come from new deposits in cash (new money), should encourage, in the medium term,
the return of deposits to the domestic banking system, which in turn will allow a further easing
and ultimately the elimination of capital controls. 
The  economy’s  gradual  improvement  starts  being  reflected  in  the  course  of  several
macroeconomic indicators. Specifically: 
Industrial  production  rose  by  2.0%  year-on-year  in  January-August  2016,  mainly  due  to  a
significant rise in manufacturing (+4.8% yoy). 
In  July  2016,  the  retail  sales  volume  index  increased  by  9.7%  year-on-year,  while  the
seasonally adjusted retail sales volume index increased by 4.9% month-on-month. 
According  to  data  from  the  ERGANI  information  system  of  the  Ministry  of  Labour,  Social
Security  and  Solidarity,  the  balance  of  salaried  employment  flows  in  the  private  sector  in
January-August  2016  was  positive,  with  the  creation  of  237,817  new  jobs,  up  by  51,793
relative to one year earlier. 
Data from ELSTAT’s Labour Force Survey for the second quarter of 2016 suggest a decline
in the unemployment rate to 23.1%, from 24.9% in the previous quarter and 24.6% in the
corresponding quarter of 2015. 
The forecasts of the Bank of Greece point to economic recovery starting from the second half of
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
2016 and continuing in the years 2017 and 2018. Specifically, a small reduction in the order of
0.3%  in  GDP  is  expected  for  2016,  followed  by  growth  of  2  5%  and  3%  for  2017  and  2018,
respectively. These forecasts are based on the assumption that the reforms and privatisations
agreed between the Greek government and the institutions will be implemented and the relevant
fund disbursements will be completed in time, so as to support liquidity in the Greek economy,
and that the ECB’s monetary policy accommodation will remain in place. 
Regarding the inflation outlook, the downward trend of prices is expected to bottom out in 2016
and be followed by gradual increases in 2017 and 2018. The unemployment rate is expected to
keep falling in 2016, although at a slow pace that should pick up in 2017–2018. 
However, risks to the path of the Greek economy remain. Any delays in the completion of the
second  review,  and  particularly  in  the  implementation  of  reforms  and  privatisations,  would
dampen the increase in economic activity, resulting in a resurgence of uncertainty, undermining
confidence and weakening the prospects for a definitive exit from the crisis. 
Meanwhile,  there  are  still  a  number  of  risks  and  uncertainties  surrounding  the  outlook  of  the
European  and  world  economy,  relating  to,  among  other  things,  the  planned  UK  exit  from  the
European Union (EU) and a possible worsening of the refugee crisis. Also, risks are posed by a
potential surge of protectionism and more simplistic approaches to complex problems, on both
sides of the Atlantic, based on isolationism rather than cooperation and coordination. These risks
could slow the recovery of the Greek economy, through a negative impact on tourism and trade
or a slower-than-expected decline in Greek government bond yields due to risk aversion among
international investors. 
To  address  these  risks  and  confirm  the  positive  outlook,  we  need  to  promptly  and  effectively
tackle a number of major issues lying ahead, which will ultimately determine the outcome of the
programme as a whole and Greece’s ability to regain access to markets thereafter. 
1st Speeding up the implementation of the programme 
The  first  and  most  important  issue  refers  to  commitment  to  the  programme’s  objectives,  in
particular the need to speed up the implementation of the agreed reforms. The next few days will
see the start of the second review, which will be looking at a number of fundamental structural
reforms,  with  expected  positive  effects  on  economic  activity.  The  review  must  be  completed
without any delay. This will allow these positive effects to be felt soon, thereby strengthening the
prospect of growth in the Greek economy at an accelerating pace from 2017 onwards. 
2nd Non-performing loans 
The second, equally serious, issue that represents a challenge for banks, the government and
the  Bank  of  Greece  alike,  refers  to  the  restructuring  of  the  banking  system,  so  as  to  restore
normal financing conditions in the private sector. Strengthening the banking system and freeing-
up resources for financing the economy requires tackling the bulk of non-performing loans as
soon as possible. 
Effective management of non-performing loans is key to both the recovery of credit expansion
and the restructuring of enterprises and sectors across the economy.
 To this end, the Bank of Greece has stepped up its efforts by promoting, in cooperation with the
government, a number of major initiatives, the implementation of which needs to be accelerated
and completed in the coming months. Let me indicatively mention some of these initiatives: 
the development of a secondary market for loans (performing or non-performing); 
the reform of the framework for out-of-court debt settlements; 
the improvement of infrastructure and expertise of the judicial framework; 
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
the legislative reform to ensure that existing shareholders participate in the reorganisation of
companies, or otherwise immediately withdraw. 
In parallel, however, banks need to adopt a more active NPL management policy, focusing on
long-term  solutions,  multi-creditor  workouts  and  restructuring  of  viable  companies,  with  the
participation of shareholders. 
During  the  protracted  period  of  the  crisis,  the  private  sector  has  paid  a  high  toll.  Uncertainty,
crumbling  demand,  funding  constraints  and  high  indebtedness  as  a  legacy  of  the  past  have
driven many companies out of business, thousands of workers to unemployment and the volume
of  NPLs  to  burgeoned  levels. At  the  same  time,  though,  we  also  see  certain  sectors  of  the
economy that have suffered less or no losses from the crisis, but still do not reduce – as one
would reasonably expect – their non-performing loan ratios. 
Regarding the industries that are directly related to tourism (accommodation and food service
activities),  during  the  crisis  their  shares  in  terms  of  both  value  added  and  employment  have
increased. At the same time, however, the non-performing exposures as a ratio of total loans to
these sectors has also risen, to 54.3% at the end of the first half of 2016, a level much higher
than  the  corresponding  NPE  ratio  for  the  total  economy  (45.1%).  This  is  a  phenomenon  that
needs to be investigated and addressed. 
3rd Debt 
The  third  major  challenge  lying  ahead  pertains  to  the  launch  of  in-depth  discussions  with  our
partners on debt relief measures. Debt relief is crucial, in both the long and the short run. For, if
the Greek debt is seen as unsustainable, the country’s predicted exit to markets in 2018 will not
be feasible. Therefore talks have to begin now and conclude as soon as possible. Besides, the
discussion of ways to alleviate the Greek debt is a commitment undertaken by our partners as
early as in 2012, and reaffirmed last May, but not fulfilled as yet.
 *** 
The role of tourism in the new growth model 
Unquestionably, the problems I mentioned are large and hard to solve. But I believe that we can
overcome them, if we act with prudence, determination and mutual understanding. I also believe
that the Greek economy has the ability and the potential to return to a sustainable upward path
through a new extroverted growth model, taking advantage of its strong comparative advantages
and the opportunities presented. In this process, tourism has a key role to play, for the following
reasons: 
It is by definition an extroverted industry. 
It  has  been  comparatively  less  hit  by  the  recession  and  has  preserved  its  productive
capacity. Especially from 2013 onwards, it has shown remarkable growth performance, as I
already mentioned. 
Second, it represents a sizeable share of GDP. In 2015, travel receipts contributed directly
about  8%  of  GDP,  compared  with  5%  in  2008.  In  terms  of  macroeconomic  multipliers,
various studies estimate that every euro in tourist spending adds €2.2-2.6 to GDP. Research
also suggests that the sectors which benefit the most from the development of the tourism
product  are 
financial  services,  property  management,  construction  and
manufacturing. 
As regards the export performance of the economy, for 2014 tourism services represented
roughly 43% of total receipts of the services balance, while net tourism receipts (receipts
minus payments) accounted for 62% of the services surplus. In 2015, due to the negative
impact of capital controls on shipping, the weight of tourism receipts rose to 50.6% in total
trade, 
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
receipts from services, while net tourism receipts accounted for about 71% of the services
surplus. 
Third,  tourism  as  a  business  activity  is  being  modernised,  and  the  quality  of  the  tourism
product is being improved: search for new markets, promotion and exploitation of the cultural
product of Greece, new innovative units, promotion and development of the country’s cities. 
Surveys conducted by the Bank of Greece 
The  Bank  of  Greece  recognises  the  importance  of  tourism  to  the  Greek  economy  and
understands  that  timely  and  objective  information  on  the  development  of  tourism-related
aggregates is essential for fulfilling its mandate. We attach great importance to the collection of
reliable  and  comparable  statistics  over  time  on  the  tourism  sector.  For  this  reason,  we  go
beyond what is required to meet our obligations to the ECB and international organisations, and
collect more thorough and detailed data regarding this sector. 
Since 2002 the Bank of Greece conducts the Border Survey, aiming not only to record inbound
and outbound traveller flows, but also, and most importantly, to calculate travel expenditure in
Greece. The survey on incoming travellers is based on a very large sample, of at least 25,000
inbound  visitors.  The  Border  Survey  is  fully  harmonised  with  the  guidelines  of  international
organisations (IMF, ECB, Eurostat). In particular, the relevant mirror statistics, compiled on an
annual  basis  by  Eurostat  (in  the  context  of  the  Travel  Working  Group),  show  Greece’s  travel
expenditure  and  traffic  data  to  be  fully  consistent  with  the  corresponding  figures  of  the  other
EU28  countries,  with  differences  of  below  2%.  The  Border  Survey,  among  the  most
comprehensive  ones  in  the  EU,  is  conducted  at  the  12  largest  airports  of  the  country,  which
cover around 95% of visitors, at all seaports of entry and at the six main road entry points. The
resulting data are combined with administrative information and regularly cross-checked against
respective  data  from  the  visitors’  countries  of  origin,  so  as  to  ensure  compliance  with  the
standards set for the quality checks carried out by the ECB. 
The  Border  Survey  is  conducted  at  the  time  of  departure  from  Greece,  when  visitors  know
exactly  how  much  they  have  spent  here.  To  calculate  expenditure,  respondents  provide  an
estimate of: (a) their total expenditure; (b) any relevant amounts they have paid in their home
countries (e.g. through a travel agency, directly to an airline, etc.) for transport, accommodation,
other  services  or  a  cruise  package;  (c)  if  possible  and  more  specifically  within  the  previous
category, any amount corresponding to travel costs; and (d) the breakdown of the amount spent
in  Greece  for  accommodation,  cafes  and  restaurants,  transportation,  entertainment,  and
shopping. 
The  Border  Survey  is  conducted  according  to  a  consistent  methodology  over  time  to  ensure
intertemporal comparability, but its content and scope are expanded and adjusted in response to
changes in international rules and to the changing information requirements. Since the beginning
of  2016,  the  Border  Survey  has  included  a  specific  question  about  the  visitors’  geographical
destination within Greece, and the first data should be published towards the end of this year.
This information will be particularly useful in the development of the tourism satellite accounts,
which  is  a  long-standing  demand.  Further  to  the  Border  Survey,  in  2012  the  Bank  of  Greece
launched  a  more  focused  Cruise  Survey.  This  survey,  unique  in  Europe,  relies  mainly  on
administrative  data  from  16  major  ports  that  account  for  85%  of  total  cruise  traffic,  which  –
starting from this year – will be enriched with data from targeted sample surveys. 
Recent developments 
In 2016, Greek tourism faced a number of challenges after a record year in terms of arrivals and
receipts in 2015. Let me recall that in 2015 Greece welcomed over 26 million tourists, 7.6% more
than in 2014, while tourism receipts exceeded €14 billion, rising by 5.5%. In addition to economic
weakness  in  Europe,  where  most  visitors  come  from,  the  refugee  crisis  combined  with
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
geopolitical  developments  in  our  region  and  increased  fears  of  terrorism  have  discouraged
visitors from coming to Greece. It is estimated that during the first half of this year, when the
impact of the refugee crisis was stronger, road arrivals decreased by 15%, while to date flight
arrivals to the islands of the eastern Aegean are particularly reduced. The UK’s decision to leave
the EU has been a further negative factor. In this respect, let me mention that in July, the first
month after the British referendum, the decline in tourism spending by UK citizens in our country
exceeded 35%, whereas previously the British had been one of the most robust categories of
visitors. Without this reduction, total receipts in July would have increased instead of decreasing. 
Tourism stakeholders in our country have tried to respond to external challenges by redoubling
efforts to attract visitors. The number of arrivals has thus remained on an upward trend in 2016
as well. To some extent, however, this was achieved by highly competitive pricing, something
that ultimately had a negative effect on total travel receipts. For the year as a whole, prices are
likely to show a decline, slightly faster than the average rate of decline observed in the last ten
years.  On  a  positive  note,  however,  the  downward  trend  in  average  stay  in  our  country  has
bottomed out, and the first half of 2016 saw a slight increase. 
The differentiation of tourism demand 
The  decline  in  tourism  receipts  despite  the  growing  numbers  of  visitors  is  partly  attributed  to
lower prices, as noted above. However, it also relates in part to a longer-term trend, namely the
decline in spending per visitor and per night of stay, observed in the past few years. Since 2005
such spending has fallen on average by 2.5% annually, coming down to €598 per visitor in July
this year, from €746 in 2005. To some extent this reflects the downward trend in the average
days of stay in the country, from 10.7 days in 2005 to 7.2 in 2015. This is a result of changes in
both the income situation of visitors, as Greece attracts fewer high-income visitors, and the mix
of visitors’ countries of origin, as well as of long-term trends in the global economy, such as the
entry of new competitor countries and the use of the Ιnternet that allows price comparisons and
intensifies competition. Moreover, arrivals, mainly from traditional markets (UK, Germany, etc.)
are close to a saturation point. This means that the tourism growth model has to be adapted,
aimed towards a further improvement in product quality and higher specialisation.
 This would involve: 
Increasing the number of target markets through appropriate marketing policies and market-
specific advertising campaigns. Particular emphasis should be placed on countries with the
highest expenditure per night. 
Extending the tourist season throughout the year, by developing the tourism product beyond
the  traditional  “sun  and  sea”  model,  creating  diversified  products,  focusing  on  alternative
forms  of  tourism  such  as  cultural,  conference,  religious  and  medical  tourism  and  theme
parks.  Particular  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  attracting  visitors  for  short  stays  (city
breaks),  which  are  typically  associated  with  higher  expenditure  per  day  and  are  less
concentrated in peak summer months. 
Establishing Greece as a homeporting and last port country rather than just a port of call for
cruises. 
Reforms 
A crucial contribution in this direction, i.e. towards stimulating and diversifying tourism demand,
will  come  in  the  future  from  the  reforms  undertaken  in  recent  years.  These  reforms  will
strengthen long-term potential growth by removing existing barriers and increasing competition.
Actually,  by  improving  the  long-term  prospects  of  tourism,  such  reforms  have  already  helped
boost investment in high-quality hotels (for instance, between 2009 and 2014 the number of five-
star hotels increased by 34% and the number of beds by 32%). Therefore, the improved future
prospects as a result of reforms should further encourage investment and speed up recovery.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  positive  experience  of  tourism  should  make  all  other  sectors  of  the  economy  equally
receptive  to  reforms  that  enhance  competition  and  extroversion,  and  ultimately  benefit  the
sectors themselves by increasing demand for their products. 
Here are some examples of the reforms already enacted: 
The privatisation of the 14 regional airports, which will strengthen their competitive position
and enable the development of new tourist facilities with direct flight connections to the cities
of departure. 
The simplification and acceleration of the tourist visa procedure for visitors from emerging
market economies (Russia, Turkey, China). 
Regulatory  reforms  such  as  the  removal  of  cabotage  restrictions,  which  have  already
encouraged the development of cruise tourism. 
Setting  up  a  “one-stop  shop”  service  by  the  Greek  National  Tourism  Organisation  for  the
promotion and licencing of large tourism investments. 
Simplification  of  the  licensing  procedures  of  all  tourism  businesses  in  order  to  reduce
administrative  costs  and  licensing  lead  times,  speeding  up  the  procedures  for  starting  a
tourism business (which refers to any type of license, such as installation, operation, taking
up  of  business  and  environmental  permits),  and  processing  of  licensing  applications
electronically and, in some cases, on the same day.
 Development of a new form of integrated tourism companies, i.e. tourist complexes. These
refer to five-star hotels constructed on land plots of no less than 150,000 square meters,
together  with  (a)  furnished  tourist  residences  with  a  minimum  surface  area  of  100  sq.m.
available  for  sale  or  long-term  lease  as  separate  properties;  and  (b)  special  tourism
infrastructure facilities, such as golf courses, conference centres, marinas, thalassotherapy
and spa resorts, rejuvenation centres, etc. 
Liberalisation  of  the  tourist  guide  profession,  allowing  archaeologists  and  historians  to
become tourist guides, which was not permitted in the past. 
Streamlining of procedures and elimination of restrictions on the operation of travel agencies
and car rental companies. 
Introduction  of  extended  visiting  hours  for  museums  and  archaeological  sites  during  the
spring period. 
In addition to these reforms, there are a number of other actions that would further strengthen
tourism, including: 
Modernisation and upgrading of the other regional airports in the country. 
Strengthening  competition  between  airlines,  as  the  reduction  in  air  fares  will  stimulate
tourism demand. 
Upgrading and development of infrastructures such as marinas, which can help to increase
sea and nautical tourism, further boosting tourism traffic in Greece. 
Upgrading of port infrastructures and establishment of a national plan for the development of
cruise tourism – especially home porting cruises. 
Overall, the enhancement of infrastructures is a prerequisite for the improvement of the tourism
product. A lot needs to be done in this respect. In particular, I would like to refer to the utilisation
of public property and the settlement of outstanding issues regarding land use planning. This will
enable us to attract new investment, which will upgrade the tourism product.
During the crisis period, the tourism industry – like all other sectors of the Greek economy – was
forced to operate in an environment of increasing tax burdens, which affects competitiveness.
The  Bank  of  Greece  has  repeatedly  pointed  out  this  issue  and  has  stressed  that  fiscal
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
adjustment should focus on reducing public spending rather than increasing tax rates. Equally
important, though, are the adjustment gains to be achieved through a more effective use of public
property and through privatisation.
If  this  happens,  it  will  be  easier  to  alleviate  the  tax  burden  by  lowering  the  tax  rates.  This  is
essential for creating a business-friendly institutional environment and attracting new investment.
 In closing, I would like to point out that the structural reforms implemented in the past few years,
coupled with lower prices, have supported the growth of tourism and mitigated the impact of the
economic crisis, through a sectoral restructuring of the economy. Increased investment in high-
quality hotels and the upgrading of hotel capacity, combined with the tourism industry’s proven
adaptability to the new economic conditions, must not be merely continued but intensified, so that
tourism can be a driver and an example of the new growth model the country is in need of. 
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
