 O c t o b e r   8 ,   2 0 1 6 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 "Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) 
with Yield Curve Control": 
New Monetary Policy Framework  
for Overcoming Low Inflation 
Speech at the Brookings Institution in Washington, D.C. 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Introduction 
It  is  a  great  honor  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  speak  at  the  Brookings  Institution,  a 
think-tank with a long history and notable achievements. 
 Since the global financial crisis in 2008, declines in the natural rate of interest and inflation 
expectations have led to a growing debate about whether monetary policy is becoming less 
effective.  While  it  is  now  widely  recognized  that  this  is  a  common  challenge  for  major 
economies, Japan has faced and addressed such a challenge ahead of other countries. Against 
this background, it is extremely valuable to share experiences of different countries and to 
exchange  views  among  academics,  market  participants,  and  central  bankers  during 
opportunities like this. 
 In order to overcome deflation that has lasted for 15 years and achieve the 2 percent price 
stability target, the Bank of Japan has conducted large-scale monetary easing by introducing 
"Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Monetary  Easing  (QQE)"  in  April  2013  and  "QQE  with  a 
Negative Interest Rate" in January 2016. As a result, corporate profits, measured by the ratio 
of  current  profits  to  sales,  have  been  at  a  record-high  level.  The  unemployment  rate  has 
declined to  as  low  as  3  percent.  A  practice  of  base  pay  rises  in  annual  wage  negotiations, 
which was lost during the period of deflation, returned for the first time in two decades and 
has  continued  for  three  consecutive  years.  On  the  price  front,  a  measure  of  underlying 
inflation -- the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less 
fresh food and energy -- has remained positive for almost three years. Japan's economy is no 
longer in deflation, which is commonly defined as a sustained decline in prices. However, the 
price stability target of 2 percent has not been achieved.  
 At the Monetary Policy Meeting held in September, the Bank conducted a "Comprehensive 
Assessment" of the effects of these policy measures and, based on this assessment, introduced 
a  new  monetary  policy  framework. This  new  framework  reflects  the  Bank's  thinking  with 
regard  to  the  challenges  that  advanced  economies  have  in  common.  In  advance  of  our 
discussion later, I would like to talk about the essence of this new framework.  
  1 
I. Challenges in Japan and the New Monetary Policy Framework 
There were two major challenges to monetary policy in Japan. 
 To  start  with,  despite  unprecedentedly  large-scale  monetary  easing,  inflation  expectation 
formation in Japan is still adaptive to a large extent. That is, the expectations are formed in a 
backward-looking  manner.  In  the  wake  of  the  substantial  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  since 
summer 2014, a reduction in the observed inflation has pushed down inflation expectations. 
The first challenge, therefore, is in terms of how to lift inflation expectations that had fallen 
once to an undesirably low level and re-anchor them at the target of 2 percent. 
 The next issue concerns the link between the interest rate level and the effects of monetary 
easing. When short- and long-term interest rates were well in positive territory, a common 
understanding was that, so far as the impact on the economy was concerned, the lower the 
interest  rates,  the  greater the monetary  easing  effects.  However,  it  is  now  recognized  that, 
when  short-term  interest  rates  are  negative  and  long-term  interest  rates  have  fallen  to 
extremely  low  levels,  there  could  be  side  effects  or  costs  that  weaken  the  functioning  of 
financial intermediation, which may reduce monetary easing effects. Such observations lead 
us to the other challenge, which is to explore optimal levels and shapes of the yield curve that 
can maximize monetary easing effects on the economy and prices. 
 As  solutions  to  these  challenges,  the  Bank  recently  introduced  the  new  monetary  policy 
framework "QQE with Yield Curve Control." This consists of two major components: (1) an 
inflation-overshooting  commitment and  (2)  yield  curve  control.  Let  me  talk about each  of 
these in turn. 
 II. Inflation-Overshooting Commitment 
I will start by talking about the inflation-overshooting commitment. 
 There is a widespread consensus that anchoring inflation expectations is very important in 
achieving  a  price  stability  target  set  by  the  central  bank.  However,  it  has  not  been  fully 
analysed,  either  theoretically  or  empirically,  how  inflation  expectations  are  formed  by  the 
 2 
public  and  how  they  can  be  raised  once  they  have  been  de-anchored  and  fallen  to  an 
undesirably low level. 
 QQE  introduced  by  the  Bank  in  2013  aimed  at  changing  people's  perceptions  of  inflation 
through a regime shift in monetary policy by combining a strong commitment to achieving 
the price stability target and the significant expansion of the monetary base. As shown in the 
"Comprehensive Assessment," this approach has produced positive results. 
 In light of these achievements, the Bank of Japan further strengthened this approach recently 
with the introduction of an inflation-overshooting commitment, in which the expansion of the 
monetary  base  is  linked  to  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  observed  CPI.  By 
committing  to  continuing  to  expand  the  monetary  base  until  the  observed  CPI  inflation 
exceeds the price stability target of 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable manner, the 
Bank aims to work on people's perceptions of inflation in a more forceful manner. 
 As  a  possible  policy  option  to  address  declines  in  inflation  expectations,  prominent 
economists such as  Olivier Blanchard, professor emeritus  at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology,  and  John Williams,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco, 
have proposed that a central bank raise its inflation target from the current 2 percent to, say, 4 
percent.1,2 However, based on Japan's experience, the argument that a central bank can  lift 
inflation expectations of various economic entities simply by raising its inflation target seems 
a little naïve to me. 
 In  order  to  re-anchor  inflation  expectations,  I  believe  it  necessary  to  strengthen  a  central 
bank's credibility that it can achieve its price stability target. For this purpose, making use of 
forward guidance, or a commitment with regard to the future course of monetary policy, is 
considered effective. However, designing an effective forward guidance is not an easy task. 
There is nothing to be gained from promising the obvious; on the other hand, promises that 
impose excessive constraints on future conduct of monetary policy  would not be effective 
                                                        
1 Olivier  Blanchard,  Giovanni  Dell'Ariccia,  and  Paolo  Mauro  (2010),  "Rethinking  Macroeconomic 
Policy," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.42, issue s1, pp.199-215. 
2 John  C.  Williams  (2016),  "Monetary  Policy  in  a  Low  R-star  World,"  FRBSF  Economic  Letter, 
2016-23. 
 3 
either, because people think that a central bank would end up reneging on the commitment. 
This is a problem of the so-called time inconsistency.  
 The Bank of Japan's solution to this problem is to make a commitment that is "bold but not 
excessively binding" by making a commitment to expansion of the monetary base, based on 
the observed CPI inflation rate, instead of the forecast of them. Given that there is a time lag 
for monetary policy to have effects on economic activities, it is exceptional for a central bank 
to  make  a  commitment  based  on  the  observed  indicators.  In  the  new  commitment,  the 
monetary base continues to expand until the condition is fulfilled. That means that the Bank 
of Japan's holdings of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) keep increasing as well, because 
they provide a significant portion of the monetary base. By committing to an increase in the 
core  element  of  monetary  easing  --  the  monetary  base  --  the  Bank  demonstrates  that  the 
unprecedented monetary easing will be firmly in place until the observed CPI inflation rate 
exceeds the price stability target of 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable manner. 
Under our baseline scenario in which the inflation rate increases at a fairly moderate pace, a 
low-level yield curve will also continue until the condition is met along with an expansion of 
the monetary base. That said, if inflation were to accelerate suddenly, the Bank would be able 
to address this by raising the short- and long-term interest rates. Therefore, this commitment 
can be kept all the time, while giving powerful monetary stimulus.  
 Some economists raise concern that a higher inflation target, even though originally designed 
to lift inflation expectations, would end up being long-lasting, creating a new challenge of 
how high of an inflation rate level would be consistent with the legal mandate to achieve price 
stability. The Bank of Japan's new policy framework is constructed in such a way that it can 
avoid this problem while maximizing the monetary easing effects. 
 The formation of inflation expectations and policy responses to lift inflation expectations are 
the subject of an ongoing debate. I strongly expect these issues to be further explored. 
 III. Yield Curve Control 
Next, I would like to talk about yield curve control.  
  4 
With regard to central banks' ability to  control interest rates, the conventional view is  that 
they can control short-term rates but not long-term rates. However, since the global financial 
crisis, major central banks, having faced the zero lower bound on short-term interest rates, 
have directly exerted influence on long-term interest rates through large-scale asset purchases. 
This policy is widely referred to as quantitative easing, or QE. In practice, all of the major 
central banks set the amount of asset purchases as an operating target, and long-term interest 
rates consequently are endogenously determined.  
 However, the Bank's analyses in the "Comprehensive Assessment" showed that the impact of 
government bond purchases by the Bank on long-term interest rates has varied considerably 
depending  on  economic  circumstances  and  financial  market  conditions  from  time  to  time. 
This means that, when the amount of government bond purchases is set as an operating target 
in  advance,  actual  long-term  interest  rates  could  be  too  high  or  too  low  relative  to  a  level 
considered  appropriate  by  the  central  bank.  Against  this  background,  the  Bank  of  Japan 
introduced  "yield  curve  control,"  in  which  long-term  interest  rates  are  explicitly  set  as  an 
operating target. This is perhaps the first attempt to do so among major central banks. 
 You  may  think  that  yield  curve  control  is  an ambitious  project  for  a  central bank.  Let  me 
remind  you,  however,  that  major  central  banks  that  have  been  conducting  asset  purchases 
must have already faced the question of what shape and location of the yield curve would be 
appropriate for their policy goals. Without answering this question, the central bank cannot 
reasonably specify the amount of asset purchases. 
 In a recent post in his blog, Ben Bernanke, former Chairman of the Federal Reserve, referring 
to discussions at the Federal Open Market Committee's meeting in October 2010, compared 
QE, in which the amount of government bonds to be purchased is decided in advance, with a 
peg  for  long-term  interest  rates.3 In  this  comparison,  Dr.  Bernanke  pointed  out  that,  if  the 
Federal Reserve pegged long-term interest rates, it might end up having to buy  very large 
amounts of securities, giving rise to the risk of losing control of the balance sheet; for this 
reason, the Federal Reserve decided to opt for QE rather than rate-pegging. 
                                                        
3 Ben Bernanke (2016), "What tools does the Fed have left? Part 2: Targeting longer-term interest 
rates," Ben Bernanke's Blog, Brookings Institution, March 24. 
 5 
While  I  share  such  concerns,  I  have  two  responses  to  them.  The  first  is  that,  in  the  new 
framework, the Bank of Japan will set the operating target for long-term interest rates at each 
Monetary Policy Meeting. That means that it will facilitate the formation of the yield curve 
that is deemed appropriate by taking account of the economic, price, and financial conditions 
from time to time so as to provide a sufficient level of monetary accommodation in order to 
achieve the price stability target. The second is that the Bank has  already been conducting 
very large-scale government bond purchases and, in combination with a negative interest rate 
policy,  has  been  fairly  successful  in  controlling  long-term  interest  rates.  As  shown  in  the 
"Comprehensive  Assessment,"  this  combination  has  been  exerting  powerful  downward 
pressure  on  long-term  interest  rates.  With  this  in  mind,  I  believe  that  there  will  be  no 
significant changes in the management of the Bank's balance sheet going forward under the 
new framework.  
 Meanwhile, in a recent book, Professor Kenneth Rogoff of Harvard University argues that a 
negative interest rate policy is more effective than QE, not least because QE has had uncertain 
impacts so far compared to the conventional interest rate policy and there is difficulty in its 
calibration and communication. In this context, he calls for abolishment of cash as it would 
make further policy room for a negative interest rate.4 While I am interested in his argument, 
the reality is that cash cannot be abolished in the near future. From the viewpoint of policy 
makers, a negative interest rate policy and asset purchases are not mutually exclusive. Taking 
account  of  the  existing  financial  system and  financial  market  structures in Japan,  we  have 
come  to  a  conclusion  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  can  proceed  with  more  powerful  monetary 
easing  by  controlling  the  yield  curve  through  the  appropriate  combination  of  a  negative 
interest rate policy and asset purchases. 
 In conducting yield curve control, more detailed analyses -- both theoretical and empirical -- 
on the appropriate level of short- and long-term interest rates are required. In particular, the 
conventional  concept  of  a  natural  rate  of  interest  and  "monetary  policy  rules"  are  not 
sufficient,  as  they  focus  exclusively  on  short-term  interest  rates.  Research  and  discussion 
should be extended across the entire yield curve. 
                                                         
4 Kenneth S. Rogoff (2016), "The Curse of Cash," Princeton University Press. 
 6 
These issues are relevant for the Federal Reserve as well, although it already has discontinued 
asset purchases except for reinvestment. If one stands on the "stock view" of QE, suggesting 
that what matters for monetary easing effects is  the central bank's holdings of assets rather 
than the amount of asset purchases during a period of time,  the Federal Reserve's massive 
bond  holdings  is  still  providing  monetary  stimulus.  If  this  is  the  case,  the  level  of  the 
short-term interest rate that is desirable for the Federal Reserve at present must be different 
from  what  would  have  been  the  case  if  the  Federal  Reserve  had  not  held  such  massive 
amounts of bonds on its balance sheet.   
 Moreover, based on the experience in Europe and Japan, it is becoming increasingly evident 
that  an  excessively  lowered  and  flattened  yield  curve  could  weaken  the  transmission 
mechanism of monetary easing by squeezing banks' profit. In addition, a decline in expected 
rates of returns of insurance and pension products may have an adverse impact on consumers' 
confidence. These aspects are not only of interest from a macroprudential perspective but also 
need to be examined in terms of the macroeconomic transmission and influence of monetary 
easing. In sum, with interest rates at historically low levels, monetary policy  design going 
forward  necessitates  a  new  paradigm  of  monetary  economics,  by  broadening  the  focus  of 
analysis from short-term interest rates to the entire yield curve. 
 Conclusion 
Today, I was able to discuss only a couple of topics that are covered in the Bank of Japan's 
"Comprehensive Assessment." In fact, we have conducted in-depth analyses of hotly debated 
issues in monetary policy, including the impact of large-scale government bond purchases on 
long-term interest rates, the mechanisms of inflation expectation formation, and the effects 
and impact of the negative interest rate policy. 
 As I mentioned at the outset, monetary policy under a low-growth, low-inflation environment 
is  becoming  a  challenge  that  major  economies  around  the  world  have  in  common.  To 
conclude my remarks, I sincerely hope that the Bank's "Comprehensive Assessment" and the 
introduction  of  the  new  policy  framework  based  on  this  assessment  will  contribute  to 
constructive debate in this field. 
 Thank you very much for your attention. 
 7 
