   Philip R Lane: The eurozone after Brexit 
Speech by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Euro50 Group & 
CIGI Breakfast Meeting, Washington DC, 9 October 2016. 
 It is a pleasure to speak to this joint Euro50 / CIGI meeting on the topic of the implications of 
Brexit for the euro area. I will focus on the economic and financial dimensions, leaving to others 
to discuss the political issues. 
In  the  period  immediately  following  the  referendum,  the  capacity  of  banking  systems  and 
financial markets to absorb the unexpected result can be attributed to several factors.  
First, it was clear that the Bank of England and other central banks (including the European 
Central Bank and the eurosystem more generally) had taken the necessary precautions to 
ensure  that  banks  would  have  sufficient  liquidity  to  overcome  any  short-term  disruption  in 
funding  markets.  The  improvement  in  underlying  resilience  as  a  result  of  the  substantial 
increase in capital ratios for European banking systems over the last several years was also 
an important factor in ensuring an orderly market response to the Brexit news.  
Second,  it  was  also  well  understood  that  the  central  banking  community  would  respond 
appropriately over time to any shifts in macroeconomic conditions that might be generated by 
the Brexit fallout. Indeed, the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) loosened 
its  policy  stance  in  August  2016,  while  the  broader  decline  in  euro  area  yields  might  be 
attributed  to  beliefs  that  Brexit  could  represent  a  headwind  for  recovery  in  the  euro  area, 
prolonging  the  phase  of  accommodative  monetary  policy.  In  turn,  the  prospect  of  slower 
recovery and “lower for longer” interest rates helps to explain the decline in bank equity values 
that has occurred post-Brexit.  
Third, the substantial decline in Sterling since the referendum provides an important stabilising 
mechanism by which the adverse implications of Brexit for the UK’s terms of trade are mapped 
into  international  relative  price  adjustment.  By  the  way,  it  is  important  to  put  the  recent 
movement in the Sterling-euro exchange rate into context: it partly just unwinds the sustained 
appreciation of Sterling that took place between early 2013 and early 2015. 
Looking ahead, the design and timing of the new relationship between the UK and the EU 
remain  quite  uncertain.  It  is  reasonable  to  expect  some  volatility  in  financial  markets  and 
macroeconomic variables as the negotiations move along, with harder versions of Brexit likely 
to be associated with more substantial re-assessments of growth prospects and asset prices 
for both the UK and the EU.  
Given  the  especially  close  ties  between  the  UK  and  Irish  economies,  the  Central  Bank  of 
Ireland has adjusted its 2017 growth forecast from 4.2 percent to 3.6 percent as a result of 
Brexit,  while  also  calling  out  further  adverse  Brexit-related  developments  as  a  specific 
downside risk.  
Let  me  turn  to  a  longer-term  perspective,  with  a  particular  focus  on  the  evolution  of  the 
European financial sector. To the extent that some relocation of financial activity from the UK 
to the EU (and/or to other regions) will be triggered by Brexit, it is important to bear in mind 
several factors.  
First,  the  EU  system  of  financial  regulation  and  supervision  is  grounded  in  a  common 
framework, as expressed in the various EU directives and regulations.  
Second, this applies a fortiori in the euro area banking sector, given the lead role of the ECB’s 
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) in authorising and regulating banks.  Accordingly, the 
locational strategies of financial firms should not be driven by regulatory considerations but 
should rather reflect the typical determinants in the economic geography literature: availability 
of skilled labour and suitable office accommodation; quality of public infrastructure; relative 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   cost levels (both wage and non-wage components); national education, legal and tax systems; 
language and cultural factors; and relative attractiveness in relation to “quality of life” indicators. 
Third, Brexit reinforces the urgency of making progress in relation to the Capital Markets Union 
agenda. To the extent that the new longer-term UK-EU relationship will make it more difficult 
to rely on London as a location for euro-denominated capital markets activity, fostering scale 
economies and harmonisation in the EU financial system is essential in order to develop the 
deep and liquid euro-denominated markets that are required if the EU is to reap the benefits 
from a more balanced financial system, in which the availability of equity and bond funding 
provides an important alternative to bank-sourced funding for corporates. 
In summary, Brexit is a disruptive event that has adverse implications for both the UK and EU 
economies. At this point, the focus of policymakers has to be on negotiating a new UK-EU 
settlement that can allow both the UK and EU to prosper over the long run. For central bankers, 
the transition towards the new arrangements has the potential to be a source of volatility and 
will require continuous monitoring and risk assessment.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
