1 
    ‘The future of savings’ conference – 4 November 2016 
Introductory speech by François Villeroy de Galhau,  
Governor of the Banque de France 
 Savings glut, or investment deficit? 
  First  and  foremost,  I  would  like  to  warmly  welcome  you  all  here  at  the 
Banque  de  France.  I  am  delighted  to  open  this  conference  dedicated  to  the 
future  of  savings,  with  such  distinguished  speakers  and  panelists:  leading 
academics, bank and insurance industry experts, as well as regulators. Before 
leaving the floor to them, I would like to share with you a few thoughts on the 
role that savings can play in the current challenging macroeconomic context.  
 Post-crisis  growth  has  been  disappointingly  weak,  both  at  the  global 
level, with growth standing only marginally above 3% in 2015 and most likely 
in  2016  as  well;  and  in  Europe,  where  growth  is  levelling  off.  So  what  is  the 
problem? (slide 2) In the mid-2000s, Ben Bernanke famously coined the term 
“global savings glut” to refer to the situation of surplus savings in emerging 
market  economies.  Savings  are  still  abundant  worldwide,  but  one  thing  has 
dramatically changed in recent years: (slide 3) investment, which has sharply 
dropped  as  a  share  of  GDP  in  advanced  economies.  This  is  what  I  call  the 
“investment  dearth”  or  “investment  deficit”.  This  is  particularly  true  in  the 
euro area, where the gap between savings and investment is huge: the current 
account  surplus  reached  EUR  350  billion  on  a  yearly  basis  in  August  2016, 
  which is more than 3% of GDP.i I believe that the solution to closing the gap is 
not  to  diminish  savings,  but  to  increase  productive  investment  –  and  savings 
can  be  instrumental  in  doing  so.  Let  me  delve  further  into  this  issue  by 
answering  three  questions:  what  is  the  evidence?  What  are  the  causes? 
2 
What is the remedy? 
First, what evidence do we have? 
 The total investment to GDP ratio offers a first glimpse of the current 
investment  dearth  (slide  4).  The  2007-08  crisis  caused  the  total  investment 
ratio  to  fall  sharply.  In  many  countries,  it  has  not  yet  returned  to  its  pre-crisis 
level. This is particularly the case in the euro area, where the total investment 
ratio has dropped by around 3 points since the 2007 peak and has only slightly 
recovered since. By comparison, the pace of the recovery is significantly faster 
in the United States.   
Now,  (slide  5)  let’s  dig  deeper  into  the  composition  of  this  investment 
dearth:  real  estate  and  public  investment  have  contributed  to  the  post-crisis 
decline in total investment, but  what matters the most for  our  economy is  the 
contraction in business investment. The IMF estimates that it stands 10% to 
15% below pre-crisis forecasts in the euro area.ii However, to fully understand 
the  situation,  we  need  to  take  a  closer  look  at  the  nature  of  business 
investment.  We  must  distinguish  between  investment  in  construction  on  the 
one  hand  –  which  in  itself  does  not  spur  innovation  –  and  investment  in 
research and development and industrial machinery on the other, which I call 
“productive 
investment”.iii  The  matter  of  concern 
is 
that  productive 
investment  is  insufficient:  across  the  economy  as  a  whole,  the  productive 
investment rate has long been lower than before 2007 in the euro area and is 
persistently weaker in France than in Germany.  
This  brings  us  to  the  third  important  feature  of  this  investment  dearth: 
the  behaviour  of  businesses  (slide  6).  Since  mid-2009  it  has  dramatically 
changed:  given 
the  weakness  of  business 
investment,  non-financial 
corporations  have  turned  from  net  borrowers  into  net  lenders.  Thereby  they 
  have fuelled the current account surplus in the euro area. In short, all of these 
realities  converge:  the  root  of  the  problem  today  in  Europe  is  the  investment 
3 
deficit more than the savings glut. 
 2. Now, why has this investment dearth happened?  
Let  me  briefly  elaborate  on  the  key  levers  of  investment.  The  first  and 
most  important  one  is  expected  demand  (slide  7).  The  overall  weakness  in 
economic activity acts as a deterrent for most businesses. The latest biannual 
survey conducted by Bpifrance shows that demand remains the main obstacle 
to investment for French small business ownersiv. This diagnosis is confirmed 
at  the  macro  level  by  one  of  our  staff’s  recent  working  papers,  which 
investigated a panel of 22 advanced economies: expected demand appears as 
the  main  determinant  of  the  slowdown  in  business  investment  (negative 
contribution of more than 80%).v The second key economic lever of investment 
is confidence, or to put it another way, the level of uncertainty (17%).vi If the 
environment is blurred, complex or unstable – especially as regards rules and 
norms  –,  businesses  opt  for  a  “wait-and-see”  behaviour  and  postpone  their 
investment  decisions.  So,  the  simplification  and  stabilisation  of  rules  is  an 
often underestimated albeit key trigger of business investment. 
Economic levers are of the essence, but financial ones also play a role. 
Currently,  the  cost  of  debt  financing  is  low  in  the  euro  area,  there  is  no 
evidence  of  credit  rationing,  and  yet  business  investment  is  not  completely 
responding. So what’s wrong? There are two intertwined features that explain 
this  puzzle.  First,  as  Europe’s  economy  is  “at  the  technological  frontier”, 
businesses  need  to  innovate  more,  which  means  they  need  to  diversify  their 
sources of financing: to be able to take more risks, they need less internal or 
debt financing and more equity financing. Yet, (slide 8) and this is the second 
key  feature  of  today’s  environment,  the  cost  of  equity  (CoE)  has  remained 
high,  despite  the  sharp  fall  in  interest  rates  over  the  last  two  decades. 
According  to  Banque  de  France  calculations,  the  nominal  CoE  is  still  more 
than  9%  for  large  listed  companies  in  the  euro  area  –  compared  with  a  risk-
 4 
 free  rate  of  around  0%.  In  other  words,  the  risk  premia  have  increased.  The 
high CoE prompts companies to give priority to dividends and share buybacks 
over investment. In addition, it often goes hand in hand with a persistently high 
“hurdle  rate”vii  within  companies,  which  results  in  an  excessively  severe 
selection  of  investment  projects.  The  United  States  are  a  case  in  point  (slide 
9):  since  the  early  2010s,  share  buybacks  and  dividends  have  increased 
sharply to more than 100% of reported earnings,  while productive investment 
has significantly slowed down to an almost zero growth.  
 3. So what can be done to cure the investment dearth? 
First and foremost, we need a comprehensive therapy in Europe, both 
economic  and  financial.  On  the  economic  side,  monetary  policy  is  active  and 
efficient; but it cannot remain the only game in town. Growth will be stronger in 
Europe if we combine structural reforms – including pro-business measures – 
where they are needed, such as in France,  with greater fiscal support to help 
spur  investment  in  the  countries  that  have  room  to  manoeuvre,  such  as 
Germany.  But  we  also  need  to  address  the  financial  side  of  this  investment 
dearth issue. The United States shows how crucial it can be in the long term. 
Their model has positive features: (slide 10) equity capital amounts to 121% of 
GDP  in  the  United  States,  compared  with  only  52%  in  the  euro  area,  which 
means  that  in  the  United  States  innovation  finds  appropriate  financing  more 
easily. But it also has limitations that we should be mindful of: excessive cost 
of equity can have harmful effects.  
To meet the financial challenge, savings have a central role to play. I will 
focus  on  two  avenues  for  steering  them  into  productive  investment.  First, 
savings  should  be  reoriented  towards  the  long-term,  more  easily  than 
towards  direct  risk-taking.  French  and,  more  generally,  European  savers  are 
more  risk-averse  than  American  ones  –  and  this  is  probably  not  going  to 
change. The first savings motive in the euro area is indeed insurance against 
unexpected events (mentioned by more than 50% of households).viii But at the 
same  time,  savers  are  more  and  more  concerned  by  the  increase  in  life 
 5 
 expectancies and the need to prepare for retirement: old  age provision  ranks 
as  the  second  most  important  savings  motive  (nearly  40%).ix  Therefore  it 
makes sense to offer savers new, complementary forms of  savings  products, 
that  are  less  liquid  during  the  first  years,  but  that  include  some  form  of  long-
term  capital  guarantee.  These  new  products  would  provide 
financial 
intermediaries – in particular life insurers – with liabilities long enough to take 
pooled risks – in the form of equity investments essentially – and savers with 
the higher returns offered by equity over the long run. To promote these new 
products,  we  also  need,  at  the  very  least,  to  avoid  any  tax  distortions  that 
might penalise them more than liquid and risk-free investments.  
Second,  savings  should  better  circulate  across  Europe,  to  where 
investment  needs  are.  A  large  part  of  the  solution  lies  at  the  European  level, 
with  the  building  of  what  I  call  a  “Financing  and  Investment  Union”  (FIU), 
rather  than  just  a  “Capital  Markets  Union”  (CMU).  This  FIU  would  merge 
together  the  initiatives  already  in  place  –  the  CMU  of  course,  but  also  the 
Juncker Plan and the Banking Union – in order to magnify their impact through 
synergies  and  more  ambitious  measures.  Let  me  mention  two  measures  for 
tackling  obstacles 
to  cross-border 
investment.  Firstly, 
the  FIU  would 
encourage  the  development  of  a  pan-European  venture  capital  ecosystem. 
One  of  Europe’s  most  obvious  limitations  is  indeed  the  size  of  its  funds 
compared with US ones: the size scale varies from  at least 1 to 10 given the 
national  borders  and  the  domestic  bias  in  Europe.  This  unfortunately  limits 
European  funds’  ability  to  take  on  big  enough  equity  stakes,  especially  in 
“scale  up”  companies  –  successful  start-ups  at  a  later  stage.  The  second 
example  concerns  the  regulatory  and  legal  barriers  to  equity  financing.  The 
FIU  would  promote  further  convergence  of  insolvency  regimes,  as  well  as 
standardised and more detailed financial information on European corporates, 
including  SMEs.  In  this  regard,  advantage  could  be  taken  of  the  experience 
acquired in certain Member States – in France for instance, the central bank’s 
expertise in company rating.  
  6 
 To  conclude,  let  me  quote  Benjamin  Franklin  who,  in  his  essay  entitled  The 
Way  to  Wealth,  gave  advice  that  remains  highly  topical:  “vessels  large  may 
venture more, but little boats should keep near shore”. In the present situation, 
savings are certainly closer to large vessels than to little boats. And yet, unlike 
large  vessels,  they  do  not  take  sufficient  reasonable  risks.  Our  future  will 
depend on them venturing more to help fill the investment dearth that plagues 
our  economy.  I  have  given  you  my  view  on  the  forms  it  can  take,  and  I  wish 
you fruitful debates throughout this conference. 
                                                             
i 12-month cumulated current account for the period ending in August 2016. Source: ECB. 
ii IMF WEO Chapter 4 ‘Private Investment: What’s the Holdup?’, April 2015. The figures express the average 
percent deviation from spring 2007 forecasts.  
iii GFCF in machinery and equipment and intellectual property.  
iv 63% of French small business owners mention demand as an obstacle to investment. Source: Bpifrance, ‘63rd 
survey of the economic climate for SMEs’, May 2016. 
v Matthieu Bussière, Laurent Ferrara and Juliana Milovich: ‘Explaining the recent slump in investment: the role 
of expected demand and uncertainty’, Banque de France WP No. 571 – September 2015. 
vi Ibid. 
vii The hurdle rate is the internal rate of return that must be cleared for a project to be approved by a company. 
viii ‘Savings and investment behaviour in the euro area’, ECB occasional paper series No. 167, January 2016. 
Note: Finland, France and Italy are not included in the panel.  
ix Ibid. 
 