William C Dudley: The evolving structure of the US treasury market
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank  of  New  York,  at  The  Evolving  Structure  of  the  U.S.  Treasury  Market:  Second  Annual
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 24 October 2016.
 On behalf of the New York Fed and our co-sponsors, it is my pleasure to welcome you to this
second annual conference on the evolving structure of the U.S. Treasury market.  We have the
opportunity today to continue the dialogue around the changing nature of the Treasury market, a
discussion that grew more urgent following the events of October 15, 2014.   We  have  made
significant progress since last year’s conference in improving our collective understanding of the
Treasury market, and I believe it is important to continue official and private sector collaboration
on this topic. Indeed, there is much left to do to ensure the continued integrity and effectiveness
of this market, and I look forward to the further progress we will make today.  As always, what I
have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market
2
Committee or the Federal Reserve System.
1
3
Over  the  past  year,  the  Joint  Member Agencies   have  engaged  with  market  participants  and
other members of the public to gain more information on the changing structure of the Treasury
market.  The  Treasury’s  Request  for  Information,  and  comments  on  various  SEC  and  CFTC
proposals, have provided thoughtful perspectives on the evolution of Treasury market structure.
We have also benefited from consultation with groups such as the Treasury Markets Practices
Group (TMPG), which is made up of market professionals committed to supporting the integrity
and efficiency of the Treasury market.
Continued  engagement  between  the  official  sector  and  the  public  on  the  Treasury  market
remains necessary to help to manage its evolution, and to best maintain its efficient function and
integrity.    Those  of  you  who  transact  in  this  market  have  a  crucial  perspective  on  how  the
Treasury market works and what information is useful for evaluating its function.  Engagement
between the official and private sectors can also facilitate the development of timely solutions to
important issues in the industry.  Such efforts include the best practices the TMPG has produced
4
  and  the  Group  of  30’s
for  the  Treasury,  agency  debt  and  agency  MBS  markets,
recommendations  on  banking  culture  and  conduct ―an  issue  I  believe  the  financial  industry
must continue to work on.  In fact, it is this type of collaboration―between a wide array of market
participants  and  official  agencies―that  helps  different  perspectives  come  together  to  create
7
effective practices.
5
6
In addition to engagement with the public, the Joint Member Agencies have continued their inter-
agency collaboration.  We have been working together to share information and help shape the
most  effective  path  forward  for  public  policy.    These  actions  include  the  signing  of  a
memorandum of understanding that further facilitates information sharing related to the Treasury
market,  and  again  co-hosting  this  conference.  Going  forward,  the  staff  of  the  Joint  Member
Agencies  will  continue  to  work  together  on  effective  and  comprehensive  data  collection,
monitoring of market activity and liquidity through the Interagency Working Group, development of
principles  and  best  practices  for  Treasury  market  data  transparency,  and  the  regulatory
framework for government securities.
A main focus of recent work by the Joint Member Agencies has been to improve the availability of
information to both the official sector and the public. Given this emphasis, it is worth spending a
few moments discussing the benefits of obtaining timely and robust data on Treasury market
transactions. 
Data  are  essential  to  understanding  flash  events  and  market  liquidity.  Attendees  at  this
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
conference are very familiar with the events of October 15, 2014, when the 10-year Treasury
yield  experienced  a  37-basis-point  trading  range  over  the  session.    At  that  time,  market
participants struggled to identify what had caused that sharp movement.  Similarly, a flash event
occurred in the British pound just this month. The pound depreciated nearly 6 percent, and then
largely retraced this move within several minutes, seemingly without a major catalyst. Once the
domain of equity markets, flash events have happened with increasing frequency, also occurring
in the dollar-yen and euro-dollar currency pairs in recent years. 
Treasury  and  foreign  exchange  markets  share  a  number  of  common  attributes.  They  are
evolving rapidly, they are highly automated in key market segments, and information on trading
activity  is  not  widely  available.    As  a  result,  it  is  challenging  for  the  official  sector,  market
participants,  and  members  of  the  public  to  effectively  analyze  these  markets,  understand  the
sources and risks of flash events, and evaluate how liquidity is changing.
Given the role of the Treasury market as the deepest and most liquid fixed income market in the
world, it is clear that both the official sector and the public need improved access to transaction-
level data, and I am pleased that we are making real progress on this front. Greater transparency
into Treasury market activity is necessary in maintaining the market’s many important roles:  as
a  risk-free  benchmark  for  financial  instruments;  as  a  liquid  investment  and  source  of  safe
collateral; as a channel for the implementation of monetary policy; and, of course, as a tool to
help finance U.S. government activities.
As the Treasury market continues to evolve, several complex questions lie ahead. How should
data reporting gaps be closed to ensure that as many relevant Treasury transactions as possible
are collected?  What is the proper scope and best process for sharing Treasury market data with
the  public?  How  can  the  Joint  Member Agencies  and  private  stakeholders  best  collaborate  to
ensure Treasury market stability and efficient market function, even as market structure evolves
and  new  technologies  emerge?    What  considerations  need  to  be  made  regarding  Treasury
market  clearance  practices  given  the  growth  in  activity  by  participants  who  are  not  central
counterparty members?  Will the evolving settlement marketplace introduce new challenges to
Treasury  market  participants?    How  must  practices  and  culture  evolve  as  market  structure
does?  And, how will the interplay of all of these issues affect the future of the Treasury market?
Today’s  conference  provides  an  excellent  opportunity  to  discuss  these  issues.  Thank  you  for
coming.  I  look  forward  to  today’s  dialogue  and  the  ongoing  engagement  between  the  Joint
Member Agencies and the public as we all strive to ensure the continued sound functioning of
this essential marketplace.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014, U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission, U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission, July 13, 2015.
Ellen Correia Golay, Frank Keane and Nathaniel Wuerffel assisted in preparing these remarks.
The Joint Member Agencies are the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and
the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Best  Practices  for  Treasury,  Agency  Debt,  and  Agency  Mortgage-Backed  Securities  Markets,  Treasury
Markets Practices Group, Revised February 2016.
Banking Conduct and Culture, Group of 30, July 2015.
Opening  Remarks  at  Reforming  Culture  and  Behavior  in  the  Financial  Services  Industry:  Expanding  the
Dialogue, William C. Dudley, October 20, 2016.
The Role of Best Practices in Supporting Market Integrity and Effectiveness, Simon Potter, Remarks at the
2016 Primary Dealers Meeting, September 7, 2016.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
