  Simon M Potter: Is there room for more monetary cooperation? 
Panel discussion remarks by Mr Simon M Potter, Executive Vice President of the Markets 
Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Global financial stability in a new 
monetary  environment  conference,  hosted  by  the  Bank  of  France,  Paris,  30  September 
2016. 
 to 
jointly  achieve 
from  coordinating 
their  policy  stances 
It is my pleasure to participate in this final session. I would like to express my appreciation to 
our host, the Banque de France, for its gracious hospitality, and to the organizers, the China 
Finance  40  Forum,  the  Euro  50  Group  and  CIGI,  and  all  of  the  participants  for  very 
interesting discussions. 
My  remarks  will  focus  on  a  question  at  the  very  core  of  this  meeting:  would  individual 
countries  benefit 
their 
macroeconomic  objectives?  This  naturally  leads  to  another  question:  have  we  entered  a 
stage in the history of the international monetary system that requires new institutional and 
policy solutions to the evergreen issue of how to insulate an economy from external shocks? 
And if the answer to these questions is yes, or even a partial and qualified yes, what are the 
next steps for policy design and implementation? 
To get the ball rolling, let me recapitulate some of the themes underlying the current debate 
on  policy  coordination,  and  highlight  a  few  open  issues  of  particular  relevance  for  our 
meeting  today.  It  is  worth  emphasizing  that  these  are  my  personal  views,  and  need  not 
reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. 
Stated in abstract terms, macroeconomic coordination implies an arrangement to give up – at 
least partially – independence in policymaking to achieve objectives not otherwise in reach. 
Traditionally,  gains  from  coordination  are  deemed  to  arise  from  avoiding  “beggar-thy-
neighbor” externalities that policymaking in one country or region can impart onto the rest of 
the world. 
The modern theoretical case for coordination was formalized in a number of path-breaking 
re-visitations of the Keynesian Mundell-Fleming model through the lens of game theory. It is 
a pity that Richard Cooper was unable to join us today, because his work, along with that of 
his  colleagues  since  the  late  1960s,  has  posed  the  scientific  basis  for  an  insightful  and 
ambitious research agenda. 
In practice, though, once the Bretton Woods system ended, there were no attempts to revive 
a global framework of coordinated exchange rate or interest rate policies.1 The general view 
in  the  policymaking  community  was  that  the  potential  welfare  net  gains  from  cooperation 
were modest and difficult to achieve, relative to the outcomes attainable within an orderly, yet 
                                                 
1   The  case  for  limiting  competitive  devaluations  was  paramount,  for  instance,  in  Europe  –  leading  to  the 
Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary System and providing the key underpinning of the “one 
market, one money” vision. But post-Bretton Woods  attempts at coordination among  advanced economies, 
such  as  the  Plaza  Agreement  of  1985,  were  limited  in  scope  and  short-lived.  And  while  the  episodes  of 
financial turmoil in Mexico and Asia during the 1990s challenged global policymakers’ capacity to coordinate 
their responses to crises, and led to calls for refocusing outreach to engage the major Emerging Market (EM) 
economies in new forms of diplomacy, the academic and policy debate kept calling into question the relevance 
of monetary compacts, arguing that coordination at best achieved little, and at worst led to counterproductive 
outcomes.  For  a  recent  survey  see  Kahn,  Robert  B.,  and  Ellen  E.  Meade  (2016),  International  Aspects  of 
Central  Banking:  Diplomacy  and  Coordination,  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2016–062. 
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
uncoordinated  regime,  where  central  banks  and  fiscal  authorities  pursued  their  domestic 
objectives.2  
However,  renewed  calls  for  coordination  have  recently  re-surfaced  on  a  number  of 
occasions. Why now? Is this old wine in new bottles, or does the new case for cooperation 
have its merits? I will focus on two significant forces that might lead one to reexamine the 
benefits  to  cooperation.  The  common  theme  is  the  restriction  on  providing  monetary 
accommodation  at  the  zero  lower  bound  (ZLB).  I  will  also  briefly  touch  on  the  growing 
importance of emerging market economies. 
First,  over  the  last  two  decades,  nearly  all  advanced  economies  have  witnessed  trend 
declines  in  their  long-run  real  natural  interest  rates3,  defined  as  the  hypothetical  rates 
required to balance national saving and investment in a full-employment equilibrium over the 
longer run. Lower longer-run natural rates reflect a number of slow moving structural factors, 
such as the aging of advanced economy populations and lower fertility, which are unlikely to 
reverse  any  time  soon.  With  the  success  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations  at  levels 
consistent  with  price  stability,  the  low  levels  of  the  natural  rate  going  forward  imply  a 
likelihood of more visits to the ZLB, or at least market participants placing more weight on 
such visits even for relatively small demand shocks. 
Second, the global financial crisis was a sufficiently large demand shock that the short-run 
equilibrium real rate became very negative, and central banks were required to implement a 
number of unconventional policies to provide accommodation at the ZLB to mimic a highly 
negative nominal policy rate. Further, the zero bound has proved very sticky, as headwinds 
from  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  such  as  consumer  uncertainty  boosting 
precautionary saving, tighter lending standards, lower business appetite for risk-taking, and 
at times fiscal consolidation, have restrained aggregate demand.4  
In  these  types  of  environments,  exchange  rate  depreciations  may  be  deemed  to  be  a 
particularly effective channel of monetary policy transmission as they raise foreign demand 
for domestic products. National policymakers may be tempted to deliberately weaken their 
exchange rates as a countercyclical instrument of demand management.  Further, some of 
the  transmission  mechanisms  of  unconventional  monetary  policies,  such  as  portfolio 
rebalancing, can generate strains on financial stability in other parts of the globe. 
A  question  naturally  arises  whether  a  coordinated  strategy  would  reduce  the  risks  of 
exchange rate depreciation that can export disinflation and stagnation, and better promote 
global financial stability. Of course, a necessary condition for a positive sum game would be 
that joint policy can be effective through channels other than the exchange rate and portfolio 
rebalancing, or perhaps through better balanced combinations. To be clear, an expenditure-
switching component is always associated with monetary accommodation in one country, at 
                                                 
2   Exchange rate adjustments, far from being part of the problem, were to a large extent deemed as part of the 
solution, as they provided insurance against cyclical shocks allowing a country to target appropriate financial 
conditions  and  achieve  the  desired  policy  stance.  One-off  episodes  of  multi-country  foreign  exchange 
intervention or simultaneous interest rate cuts by central banks worldwide (as most notably in October 2008 in 
response to the Great Recession) did not substantially alter this picture. 
3   See, for example, Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, John C. Williams. 2016, Measuring the Natural Rate of 
Interest:  International  Trends  and  Determinants,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco  Working  Paper 
2016–11, and Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D Smith. 2015. “Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate,” 
Bank of England, Staff Working Paper No. 571, December. 
4   Crucially, the distance between inflation-adjusted market interest rates and the equilibrium real rates provides 
a metric to assess whether monetary policy provides sufficient accommodation or restraint. In many countries 
nominal policy rates have reached their zero or effective lower bound and have remained there for quite a 
while. But to the extent that real equilibrium rates remain low and are not expected to move back quickly – if at 
all – to historical levels, national monetary policies are unable to sufficiently spur domestic demand growth by 
lowering real borrowing costs below the equilibrium real rates and supporting asset prices. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
the  expense  of  its  trading  partners.  Likewise,  through  their  impact  on  the  term  structure, 
conventional  and  unconventional  monetary  policy  both  produce  some  degree  of  portfolio 
rebalancing and spillover to financial conditions elsewhere. 
The problem is that in a global ZLB environment this expenditure-switching effect may turn 
out to be stronger than usual – in fact, strong enough to dominate the positive spillovers of 
national monetary stimulus inducing an expansion in demand for world output. The point is 
that, in a ZLB regime, the negative spillovers abroad may be compounded by the inability of 
the trading partners to respond to exchange rate shocks and restore cost-competitiveness by 
easing their policy stances effectively. 
But  while  press  accounts  have  often  focused  on  negative  externalities  –  alleged  currency 
wars and the like – there is also a question of potential positive externalities – specifically 
whether, and how, authorities in one country might improve their own prospects by moving in 
concert  with  their  counterparts  in  other  countries.  Indeed,  some  have  suggested  a  global 
policy compact is needed to provide additional countercyclical stimulus to boost demand and 
make up for the loss of effectiveness of conventional and unconventional national policies. 
Some have argued that in this context, fiscal coordination could be at least as impactful as 
monetary, as it provides a different channel for accommodation and can, if applied with some 
care, also push up longer-run natural rates of interest. Absent coordination – the argument 
goes – there is little hope that a country can escape its ZLB sandtrap on its own, if the rest of 
the world is also simultaneously stuck in a liquidity trap. Of course, this is just an argument at 
the moment and we have little concrete evidence that this is empirically true. 
As an illustration of this potential sandtrap, consider the case of a country experiencing an 
earlier  recovery  than  others  from  a  large  financial  crisis  that  had  pushed  it  and  its  trading 
partners to the ZLB. This country will exhibit relatively better fundamentals, and a relatively 
higher real equilibrium rate, than its trading partners. Absent coordination, the country would 
be expected to run a relatively tighter monetary policy. This tighter stance would trigger net 
capital inflows as market participants respond to “search for yield” opportunities, leading to a 
stronger 
financial  conditions.  Contractionary  and 
disinflationary  pressures  would  then  deteriorate  the  country’s  medium-term  outlook  and 
offset  its  initial  comparative  advantage.  The  final  outcome  could  be  a  return  to  the  ZLB 
prevailing amongst its trading partners.5 This illustration critically depends on all the countries 
being relatively equal on structural supply issues. If the country recovering more quickly has 
a  more  flexible  supply  side  entering  the  financial  crisis  or  successfully  implements  supply 
reforms after the crisis, it is less clear the argument holds. 
Going forward, coordination could also play a role as insurance against future downturns in a 
global environment of low natural real interest rates. In such an environment, average policy 
rates over the long run will be relatively low. Facing cyclical disturbances, national monetary 
authorities  will  have  little  leeway  to  cut  their  policy  rates  and  provide  effective  monetary 
easing.  But  expected  coordinated  efforts  to  avoid  beggar-thy-neighbor  spillovers  while 
supporting global demand through simultaneous easing may reduce the probability of hitting 
or staying at the ZLB for a prolonged period of time. 
The question of financial stability spillovers has taken on particular prominence with respect 
to  the  emerging  market  economies,  or  EMEs.  It  has  been  argued,  for  example,  that 
accommodative  unconventional  monetary  policies  in  the  advanced  economies  expose  the 
EMEs to excessive and potentially destabilizing fluctuations in capital flows. And conversely, 
it  has  been  argued  that  efforts  by  some  EMEs  to  resist  currency  adjustment  have  posed 
real  exchange 
rate  and 
tighter 
                                                 
5   Similar considerations appear in Eggertsson, Gauti, and Lawrence Summers (2016). “Secular Stagnation in 
the  Open  Economies:  How  it  Spreads,  How  It  Can  Be  Cured”,  VoxEU,  July  22.  See  also  Eggertsson,  G., 
N. Mehrotra, S. Singh, and L. Summers (2016), “A Contagious Malady? Open Economy Dimension of Secular 
Stagnation,” mimeo, Brown University. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
financial stability risk to other countries, both advanced and emerging, by contributing to a 
global  savings  glut.  An  often  heard  case  for  cooperation  is  that  a  more  favorable  and 
sustainable  global  allocation  could  be  achieved  if  policymakers  in  both  advanced  and 
emerging  countries  were  willing  to  internalize  the  externalities  they  impose  on  each  other, 
instead of acting unilaterally according to domestic mandates. 
But while these various arguments for increased cooperation are suggestive, they hinge on 
many theoretical and empirical assumptions that would need to be more rigorously quantified 
and validated. And of course, there is the thorny issue of how joint decision-making could be 
coordinated in practice, given likely difficult and hard to measure tradeoffs among and across 
various  countries’  interests,  not  to  mention  all  the  complexities  of  real-world  policymaking 
and national accountability. 
But with changed global circumstances, the potential gains from enhanced coordination do 
appear  worth  exploring.  Academic  economists  are  starting  to  address  the  issues  I  have 
discussed,  using  models  that  better  capture  the  current  international  situation.  The  results 
from  their  analysis  will  be  useful  in  assessing  whether  there  are  increased  benefits  to 
cooperation,  given  this  new  environment  of  low  natural  rates  and  the  growing  size  of  the 
emerging world. 
Let me conclude by underscoring the continuing importance of the forms of cooperation that 
we  do  see  today  among  central  banks,  the  ones  so  vitally  supported  by  Claudio  and  his 
colleagues  at  the  BIS:  the  information  sharing,  the  exchange  of  perspectives  based  on 
differing experiences, and different frameworks. 
While  perhaps  not  as  sexy  sounding  as  designing  a  new  architecture  for  international 
coordination,  this  ongoing  cooperation  has  certainly  produced  numerous  benefits,  and  we 
are all better off for it. It merits continued nurturing, including through gatherings such as this. 
Thank you. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
