   Lesetja Kganyago: The outlook for monetary policy 
Address by Mr Lesetja Kganyago, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 2016 
SA Tomorrow Investor Conference, New York City, 4 October 2016. 
 Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen. It is a great pleasure for me to be here today to highlight 
recent monetary policy developments and the outlook.  
Monetary policy continues to face a difficult environment. Targeted inflation has been outside 
the target range of 3–6 per cent during the first half of the year, and despite a decline to within 
the range, to 5,9 per cent in August, this respite is expected to be temporary.  
For some time we have been lamenting the fact that we are experiencing the classic central 
banker  dilemma:  one  of  low  and  slowing  growth  alongside  high  and  rising  inflation.  This 
combination has been driven by exogenous factors interacting with the particular price and 
wage  determination  processes  of  South  Africa,  which  compounds  the  dilemma.  We  have 
focused on reducing inflation to within the target range and containing inflation expectations, 
while at the same time limiting the possible negative impact on growth. Since January 2014, 
we have raised our policy rate by 200 basis points, from 5 to 7 per cent, or a little more than 1 
per cent in real, ex ante terms. 
Our most recent policy statement reflects the sense of the committee that monetary policy 
actions have helped to better contain inflation expectations and that the outlook has improved 
for some of the external factors impacting on the inflation forecast. We still face considerable 
uncertainty,  but  we  believe  downside  and  upside  surprises  are  now  about  equally  likely, 
allowing the committee to assess the balance of risks to be neutral.  
The challenge for monetary policy is that we have experienced repeated exogenous shocks 
which have fed into core inflation and wages. As a result, we now expect core to reach 5,9 per 
cent, almost at the top of the target range, while inflation expectations have converged on 6 per 
cent.  These  sorts  of  shocks  pose  a  different  sort  of  problem  to  excess  demand  enabling 
ongoing  price  increases.  During  the  past  three  years,  these  shocks  have  included  the 
exchange rate, domestic electricity prices, international oil prices and food prices. They have 
coincided with negative growth shocks. Global growth has been relatively weak in recent years 
and  commodity  prices  have  fallen  since  2011,  limiting  foreign  demand  for  South  African 
exports. Meanwhile, domestic demand has decelerated. In the mid to late 2000s, household 
debt  levels  reached  unprecedented  highs.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  however,  credit 
extension to households has been subdued, reflecting a moribund housing market, regulatory 
demands and pro-cyclical behaviour by financial institutions – despite historically low interest 
rates.  
Meanwhile, fiscal policy was used to provide a counter-cyclical response to weaker domestic 
and global demand, yet as government’s debt metrics deteriorated and growth kept slowing, 
while  US  monetary  policy  normalisation  raised  interest  rate  risks,  it  became  clearer  that 
government needed fiscal consolidation. These headwinds to growth were reinforced by more 
idiosyncratic shocks, including electricity shortages and drought. The final result was a mix of 
stagnant growth and higher inflation.  
As monetary policymakers, we have over time looked through the first-round or impact-effects 
of exogenous shocks, and tried to assess second-round effects, where higher prices translate 
into higher generalised inflation and higher wage settlements.  
With modest economic growth and robust wage growth, partly in response to these exogenous 
forces, unit labour costs have remained an underlying support to core inflation. Stronger growth 
in investment, exports or productivity resulting from sustained real exchange rate depreciation 
should have provided greater lift to growth in disposable income and helped to moderate unit 
labour costs. In recent years, this hasn’t transpired, keeping core and headline inflation high, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   and pushing down on potential growth. This has limited the scope for maintaining low real 
interest rates.  
Over  the  past  few  months  we  have  downwardly  revised  our  inflation  forecasts.  Since  the 
January  MPC,  the  expected  average  inflation  rates for  2016  and  2017 have  declined from 
respective averages of 6,8 per cent and 7,0 per cent to 6,4 per cent and 5,8 per cent; the peak 
on the inflation forecast, which has been consistent for the fourth quarter of this year, declined 
from 7,8 per cent to 6,7 per cent; and the length of the breach of the target has been shortened, 
with inflation now expected to return to within the target range during the second quarter of 
2017, rather than in the fourth quarter of 2017 as forecast in January.  
These are sizeable revisions. However, before we get too complacent we should note that the 
revisions to the 2018 forecasts have been a lot more modest. While the expectation remains 
for inflation to be within the target range for the whole of that year, the trajectory, at an average 
of 5,5 per cent, remains uncomfortably close to the upper end of the target range. Similarly, 
our forecasts of core inflation also show a persistence well above the 5 per cent level over the 
forecast period.  
There  are  two  main  reasons  for  the  more  favourable  forecasts.  In  part,  the  rise  in  the 
repurchase rate of 200 basis points since January 2014, with the most recent increases this 
year in January (50 basis points) and March (25 basis points), has helped to guide expectations 
of  future  inflation.  As  the  forecasts  that  we  consider  in  MPC  meetings  are  based  on  an 
unchanged policy rate, the forecast in January would not have incorporated the cumulative 
75 basis point increase that transpired in that and the subsequent meeting.  
The second part relates to changed assumptions regarding the exogenous variables in the 
model. In particular, the assumption regarding the rand exchange rate outlook has improved 
as  a  consequence  of  greater  stability  and  appreciation  over  the  course  of  the  year.  The 
international oil price assumption has been increased from its low point in January, but not 
sufficiently to offset the positive revisions.  
There has also been a change to how we see the risks to the forecast. In January, the risks 
were seen to be unambiguously to the upside. An upside risk was maintained for the next three 
meetings, despite downward revisions to the forecast, and in July the MPC assessed these 
upside risks to have moderated. In the September meeting, the risks were seen to be more or 
less  balanced.  However,  as  the  MPC  pointed  out,  while  the  outlook  has  improved,  these 
improvements are highly vulnerable to changes in the risk factors affecting inflation, and these 
factors can change very quickly.  
I will now highlight some of these risk factors.  
The global growth outlook continues to be challenging. Growth in the advanced economies 
remains subdued. Uncertainty about the strength of the US recovery has contributed to a delay 
in further monetary policy tightening in the US. These delays have supported the rand and 
other emerging market currencies. While an interest rate increase in the US is inevitable, the 
timing continues to remain uncertain. This uncertainty, and changing perceptions, is likely to 
keep the rand relatively volatile. This may be tempered somewhat by a more muted trajectory 
for US rates.  
These  developments  have  impacted  on  the  pattern  of  global  capital  flows.  Data  from  the 
Institute  for  International  Finance  show  a  sustained  recovery  of  capital  flows  to  emerging 
markets since earlier this year, following the pronounced decline in the second half of last year. 
The predominance of flows into emerging market bond markets suggests that the search for 
yield remains a driving factor. Reflective of this pattern, since the beginning of the year, non-
residents have been net sellers of South African equities, but net purchasers of South African 
government bonds. 
Apart from US monetary policy, other potential global risks pertain to China and Brexit. The 
effect of a slowing Chinese economy on South Africa is mainly through commodity prices. The 
ultimate impact on our terms of trade however will depend on the extent to which oil prices are 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   also affected. Nevertheless there is no doubt that falling commodity prices are negative for 
South African growth, the value of our exports and the exchange rate. While the outlook for 
China has improved since the beginning of the year, concerns about the stability of the financial 
sector persist.  
The impact of the UK decision to leave the EU is still unclear, but the high degree of market 
volatility that followed the decision subsided somewhat. For now it seems that the impact will 
be mainly contained within the UK, with some fall-out on the EU. But until the full terms of the 
withdrawal  are  clear,  uncertainty  will  persist,  which  will  impact  negatively  on  investment 
sentiment  in  the  UK.  The  direct  short-term  impact  on  South  Africa  is  expected  to  be  fairly 
limited, but there could be longer term impacts on trade and financial links, and on tourism 
from the UK into South Africa, should a sharp growth decline transpire. We are also likely to 
be  affected  indirectly  to  the  extent  that  there  are  broader  negative  global  spillovers  than 
currently expected.  
A consequence of the decline in commodity prices has been a slowdown in growth in Sub-
Saharan Africa (SSA), for many years one of the world’s fastest growing regions. The IMF 
forecast for SSA growth for this year is 1,6 per cent, compared with the past decade average 
of  5,5  per  cent.  With  the  region  accounting  for  almost  30,0  per  cent  of  South  Africa’s 
manufactured exports, we are particularly exposed to this slowdown and will weigh against a 
sustained improvement in our trade balance (as is discussed in our recently released Monetary 
Policy Review).  
Most of these developments impact the exchange rate, either directly or indirectly. The rand 
remains  an  important  determinant  of  inflation,  and  therefore  we  need  to  have  a  careful 
assessment of the risks. This is complicated by the fact that the observed pass-through from 
the exchange rate to inflation appears to have declined in recent years. Given the pressure 
this places on the margins of South African firms, the monetary policy committee has been 
concerned for some time that this subdued pass-through could reverse at any stage.  
The rand started off the year in a particularly vulnerable spot following domestic developments 
in December that raised risk perceptions, followed by renewed concerns in January regarding 
the  outlook  for  the  Chinese  economy.  Since  its  low  point  in  late  January,  while  remaining 
volatile, the rand has appreciated by about 24 per cent on a trade-weighted basis, and by about 
15  per  cent  year  to  date.  Appreciation  has  been  pronounced  against  troubled  advanced 
economy  currencies,  but  less  so  compared  to  other  commodity  producers  and  emerging 
market  economies.  The  Chinese  economy  appears  to  have  stabilised,  capital  flows  to 
emerging  markets  have  resumed,  and  US  monetary  policy  has  remained  on  hold. 
Domestically, the positive second quarter growth outcome and the significant narrowing of the 
current account deficit, and more recently speculation regarding the large M&A transaction in 
the market also helped to underpin the rand’s recovery.  
Going forward, it is uncertain whether the rand will sustain current levels. The rand remains 
vulnerable to global factors, as well as domestic risks, including a possible ratings downgrade, 
though the rating got affirmed during the course of the mid-year. Unfortunately, predicting the 
rand is extremely difficult, given the multiplicity of factors affecting it. In our model, we make a 
simplifying  assumption  of  a  stable  real  effective  exchange  rate  over  the  forecast  period, 
(implying a nominal change in line with inflation differentials) and then try to assess the risks 
to this assumption.  
The starting point is critical. We generally set the starting point at the prevailing level of the real 
effective  exchange  rate,  unless  we  believe  that  that  level  represents  a  clear  over-  or 
undervalued position. At the most recent meeting of the MPC, the risks to inflation from the 
exchange rate were seen to have moderated somewhat, given recent positive developments.  
I should emphasise that our focus on the rand is not because we would like to see a particular 
level of the rand. Rather, our focus is on the possible impact of the rand exchange rate on the 
inflation outlook. This needs to be assessed in conjunction with all the other factors that are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   impacting on the inflation outlook at that time. We would also need to assess the extent to 
which any movement is likely to be persistent, or if it is merely short-term volatility. 
A related point concerns the questions recently raised as to whether we would be purchasing 
dollars in the M&A transaction. Our position on the rand and reserve accumulation remains 
unchanged.  
First, we remain committed to a flexible exchange rate, determined by market forces. However, 
in the event of abrupt movements in the rand exchange rate that could threaten the orderly 
functioning of markets, the SARB will consider becoming involved by way of facilitating the 
smooth execution of trades, with the objective of ensuring orderly market functioning.  
Second, in the case of inflows that display somewhat more permanent characteristics (such 
as FDI or M&A related inflows), we may seek to increase our foreign exchange reserves when 
these opportunities arise and/or market conditions are conducive. Any changes in our foreign 
exchange reserves position will be published in our monthly statement of asset and liabilities. 
Any such purchases will be for the purpose of accumulating reserves, rather than to achieve a 
desired exchange rate outcome.  
Not all the drivers and risks to inflation are external. For some time food prices have been an 
upside risk to the inflation outlook in the face of the protracted drought experienced in the 
country. For the past few months our food price forecasts have been more or less in line with 
outcomes, and we expect prices to peak in the third quarter at over 12 per cent. This assumes 
that normal rainfall patterns that are currently predicted do in fact occur. Alternatively, should 
crop estimates surprise on the upside, food prices could fall faster than expected, and pose a 
downside risk to the inflation outlook. This is despite the fact that meat prices are expected to 
remain elevated as farmers restock their herds. The global context, however, also matters, and 
we  have  seen  FAO  data  showing  global  prices  to  have  ended  a  sustained  deflationary 
trajectory.  
A final consideration in the inflation forecast is the role of wage growth in a weak economy. 
Our forecast includes some decline in private employment which, alongside some pickup in 
the aggregate growth rate, results in a rise in productivity per worker and moderates growth in 
unit labour costs.  
The  domestic  growth  outlook  remains  a  concern,  despite  the  favourable  second  quarter 
outcome, which followed a quarter of contraction. We assess the outlook to remain relatively 
subdued, but our forecast was revised up for this year to 0,4 per cent, and to 1,2 per cent and 
1,6 per cent in the next two years. We assess the risks to this forecast to be more or less 
balanced. Our estimate of potential output for this year is 1,4 per cent, rising to 1,7 per cent by 
2018. This suggests below-potential growth and a negative output gap over the forecast period. 
However, because our estimates of potential output growth have been revised down during 
the past year or so, the output gap is not as wide as previously thought.  
Lower potential growth and a small output gap suggest that the cyclical stimulus that monetary 
policy can give to growth is limited. The growth constraint is structural in nature, and should be 
tackled through structural reforms, for example those envisaged in the National Development 
Plan.  
Nevertheless, in a flexible inflation targeting context we have to be mindful of the impact of our 
actions on the cyclical element of growth. For this reason, the current interest rate cycle has 
been very moderate, particularly in comparison with previous interest rate cycles.  
At our most recent meeting, we highlighted the moderation of the inflation forecast, and the 
balanced  nature  of  the  risks.  We  noted  further  that,  should  current  assumptions  and 
expectations transpire, we could be close to the end of the tightening cycle. This implies that 
policy remains very data dependent. Calling the peak of a cycle with precision is difficult at the 
best  of  times.  Under  current  conditions  of  heightened  uncertainty  both  globally  and 
domestically, it is even more difficult.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   However, even if it turns out that we are at the end of the cycle or close to it, this does not 
mean that further accommodation is imminent. As I underlined earlier, the expected inflation 
trajectory,  while  within  target,  is  uncomfortably  close  to  the  upper  end of  the  target range, 
leaving  little  room  for  error. We  would  prefer  to  see  an  inflation  trajectory  more  firmly  and 
sustainably within the target range. For this reason we see the bar for a cut in interest rates as 
being set high.  
Part of our concern relates to the impact of wage settlements and inflation expectations in 
contributing to inflation persistence at levels near the top of the target range. While we are 
pleased that inflation expectations have not become unanchored during the current inflation 
target  breach,  the  longer  term  expectations  remain  at  the  upper  end  of  the  target  range. 
Similarly, average wage settlement rates have been consistently above inflation, contributing 
to inflation persistence at higher levels.  
At  current  levels  of  the  real  interest  rate,  monetary  policy  is  assessed  to  remain 
accommodative.  But  a  lot  depends  on  where  we  see  the  neutral  interest  rate,  which  is 
notoriously  difficult  to  calculate.  Since  the  global  financial  crisis,  many  countries  have 
progressively  reduced  their  estimates  of  their  neutral  interest  rates,  alongside  declining 
estimates of potential output. However, there are different views as to whether these revisions 
represent  short-term  deviations  from  longer  term  unchanged  values,  or  whether  these 
represent a longer-term “new normal”.  
One complication in estimating neutral real rates is that most models don’t explicitly assess 
the role of external factors, nor other structural and shorter run determinants. In particular, 
long-run  determinants  like  the  savings  culture  of  households  and  decisions  by  fiscal 
authorities, or shorter-run factors like the impact of policy uncertainty, and critical drivers of 
capital stock growth such as the exchange rate, are not clearly identified in the models, but 
would seem to be quite important.  
Generally  speaking,  for  emerging-market  economies,  global  surplus  saving  pushes  down 
neutral  real  rates,  while  structurally  weak  domestic  savings  pushes  them  back  up.  This 
suggests that neutral real rates should be below long-term averages, but well above the levels 
applying  in  advanced  economies. Where  investment-saving  imbalances  are  sticky  and  risk 
premia reflect sustained higher inflation or weakening policy frameworks, neutral rates should 
probably be higher.  
In conclusion, it is almost trite to say that monetary policy is always made under conditions of 
uncertainty. Since the crisis in particular, we have been experiencing a prolonged period of 
elevated uncertainty. We have, however, benefitted in recent months from movements in from 
some global and domestic factors that have aided downward revisions to our inflation forecast. 
We also know that the positive factors underlying the more favourable outlook can change very 
quickly, and therefore there is no room for complacency. A continued rise in inflation would put 
at risk our current low interest rate environment and its cyclical support, and threaten long run 
sustainable economic growth and employment.  
The  SARB  remains  committed  to  its  constitutional  mandate.  We  will  pursue  this  mandate 
vigorously and without fear, favour or prejudice. We would continue to do that within a flexible 
inflation  targeting  framework.  We  can  do  this  with  confidence  in  the  knowledge  that  our 
constitution guarantees our independence. Of late South Africans from all walks of life have 
defended the SARB. Our strength and credit lies with the institutions of our democracy. The 
SARB is one such institution. Together with National Treasury, we remain a pillar of strength 
in macroeconomic management and we remain resolute in pursuing our mandate.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
