Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Vítor
Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 20 October 2016.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at present or lower levels for
an  extended  period  of  time,  and  well  past  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases.
Regarding non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  we  confirm  that  the  monthly  asset
purchases of €80 billion are intended to run until the end of March 2017, or beyond, if necessary,
and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation
consistent with its inflation aim.
The  information  that  has  become  available  since  our  meeting  in  early  September  confirms  a
continued moderate but steady recovery of the euro area economy and a gradual rise in inflation,
in line with our previous expectations. The euro area economy has continued to show resilience
to the adverse effects of global economic and political uncertainty, aided by our comprehensive
monetary  policy  measures,  which  ensure  very  favourable  financing  conditions  for  firms  and
households. Overall, however, the baseline scenario remains subject to downside risks.
Looking  ahead,  we  remain  committed  to  preserving  the  very  substantial  degree  of  monetary
accommodation  which  is  necessary  to  secure  a  sustained  convergence  of  inflation  towards
levels  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  To  that  end,  we  will  continue  to  act,  if
warranted, by using all the instruments available within our mandate. In December the Governing
Council’s  assessment  will  benefit  from  the  new  staff  macroeconomic  projections  extending
through to 2019 and from the work of the Eurosystem committees on the options to ensure the
smooth implementation of our purchase programme until March 2017, or beyond, if necessary.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Real
GDP in the euro area increased by 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the second quarter of 2016, after
0.5% in the first quarter. The latest data and survey results point to continued growth in the third
quarter of 2016, at around the same pace as in the second quarter. Looking further ahead, we
expect the economic expansion to proceed at a moderate but steady pace. Domestic demand
should be supported by the pass-through of our monetary policy measures to the real economy.
Favourable financing conditions and improvements in corporate profitability continue to promote
a recovery in investment. Moreover, still relatively low oil prices and sustained employment gains,
which are also benefiting from past structural reforms, provide additional support for households’
real disposable income and private consumption. In addition, the fiscal stance in the euro area
will be broadly neutral in 2017. However, the economic recovery in the euro area is expected to
be dampened by still subdued foreign demand, the necessary balance sheet adjustments in a
number of sectors and a sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms. The risks to the
euro  area  growth  outlook  remain  tilted  to  the  downside  and  relate  mainly  to  the  external
environment.
According to Eurostat, euro area annual HICP inflation in September 2016 was 0.4%, up from
0.2% in August. This reflected mainly a continued increase in annual energy inflation, while there
are no signs yet of a convincing upward trend in underlying inflation. Looking ahead, on the basis
of current oil futures prices, inflation rates are likely to pick up over the next couple of months, in
large part owing to base effects in the annual rate of change of energy prices. Supported by our
monetary policy measures and the expected economic recovery, inflation rates should increase
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
further in 2017 and 2018.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) continued to increase at a robust pace in
August 2016, with its annual rate of growth standing at 5.1%, after 4.9% in July. As in previous
months,  annual  growth  in  M3  was  mainly  supported  by  its  most  liquid  components,  with  the
narrow monetary aggregate M1 expanding at an annual rate of 8.9% in August, after 8.4% in July.
Loan dynamics followed the path of gradual recovery observed since the beginning of 2014. The
annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations stood at 1.9% in August 2016. The
annual growth rate of loans to households also remained stable, at 1.8%, in August. Although
developments in bank credit continue to reflect the lagged relationship with the business cycle,
credit risk and the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets, the
monetary  policy  measures  in  place  since  June  2014  are  significantly  supporting  borrowing
conditions for firms and households and thereby credit flows across the euro area.
The  euro  area  bank  lending  survey  for  the  third  quarter  of  2016  indicates  some  further
improvements in both supply and demand conditions for loans to the non-financial private sector.
Furthermore,  banks  continued  to  report  that  the  ECB’s  asset  purchase  programme  and  the
negative deposit facility rate had contributed to more favourable terms and conditions on loans.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from  the  monetary  analysis  confirmed  the  need  to  preserve  the  very  substantial  amount  of
monetary support that is necessary in order to secure a return of inflation rates towards levels
that are below, but close to, 2% without undue delay.
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its
accommodative stance supports economic activity. As emphasised repeatedly by the Governing
Council, and as again strongly echoed in both European and international policy discussions, in
order  to  reap  the  full  benefits  from  our  monetary  policy  measures,  other  policy  areas  must
contribute  much  more  decisively,  both  at  the  national  and  at  the  European  level.  The
implementation of structural reformsneeds to be substantially stepped up to reduce structural
unemployment  and  boost  potential  output  growth  in  the  euro  area.  Structural  reforms  are
necessary in all euro area countries. The focus should be on actions to raise productivity and
improve the business environment, including the provision of an adequate public infrastructure,
which  are  vital  to  increase  investment  and  boost  job  creation.  The  enhancement  of  current
investment  initiatives,  including  the  extension  of  the  Juncker  plan,  progress  on  the  capital
markets  union  and  reforms  that  will  improve  the  resolution  of  non-performing  loans  will  also
contribute positively to this objective. In an environment of accommodative monetary policy, the
swift and effective implementation of structural reforms will not only lead to higher sustainable
economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  but  will  also  make  the  euro  area  more  resilient  to  global
shocks. Fiscal  policies  should  also  support  the  economic  recovery,  while  remaining  in
compliance with the fiscal rules of the European Union. Full and consistent implementation of the
Stability and Growth Pact over time and across countries remains crucial to ensure confidence
in the fiscal framework. At the same time, all countries should strive for a more growth-friendly
composition of fiscal policies.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
