Claudia  Buch:  Public  hearing  on  the  Review  of  the  EU  Macro-
Prudential Framework – panel discussion
Statement by Prof Claudia Buch, Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the public
hearing  on  the  Review  of  the  EU  Macro-Prudential  Framework  -  panel  discussion,  European
Commission, Brussels, 7 November 2016.
1. Overview
 After the financial crisis, macro-prudential policy has been established as a new policy area with
the mandate to ensure the stability of the financial system as a whole and to prevent systemic
risks building up. Systemic risks in financial systems arise if distress in one institution or a group
of financial institutions threatens the functioning of the entire financial system. Resilience of the
financial  system  with  regard  to  systemic  stress  thus  requires  buffers  which  take  these
externalities into account.
Experience  with  macro-prudential  policies  is  limited  though,  which  requires  a  continuous
monitoring  of  the  progress  that  has  been  made.  The  consultation  process  that  has  been
launched by the European Commission on the macro-prudential framework is a key element of
monitoring the effectiveness and efficiency of macro-prudential institutions.
Effective macro-prudential policies are particularly needed at the European level, given the close
real  and  financial  linkages  between  member  countries  of  the  European  Union  (EU).  Effective
macro-prudential policies require an institutional set-up with three key characteristics. First, the
institutional  set-up  should  allow  tracking  potential  risks  to  financial  stability.  Second,  it  should
clearly assign responsibility for the use of macro-prudential instruments. Third, it should allow for
the  effective  coordination  between  institutions  tasked  with  macro-prudential  mandates.  In  this
regard, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) has a critical function. Maintaining its current
strength and improving its institutional set-up, where needed, should thus be a priority.
Maintaining  and  strengthening  the  role  of  the  ESRB  gives  rise  to  questions  concerning  its
mandate  and  its  role  as  well  as  the  organizational  structure  and  the  institutional  links  with
the ECB. When the ESRB was established, the ECB did not have the role of a micro-prudential
banking supervisor nor did it have macro-prudential responsibilities in the banking sector. This
has changed with the Banking Union and the establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism
(SSM).  Therefore,  potential  changes  in  the  ESRB’s  organizational  structure  and  its  ties  to
the ECB should reflect the ECB’s new role in the SSM.
Overall,  the  ESRB’s  mandate  is  appropriate  and  its  role  is  essential  in  coordinating  and  as-
sessing  macro-prudential  policies  for  the  whole  EUfinancial  market.  However,  there  are  three
areas in which the efficiency and effectiveness of the ESRB could improve:
1.  The  ESRB  has  a  comparative  advantage  in  analyzing  and  addressing  macro-prudential
issues  that  involve  the  cross-border  and  cross-sectoral  dimension.  Therefore,  one  might
strengthen the ESRB’s capabilities to focus on these issues.
2.  The  coordination  and  notification  requirements  that  are  in  place  right  now  are  overly
complex.  Hence,  it  should  be  considered  to  establish  the  ESRB  as  a  central  hub  for
notifications  concerning  macro-prudential  instruments  that  also  harmonizes  procedures.
This may, for instance, include a single EU-wide platform for notification procedures which
currently does not exist.
3.  The ESRB provides a valuable platform for the exchange of experiences in macro-prudential
policy making. In order to enhance this role, the ESRB could act as a hub for the ex-post
evaluation  of  macro-prudential  policies  by  coordinating  analytical  work.  It  could  set  up
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
dedicated working groups and ensure high-quality output by coordinating peer-reviews of the
evaluation.
Successfully  improving  the  operations  of  the  ESRB  and  strengthening  its  capacities  has  two
important  prerequisites.  First,  The  ESRB  would  need  more  own  resources  to  build  up
independent analytical capacities mainly to identify, to propose and to coordinate joint analytical
efforts,  thereby  reducing  the  current  dependence  on  ECB’s  resources.  Cooperation  with  the
European Supervisory Authorities  (ESAs) should be intensified in order to enhance its cross-
sectoral analytical capacities. Second, the ESRB needs access to relevant data and information
and data sharing among members has to be facilitated.
1
 
2. Mandate and Role of the ESRB
The macro-prudential supervisory architecture of the EU was established right after the financial
crisis, while the macro-prudential architecture of the Euro Area was significantly overhauled with
the establishment of the Banking Union in 2014. At the EU level, the ESRB has been in place as
an integrated financial supervisor for macro-prudential supervision since 2011. The ESRB’s aim
is to identify systemic risks in the financial system and to propose measures to eliminate them,
employing  warnings  and  recommendations,  which  are  subject  to  a  ‘comply  or  explain’
mechanism. Mandates for macro-prudential policies lie at the national level. However, with regard
to specific macro-prudential measures, the ECB has asymmetric intervention powers: according
to Article 5 of the SSM Regulation, the ECBmay – after consultation with the national supervisory
authorities – tighten macro-prudential measures enshrined in the CRD IV but not ease them.
Cross-border and cross-sectoral surveillance
Given  the  importance  of  national  risk  factors  and  institutional  specificities  that  affect  systemic
risks, surveillance of systemic risk has a strong domestic component. Thus various authorities,
in  particular  central  banks,  which  traditionally  maintain  capacities  for  a  holistic  analytical  view
combining cross-sectoral views with micro- and macroeconomic analysis, contribute to macro-
prudential surveillance through the ESRB.
At  the  same  time,  domestic  (macro-)prudential  policies  spill  over  across  borders  through  the
activities  of  internationally  active  banks  and  other  financial  institutions.  Current  research
conducted  by  the  International  Banking  Research  Network  (IBRN),  for  instance,  shows  that
prudential instruments often spill over across borders through bank lending.  At the same time,
international spillovers vary across prudential instruments and are heterogeneous across banks.
Bank-specific factors like balance sheet condition and business model drive the amplitude and
direction  of  spillovers  to  lending  growth  rates. Accounting  for  bank-level  heterogeneity  is  thus
crucial for understanding the effects of prudential policies. In the past, international spillovers of
prudential policy on loan growth rates have not been large on average, but have the potential to
grow with broader use of macro-prudential instruments.
2
Hence,  macro-prudential  policies  and  institutions  are  inherently  complex  because  they  involve
authorities taking cross-sectoral perspectives (banking, insurance, other financial intermediaries
and  financial  market  infrastructures),  micro-  and  macroeconomic  perspectives,  and  cross-
country perspectives. There is, thus, no single institutional set-up for the organization of macro-
prudential  policies  and  the  assignment  of  powers.   Generally  though,  central  banks  play  an
important role in macro-prudential policies across countries, reflecting their expertise in analyzing
macroeconomic, system-wide developments in the financial sector and the real economy. The
current institutional set-up of the ESRB reflects these different perspectives, and the ESRB has
been effective in coordinating these perspectives across European countries.
3
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  ESRB  as  a  body  of  independent  experts  provides  a  forum  to  openly  discuss  macro-
prudential issues from different angles. It brings together the perspective of micro- and macro-
prudential authorities that, as a group, cover the respective national financial systems, together
with ESAs and the ECB the European financial system. Therefore, National Competent Authority
(NCA) and National Designated Authority (NDA) – the micro- and macro-prudential authorities,
respectively – should be represented in the General Board. However, the composition should be
flexible enough to reflect the different institutional set-ups and the division of labor at the national
level.  In  some  member  states  the  national  mandate  for  macro-prudential  oversight  is  split
between the NDA and the national central bank (NCB) – Germany might serve as an example –
which, due to their analytical capacities, are responsible for the surveillance of systemic risks. In
other member states the national central bank is the NCA/NDA.
Any change in the composition of the Board should, therefore, do justice to the country-specific
set-up. Otherwise, the ESRB would run the risk of losing access to the independent analytical
capacities  of  central  banks  in  several  member  states.  The  General  Board  should  continue  to
include representatives from all ESCB central banks. If there are more than two authorities in one
Member State, i.e. if NCB, NDA and NCA are distinct authorities, a mechanism similar to Article 6
(2) lit. a) ESRB Regulation may be chosen. In particular, if NCB and NDA are the same authority,
the NCAhas the second seat.
Accountability and Decision-Making
While  macro-prudential  policy  in  Europe  clearly  has  a  cross-border  (and  cross-sectoral)
dimension, it yet takes place in a context of national sovereignty and subsidiarity. This implies
that  macro-prudential  authorities  remain  accountable  to  their  national  electorates,  and  this
national  accountability  needs  to  be  reflected  in  the  institutional  set  up  of  macro-prudential
policies.  Both,  the  factors  contributing  to  systemic  risks  and  the  costs  of  potential  financial
crises,  have  a  strong  national  component.  Costs  of  financial  crisis  are  largely  borne  at  the
national level. Financial stability risks are affected by various factors which have a strong national
component such as regional imbalances and national laws.
The financial sectors of EU member states differ substantially, and national characteristics need
to be considered in setting up surveillance mechanisms and regulatory interventions. Therefore,
and  against  the  background  of  the  Single  Rule  book,  it  is  important  to  give  sufficient  national
discretion and flexibility to national macro-prudential authorities when it comes to the actual use
and calibration of instruments.
At the same time, national authorities may be subject to political pressure. They are at risk of
acting too little or too late in addressing risks to financial stability. In order to alleviate the inaction
bias in macro-prudential policymaking, asymmetric powers are needed. “Top-up powers” thus
have an important role in addressing the risk of inaction and potential spill-overs of insufficient
(from the Euro area perspective) action taken at the national level.
Ensuring timely policy decisions to be taken that reflect cross-border spillovers does not require
“scale-down” powers. Instead, they raise two main concerns on their own right. First, the main
goal  of  macro-prudential  policies  is  to  increase  resilience  and  to  internalize  systemic-risk
externalities,  not  to  manage  the  financial  cycle.  Scaling  down  powers  may  run  against  these
objectives. If capital buffers of banks are reduced, resilience of the financial sector in times of
crises  is  weakened.  Second,  inaction  bias  or  the  risk  of  taking  policy  decisions  which  not
adequately  respond  to  systemic  risk  are  not  only  concerns  at  the  national  level.  Centralized
decisions  might  also  be  inadequate,  and  the  potential  effects  could  be  larger  than  those  of
misjudgement at the national level.
The  current  federal  structure  of  asymmetric  powers  strikes  an  appropriate  balance  between
national and European interests, and it seems well-suited in the EU context. It allows the “center”
to act against inaction (or, from the perspective of the EU, insufficient action) at the national level
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
in order to safeguard Euro Area-wide financial stability. And it also allows the member states to
self-insure  against  inaction  or  insufficient  action  at  the  level  of  the  ECB  in  order  to  safeguard
national financial stability.
Overall, it is thus difficult to make the case for a further centralization of macro-prudential policy
within the Euro Area (i.e. the SSM) or within the European Union. This applies to coordination of
macro-prudential  policy  beyond  the  existing  harmonized  framework,  the  common  rules  for
reciprocation,  and  the  work  of  the  ESRB.  Instead,  before  any  further  centralization  of  macro-
prudential  policy-making  is  being  considered,  it  should  be  carefully  assessed  which  specific
measures  and  sectors  would  benefit  from  a  harmonized  approach,  taking  into  account  the
structural and regional diversity of the financial system in Europe to date.
 
3. Strengthening the Role and the Independence of the ESRB
Given  the  importance  of  the  ESRB  in  addressing  cross-country  and  cross-sectoral  risks  to
financial stability, measures can yet be taken to strengthen its role and independence.
Resources: Currently, the ESRB depends on ECB resources without clearly specifying financial
and organizational arrangements between the two institutions. This has the potential advantage
of  affording  flexibility,  but  experience  shows  that  clarifying  roles  and  responsibilities  could
increase  effectiveness  and  efficiency.  Ideally,  the  ESRB  should  have  resources  that  are
independent of the ECB. In addition to providing clarity with regard to institutional structures, this
may enhance independence of the ESRB in voicing potential issues concerning the ECB and
the SSM. Unlike today, this issue was of no concern at the time when the ESRB was established
as  the  ECB  had  not  assumed  the  role  of  a  micro-prudential  banking  supervisor  and  had  no
macro-prudential competencies.
Moreover, the cross-sectoral orientation of the ESRB could be strengthened. At the same time, a
closer  cooperation  with  the  ESAs  is  warranted  in  order  to  foster  the  cross-sectoral  analytical
capacities, risk analysis beyond  banking  and  in  order  to  ensure  that  relevant  financial  stability
risks identified by the sectoral supervision authorities are covered. In particular, it is proposed
that the ESAs support both the secretariat and the analysis section of the ESRB by transferring
additional staff to the ESRB.
The  visibility  of  the  ESRB  and  its  ability  to  contribute  the  macro-prudential  perspective
in EU policy-making could be enhanced by creating the position of a Managing Director besides
the  ESRB  chair.  While  the  ESRB  chair  would  continue  to  preside  the  General  Board,  the
Managing  Director  could  represent  the  ESRB  in  the  public  or  in  EU  committees.  This  could
enhance  the  credibility,  ownership  and  visibility  of  the  ESRB  as  a  body  with  a  clear  macro-
prudential  mandate.  Particularly,  it  would  strengthen  its  ability  to  address  warnings  and
recommendations to financial supervisors. Additionally, the establishment of a Research Director
(or  Chief  Economist)  might  additionally  steer  the  ESRB’s  analytical  power  towards  issues  of
value added.
Data: In conducting system-wide risk analysis, the ESRB largely relies on ECB resources as
well. In order to make use of its own comparative advantage and to deliver analyses of value
added, the ESRB and its working groups need to have access to relevant data and information.
Hence, improvements could be made to data exchange procedures, especially with regard to
data  that  are  already  available  in  other  authorities  (ESAs,  SSM  or  at  the  national  level).
Procedures for data access should be streamlined. In this context, it would be useful to review
Article 15 (6) and (7) of the ESRB Regulation.  In case of data gaps that restrain the ESRBin
fulfilling  its  mandate,  the  ESRB  should,  first  of  all,  rely  on  its  powers  to  issue  warnings  or
recommendations asking the respective ESAs or national authorities to close those data gaps.
4
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Improving resources and data access would also strengthen the ESRB as a hub for the ex-post
evaluation of macro-prudential policies. More specifically, the ESRB could coordinate analytical
work  for  the  evaluation  of  specific  policies  (e.g.  by  setting  up  dedicated  working  groups)  and
ensure high quality output by coordinating peer-reviews of the evaluation.
1
2
3
4
The respective ESAs are the European Banking Authority (EBA), the European Insurance and Occupational
Pensions Authority (EIPOA) and the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA).
For details, see “Cross-Border Prudential Policy Spillovers: How Much? How Important? Evidence from the
International Banking Research Network” (2016), Claudia M. Buch (Deutsche Bundesbank) and Linda Goldberg
(Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York)  (mimeo).  The  International  Banking  Research  Network  (IBRN)  was
founded in 2012 to inform, both the academic and the policy debate, on current issues related to international
banking. It is a multi-country initiative, bringing together research teams from 25 central banks, the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), and the European Central Bank (ECB). The
current  list  of  participating  central  banks  and  institutions  as  well  as  country  studies  are  available  at
www.newyorkfed.org/IBRN/index.html.
For a recent review of country-specific experiences, see International Monetary Fund (IMF), Financial Stability
Board (FSB), Bank for International Settlements (BIS) (2016). Elements of Effective Macroprudential Policies:
Lessons 
www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/Elements-of-Effective-
Macroprudential-Policies1.pdf.
International 
Experience. 
from 
See  also  p.  15–17  of  the  report  of  the  High-Level  Group  on  the  ESRB  Review,  March  2013,  available  at:
www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/130708_highlevelgroupreport.pdf?e913faa529f509c934cd484435ad13a8
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
