Mario Draghi: The state and prospects of the euro area recovery
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the European Banking
Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 18 November 2016.
 Since the onset of the global financial crisis, 2016 has been the first full year where GDP in the
euro area has been above its pre-crisis level. It has taken around 7.5 years to get there.
The economy is now recovering at a moderate, but steady, pace. Employment has grown by
more than four million since its trough in 2013. And the recovery has become more broad-based,
with less difference in economic performance across countries.
What we have now to ask is what are the factors that have allowed the recovery to gather steam,
and whether we have reason to believe that they are sufficient to deliver a sustained adjustment
in the path of inflation.
We  have  witnessed  many  encouraging  developments,  not  least  the  healing  of  the  euro  area
banking  sector,  which  has  allowed  credit  growth  to  turn  positive  again  and  monetary  policy
transmission to strengthen. This is a necessary condition for a full return to macro-economic and
price stability.
But  despite  the  uplift  to  prices  provided  by  the  gradual  closing  of  the  output  gap,  a  sustained
adjustment in the path of inflation still relies on the continuation of the current, unprecedented
financing  conditions.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  remain  committed  to  preserving  the  very
substantial  degree  of  monetary  accommodation,  which  is  necessary  to  secure  a  sustained
convergence of inflation towards level below, but close to, 2% over the medium-term.
What I would like to do in my remarks today is explain these perspectives – the factors that have
put the euro area economy on a stronger footing, but also the reasons why we cannot yet drop
our guard.
New factors making the euro area economy more robust
The first development that gives us comfort is the improving solvency of the banking sector.
We need a strong banking sector to support the economy through the recovery. But if there is
one  lesson  we  can  draw  from  the  past  decade,  it  is  that  to  be  genuinely  robust,  the  banking
sector must be well-regulated. Indeed, there is a widespread agreement that one of the main
causes of the global financial crisis was the excessive deregulation of the financial sector in the
previous two decades.
The financial origins of the crisis explain in turn the slowness of the economic recovery. Banks
that overextended credit in the upswing had to clean up their balance sheets and strengthen their
capital.  Firms  and  households  that  took  on  excessive  debt  had  to  deleverage.  And  that
combination depressed both credit supply and demand.
So  the  re-regulation  of  the  financial  sector  is  in  fact  a  part  of  the  growth  agenda. And  major
progress has now been made in redressing the mistakes of the pre-crisis era.
The  global  regulatory  agenda,  steered  by  the  G-20,  has  made  the  sector  considerably  more
robust in terms of capital, leverage, funding and risk-taking. Common Equity Tier 1 ratios in the
euro area have improved substantially, rising from less than 7% for significant banking groups in
2008 to more than 14% today. Leverage ratios are now close to 4% for large banks. The Liquidity
Coverage Ratio was implemented last year, and most euro area banks are already complying
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
with the Net Stable Funding Ratio ahead of its implementation in 2018.
It is true that this regulatory agenda, which has evolved profoundly in its design over the past
eight years, may also have created some uncertainties, for instance over steady state capital
levels,  which  are  reflected  in  bank  share  prices.  Indeed,  uncertainty  over  future  capital
requirements can give rise to a risk premium, which weighs on banks’ cost of finance and acts
as a deterrent to expanding activities or supplying credit to the economy.
So now is the time to finalise the regulatory agenda and enter a period of stability. The focus
should be on implementation, not on new design. Regulatory measures should be implemented
in a balanced way that ensures a level playing-field globally. And while marginal adjustments are
possible, there should be no rolling back on what has been decided.
Re-regulation has led to welcome improvements in bank solvency. Meanwhile, asset quality has
also improved. The non-performing loan (NPL) ratio has been decreasing in the euro area, even
if modestly. Critical in this context was the Comprehensive Assessment of bank balance sheets
–  including  an  asset  quality  review  of  great  depth  –  which  encouraged  banks  to  frontload  the
strengthening of their balance sheet. While NPLs remain high in some countries, the problem
today is more related to profitability than to the robustness of balance sheets, since coverage
ratios are close to 50% and much of the remainder is collateralised.
All this progress has gone hand-in-hand with a steadying economic recovery. Increased banking
sector resilience has helped  shield  the  recovery  from  external  shocks  and  sustain  its  internal
momentum. The banking system has been able to weather, among other things, the crisis in
emerging market economies, the collapse in oil and commodity prices, and the consequences of
the UK referendum. And healthier banks have provided the necessary supply of credit to maintain
the pace of the recovery.
The easing in credit supply conditions has been visible in both lending rates and lending volumes.
Since mid-2014, bank lending rates have fallen by almost 100 basis points for both euro area
households  and  corporates.  Small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  have  benefitted  from  even
larger declines. Lending volumes, in turn, have posted positive growth rates for households since
end-2014, and for non-financial corporations since the last quarter of 2015, following multi-year
declines.
And financing conditions have improved in capital markets too, which has been followed by a
pick-up in corporate bond issuance.
This credit reversal has in turn supported a second benign characteristic of the recovery: the fact
that it has become increasingly driven by domestic sources of growth.
Domestic demand has now replaced foreign demand as the main driver of growth. Over the past
two  years,  domestic  demand  has  on  average  added  more  than  a  percentage  point  to  GDP
growth, supported by very accommodative financing conditions. By contrast, net exports, which
were a key growth engine for most of the crisis period, have barely contributed to GDP growth
since end-2013 as the global environment has deteriorated.
This shift in the composition of growth is important, from an inflation perspective, since it makes
the recovery in the euro area less vulnerable to external shocks. Indeed, domestic strength has
helped  insulate  the  euro  area  against  recent  global  weakness,  which  otherwise  would  have
dragged the recovery off track – and with it, the expected pick-up in the path of inflation.
The domestic picture is also contributing to a third encouraging development: the strong rebound
in employment. This has been driven by a striking reconnection between GDP and employment
growth  in  recent  years.   The  temporary  post-Lehman  rebound  in  2010–11  was  essentially  a
jobless recovery. The current recovery, however, has reduced the unemployment rate from more
1
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
than 12% in 2013 to 10% today. And, besides lower unemployment, the overall labour force has
2
expanded as well in recent years, reflecting increasing labour participation rates.
A faster return to full employment – or what economists call the “non-accelerating inflation rate of
unemployment” – is clearly supportive of price stability, since it heralds a tighter labour market
and  stronger  wage  pressures. And  while  those  pressures  might  be  somewhat  offset  by  the
increasing  number  of  people  entering  the  labour  force  as  the  recovery  strengthens,  a  larger
workforce will ultimately support both supply – by raising potential growth – and demand.
With  strengthening  labour  market  prospects,  existing  employees  can  be  reassured  of  their
earnings prospects and revive their spending plans with greater confidence; and new recruits
can satisfy some of the pent-up demand they accumulated while unemployed. The elasticity of
aggregate consumption to new hires is particularly large. As such, these labour market trends
represent a key factor in preserving growth and inflation momentum in conditions where global
demand may become a less dependable engine of growth.
Factors warranting prudence
We have therefore every reason to be more confident in the strength of the recovery than we
were one year ago. But we cannot be sanguine over the economic outlook.
Besides the geopolitical risks that remain prevalent, there are indeed three factors that warrant
caution: the profitability of euro area banks, the relative weakness of inflation dynamics, and the
dependence of the recovery on accommodative monetary policy.
Even  though  the  euro  area  banking  system  is  today  more  resilient,  its  profitability  remains  a
challenge – one that is weighing on bank share prices and raising the cost banks face when
raising equity. There has in fact been a negative gap between euro area banks’ return on equity
and their cost of equity since the 2008 financial crisis. While the level of bank equity prices is
not per se  a  matter  for  policymakers,  insofar  as  it  raises  financing  costs  for  banks,  it  could
ultimately curtail lending to the real economy and hold back the recovery.
One of the factors weighing on profitability is the low growth and low inflation environment, which
translates into lower levels of policy interest rates. But legacy and structural challenges are also
at play, which banks and policymakers can and should address.
Where the legacy stock of NPLs is depressing profitability, key is to create an environment where
the  resolution  of  bad  loans  can  be  accelerated.  And  where  profitability  is  being  affected  by
structural  issues,  such  as  overcapacity  and  inefficient  cost  structures,  rationalisation  and
consolidation must form part of the answer. Indeed, such inefficiencies may have been exposed
by the low interest rate environment, but they have certainly not been created by it.
A  second  reason  to  remain  alert  is  that  despite  the  recovery  in  growth  and  employment,  the
persisting output gap is still keeping inflation dynamics weak. The October inflation rate stood at
0.5%. While this marks the highest level recorded in almost two years, it remains far below the
ECB’s  objective.  And  while  we  expect  headline  inflation  to  continue  rising  over  the  coming
months,  much  of  this  increase  will  be  driven  by  statistical  factors  related  to  the  mechanical
unwinding  of  the  extreme  oil  price  declines  a  year  ago.  We  do  not  yet  see  a  consistent
strengthening of underlying price dynamics.
Our objective is – and will remain – a rate of inflation below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term. Going forward, our assessment will depend on whether we see a sustained adjustment in
the path of inflation towards that objective. And that means that inflation convergence towards 2%
is durable, even with a reduction in monetary accommodation. Inflation dynamics, in other words,
need to be self-sustained.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
And this brings me to the third factor which calls for prudence over the outlook: the fact that the
euro area recovery still relies to a considerable degree on accommodative monetary policy. The
recovery in credit is being facilitated by a more resilient banking sector, but the impetus comes
from our monetary policy.
Our  measures  and  their  effective  transmission  underpin  our  outlook  for  growth  and  inflation.
According  to  staff  estimates,  our  measures  will  raise  the  inflation  rate  by  more  than  half  a
percentage point, on average, over 2016 and 2017. And they will contribute to increasing real
euro  area  GDP  growth  by  more  than  one  and  a  half  percentage  points  cumulatively  between
2015 and 2018. In other words, monetary policy remains a key ingredient in the reflation scenario
we foresee for the euro area in the coming years.
Conclusion
So even if there are many encouraging trends in the euro area economy, the recovery remains
highly  reliant  on  a  constellation  of  financing  conditions  that,  in  turn,  depend  on  continued
monetary  support.  The  ECB  will  continue  to  act,  as  warranted,  by  using  all  the  instruments
available  within  our  mandate  to  secure  a  sustained  convergence  of  inflation  towards  a  level
below, but close to 2%.
We  also  have  to  recognise  that  we  operate  under  a  still  significant  degree  of  uncertainty.
Whether  the  economic  recovery  becomes  more  solid,  and  how  quickly  inflation  dynamics
become more self-sustained, depends not just on the current monetary policy stance, but also
on other policies, as I have discussed on several other occasions. Restoring a sense of direction
–  and  therefore  confidence  –  would  be  the  simplest  and  yet  most  powerful  way  to  deliver
economic stimulus.
1
2
For further detail, see ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 6/2016 – Article on “The employment-GDP relationship
since the crisis”.
For further detail, see ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1/2015 – Box on “Recent developments in the labour force
participation rate in the euro area”.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
