“EMERGING OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES OF FINANCIAL INCLUSION” 
 REGIONAL FORUM ON  
TALKING POINTS 
Mr. Erwin Rijanto, Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia 
“FINANCIAL INCLUSION FOR SME IN INDONESIA” 
Kathmandu, 9 November 2016 
 I. 
INTRODUCTION 
1.  A very good afternoon and warm greetings to: 
a.  Mr. Shitangshu Kumar Sur Chowdhury, Chairman of APRACA; 
b.  Mr. Shiba Raj Shrestha, Vice Chairman of APRACA; 
c.  The member of APRACA;  
d.  Ladies and gentlemen. 
Distinguished guests, 
2.  We are all aware that financial  inclusion has become a priority in 
the world, but it has now also been considered as national agenda 
for Indonesia. 
3. 
In  this  honorable  meeting,  I  would  like  to  share  Indonesian’s 
experience  regarding  the  financial  inclusion  in  Indonesia,  and  its 
relation to SME. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
II.  CURRENT CONDITION IN INDONESIA 
4.  Considering the current condition, Indonesia with its population of 
almost 250 million people which 28 million people living in poverty 
line  remains  to  be  unbanked.  Taking  a  closer  look  these  large 
portion  of  the  unbanked  clustered  around  poverty  line  remains 
vulnerable.  Geographic  condition  adds  the  challenge  in  providing 
access to this target group as Indonesia consist of almost 17.000 
island  and  most  of  poor  people  live  in  a  very  remote  area  with 
 1 
different  culture.  On  the  supply  side,  there  are  several  factors 
inhibiting 
services 
to 
the 
community 
such  as 
limited 
communication network and electricity infrastructure. 
5.  Based on our survey, banked people reached 39% in 2015. It is 
still in a long journey to reach the target of 75% banked people at 
the  end  of  2019.  The  percentage  of  39%  in  our  survey  means 
they have a savings or credit account, insurance or formal means 
of  low-cost  payments.  Outside  of  39%  still  use  financial  services 
but  rely on  the  age-old  informal  mechanisms:  family  and  friends, 
the rotating savings club, the moneylender, the pawnbroker, cash 
under the mattress and long-term savings in the form of livestock. 
These  mechanisms  are  incomplete,  and  can  be  very  unreliable, 
risky and expensive.  
6. 
Interestingly,  Indonesia  is  one  of  the  fastest-growing  user 
smartphone  in  the  world:  Nearly  60  million  of  the  country's 
citizens  will  have  smartphones  in  2016.  Continuously,  Indonesia’s 
smartphone  users  are  expected  to  grow  at  a  compound  annual 
growth  rate  (CAGR)  of  11.2%  between  2016  and  2020,  to 
reach  more  than  100  million  and  become  the  fourth-largest 
global market. 
7.  On the other hand, Indonesia faces some challenges regarding the 
implementation  of  digital  financial  inclusion  such  as  cash  based 
mindset,  lack  of  information  of  non-cash  instrument,  limited 
interconnection,  coordination  amongst  stakeholders,  and  lack  of 
infrastructure. 
8.  Regarding  the  challenges  as  mentioned,  Indonesia  has  high 
concern  to  increase  financial  access,  especially  for  unbanked  and 
underbanked,  through  the  financial  inclusion  policy.  Financial 
 2 
inclusion  policy  will  eliminate  the  barriers  for  people  to  reach 
financial access.   
Ladies and gentlemen, 
III.  PRESIDENTIAL  DECREE  NO.  82  YEAR  2016  REGARDING 
NATIONAL  STRATEGY  OF  FINANCIAL 
INCLUSION  ON 
SEPTEMBER 1ST 2016 
9.  Financial  Inclusion  has  been  considered  as  national  priority  for 
Indonesia;  therefore  in  2012,  Indonesia  launched  its  National 
strategy for Financial Inclusion (NSFI)1. With the vision to improve 
the  coordination  between  ministries,  Bank  Indonesia,  related 
institutions  and  bodies  in  implementing  this  strategy,  NSFI  has 
been  amended  and  formulated  as  legal  entities  in  Presidential 
Decree  No.  82  Years  2016  regarding  National  Strategy  for 
Financial Inclusion. 
10.  NSFI has 5 Pillars and 3 enablers as follow : 
a.  Pillar  1:  Financial  Education,  aims  to 
improve  public 
knowledge  and  awareness  about 
the 
formal 
financial 
institutions,  financial  products  and  services,  as  well  as  to 
improve public’s skills in financial planning and management. 
b.  Pillar  2:  Public  Property  Rights,  aims  to  expand  the 
guarantee  thus  people  could  access  credit  from  formal 
financial services. 
c.  Pillar  3:  Financial  Intermediation  Facility  and  Distribution 
Channels  aims  to  expand  the  range  of  financial  services  to 
meet the needs of the different groups of people.  
d.  Pillar  4:  Financial  Service  in  Government  Sector,  aims  to 
improve the governance and transparency of public services in 
                                                           
1 In NSFI, Financial Inclusion is defined as: a condition when every individual has access to a wide range of quality 
formal financial services in a timely, clear, and secure with affordable price according to the needs and capabilities in 
order to improve their welfare 
3 
 the distribution of government funds. This can be achieved by 
distribution  of  aid  through  non  cash  which  is  expected  to 
increase targeting accuracy, quantity, price, time, quality, and 
administrative. 
e.  Pillar  5:  Consumer  Protection,  aims  to  provide  a  sense  of 
security 
to 
the  community 
to 
interact  with 
financial 
institutions,  and  take  advantage  of  the  products  as  well  as 
financial  services  and  payment  systems  offered.  Principle  of 
consumer  protection  are  transparency,  equal  treatment, 
reliability,  confidentiality  and  security  of  data  /  consumer 
information,  and    complaint  handling,  as  well  as  consumer 
dispute resolution in a simple, fast, and affordable cost. 
11.  The five pillars of National Strategy of Financial Inclusion must be 
supported by three enablers as follows: 
a.  Conducive  Policies  and  Regulations:  The  implementation  of 
inclusive  financial  programs  needs  policies  and  regulations  of 
the government and authorities/regulators. 
b.  Supportive  Infrastructure  and  Information  Technology:  It  is 
necessary  to  minimize  information  asymmetry  that  is  obstacles 
or bottlenecks in accessing financial services. 
c.  Effective  Organization  and  Implementation  Mechanism:  The 
diversity of financial inclusion actors and organizations leads to 
a  need  of  mechanism  to  encourage  the  implementation  of 
various activities together and integrated.  
Distinguished guests, 
IV.  ROBUST,  SOUND,  EFFICIENT  AND  SECURE  PAYMENT  SYSTEM 
TO SUPPORT FINANCIAL INCLUSION INITIATIVES 
12.  Bank  Indonesia  as  the  payment  system  regulator  also  put  high 
concern  in  financial  inclusion.  By  bringing  people  to  financial 
 4 
system,  we  believe  it  will  support  financial  stability.  First,  it  will 
increase the resilience of financial system through the increase of 
financial  buffer  from  the  retail  deposits.  Second,  with  expanding 
financial  access  to  retail  sector,  for  both  saving  and  borrowing 
side,  it  will  diversify  liquidity  and  credit  risk.  Meanwhile,  financial 
inclusion  combined  with  electronification2  will 
increase  the 
efficiency of financial transaction. For the benefit of the economy, 
financial inclusion will bring positive impact in minimizing the gap, 
reducing  the  poverty  level,  and  increasing  asset  accumulation  of 
people. 
13.  To  support  access  to  finance,  Bank  Indonesia  implements  a  dual 
policy  approach,  which 
include 
financial 
inclusion  and 
electronification.  Currently,  64%  of  the  unbanked  people  in 
Indonesia 
are 
subject 
to 
financial 
inclusion 
through 
electronification via e-money and Digital Financial Services agents. 
Once these unbanked people are accustomed to perform cashless 
transactions  and  able  to  maintain  the  amount  in  their  electronic 
money (registered with maximum amount Rp 5 million), they will 
be  asked  to  open  a  savings  account  at  a  bank  through  the  Laku 
Pandai  program.  Thus,  overtime,  these  unbanked  people  will 
become  bankable  and  are  subsequently  expected  to  utilize  other 
financial service products through Banks and Insurance. 
14.  In the mean time, the 36% banked people are also encouraged to 
utilize  electronic  payments.  This  is  carried  out  through  the 
National Non Cash Movement initiative that is supported by G to P 
(Government to Person), P to G (Person to Government), and P to 
P (Person to Person) programs. 
15.  Payment technology in terms of financial inclusion implementation 
is perceived as enabler because it creates more efficient usage of 
                                                           
2 Electronification is a change mechanism from cash to non-cash and from manual to electronic.  
5 
 financial services and plays an important role to enhance financial 
access for the society. To increase the effectiveness and efficiency 
of  transaction,  Indonesia  supports  the  interoperability  and  inter-
connectivity among payment infrastructure.  
16.  In  order  to  increase  financial  access,  Bank  Indonesia  implement 
financial  inclusion  program.  Most  of  our  financial  inclusion 
programs  are  developed  based  on  digital  technology.  As  a  main 
access  is  Digital  Financial  Services  (DFS)  and  develop  ecosystem 
through electronification. Both programs are implemented through 
sectoral approach, such as electronic Government to People (G2P) 
assistance,  People  to  Government  payment,  especially  public 
services,  electronification 
for  migrant  worker  and 
fisher 
community, and electronic payment in smart city. 
17.  Implementing  the  financial  inclusion  strategy  will  promote  the 
financial  access  of  SME  as  well  because  it  is  fundamental  for 
enabling SME, as the engine of economic growth and employment, 
to expand their business. 
Distinguished guests, 
V.  SME FINANCING 
18.  Indonesian SME dominates the number of business units with the 
percentage of 99%. They also create employment opportunity for 
97% of the total workforce and contribute to 60% of Indonesia’s 
GDP.  In  contrast  with  the  number  and  contribution  of  SME,  their 
financing  is  still  relatively  low.  The  SME  loans  share  on  August 
2016  is  19.7%.  Most  of  them  are  disbursed  to  trade  sector  for 
about  53%.  Some  issues  trigger  the  low  percentage  of  SME 
financing are  
a.  Banks encountered difficulties in assessing the financial viability 
of SMEs. 
 6 
b.  There  is  asymmetric  information  where  Banks  require  the 
information on the potential SMEs and the eligibility of SMEs. 
c.  Banks looked at SMEs as high risk business. 
d.  The limited public access to finances, especially in remote areas.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
VI.  CONCLUSION 
19.  Despite the limitation in telecommunications network in Indonesia 
and  lack  of  socialization  and  assistance  for  end  user,  Bank 
Indonesia  continuously  perform  our  best  efforts  to  improve  SME 
access  to  finance  through  the  means  of  information  technology 
(IT)  since  IT  will  broaden  the  range  of  SME  access  to  finance 
facilities/infrastructure  in  an  easier,  cheaper,  and  reach  out  to 
broader and remote region. Then, it could also facilitate change of 
SME behavior in recording and conducting financial transactions of 
its  business.  Finally,  information  technology  is  also  expected  to 
encourage  SME 
to  utilize 
the  development/innovation  of 
technology in conducting its business 
Distinguished guest, ladies and gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  conclude  my  presentation  by  quoting  the  statement  from 
Christine Lagarde, Managing Director of the IMF: “Greater financial inclusion 
has  tangible  economic  benefits,  such  as  higher  GDP  growth  and  lower 
income  inequality.  By  providing  access  to  accounts,  credit,  infrastructure, 
women and low income users, financial  inclusion helps make  growth more 
inclusive”. Thank you. 
Kathmandu, 9 November 2016 
Mr. Erwin Rijanto 
Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia 
 7 
