Vítor  Constâncio:  Stijn  van  Nieuwerburgh's  contribution 
macroeconomics and finance
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the ceremony
marking the award of the Germán Bernácer Prize for Promoting Economic Research in Europe
to Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, Madrid, 16 December 2016.
to
 I am delighted to be here today to celebrate with you the winner of the 2016 Bernácer Prize: Stijn
van Nieuwerburgh, Professor of Finance at the New York University, Stern School of Business.
Stijn  is  an  outstanding  scholar,  researching  at  the  interface  between  macroeconomics  and
finance, with a focus on the interdependencies between the real economy, asset pricing and the
real  estate  market.  His  widely  cited  studies  have  been  published  in  the  leading  international
academic journals. Stijn’s intellectual endeavours have significantly broadened our understanding
of  various  aspects  of  housing  markets  and  financial  stability,  to  name  two  examples.  His
research is of significant relevance to central bank policy. As I will show in a minute, some of
Stijn’s  innovative  research  has  become  a  fundamental  part  of  the  newly  established  field  of
macroprudential policy.
Macroprudential  policy  aims  to  safeguard  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  by
increasing  its  resilience  and  resisting  the  build-up  of  vulnerabilities  that  lead  to  systemic  risk
materialisation. Since the mid-1970s all episodes of banking crises in advanced economies, i.e.,
periods of systemic risk materialisation, were associated with housing busts that, of course, had
costly implications for the macroeconomy. These housing busts were preceded by protracted
periods of systemic risk build-up inherent in ebullient house price cycles or even more broadly
defined financial cycles underpinning the importance of monitoring joint cycles comprising credit
2
and house prices.
1
Stijn van Nieuwerburgh’s research has helped to bring such issues to the fore.
To  put  his  contributions  into  context,  note  that  these  issues  played  no  special  role  in
macroeconomic  models  until  the  turn  of  the  century.  The  Handbook  of  Macroeconomics,
published  in  1999,  contained  no  references  to  housing.   It  was  not  entirely  absent  from
macroeconomic  research  but  rather  had  a  marginal  role  within  the  models.  It  wasn’t  until  the
housing boom in the first half of 2000 that housing became a focus of macroeconomic studies.
Academics  began  to  study  the  interaction  of  house  prices  and  collateralised  household
borrowing with business cycles or monetary policy. They chose to explore how housing – in its
twin  role  as  a  consumption  good  and  as  a  collateralisable  asset  –  influences  asset  pricing,
portfolio and consumption-saving choices.
3
But  let  me  now  give  you  some  concrete  examples  of  Stijn  van  Nieuwerburgh’s  timely  and
significant research. Of the wide range of topics covered in his studies, I shall concentrate on
housing markets and other sources of systemic risk, which are key inputs into macroprudential
policy.
4
Let me begin by referring to one of Stijn’s earliest research papers from 2005 on housing as a
collateral  good,  published  in  the  Journal  of  Finance.  In  this  study,  Stijn,  together  with  Hanno
Lustig,  describes  how  housing  can  affect  asset  returns  and  may  thus  spread  to  other
markets.   The  authors  explore  the  role  of  housing  as  a  collateral  asset  in  a  model  of  limited
commitment. When housing collateral is scarce, i.e., the ratio of housing wealth to human capital
wealth is low, their model predicts that households are less keen to take on financial risks, and
therefore  demand  a  higher  return  for  bearing  these  risks.  Using  US  data,  they  show  that  a
decrease in housing collateral is followed by higher future stock returns. Stijn and co-author thus
highlight an important channel through which housing affects stock returns, namely through its
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
role  as  a  collateral  asset.  This  result  stresses  the  relevance  of  housing  market  surveillance
because developments in these markets can have a broader impact on asset markets.
5
With respect to the role of housing as a business cycle driver, a very significant piece of work is
Stijn’s most recent research, forthcoming in the Journal of Political Economy and jointly written
with Jack Favilukis and Sydney Ludvigson.  Stijn and co-authors study the impact of changes in
housing collateral constraints as well as foreign capital inflows in a general equilibrium model.
Housing  provides  utility  to  households  but  can  be  used  as  collateral  in  debt  obligations.  The
authors find that financial market liberalisation, seen as an economy-wide relaxation of collateral
constraints,  such  as  lower  down  payments,  can  create  a  boom  in  house  prices  relative  to
housing fundamentals. This result has highly relevant policy implications. In fact, macroprudential
policy  aims  to  address  excessive  leverage  through  capital-based  measures  affecting  banks’
balance  sheets,  but  also  through  borrower-based  measures,  such  as  loan-to-value  ratios,  as
suggested by Stijn and co-authors in this paper.
They also highlight capital inflows that – alongside lower collateral requirements – have been one
of the distinguishing features of the recent housing boom. With respect to the relative importance
of inflows in explaining house price booms across countries, Stijn, together with Jack Favilukis,
David Kohn and Sydney Ludvigson in a paper in 2013, empirically document that these played a
rather small role in the US.  However, they stress that more research is needed on this issue
and suggest that capital inflows may have played a more relevant role in the euro area. In fact,
capital flowing from productive economies to relatively unproductive economies in combination
with a relaxation of lending standards might have contributed to the house price booms in Ireland
and Spain. From a policy perspective, this emphasises the need to take into account country
specificities when addressing imbalances in housing markets. Credit standards, but also capital
inflows, differ significantly across countries, as does, therefore, the optimal policy.
6
7
Let  me  now  turn  to  systemic  risk  more  generally.  Stijn,  together  with  Bryan  Kelly  and  Hanno
Lustig, point to the issue that government guarantees may distort systemic risk indicators. In the
American Economic Review this year, they show that pricing in US option markets implied that
the price of insuring against a US financial sector stock market crash was low, relative to prices
of insurance against individual banks’ stock price falls during the 2007–2009 financial crisis in the
US.  Thus, a large amount of tail risk was actually missing from the cost of financial sector crash
insurance  during  the  crisis.  In  the  presence  of  an  implicit  or  explicit  government  guarantee,
market crash insurance prices may even fall when the guarantee is more likely to be activated.
Thus, a fall in crash insurance prices could be mistakenly interpreted as a reduced risk, exactly
when systemic risk is rising. As anticipation of future government intervention is embedded in
market prices, these do not reflect the true underlying tail risk thus leading to a mismeasurement
of  systemic  risk,  particularly  for  the  methods  that  use  market  prices  to  build  indicators  of
systemic risk.
Stijn van Nieuwerburgh has made an important contribution to the widely debated topic of safe
assets,  following  the  massive  fall  in  its  supply  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis.  The  subsequent
emergence of the euro area sovereign debt crisis led to government bonds in certain jurisdictions
no  longer  being  considered  a  safe  asset.  Stijn,  along  with  Markus  Brunnermeier  and  others
propose  a  framework  for  a  safe  asset  for  the  euro  area.  The  proposal  is  to  use  a  synthetic
security build with sovereign debt of all countries and tranched, which, if created and accepted by
the market, would provide a safer asset that banks could use to substitute sovereign debt of a
8
particular country.
All the references I made illustrate how good research is the foundation of good policy. That is
why  the  ECB  dedicates  significant  resources  to  research,  but  also  to  its  exchanges  with
academia. Last April, we held our first annual Macroprudential Policy and Research Conference
which was, on this occasion, jointly organised with the IMF. In September, we also had our first
annual Research Conference, which brings together senior researchers from a wide range of
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
areas.  Of  course,  there  have  been  many  other  conferences  and  workshops  held  at  the  ECB
since it was founded 18 years ago, but not on this scale. In addition to such events, which foster
exchanges between distinguished scholars and the ECB, each year we give leading academics
an opportunity to gain insights into the policymaking environment of the ECB through our Wim
Duisenberg Research Fellowship Programme. For younger researchers we have established a
Summer  Research  Graduate  Programme  enabling  graduate  scholars  close  to  finishing  their
PhD  to  temporarily  join  our  research  department.  Further,  our  Lamfalussy  Fellowship
encourages younger researchers to conduct high-quality research into the structure, integration
and performance of the European financial system. But I hasten to add that the ECB, like the
central  banking  community  in  general,  relies  for  most  of  its  research  progress  on  brilliant
scholars such as Stijn van Nieuwerburgh.
I  hope  it  has  become  evident  from  my  remarks  how  timely  and  seminal  Stijn’s  intellectual
pursuits have been. They mark significant contributions to the new field of macroprudential policy
by  emphasising  the  importance  of  housing  markets  and  shedding  light  on  its  driving  factors.
From  a  policy  perspective,  Stijn’s  research  stresses  the  importance  of  borrower-based
macroprudential  measures  and  the  role  of  capital  inflows.  This  calls  for  proper  co-ordination
across European countries, which is embedded in European legislation. His academic work is
notably  relevant  for  the  review  of  the  EU  macroprudential  policy  framework  that  is  underway,
carried  out  by  the  European  Commission  –  e.g.  in  what  concerns  the  extension  of  the  policy
toolkit.  On  that  note,  I  warmly  congratulate  you,  Stijn,  on  winning  the  2016  Germán  Bernácer
Prize  for  Promoting  Economic  Research  in  Europe.  I  am  confident  that  you  will  make  further
important contributions in the years to come.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoff, (2009), “This Time is Different, Eight Centuries of Financial Folly”, Princeton,
New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Work at the ECB finds evidence that financial cycles, defined as the joint movement of house prices and credit,
are the single best predictors of banking crises (see Schüler, Y., P. Hiebert and T. Peltonen, (2016), “Coherent
financial cycles: Why extending credit can be an asset”, SSRN Working Paper. This analysis builds on work
carried out at the BIS; see Drehmann, M., C. Borio, and K. Tsatsaronis, (2012), “Characterising the financial
cycle: Don’t lose sight of the medium term!”, BIS Working Paper No 380.
Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider, (2016), “Housing and Macroeconomics”. Mimeo.
Lustig, H. and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, (2005), “Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance, and Risk Premia: An
Empirical Perspective”, Journal of Finance, 60, 1167–1219.
Favilukis, J., S. C. Ludvigson and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, (forthcoming), “The Macroeconomic Effects of Housing
Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing in General Equilibrium”, Journal of Political Economy.
Favilukis, J., D. Kohn, S. C. Ludvigson and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, (2013), “International Capital Flows and House
Prices: Theory and Evidence, in Housing and the Financial Crisis”, edited by E.L. Glaeser and T. Sinai, 235–299,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kelly, B., H. Lustig and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, (2016), “Too-Systemic-to-Fail: What Option Markets Imply about
Sector-Wide Government Guarantees”, American Economic Review, 106, 1278–1319.
See Brunnermeier, M., L. Garicano, P. Lane, M. Pagano, R. Reis, T. Santos, S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and D.
Vayanos, (2011), “ESBies: A realistic reform of Europe’s financial architecture”,  VoxEU; Brunnermeier, M., L.
Garicano, P. Lane, M. Pagano, R. Reis, T. Santos, D. Thesmar, S. Van Nieuwerburgh and D. Vayanos, (2016),
“The sovereign-bank diabolic loop and ESBies”, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 106,
508–512;  Brunnermeier,  M.,  S.  Langfield,  M.  Pagano,  R.  Reis,  S.  Van  Nieuwerburgh  and  D.  Vayanos,
(forthcoming), “ESBies: Safety in the tranches”, Economic Policy.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
