  William C Dudley: Remarks at the 40th Annual Central Banking Seminar 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the 40th Annual Central Banking Seminar, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, New York City, 3 October 2016. 
 Elizabeth Mahoney, Jonathan McCarthy, Nick Stanescu and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
It’s my pleasure to welcome you to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to participate in 
the  40th  anniversary  of  our  Central  Banking  Seminar.  This  year  we  have  140  participants 
representing  67  different  countries  and  institutions.  The  program  is  designed  to  provide  a 
broad  view  of  central  banking  covering  the  key  areas  of  monetary  policy,  supervision, 
payments  and  financial  stability.  This  design  reflects  our  belief  that  a  well-rounded 
perspective can help us to be more effective in our jobs as central bankers. We also hope 
this program provides you with an opportunity during your stay to broaden your network of 
central  bank  colleagues.  As  always,  what  I  have  to  say  reflects  my  own  views  and  not 
necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve 
System.  
The  theme  of  this  year’s  seminar  is  the  policy  challenges  we  face  in  an  environment  of 
sluggish  economic  growth  and  low  inflation.  Central  bankers  will  always  be  confronted  by 
challenges  in  carrying  out  their  responsibilities,  which  will  change  over  time.  This  puts  a 
premium  on  our  ability  to  adapt.  Consider,  for  example,  the  contrast  between  the  issues 
faced by the Federal Reserve in 1976 – the inaugural year of our seminar – and today. In 
1976,  the  U.S.  economy  was  recovering  from  the  first  oil  price  shock  and  the  ensuing 
recession, which had ended in March 1975. The FOMC faced the problem of stagflation, as 
both inflation and unemployment were high – inflation was running around 6 percent and the 
unemployment rate was nearly 8 percent. The FOMC’s policy rate – the federal funds rate – 
was about 5 percent. 
Compare  that  to  today’s  circumstances.  The  U.S.  economy  has  entered  its  eighth  year  of 
expansion following the financial crisis and the Great Recession. In contrast to 1976, inflation 
has been below the FOMC’s desired level of 2 percent for most of this expansion. This year, 
inflation is running at about 1 percent and the unemployment rate is 4.9 percent. Monetary 
policy  remains  accommodative,  with  the  target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  at  
0.25–0.50 percent. I doubt that a central banker in 1976 would have viewed the current set of 
circumstances  as  even  remotely  plausible,  or  would  have  ever  contemplated  the  types  of 
challenges that we now face. 
In my remarks today, I would like to briefly touch on four topics: (1) the efficacy of monetary 
policy  at  the  zero  lower  bound,  (2)  central  bank  communications,  (3)  cyber  risk,  and 
(4) market liquidity and regulation. These have particular relevance for central banks today, 
and are likely to remain relevant in the years ahead. The speakers that you will hear over the 
course of our program will elaborate on some of these topics. 
The financial crisis severely impaired the global financial system, and the resulting recession 
in the United States was the most severe since the Great Depression. Based in part on the 
lessons of the Japanese experience, in which falling inflation expectations undermined the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  the  FOMC  responded  aggressively  as  the  economy 
weakened. It began cutting the policy rate from 5.25 percent in September 2007 and reached 
the effective zero lower bound in December 2008. From that point on, the FOMC turned to 
unconventional monetary policy in order to provide additional stimulus to the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Academic  research  indicates  that  recoveries  following  financial  crises  have  tended  to  be 
shallow  and  protracted.1  One  plausible  reason  for  this  pattern  is  that  a  financial  crisis 
typically results in headwinds that take time to dissipate – for example, the deleveraging of 
business and household balance sheets or the tightening of credit standards. Even so, as the 
expansion  failed  to  gather  momentum  and  persistently  underperformed  most  forecasts, 
alternative  explanations  for  the  sluggish  economic  growth  –  such  as  secular  stagnation  –
began to receive increased attention. Wednesday’s session on Global Trends and Risks will 
more fully explore this debate. The insights from this debate have important implications for 
the appropriate path for monetary policy and the question of whether monetary policymakers 
need additional tools or greater support from the fiscal authorities to avoid being trapped at 
the zero lower bound for interest rates. 
Beyond these factors, the tepid pace of the expansion reflects the fact that monetary policy 
was  constrained  by  the  zero  lower  bound.  Monetary  policy  affects  the  economy  mainly 
through its influence on financial market conditions – including long-term interest rates, credit 
spreads,  exchange  rates  and  equity  prices.  However,  when  the  policy  rate  hits  zero, 
conventional  policy  is  constrained  in  terms  of  providing  additional  accommodation―even 
recognizing that some central banks have pushed short-term rates into negative territory. To 
overcome such constraints, the FOMC used forward guidance – promising to keep rates low 
for longer – and asset purchases to provide additional stimulus to the economy. Given the 
initial  novelty  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  tools,  central  banks  did  not  have  a  well-
developed body of research to draw on to design the programs and calibrate their impact. 
While  it  will  take  time  to  build  this  body  of  work,  research  to  date  varies  in  terms  of  the 
estimated effectiveness of unconventional policy. Several studies indicate that the FOMC’s 
first asset purchase program helped to reduce long-term interest rates, while the subsequent 
programs had smaller though still significant effects on rates. However, Professor Summers, 
who is participating in our program, has recently questioned the effectiveness of the Fed’s 
asset purchase programs when financial markets are well-functioning.2  
There is a related concern given that the federal funds rate is still close to zero at this point in 
the expansion. While I’m on record as saying that expansions do not simply die of old age,3 
some  economists  are  concerned  that  the  risk  of  a  recession  is  increasing.  As  I  indicated 
earlier,  the  FOMC  was  able  to  reduce  the  federal  funds  rate  by  more  than  5  percentage 
points  in  an  effort  to  offset  the  effects  of  the  last  recession.  If  another  recession  were  to 
happen in the next few years, it is likely that the FOMC would be unable to respond with a 
cut of such magnitude. In this case, the effectiveness of unconventional monetary policy in 
providing accommodation would again become a central issue, as Chair Yellen discussed in 
her  recent  Jackson  Hole  speech.4  A  risk  management  approach  to monetary  policy  would 
suggest that the more concerned one is with the effectiveness of these policies at the zero 
lower bound, the more cautious one would be in the process of removing accommodation. 
So,  even  though  we  are  now  slightly  off  the  zero  lower  bound,  an  assessment  of  the 
effectiveness of unconventional monetary policy has implications with respect to the current 
stance of monetary policy. 
Another  important  challenge  for  central  banks  is  communication  with  the  public.  It  is  now 
accepted that the effectiveness of monetary policy is enhanced when the public has a clear 
understanding  of  the  goals  of  monetary  policy,  and  the  framework  and  actions  that  the 
central bank will use to attain them. One important example is inflation expectations, which 
                                                
1  For  example,  see  Carmen  Reinhart  and  Kenneth  Rogoff.  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of 
Financial Folly. Princeton University Press, 2009. 
2  See Larry Summers’ blog. 
3  See Remarks at the New York Fed’s Economic Press Briefing on the Household Debt and Credit Report. 
4  See The Federal Reserve’s Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the 
are important to the dynamics of inflation. Effective communication by the central bank can 
help to anchor inflation expectations at its target, thereby making it easier for the central bank 
to attain its inflation objective. 
The  use  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  has  also  heightened 
focus  on 
communication. In  the  past,  communication  almost  exclusively  focused on  the  likely  short-
term  path  for  the  central  bank’s  policy  rate.  But,  once  the  zero  lower  bound  became  a 
constraint,  forward  guidance  became  an  important  communication  tool  to  surmount  the 
problems caused by that constraint. In addition, there are now many more dimensions to the 
stance of monetary policy, including the size and composition of the central bank’s balance 
sheet. When communicating about these various dimensions, it is important for the central 
bank  to  demonstrate  its  commitment  to  a  framework  rather  than  to  a  specific  policy  path, 
since the precise path of policy should be data dependent and the future is uncertain. Good 
communication can lead to a clear understanding of the Fed’s framework, which will help the 
public to assess the data along with the Fed and enable it to better predict how the Fed is 
likely to adjust policy as the economic outlook changes. 
As  I  indicated  earlier,  the  challenges  the  FOMC  faced  in  1976  were  very  different  from 
today’s. In addition, advances in information technology also have changed how we do our 
work. However, these advances come with the risk of increased exposure to cyber-attacks. 
The  various  motivations  for  these  attacks  include  causing  embarrassment  to  the  central 
bank,  stealing  money,  and  disrupting  critical  financial  services.  The  large  sums  of  money 
potentially at risk mean that we need very strong defenses to lower the probability of success 
by  cyber  attackers  in  order  to  deter  such  efforts.  Attacks  can  have  consequences  for  a 
central bank’s reputation and the public’s confidence in it, underscoring the importance of a 
sturdy set of defenses and response actions. Protecting against cyber-attacks requires not 
only  investment  in  the  right  infrastructure,  policies  and  processes,  but  also  vigilance  from 
central bank employees. Many attacks involve tricking unsuspecting employees into installing 
malicious  code  or  revealing  key  access  information.  Since  this  “phishing”  plays  on  human 
weaknesses,  to  which  we  are  all  prone,  protecting  against  these  tactics  requires  ongoing 
training and testing, appropriate access controls, and segregation of duties in the context of 
critical  infrastructures.  Central  banks  also  need  reliable  channels  of  communication  and 
cooperation with those agencies that track and combat malicious cyber activity. 
The last topic that I would like to touch on is market liquidity and regulation. Market liquidity is 
essential  to  the  proper  functioning  of  financial  markets.  I  think  of  it  as  the  cost  –  both  in 
expense and time – of buying or selling an asset for cash. Market liquidity is like engine oil, 
which is essential for engine parts to move properly without generating excessive friction and 
heat.  Market  liquidity  reflects  many  factors,  including  the  expense  of  conducting  a 
transaction, the  price  of  the transaction  relative  to  the  midpoint  of the  bid-ask  spread,  any 
impact of the transaction on the market price, and the speed at which the transaction can be 
completed. 
Some argue that market liquidity has been adversely effected by post-crisis regulation. For 
example, the higher capital and liquidity requirements for the largest securities dealers may 
have impaired market liquidity by reducing the profitability of dealer intermediation activities 
and raising the cost of dealer balance sheets. But, before considering whether any regulatory 
changes would be appropriate, it is important to carefully examine the evidence. New York 
Fed  staff  have  been  conducting  an  extensive  analysis  of  empirical  measures  of  market 
liquidity and the effects certain regulations may have had on it. The work to date finds little 
evidence – based on traditional liquidity measures – of any meaningful degradation in market 
liquidity across key asset classes. However, there are important data gaps that must be filled 
in order to have a more complete assessment. For example, the U.S. Treasury market data 
capture  dealer-to-dealer  transactions,  but  not  dealer-to-customer  transactions  that  are 
typically conducted on an over-the-counter basis. Moreover, we do see other consequences 
of regulation, such as the rise in the foreign exchange swap basis and the spread between 
LIBOR and the federal funds rate, as well as the decline in dealer repo financing activity. Still, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  it is important to keep in mind that even if further analysis were to identify a regulatory-related 
decline  in  market  liquidity,  any  associated  cost  would  have  to  be  weighed  against  the 
benefits of these regulations in terms of a safer and more robust financial system. 
In closing, I hope you will find our program both engaging and challenging. Don’t be shy – 
our speakers welcome difficult and thought-provoking questions. Absorb all you can. Use this 
opportunity  to  network  with  your  colleagues.  Hopefully,  this  experience  will  stimulate  your 
thinking and help you be successful in your career as a central banker. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
