December  5,  2016 
B ank  o f   Japa n 
Digital Innovation and FinTech 
Remarks at the Paris EUROPLACE Financial Forum in Tokyo 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Introduction 
It  is  a  great  honor  to  have  this  opportunity  to  speak  before  the  Paris  Europlace  Financial 
Forum. 
 When I look back on my teenage years, I was passionate about science and technology, and 
I  dreamed  of  a  future  in  which  people  enjoyed  traveling  to  other  planets  and  talking  with 
friends  around  the  world  by  videophone.  After  decades  of  technological  development, 
interplanetary  travel  is  unfortunately  still  some  way  off,  but  innovation  in  information 
technology has evolved far beyond people's expectations over half a century ago. 
 As  a  central  banker,  I  am  in  a  position  to  closely  monitor  the  financial  world,  and  recent 
developments  in  information  technology,  which  are  leading  to  wide-scale  innovations  in 
financial  services,  bring  new  excitement  and  challenges.  Such  innovations  have  the 
potential to significantly change the global landscape of finance and economies. 
 Thus,  today  I  would  like  to  talk  about  financial  innovation,  which  is  attracting  attention 
around the world as "FinTech." I hope my remarks  will serve as a bridge to the afternoon 
sessions. 
 Technological Innovation, Economic Growth, and Finance 
Innovation is undoubtedly a main  driver of economic growth, and thus it has always been 
the focus of economic policy. 
 Historical  studies  show  that  global  economic  growth  was  considerably  slow  until  the 
medieval  period.  The  growth  rate  surged  in  the  modern  era  when  new  industrial 
technologies  were  widely  applied  to  economic  activities.  The  financial  industry,  which 
emerged shortly before the modern era, has played an important role in enabling subsequent 
technological innovations to drive the growth of various industries and economies. 
 By  making  use  of  sophisticated  financial  infrastructure,  people  discover  promising  new 
technologies. Then, with the support of finance, these new technologies attract money and 
resources,  develop  as  an  industry,  and  eventually  spread  widely  and  are  used  by  many 
 1 
people. Looking back at the history of the automobile and airline industries as examples, the 
creation  of  the  Ford  Model  T  and  the  flight  of  the  Wright  brothers  happened  in  the  early 
20th  century.  Without  finance,  those  industries,  as  well  as  many  other  relevant  industries, 
could not have grown so rapidly and led to strong economic growth in the 20th century. 
 Information Technology and Financial Innovation 
As  such,  technological  innovations  since  the  Industrial  Revolution  have  generated  many 
new  industries.  The  financial industry  has  a longer  history  than  even  many  manufacturing 
industries,  because  basic  financial  infrastructure  such  as  money,  ledgers,  and  accounting 
came into being before or during the medieval period. Nonetheless, ongoing innovations in 
information  technologies  are  now  expected  to  have  significant  impacts  particularly  on  the 
financial industry and financial services. 
 There  are  various  reasons  behind  such  strong  linkages  between  recent  information 
technologies  and  financial  services.  First,  finance  is  a  sophisticated  system  of  various 
information  processing  such  as  payment,  settlement,  investment  decisions,  and  risk 
management.  In  this  respect,  the  financial  industry  can  be  considered  an  "information 
industry."  Second,  some  recent  information  technologies  such  as  the  "blockchain"  and 
"distributed  ledger  technology,"  or  DLT,  have  the  potential  to  significantly  affect  money 
and ledgers, which are the basic infrastructure for financial activities. 
 Moreover,  wide-ranging  innovations,  which  may  significantly  affect  financial  services, 
appeared  almost  simultaneously  around  the  time  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  First, 
smartphones such as the iPhone which was invented in 2007, enhanced the accessibility to 
various financial services. Then, in 2008 the new technologies of the blockchain and DLT 
were  created.  Moreover,  artificial  intelligence,  or  AI,  and  big  data  analytics  have  evolved 
greatly thanks to the dramatic increase in computing power. 
 In  addition,  since  the  global  financial  crisis,  new  entrants  to  financial  services  have  been 
welcomed,  particularly  in  those  countries  where  public  funds  were  injected  to  financial 
institutions. This environment has also supported the development of FinTech. 
  2 
Promising Potential of Financial Innovation 
Recent  financial  innovation,  symbolized  by  the  word  "FinTech,"  has  huge  potential  to 
change the structure of financial services. 
 First,  FinTech can "globalize" financial services. Mobile phones and smartphones  are now 
spreading  rapidly  in  developing  and  emerging  economies  where  financial  services  are  not 
yet  widespread.  These  new  devices  could  substantially  promote  "Financial  Inclusion,"  by 
enabling  people  in  those  countries  to  access  financial  services  such  as  mobile  banking. 
Indeed, the developing and emerging countries in Asia and Africa  are keenly interested in 
FinTech and mobile banking. 
 Second, FinTech can "personalize" financial services. Mobile phones and smartphones are 
designed  as  "personalized"  tools  because  they  were  originally  portable  phones.  By  using 
these  devices  as  new  access  points  for  financial  services  as  well  as  advanced  big  data 
analytics,  it  is  becoming  easier  to  provide  customized  and  personalized  services  to  each 
user. 
 Third,  FinTech  can  "virtualize"  financial  services.  With  innovations  in  information 
technology, financial services providers can use the Internet, smartphones, cloud computing, 
and  AI  as  new  tools  for  their  activities.  Accordingly,  tangible  fixed  infrastructure  such  as 
"brick  and  mortar"  branches  and  ATM  networks  are  no  longer  prerequisites  for  providing 
financial services. 
 New Issues Stemming from Financial Innovation 
Although  there  are  many  upsides  of  financial  innovation,  it  also  raises  new  issues  and 
challenges for us. 
 First  and  ironically,  new  information  technologies  have  made  sophisticated  cyber-attacks 
possible. Moreover, with the widespread use of the Internet and smartphones for accessing 
financial services, financial networks are becoming increasingly  "open." Accordingly, it is 
becoming  much  more  important  to  take  effective  measures  against  cyber-attacks  and 
maintain information security. 
 3 
Second, financial authorities  are extracting various  information from the balance sheets of 
licensed  financial  institutions  such  as  commercial  banks.  Furthermore,  the  authorities  use 
regulatory tools, such as capital requirements and liquidity standards, to impose constraints 
on  these  balance  sheets  in  order  to  maintain  financial  stability.  However,  these  measures 
may  not  be  very  effective  for  non-bank  FinTech  firms,  especially  if  they  deal  only  with 
payment-related  services,  or  if  they  match  the  supply  and  demand  of  funds  without  using 
their own balance sheet in their Peer-to-Peer, or P2P, lending. Thus, financial authorities are 
facing new challenges in terms of obtaining information and maintaining financial stability. 
 Third,  there  are  debates  on  whether  and  to  what  extent  new  types  of  transactions  such  as 
high-frequency  trading  and  algorithm  trading  enabled  by  recent  information  technologies 
tend  to  increase  market  volatility.  Theoretically,  if  technological  innovation  makes 
transactions  more  efficient,  it  could  also  contribute  to  market  efficiency  by  increasing 
liquidity, for example. Nonetheless, in view of the recent developments in various countries, 
policymakers must develop a deeper understanding of the impact of these new transactions 
on financial markets. 
 Even  though  new  technologies  bring  new  challenges,  it  may  not  be  wise  to  try  to  stop 
technological  innovation.  I  believe  that  policymakers  should  try  to  maximize  the  benefits 
and minimize the negative sides of technological innovation. 
 In  some  sense,  technological  innovation  reflects  the  basic  human  nature  of  "intellectual 
adventure." I believe that human beings are inherently curious and search for better ideas to 
resolve problems, and that they have a genuine desire to communicate and share such ideas 
with other people. Thus, I do not think it is easy to suppress such human characteristics. I 
believe the reason why smartphones have instantly become popular worldwide is that they 
were  originally  designed  to  be  "tools  for  communication,"  thus  satisfying  a  basic  human 
desire. 
 Moreover,  if  new  information  technologies  are  truly  advanced  ones,  we  should  be  able  to 
utilize  them  also  for  enhancing  information  security  and  maintaining  people's  trust  in 
financial transactions. To ensure that people support financial innovation and FinTech, it is 
 4 
also important to improve biometrics authentication and cryptography technologies. 
 Some  people  argue  that  humans  will  eventually  have  nothing  to  do  if  information 
technologies  advance  so  far  and  if  computers  and  AI  become  more  capable,  but  I  am 
skeptical  of  such  a  pessimistic  view.  The  invention  of  the  automobile  and  airplane 
substantially reduced the demand for horse-drawn coaches and sailing ships. Nonetheless, if 
we look at society as a whole, those new technologies clearly have enabled human beings to 
make more use of their abilities. Today, we have this wonderful forum, connecting France 
and  Japan  and  with  many  people  attending  from  around  the  world.  Without  technological 
innovation, we could never imagine holding such an event. 
 Furthermore, I think it is very unlikely that financial innovation will take over the roles of 
humans. To reiterate, finance is a sophisticated bundle of information processing: it creates 
linkages between various entities such as between lender and borrower, and between payer 
and  payee.  Through  such  activities,  finance  enables  people  to  allocate  their  limited 
resources  to  projects  with  higher  productivity  and  growth  potential.  Thinking  about  this 
nature  of  finance,  I  believe  that  financial  innovation  will  create  an  environment  where 
everyone can share their creativity with others, thus contributing to economic development, 
as long as innovation really enhances the efficiency of financial services. 
 For example, if FinTech enables people in developing countries to access financial services, 
it  would  also  help  those  people  to  use  e-commerce  and  e-learning.  This  would  increase 
opportunities  for  people  wanting  to  raise  their  living  standard  and  receive  education. 
Moreover,  if  new  information  technology  and  FinTech  help  channel  financial  support  to 
new  ideas,  it  will  help  new  businesses  incorporating  new  ideas  to  develop.  Through  such 
activities, financial innovation and FinTech will eventually contribute to economic growth. 
 Initiatives at the Bank of Japan 
In view of such potential of financial innovation, the Bank of Japan established its "FinTech 
Center" on April 1, aiming to facilitate the development of FinTech. The Bank has also built 
up  its  "FinTech  Network"  comprising  a  wide  range  of  staff  drawn  from  the  relevant 
departments  of  the  Bank.  This  FinTech  Network  promotes  the  sharing  of  information  and 
 5 
expertise related to Fintech in a cross-sectoral manner. 
 Meanwhile,  private  entities  are  now testing  the application  of  DLT,  which  is  a  technology 
that  symbolizes  FinTech.  In  order  for  central  banks  to  fulfill  their  responsibilities  such  as 
ensuring the stability of payments and settlements, it is becoming increasingly important to 
have a profound understanding of new technologies including DLT. Accordingly, the staff in 
the  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  Department  of  the  Bank  are  deepening  their 
understanding of such new technologies by test-driving distributed ledgers. Note that these 
trials  by  the  Bank's  staff  simply  aim  to  understand  the  mechanics  of  DLT,  rather  than 
applying it to the Bank's own liabilities or its payment and settlement systems. 
 The Bank, as the central bank of Japan, is dedicated to supporting the healthy development 
of  FinTech, in order to enhance the welfare of financial service users as well as economic 
activities. 
 Concluding Remarks 
In order to make effective use of financial innovation for developing financial markets and 
stimulating  economic  activities,  it  is  important  to  continuously  upgrade  the  basic 
infrastructure  by  using  new  technologies,  while  maintaining  people's  trust  in  financial 
services and security. 
 In  this  regard,  both  France  and  Japan  have  continuously  adopted  many  new  technologies 
while  maintaining  their  cultural  heritage.  Also,  these  two  countries  have  always  tried  to 
harmonize  the  old  and  the  new.  In  my  view,  this  attitude  in  France  is  symbolized  by  the 
Eiffel  Tower,  which  sparked  heated  debate  in the 19th  century  but  now  perfectly  matches 
the landscape in Paris, as well as by the glass Pyramid in the center of the Louvre Museum. 
Above all, it is fascinating to see the two Triumphal Arches of Caroussel and Etoile, which 
were built in the age of Napoléon, arranged in a straight line toward the very contemporary 
Grand  Arch  of  Defense.  This  wonderful  scenery  reminds  me  of  the  fact  that  financial 
services, which supported economic development in the modern age, are now experiencing 
wide-scale innovations with new information technologies and are poised to develop further. 
As  long  as  France  and  Japan  actively  embrace  new  technologies,  I  firmly  believe  that 
 6 
financial innovation will boost the development of the markets and the economies of France 
and Japan. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
 7 
