21st ASEAN Banking Conference Governor’s Speech 
28th November 2016, Anantara Siam Bangkok Hotel 
 “TRANSFORMING FINANCIAL SERVICES TO MEET THE NEEDS OF 
THE GROWING ASEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY (AEC)” 
 
Chairman of the ASEAN Bankers’ Association  
Chairman of the Thai Bankers' Association 
Deputy Governor of the National Bank of Cambodia 
Chairpersons, CEOs, and Top Executives of ASEAN Banks, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Sawasdee Krub 
A very good morning to you all. It is a great pleasure for me to be here today to share with you 
my thoughts on the upcoming challenges for the ASEAN banking industry. Before I begin, I 
would like to thank the Thai Bankers’ Association for the invitation to this annual gathering of 
ASEAN bankers. Let me also extend a warm welcome to the executives of ASEAN banks who 
have travelled here for this special event. From my calculation, in aggregate, you all manage 
assets of around 120 percent of total ASEAN GDP.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
We  are  going  together  through  profound  changes  in  the  global  economic  environment.  The 
economic  condition  called  the  “new  mediocre”  together  with  the  transformation  towards 
digitization have  been  key  driving  forces  for  a  volatile,  uncertain,  complex, and  ambiguous 
environment or the VUCA world in short. Against this backdrop, we as commercial bankers 
and regulators have to move together to ensure growth, prosperity, and sustainability for our 
region. Let me elaborate on the key issues we are facing. 
 
The  “new  mediocre”  is  a  state  of  multiple “lows”  –  low-growth,  low-investment,  low-trade 
volume, low-interest rate, low commodity  prices, and low-inflation.  Compared to ten years 
ago, global growth has been relatively subdued, with no significant pickup in sight. The latest 
IMF economic forecast puts global growth next year at 3.4 percent, a slight improvement from 
a disappointing 3.1 percent this year.  Slow growth momentum is most pronounced in the core 
advanced  economies,  with  1.8  percent  forecast  for  2017.    Yet,  while  this  state  of  the  “new 
mediocre”  is  more  often  associated  with  the  advanced  economies,  there  is  risk  that  some 
emerging countries including ASEAN countries will sooner or later experience it as well due 
to spill-over effects and domestic structural constraints. 
 
The spill-over effects of the "new mediocre" go beyond  the growth dimension, but well into 
the  realm  of  financial  stability.  Given  the  low-interest  rate  and  low-yield  in  advanced 
economies,  investors  have  shifted  their  portfolios  to  many  emerging  economies  including 
ASEAN in search of higher yielding financial assets. This “search-for-yield” behaviours with 
capital inflows, rise in asset prices, and higher debt ratio have already  resulted in pockets of 
financial vulnerabilities in many countries. 
 
Yet the “new mediocre” is not only impacting the stability of the financial system and economic 
growth, but is also catalysing social tensions and geo-political changes. As Christine Lagarde 
said at this year's IMF annual meeting, global economic growth has been “too low, for too long, 
and benefiting too few.”  
 1 
 
Across  a  spectrum  of  countries  not  only  is  the  growth  low,  but  it  is  also  not  inclusive, 
particularly for people at the lower end. The widening wealth gap, coupled with lower yields 
on savings has led to the feeling of less hope of a better future. Amidst this frustration with the 
status quo, sentiments of anti-present economic establishment such as anti-globalisation, anti-
trade,  and  even  anti-bankers  have  become  more  widespread.  We  see  increases  in  
non-tariff  trade barriers  and oppositions to trade deals, polarization of views among people, 
Brexit, and the US Election.  Populist and nationalist policies are flourishing among middle 
and lower income people in many countries.   
 
Against this backdrop, we also face fast changes in technology.  Not since the industrial age, 
have  we  witnessed  such  rapid  adoption  of  technology  and  innovation,  thanks  in  part  to  the 
digital revolution. 
 
Although  technology  increases  economic  productivity  and  improves  people’s  standard  of 
living,  it  can  be  a  source  of  stress  for  the  working-age  population.  Many,  even  the  highly 
skilled,  such  as  investment  professionals,  fear  being  replaced  by  robots  and  artificial 
intelligence. Current business models are rapidly rendered obsolete by new business models and 
the sharing economy such as Uber or Airbnb.   
 
Owing to changing economic environment, social sentiment, and technological advancement, 
I see five imperatives for ASEAN’s banking sector going forward.  
 
First, innovative technology is fast changing financial business landscape and we have to 
be  proactive  in  embracing  technology.  Given  the  low-growth  and  low-interest  rate 
environment,  banks’  income  is facing  pressure  from  declining  spread  and  fees.  Consumers’ 
needs and behaviour have changed and they now demand faster and more convenient services. 
In light of this trend, many banks have already embraced technology into their businesses for 
lowering costs, increasing efficiency, and better serving their customers. However, technology 
has developed at a faster pace than the past.  To remain competitive, banks will have to adopt 
new  financial  technology  fast  enough  while  making  sure  that  the  organizational  structure, 
corporate culture, and business models are agile and adaptive.   
 
More  importantly,  large  non-bank  fintech  players  are  becoming  significant  players  in  our 
financial landscape. Banks cannot afford to wait and see the landscape change before taking 
action. Every day, new business models are being developed. Technology adoption by banks 
is  therefore  unavoidable  should  they  wish  to  stay  ahead.  As  Ravi  Menon,  MAS  Managing 
Director, recently said at the Singapore Fintech Festival, “In an industry facing the headwinds 
of  lower  economic  growth  and  heavier  regulatory  burdens,  innovation  must  be  the  way  to 
refresh and re-energise the business model.” 
 
Fortunately, financial technology is being adopted in many ASEAN countries, notwithstanding 
their different stages of development. Singapore is testing a blockchain-based system for interbank 
payment to simplify the payments process and reduce costs. In Cambodia, Wing Money Transfer and 
Payment Services are popular among local people.   
 
In Thailand, the government and the Bank of Thailand, together with the banking industry, are 
committed to supporting the use of technology  for greater  efficiency  and productivity  in the 
financial  sector  and  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Early  next  year,  Prompt  Pay  or  the  fast  P2P 
payment system will be implemented. Prompt Pay will be an impetus in changing consumers’ 
behaviours to use electronic payment for everyday goods and services. Transactional banking 
 2 
instability, 
the  main  drivers  of  financial 
could be easily completed online or via mobile phone rather than going to bank branches.  This 
move towards less reliance on cash will reduce the cost of cash handling thereby  increasing 
efficiency of the banking industry and the Thai economy as a whole.  
 
On the downside, technology comes with associated risks. In recent years, cyber threats have 
increased dramatically in frequency, sophistication and their widespread effects.  This year, at 
least four financial institutions in Bangladesh, Vietnam, Ecuador, and the Philippines became 
victims of cyber heist involving the SWIFT system while ATMs in Japan, Taiwan, Thailand, 
and recently in many European countries have been hacked. IT security and cyber security need 
to  be  addressed  for  secure  transactions  and  to  ensure  trust  among  customers.  The  Bank  of 
Thailand and the Thai Bankers Association (TBA) have collaborated to set up an Information 
Sharing Group (ISG) or financial-sector CERT. The group enables comprehensive information 
sharing and connects to other involved parties such as cyber security specialists, vendors, and 
legal enforcement agencies, to develop defensive, preventive and responsive plans. This is a 
first step for Thailand. Given the borderless cyber world, collaboration on cyber security among 
ASEAN countries needs to be enhanced. ASEAN banks have to step up efforts and join hands 
in setting up processes and tools for sharing cybersecurity incidents, exchange of information 
and knowledge, conducting cyber attack exercises, and developing cyber security experts.  
 
Secondly, there has to be sufficient immunity against the boom and bust of financial cycle. 
We have seen many financial crises over the years. The Global Financial Crisis, whose total 
magnitude of economic costs are still being tallied is the latest example. As the financial cycle 
is  one  of 
to  counteract  
pro-cyclical behaviours and reduce potential systemic risk build-up is necessary. The Basel III 
framework  of  pro-cyclical  capital  buffer  and  systemically  important  financial  institutions 
(SIFIs) capital surcharge are among the first initiatives by a global standard setter. Having good 
buffers in place will provide the financial system with an immunity against the large swing of 
financial cycle and financial volatility, as going forward, the potential of policy normalization 
in advanced economies and yield snapback could trigger capital reversal and foreign exchange 
liquidity squeeze in many emerging countries. 
 
Changes in regulations and a greater emphasis on financial stability by policy makers, however, 
is  only  half  of  the  solution.  Equally  important  are  the  roles  of  commercial  bankers  who 
contribute directly to the stability of the financial system. Banks need to remain vigilant and 
look  through  the  cycle  while  assessing  credit  risk  and  building  up  buffers.  Buffers  such  as 
provisions and capital have to be built-up during good times to absorb any losses during rough 
times.  In  short,  decisions  need  to  be  based  more  on  long-term  views  rather  than  short  term 
views. 
 
Basing decisions on long-term views is an important factor for commercial banks’ practices. 
During  periods  of  low  growth  and  low  yield,  banks  should  refrain  from  unsound  
search-for-yield  behaviours  or  facilitating  aggressive  search-for-yield  behaviours  that  could 
build-up systemic risk and cause financial instability.       
 
Thirdly,  behaviour  and  culture  within  financial  institutions  must  gear  towards  good 
governance, soundness, and sustainability to pre-empt unwarranted risks. During the last 
Asian  and  global  financial  crisis,  excessive  risk-taking  behaviour  was  one  key  driver.  
Short-sighted views on risk were embedded in the practice of management and employees. This 
was defined and reflected in the structure on rewards, accountability,  personalities, as well as 
check  and  balance  mechanisms,  or  lack  thereof,  within  the  organization.  More  recently,  the 
manipulation of the London Interbank Offered Rate (Libor) which has done serious reputational 
taking  action 
 3 
damage  to  the  banking  industry  and  reduced  public  trust  was  an  example  of  misbehaviour 
fostered by inappropriate cultures.   
 
While events such as the financial crisis, and other scandals have continuously triggered waves 
of regulatory reforms, those are not enough and our work is far from over. Today, there are still 
examples  of  poor  corporate  governance  and  misconduct  resulting  from  the  root-cause  of 
inappropriate  behaviour  and  culture  within  banks.  Recently,  fraudulent  practices  in  a  large 
global bank were exposed where bank accounts were opened without customers’ consent or 
knowledge.  Banks  themselves  need  to  create  culture  that  encourages  management  and 
employees to have the right values and behaviour.     
 
This behaviour and culture cannot be detected quantitatively and similarly to the way we assess 
financial  data,  or  risk-taking  investment.  Let  me  demonstrate  by  using  an  iceberg  to  paint  a 
clearer  picture.  The  tip  of  an  iceberg  above  the  water  is  what  we  observe  through  banking 
performance, financial information, and investment portfolios. Although the tip may show good 
performance  records,  the  larger  portion  of  the  iceberg  under  water  is  what  determines  its 
strength or fragility. Unawareness of small cracks in the iceberg could result in its unforeseeable 
disintegration. Corporate culture and behaviour is a part of this portion under water and is an 
influencer of decisions within the organization. Building corporate culture and behaviour that 
fosters  good  governance,  soundness,  and  sustainability  therefore  has  to  be  instilled  into  the 
organization.  
 
For ASEAN banks, we have learnt our lesson from the Asian Financial Crisis and bankers who 
had endured through that period are fully aware of the associated risks and their consequences. 
Going forward, however, with new and younger generations of bankers, these lessons may not 
be  as  fully  appreciated.  Newer  generations  may  be  less  aware  of  the  costs  associated  with 
excessive risk-taking behaviours and the aggressive search for higher yields may be prevalent. 
In  this  transitional  period,  it  is  therefore  even  more  imperative  that  the  proper  culture  and 
behaviour be embedded into every level of the organization, starting from the highest level at 
the board and cascading down to every level of management and staff.  
 
Fourthly,  financial  institutions  need  to  embrace  sustainable  banking  to  ensure 
sustainable success. The concept of sustainability plays an increasingly important role in our 
global  and  regional  development.  Global  warming,  growing  inequality  of  wealth  and 
opportunity,  and continued  exploitation of natural  resources,  have  elevated  the issue of social 
responsibility across all players in the society.  
 
If  we  look  at  the  Dow  Jones  Sustainability  World  Index  (DJSI),  which  is  used  to  measure 
sustainable performance of listed companies worldwide through analysis of various factors in 
economic, environmental, and social dimensions, we see only one bank from ASEAN included 
in the Index for the first time this year. I congratulate this Thai bank and certainly hope other 
ASEAN banks will soon follow.  
 
Sustainable  banking  encompasses  wide-ranging  areas  from  codes  of  business  conduct, 
responsible lending, environmental policy and financial literacy, as well as financial inclusion. 
These initiatives have to be incorporated into banks' way  of doing businesses.  Banks as the 
main players in the allocation of resources, play a key role in ensuring sustainable growth of 
the whole economy.  
 
 4 
A strong culture of ethics and responsibility of banks should also be in place. This ranges from 
employees’  integrity,  customers’  data  privacy,  anti-bribery  and  corruption,  to  strictly 
complying with laws and regulations.  
 
Socially, banks’ responsibilities should start with the design of products that meet the needs of 
customers.  Financial  literacy  will  also  increase  customers’  financial  discipline  and 
understanding  of  financial  products  and  associated  risks.  Nowadays,  as  banks  also  provide 
digital  services,  financial  technology  literacy  is  another aspect  that needs  to  be  deepened  to 
improve awareness of cyber security and promote greater usage of digital products. 
 
Increasing financial access is another channel through which to drive equal opportunity for all. 
ASEAN has a large population that is currently  underserved  with average  exclusion level at 
44%.    Reducing  this  exclusion  level  means  an  increase  in  opportunities  for  people  and 
businesses and contribute to sustainable growth of ASEAN.   
 
Lastly,  ASEAN  banks  need  to  intensify  our  commitment  to  strengthening  regional 
financial connectivity. The ASEAN region remains the world’s beacon of hope and a bright 
spot.  One driver of growth in our region is the increased intensity of connectivity  via trade, 
investment, and people as we reach our integration goals. Tangible benefits of increasing intra-
regional trade and investment have been witnessed; however, much work remains with regards 
to financial connectivity. More long-term benefits for regional growth need to be realized, and 
financial connectivity reinforced. 
 
There are a number of important initiatives that both regulators and bankers in ASEAN need 
to collaborate to further connect our ASEAN financial systems. There will be greater business 
opportunities through the strengthening of partnerships amongst ASEAN banks and increased 
usage of cross-border financial services by introducing proper infrastructure and fee structure. 
Expansions of banking  presences  through  the  Qualified  ASEAN  Banks  (QABs)  will enable 
greater  efficiency  and  reduce  costs  of  businesses  for  both  bankers  and  customers  alike.  At 
present, Thailand is in the process of negotiating bilateral QAB frameworks with Malaysia and 
Indonesia. And yesterday, in Nay Pyi Taw, the Central Bank of Myanmar and Bank of Thailand 
signed a letter of intent to start the QAB negotiation process. 
 
ASEAN regulators have taken on a number of initiatives to reduce costs of businesses through 
the support of greater connectivity, mutual recognition agreements and greater cohesiveness of 
rules  and  regulations.  Additionally,  usage  of  local  currencies  as  a  means  of  payment  and 
settlement  will  facilitate  our  intra-region  trade  and  investment.  Common  infrastructures  for 
cross border payment and settlement such as through the Asian Payment Network are important 
to increasing efficiency of doing businesses and reducing costs of remittances and transfers. 
 
If  we  all work together  in  our various  capacities  we  can  together  strengthen  our  region  and 
improve ASEAN people’s standards of living.  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
To  sum  up,  I  strongly  believe  that  bankers  play  a  critical  role  in  the  future  of  ASEAN 
economies and people’s lives. ASEAN banks, given their large scale and power of intellectual 
and capital resources, must be the force that drives our region forward and improve people’s 
quality of lives. During this period of VUCA world and changes in economic environment with 
technology  disrupting  business  landscapes,  we  must  focus  on  longer  term  goals.  Working 
together,  ASEAN banks  must commit to strengthening  our regional  growth  and  to ensuring 
 5 
sustainable development.  Instilling  proper behaviours and cultures into the organization and 
practicing sustainable banking will strengthen us from within.   
 
Looking at today’s agenda, I am delighted that ASEAN bankers will  engage and work together 
to find ways  to meaningfully  impact our region on issues ranging from digital and fintech to 
sustainable finance. Close collaboration is a win-win strategy I believe will truly benefit us all. 
The benefits of integration  must be felt by  every  part of the society.  Ladies and Gentlemen. 
The future of ASEAN as a region rests within your hands. 
 
I wish you all a successful and fruitful conference.  
Thank you.  
 6 
