Murat Çetinkaya: Recent economic and financial developments in Turkey 
Speech by Mr Murat Çetinkaya, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the 
press conference for the presentation of the Oktober 2016 Inflation Report, Istanbul, 27 October
2016.
Distinguished Guests,
 Welcome to the briefing held to convey the key messages of the October 2016 Inflation Report.
The  report  typically  summarizes  the  economic  outlook  underlying  monetary  policy  decisions,
shares  our  evaluations  on  macroeconomic  developments  and  presents  our  medium-term
inflation forecasts, which were revised in view of the developments in the last quarter, along with
our monetary policy stance. Furthermore, I would like to talk about some of our evaluations on
the recent steps taken by our Bank.
In addition to the main text, the Report includes eight boxes, which entail analyses on current and
interesting topics. These boxes evaluate the dynamics of inflation over the last decade; discuss
how  developments  in  the  tourism  industry  affected  food  inflation  and  key  macroeconomic
aggregates; and look into Turkey’s export gains in the EU market on the competitiveness front. In
addition,  the  Report  also  includes  boxes  that  analyze  the  effect  of  agricultural  banking  on
agricultural productivity; give a brief account of motivations for FX collateral deposits and then
elaborate  on  their  effects  on  currency  swap  markets;  scrutinize  recent  loan  developments
through various indicators for loan supply and demand; and summarize the general framework
and key features of the recent incentive systems introduced in Turkey. The titles of the boxes are
shown on the slide. Each of these boxes shed light on important and current issues pertaining to
the  Turkish  economy.  I  strongly  recommend  that  you  read  these  boxes,  which  will  soon  be
published on our website.
Esteemed Guests,
I would like to commence my speech by reviewing the global economic outlook, given its ongoing
influence  on  our  policies.  As  you  all  know,  monetary  policy  developments  in  advanced
economies were the major factor feeding into volatility in global markets in the third quarter of
2016.  In  this  period,  major  central  banks  opted  for  more  monetary  easing,  yet  growing
expectations of a possible Fed rate hike and uncertainties surrounding monetary policies of other
advanced market central banks stopped the ongoing decline in bond yields (Chart 1). Thus, after
a  marked  upsurge  following  the  previous  reporting  period,  portfolio  flows  into  emerging
economies have recently started to slow down again (Chart 2).
1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  addition  to  the  volatility  in  global  markets,  both  geopolitical  developments  and  decisions  of
credit rating agencies caused domestic financial markets to fluctuate over the third quarter of
2016. In this period, Turkey attracted less portfolio flows than other emerging economies, while
the Turkish lira depreciated against the US dollar and the country’s risk premium inched up. 
Overall financial conditions were supported by reduced tightness in monetary conditions, thanks
to our policy actions, and macroprudential measures. The gradual fall in the marginal funding rate
has partially passed through to loan and deposit rates while consumer loans have edged up in
recent months. Consumer inflation was in line with the forecasts of the July Inflation Report in the
third quarter of 2016, with core goods and unprocessed food pulling underlying inflation down.
Domestic demand was subdued in the third quarter but leading indicators signal that economic
activity will pick up by the fourth quarter of the year. Moreover, despite downside risks to external
demand  due  to  geopolitical  tensions,  the  external  trade  balance  continues  to  improve  amid
increasing EU demand. On the other hand, developments regarding tourism revenues cause a
slight widening in the current account deficit.
1. Monetary policy and monetary conditions
Esteemed Guests,
We  continued  with  monetary  policy  simplification  in  the  third  quarter  on  the  back  of  improved
core inflation indicators, the favorable course of the global risk appetite and the effective use of
monetary policy tools. Accordingly, we lowered the marginal funding rate to 8.25 percent by three
consecutive  25  basis  point  reductions  in  July, August  and  September.  On  the  other  hand,  in
October,  we  left  the  policy  rates  unchanged  in  view  of  less  tight  financial  conditions  and
spillovers of other cost factors to the inflation outlook. Hence, we kept the marginal funding rate,
one-week  repo  auction  rate  and  the  overnight  borrowing  rate  constant  at  8.25,  7.5  and  7.25
percent, respectively (Chart 3). As you all know, with simplification, we aim to provide funding via
a  single  rate,  which  will  bring  short-term  market  rates  closer  to  the  funding  rate.  The
simplification will contribute to the effectiveness of the transmission mechanism by enabling a
more reliable assessment of the monetary policy stance. In this context, we mostly achieved our
targeted gains. We are planning to finalize the monetary policy simplification within a reasonable
schedule.  I  also  would  like  to  add  that  the  direction  and  timing  of  the  next  step  towards
simplification will depend on the developments affecting the inflation outlook and financial stability.
As CBRT, our main funding has continued to be provided via one-week repo auctions, while the
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
share of our marginal funding decreased (Chart 4). Our weighted average funding rate dropped
to around 7.8 percent in October. Interbank overnight repo rates remained on the decline in line
with the reductions in the upper band of the interest rate corridor. I would like to underline that our
monetary policy stance will continue to depend on the inflation outlook in the upcoming period. As
CBRT,  we  will  maintain  our  cautious  monetary  policy  stance  by  taking  into  account  the
developments  regarding  inflation  expectations,  the  pricing  behavior  and  other  factors  affecting
inflation.
Amid  continued  expectations  for  a  prolonged  low  interest  rate  environment  across  advanced
economies  as  well  as  the  favorable  course  of  domestic  macroeconomic  indicators  and
monetary  policy  simplification,  the  yield  curve  shifted  downwards  in  all  maturities  from  the
previous  reporting  period,  as  shown  on  the  slide  (Chart  5).  The  fall  was  more  pronounced  in
short-term interest rates due to the decline in our funding rate.
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
The slide in the annual growth rate of loans extended to the non-financial sector came to a halt in
the  third  quarter  of  2016  owing  to  reduced  tightness  in  monetary  conditions,  macroprudential
measures that support the financial system and government incentives (Chart 6). Commercial
loans continued to grow faster than consumer loans in this period as well. Although the gradual
fall in our marginal funding rate partially passed through to loan and deposit rates, loan standards
remained partially tight in the third quarter. However, I would like to state that consumer loans
have  recently  rebounded  on  the  back  of  the  favorable  effect  of  our  liquidity  policies  on  banks’
domestic funding conditions and emerging effects of macroprudential policies (Chart 7).
2. Macroeconomic developments and main assumptions 
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Estemeed Guests,
Now, I will talk about the macroeconomic outlook and our assumptions on which our forecasts
are based. First, I will summarize the recent inflation developments. Then, I will continue with the
domestic and external demand outlook upon which we based our projections.
Consumer inflation ended the third quarter at 7.28 percent, remaining consistent with the lower
bound of the July Inflation Report forecast (Chart 8). The fall in inflation was mostly driven by
prices of core goods and unprocessed food, whereas annual inflation in tobacco and energy was
up. Thus, inflation excluding unprocessed food and tobacco posted a smaller decline, according
closely with the upper bound of the July Inflation Report forecast (Chart 9). The inflation outlook
remained benign amid waning cumulative exchange rate effects, weakening demand conditions
and modest import prices. Cost pressures driven by producer prices remained subdued in this
period. On the other hand, rising tobacco prices and adjustments in fuel taxes hampered the
improvement  in  inflation.  Therefore,  consumer  inflation  fluctuated  while  annual  core  inflation
remained on a downward track through the third quarter.
After a slight increase in the previous quarter, annual food inflation recorded a sharp drop in the
third quarter, standing far below the path projected in the July Inflation Report. The slowing food
inflation  was  mostly  attributed  to  the  waning  tourism  demand,  the  contraction  in  exports  to
Russia  and  the  measures  placed  on  red  meat.  Food  inflation  excluding  fresh  fruits  and
vegetables fell to a five-year low of 4.78 percent in September (Chart 10). Meanwhile, despite the
sluggish economic activity and the slowing food inflation, services inflation remained high mostly
due to rising real unit labor costs and rent.
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  underlying  core  goods  inflation  slowed  down  in  the  third  quarter  as  a  result  of  moderate
exchange rates and weakening domestic demand. On the other hand, the underlying services
inflation  increased.  Accordingly,  the  underlying  core  inflation  indicators  remained  largely  flat
compared to the previous quarter (Chart 11). Meanwhile, the tendency to increase prices was
down  quarter-on-quarter  as  implied  by  the  diffusion  indices  for  core  indicators,  while  our
alternative  core  inflation  indicators  posted  a  more  solid  decline.  In  conclusion,  considering  all
indicators  capturing  the  underlying  trend  and  the  pricing  behavior,  I  would  like  to  say  that
underlying inflation continued to improve in the third quarter.
Esteemed Guests,
Economic activity slowed in the second quarter as we predicted in the July Inflation Report. The
GDP  grew  by  0.3  and  3.1  percent  in  quarter-on-quarter  and  year-on-year  terms,  respectively
(Chart  12).  We  observe  that  the  main  driver  of  annual  growth  was  final  domestic  demand,
whereas  net  exports  provided  more  negative  contribution  to  growth  due  to  the  tourism  slump
(Chart 13). The contribution of final domestic demand to growth has been through both public
and private consumer spending, while investments remain subdued. Public spending provided a
large (1.7 points) contribution to growth as in the first quarter. On the other hand, value added
gains were limited in industrial and services sectors with strong linkages to tourism.
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Indicators for the third quarter of 2016 point to further deceleration in economic activity. In addition
to the deepening tourism slump, the mid-July domestic turbulence and working day losses due to
religious holidays dampened production activities. Therefore, although the sharp drop in July’s
industrial production was offset by a rapid recovery in August, we expect production to fall below
the  second-quarter  level  in  the  third  quarter.  Yet,  I  would  like  to  remind  you  that  working  day
losses caused by the holiday in September will make it difficult to track the underlying trend in
production  as  in  July.  Despite  weaker  domestic  demand,  growing  EU  demand  continued  to
bolster  Turkey’s  exports  in  the  third  quarter.  Turkey’s  market  shifting  flexibility  continues  to
cushion exports against the negative effects of geopolitical tensions on external demand.
We expect domestic demand and economic activity to recover starting from the last quarter of
2016. Thanks to more accommodative monetary conditions and other measures, the recovery in
consumer  loans  in  recent  months  support  our  projections  of  improvement  in  the  last  quarter.
Against this background, we envisage that the economic growth will be mild in 2016, which is
marked by consecutive adverse shocks. In view of waning uncertainties in the upcoming period,
we assess that producer and consumer confidence will be re-built, demand-stimulating policies
will support consumption expenditures and negative contribution of net exports will fall, which will
all  contribute  to  economic  recovery.  In  addition  to  the  partial  improvement  both  in  tourism
revenues  and  exports  to  Russia  in  the  normalization  process,  we  envisage  that  the  recently
released incentive packages will contribute to growth next year. On the other hand, uncertainties
regarding the pace of global growth and monetary policies of advanced economies as well as the
course of capital flows and geopolitical developments pose a downside risk to growth. Moreover,
the persistent contraction in the tourism sector and the gradual decline in the favorable effects of
commodity prices are likely to cause some increase in the current account deficit in the short
term (Chart 14).
Esteemed Guests,
As  you  all  know,  food,  energy  and  import  prices  also  play  a  great  role  in  inflation  forecasts.
Therefore, before moving on to forecasts, I will briefly talk about our assumptions regarding these
variables.
We revised our assumptions for crude oil prices for the upcoming period upwards compared to
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
the July Inflation Report, while our assumptions for USD-denominated import prices saw some
downward revision (Charts 15 and 16). As depicted on the slide, in terms of annual averages, we
kept our oil price assumption constant at 44 USD for 2016, and increased it to 54 USD for 2017.
On the food front, food inflation remained far below the level envisaged in the July Inflation Report
due to unprocessed food inflation in the third quarter of 2016. Taking account of the current trend
of unprocessed food inflation as well as the decrease in the demand for food stemming from the
fall in tourism revenues, food inflation, which we assumed to be 8 percent by end-2016 in the July
Inflation  Report,  was  revised  downwards  to  6  percent.  Due  to  the  ongoing  weakness  in  food
demand owing to the tourism sector that will persist in 2017 coupled with the measures taken by
the  Food  and  Agricultural  Products  Markets  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  Committee  (the  Food
Committee),  we  expect  food  inflation  to  be  lower  than  its  historical  average  in  2017  as  well.
Accordingly, we revised our assumption for food inflation downwards from 8 percent to 7 percent
for end-2017.
Our medium-term forecasts are based on an outlook that adjustments to taxes and administered
prices  will  be  consistent  with  the  inflation  target  and  automatic  pricing  mechanisms.  For
medium-term fiscal policy stance, we use the MTP projections covering the 2017–2019 period.
3. Inflation and the monetary policy outlook
Esteemed Guests,
Now, I would like to present our inflation and output gap forecasts based on the outlook I have
described so far.
Given a cautious policy stance that focuses on bringing inflation down, we estimate inflation to
approach gradually to the 5-percent target. Inflation is likely to be 7.5 percent in 2016, falling to 6.5
percent in 2017 and stabilizing around 5 percent in 2018. Accordingly, we expect inflation to be,
with 70 percent probability, between 7 percent and 8 percent (with a mid-point of 7.5 percent) at
end-2016 and between 5 percent and 8 percent (with a mid-point of 6.5 percent) at end-2017
(Chart 17).
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  Turkish  lira  fluctuated  following  the  July  Inflation  Report,  while  oil  prices  increased.  We
revised  our  assumptions  for  TL-denominated  import  prices  upwards  for  the  upcoming  period
compared  to  the  previous  reporting  period.  On  the  other  hand,  we  envisage  that  the  latest
domestic developments will curb domestic demand particularly in the short term. Accordingly,
we revised our output gap forecasts downwards. The year-end consumer inflation forecast for
2016 remained unchanged as downside effects and upside effects on inflation cancelled each
other out.  On the other hand, end-2017 consumer inflation forecast was revised upwards by 0.5
points  as  the  upside  effects  driven  by  import  prices  outweighed  the  effects  of  the  downward
revision in the output gap and food inflation.
In addition to these forecasts, we summarize a variety of risk assessments regarding the overall
macroeconomic outlook and the monetary policy in the Risks and Monetary Policy section of the
Inflation Report. You can refer to the Report for details.
Esteemed Guests,
In  the  final  part  of  my  speech,  I  also  would  like  to  share  some  information  on  structural
developments I mentioned in the previous Inflation Report briefings.
Previously,  I  have  emphasized  that  long-lasting  price  stability  would  only  be  achieved  through
cooperation among institutions. Moreover, I underlined the role of structural factors in the higher-
than-targeted  inflation  realization  and  price  volatility  in  certain  products.  We  continue  to  take
actions in this regard.
Last month, secretarial affairs of the Food Committee were entrusted to the Central Bank of the
Republic of Turkey. From now on, the Committee will be headed by the Deputy Prime Minister
and  measures  regarding  food  prices  will  be  evaluated  efficiently.  The  committee  held  its  first
meeting  under  the  new  setup  and  commenced  work.  The  key  agenda  items  of  the  Food
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Committee include establishing an early warning system to facilitate close monitoring of supply
and demand developments in food products and taking timely actions; enforcing foreign trade
mechanisms  when  necessary  also  taking  account  of  the  sectoral  balances;  introducing
arrangements to improve competition conditions in the wholesale and retail food market; taking
logistic measures to diminish losses and developing efficient agricultural financing models.
Actions taken by the Food Committee set an invaluable precedent for the joint effort of institutions
to achieve long-lasting price stability in Turkey. However, I would also like to underline that food is
only one of the structural factors that slow down the disinflation process. We will soon announce
our work on other structural issues that cause persistence in inflation.
Esteemed Guests,
While  concluding  my  remarks,  I  would  like  to  thank  all  my  colleagues  who  contributed  to  the
Report,  primarily  those  at  the  Research  and  Monetary  Policy  Department  as  well  as  the
members of the Monetary Policy Committee. I also thank every one of you for your participation
and patience.
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
