Mario Draghi: Introductory statement to the plenary debate of the
European  Parliament  on  the  European  Central  Bank's  Annual
Report 2015
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  to  the
plenary debate of the European Parliament on the European Central Bank's Annual Report 2015,
Strasbourg, 21 November 2016.
 I am happy to be back at the European Parliament to discuss with you the ECB Annual Report
for 2015.
This debate is an important pillar of our accountability. We take your comments and suggestions
very seriously.
At your request, last year we began publishing the ECB’s feedback on your resolution on the
ECB  Annual  Report.  On  4  October  2016  the  Governing  Council  also  approved  principles
increasing transparency in developing ECB regulations on European statistics. These principles
take  into  account  the  transparency  practices  of  the  European  Parliament,  the  Council  of  the
European Union and the European Commission.
In my remarks today, I will retrace the economic developments since our last plenary exchange
in February. In particular, I will discuss the role of the ECB’s monetary policy in supporting the
ongoing recovery. I will also review the policy agenda aimed at addressing current vulnerabilities
in the euro area.
Economic developments and the role of the ECB’s monetary policy in supporting the
recovery
The  euro  area  recovery  continues  to  proceed  at  a  moderate,  but  steady,  pace.  It  has  shown
remarkable  resilience  to  adverse  developments  and  uncertainties  emanating  from  the  global
environment.
In fact, euro area unemployment has been steadily declining. More than four million jobs have
been  created  since  2013,  when  the  situation  was  at  its  worst.  Domestic  demand  has  also
strengthened and real GDP growth has recorded positive figures for 14 consecutive quarters.
Since  the  beginning  of  the  year  headline  inflation  has  gradually  picked  up,  moving  from  the
negative rate of –0.2 in February to 0.5 in October.
Our monetary policy measures since June 2014 have been a key factor behind these positive
developments. Asset purchases, targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) and low
policy rates have strongly supported the recovery. Let me explain more in detail.
First,  the  pass-through  of  our  monetary  stimulus  to  bank  lending  conditions  has  been
remarkable. Interest rates have fallen markedly across a broad spectrum of asset classes and
credit markets since June 2014. As a result, euro area firms and households have experienced
more favourable borrowing conditions. For example, bank lending rates for companies declined
by more than 100 basis points between June 2014 and September 2016. Bank lending conditions
for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  –  the  backbone  of  our  economy  –  have
improved  even  more:  since  May  2014  bank  lending  rates  on  very  small  loans  to  corporations
have declined by around 170 basis points. They are now converging towards those of large-scale
borrowers.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Evidence from our bank lending survey supports this picture. Banks report that our measures are
contributing to more favourable terms and conditions on loans and are supporting credit creation.
Moreover, we see that banks are passing on the very attractive funding conditions of the TLTROs
to their customers.
Lower  borrowing  costs  for  firms  and  households  have  stimulated  both  consumption  and
investment.  For  example,  household  income  is  benefiting  from  lower  interest  rate  expenses.
Likewise,  investment  spending  benefits  from  lower  financing  costs,  which  are  making  more
investment projects profitable.
Supported by our monetary  policy,  the  recovery  is  sustaining  its  momentum.  We  also  expect
headline inflation to continue rising over the coming months. At the same time, we are not seeing
a consistent strengthening of underlying price dynamics. Much of the expected increase will be
driven by statistical factors related to the stabilisation of oil prices.
Moreover, the return of inflation towards our objective still relies on the continuation of the current,
unprecedented level of monetary support, in spite of the gradual closing of the output gap.
It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  remain  committed  to  preserving  the  very  substantial  degree  of
monetary  accommodation  necessary  to  secure  a  sustained  convergence  of  inflation  towards
levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
However, as your draft resolution on our Annual Report argues, our monetary policy support has
to be accompanied by decisive action from other policy areas.
In  fact,  we  continue  to  face  a  number  of  structural  challenges  that  are  holding  back  a  more
dynamic  expansion  of  the  euro  area  economy.  So  the  right  policies  need  to  be  designed  to
address existing vulnerabilities and challenges and, ultimately, secure higher sustainable growth
for the euro area.
The need for policy actions to address current vulnerabilities
As I argued before, the euro area economy has proved resilient despite the uncertainty caused,
among  other  things,  by  the  crisis  in  emerging  market  economies,  the  collapse  in  oil  and
commodity prices, and the consequences of the UK referendum.
Beyond the relevance of the ECB’s monetary policy, an important contributing factor has been
the more robust financial sector which has emerged from the financial crisis.
The decision to address the mistakes of the pre-crisis era through ambitious regulatory reforms
is thus paying off. It has resulted in a European financial sector that is now stronger in terms of
capital, leverage, funding and risk-taking. For example, Common Equity Tier 1 ratios in the euro
area have improved substantially, rising from less than 7% for significant banking groups in 2008
to more than 14% today.
The welcome improvements in bank solvency – and the related improvement in asset quality –
are a tangible result of our common work to create the Banking Union.
The  comprehensive  assessment  we  conducted  in  2014  –  together  with  a  deep  asset  quality
review – encouraged banks to strengthen their balance sheets without delay. As a result, while
the level of non-performing loans (NPLs) remains high in some countries, today this problem is
not primarily related to the robustness of balance sheets. Coverage ratios are close to 50% and
much of the remainder is collateralised.
A more resilient euro area banking system has been able to respond to the impetus originated by
our monetary policy and facilitate the recovery in credit we have witnessed so far.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, a number of structural factors are still weighing on the ability of the financial sector to
fully  support  the  euro  area  recovery.  Notably,  the  profitability  of  euro  area  banks  remains  a
challenge to be addressed.
While bank profitability and the level of bank equity prices is not per se a matter for policymakers,
insofar  as  it  raises  financing  costs  for  banks,  it  could  ultimately  curtail  lending  to  the  real
economy and hold back the recovery. We should therefore consider what factors are behind this
and what we can do to address them.
One factor is certainly the low growth and low inflation environment, which translates into low
interest rates. By supporting the recovery, our monetary policy measures are supporting a return
towards higher rates of return. In other words, low interest rates today are necessary for a return
to higher interest rates in the future.
But legacy and structural challenges are also important factors behind banks’ low profitability.
Where  profitability  is  being  affected  by  structural  issues,  such  as  overcapacity  and  inefficient
cost structures, rationalisation and consolidation must form part of the answer.
Where NPLs are at a high level, creating the conditions for a faster resolution of bad loans is an
essential  part  of  the  solution.  ECB  Banking  Supervision  has  presented  its  draft  guidance  on
NPLs  for  public  consultation.  We  have  also  conducted  a  stocktake  of  national  supervisory
practices  and  legal  frameworks  related  to  NPLs.  With  a  view  to  creating  liquid  markets  of
distressed debt, efforts will be required to foster the development of an NPL servicing industry, to
improve data quality and access, and to remove tax and legal impediments to debt restructuring.
The  European  Parliament  also  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  a  number  of  key  legislative
dossiers.
Some relate to the Banking Union, with the proposed European Deposit Insurance Scheme and
the  introduction  of  “risk-reduction”  measures  in  the  context  of  the  upcoming  revision  of  the
legislative pillars of the Single Rulebook for banks – namely the Bank Recovery and Resolution
Directive (BRRD), the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) and the Capital Requirements
Directive (CRD).
Others relate to the Capital Markets Union (CMU). In particular, the negotiations concerning the
securitisation regulation need to be finalised soon. Securitisation can play a very important role in
increasing  bank  funding  to  the  economy  but  regulatory  uncertainty  is  detrimental  to  European
securitisation markets. We consider that the Commission has put forward a strong package that
balances  a  revival  of  the  European  securitisation  markets  with  the  preservation  of  a  prudent
regulatory framework.
Progress  needs  to  be  made  in  other  areas  too,  in  particular  insolvency  law  and  taxation,  as
announced  in  the  Commission’s  Communication.  It  will  also  be  necessary  to  address  the
financial stability aspects of CMU as part of the macroprudential review.
A stable, profitable and competitive financial sector is essential for sustainable economic growth.
But  the  reverse  is  also  true.  This  is  why  we  need  more  decisive  action  to  raise  the  potential
growth rate of the economy.
First, let me echo your draft resolution. The implementation of structural reforms needs to be
substantially  stepped  up.  This  concerns,  in  particular,  policy  actions  to  raise  productivity  and
improve the business environment. We will soon discuss the Annual Growth Survey 2017, which
touches upon these exact issues. We should make the best use of the annual cycle of economic
governance by ensuring that recommendations – including euro area recommendations – are
really taken into account and effectively implemented.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Second,  fiscal  policies  should  also  support  the  economic  recovery,  while  remaining  in
compliance  with  the  fiscal  rules  of  the  European  Union.  For  instance,  a  more  growth-friendly
composition of fiscal policies could boost growth.
This leads me to my final and concluding point.
Conclusions
During  our  last  plenary  exchange  in  February  I  said  that  the  cohesion  of  Europe  was  being
tested. Since then, the challenges have increased.
It  is  now  more  than  ever  important  and  necessary  that  Europe  responds  cohesively  and
decisively to the challenges it is facing.
I believe we should remember the words of a great European, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, spoken in
this room more than ten years ago:
“If we act alone we will be at the mercy of events bigger than us, events that threaten peace and
European security.”
I am confident that the foundations on which the EU project is built are strong enough to achieve
the objectives that have been entrusted to us by the people of Europe.
I am now looking forward to the debate.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
