Philip  R  Lane:  Review  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland’s  Mortgage
Measures
Statement by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, announcing the review of
the Central Bank Mortgage Measures, Dublin, 23 November 2016.
Read FAQ on review of mortgage measures.
View infographic on review of mortgage measures
 The  Central  Bank  Commission  met  today  to  conclude  its  consideration  of  the  review  of  the
mortgage measures.
The Central Bank introduced the measures in February 2015 as part of our role as the national
macroprudential  authority  for  Ireland,  and  our  mission  to  safeguard  stability  and  protect
consumers.
Macroprudential policy is about limiting risk to the financial system as a whole. The mortgage
measures are centrally important in achieving this objective.
Every  person  has  a  stake  in  this.  The  mortgage  measures  are  designed  to  ensure  borrower
resilience, but they are also designed to ensure banks lend sensibly, and that excess credit does
not build up within the Irish financial system.
In order words, the measures serve a wider purpose – to guard against another credit-fuelled
crisis.
The Central Bank first introduced the measures in February 2015. We made clear at the time
that they would be assessed on a regular basis, but that, given their importance, there would
need to be firm evidence for any changes.
Today’s  review  is  based  on  wide-ranging  analysis  by  the  staff  of  the  Central  Bank  and  has
benefited  from  the  approximately  fifty  external  submissions  we  received  from  our  public
consultation process over the summer. 
Overall,  the  review  has  confirmed  that  the  mortgage  measures  have  been  successfully
implemented – the banks are operating within the measures, leading to sensible lending patterns,
which in turn are contributing to financial stability.
The overall framework is appropriate.
The evidence shows that the probability of default for mortgages taken out under the measures is
lower.  Put  simply,  those  who  bought  properties  under  the  measures  are  better  prepared  to
manage their mortgage payments in the event of a future downturn in the economy.
The framework requires borrowers to satisfy two requirements.
First, a household can borrow a maximum of 3.5 times its gross annual income (known as the
loan to income, or LTI, ratio). This anchor remains firmly in place and is key to ensuring that
mortgage commitments are not too high relative to income levels. 
Second, a household must provide a sufficient deposit to ensure that the ratio of the mortgage
loan to the value of the house (the loan to value, or LTV, ratio) is not too high.  Excessively-high
LTV ratios fail to provide sufficient insulation in the event of a downturn in house prices, pushing
borrowers into negative equity and raising default risk.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Today,  we  are  announcing  some  limited  refinements  to  improve  the  effectiveness  and
sustainability of the LTV regulations, in order to ensure a more durable framework for the long-
term.
All first-time buyers will now be required to provide a minimum deposit of 10 per cent of the value
of the property, with the LTV ceiling set at 90 per cent.
This  replaces  the  current  system  whereby  a  deposit  of  10  per  cent  was  required  on  the  first
€220,000 of the price of a property and 20 per cent on the balance above €220,000. 
The requirement for second and subsequent buyers to provide a minimum deposit of 20 per cent
when taking out a mortgage remains unchanged. 
The  buy-to-let  regulations  also  remain  unchanged,  requiring  investors  to  raise  a  30  per  cent
minimum deposit.
The change for first-time buyers is motivated by two main factors.
First, the current system is complex and would require regular updating, given that the economic
and financial impact of the €220,000 threshold would necessarily shift in line with the evolution of
incomes, house prices and other factors.
Under the new system, the measures should require adjustments only if wider macro-financial
conditions – such as material shifts in credit patterns or financial stability conditions – warrant
revisions.
As an illustration, this simplification shifts the LTV ceiling for a €300,000 mortgage from 87.3 per
cent under the previous system to 90 per cent.
Second, there was evidence at the time of the introduction of the measures showing that first-
time  buyers  defaulted  less  than  second-time  and  subsequent  buyers,  with  the  differential  in
default probabilities especially strong in the case of lower-valued properties.
However,  the  most  recent  data  show  that  the  differential  in  default  probabilities  is  no  longer
weaker for higher-value homes than for lower-valued homes, eliminating an important justification
for  the  current  asymmetric  treatment  of  lower-valued  and  higher-valued  properties  in  the  LTV
regulations.
We are also refining the degree to which lenders can grant loans in excess of the LTV limits for a
limited percentage of their loan books. 
Providing some capacity to lend in excess of the LTV limits allows banks to take into account the
specific circumstances of individual borrowers, which sometimes may justify a higher LTV ratio.
There will now be separate allowances for first-time buyers and second and subsequent buyers.
Twenty  per  cent  of  the  value  of  new  lending  to  second  and  subsequent  buyers  will  now  be
allowed above the 80 per cent LTV limit for this group, while just five per cent of the value of new
lending to first-time buyers will be allowed above this cohort’s 90 per cent LTV limit. 
Separate  allowances  for  the  two  groups  will  ensure  there  is  not  excessive  lending  above  the
limits to either cohort. And, in the long term, it will give the Central Bank flexibility to adjust these
specific limits in a calibrated way if threats to financial stability emerge.
The 20 per cent allowance for banks to lend in excess of the LTI ceiling remains unchanged.
Finally,  we  have  also  decided  to  extend  the  current  valuation  period  from  two  months  to  four
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
months, to take account of the fact that some sales can take longer than the average of three
months.
It is critically important to appreciate that our framework sets limits on the size of mortgages: the
LTI and LTV ratios are not targets but ceilings.
In  buying  a  home,  households  should  take  into  account  the  risk  protections  offered  by  higher
deposits, meaning they have less reliance on mortgage debt.
Equally,  lenders  should  assess  the  loan-bearing  capacity  of  each  mortgage  customer  and
restrict the size of the mortgage if indicated by the credit risk analysis.
Today’s revisions do raise the maximum loan size for first-time buyers seeking to buy homes
above €220,000 in value.  However, it is important to bear in mind several contextual factors.  
First, borrowers also have to satisfy the LTI requirement: for many households, this will limit the
capacity to increase the mortgage size.
Second, under the current system, a significant fraction of first-time buyers in this category were
receiving allowances, such that the actual LTV ratios were not far below the new 90 per cent
limit.
Under  the  new  system,  a  maximum  of  only  5  per  cent  of  new  loans  to  first-time  buyers  can
exceed the LTV ceiling.
Third,  many  first-time  buyers  opt  for  mortgage  loans  below  the  LTV  ceiling:  for  loans  above
€220,000  in  value,  73  per  cent  of  borrowers  put  down  a  deposit  in  excess  of  the  required
minimum.
Fourth, to the extent that the revisions lead to an increase in aggregate mortgage credit volumes,
this should be interpreted in the context of the subdued level of lending in the aftermath of the
crisis.
Fifth,  our  framework  is  designed  to  avoid  spiral  dynamics  between  house  prices  and  credit
volumes.
Since  the  mortgage  measures  were  initially  flagged  in  late  2014,  there  has  been  a  sharp
moderation in expectations for annual gains in house prices, since it is widely understood that
persistently-high rates of increase in house prices are not likely in a system in which measures
place ceilings on LTI and LTV ratios.
Moreover,  our  macroprudential  regulations  can  be  tightened  if  there  is  emerging  evidence  of
elevated risks in the mortgage market.
Finally, it is important to appreciate that many factors influence the dynamics of house prices. 
While rising incomes typically might support some gain in house prices, the prospect of future
expansion  in  housing  supply  and  tightening  in  the  global  funding  conditions  for  lenders  are
significant factors that may place downward pressure on house prices over the medium term. 
The range of uncertainty about the future path for house prices is an important risk factor that
motivates the need for ceilings on LTI and LTV ratios.
These refinements will improve the design of the framework and will take effect from January 1,
2017.
Looking to the future, the revised framework should require adjustments only if there are material
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
changes  to  the  macro-financial  environment  that  require  a  tightening  or  loosening  of  these
measures. 
It is important to appreciate that saving a deposit for a house is a basic requirement that ensures
better  long-term  outcomes  both  for  the  borrower  and  the  lender,  in  terms  of  more  affordable
mortgages and lower credit risk.
Everybody gains from the prudent borrowing and lending patterns that are essential for a stable
financial system: our mortgage measures are designed to deliver this objective.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
