Grant  Spencer:  Innovation  with  resilience  –  a  central  banker's
perspective
Speech  by  Mr  Grant  Spencer,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the
Payments NZ conference, Auckland, 8 November 2016.
 Thanks to Payments NZ for inviting me to speak again at your impressive conference. This is a
great forum for all involved in the New Zealand payments sector.  I will give you a central banker’s
perspective.
My  theme  is  innovation  with  resilience.  We  are  seeing  a  huge  amount  of  innovation  in  the
payments industry. Since the last conference in 2014, the rapid pace of change has continued,
driven  by  factors  such  as  customer  demands,  changing  technology,  new  players,  and  also
regulatory  changes.  A  challenge  is  to  ensure  that  our  systems  remain  resilient  through  this
change.
The Reserve Bank is a system operator and the regulator. We want to be responsive on both
fronts. As  operator  we  are  upgrading  the  Exchange  Settlement Account  System  (ESAS)  and
NZClear  systems  to  ensure  they  remain  fit  for  purpose.  As  regulator  we  are  developing  an
enhanced  framework  for  oversight  of  New  Zealand’s  financial  market  infrastructures  (FMIs).
Today, I will talk about some of the drivers of change, the many risks we face and the proposed
new oversight framework.
Drivers of change
1
The  payments  landscape  is  changing  dramatically  as  it  experiences  ‘digital  disruption’ .
Customers are now seeking to make and receive payments in real time, from any location, on
any  device,  and  at  any  time.  These  customers  expect  payment  services  to  be  faster,  more
personalised, easy to use, inexpensive and fully secure.
The rise in customer expectations is being met and expanded by new providers attracted to the
payments industry. We have seen the telecommunications and computing industries merging
with the financial industry to provide innovative financial services, including payments services.
Much of the innovation in the sector is building on existing technology platforms that are getting
faster and smarter. For example, the IBM “Deep Blue” supercomputer that you may recall beat
Gary Kasparov back in 1997, is less powerful than the iPhone that we carry in our pocket.
Many  of  the  new  developments  are  taking  place  in  the  retail  payments  space  —  banks  are
introducing  new  services  such  as  mobile  and  contactless  payments,  and  engaging  with  new
market players such as Apple Pay, Amazon and Alipay. For example, ANZ’s recent partnership
with Apple Pay. Banks are having to make crucial decisions about how best to respond in the
new payments environment. We are also seeing the development of important new technologies,
such  as  Distributed  Ledger  Technology  (or  Blockchain)  that  could  have  major  impacts  on
payment systems and financial market infrastructures down the track. 
Major technology upgrades are underway in over 15 countries that have or are in the process of
deploying  real  time  payment  systems.  One  close  to  home  is  the  New  Payments  Platform  in
Australia, which will give immediate clearing and settlement, and is scheduled to be implemented
next year.
Local  banks  are  also  speeding  up  their  payments  using  existing  technology.  The  payments
pipeline project aims to address settlement risk within Settlement Before Interchange (SBI) by
minimising the delays between the issuance and settlement of payment instructions. After two
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
years of work, interbank retail payments should soon be settling within an hour. This will meet the
consumer demand for faster clearing of funds and reduce settlement risk within SBI.
Payments  NZ  recognises  the  rapidly  changing  landscape  and  has  initiated  the  Payments
Direction  project,  which  involves  environmental  scanning  and  collaboration  with  key  industry
players. This work, including various white papers and initiatives such as today’s conference, are
positive for the future of the industry.
Higher level of risks
Alongside the rapid pace of innovation and technological change, there are some serious risks. 
For  example,  a  couple  of  months  ago,  Yahoo  confirmed  that  500  millions  user  accounts  had
been stolen — one of the largest cybersecurity data breaches ever.
In the payments world, similar risks exist around the handling and storing of customer data. And,
with  customers  increasingly  demanding  24–7  access,  payments  disruptions  for  only  short
periods can cause major inconvenience. 
A  particular  source  of  risk  is  the  concentration  of  outsourcing  to  third-party  infrastructure
suppliers. A  major  EFTPOS  outage,  for  example,  would  mean  many  people  and  businesses
cannot transact, even though they are connecting through a range of banks. For example, severe
weather in Sydney a few months ago affected Amazon Web Services and led to widespread
ATM and EFTPOS outages. This highlighted the issue of banks’ reliance on third party providers
and not always having backup for their servers at alternative sites. 
Another  key  risk  is  the  growth  in  payments  fraud.  While  consumers  expect  secure,  fast  and
reliable service, the opportunities for fraud are widespread and perpetrators are more innovative.
We  saw  this  with  the  cyber-heist  at  the  central  bank  of  Bangladesh  earlier  this  year.  Nearly
USD$80 million is still unaccounted for as a result of that breach. And the hackers came close to
getting away with USD$1 billion.
2
New Zealand has been less exposed to cyber-heists than many other countries, ranking 18th of
19 in the list of most attacked countries in the Asia Pacific Region (Australia is 16th and Pakistan
1st) . But with the landscape evolving so rapidly, it is important that the industry remain ahead of
the  game  on  cyber-security  and  be  cautious  when  adopting  new  technologies  and  payment
solutions.
Network effects are inherent in payment systems and other FMIs, and result in a high degree of
systemic  risk.  If  FMIs  are  not  well  managed,  they  can  become  a  conduit  for  the  contagion  of
shocks across the financial system. This challenge concerns central banks and other payments
regulators.  How  can  we  make  FMIs  more  robust  under  stress,  and  how  can  we  mitigate  the
potential contagion effects resulting from an FMI failure?
International policy response
International  policy  makers  are  responding  to  these  growing  risks  in  the  FMI  sector.  Financial
regulation since the global financial crisis has been strengthened, and this is also true for FMIs,
particularly where systems are deemed to be systemic. 
3
Many new prudential standards now apply to FMIs, including the Principles for Financial Market
Infrastructures (PFMIs)  developed by the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures
(CPMI)  and  the  International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO);  the  OTC
derivatives reforms agreed by the G20 and the Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes
from  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB) .  This  year  has  seen  the  first  internationally  agreed
guidance  on  cyber  security  from  the  BIS: Guidance  on  Cyber  Resilience  for  FMIs .  Many
jurisdictions, particularly within the G20, are implementing these reforms.
4
5
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Reserve Bank’s response
This  leads  me  to  the  new  oversight  framework  that  the  Reserve  Bank  and  Financial  Markets
Authority (the FMA) have been developing for FMIs in New Zealand.
The case we make for oversight is driven by potential market failures inherent in many FMIs, in
particular negative network externalities where operators or participants might not fully consider
the wider social costs of their actions, particularly in stress situations.
While the Reserve Bank has had responsibility for overseeing the payments system for over a
decade,  we  believe  the  current  legislation  is  no  longer  fit  for  purpose.  The  lack  of  crisis
management powers and our limited ability to induce system improvements mean we are not
able to fully meet our mandate of promoting a sound and efficient payments system. Many of you
provided input to our review of the FMI oversight regime over the last couple of years, and I thank
you for that. We have taken our time in developing the framework so that it will be fit for purpose
and reflect a risk-based approach to regulation.
The new oversight framework, yet to be enacted, has several key features:
The  Reserve  Bank  and  FMA  would  have  information  gathering  powers  in  order  to  better
identify emerging risks
An FMI that is assessed as being systemically important would be required to be designated
under a revised Designation Regime
The Reserve Bank and FMA would have enhanced oversight of designated FMIs, including
powers  to:  set  requirements  on  governance  and  BCP  standards;    influence  FMI  operating
rules, and play a key role in crisis management
Currently designated FMIs would continue to be able to seek legal protection for netting and
settlement under the revised regime. Other new non-systemic systems would also be able to
opt-in to the new regime.
To assess whether an FMI is systemically important, we are using international standard criteria:
the  size  and  concentration  of  financial  risks  within  the  FMI;  the  role  and  the  nature  of  the
transactions it processes; the extent to which there are alternative services available; and the
FMI’s  interdependencies  with  other  FMIs.  Our  initial  assessment  identified  nine  FMIs  that  are
either  systemically  important  or  potentially  of  systemic  importance.  Four  of  them  are  already
designated systems: ESAS, NZClear, CLS and NZCDC. Two of the Payments NZ systems – SBI
and HVCS – are also likely to be designated under the new framework. There are another three
offshore based FMIs that are on this list too, including LCH, ASX Clear (Futures) and Singapore’s
DTCC (trade repository).
A key feature of the proposed new framework is crisis management. We are proposing that the
Reserve Bank and FMA would have a tools to respond if a systemically important FMI fails or is
about to fail. In such a situation, we want to facilitate an orderly recovery or resolution so as to
minimise potential disruptions to the financial system.
While  the  focus  will  be  on  systemically  important  FMIs,  the  proposed  framework  will  help  us
monitor emerging risks in the broader industry. This would not be an “all-or-nothing” oversight
regime. Rather, it would give the Bank and the FMA flexibility to tailor the oversight regime in light
of the risks identified. The oversight regime would continue to be less intrusive than in most other
jurisdictions.
As in our recent engagement with the industry on the potential impact of a point-of-sale switch
outage, we will seek to identify relevant action points for the Reserve Bank and industry. But,
consistent with our broader regulatory philosophy, we will avoid prescriptive solutions if possible.
Industry  cooperation  and  rigorous  self-assessment  in  the  context  of  international  standards  is
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
preferable to regulatory intervention.
The proposals are still subject to Cabinet approval. The next step in the process would be to
prepare  new  legislation.    The  Reserve  Bank  would  issue  an  exposure  draft  for  consultation
around the end of Q1 or early Q2 next year.
Apart  from  the  new  regulatory  framework  for  FMIs,  the  Ministry  of  Business,  Innovation  and
Employment  (MBIE)  has  recently  released  an  issues  paper  on  retail  payment  systems,  their
focus  being  on  merchant  service  and  interchange  fees.  This  is  an  important  efficiency  and
competition  issue  that  many  countries  are  grappling  with.  The  Reserve  Bank  and  the
Government share the common objective of a sound and efficient payments system and which
facilitates innovation and open access. The Government’s issues paper looks at features of the
retail payments system that may also have broader social efficiency implications, for example
arising from the allocation of costs associated with new payment services. I encourage you to
consider and make submissions on the issues paper.
Replacement technology for ESAS and NZClear
The Reserve Bank operates two important parts of the New Zealand payments infrastructure:
ESAS  and  NZClear.  These  systems,  both  of  which  are  designated,  need  to  remain  reliable,
efficient and fit for purpose. We also need to be responsive to changing customer demands and
new technologies. The current ESAS and NZClear systems, introduced in 1998 and 1990, have
served  us  well,  but  both  now  require  upgrades.  The  replacement  project  underway  aims  to
implement systems that meet modern standards of reliability and security while having sufficient
capacity and agility to meet customers’ performance expectations.  At this point, these upgrades
are expected to be completed by the end of 2018.
Closing
In conclusion, I want to reinforce what I have said about the proposed new FMI oversight regime. 
We have sought your input to the regime over recent years and we believe we have listened. We
do  not  envisage  that  the  new  framework  will  significantly  change  how  the  payments  industry
operates or how we engage with each other. We already have a very collaborative relationship
with the industry, including Payments NZ. While some current processes will be formalised over
time,  the  nature  of  our  open  engagement  means  there  should  not  be  surprises.  We  want  to
continue our open dialogue with the industry, allowing mutual goals to be achieved in a low key
and non-prescriptive manner.
The rapidly changing payments landscape provides challenges and opportunities. Competition in
payments  is  important  but  collaboration  is  also  needed  between  financial  institutions,  new
entrants and policy-makers. This is necessary to create the right environment for modernising
the payments system and sensibly managing the risks that arise. Effective innovation is often
best achieved through collaboration and we encourage the industry to move in this direction.
For the Bank, the main focus is on preserving financial stability while also facilitating innovation
and  improved  efficiency.  To  do  this,  we  need  to  keep  abreast  of  the  changing  technology
environment and continue to assess the level of preparedness of the system to handle adverse
shocks.  The  challenge  for  the  Reserve  Bank,  and  for  all  of  us,  is  to  understand  the  evolving
financial services landscape, including its opportunities and vulnerabilities. As we move forward
in this rapidly changing environment, it serves all our interests to first ensure the safety of the
system. This is the foundation for achieving innovation and growth in the industry. 
1
2
3
Watson, A  (2016),  “Disruption  or  distraction?  How  digitisation  is  changing  New  Zealand  banks  and  core
banking systems’, RBNZ Bulletin,78(8).
Based on Microsoft’s Malware Infection Index 2016.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
4
5
Bank for International Settlements (BIS) - Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMI).
Financial Stability Board (FSB) - Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions.
Bank for International Settlements (BIS) - CPMI-IOSCO release guidance on cyber resilience for financial market
infrastructures.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
