  Mario Draghi: IMFC Statement 
Statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the thirty-fourth 
meeting of the International Monetary and Financial Committee, Washington DC, 7 October 
2016. 
 The euro area economy is continuing to expand at a moderate and steady pace, with slightly 
less  momentum  than  envisaged  at  the  time  of  the  Spring  IMFC  meeting.  Incoming 
information  continues  to  point  to  the  economy  being  resilient  to  economic  and  political 
uncertainty in Europe as well as globally. Nevertheless, the prospects for euro area growth 
remain  moderate,  at  slightly  below  1¾%  according  to  the  ECB  staff  projections  for  the 
current  year  and  the  next  two  years.  This  is  mainly  due  to  subdued  foreign  demand,  the 
aforementioned  uncertainties  and  the  sluggish  implementation  of  structural  reforms  that 
could  support  in  particular  a  stronger  recovery  in  investment  as  well  as  boost  potential 
growth. 
The ongoing economic expansion of the euro area is largely supported by developments in 
domestic demand. Real GDP rose by 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the second quarter of this 
year,  following  a  0.5%  increase  in  the  first  quarter.  Survey  indicators  have  shown  some 
resilience in the aftermath of the UK referendum outcome and point to ongoing growth in the 
near  term.  The  ECB’s  very  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  and  its  impact  on 
financing  conditions  are  supporting  domestic  demand.  In  addition,  relatively  low  oil  prices 
and sustained employment gains, in part owing to past structural reforms, should continue to 
support disposable income and private consumption. Reduced leverage ratios and improving 
corporate  profitability  should  further  promote  investment.  The  risks  to  this  growth  outlook 
remain tilted to the downside. 
Headline inflation has remained low and is still being influenced by past declines in oil prices. 
The  current  lack  of  momentum  also  partly  reflects  the  indirect  effects  of  low  oil  prices. 
Meanwhile, domestic cost pressures, in particular wage growth, continue to be subdued, also 
weighing on underlying inflation. Looking ahead, inflation rates are expected to pick up in the 
remaining months of 2016, to a large extent owing to energy-related base effects. Thereafter, 
inflation  rates  should  recover  further  in  2017  and  2018,  supported  by  our  monetary  policy 
measures  and  the  continued  economic  recovery  gradually  closing  the  output  gap.  In  the 
current  context  of  inflation  rates  still  being  very  low,  the  ECB  will  continue  to  ensure  that 
harmful second-round effects do not become entrenched in price and wage-setting. 
The  comprehensive  monetary  policy  measures  taken  by  the  ECB  since  June  2014  are 
providing  effective  support  to  the  euro  area’s  recovery  and  thus  reinforce  its  resilience  to 
shocks  stemming  from  the  global  environment.  They  continue  to  filter  through  to  the 
borrowing  conditions  available  to  households  and  firms,  which  have  already  markedly 
improved, and they support credit flows across the euro area. 
In June we began our corporate sector purchase programme as part of our expanded asset 
purchase programme (APP), with monthly purchases of €80 billion. In September we allotted 
the  second  operation  of  our  new  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations 
(TLTRO-II). These operations allow banks to secure long-term funding under very attractive 
conditions provided they can demonstrate strong lending performance. As a result of these 
built-in incentives, the exceptionally favourable borrowing conditions that banks enjoy under 
TLTRO-II  are  being  passed  through  to  their  customers  and  are  reaching  the  broader 
economy. Two more TLTRO-II operations will take place in December 2016 and March 2017. 
Alongside our APP, they will provide additional stimulus. 
We have confirmed our forward guidance on asset purchases and our policy interest rates, 
indicating  that  the  ECB  intends  to  run  asset  purchases  until  the  end  of  March  2017  or 
beyond,  if  necessary,  and  in  any  case  until  the  Governing  Council  sees  a  sustained 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  adjustment in the path of inflation towards levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. We continue to expect the ECB’s key policy rates to remain at current or lower levels 
for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of the net asset purchases. 
Negative  interest  rates  on  our  deposit  facility  have  empowered  the  transmission  of  our  asset 
purchase  programmes  and  contributed  to  very  accommodative  financing  conditions.  Even 
though  some  banks  were  more  negatively  affected  than  others  by  this  policy  measure,  the 
aggregate of euro area banks’ net interest income showed resilience in 2015, which was the first 
full year with negative rates. The decline in gross interest income that we observed in the first 
quarter of 2016 was, to a large extent, offset by a fall in banks’ funding and impairment costs. 
Overall,  our  measures  have  improved  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  across  all  euro 
area countries. Our very accommodative monetary policy stance provides the impetus that is 
necessary  for  the  euro  area  recovery  to  strengthen  and  for  inflation  to  gradually  return  to 
levels that we consider consistent with our objective. Looking forward, we will preserve the 
very substantial amount of monetary support that is necessary to secure a return of inflation 
rates towards levels that are below, but close to, 2% without undue delay. If warranted, we 
will act by using all the instruments available within our mandate. 
In  recent  years,  banks  have  strengthened  their  capital  positions  substantially  and  stress 
resilience has been enhanced. However, challenges remain, notably regarding profitability. 
The current weak economic growth outlook remains a key issue, with the environment of low 
interest  rates  and  flat  yield  curves  particularly  impacting  those  banks  that  rely  heavily  on 
maturity  transformation.  In  response  to  structural  factors,  banks  will  need  to  adapt  their 
business  models.  Although  the  burden  of  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  has  become 
somewhat lighter compared with the peaks observed in late 2013, the process of reducing 
NPLs is very gradual and therefore continues to weigh on some banks’ capacity to extend 
new loans. Determined action by all relevant stakeholders is needed to further reduce NPL 
levels.  The  ECB  has  launched  a  public  consultation  on  guidance  for  banks  on  NPLs.  The 
draft guidance recommends that banks with a high level of NPLs establish a clear strategy 
aligned with their business plan and risk management framework to effectively manage and 
ultimately  reduce  their  NPL  stock  in  a  credible,  feasible  and  timely  manner.  However, 
cooperation  among  all  major  stakeholders,  including  governments,  banks,  legislators  and 
investors,  at  national  and  European  level,  is  fundamental  in  order  to  make  substantial 
progress in this field. In parallel, the development of a capital markets union in Europe needs 
to be pursued. 
Our very accommodative monetary policy stance creates a unique window of opportunity to 
step  up  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  in  various  areas.  At  the  same  time,  an 
ambitious and well-sequenced structural reform effort, in combination with a fiscal policy that 
supports growth, will enable the euro area economy to reap the full benefits of our monetary 
policy measures, leading to higher sustainable economic growth and making our economy 
more  resilient  to  shocks.  Successful  examples  of  structural  reforms  implemented  in  some 
euro  area  countries  in  the  first  phase  of  the  crisis  confirm  that  well-targeted  and  credible 
reforms  can  support  the  ongoing  cyclical  recovery.  Fiscal  policies  should  also  support  the 
economic recovery. However, full and consistent implementation of the Stability and Growth 
Pact  over  time  and  across  countries  remains  crucial  to  ensure  confidence  in  the  fiscal 
framework  and  safeguard  the  sustainability  of  public  debt.  In  particular,  all  euro  area 
countries  should  strive  for  a  more  growth-friendly  composition  of  fiscal  policies,  prioritising 
public investment and reducing the tax burden on labour. 
A balanced three-pronged policy approach with a particular focus on structural reforms must 
be pursued with determination in order to lift long-term growth prospects, dispel feelings of 
economic  insecurity  and  lay  the  foundations  for  a  better  and  fairer  life  for  citizens 
everywhere.  A  strong  and  sustainable  recovery  of  the  euro  area  economy  is  the  best 
contribution we can make to promoting balanced and inclusive growth around the world. The 
ECB will continue to play its part by delivering on its mandate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
