Yves Mersch: The European Central Bank and the Federal Reserve
– an ocean apart?
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts, 12 October 2016.
 Interest rates on both sides of the Atlantic seem to be trapped near zero. At first glance, looking
only  at  the  short  term  policy  rates,  one  might  think  that  both  the  Federal  Reserve  (Fed)  and
European Central Bank (ECB) are facing very similar circumstances and challenges. Below the
surface, however, the differences are pronounced.
In the euro area monetary policy continues to be highly accommodative, aiming to steer inflation
back to levels in line with our definition of price stability. In the US, which is at a different stage of
the business cycle, interest rate normalisation has so far been slower than expected.
It is worth taking a closer look at the details to understand the unprecedented actions of central
bank on either sides of the ocean in recent years.
To do so, it is useful to divide the crisis into three separate phases. The first phase was the
global financial crisis after the collapse of Lehman Brothers just over eight years ago. Central
banks worldwide faced a largely common challenge to avert a collapse in aggregate demand.
The second phase centred on sovereign debt, a problem which only affected the euro area. In
the third phase, which is still in place today, stubbornly low global inflation and anaemic growth
are compounding domestic challenges.
The first phase: combating a systemic shock
The  first  phase  of  the  crisis  had  its  origin  in  the  US.  In  2006,  many  experts  considered  the
subprime crisis to be a minor incident with only local impact, but then it escalated into a financial
crisis  of  systemic  proportions  that  propagated  to  the  whole  advanced  world.  Many  banks
experienced a sudden stop in their access to money markets, and the ensuing liquidity squeeze
in interbank markets affected credit provision across the United States and euro area.
The effects on the real economy were immediate and large. Both regions went through severe
recessions.  But  the  respective  central  banks  and  fiscal  authorities  responded  promptly  and
decisively.
The Federal Reserve quickly cut its target for the fed funds rate to close to zero, then embarked
on  a  series  of  large-scale  asset  purchases  of  US  government  bonds  and  mortgage-backed
securities.  Likewise,  the  ECB  cut  its  main  refinancing  rate  by  more  than  300  basis  points
between October 2008 and May 2009. To ease the liquidity constraints of the banking system we
altered the mode and maturity of our operations and widened the range of eligible collateral.
These responses were, in many ways, an extension of the existing operational frameworks. The
asset side of the Fed’s balance sheet traditionally consisted mainly of holdings of US government
bonds. By contrast, the ECB, lacking a single fiscal counterpart, injected liquidity mainly through
repos  with  banks.  This  mode  of  operation  reflected  in  turn  the  predominance  of  bank-based
intermediation in the euro area.
Coupled with a sizeable fiscal impulse, both types of actions were successful in delivering the
stimulus needed to counteract the shortfall in aggregate demand, stabilise output and initiate the
economic recovery. Unemployment in both jurisdictions, which had spiked in the early phase of
the crisis, levelled off and began to decrease.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
At this point, however, the euro area entered the second phase of the crisis, causing its growth
trajectory to diverge substantially from that of the United States. It experienced a sovereign debt
crisis in 2011–12 which was unique among advanced economies.
Fears about the sustainability of the sovereign debt of some euro area Member States triggered
a sharp widening of sovereign spreads and introduced the fear of redenomination risk: that some
countries would revert to national currencies, invariably weaker ones, and thus leave the euro
area.
Moreover, banks in some countries came under intense scrutiny over their domestic sovereign
holdings  and  some  national  banking  systems  completely  lost  access  to  wholesale  funding
markets. Private investment contracted as the cost of capital rose and uncertainty spiked. The
fiscal stance in the euro area shifted from expansionary to contractionary as governments acted
to restore market confidence. The euro area entered a renewed recession.
The second phase: unique institutional challenges
The ECB responded to the sovereign debt crisis with various new monetary policy measures,
such as our long-term lending operations, and even began purchasing sovereign bonds under
the Securities Markets Programme. All these measures aimed to support bank funding markets
and ensure that the flow and pricing of credit to the real economy was in accordance with our
intended monetary policy stance.
But a question often asked is why we did not resort to large-scale asset purchases at this point,
as the Fed was already doing. Bear in mind that inflation developments in the euro area at the
time did not suggest a tight stance. Headline inflation was rising steeply from its 2009 trough,
exceeding  3%  in  October  2011,  partly  driven  by  an  increase  in  underlying  inflation.  Inflation
expectations were well anchored around our objective.
Hence our diagnosis of the problem in this period focused more on monetarytransmission than
on the policy stance. Our stance was not being transmitted evenly across all parts of the euro
area.  And  so  our  measures  in  this  period  were  specifically  designed  to  remove  those
impairments in transmission.
The main issue we faced was the perverse interaction between the euro area banking sector and
institutional incompleteness of our monetary union, which had fundamental implications for our
policy in a system of bank-based monetary transmission. While the first phase of the crisis can
be interpreted as a severe recession amenable to monetary policy, this second phase was the
consequence of institutional challenges that monetary policy could only aim to mitigate, but could
not overcome.
Despite  swift  efforts  to  set  up  a  European  Banking  Union  there  were  in  fact three  major
differences between the euro area and US in terms of the environment facing monetary policy:
the sluggish recovery of the banking sector, the fragmented fiscal framework of the euro area
and the structural rigidity present in many euro area economies.
The necessary process of banking sector repair proceeded much more slowly in the euro area
than in the US. Indeed, here in the US it was more or less completed by end-2011, but in some
euro area countries it is still ongoing, even today. US authorities exerted pressure on banks (and
non-financial  corporations)  to  recapitalise  with  public  money,  via  the  Troubled  Asset  Relief
Program. In the euro area, there was a preference for recapitalisation through organic growth.
Recapitalisation in the United States was bolstered by the early and effective use of stress tests
in the US to restore confidence in solvent banks, reinforced by a credible backstop. By contrast,
early  attempts  at  stress  tests  in  the  euro  area  were  hampered  by  splits  among  national
supervisors  and,  with  only  national  backstops  available,  the  tests  proved  unsuccessful  at
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
restoring confidence in the banking system. US banks were also encouraged to recognise non-
performing loans (NPLs) more quickly, freeing up capital for new lending.
The  third  difference  was  the  ability  to  efficiently  resolve  insolvent  banks  and  prevent  the
emergence  of  “zombie  lenders”.  The  US  had  a  trusted  process  through  the  Federal  Deposit
Insurance Corporation, backed by a credit line from the US Treasury. By contrast, prior to the
crisis many member states of the euro area did not even have a national resolution framework.
Since 2008, the FDIC has resolved over 500, mostly smaller banks in the United States. While
determining  the  exact  definition  is  tricky  in  the  euro  area,  the  number  appears  less  than  a
1
hundred.
All this explains why the recovery of the banking sector took longer in the euro area, which our
monetary policy had to work to mitigate. And what is more, when public authorities in the euro
area  did  intervene  to  backstop  their  national  banking  sectors,  the  fiscal  implications  naturally
differed: the onus fell entirely on national budgets. This in turn contributed to the second area
where the euro area and the US diverged: the emergence of the so-called “vicious loop” between
banks and sovereigns, which further delayed the financial repair process.
Importantly,  this  vicious  loop  not  only  further  impaired  monetary  transmission,  but  it  also  had
implications for the stance of monetary policy. The need for accelerated fiscal consolidation to
quell  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  constrained  the  ability  of  fiscal  to  carry  out  macroeconomic
stabilisation in the euro area and hence the overall policy-mix. Whereas the US could consolidate
its budget against the backdrop of a firming recovery, some euro area governments were forced
into a pro-cyclical fiscal stance. That in turn worsened the macroeconomic environment in which
monetary policy had to operate.
Institutions are again central to explaining the difference. While the US operates in a consolidated
union – with a federal Treasury acting as the counterpart of the central bank – the euro area
comprises  19  sovereign  governments  with  separate  national  budget  constraints,  making
sovereigns more vulnerable to a loss of market confidence. This is particularly valid amid a no-
bail-out clause for member states without any debt-restructuring mechanism below the federal
level.
Accordingly,  national  fiscal  policies  have  to  be  sound ex ante  to  build  fiscal  buffers,  as  is  the
case for states in the US. Yet fiscal rules were only weakly enforced before the crisis, permitting
public  debt  levels  at  the  national  level  that  were  too  high  for  a  monetary  union  that  is  not
complemented by a fiscal union.
That said, even countries with low starting debt levels – such as Ireland and Spain – ended up
embroiled in the bank-sovereign loop, showing that the institutional framework was incomplete in
other ways, too. In terms of sovereign risk, there was no fiscal backstop of sufficient capacity for
sovereigns until the European Stability Mechanism was established in late 2011, leaving the euro
area  vulnerable  to  contagion.  Likewise,  there  remains  no  mechanism  for  sovereign  debt
restructuring.
And in terms of bank risk, there was no backstop on the European level as one might expect for
a European banking sector.
Still, it would be too simple to lay the challenges faced by monetary policy solely on the European
supranational institutional framework; national characteristics were in many ways inadequate too.
Indeed,  the  third  major  difference  between  the  US  and  the  euro  area  can  be  found  in  the
structural flexibility of their respective economies.
Many euro area economies entered the crisis with long-standing structural rigidities. In a more
flexible  economy,  output  tends  to  be  less  affected  by  shocks  as  relative  prices  adjust  more
quickly, and the recovery in output is faster since the economy can reallocate resources in a
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
more efficient way.
Unemployment has decreased more slowly in the euro area than in the US, not only due to a
weaker  demand  environment,  but  also  because  of  labour  market  rigidities.  Indeed,  every  time
since the 1970s that there has been a downturn in economic activity, unemployment in the US
has quickly readjusted when the economy picked up, while in euro area it has taken much longer
to do so. And once the unemployment rate starts falling it rarely returns to the previous low. The
result is that euro area unemployment has risen steadily for 40 years.
So in sum, in this second phase of the crisis, monetary policy in the euro area, which works
primarily  through  banks,  had  to  contend  with  a  protracted  process  of  banking  sector  repair,
exacerbated  by  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  a  lack  of  fiscal  space,  and  compounded  by  sub-
optimal institutions to tackle structural issues and support the transmission process.
The  measures  we  adopted  were  specifically  aimed  at  addressing  the  impairments  of  the
transmission  mechanism.  Our  two  3-year  lending  operations,  in  particular,  were  effective  in
securing term funding for banking systems cut off from wholesale markets, and initially had a
strong easing effect on sovereign spreads. Our interventions in sovereign bond markets under
the Securities Markets Programme have also been found to have reduced yields and volatility in
2
the countries targeted.
And  when  redenomination  risks  spiked,  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  announcements
were extremely successful in removing unwarranted fears about a break-up of the euro area.
Importantly  for  the  credibility  of  the  ECB,  the  legality  of  OMTs  was  confirmed  on  the  highest
judicial level by the European Court of Justice and also by national constitutional courts.
Fortunately, around the same time as these measures were introduced, euro area leaders called
on  the  Presidents  of  major  European  Institutions  to  develop  a  roadmap  towards  deepening
Economic  and  Monetary  Union.   This  has  led  to  a  marked  improvement  in  the  institutional
environment,  which  has  contributed  both  to  an  improved  transmission  of  our  policy  and  to  a
stronger recovery.
3
In 2014, the Single Supervisory Mechanism was launched under the aegis of the ECB, which
directly supervises the 129 significant banks in the euro area. In contrast to the earlier attempts
to build confidence in the euro area banking sector, its founding act was to carry out a thorough
and credible asset quality review and stress test of bank’s balance sheets. The result has been
an  improved  acknowledgment  and  provisioning  for  NPLs,  while  bank  capitalisation  has  also
increased – the banks participating in the Comprehensive Assessment had built up additional
capital of over €200 billion between the onset of the crisis and the Assessment.
In  terms  of  repairing  the  banking  sector,  the  new  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive
provides a harmonised EU framework for resolution with a requirement of bail-in. And the new
Single Resolution Mechanism ensures that decisions on resolution are made consistently across
the  euro  area,  with  resolution  financing  given  at  the  union  level  and  then  recouped  from  the
banking  sector.  This  is  a  vital  step  to  make  resolution  more  effective,  while  it  should  also  go
some way towards severing the link between banks and their sovereigns by shifting the financial
burden onto the private sector, or in the interim, onto the union.
But there is more still to be done. For the bank-sovereign nexus to be truly broken it is clear that
Banking Union needs to be completed. That means moving towards genuine risk-sharing over
deposit guarantee schemes, coupled with genuine risk reduction on banks’ balance sheets.
European institutions need to be strengthened in other areas, too, notably those governing fiscal
policies. To my mind this must entail moving from a framework of decentralised rules to more
effective central institutions; it hardly helps credibility when we take years drafting new rules only
to break them at the first test. And there is still an urgent need for more structural reforms –
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
because third phase of the crisis has been, above all, structural.
The third phase: the re-emergence of structural challenges
This third phase – which we are still in today – has been characterised by two main challenges:
low  inflation  and  low  growth.  Just  as  in  the  initial  phase  of  the  crisis,  these  are  common
challenges for advanced economy central banks. But what has become increasingly clear is that
the  challenges  today  have  a much stronger structural element.  Low  global  inflation  is  partly  a
cyclical  phenomenon  –  linked  to  falling  energy  prices  and  the  slowdown  in  major  emerging
market economies – but it is also a result of structural changes brought about by globalisation.
And the secular slowdown of global growth has brought with it declining long-term interest rates
across the advanced world.
To be sure, the intensity of these challenges has varied across jurisdictions. The euro area, still
recovering from its double dip recession, has faced a more prolonged period of low core and
headline inflation, which the ECB has reacted to by launching three new unconventional tools: a
set  of  targeted  long-term  refinancing  operations  with  in-built  incentives  for  banks  to  lend,  a
negative  interest  rate  policy,  and  an  asset  purchase  programme  encompassing  public  and
private sector securities. These measures aim both to smooth transmission and to expand the
policy  stance  to  combat  excessive  disinflationary  pressures. And  they  have  been  effective  in
easing financial conditions and supporting the recovery.
Yet  it  is  clear  that,  for  all  central  banks,  the  structural  backdrop  has  made  monetary  policy
normalisation slower. Consider lower growth. It is now clear that the long-run growth potential of
major economies has been falling for a number of years. For example, the Consensus forecasts
for long-run growth real GDP for the US – that is the average growth six to ten years – stood at
3.1% in early 2003. The latest figure is just 2.2%. Long-run growth forecasts for the euro area
were revised down from 2.2% to 1.4% over the same period. These lower forecasts represent in
4
part the impact of ageing populations, but also reflect the falling trend in total factor productivity.
This affects monetary policy  because  slower  growth  in  potential  output  reduces  what  is  often
referred to as the equilibrium interest rate.  While not directly observable in the real world, this
widely used concept is organised around the notion of an equilibrium level of the rate of interest
where there is neither upward nor downward pressure on inflation. If the equilibrium rate falls, the
margin  above  the  effective  lower  bound  becomes  compressed,  reducing  the  space  in  which
central banks can operate to provide accommodative policy.
5
One  might  reasonably  ask  why  central  banks  did  not  identify  this  trend  sooner.  The  answer
seems to lie in an overreliance on pro-cyclical estimates of potential output. Indeed, the revisions
to estimates of potential growth have mostly occurred after the crisis, whereas it is most likely
that the slowdown in productivity had already startedbefore  the  crisis  but  was  masked  by  the
credit-fuelled  boom.  For  example,  in  2007  the  euro  area’s  output  gap  was  estimated  by
international  institutions  such  as  the  IMF,  the  OECD  and  the  European  Commission  to
be negative – somewhere between –0.2% and –0.6%. The most recent estimates put the output
gap in the region of positive2.7% to 3.4%, a significant downward revision to views of potential.
At  the  same  time  as  potential  growth  has  been  declining,  the  share  of  global  factors  driving
inflation  seems  also  to  have  been  increasing.  In  large  part,  the  common  global  trend  can  be
explained by the decline in price of energy and other commodity prices. But low global inflation
goes beyond weakness in domestic demand and falling energy and commodity prices. In recent
years there has been a growing understanding of the role of global demand factors on domestic
6
inflation.
For example, it has been observed that changes in the degree of slack in OECD economies are
having a smaller impact on inflationary pressures than it has in the past.  In part this changing
7
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
correlation is a result of the success of monetary policy in anchoring inflation expectations.
But  structural  factors  are  also  playing  a  role:  higher  import  volumes  as  a  result  of  advanced
globalisation have increased the importance of international prices relative to domestic prices,
forcing domestic mark-ups to be less sensitive to the state of the domestic economy. This may
imply that monetary policy has to react more aggressively to counteract shocks.
So in combination, central banks may be facing a two-pronged challenge to their mandates: a
situation where, due to the role of global inflation, more stimulus is needed than in the past to
deliver  their  domestic  mandates;  and  where,  due  to  the  falling  equilibrium  interest  rates,  their
ability to deliver that stimulus is more constrained. That would certainly offer one explanation for
why  monetary  policy  has  needed  to  stay  accommodative  for  so  long  across  advanced
economies.
This does not make monetary policy ineffective. As we have seen in the euro area, even with a
low equilibrium rate central banks can still steer conditions in the wider economy by targeting
directly the constellation of interest rates that matter for borrowers. But one nonetheless cannot
deny that the fall in the equilibrium rate poses a challenge for central banks. This challenge for
monetary  policy  has  been  recognised,  with  a  number  of  innovative  solutions  proposed  by
academics. Let me mention two but also say upfront that I am not particularly convinced by any
of them.
One option that has been mooted is to allow nominal interest rates to go deeper into negative
territory.  Yet  there  is  an  effective  limit  to  lowering  rates  since  ultimately  this  conflicts  with  the
ability  of  citizens  to  hold  cash.  Therefore  some  scholars  have  called  for  the  imposition  of
electronic  money  and  the  abolition  of  cash. As  I  have  discussed  at  length  elsewhere,  I  see
serious problems with such an approach.  It risks gambling with central banks’ credibility at a
time  when  credibility  is  paramount. And  perhaps  even  more  importantly,  it  denies  the  crucial
social function of cash.
8
Another option proposed by some observers is for central banks to raise their inflation objectives
and therefore to lift equilibrium nominal rates. Leaving aside the debate about the costs of higher
inflation, I am not sure that this idea is entirely convincing. The reason is that the mechanism
through which it works is the signalling channel – people expect higher inflation, so inflation rises.
But  at  a  time  when  inflation  is  low  everywhere,  and  when  central  banks  are  running  very
accommodative monetary policies just to achieve that, one can question whether such signals
would really be credible. I see a risk, in fact, that changing our strategy to rely on fuzzy concepts
and unobservables would only end up damaging our credibility.
So  what  we  need  today,  in  my  view,  is  to  shift  the  debate  away  from  its  narrow  focus  on
monetary policy. Rather than concocting more and more innovative solutions for central banks to
get around the lower bound, we should focus instead on what other policy areas can contribute.
In a world of very low interest rates, monetary policy cannot be the only game in town – and we
should not pretend it can be.
In  particular,  we  urgently  need  to  press  ahead  with  structural  reforms  to  improve  long-run
economic growth, which will consequently lift equilibrium interest rates. In my view it is much
better to provide monetary policy with greater room with a process that increases output and
wealth than by ones that increase social costs. At the same time, fiscal policy needs to become
more effective at complementing monetary policy in managing cyclical fluctuations. In the current
euro area context that means those countries with fiscal space should use it better, and going
forward fiscal rules should be more rigorously enforced so that countries enter downturns with
greater ability to carry out active stabilisation and invest into education and innovation, to name
but a few.
For individual jurisdictions the exact policy mix will of course differ. In some cases the emphasis
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
may be on increasing public investment, in others on more growth-friendly tax policy. Likewise
structural reforms that aim at raising productivity have to be tailored towards domestic priorities.
But given the common nature of the challenges for central banks, all countries would benefit from
prioritising it. And the positive spill-overs will clearly be larger if all act in unison.
Conclusion
Roughly eight years of extremely accommodative monetary policies on both sides of the Atlantic
might  lead  to  the  notion  that  the  ECB  and  Fed  have  been  confronted  with  similar  or  even
homogenous challenges. This would be a misapprehension.
Major institutional and structural differences at the onset of the financial crisis explain why the
clean-up  efforts  in  the  US  were  faster  and  more  effective  and  the  recovery  was  more
sustainable.
After  the  institutional  short-comings  of  Monetary  Union  had  been  painfully  exposed,  much
progress  has  been  achieved  on  the  road  to  completion  and  further  integration.  However,  this
institutional reform package took time. Now, economic recovery, although still timid, is under way
in the euro area.
But this finding cannot be taken as an excuse to rest on our laurels. More determined structural
reforms need to be implemented to lift the growth potential and overcome the ultra-low interest
rate  phase.  A  more  determined  approach  to  tackle  the  problem  of  non-performing  loans  is
necessary to tackle the remaining legacy of banking crisis.
When  the  macroeconomic  ship  is  engulfed  by  a  major  storm,  all  hands  –  not  just  monetary
policy – need to man the pumps. This, indeed, holds true on both sides of the ocean.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Lang, J. H., Peltonen, T. and Sarlin, P., “A framework for early-warning modeling with an application to banks”,
Working Paper Series, ECB, forthcoming.
Ghysels, E., Idier, J., Manganelli, S. and O. Vergote, (2014), “A high frequency assessment of the ECB Securities
Market Programme”, ECB Working Paper No. 1642.
Junker, J.-C., Tusk, D., Dijsselbloem, J., Draghi, M. and M. Schulz, (2015), “Completing Europe’s Economic and
Monetary Union”, European Commission, Brussels.
See, e.g. Gordon, R. (2016) “The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil
War”, Princeton University Press.
Constâncio, V., (2016), “The challenge of low real interest rates for monetary policy”, Lecture by Vítor Constâncio,
Vice-President of the ECB, Macroeconomics Symposium at Utrecht School of Economics, 15 June 2016.
Inflation as a global phenomenon has been documented e.g. by M. Ciccarelli and B. Mojon (2010), “Global
Inflation”,  The  Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics,  92:524-535,  although  there  is  less  evidence  of  the
phenomenon in developing countries: Parker, M (2016) “Global inflation: the role of food, housing and energy
prices”, RBNZ Discussion Paper 2016/05. Measures of global economic slack are good predictors of national
inflation in advanced countries, as shown empirically e.g. by C. Borio and A. Filardo (2007), “Globalisation and
inflation: New cross-country evidence on the global determinants of domestic inflation” BIS WP no. 227; and in
New Keynesian open economy models e.g. by R. Clarida, J. Gali, and M. Gertler, (2002) “A Simple Framework
for International Monetary Policy Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49: 879–904.
IMF (2013), “The dog that didn’t bark: has inflation been muzzled or was it sleeping?”, World Economic Outlook,
April.
Mersch, Y. (2016) “Bares bleibt Wahres”, Spiegel Online.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
