Gent  Sejko: Albania’s  economy  and  its  interaction  with  monetary
and fiscal policies
Statement  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of Albania,  to  the  hearing  session  of  the
Parliamentary  Committee  on  Economy  and  Finance,  about  the  draft-budget  2017,  Tirana,  22
November 2016.
Honourable Chairman,
Honourable Members of the Committee,
 The steady and long-term development of Albania has been and is a constant priority of Bank of
Albania’s  work.  Therefore,  accomplishing  this  objective  requires  not  only  applying  prudent
monetary and fiscal policies, but also their constant and efficient coordination.
The approval of the budget and the accompanying fiscal package is decisive for the country’s
economic  development.  The  budget  and  the  relevant  fiscal  package  outline  the  short  and
medium-term  priorities  for  public  finance,  contribute  to  the  long-term  profile  of  growth  and
development  by  supporting  with  funds  the  structural  reforms,  and  orientate  the  private  sector
development by determining the incentives on consumption and investments.
Therefore, the Bank of Albania appreciates the opportunity to be able to present to this hearing
session our opinion on the draft-budget 2017.
In compliance with our legal mandate and the scope of our expertise, the opinion of the Bank of
Albania on the draft-budget 2017 will focus on the following:
Albania’s development perspectives, intertwined with the monetary and fiscal policies;
Fiscal projections and public finance stability; and,
Effects of projected public borrowing on the domestic financial markets.
At the end, there are some suggestions on possible measures to boost the effectiveness and
stability of public finances.
1. The expected performance of the economy and its interaction with the monetary and
fiscal policies
The Albanian economy has shown signs of recovery over the past two years. This performance
reflects the recovery of private consumption and investments, whereas the external environment
has been and remains unfavourable. The expansion of the private sector activity was supported
by  our  accommodative  monetary  policy  and  was  favoured  by  the  consolidating  fiscal  policy
implemented during this period. This policy mix has brought financing costs down for the private
sector and has improved the liquidity situation in the economy.
The  2017  budget  takes  into  account  forecasts  for  the  real  economic  growth  at  3.8%  and  an
increase in the nominal value of the gross domestic product to 6.3%. As detailed in the draft-
budget and in the accompanying explanatory notes, such economic growth will be supported by
the continuation of the combination of the monetary stimulus with the fiscal consolidation policy.
However, the intensity of the fiscal consolidation in 2017 is foreseen to be somewhat lower than
in 2016.
The  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  the  expected  economic  developments  and  the  sustaining
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
policies constitute an acceptable and consistent starting point for drafting the budget for 2017.
Economic activity at home is expected to mark an improved growth over the next two years. The
monetary  stimulus  will  support  boosting  domestic  demand,  keeping  financing  costs  down  for
private  consumption  and  investments.  In  parallel,  the  fiscal  policy  is  expected  to  pursue  a
consolidating  trend,  as  illustrated  by  the  improvement  by  0.2  percentage  point  in  the  primary
balance-to-GDP ratio and the forecast for the reduction by 2.7 percentage points in public debt-
to-GDP ratio.
The  Bank  of Albania  has  supported  and  continues  to  support  the  fiscal  consolidation  policy,
deeming that – in balance – it contributes positively to the country’s long-term and stable growth.
The continuation of the consolidating trend in the fiscal policy reduces risk premiums, mitigates
the effect of the public sector on domestic financial markets, and increases the space for lending
to the private sector.
2. Fiscal projections and public finance stability
Based on the macroeconomic backdrop and measures regarding the fiscal package, described
above, the draft-budget 2017 envisages:
- Public revenues amounting to ALL 436 billion, or 27.3% of the GDP. This forecast implies an
increase by 6.9% from the expected revenues level for 2016 and reflects mainly the broadening
of the taxable base, in response to the expected economic growth. On the other hand, the effect
from changes to the fiscal package is relatively small;
-  Public  expenditures  amounting  to  ALL  467.2  billion,  or  29.3%  of  the  GDP.  This  projection
implies an increase by 6.5% from the expected level of expenditures level for 2016;
- The budget deficit amounting to ALL 31.2 billion, or 2% of the GDP. This  level  of  the  deficit
stands 2.4% higher than that expected for 2016. In terms of financing, the deficit is envisaged to
be financed at around 60% from domestic resources and 40% from external resources;
- A reduction of the public debt, from the expected 71.8% of GDP, at the end of 2016, to 69.1% of
GDP  at  the  end  of  2017.  This  projection  is  in  conformity  with  a  requirement  of  the  Organic
Budget  Law  (OBL).  Moreover,  it  is  consistent  with  the  programmed  budget  deficit  level  and
economic growth projections, but it does not take into account the effects of potential volatilities
in the exchange rate.
In relation to these projections and their implications for the stability of public finance, the Bank of
Albania identifies the following:
2.1 On fiscal projections
Excluding  the  potential  effects  of  the  electoral  year,  which  often  –  and  regrettably  –  are
materialised in a reduced efficiency of the tax administration, the Bank of Albania deems that the
projected level of public revenues is realisable. However, the Bank of Albania considers that, like
in the case of macroeconomic projections, the balance of risks to this projection has shifted on
the  down  side. Against  this  backdrop,  it  is  encouraging  that  the  budget  of  2017  incorporates
some  buffers  against  the  potential  non-realisation  of  revenues,  in  the  form  of  various  budget
contingencies  envisaged  up  to  0.5%  of  the  GDP.  However,  such  contingencies  may  not  be
sufficient. Our opinion about the optimum manners for the treatment of uncertainties and risks in
forecasting is detailed in the last section.
2.2 On compliance with OBL requirements
As noted in the accompanying explanatory notes, the Bank of Albania finds that the draft-budget
2017 complies with the legal requirements laid down in the OBL.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thus, beyond the reduction of the public debt:
- The expected nominal GDP is within the International Monetary Fund projections, detailed in the
last publication of the World Economic Outlook.
-  The  projected  level  of  capital  expenditure  is  higher  than  the  programmed  level  of  public
borrowing;
- The draft-budget 2017 envisages a contingency of funds equal to 0.9% of total expenditures
(ALL 4 billion), to offset adverse effects from the exchange rate and interest rate volatility on the
level of public debt;
- The draft-budget 2017 does not envisage revenues from privatisations.
2.3. On public finance stability
The  Bank  of Albania  deems  that  the  programmed  reduction  of  public  debt  is  a  positive  step
toward enhancing the fiscal stability and reducing the weaknesses that arise from the still-high
level of public debt.
Also, the OBL sets out certain legal requirements, which:
- require the progressive reduction of the public debt during each fiscal year;
- anchor the macroeconomic framework to IMF projections; and,
- limit the concentration of the budget deficit in certain periods of electoral years,
These  requirements  help  to  discipline  the  fiscal  policy,  improve  public  finance  stability,  and
enhance  the  interest  of  investors,  both  domestically  and  internationally,  in  Albanian  debt
instruments.
3. Public sector borrowing and domestic financial market
The draft-budget 2017 envisages domestic borrowing amounting to ALL 19.8 billion. The liquidity
situation  in  the  domestic  financial  market  and  the  low  interest  rates  provide  the  premises  for
accommodating the aimed borrowing level.
However, the Ministry of Finance and the Government of Albania should give due attention to the
even  distribution  of  borrowing  and  budget  expenditures,  in  order  to  reduce  domestic  markets’
volatility. Also, the Ministry of Finance should constantly monitor the absorption of borrowing in
domestic financial markets, in order to enable the constant re-calibration of debt instruments with
market requirements.
 Concluding, the Bank of Albania would like to present some suggestions, which – in our opinion –
would contribute to the process of drafting and implementing the Budget in the future.
4. Suggestions and recommendations
4.1 Forecasting, Uncertainty and Risk Management
The forecast on the revenue of the budget – like any other economic forecast – is surrounded by
uncertainties and risks. The proper acknowledgment and understanding of this fact necessitates
measures to identify and quantify them, and paves the way to effectively manage the possible
consequences.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In line with our previous suggestions, Bank of Albania deems that the drafting and implementation
process of Budget would benefit from the establishment of alternative budget scenarios, which
would be implemented in the event of large deviations from the forecast.
The Bank of Albania, in the light of priority to comply with budget deficit and fiscal consolidation
objectives, suggests that the implementation of the budget 2017 should regard the following:
- In the event the budget revenues are less than the planned level and the difference is higher
than  the  contingencies  foreseen  in  the  budget,  then  the  Government  should  take  additional
measures  to  comply  with  the  budget  deficit  levels.  This  implies  the  reduction  of  budget
expenditures commensurate to the level of unrealised income.
- In the event the budget revenues are above the planned level, and the difference stems from
faster  than  projected  economic  growth,  such  revenues  should  be  saved,  by  proportionally
reducing the budget deficit.
- In the event the budget revenues are above the planned level and the difference stems from
the  improved  fiscal  management,  such  revenues  may  be  spent,  affecting  neither  the  budget
deficit nor the fiscal consolidation intensity.
4.2 Structure of financing and public debt
The  way  the  budget  deficit  and  public  debt  are  financed  is  as  important  as  their  level.  The
financing structure of the Albanian debt was and remains stable. The domestic debt is shifting
towards longer-term maturities, and its sensitivity against short-term volatilities on interest rates
is downward. In parallel, the external debt is mostly in concessionary terms and has long-term
maturity.
Nevertheless,  the Albanian  public  debt  showed  an  increasing  trend  of  financing  from  external
resources. In the last decade, the share of external debt to total debt increased by 16 percentage
points.
For  this  reason,  the  Bank  of Albania  draws  the  attention  on  the  increasing  exposure  of  debt
servicing  cost  and  level  against  exchange  rate  volatilities.  This  implies  the  need  for  added
attention  to  external  borrowing,  in  particular  to  the  one  in  commercial  terms,  which  should  be
considered as the last option in the list of possible financing resources.
4.3 Further rationalisation of the selection process of public investments
The selection process of public investments has improved considerably over the last years. This
is  realised,  amid  others,  through  the  rationalisation  of  non-budgeted  public  commitments,  the
disciplining of several-years-long projects, and the improvement of selection mechanisms.
Nevertheless, the Bank of Albania deems that there is still room for improvement.
The application of a formal cost-profit analysis for public investments in certain fields, such as
health and education, culture, defence or various social programmes may be difficult from the
economic standpoint, even problematic from the ethic one. Nevertheless, the selection process
of  other  public  investments,  in  particular  those  in  infrastructure,  may  be  further  improved,
through the formalisation of the process and the standardisation of assessment techniques for
the economic profitability provided by alternative projects. This would be another positive step to
increase  the  efficiency  of  the Albanian  public  finances  and  support  the  stable  and  long-term
growth of our economy.
4 .4  Budget implementation pattern throughout the year
The uneven distribution of expenditures and public borrowing has been and remains a problem in
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the Albanian public finances. The Bank of Albania has been emphasising constantly that their
concentration in the last quarter of the year tends to reduce the effectiveness and increase the
volatility of financial markets.
In  this  context,  we  deem  that  further  efforts  should  be  made  to  improve  the  distribution  of
expenses and borrowing throughout the year. The anchoring of the budget implementation and
monitoring in quarterly plans could be a valuable instrument in this regard.
Thank you for your attention!
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
