ACRI
Association of Italian Savings Banks
2016 World Savings Day
Address by the Governor of the Bank of Italy
Ignazio Visco
Rome, 27 October 2016
    There are mixed signals from the global economy. On the one hand, the most recent data 
show  that  economic  activity  is  strengthening  in  the  United  States  and  in  China,  while  Russia  is 
pulling  out  of  recession;  on  the  other,  the  available  data  for  the  third  quarter  point  to  a  fresh 
weakening  of  international  trade.  Overall,  uncertainty  prevails:  the  difficulty  of  predicting  the 
impact  of  technological  development  on  the  economy  and  employment  and  managing  that  of 
demographic trends has been compounded by growing political and geopolitical tensions.   
Uncertainty in the European Union has been heightened by a number of specific factors. The 
tensions associated with managing  exceptional flows of migrants, at a time when mutual trust is 
already impaired, are driving deep wedges in relations between the member states. The proliferation 
of  nationalist  movements,  which  are  openly  hostile  to  the  single  currency  and  plans  for  further 
integration, is casting a shadow on Europe’s future, which has lengthened in the wake of the UK 
referendum. European politics remains mired in short-termism; individual countries tend to favour 
internal contingent interests over more far-reaching common initiatives.  
The  outlook  for  the  euro  area  remains  that  of  stable  but  moderate  growth,  with  inflation 
recovering  gradually  but  still  excessively  low,  and  elements  of  persistent  frailty  in  the  financial 
system. Uncertainty is driving firms to increase  their liquidity and discouraging investment; it is 
holding  back  household  consumption  while  at  the  same  time  greater  precautionary  saving  is  not 
going into financing additional business investment.  
While  averting  a  deflationary  spiral,  the  exceptionally  expansionary  measures  adopted  by 
the Governing Council of the ECB aim to bring inflation back in line with the objective and support 
demand. But monetary policy by itself is not enough. The absence of a common fiscal capacity that 
could  be  used  countercyclically  is  weighing  on  the  euro  area,  a  situation  which  is  all  the  more 
worrying when many countries have scant room for manoeuvre at national level and others hesitate 
to  adopt  expansionary  policies.  In  any  event,  monetary  policy  cannot  serve  to  raise  the  area’s 
growth  potential.  What  is  needed  instead  are  policies  capable,  at  a  time  of  major  change,  of 
recasting  the  structural  traits  of  our  economies.  The  reforms  underway  in  several  countries  must 
continue apace. 
   
In Italy, the economic recovery continues but remains stunted. After stalling in the second 
quarter, economic activity appears to have returned to slight growth in the third, according to the 
latest data on industrial production and recent business surveys. The recovery is having a positive 
effect on financial stability: the increase in the employment rate is supporting household disposable 
income; corporate financial vulnerability indices are improving. Investment is still the main weak 
point,  particularly  in  Italy.  Although  it  has  been  on  the  rise  since  mid-2015,  partly  thanks  to 
increasingly  accommodating  lending  conditions,  it  remains  modest  compared  with  that  of  other 
European  countries  and  with  the  levels  recorded  in  the  aftermath  of  previous  recessions;  in  real 
terms investment remains nearly 30 per cent lower than in 2007. 
In Italy, the scope for government intervention to support economic activity is limited by the 
 
very high level of debt. Our production system has been weakened by the delay in responding to 
increased  competitive  pressure  in  the  international  markets  and  to  technological  innovations. 
Notwithstanding the improvements obtained with the reforms of recent years, it is still hindered by 
an environment that is not business friendly, encumbered as it is by excessive bureaucracy, a slow 
judicial  system  and  illegal  activity.  Italian  banks,  like  banks  in  other  countries,  face  a  delicate 
transition,  complicated  by  the  need  to  manage  the  legacy  of  the  long  recession  in  a  still  weak 
economic environment and with regulatory reforms underway. 
  
An  accurate  assessment  of  the  conditions  and  prospects  of  the  Italian  banking  system  
should take account of the differences between the various banks and of the measures and reforms 
adopted so far. 
 
Overall, the results of four of the five major Italian banking groups in the recent stress test 
coordinated by the European Banking Authority are in line with the average for the main banks of 
the other countries. Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena, which failed the test, announced, at the time 
the results were published, a major recapitalization plan to be implemented by the end of the year, 
which will allow it to dispose of its entire portfolio of bad loans. 
 
Even  among  the  remaining  Italian  banks,  both  the  ‘significant’  ones  (under  the  direct 
supervision of the ECB with the participation of the national authorities) and the others (with assets 
below €30 billion, supervised directly by the Bank of Italy according to common guidelines), the 
difficult cases are well-identified.  
  In  the  last  few  years,  crisis  management  has  become  more  complex  because  of  market 
conditions, which discourage the provision of new capital, and because of changes in the regulatory 
framework,  which  no  longer  allows  use  of  the  tools  that  Italy  had  long  relied  on  to  prevent  or 
resolve  bank  crises.  Nevertheless,  the  banks  concerned  are  carrying  out  restructuring  operations, 
taking  measures  to  make  managing  impaired  assets  more  efficient  –  where  necessary  through 
divestments on the market – and recapitalizing.  
The sale of the ‘bridge banks’, set up during the resolution of four banks at the end of last 
year,  continues  in  an  open,  transparent  and  non-discriminatory  manner.  The  process  takes  into 
account European rules on competition and the prudential requirements  established by the single 
supervisory  mechanism.  In  recent  weeks,  the  deadline  for  completing  the  process  has  been 
postponed, in agreement with the European Commission.  
Measures  are  being  taken  to  overcome  crises  at  ‘significant’  banks  and  at  other  banks 
directly supervised by the Bank of Italy: the latter number about 460, including groups and stand-
alone banks, and account for 18 per cent of the assets of the Italian banking system. Their average 
size is small, but the dispersion is high: 17 banks have assets exceeding €5 billion, while about 240 
banks have assets below €500 million; 355 of them are mutual banks.  
Supervision  of  these  banks  is  intensive;  the  supervisory  review  process  is  based  on  risk 
profile  analysis  methods  consistent  with  European  guidelines  and  on  regular  on-site  inspections 
(roughly one hundred a year). The bank’s overall functionality, its capital adequacy and its asset 
quality are assessed. Regarding asset quality in particular, inspections include a review of individual 
credit  files  to  check  that  loans  are  correctly  classified  and  the  relative  valuation  adjustments  are 
adequate. At the end of the annual evaluation, the capital ratios deemed adequate for each bank are 
established, taking the minimum requirement as a basis, and requests to strengthen capital are made 
where necessary. It is also thanks to this supervisory action that since the end of 2011 the highest 
quality capital ratio of the banks directly supervised by the Bank of Italy has increased from 11.8 to 
15.5 per cent (against an increase from 8.8 to 11.7 per cent for ‘significant’ banks) and the coverage 
ratio for non-performing loans (NPLs) has risen from 28.2 to 43.6 per cent (against an increase from 
40.6 to 45.6 per cent for ‘significant’ banks). 
  
The  high  level  of  NPLs,  a  weakness  more  typical  of  the  Italian  banking  system  than  of 
others,  is  being  assessed  by  market  analysts  as  well.  Some  describe  the  phenomenon  as  still 
growing, others suggest that it is underestimated in publicly available data. Given the importance of 
the questions raised, they deserve satisfactory answers.  
  In Italy, the deterioration in loan quality, aggravated above all by the long recession, recently 
came to a halt. The ratio of the stock of NPLs to outstanding loans began to diminish at the end of 
last year. In June this year it stood at 17.7 per cent including write-downs; net of write-downs it was 
10.4 per cent, of which 4.8 per cent related to bad loans. Attention should focus on the net amounts, 
as writing down the value of NPLs is virtually equivalent to writing them off.  
In the first six months of this  year, the flow of new NPLs returned to the levels of 2008, at 
around  3  per  cent  of  outstanding  loans.  Provisional  data  on  the  third  quarter  show  that  the 
improvement is continuing. Moreover, the NPL coverage ratios continue to grow and are now slightly 
above the average for the main European banks. A large part of these exposures are collateralized; this 
should be taken into account in any overall assessment, although without disregarding the possible 
problems in recovering the collateral, especially in today’s difficult market.  
Also worth noting is the significant difference between exposures classified as bad loans, for 
which there is actually no possibility of a ‘cure’, and other non-performing loans (those ‘unlikely to 
pay’  and  past-due  debts  or  credit-line  breaches),  in  which  the  debtors  may  be  facing  temporary 
difficulties.  Without  underestimating  the  risks  associated  with  the  latter  exposures,  it  should  be 
borne in mind that proactive management by the banks may make positive cash flows possible and 
permit a return to normal conditions.  
As  regards  managing  bad  loans,  in  several  cases  we  have  found  shortcomings  in  banks’ 
organization and governance. These must be resolved so that the banks can take full advantage of 
the  opportunities  that  have  opened  up  following  the  recent  enactment  of  new  laws  to  shorten 
recovery  procedure  times,  potentially  bringing  them  closer  to  those  in  the  other  main  countries. 
Banks are being encouraged to move in this direction by the guidelines on managing NPLs, recently 
provided for consultation by the ECB and addressed to ‘significant’ banks, and the new detailed 
survey of bad loans requested by the Bank of Italy, which is currently examining the early findings. 
The availability of systematic, detailed data will not only help to make the internal management of 
bad loans more efficient, but it will also encourage their sale on the market, where necessary, by 
ensuring more transparent information.  
It should nevertheless be noted that the majority of non-performing loans are held by banks 
that are healthy overall; because they do not need an immediate sale of bad loans, they can take 
advantage of generally higher recovery rates than current market prices imply. Moreover, incentives 
to reduce the ratio of NPLs to outstanding loans, which could have been done quickly had it been 
possible to set up, with public backing, a company to manage such assets, are now provided by the 
 
 measures introduced by the Italian authorities over the last two years. These are designed to foster 
the development of a market for NPLs, in part by shortening the recovery process.  
In  the  near  future,  a  large  volume  of  bad  loans  could  be  sold  or  securitized,  including 
through  recourse  to  government  guarantees  for  senior  tranches.  The  timeline  for  this  recovery 
process  should  not  be  cut  too  short,  however.  The  risks  that  could  arise  along  the  way  will  be 
smaller, the more efficient are economic policies in supporting the recovery. 
 The  action  taken  to  reduce  the  NPL  ratio  is  essential,  but  by  itself  it  cannot  conquer  the 
challenges  facing  Italian  banks.  All  of  them,  not  just  the  ones  most  weakened  by  the  crisis,  must 
improve  their  profitability,  adapting  their  business  models  to  a  market  environment  that  has  been 
profoundly  altered  by  technological  advances  and  regulatory  reforms.  By  drastically  cutting  costs 
without delay and significantly raising efficiency it will be possible to free up considerable funds to 
invest in technology and in improving the quality of human capital. On occasion, sweeping measures 
may be taken to reduce staff costs; the social repercussions should be cushioned by using existing 
unemployment  and  welfare  benefits,  the  resources  of  the  industry’s  Solidarity  Fund  (the  scope  of 
which has recently been extended), and those that will be made available by forthcoming legislation.  
A greater diversification of revenues could benefit from the provision of asset management 
services which, while fully satisfying the needs of customers, would also emphasize, in particular, 
the avoidance of conflicts of interest and, more generally, the protection of customers. This is not 
merely a legal requirement, it is the cornerstone of a fruitful and long-lasting relationship. Clear and 
fully  transparent  transactions  with  customers  help  to  strengthen  the  trust  placed  in  banks,  the 
ingredient on which their business hinges. These principles should be in place even when contract 
conditions change, which is only possible for a valid reason; customers should be properly informed 
of these in order to make reasoned choices.    
Mergers  and  acquisitions,  especially  among  small  and  medium-sized  banks,  can  certainly 
facilitate  adjustments  in  business  models  and  a  recovery  of  profitability.  Internationally,  the 
authorities are determined to complete the reform of  the rules on banks’ prudential requirements 
(Basel III) as soon as possible; their intention is to avoid at the same time significantly increasing 
overall  requirements.  Finalizing  the  reform  will  help  to  dispel  the  regulatory  uncertainties  that 
currently hamper the process of consolidation.  
  The governance reforms introduced recently in Italy facilitate this process; they are starting 
to bear fruit. Other such operations will follow the important merger of two (former) cooperative 
banks completed in recent weeks. The transformation into joint stock companies of the cooperative 
banks affected by the 2015 reform must be completed by the end of this year; it should help them to 
strengthen their capital, restore profitability and improve credit quality. As regards mutual banks, 
the reform envisaging the creation of cooperative banking groups makes their strengthening much 
easier; it should be implemented without delay. 
 The  difficulties  facing  the  Italian  banks  will  be  solved  all  the  more  easily  the  sooner  the 
economic recovery gains a firm footing: non-performing loans will be disposed of more quickly and 
the recovery of profitability will be less complex. The improved economic outlook would make it 
possible  for  saving  to  fund  business  investment.  For  the  economy  to  return  to  a  path  of  stable 
growth,  however,  capital  accumulation  must,  crucially,  resume  at  a  more  vigorous  pace.  The 
measures  set  out  in  the  ‘Industry  4.0’  plan  announced  by  the  Government  will  provide  further 
impetus for public support to firms’ innovation and investment activity.   
This action is part of a broader reform strategy that has been taking shape over the years. 
Important measures have been implemented and are now yielding their first results. The only option 
is to continue resolutely along this path in order to provide a better working environment for firms, 
assist  the  creation  of  new  job  opportunities,  and  reduce  the  imbalances  weighing  down  our 
economy and our society. 
     by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed and printed  
