Øystein Olsen: The role of central banks – a Norwegian perspective
Speech by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Official
Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF), London, 1 November 2016.
The charts can be found at the Central Bank of Norway’s website.
INTRODUCTION
 Let me begin by thanking the OMFIF for the opportunity to speak to you today about the monetary
policy  regime  in  Norway.  Like  other  central  banks,  the  central  bank  of  Norway  is  facing  new
challenges in a post-crisis environment of persistently low interest rates and uncertainty. Today I
want to focus on how Norges Bank is responding to those challenges.
Inflation  targeting  was  formally  introduced  as  a  framework  for  monetary  policy  in  Norway  15
years  ago. As  in  other  inflation-targeting  countries,  our  inflation  targeting  regime  has  become
more flexible over time. The operational target of monetary policy in Norway is annual consumer
price  inflation  of  close  to  2.5%  over  time.  However,  according  to  the  mandate,  interest  rate
setting should seek to achieve a reasonable balance between inflation and capacity utilisation.
  Monetary  policy  should  also  be  robust,  taking  uncertainty  into  account  and  seeking  to  avoid
adverse outcomes. I will reurn to this topic in the following. The reasoning behind the policy rate
decision taken by Norges Bank’s Executive Board is published in our Monetary Policy Report.     
The evolution of inflation targeting in Norway reflects the practical experience we have gained
since it was introduced. The trade-offs have been challenging at times. In these past 15 years,
the Norwegian economy has been exposed to different types of shocks. The supply side has
been influenced by increased labour immigration following EU enlargement in 2004. The legacies
from the financial crisis have posed challenges that monetary policy has had to address. And not
least, the Norwegian economy has had to contend with wide fluctuations in the terms of trade.
Chart: Performance
Inflation targeting has performed well over the past 15 years taken as a whole. When inflation
targeting was introduced, inflation had already come down after years at an elevated level and
has  since  been  low  and  relatively  stable.  At  the  same  time,  monetary  policy  has  helped  to
moderate fluctuations in the real economy. Flexible inflation targeting has functioned well. The
monetary policy framework has provided sufficient flexibility to address the shocks that have hit
the economy.
LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES HAVE FALLEN
Chart: International interest rates
In recent years, monetary policy has faced a new challenge in many countries. The interest rate
level that is consistent with balanced developments in the economy has fallen. This is reflected in
the  low  level  of  global  interest  rates.  The  decline  in  real  interest  rates  has  been  particularly
marked over the past 15–20 years. In 2001, when inflation targeting in Norway was adopted, real
long-term interest rates were around 3 percent. Now, the same interest rates are around zero.    
Chart: Forces driving the fall in the global real interest rate
The causes of the decline in interest rates are complex. In recent years, extraordinary measures
by  many  central  banks  have  pushed  down  long-term  rates.  Over  a  longer  time  horizon,  the
factors  behind  the  decline  in  interest  rates  are  more  structural  in  nature.  The  savings  glut  in
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
emerging  economies,  particularly  China  and  oil  exporting  countries,  has  been  one  important
factor.  Savings  have  probably  also  increased  in  many  countries  as  a  result  of  demographic
developments and a more uneven distribution of income. At the same time, investments in many
advanced economies have been low, possibly reflecting prospects for low returns on investment
in productive capital. In the wake of the financial crisis, conditions of a more cyclical nature have
also contributed to the fall in interest rates. While deleveraging has pulled up savings, greater
uncertainty may have dampened the willingness to invest.          
These developments have consequences for monetary policy. The level of the real interest rate
that  is  consistent  with  balanced  developments  in  the  economy  is  usually  referred  to  as  the
neutral  interest  rate.  The  difference  between  the  actual  real  interest  rate  and  the  neutral  real
interest rate provides an indication of whether monetary policy is expansionary or contractionary.
A real interest rate that is below the neutral  rate stimulates economic growth, while a higher real
interest rate dampens growth.
The  neutral  interest  rate  is  not  directly  observable.  Central  banks  must  nevertheless  form  a
perception of how expansionary or contractionary monetary policy is. In the past few decades,
international estimates of the neutral real interest rate have fallen and are now at 1 percent or
below in many countries (see Rachel et al (2015), Laubach et al (2015), Hamilton et al (2015),
Constâncio (2016) and Zhu (2016)).  Obviously, international interest rate developments affect
Norwegian  interest  rate  setting,  particularly  through  the  exchange  rate  channel.  And  Norges
Bank’s  estimate  of  the  neutral  interest  rate  has  been  gradually  revised  down  in  pace  with
international  developments.  The  Bank’s  forecasts  are  now  based  on  the  assumption  that  a
neutral nominal money market rate in Norway will be between 2½ percent and 3½ percent in the
1
coming years. The associated neutral nominal key policy rate is somewhat lower.  
The low level of the neutral interest rate raises a number of issues. Today, I would like to focus
on two aspects that have been given weight in recent years in Norges Bank’s assessment of a
robust interest rate path. The first is that the effect of changes in the policy rate tends to be more
uncertain when the rate is very low. The second relates to the challenge persistently low interest
rates pose to financial stability.
GREATER UNCERTAINTY ABOUT THE EFFECT OF THE POLICY RATE
Monetary policy decisions are made under uncertainty. Central banks operate in an environment
of  uncertainty  regarding  the  current  situation,  the  driving  forces  in  the  economy  and  the
functioning of the economy.
Much of this uncertainty is associated with conditions beyond the influence of monetary policy.
For Norway, these conditions include the oil price and economic developments among trading
partners.  These  variables  are  treated  as  exogenous  factors  in  our  analysis.  However,  the
uncertainty associated with the effect of monetary policy is of a different nature in that it relates to
the functioning of the economy – and the effect of the policy rate in particular. 
Chart: Norway – Interest rates
For the transmission mechanism of monetary policy to function normally, changes in the policy
rate  must  pass  through  to  the  bank  lending  and  deposit  rates  faced  by  households  and
enterprises. In Norway, the latest policy rate cuts have had a broad impact on banks’ interest
rates.  Lending  and  deposit  rates  for  households  are  both  approximately  one  percentage  point
lower now than when the key policy rate was reduced in December 2014, from a level of 1.5
percent. Rates facing enterprises have also fallen. Banks’ profitability and net interest income
have remained solid in the same period.           
At the same time, given the current low interest rate level, we are navigating in uncharted waters.
 Banks’ response to changes in the policy rate may differ from their usual behaviour. Households
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
and enterprises may also  respond  differently  to  interest  rate  changes  when  interest  rates  are
already  at  a  low  level.  So  far,  there  is  no  clear  indication  that  historical  relationships  have
collapsed, but nor do we have experience with such low interest rates over such a long period of
time. It may also be difficult to predict financial market reactions to very low and negative real
interest rates.
As early as 1967, US economist William Brainard discussed how central banks should respond
to  economic  shocks  when  there  is  uncertainty  about  the  impact  of  the  policy  rate  on  the
economy.  He  concluded  that  the  policy  rate  should  be  used  with  greater  caution  when
uncertainty  about  its  effect  increases  (Brainard  (1967)).  This  involves  a  trade-off  that  can  be
illustrated graphically.
Chart: Monetary policy and uncertainty
This  chart  describes  a  situation  where  the  policy  rate  is  used  to  counteract  the  effect  of  a
negative shock to the real economy.  Two different interest rate paths are shown. The uncertainty
is illustrated using bands around the expected paths for the policy rate, inflation and the output
gap.  In  the  scenario  denoted  by  the  blue  line,  the  central  bank  does  not  take  the  uncertainty
associated  with  the  interest  rate  into  consideration.  In  contrast,  the  yellow  line  represents  a
scenario  based  on  a  more  cautious  monetary  policy  response  to  the  perceived  uncertainty
involved.
The expected real economic costs of a more cautious response – as measured by the output
gap – are somewhat higher, and inflation moves further from the target. In that respect, this is a
less appropriate path for the policy rate. But there is also a benefit: uncertainty about the future
path is substantially reduced. As you can see in the chart, the uncertainty bands around inflation
and output have narrowed. When choosing between the two paths, the benefits must be weighed
against the costs.
In principle, a robust monetary policy should take account of uncertainty regarding the functioning
of the economy. The policy rate in Norway has come down to a low level, approaching a lower
bound. This has increased the uncertainty about the effect of monetary policy. Norges Bank has
taken  this  uncertainty  into  account  over  the  past  year  and  reacted  somewhat  less  to  new
information, whether the information has pulled in the direction of a lower or a higher policy rate. It
has been appropriate to respond with caution.
LOW INTEREST RATES COULD BE A PRECURSOR TO FINANCIAL INSTABILITY
A period of low interest rates can engender financial imbalances. There is a risk that growth in
property  prices  and  debt  will  become  unsustainably  high  over  time.  With  high  debt  ratios,
households are more vulnerable to cyclical downturns. In the event of a reduction in household
income, debt burdens may become heavy to bear, forcing households to reduce spending on
consumption,  with  a  deeper  downturn  as  a  result.  For  Norges  Bank,  the  consideration  of
restraining the build-up of financial imbalances has long been an element of a robust monetary
policy. The aim is to mitigate the risk of particularly adverse economic outcomes further ahead.
Chart: Estimated path for consumption during recessions
A  recently  published  study  by  Norges  Bank  examines  developments  in  private  consumption
during recessions. The analysis is based on data from 61 international recessions in the past
four  decades  (Hansen  et  al  (2015)). An  important  outcome  is  shown  in  this  chart.  The  chart
compares  two  different  paths  for  consumption  during  a  recession.  The  blue  line  shows  the
average path, while the yellow line shows the path following a period of high debt growth. The
results confirm that high debt growth ahead of a recession leads to a deeper downturn. It also
takes longer for the economy to recover.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Chart: Monetary policy and financial stability
When financial imbalances are building up, the probability of a deep recession may increase.
This is illustrated in this chart by the blue lines. The uncertainty bands around inflation and the
output gap are highly assymetrical. Monetary policy can dampen vulnerabilities by keeping the
interest rate somewhat higher than would otherwise have been the case – in other words, by
“leaning against the wind”. This policy is illustrated by the red lines. By keeping the interest rate
higher,  the  risk  of  a  deep  economic  downturn  is  reduced.  The  uncertainty  bands  are  more
narrow and symmetric. But this policy also entails a short-term cost: capacity utilisation is lower,
and inflation may stay below target. 
The  aim  of  “leaning  against  the  wind”  is  to  achieve  an  improved  path  for  inflation,  output  and
employment over time. This is in line with our central bank mandate. Flexible inflation targeting
with a sufficiently long horizon should take financial stability into account if the situation so allows
and so warrants.
At the same time, it should be stressed that regulation and surveillance of financial institutions
are the first line of defence against shocks to the financial system. And in the years following the
financial crisis, the regulatory framework has been strengthened. But that does not mean that our
work is done. The financial system is in constant flux. Economic agents in search of yield will
seek  out  new  opportunities.  Today’s  regulations  are  not  necessarily  well  suited  to  meet
tomorrow’s challenges. We still need more knowledge about the use of macroprudential tools.
The prospect of a persistently low neutral interest rate has made this work even more important.
CONCLUSION
Let me conclude by noting that in spite of the demanding task monetary policy has faced globally
in the aftermath of the Great Financial Crisis, it is difficult to see alternative strategies to today’s
flexible inflation targeting framework. The framework did not hinder a powerful response when the
financial crisis erupted. Inflation expectations were firmly anchored. This enabled central banks to
reduce the amplitude and length of the downturn. In Norway, the monetary policy regime also
functioned effectively in the face of the sharp fall in oil prices.
A  lower  neutral  interest  rate  level  has  complicated,  but  not  prevented,  monetary  policy  from
fulfilling  its  role  as  the  first  line  of  defence  in  countering  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  economy.
Recent years have also shown that central bank toolkits can contain more than policy rates.
The  complex  task  facing  advanced  economies  of  enhancing  productivity  and  promoting
employment growth as populations age is clearly beyond the power of monetary policy. Other
policy action is needed to address this task. Boosting potential output growth is a key priority in
itself, and higher potential growth would also help to raise the neutral interest rate and reduce the
risk of overburdening monetary policy.
An inflation targeting regime is a constant reminder that controlling inflation is the central bank’s
main monetary policy objective. At the same time, monetary policy cannot be strictly rule-based –
it must be flexible and robust. Economic models are useful and necessary tools for constructing
an appropriate interest path. But no model is capable of fully capturing the complexity of the trade
offs. Moreover, given the uncertainty associated with the functioning of the economy, it is neither
possible nor desirable to fine-tune economic developments. Because even the most advanced
models cannot reproduce the complexity of economic mechanisms or of the trade-offs facing
central banks, interest rate decisions must also be based on sound judgment.
Thank you for your attention.
References
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Brainard,  W.  (1967):  “Uncertainty  about  the  effectiveness  of  policy”, American  Economic
Review 57, 411–425
Constâncio, V. (2016): “The challenge of low real interest rates for monetary policy”, speech
delivered on 15 June 2016
Hamilton, J. D., J. Hatzius, E. S. Harris and K. D. West (2015): “The equilibrium real funds
rate:  Past,  present,  and  future”,  Hutchins  center  on  fiscal  &  monetary  policy  at
Brookings, Working Paper 16
Hansen, F. and K. Torstensen (2016): “Does high debt growth in upturns lead to a more
pronounced  fall  in  consumption  in  downturns?”, Economic  commentaries  8/16,  Norges
Bank
Laubach,  T.  and  J.  C.  Williams  (2015):  “Measuring  the  natural  rate  of  interest  redux”,
Hutchins center on fiscal & monetary policy at Brookings, Working Paper 15
Lund,  K.,  K.,  K.  Tafjord  and  M.  Øwre-Johnsen  (2016):  “What  drives  the  risk  premium  in
Nibor?”, Economic commentaries 10/2016, Norges Bank
Rachel,  L.  and  T.  D.  Smith  (2015):  “Secular  drivers  of  the  global  real  interest  rate”, Staff
Working Paper 571, Bank of England
Zhu,  F.  (2016):  “Understanding  the  changing  equilibrium  real  interest  rates  in  Asia-
Pacific”, BIS Working Papers 567
1
The spread between the money market rate and the expected key policy rate (the interest rate premium) can vary
somewhat over time (see Lund et al (2016) for a discussion of the premium in the Norwegian three-month
money market rate).
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
