Mario Draghi: The productivity challenge for Europe
Lectio  magistralis  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  marking  the
100th anniversary of the Deusto Business School, Madrid, 30 November 2016.
 The  euro  area  economy  continues  to  expand  at  a  moderate,  but  steady,  pace  and  labour
markets are gradually improving, including notably here in Spain. This gradual upward trend is
expected to continue, not least owing to our monetary policy measures. But productivity growth
has remained very subdued. In 1995, productivity growth in the euro area was on a par with the
rest of the world at about 2%. But now, at below 0.5%, it lags behind the growth rates of the
United States, other advanced economies and emerging markets.
If it persists, this slowdown in productivity growth will matter greatly for our future prosperity, and
will have direct consequences for the conduct of monetary and fiscal policy and the cohesion of
the euro area.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Consider first the challenge caused by ageing populations, which many economies will face in
the coming decades. The share of working-age persons in the total population is projected to
decline across Europe, and this is particularly marked in some economies.
In  the  absence  of  change  –  if  output  per  worker,  structural  unemployment,  and  labour
participation remain at current levels – population ageing will result in a stark fall of output per
capita. Using the OECD’s population projections, the decline in output per head by 2050 would
be  14%  in  Germany,  16%  in  Italy  and  22%  in  Spain.  While  this  scenario  is  very  unlikely  to
materialise, it shows that current rates of productivity growth are barely sufficient to offset the
demographic drag on per capita income.
Structural reforms are therefore urgently needed to raise productivity growth and unlock unused
labour potential and thereby avoid stagnation in per capita income.
But the benefits of structural reforms to the welfare of people in the euro area extend beyond
increasing aggregate incomes and offsetting the demographic drag. They also empower other
policies.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Stronger potential output growth aids monetary policy by increasing the equilibrium real interest
rate. Higher equilibrium rates provide more room for monetary policy to operate without being
constrained by the effective lower bound. This in turn reduces the likelihood that unconventional
measures will be required to counteract future downturns.
And higher future growth helps monetary policy today. It encourages households to spend more
and firms to invest, reducing the need for monetary policy to support current economic activity
and bring inflation back towards 2%, and speeding up the return to more conventional monetary
policy settings.
There  are  benefits  for  fiscal  policy  too.  By  lifting  output  and  employment  and  lowering
unemployment,  reforms  improve  governments’  structural  balances.  Moreover,  higher  levels  of
potential  output  reduce  the  current  overhang  of  public  sector  debt  that  is  impinging  on  some
countries’  ability  to  carry  out  stabilisation  policies.  The  greater  fiscal  space  also  enables
governments to redistribute the benefits of reforms across the whole population. Some reforms
can have upfront negative distributional effects, which governments may want to offset.
Structural reforms also help fully unlock the benefits of the Single Market and thereby improve the
cohesiveness of the monetary union.  Increased convergence not only reinforces the integrity of
the  union.  It  also  builds  up  the  trust  among  Member  States  that  is  necessary  to  take  further
integration steps.
1
And  finally,  structural  reforms  make  the  euro  area  economy  more  resilient  in  the  face  of  the
disruptive influence of globalisation and digitalisation.
All  these  reasons  highlight  the  vital  importance  of  structural  reforms  for  the  welfare  and  well-
functioning of our union. Let me now briefly consider the factors behind the euro area’s recent
lacklustre productivity performance, before setting out some necessary steps for improvement.
Factors contributing to low productivity growth in the euro area
There are two underlying sources of labour productivity growth. The first is the amount of capital
available to each worker. Raising investment is therefore a key part of tackling the productivity
challenge  in  many  advanced  economies.  The  second  relates  to  how  efficiently  resources  are
used,  and  includes  such  things  as  innovation  and  organisational  improvements.  This  is  total
factor productivity.
It  is  in  this  area  that  the  euro  area  performance  has  been  particularly  weak.  There  are  many
reasons  put  forward  for  this  weakness,  but  in  essence  they  relate  to  the  role  of  innovation,
technology adoption and efficient reallocation of resources.
2
Some  argue  that  innovations  now  are  on  a  smaller  scale  than  in  previous  decades  and
centuries.  The argument goes that the 19th century witnessed the diffusion of transformative
inventions  such  as  the  railway  and  electricity;  whereas  nowadays  our  innovations  are  things
such as an app to order a taxi, rather than phoning. To an extent this may be true, but the facts
seem to say otherwise.
If  falling  total  factor  productivity  growth  were  caused  by  slowing  progress  at  the  technological
frontier, you would expect productivity growth of firms at that frontier to be correspondingly poor.
The opposite appears true. From 2003 to 2013, productivity at global frontier manufacturing firms
–  i.e.  the  top  100  firms  globally  in  each  sector  in  terms  of  productivity  –  increased  by  a
quarter.   Productivity  growth  at  global  frontier  service  sector  firms  was  even  higher.  And,
importantly,  the  performance  of  euro  area  firms  at  the  frontier  is  on  a  par  with  that  of  other
advanced economies.
3
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is productivity growth among the non-frontier firms that is poor across the OECD countries,
explaining  the  slowdown  in  aggregate  productivity  growth  across  advanced  economies.
Productivity in non-frontier manufacturing firms increased by just 10%. And, for the euro area, the
picture  for  non-frontier  firms  appears  even  worse,  with  non-frontier  productivity  stagnating  in
manufacturing and even declining in services.
Overall, the picture appears to be not so much a lack of technological progress per se, but a lack
of diffusion of progress from the frontier to other firms. In other words, the laggard firms aren’t
absorbing the new technology and incorporating it into their production processes to increase
their efficiency, possibly due a lack of competitive pressures.
But  labour  productivity  growth  not  only  depends  on  the  efficiency  gains  of  each  firm  in  the
economy. It also depends on the extent to which capital and labour are allocated to the most
productive firms. Here, again, there are signs of underperformance in the euro area, particularly
in  the  non-tradable  sectors.   Recent  research  suggests  that  this  misallocation  of  capital  and
5
labour is trending upwards in many euro area countries.
4
In conclusion, therefore, the euro area’s poor productivity appears a result of poor diffusion of
technology from the frontier to other firms, and from an inefficient allocation of capital and labour
to  relatively  low  productivity  firms.  Such  factors  are  fortunately  more  receptive  to  structural
reforms than innovation, which is harder to institute. There are two main areas that need to be
addressed.
First,  barriers  to  knowledge  diffusion  need  to  be  brought  down.  This  includes  fostering  a
competitive  business  environment  that  encourages  the  adoption  of  the  best  management
techniques and organisational structures. Here, there is a clear role for institutions such as the
one  whose  centenary  we  are  celebrating  today  to  aid  this  diffusion  of  knowledge  and  best
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
practice across firms.
Second, productive firms need to be able to grow, to attract both capital and skilled workers. This
requires well-functioning capital, product and labour markets. It is crucial that the Single Market is
completed, particularly in the services sector where misallocation is largest. Regulatory barriers
that  inhibit  small  firms  from  gaining  headcount  need  to  be  relaxed  –  there  is  evidence  that
productive  firms  choose  not  to  grow  rather  than  cross  the  threshold  and  incur  greater
administrative expenses. Recent reforms in Italy and Spain have sought to address this problem.
Improving  allocation  also  requires  a  well-functioning  financial  system  that  can  direct  funds  to
dynamic firms. Adequate institutional and judicial frameworks, such as bankruptcy laws and the
ability  of  banks  to  enforce  collateral  arrangements,  are  also  needed  to  ensure  capital  is  not
trapped  in  unproductive  or  failed  firms.  The  steps  taken  here  in  Spain  to  reduce  the  legacy
effects  of  the  banking  crisis  will  help  invigorate  the  flow  of  new  credit  towards  profitable  and
growing firms.
Bolstering the contribution from labour supply
6
The  solution  to  the  demographic  challenge  lies  not  just  in  making  current  workers  more
productive, but also increasing the working share of the population. Structural unemployment is
high in the euro area, and has increased steadily for decades with each successive economic
cycle.  Labour force participation rates across much of the euro area similarly lag those of the
top performers in the OECD by a large margin. Reducing the structural unemployment rate and
increasing participation rates to the average levels of the top three economies in the euro area is
in  many  cases  sufficient  to  offset  the  demographic  drag,  even  assuming  output  per  worker
remains the same.
In the short run, bringing additional workers into the workforce may lower average productivity.
But  lowering  structural  unemployment  helps  protect  future  labour  productivity.  Workers  who
remain unemployed for long periods suffer permanent losses throughout their life, in terms of
lower income, productivity and employability.  This is particularly the case for young unemployed
people, who risk losing important experience in their formative years. The current high rates of
youth unemployment are likely compromising the future productivity of this generation – and it’s
precisely  this  group  which  will  have  to  support  a  larger  number  of  dependants  than  previous
generations did.
7
The labour market reforms in Spain in mid-2012 are an example of a structural reform that has
been successful in unblocking the labour market. The unemployment rate peaked at 26.5% in
2013 but is now at 19%. While still very high, the decline of nearly 8 percentage points in three
years against a backdrop of major deleveraging is remarkable.
The European Commission estimates the reforms had a cumulative impact of 0.5% on GDP and
of  0.8%  on  employment  between  2013  and  2015.   The  OECD  estimates  that  the  reforms
contributed  to  moderated  unit  labour  cost  growth,  increased  hiring  by  8%  and  reduced  job
separation  by  24%.    Analysis  by  the  IMF  reached  similar  conclusions.
  Other  examples  of
successful  labour  market  reforms  in  the  euro  area  have  similarly  resulted  in  an  employment-
intensive recovery in the reforming countries.
10
11
8
9
Labour  markets  need  to  improve  to  deliver  a  skilled,  flexible  workforce.  Reducing  skill
mismatches  lowers  structural  unemployment  and  enables  productive  firms  to  grow.  It  also
importantly addresses one of the main factors explaining the increase in income inequality. The
key  here  is  education,  which  includes  life-long  learning  and  retraining,  potentially  bolstered  by
schemes to facilitate re-allocation of workers across sectors. Breaking down the barriers that
create duality in the labour market will enable the unemployed youth of today to become the high-
skilled older workers of the future.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The slowing momentum of reform
So,  structural  reforms 
to  boost  productivity  and  participation  and  reduce  structural
unemployment are vital. And that is why the Governing Council continues to call for such reforms
in  the  euro  area.  Yet  reform  momentum  appears  to  be  slowing.  Why  then,  given  the  clear
benefits and urgent need for reforms, are governments reluctant to carry them out?
One factor is the distributional impact of reforms, particularly in the near term, which can make
them unpopular. But what is often overlooked in the public debate about structural reforms is the
distributional impact of inaction. The high rates of structural unemployment, duality in the labour
market and people being discouraged from entering the labour market have also a human as well
as an economic cost. Reducing unemployment is socially positive from a distributional point of
view.
But  it  is  clearly  important  to  design  the  reforms  so  that  they  are  as  inclusive  as  possible.  By
counteracting any negative distributional effects of reforms, governments can build broad-based
support  for  further  welfare-enhancing  reforms.  Of  course,  not  all  redistribution  resulting  from
reforms  is  socially  negative.  Removing  inefficiently  high  economic  rents  in  protected  sectors,
notably  non-tradable  ones,  can  have  marked  positive  benefits  on  social  welfare.  Entrenched
special interests can have powerful lobbying operations, though, that governments need to resist.
As  these  barriers  to  implementing  structural  reforms  are  perennial,  what  then  has  driven  the
implementation  of  reforms  in  the  past?  The  literature  on  the  subject  is  relatively  new,  but
highlights a number of drivers, in particular economic crises and high unemployment.
 For the
EU, the Single Market directives are an important driver of product market reforms.
12
13
Correct  sequencing  of  reforms  can  also  help  –  product  market  reforms  can  facilitate  the
subsequent  implementation  of  labour  market  reforms.  By  eliminating  barriers  to  entry,  pro-
competition  product  market  reforms  can  eliminate  inefficiencies,  in  turn  promoting  higher
economic  activity  and  employment,  and  thereby  offsetting  possible  short-term  costs  of  later
labour market reforms.
But  what  about  monetary  policy? As  it  turns  out,  the  literature  says  little  about  how  monetary
policy drives the reform process. One view is that an accommodative monetary policy stance
may increase the room for manoeuvre of governments, allowing measures to offset some of the
short-term  costs  of  reforms.
  But  there  are  certainly  some  commentators  who  at  present
believe that the ECB’s unconventional measures are stifling incentives for reform.
14
To  answer  this  question,  preliminary  internal  research  at  the  ECB  investigates  the  drivers  of
structural reform in 40 OECD countries over the past three decades. This research supports
previous findings in the literature on the drivers of reform. On monetary policy, it finds that lower
interest rates, if at all, tend to support rather than hinder the implementation of reforms. We also
see  this  confirmed  by  anecdotal  evidence  in  some  larger  euro  area  countries,  which  recently
implemented some important labour market reforms.
It seems, then, that we should put more weight on the former view. By acting in accordance with
our  mandate,  namely  to  support  activity  to  bring  inflation  back  in  line  with  our  medium-term
objective, the ECB is in fact also providing space for euro area governments to carry out the
necessary structural reforms. It is a window of opportunity they should seize.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
The euro area faces a significant demographic challenge in the coming decades. Reversing the
decline in productivity growth and improving labour market outcomes are both required to meet
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
this challenge. Without concerted effort on structural reforms, per capita income growth in the
euro area is likely to stagnate, and may even decline.
The welfare benefits of structural reforms extend beyond just protecting income per capita. The
distributional  impacts  of  lower  unemployment  and  higher  participation  are  positive.  Increasing
potential output growth provides both monetary and fiscal policy more space to operate in. By
breaking  down  barriers,  reforms  allow  the  full  benefits  of  the  Single  Market  to  be  realised,
increasing economic cohesion and strengthening the monetary union.
The  ECB’s  current  monetary  policy  settings  are  designed  to  support  activity  to  bring  inflation
back  to  our  objective  of  close  to,  but  below,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  In  doing  so,  we  are
lowering the risk that the current low rates of growth become entrenched, but we alone cannot
eliminate that risk. Monetary policy is providing support and space for governments to carry out
necessary structural reforms. It is up to euro area governments to act, individually at national
level as well as jointly at European level.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Draghi, M. (2015), “Structural reforms, inflation and monetary policy”, speech at the ECB Forum on Central
Banking, Sintra, Portugal, 22 May 2015.
E.g. Gordon, R. (2016), The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The US Standard of Living since the Civil War,
Princeton University Press.
OECD (2015), The Future of Productivity, OECD, Paris, France.
Source: CompNet (2016), “European firms after the crisis: New insights from the 5th vintage of the CompNet
firm-level-based database”.
Gamberoni, E., Giordano, C. and P. Lopez-Garcia (2016), “Capital and labour (mis)allocation in the euro area:
some stylized facts and determinants”, ECB Working Paper No 1981.
See, e.g., Anderton, B. et al. (2015), “Comparisons and contrasts of the impact of the crisis on euro area labour
markets”, ECB Occasional Paper Series No 159.
See,  e.g.,  Ball,  L.  (2009),  “Hysteresis  in  Unemployment:  Old  and  New  Evidence”,  NBER  Working  Paper
No 14818, March 2009.
European Commission (2016), “The Economic Impact of Selected Structural Reform Measures in Italy, France,
Spain and Portugal”, Institutional Paper 023, April 2016.
OECD (2014), “The 2012 Labour Market Reform in Spain: A Preliminary Assessment”, the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris, France.
IMF (2015), “Spain: selected issues”, IMF Country Report No 15/233.
European Commission (2016), op. cit.
See, for example, Høj, J., Galasso, V., Nicoletti, G., and T-T. Dang (2006), “The Political Economy of Structural
Reform: empirical evidence from OECD countries”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers No 501 and
Agnello, L., Castro, V., Jalles, J. and R Sousa (2015), “What determines the likelihood of structural reforms?”,
European Journal of Political Economy, 37: 129–145.
See,  for  example,  Thompson,  W.  and  R.  Price  (2009),  The  Political  Economy  of  Reform:  Lessons  from
pensions, product markets and labour markets in ten OECD countries, OECD, Paris, France.
Gordon, R. (1996), “Macroeconomic Policy in the Presence of Structural Maladjustment”, NBER Working Paper
Series, No 5739.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
