  An update on ‘Africa rising’ 
 Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the Institute of International Finance  
Africa Financial Summit 
 Johannesburg 
30 September 2016 
 1.  Introduction 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen   
 It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  address  you  today,  some  five  years  since  the  inaugural 
Africa  Financial  Summit  that  was  held  in  Cape Town  in  2012.  At  that  time,  George 
Abed1 noted the great progress that African countries had realised in stabilising their 
economies  –  a  particularly 
remarkable  achievement  during  a  period  of 
unprecedented  global  financial  turbulence.  However,  he  also  cautioned  that  the 
prospects  for  continued  growth  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  (SSA)  were  contingent  on 
greater economic diversification and on reducing dependence on commodity exports 
– an issue to which I will return later in my address.  
 I see from the programme that yesterday you have covered much ground regarding 
the economic and financial issues currently facing Africa. There is no doubt that the 
economic  environment  has  changed  drastically  since  2012.  Indeed,  the  challenges 
are  presently  somewhat  greater  and  more  complex.  Today,  I  will  touch  on  this 
changing economic landscape, focusing on digital finance and financial inclusion as 
                                            
1 George Abed is the former Senior Counsellor and Director for Africa and the Middle East at the 
Institute of International Finance. 
 Page 1 of 11 
well  as  the  financial  regulatory  environment.  Each  one  of  these  is  important  in  the 
African growth context.  
  2.  A pause in the ‘Africa rising’ narrative?  
Beset by war, corruption, bad governance  as well as poor macroeconomic policies, 
Africa  was  labelled  ‘the  hopeless  continent’  in  2000.  Some  10  years  later,  this 
narrative  changed  to  a  more  inspiring  one,  of  ‘Africa  rising’,  facilitated  by  the 
commodities  boom,  growing  manufacturing  and  services  sectors,  a  rapidly  growing 
middle class, improved health prospects for many Africans, and a new-found passion 
for  technology.  With  a  stable  economic  outlook,  foreign  investment  also  increased. 
This was all the result of most African economies putting in place good governance 
frameworks  as  well  as  sound macroeconomic  and  market-orientated  policies  which 
spurred growth, trade, and investment.  
 The  Global  Financial  Crisis,  which  caused  turmoil  in  both  advanced  and  emerging 
economies, did not affect SSA quite as severely. In part, limited financial integration 
with international capital markets and an inward focus of African banks had shielded 
the  region.  So  instead,  SSA  flourished,  ranking  second  behind  emerging  and 
developing  Asia  in  terms  of  growth.  Easy  monetary  policy  in  the  advanced 
economies, the search for yield as well as excess liquidity in global financial markets 
benefitted  Africa,  and  ‘frontier  markets’  became  the  new  buzzword  and  investment 
destinations of choice.   
 However, there has been a notable economic turnaround since 2014, coinciding with 
the  period  when  crude  oil  prices  and  commodity  prices  lost  significant  ground. 
Furthermore,  as  soon  as  it  became  clear  that  the  Federal  Reserve  would  begin  to 
normalise  monetary  policy,  international  investors  and  creditors  started  to  withdraw 
capital.  African  countries  heavily  reliant  on  commodity  revenues  were  negatively 
affected, their position exacerbated by a failure to build fiscal buffers during the good 
times, combined with a significant pickup in foreign currency-denominated sovereign 
bond issuance by African countries during the boom years. Consequently, the overall 
 Page 2 of 11 
fiscal  balance  for  SSA  moved  from  an  average  surplus  of  1,7  per  cent  of  GDP2  in 
2004-08 to a deficit of 4,9 per cent in 2016. Government debt accelerated markedly 
over  this  period,  for  example  from  28  per  cent  of  GDP  to  around  70  per  cent  in 
Angola  and  from  30 to  50  per  cent  of  GDP  in  South  Africa.  Foreign  exchange 
reserves  have  been  run  down  in  some  countries  and  inflows  of  foreign  direct 
investment  declined  in  the  region  as  a  whole.  In  addition,  SSA’s  current  account 
deficit increased from an average of 2,1 per cent of GDP in 2004-08 to 5,9 per cent 
in  2015;  it  is  expected  to  widen  further,  to  levels  above  6  per  cent,  this  year.  The 
most  pronounced  shifts  could  be  observed  in  the  oil-exporting  countries  where  the 
average balance moved from a surplus of 13,1 per cent of GDP to a deficit of 3,9 per 
cent over the same period.3   
 Thus, 2014 marked the end of the ‘Goldilocks years’ for Africa. SSA growth dropped 
from  6,8  per  cent  in  2004-08  to  3,4  per  cent  in  2015,  and,  according  to  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), it is set to decelerate further this year, to around 
1,6 per cent – the weakest growth rate since the early 1990s, undershooting global 
growth for the first time since 2000. Also according to the IMF, per capita income in 
SSA is anticipated to fall this year for the first time since 1994.  
 Much of the more recent slowdown in SSA can be attributed to developments in the 
two largest economies, Nigeria and South Africa, which account for more than half of 
SSA growth. To put this into context: the IMF projects that Nigeria, which had been 
growing  by  10  per  cent  in  the  2000s,  will  contract  by  1,8 per  cent  this  year  while 
South Africa will barely grow at 0,1 per cent in 2016. I should, however, mention that 
the  most  recent  forecast  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (SARB)  has  lifted  the 
projection  for  economic  growth  in  the  country  to  0,4  per  cent  in  2016.  McKinsey 
highlights that, for the African continent, economic deterioration emanates from two 
distinct groups:  the North  African countries affected by the Arab Spring, and  the oil 
exporters  (which  include  Nigeria)  affected  by  the  sharp  decline  in  oil  prices. 
Together, these two groups account for nearly three-fifths of Africa’s combined GDP. 
                                            
2 gross domestic product 
3 Various issues of the sub-Saharan Africa Regional Economic Outlook of the International Monetary 
Fund 
 Page 3 of 11 
The real annual GDP of the Arab Spring countries declined by 4,8 per cent in 2010-
15, and that of the oil exporters by 3,3 per cent.4  
 Many  parts  of  SSA  have  witnessed  a  turnaround,  but  this  is  not  true  of  the  entire 
region.  We  need  to  recognise  the  increasingly  important  role  that  East  Africa  is 
playing in driving growth, as it benefits from cheap oil, slowing inflation, lower interest 
rates,  and  an  improved  regulatory  regime  with  increased  investment  in  key  sectors 
such as transport and telecommunications.  
 Nonetheless,  some  believe  that  the  ‘Africa  rising’  story  was  directly  related  to 
elevated  commodity  prices  underpinned  by  China’s  success  and  its  many  years  of 
double-digit  growth  rates.  It  is  postulated  in  some  quarters  that  the  rebalancing  of 
China’s  economy  away  from  investment  to  focus  more  on  domestic  consumption 
would  give  rise  to  a  slowing  in  the  Chinese  economy,  spilling  over  to  commodity 
prices  and  negatively  affecting  commodity-producing  countries  in  Africa.  But  this  is 
only part of the story; the global economic recovery has not been particularly robust 
and  the  slowdown  is  also  not  unique  to  SSA.  Emerging  markets  in  general  have 
slowed, with a few key economies having entered recession.   
 It is imperative to ensure that the deceleration in Africa’s growth trajectory is  indeed 
temporary. For this reason, countries on the continent must ensure that there is strict 
fiscal  discipline,  that  market-friendly  policies  are  implemented  (such  as  flexible 
exchange  rates),  and  that  the  strides  made  in  strengthening  institutions  are 
maintained  and  further  entrenched.  To  reiterate  what  George  Abed  said  in  2012: 
revenue  bases  must  be  broadened,  and  Africa  needs  to  continue  improving  the 
basics, including infrastructure development.  
 On this note, it was heartening to note German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s remarks 
a few weeks ago, made on the sidelines of the G-205 Summit in China, that, during 
Germany’s  presidency  of  the  G-20  in  2017,  there  will  be  a  focus  on  Africa, 
                                            
4 Lions on the move II: realizing the potential of Africa’s economies, McKinsey & Company, 
September 2016. 
5 Group of Twenty (Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors) 
 Page 4 of 11 
particularly  pertaining  to  investment  in  infrastructure  and  direct  investment  in  the 
continent. 
 It has been said many times before: it would be difficult to ignore the potential that 
this continent has to offer in terms of its fast-growing young population which is more 
educated  and  wealthier  than  ever.  According  to  the  United  Nations  (UN),  Africa’s 
population is expected to rise from the current 1,2 billion people to 2,5 billion in 2050. 
Granted, such population growth can be to the detriment of the continent if there are 
no  new  jobs,  but  a  recent  report  by  McKinsey  shows  that  job  creation  is  outpacing 
labour  force  growth  at  3,8  per  cent  a  year  versus  2,8  per  cent.6  Africa  is  also  the 
world’s fastest-urbanising region; its household consumption  is expected to grow at 
3,8 per cent a year between now and 2025 to reach US$2,1 trillion that year. Africa 
could  double  its  manufacturing  output  from  the  current  US$500  billion  to  almost 
US$1  trillion  in  2025,  largely  based  on  African  companies  meeting  domestic 
demand.  We  should  also  remember  that  Africa’s  natural  resources  remain  in 
abundance  and  that  the  continent  is  more  peaceful  and  democratic  than  it  was  a 
decade ago.  Indeed,  in  terms  of  projected  growth  rates for 2016, of  the  10 fastest-
growing economies in the world,  3 are from Africa.7 The World Bank ease of doing 
business  report  further  shows  that,  despite  the  economic  turnaround,  5  of  the  10 
fastest reformers are African.8  
 In addition, regional integration remains a priority for Africa over the long term. In this 
respect, Agenda 2063 sets out the vision for this path, recognising that with deeper 
regional  integration  come  larger  markets,  greater  industrialization  and  productivity, 
as well as greater talent mobility. Investment in infrastructure means less congestion 
along regional corridors and  the facilitation of trade by cutting barriers such as time 
and costs. The African Regional Integration Index9 was launched earlier this year for 
the purpose of measuring and providing an assessment of developments across the 
continent  to  identify  gaps  in  terms  of  integration.  The  average  Regional  Economic 
                                            
6 Lions on the move II: realizing the potential of Africa’s economies, McKinsey & Company, 
September 2016. 
7 These are Ivory Coast (8,5 per cent), Tanzania (6,9 per cent), and Senegal (6,6 per cent).  
8 ‘Business in Africa, making Africa work’, The Economist, 16 April 2016 
9 Africa Regional Integration Index Report 2016 by the United Nations Economic Commission for 
Africa, African Union and African Development Bank. 
 Page 5 of 11 
Community (REC) scores are around 0,47 on a scale of 0 (low) to 1 (high). Overall, 
the  index  shows  that  integration  in  the  region  could  significantly  progress,  with  the 
East  African  Community  the  top  performer  (0,54)  followed  closely  by  SADC10 
(0,531). It is interesting to note that the highest scores are on trade integration while 
the lowest scores are on financial and macroeconomic integration.  
 
The  African  Central  Bank  (ACB)11,  one  of  the  three  financial  institutions  of  the 
African  Union,  is  due  to  be  set  up  by  2028,  after  the  achievement  of  certain 
milestones, including the establishment of an African Common Market as well as an 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  that  would  include  Continental  Fiscal  and  Banking 
Unions. All these milestones (including the establishment of the ACB) are envisaged 
to  be  achieved  between  2029  and  2034.  Given  the  tight  timelines,  it  is  doubtful 
whether  the  establishment  of  the  ACB  is  still  within  schedule.  It  may  therefore  be 
useful to pause at this juncture and take stock in order to assess where the continent 
finds  itself  in  its  economic  and  financial  integration  journey  in  relation  to  set  goals. 
The focus should first be  on pursuing integration within regions before accelerating 
integration across the continent.  
  3.  Digital finance and financial inclusion 
Globalisation  and  the  information  technology  (IT)  revolution  provide  unprecedented 
opportunities  for  countries  and  regions  to  make  significant  advances  in  reducing 
poverty and improving incomes, which in turn could underpin the desired economic 
and  social  transformations.  As  the  G20  High  Level  Principles  for  Digital  Financial 
Inclusion pointed out, one can no longer talk about growth  without  reference to the 
Fourth  Industrial  Revolution  and  digital  finance  –  a  powerful  and  effective  tool  of 
expanding  access  beyond  financial  services  to  other  sectors,  holding  enormous 
opportunities for  the  expansion  of  basic  services  and  enhancing  financial  inclusion. 
                                            
10 Southern African Development Community 
11 The African Central Bank (ACB) was agreed upon in the 1991 Abuja Treaty. Once fully 
implemented via Pan-African Parliament legislation, the ACB will be the sole issuer of the African 
Single Currency, it will become the banker of the African Government, it will become the banker to 
Africa's private and public banking institutions, it will regulate and supervise the African banking 
industry, and it will set the official interest and exchange rates – all in conjunction with the African 
Government’s administration. 
 Page 6 of 11 
These are powerful engines for job creation in developing countries – and they have 
an  increasingly  important  role  to  play  in  promoting  the  development  of  small 
businesses. Indeed, this was a key topic at the most recent World Economic Forum 
on Africa, held in Kigali during May 2016. The World Bank highlighted digital finance 
as an area which can contribute to achieving the goal of universal access to financial 
services by 2020. The G-20 also recognised the potential role that digital finance can 
play and released the  G-20 high-level principles for digital financial inclusion during 
its  Hangzhou  Leaders’  Summit  in  September  2016.  Countries  were  encouraged  to 
consider these  principles  as a  basis for  the development  of  country  action  plans  to 
leverage the huge potential offered by digital technologies. The promotion of  digital 
financial services would contribute towards the growth of inclusive economies. 
 At this stage, allow me to hone in on financial inclusion as it relates to the sphere of 
digital finance. As has recently been reported by the G-20 through the work done by 
the Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion,  2 billion adults globally – the majority 
of whom are women – do not have access to formal financial services and are  thus 
excluded  from  opportunities  to  improve  their  lives.  In  SSA,  the  percentage  of  the 
population  with  an  account  at  a  financial  institution  is  just  above  30 per  cent, 
compared with almost 50 per cent in emerging Asia and almost 70 per cent in East 
Asia. Only about 23 per cent of small and medium enterprises in Africa have access 
to  formal  financing.12  The  SADC  Financial  Inclusion  Strategy  Workshop  Report13, 
developed  by  the  FinMark  Trust  and  presented  to  stakeholders  in  February  2016, 
notes  that financial  inclusion  in the  SADC  region  is  relatively  low  and  varies  widely 
across countries. A number of supply barriers  have been identified, which include a 
lack  of  incentives  and  appropriate  delivery  channels  that  constrain  financial 
institutions  in  providing  and  extending  financial  products  and  services  to  unserved 
and underserved segments of the population. On the demand side, barriers include 
administrative,  systemic  as  well  as  attitudinal  challenges,  many  of  which  are  more 
pronounced  among  certain  groups,  such  as  the  youth  and  women.  These  barriers 
                                            
12 World Bank (http://datatopics.worldbank.org/financialinclusion/region/sub-saharan-africa)  
13 FinMark Trust (http://www.finmark.org.za/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/Rep_SADC-Financial-
Inclusion-Strategy-Workshop_Feb2016.pdf)  
 Page 7 of 11 
undermine or downright prohibit the ability to access and use financial products and 
services. 
 Thus,  much  remains  to  be  done  in  furthering  financial  inclusion,  as  the  financial 
markets in many African countries continue to lack depth and therefore offer limited 
financing  opportunities  to  small-  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  and  to  the 
population at large. It is widely acknowledged that there are limited financial avenues 
for  basic  services  such  as  savings  and  making  payments.  For  example,  by  paying 
wages and transfers digitally, instead of in cash, governments and the private sector 
can  play  a  pivotal  role  in  increasing  financial  inclusion.  While  there  is  wide 
recognition  on  the  continent  of  the  growing  importance  of  mobile  money  accounts 
and  digital  technology  in  the  financial  sector,  this  potential  needs  to  be  leveraged 
much  more.  However,  we  also  need  to  keep  in  mind  that  there  is  a  key  trade-off 
between  inclusion  and  maintaining  the  integrity  of  the  financial  system;  a  balanced 
regulatory and supervisory approach is therefore required in considering the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution.14  
 The  breakthrough  innovation  brought  on  by  crypto-currencies  and  block  chain 
technology, amongst others, will continue to bring about significant and wide-ranging 
changes  to  society  and  the  broader  economy,  and  is  very  likely  to  have  a  positive 
spillover effect on the financial services sector and markets in the African continent. 
Many financial institutions have already experienced cyber attacks, including banks, 
insurers,  and  even  central  banks.  Central  banks  have  to  be  vigilant  in  assessing 
potential  systemic  risks  and  enhancing  the  financial  system’s  resilience  to  cyber-
threats.  Reported  attacks,  such  as  those  on  the  Society  for  Worldwide  Interbank 
Financial  Telecommunication  (SWIFT)15,  the  financial  messaging  network  that 
underpins most  international  money  transfers,  have  the  potential  to  paralyse  global 
trade and finance. It is no surprise that cybersecurity has in the recent past moved 
swiftly up the list of priority issues in a number of countries as regulatory authorities 
                                            
14 Wolrd Bank Global Findex Database 2014, Measuring Financial Inclusion around the World. 
15 There have been three successful attacks on banks using the SWIFT money transfer network. The 
latest of these affected an Ecuadorian bank on 12-22 January 2015. During this period, at least 12 
fraudulent transfer requests instructed Wells Fargo to send US$12 million belonging to Ecuador’s 
Banco del Austro to accounts in Dubai, Hong Kong, and the United States. Wells Fargo complied with 
these requests. 
 Page 8 of 11 
seek  to  address  cybersecurity  threats  and  enhance  cyber-resilience.  It  is  therefore 
very  important  to  strengthen  international  cooperation  and  peer  exchange  of 
information  in  this  area.  In  this  regard,  the  SARB  hosted  its  first  cybersecurity 
conference last month, with the theme of ‘Collaboration for building cyber-resilience’.  
 4.  The rise in African cross-border banks and financial regulatory impacts 
on Africa  
 As I come to the end of my remarks, I would like to briefly touch on the rapid growth 
in  recent  years  of  African  cross-border  banks,  or  pan-African  banks  (PABs)  –  a 
further testimony to the ‘Africa rising’ theme.  
 PABs  are  improving  competition,  especially  in  host  countries  with  small  markets, 
driving  innovation  and  bringing  new  opportunities  for  diversification  for  the  home 
countries.  But  with  rapid  growth  come  a  number  of  responsibilities,  such  as 
maintaining  financial  stability  and  ensuring  adequate  cooperation  and  resolution 
strategies  among  home  and  host  financial  supervisors16.  The  rising  trend  of  cross-
border  banking  in  Africa  is  an  opportunity  to  further  strengthen  regional  financial 
integration. In this regard, the work of the Association of African Central Banks under 
the  auspices  of  the  Community  of  African  Banking  Supervisors  (CABS)  is  an 
important  initiative  to  consider  the  potential  macro  financial  spillovers  across 
countries.  Implementing  regulatory  coordination  measures  on  financial  integration 
and access will have substantial benefits in promoting growth on the continent.  
 The  global  regulatory  reforms  agreed  to  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Global  Financial 
Crisis  have  been  vast,  complex,  and  ground-breaking  in  many  aspects,  requiring 
effective  coordination  among  many  stakeholders.  Many  of  the  ‘fault  lines’  that  had 
contributed  to  the  Crisis  have  been  addressed,  but  the  full,  consistent,  and  timely 
implementation – ensuring a level playing field and addressing the major unintended 
consequences of the reforms – remains an ongoing challenge.   
                                             
16 The report on Pan-African Banks-Opportunities and Challenges for Cross-Border Oversight, IMF, 
January 12, 2015. 
 Page 9 of 11 
One  of  these  unintended  consequences  is  related  to  the  effects  arising  from  the 
global reforms addressing the problem of ‘too big to fail’ (TBTF). South Africa directly 
experienced  such  changes  in  business  models  recently  when  Barclays  announced 
its intention to reduce its 62 per cent share in Barclays Africa Group Limited (BAGL), 
a material subsidiary publically listed in South Africa which includes Absa, one of the 
largest  South  African  banks.  Barclays’  intention  to  reduce  its  controlling  stake  in 
BAGL  was  mainly  informed  by  global  regulatory  pressures  to  meet  additional  G-
SIB17  requirements.  The  objective  of  addressing  the  problem  of  TBTF  was  thus 
achieved,  but  in  so  doing  other  adverse  and  unintended  effects  were  introduced. 
Significant strategic changes by G-SIBs, as well as the fact that these changes are 
at times made in reaction to regulatory changes rather than necessarily on business 
considerations, can lead to increased market uncertainty and short-term volatility. 
 A  fallout  from  the  international  reforms  has  been  the  effect  of  the  decline  in 
correspondent  banking  relationships  (CBRs)  on  the  operations  of  banks  on  the 
African continent. Some G-SIBs have either restricted or exited  CBRs in more than 
10 African markets. A recent report of the Working Group on Correspondent Banking 
of  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Market  Infrastructures  18  acknowledges  that  the 
issues  surrounding  the  withdrawal  from  CBRs  are  very  complex  and  that  costs 
related 
to  anti-money 
laundering  and  combating 
the 
financing  of 
terrorism 
(AML/CFT)  compliance  are only  one  of  the elements  that  have  to  be  considered  in 
order to understand recent trends. The report states that it is difficult to disentangle 
the  effects  of  de-risking  from  other  causes,  including  declining  economic  activity, 
external  shocks,  and  the  consolidation  of  the  banking  system.  In  Africa,  the  most 
pronounced  declines  in  CBRs  occurred  in  Northern  Africa  and  partly  in  Southern 
Africa; other regions experienced substantial increases.  
 Markets  in  all  jurisdictions  must  have  access  to  a  well-functioning  global  financial 
system in order to develop and prosper, but de-risking can create financial exclusion 
and has the potential to drive certain payment flows underground, which can set the 
                                            
17 global systemically important bank 
18 Correspondent banking,  Committee on Payment and Market Infrastructures, Bank for International 
Settlements, July 2016. 
 Page 10 of 11 
goal of creating an open and global integrated financial system at risk. In this regard, 
the  efforts  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  its  outreach programme  through  the 
six  Regional  Consultative  Groups  (RCGs)19  to  better  understand  and  address  the 
reasons behind the decline in CBRs, as well as the global trend of de-globalising and 
de-risking, are to be welcomed. The RCG for SSA, which will be held in Cape Town 
on 25-26 October, will focus on CBRs and the effects of the reforms.  
  5.  Conclusion 
In conclusion: while the growth paths in Africa may have diverged, the potential that 
this continent has is tremendous and outpaces that of any other region in the world. 
But  this  potential  needs  to  be  harnessed.  Integration  needs  to  be  deepened, 
infrastructure improved, and productivity lifted.  
 The  long-term  fundamentals  remain  strong,  and  while  regional  integration  may  not 
be proceeding at the speed hoped for, this is not necessarily a bad thing, but rather 
an  opportunity  to  take  stock,  readjust  plans  where  necessary  and  implement  them 
with  renewed  vigour.  In  this  regard,  the  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution  promises 
significant benefits, if harnessed correctly.  
 While  some  have  suggested  that  the  ‘Africa  rising’  narrative  may  have  been 
exaggerated and are starting to question it, to me it looks more like a pause, and we 
should  not  allow  the  current  headwinds  to  detract  from  the  vast  potential  and 
opportunities that the African continent continues to offer. 
 Thank you. 
                                            
19 The Financial Stability Board (FSB) has six Regional Consultative Groups (RCGs), established 
under the FSB Charter to bring together the financial authorities from the FSB member (24) and non-
member (41) countries to exchange views on the vulnerabilities affecting financial systems and 
initiatives to promote financial stability. The FSB RCG for sub-Saharan Africa is co-chaired by 
Governor Emefiele of the Central Bank of Nigeria and Governor Kganyago of the South African 
Reserve Bank. 
 Page 11 of 11 
