Paul A Acquah: Workshop on the general data dissemination systems 
(GDDS) 
Opening address by Dr Paul A Acquah, Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at the Workshop on 
the general data dissemination systems (GDDS), Accra, 17 August 2005. 
 Mr. Chairman, 
Distinguished Stakeholders, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I deem it an honour and at the same time necessary to be part of this important workshop 
and I appreciate the opportunity to give the opening address. You would agree with me that 
the appetite for statistics and other information on the economy has increased considerably 
in this country and that users have become more resourceful in the analysis and use of data. 
This growing interest has been motivated by a desire to make assessments of how far we 
are  from  our  national  objectives,  be  they  on  growth,  inflation,  income  distribution  and 
incidence of extreme poverty or how distant or close we are to the Millennium Development 
Goals. All this requires a robust and responsive statistical system to monitor developments 
and to allow policy changes to meet changing demands. 
Mr.  Chairman,  statistics  do  not  only  serve  national  purposes  but  they  have  global 
implications and it is a significant development  that Ghana has become part of the GDDS 
platform.  The  GDDS  requires  a  good  set  of  principles  for  routine  data  dissemination. 
Adherence  to  its  guidelines  should  enhance  the  usefulness  of  the  data  and  provide  users 
with valuable information to plan their work and programs. It also serves as a yardstick by 
which Ghana can judge its performance in the field of statistics. One important outcome of 
the GDDS platform is the collaboration with other statistical providers, and the fostering of a 
network among institutions. Ghana’s adherence to the GDDS should ultimately lead us to a 
strengthened statistical system. 
I am very sure we all agree on the usefulness of data and there would be no need to run you 
through that. However, we should acknowledge that good statistics as collected according to 
agreed international best practices, using appropriate methods for data collection, processing 
and dissemination are crucial as a tool for national development. Accurate and timely data 
would allow us to formulate sound policies, effectively compare our progress over time and 
space and also set benchmarks for measuring progress in the future. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  however  of  paramount  importance  that  the  data  generation 
process  is  thoroughly  understood  so  that  the  appropriate  interpretations  could  be  made. 
Economic  statistics  are  often  only  an  approximation  of  the  underlying  reality  they  are 
attempting  to  measure.  Even  where  the  data  can  be  perfectly  measured  there  is  often 
discrepancy  between  the  economic  concept  that  we  would  want  to  measure  and  the  real 
phenomenon that the statistics attempts to measure. 
For example Gross Domestic Product seeks to measure the total economic activity, the value 
added  that  takes  place  in  the  economy  over  time.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  measure  this 
directly. Instead much of the data is estimated from surveys. This gives rise to measurement 
issues relating to coverage, sampling and non-response, but not such as to undermine their 
integrity.  It  is  therefore  normal  to  have  revisions  as  new  information  that  improves  the 
accuracy of the data is received. 
GDP growth and inflation (as measured by changes in CPI) are two of the most important 
indicators that are closely watched. They do have both economic and political significance, 
as they have become the standard tools for assessing performance. 
   1/2 
In fact, ease of access to official statistics has become a hallmark of open and democratic 
societies, making it imperative for ensuring its accuracy and timeliness. The only way we can 
measure our short-to-medium term macroeconomic performance would be to effectively and 
accurately measure trends in monetary aggregates, balance of payments, debt sustainability 
and  fiscal  performance  in  addition  to  GDP  and  inflation.  Sound  statistics  are  necessary  to 
monitor these trends closely and accurately because of the economic costs that can accrue 
from imbalances and deviations of these indicators from sustainable levels. 
Mr.  Chairman,  a  conscious  effort  on  our  part  to  improve  upon  data  collection  in  terms  of 
timelines  and  accuracy  has  an  international  dimension  of  interest.  Data  are  essential  for 
investors,  international  organisations,  financial  institutions,  banks  and  fund  managers  who 
rely on data of various countries to evaluate their investments. We all agree that data can be 
unreliable and prone to different interpretations or too dated to be useful. 
Improving  upon  the  reliability  and  timeliness  of  data  enhances  the  chances  of  attracting 
foreign  direct  investment  and  allowing  better  assessment  of  various  risks  associated  with 
investment decisions. Absence of data closes the door to any access to financing from the 
international capital markets in a globally interdependent world. 
There  is  a  need  for  proper  funding  and  adequately  resourcing  our  official  institutions  in 
charge  of  generating  data,  not  only  to  ensure  that  disseminated  data  are  accurate  and 
reliable but also to ensure that they are current and not dated. 
Mr.  Chairman,  notwithstanding  the  significance  of  accuracy  and  timeliness  of  data  in  our 
national building efforts, our official institutions that have responsibility for collecting, collating 
and analyzing data have not received the prime support in terms of resources. It is caught up 
in  a  vicious  spiral  of  under-funding  and  under-performance  and  in  most  cases  their  best 
efforts given the limited resources are under-appreciated. There is no doubt that we need to 
support  increased  investment  in  our  main  statistical  agency  and  also  improve  upon  its 
capacity. Ladies and Gentlemen, acknowledging this is a first step in solving this endemic 
problem.  Information  is  invaluable  not  only  for  policy  making  but  for  the  benefit  of  the 
financial  markets.  Adhering  to  the  GDDS  should  provide  an  impetus  to  transform  our 
institutions  charged  with  the  statutory  responsibility  to  generate  statistics  so  that  they  can 
meet international best practices. 
The  GDDS  framework  is  built  around  four  pillars;  data  characteristics,  quality,  access  and 
integrity. Its main objectives are to encourage countries to improve upon data quality, provide 
a framework for evaluating needs for data improvement and setting priorities and providing a 
guide  for  countries  in  the  dissemination  to  the  public  of  comprehensive  timely,  accessible 
and reliable economic, financial and socio-demographic statistics. 
Today’s event is one evidence that our statistical agencies go beyond their limited resources 
to ensure that data disseminated are reliable. Ghana’s participation in the GDDS ensures a 
common platform and allows international data comparison due to its standard international 
best practices methods of collecting these data. 
Mr Chairman, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, I am very sure that this workshop will be 
very useful and productive with discussions guided by the pillars and principles on which the 
GDDS is built. The workshop would enable us, even as we showcase and demonstrate the 
potential benefits to be gained as a country in joining the GDDS, resolve to mobilize national 
support in terms of resources and cooperation with official agencies responsible for collecting 
and analyzing data in this country. 
Thank you. 
 
   2/2 
