Junbo Xiang: Improve the legal system to prevent financial risks 
Speech by Mr Junbo Xiang, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the “2005 High-level 
Forum of China’s Financial Reform”, Shanghai, 26 April 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It’s a pleasure to attend this high-level forum of China’s financial reform, sponsored by the Financial 
Research Institute, Development Research Center of the State Council. In my view, the theme of this 
forum,  “Financial  Innovation  and  Risk  Prevention”,  is  of  great  significance.  Innovation  is  the 
inexhaustible  impetus  for  the  development  of  financial  sector.  The  rise  and  decline  of  financial 
development in the 20th century can be viewed as a history of innovations one after another. In 1950s, 
the institutional investor sprang up with the establishment of modern pension funds. In 1960s, credit 
card appeared. In 1970s, Eurodollar and Eurobond came into being. And since 1980s, in a new round 
of  financial  liberalization,  various  financial  derivatives  and  cross-financial  sector  products  were 
introduced in the market. Of course, due to the uncertainty of innovations, while the innovations on 
financial system, institutions, market, products and service boosting the growth of financial sector and 
profits of financial institutions, new financial risks also emerged. China is also confronted with such 
problems.  Therefore,  how  to  deal  with  financial  innovation  and  risk  prevention  to  keep  a  balance 
between them poses a big challenge for supervisory authorities and financial institutions. 
Financial  legal  system  not  only  provides  regulation  for  financial  institutions,  financial  business 
participants and their legal relationship, but also improves the self-discipline of financial supervisors. 
The main target of financial legislation is to adjust the legal relationship among financial supervisors, 
institutions  and  customers,  protect  customers’  legitimate  rights,  and  strengthen  the  supervision  on 
those areas where market plays a leading role in coordinating financial supervision and market self-
discipline. Where there is market, there is risk, which is also the same for the financial sector. Thus, 
the purpose of financial legislation is not to wipe out all risks, but to control it in a certain scale that can 
be handled by the supervisors and absorbed by the financial institutions. Viewing from this aspect, the 
establishment and enforcement of financial legal system are indispensable for preventing, controlling 
and  dissolving  financial  risks.  On  today’s  occasion,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  my  observations 
about the prevention of financial risks in China in the broad context of financial innovation from the 
aspect of financial legislation. 
Current status of financial risks in China 
I. 
Financial risk refers to the possibility that a financial institution suffers from a loss of funds, property or 
reputation due to changes in macroeconomic policy environment, market situation, exchange rate or 
mismanagement.  And  there  are  various  kinds  of  risks,  such  as  operational  risk,  institutional  risk, 
macro-risk, micro-risk, etc. According to the Basel Core Principles on Effective Banking Supervision, 
the financial risks can be classified into eight categories, including credit risk, market risk, operational 
risk,  liquidity  risk,  legal  risk,  etc.  Judged  by  each  of  these  categories,  China’s  financial  risks  have 
broadly  reduced  in  recent  years.  However,  potential  risks  still  exist  in  the  financial  sector.  In  my 
opinion, there are obviously three kinds of risks in China’s financial system. 
First, credit risk remains the major risk in China’s financial industry. Loan and investment are the main 
business of financial institutions, which requires financial institutions to make appropriate assessment 
on  the  credit  status  of  the  lender  and  receiver  of  investment.  However,  due  to  the  information 
asymmetry, their assessment cannot always be correct, and the credit standing of the lender or the 
receiver of investment may decline due to various factors. Therefore, a major risk financial institutions 
facing is the lender’s default risk, i.e., credit risk. During business operation, if financial institutions fail 
to timely identify the problematic financial asset, set up special loan loss provisions to write off bad 
loans, or stop accruing relevant interests, there will be serious problems ahead. 
According  to the  balance sheet,  asset quality  of  China’s  banking  institutions  has been  enhanced  in 
recent years, with the absolute amount and ratio of non-performing loans declining, which could be 
attributed to the supervisors strengthening regulation and the financial institutions deepening reform to 
improve internal management. But we have to be mindful of the fact that the decline of non-performing 
loans is also partly a result of economic expansion, in which bank loans increased dramatically. For 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 1
example, in 2003 and 2004, new loans in all financial institutions amounted to RMB2740 billion and 
2260  billion  yuan  respectively.  Besides,  compared  with  the  international  banking  standard,  China’s 
major commercial banks still have a relatively high NPL ratio of 13.2% in 2004, and the CAR of most 
commercial banks have not met the legal requirement of 8%. 
While assessing the credit risks of the financial institutions, one of the important points is the large 
increase of loans in the real estate sector. The development of China’s real estate sector is closely 
related to the housing reform, which started in the end of last century and finished in recent years. 
Housing mortgage loans emerged as a new business after the start of housing reform. Since the real 
estate  lending  has  a  relatively  stable  income  compared  with  traditional  business,  it  is  actively 
developed  by  banks.  Therefore,  it’s  reasonable  that  real  estate  loans  increase  fast.  However,  real 
estate  lending  in  China  is  relatively  a  new  business  that  has  not  been  tested  in  economic  cycle 
changes. It has just started a few years ago and there is no available data on the medium and long-
term default ratio. Besides, the Chinese economy is in a new expansion period, and the prosperity of 
the economy partly covers the potential risks involved in real estate lending. The economic prosperity 
changes as the tide, and once the pace of the economy slows down, the default ratio of real estate 
lending will probably increase, so we cannot be too optimistic. In this field, we should learn from the 
lessons of Japanese real estate bubble. After the bubble burst, their bad loans increased dramatically 
and bond market was also affected, in addition to the revaluation of yen, which push the Japanese 
economy into a decade of recession. As a developing country, China always stresses the sustainable, 
steady, fast, and healthy development of economy. If we failed in this field, the economy would suffer 
a huge loss, even if the recession may only last for a few years. 
Not only banks but also securities companies face high credit risks, with most securities companies 
suffering  low  asset  quality.  Recently,  many  of  the  insolvent  ones  have  been  taken  over,  and  the 
Central Bank has to provide central bank lending to pay individual creditors of these companies. Thus, 
we cannot relax our vigilance on credit risk in the financial sector, for it remains one of the major risks 
in the financial industry. 
Second,  the  frequent  occurrence  of  operational  risk  is  one  of  the  outstanding  characteristics  in  the 
financial industry. According to the definitions made by the Basel Committee, financial institutions face 
two  kinds  of  operational  risks:  one  refers  to  the  losses  resulted  from  the  failure  of  information  and 
technology system or other disasters; and the other refers to the losses resulted from the failure of 
internal control and the failure in responding promptly to various mistakes, frauds, misuse of power or 
various  moral  hazards.  In  terms  of  the  exposed  operational  risks  in  recent  years  in  the  financial 
industry, the failure of internal control constitutes the major source of operational risks. In particular, 
the resulted loss mainly comes from corruption of the senior management, irregularities of the staff, 
and financial frauds. 
Recently,  many  cases  have  been  detected  in  the  financial  sector,  especially  in  commercial  banks, 
which  to  some  degree  could  be  attributed  to  the  deepening  of  banks’  internal  reform,  exposing  the 
deeply  hidden  cases.  Even  though,  it  indicates  that the  operational  risk  is  relatively  high  in  China’s 
financial sector, which is not in line with our strategic target to establish a modern financial system. 
The continuously exposed operational risks not only make financial institutions suffer big losses, but 
also  impair  their  reputation.  For  example,  the  latest  exposed  major  cases  in  financial  system  have 
negative impact on the financial industry’s reputation both at home and abroad. 
Third,  cross-market  and  cross-sector  financial  risks  become  new  unstable  elements  in  China’s 
financial  industry.  In  recent  years,  with  the  restructuring  of  the  financial  industry  and  the  increasing 
consolidation  of  financial  business,  cross-market  and  cross-sector  financial  risks  becomes  a  new 
element affecting the stability of the financial system. Nowadays, such risks are shown in two aspects. 
First, various financial-holding companies have emerged, such as the CITIC. Such financial-holding 
companies  provide  both  banking  products  and  securities  products.  However,  effective  and 
consolidated supervision is lacked, leading to many potential risks, such as infringement of consumer 
(investor)’s interests, connected trading and the transmission of financial risks from one subsidiary to 
other  companies  or  to  the  whole  group.  Second,  banks,  trust  companies,  securities  firms  and 
insurance  companies  are  developing  kinds  of  cross-currency,  cross-financing,  and  cross-market 
products and instruments in an effort to dismantle business segregation, such as the joint entrusted 
loan business and wealth management business provided by banks, which involve potential risks. 
Through  the  PBC’s  recent  experience  in  preventing  and  dealing  with  systematic  financial  risks,  we 
have found that cross-market financial risks are on the rise. Theses risks are more prominent in the 
capital operation of financial holding companies or sub-financial holding companies that were originally 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2005
industrial  companies.  As  such  companies  have  business  in  both  the  industrial  sector  and  financial 
sector, which involves banks, securities companies, trust companies and insurance companies, their 
capital  operation  is  characterized  by  a  financing  chain  of  “Financing—M&A—Listing—Re-M&A—
Re-financing”. Huge operational risks are hidden in the chain. Given that both ends are “financing”, 
financial institutions will become the biggest victim if the chain breaks. For instance, the recent crisis 
with a number of associated listed companies hurt numerous stock investors, shook the stock market, 
and inflicted heavy losses on relevant financial institutions. The stability of the entire financial system 
is also threatened. 
It  goes  without  saying  that  financial  innovation  has  become  an  effective  means  to  seek  greater 
prospect, return and competitiveness by financial institutions. Nonetheless, the external environment 
and the business model of financial institutions are undergoing sea changes, and financial-innovation-
related new products and businesses could transfer risks among financial institutions. The entrusted 
wealth  management  business,  which  is  actively  promoted  by  banks,  securities  companies,  trust 
companies  and  insurance  companies,  deserves  our  special  attention.  Despite  the  different  names 
given to the business by different financial institutions and the different rules of operation, the fact that 
the so-called “wealth” is invested in the stock market, foreign exchange market, and inter-bank bond 
market suggests that this business/product is a cross-market financial product. We have learned from 
some  recent  crises  in  high-risk  securities  companies  that  the  huge  losses  incurred  from  entrusted 
wealth  management  business  played  a  vital  part  in  the  insolvency  of  such  companies.  As  active 
players in the money market, securities companies will undoubtedly transfer their own risks to other 
market participants. We are by no means against the entrusted wealth management business, though. 
We are merely suggesting that the financial risks associated with cross-market financial products have 
surfaced. 
II.  
The causes of China’s financial risks in perspective of legal framework for the 
financial sector 
The high risks embedded in China’s financial system are the result of various problems in the national 
economy over a protracted period. The transition of the economic system, the change of the social 
environment,  the  rigidity  of  the  financial  system,  the  inadequacy  of  financial  supervision  and  the 
defects  in  the  legal  framework  for  the  financial  sector  are  among  the  causes  of  the  high  risks  in 
China’s  financial  system.  Scholars  and  government  officials  have  done  numerous  studies  in  those 
regards. Here, I would like to discuss the reasons underlying these risks, especially the three major 
risks, in China’s financial sector from the legal point of view. 
As is known to all, the legal framework is in essence a tool to regulate the relationship among financial 
supervisors, financial institutions and investors in financial products. In addition to regulating the legal 
relationship,  the  legal  framework  for  the  financial  sector  has  many  other  functions,  including 
punishment, encouragement, inhibition and guidance. In economic terms, it could be translated into 
predictable interest or loss. A large number of rules and regulations for the financial sector have been 
formulated since 1979, when China adopted the reform and opening-up policy. Such rules as the Law 
of the People’s Republic of China on the People’ s Bank of China, the Commercial Banking Law of the 
People’s  Republic  of  Chin,  the  Law  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  on  Banking  Regulation  and 
Supervision,  the  Securities  Law  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  and  the  Insurance  Law  of  the 
People’s  Republic  of  China  which  regulate  financial  supervision,  financial  institutions  and  their 
behaviors,  have  formed  the  fundamental  legal  framework  for  the  financial  sector.  The  Law  on 
Administrative Penalty, the Law on Administrative Appeal, and the Law on Administrative License are 
designed  to  regulate  the  administrative  behavior  of  financial  supervisors.  In  addition,  the  Law  on 
Negotiable Instruments, the Guarantee Law, and the Company Law are designed to regulate civil and 
commercial relations. 
However,  we  should  be  aware  that  the  existing  financial  legal  rules  were  established  in  the 
development of emerging markets and the transitional period of economy. With the deepening reform 
of China’s financial system, the accelerating opening-up and the enhancing innovation of the financial 
sector, the existing legal framework can hardly satisfy the changing requirement of the financial sector. 
Especially, we need to make an overview of the basic legal environment that our financial sector relies 
on and improve the research on laws for financial innovation (including system innovation, institution 
innovation  and  product  innovation).  Currently,  three  kinds  of  financial  risks  stand  high  in  China’s 
financial system, which is to some degree related to the inadequacy and incompatibility of our legal 
rules. 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 3
First, the lack of regulations on credit reporting hindered the development of credit reporting industry 
and  the  evaluation  on  the  credit  status  of  the  borrowers  by  the  financial  institutions.  Generally 
speaking, credit reporting refers to the collection, evaluation and sales of market participants’ credit 
information, and the credit information system is established to address the information asymmetry in 
financial  transactions.  With  the  economic  activities  being  more  and  more  complicated,  the  financial 
institutions  increasingly  rely  on  credit  reporting  department  or  social  credit  reporting  agency  to 
enhance the investigation and analysis of the credit status of borrowers. The establishment of credit 
information system has not been put on agenda in China until recent years. It is a task that should be 
strongly  supported  by  laws  since  corporate  and  individual  credit  information  collection  involve  the 
privacy of citizens and commercial secrets of enterprises. However, there is no relevant rules for credit 
reporting in the existing legal framework, and hence the credit reporting agencies can not collect and 
disclose information according to laws and the interests of the enterprises and individuals can hardly 
be safeguarded, which has hindered the healthy development of credit reporting industry. Failure of 
the  financial  institutions  to  timely  detects  irregularities  in  financial  transactions  such  as  duplicate 
frauds,  repetitive  mortgage  with  the  same  assets  and  connected  guarantee,  etc.  may  cause  great 
asset loss. 
Second,  the  underdeveloped  enterprise  insolvency  law  makes  it  difficult  for  financial  institutions  to 
protect  their  assets.  The  protection  of  financial  institution  creditors  under  the  enterprise  insolvency 
legal framework has a direct impact on the safety of the financial institutions’ assets. The existing laws 
governing enterprise insolvency mainly include the Provisional Enterprise Insolvency Law applied to 
the state-owned enterprises, Chapter XIX (Debt repayment procedures for the insolvency of corporate 
legal  entities)  in  the  Civil  Procedure  Law  applied  to  other  enterprises,  and  a  series  of  judicial 
explanations promulgated by the Supreme People’s Court. However, these laws have not adequately 
protected the rights of creditors. In terms of the building of insolvency legal system, the bankruptcy 
administrator  system  commonly  adopted  as  an  international  practice  has  not  been  established  in 
China,  and  the  current  bankruptcy  liquidation  system  often  ignores  the  interests  of  creditors  in 
liquidation. In terms of the bankruptcy procedures, relevant rules on the administration and acceptance 
of the insolvency cases, creditors’ meeting, and supervision system are not complete in the existing 
legal system, which further weakens the protection of creditors’ rights by the law. As the last resort to 
protect the claims of financial institutions, if the insolvency law fails to fully protect the interests of the 
creditors, non-performing loans and credit risks will probably accumulate in financial institutions. 
Currently,  legislation  of  the  new  Enterprise  Insolvency  Law  has  entered  a  critical  stage.  Compared 
with  the  existing  law,  the  new  one  (the  second  draft)  on  the  one  hand  extends  its  application  by 
including all the corporate legal entities under its umbrella, and enriches the provisions on insolvency 
procedures on the other hand by improving the protection of creditors’ rights in every aspect. However, 
defects remain in the draft law concerning the determination of repayment priority of claims and criteria 
of insolvency, two focal points that are closely related to the protection of creditors’ rights. Regarding 
repayment priority of claims, priority is given to employee entitlements over secured debts. Regarding 
the insolvency criteria, the draft law lists enterprises failing to repay due debts and failing to repay all 
debts  with  their  assets  (in  evident  insolvency)  both  as  tests  for  insolvency,  which  will  undoubtedly 
impose negative impact on the protection of the claims of financial institutions. 
Giving  priority  to  employee  entitlements  over  secured  debts,  which  increases  the  difficulties  for  the 
recourse of banking claims and lowers the recovery ratio of non-performing assets, will weaken the 
ability  of  financial  institutions  to  dispose  of  non-performing  assets  and  lead  to  financial  risks.  In 
addition,  underprotection  of  the  secured  debts  will  damage  the  basic  principles  of  laws  and  the 
confidence of economic entities in the security system as the last protection. Law also represents a 
faith. Without a confidence in the law, even the most prudent and systematic law will become a mere 
scrap of paper. However, the excessively strict tests of insolvency make creditors unable to apply for 
effecting insolvency of the debtors timely and effectively. Taking “inability to repay all debts with assets 
or  in  evident  insolvency”  as  the  criteria  will  prevent  the  enterprises  from  entering  the  bankruptcy 
procedures  until  they  become  absolutely  insavable.  Under  this  circumstance,  the  opportunities  to 
restructure  or  reconcile  the  insolvent  enterprises  will  be  missed,  resulting  in  a  failure  to  provide 
maximum protection for the creditor’s rights. 
Third, weakness in criminal liability investigation for financial frauds and irregularities exposes financial 
institutions to operational risks. The frequent occurrence of operational risks is one of the big problems 
for China’s financial sector. In particular, financial frauds and irregularities have caused great losses to 
financial institutions. Based on the analysis of recent cases, financial frauds in China could be divided 
into two categories: one is to provide false information for the purpose of illegal possession, such as 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2005
frauds  in  letter  of  credit  or  negotiable  instruments;  the  other  is  to  swindle  money  by  deliberately 
providing false financial information to benefit the enterprises instead of illegal possession. In the latter 
case, the use of the funds stated by the loan applicant is true; however, the applicant may deliberately 
submit  false  information  to  the  financial  institutions  that  can  mislead  the  banks’  decision  in  credit 
authorization. Currently, most of the frauds fall into the second category. In the Criminal Law, there are 
clear  provisions  on  financial  frauds  aiming  at  illegal  possession.  However,  there’s  no  stipulation  for 
frauds under the second category, and hence only civil responsibilities could be investigated on such 
behaviors in accordance with the Contract Law. Moreover, some irregularities such as misuse of the 
investors’ settlement funds for stock trading and trust funds of the customers have long existed in the 
financial  sector,  especially  the  securities  sector  and  trust  sector,  which  not  only  harm  the  legal 
interests of the public but also generate huge risks to financial institutions. However, since the existing 
Criminal Law only contains provisions against misuse of customers’ funds by the staff of the financial 
institutions  not  that  by  the  financial  institutions,  it  fails  to  provide  adequate  deterrence  for  such  a 
malpractice. It is undoubted that the lack of criminal punishment for the above frauds and irregularities 
will bring negative impact on reducing the operational risks in financial institutions. 
Fourth, the lack of laws governing financial institutions and business will increase the potential risks in 
the financial system. As mentioned above, the increase of cross-market risks has become one of the 
new  factors  affecting  the  stability  of  China’s  financial  system,  which  is  mainly  due  to  the 
underdevelopment  of  laws  to  timely  regulate  the  newly  emerged  financial  institutions  and business. 
For  example,  under  the  existing  legal  framework,  although  the  financial  holding  companies  are 
seemingly  to  be  covered  one  way  or  another  by  certain  provisions  in  laws  such  as  the  Law  of  the 
People’s  Republic  of  China  on  the  People’  s  Bank  of  China,  the  Commercial  Banking  Law  of  the 
People’s Republic of China, the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Banking Regulation and 
Supervision,  the  Securities  Law  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  and  the  Insurance  Law  of  the 
People’s  Republic  of  China,  none  of  them  fully  solve  the  supervisory  problems.  In  terms  of  the 
financial business, to supervise various entrusted asset management business, the most active cross-
market financial products, the CBRC, CSRC, CIRC each has its own supervisory standards to follow, 
and there is no unified supervision in this regard. Since the existing laws fail to solve the problems 
confronted in the supervision of financial holding companies and to provide strict legal definitions for 
new  financial  business,  potential  risks  are  likely  to  increase  and  spread  across  different  financial 
markets. According to the definition made by the Basel Committee, the cross-market risks undertaken 
by China’s financial institutions are in essence legal risks. 
Next step in optimizing the legal framework 
III. 
As  China’s  financial  reform  is  accelerating,  the  task  of  preventing  financial  risks  has  become  more 
important  and  challenging.  Given  the  innate  risks  associated  with  the  financial  sector,  the  legal 
framework for the sector cannot eliminate all financial risks once and for all. However, a sound legal 
framework may help deter imprudent risk-taking activities of financial institutions and reduce systemic 
risks. Furthermore, a favorable legal environment is the precondition for the steady performance of the 
financial system. 
The  PBC  is  stepping  up  its  efforts  in  improving  the  legal  framework  for  the  financial  sector.  More 
specifically, it is facilitating the formulation of the Regulations on Credit Information Management; it is 
actively  involved  in  the  amendment  of  the  Enterprise  Insolvency  Law  and  the  Criminal  Law;  it  is 
offering suggestions for the amendment of the Securities Law of the People’s Republic of China; it is 
drafting the Law on Anti-Money Laundering; and it is doing research on the legal issues concerning 
the market exit of financial institutions, deposit insurance, legislation for financial holding companies, 
asset  securitization,  and  entrusted  wealth  management.  We  hope  to  promulgate  these  laws, 
regulations and implementary rules as soon as possible so as to effectively regulate certain important 
financial activities. In a word, China’s legal framework for the financial sector should be overhauled - 
necessary new laws should be drafted, existing laws should be amended as appropriate, and outdated 
laws should be invalidated. 
In the long run, we should not only focus on legislation but also on the enforcement of existing laws. In 
my  view,  the  core  issue  of  financial  legislation  lies  in  a  scientific  approach.  Different  stages  of  the 
financial sector call for different approaches. At present, financial legislation should focus on improving 
infrastructure  of  the  financial  market,  regulating  legal  relationship  concerning  financial  innovation, 
advancing  the  coordination  and  effectiveness  of  financial  supervision,  and  making  the  best  use  of 
market self-discipline. 
BIS Review 42/2005 
 5
First, we shall approach financial legislation in a coordinated, scientific and comprehensive manner. 
China’s economic reform and financial reform are at a critical period, when the stand-alone strategy no 
longer meets the requirement. Therefore, coordinated planning and rational thinking should prevail in 
financial legislation. Specifically, we should gradually promote the integration and consolidation of the 
financial  market  through  legislation;  regulate  the  trading  of  homogenous  financial  products  through 
identical  supervisory  rules;  and  ensure  the  consistency  of  the  infrastructure  (such  as  the  rules  on 
issuance,  registration,  custody,  settlement  and  liquidation)  in  different  markets.  We  should  apply 
uniform rules in regulating the institutional innovation, business innovation and product innovation of 
financial  institutions.  We  should  also  work  on  the  sharing  and  transmission  of  financial-risk-related 
information  among  financial  regulatory  bodies.  Other  laws  that  support  financial  development  and 
reform  should  be  amended  so  as  to  protect  both  the  creditor  and  the  debtor.  The  revision  of  the 
Criminal Law should also reflect the current social environment so as to highlight criminal sanctions on 
corporate crime and the investigation of individual criminal liability. 
Second,  we  should  stick  to  the  protection  of  the  interest  of  the  depositor,  investor  and  creditor. 
Protecting  the  interest  of  depositors  of  financial  institutions  and  the  interest  of  investors  in  financial 
products is always an important factor in the maintenance of the reputation of financial institutions. Our 
present task is to study the fundamental legal relationship in the financial sector and to standardize the 
legal  relationship  concerning  financial  innovation  products.  While  approving  innovation  products, 
financial supervisory bodies should work hard to protect such lawful rights of the investors as the right 
to know and the right to receive due return. We should step up our efforts in improving the Insolvency 
Law.  Under  the  basic  principles  of  the  Insolvency  Law,  we  should  formulate,  while  taking  into 
consideration  the  unique  features  of  bankruptcy  of  financial  institutions,  the  Regulations  on  the 
Bankruptcy of Financial Institutions. We should also establish and improve the financial safety network 
and  formulate  a  series  of  supporting  laws  and  regulations  such  as  the  Regulations  on  Deposit 
Insurance and the Rules on Administration of the Securities Investor Protection Fund. 
Third, we should stress both self-discipline and external discipline. In drafting laws concerning financial 
supervision,  we  should  stress  the  importance  of  a  sound  and  complete  mechanism  for  corporate 
governance by such players as commercial banks, brokers and listed companies. While emphasizing 
the self-discipline of financial institutions, we should also guarantee the autonomy of these institutions 
in their operation and leave sufficient room for their future development. 
Fourth, we should raise the public awareness of financial risks and rules, which is one of the most 
effective methods for preventing financial risks and ensuring financial safety. During the process, we 
should foster the extensive publicity of credit culture, increase the awareness of risk prevention among 
the public and investors, and preach the virtues of lawful investment. 
6 
 BIS Review 42/2005
