Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Fostering leadership role in Islamic finance 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the launching of Hong Leong 
Islamic Bank Berhad - “Fostering Leadership Role in Islamic Finance”, Kuala Lumpur, 19 July 2005. 
 the 
the  on-going 
Islamic  subsidiary  represents 
Bismillahirrahmanirrahim  
Y.Bhg. Tan Sri Quek Leng Chan, 
Chairman of Hong Leong Bank and Hong Leong Islamic Bank 
Encik Daud Abdullah, Managing Director, Hong Leong Islamic Bank 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to be here today to commemorate the official launch of "Hong Leong Islamic Bank 
Berhad".  This  establishment  of 
institutional 
transformation  in  the  Islamic  banking  system  in  our  Islamic  financial  system.  The  underlying 
philosophy for the incorporation of an Islamic subsidiary is for the further strengthening the institutional 
structure for Islamic banking business operations. The emergence of Hong Leong Islamic Bank in the 
Islamic financial landscape will further increase the diversity of players in the Islamic financial system 
and  enhance  its  potential  to  contribute  to  the  further  development  of  our  Islamic  financial  services 
industry.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Today, the Islamic financial services industry in Malaysia has emerged as a viable and competitive 
component of the financial system that contributes towards enhancing wealth creation and the nation's 
economic  development.  The  advancement  and  progress  that  have  been  achieved  thus  far  have 
opened new frontiers for the Islamic financial services industry. The broad strategies that have been 
adopted as outlined in the Financial Sector Master Plan and the actions and initiatives taken leading to 
the rapid development and growth of the domestic Islamic banking industry have all contributed to the 
achievements we have realised today.  
Indeed, the recent two years have seen the Islamic financial landscape being significantly redefined - 
the  establishment  of  Islamic  subsidiaries,  the  issue  of  new  licences  to  foreign  players,  and  the 
initiatives  of  our  domestic  institutions  to  venture  abroad.  These  developments  have  increased  the 
potential for international integration of our Islamic financial system. The liberalisation of our domestic 
bond  market  to  allow  multilateral  and  multinational  corporations  to  raise  Ringgit  denominated 
instruments  in  our  market  has  also  expanded  the  volume  of  Islamic  instruments  in  our  financial 
markets. More recently, an Islamic equity index was introduced increasing further the potential for the 
deepening of the domestic capital market. 
In the area of Shariah, Bank Negara Malaysia has introduced the Shariah governance framework in 
April this year as one of the initiatives to strengthen the role and involvement of the Shariah scholars 
in the development of Islamic finance. Today, a larger pool of Shariah scholars has been created to 
better serve the needs of the industry and the plan is to further develop them to emerge as prominent 
Scholars who can serve both domestic and international Islamic financial communities. Recently, Bank 
Negara Malaysia also organized a closed-door Shariah Scholars Dialogue attended by fifty prominent 
local  and  foreign  scholars.  This  dialogue  will  now  be  held  annually  to  serve  as  a  platform  for 
cooperation  among 
to  promote  greater  understanding  on  emerging 
developments  across  the  world  in  the  area  of  Islamic  finance.  This  is  to  promote  a  greater 
understanding  on  the  approaches  taken  by  different  jurisdictions in  their  Shariah  interpretations.  To 
support the Shariah scholars' activities especially in the areas of research and capacity building, Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  has  also  allocated  a  RM200  million  endowment  fund  to  meet  the  financing 
requirements of the Shariah Scholars' Dialogue research activities and the provision of scholarships. It 
is  hoped  that  this  will  contribute  towards  greater  understanding  in  the  process  of  harmonizing  the 
international implementation of Shariah in Islamic finance.  
These  initiatives  have  contributed  to  the  success  in  the  creation  of  a  robust  Islamic  financial 
environment. It is further supported by the requisite financial infrastructure that includes the financial 
markets and that is reinforced further by a comprehensive regulatory, prudential, legal and accounting 
the  Shariah  scholars 
   1/2 
framework. These elements have provided an enabling environment that increases the potential for 
Malaysia to evolve as an Islamic financial centre. These measures, however, need to be reinforced by 
efforts by the Islamic financial institutions to take on a more active role in promoting Islamic finance. 
Indeed, the rapid progress of Islamic banking over the last two decades would not have been possible 
without the pioneering efforts of the Islamic financial institutions in building up a successful and vibrant 
industry. In conjunction with the 30th Meeting of the Board of Governors of the Islamic Development 
Bank  in  June  this  year,  an  initiative  was  taken  to  develop  a  ten-year  Master  Plan  for  the  Islamic 
Financial  Services  Industry.  The  Master  Plan  for  the  global  development  of  Islamic  finance  is  now 
being  finalised  by  the  Committee  established  by  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  and  the  Islamic 
Financial Services Board. The Plan will provide the strategic direction envisioned for the development 
of Islamic financial services, looking beyond the near term and taking a longer-term perspective into 
the needs and requirements of the future. Islamic financial institutions thus need to adopt a positive 
approach in re-inventing themselves to meet the emerging issues, challenges and opportunities.  
In the domestic Islamic financial sector, despite the achievements that have been achieved thus far, 
the need remains for the Islamic financial institutions to strive to further enhance their capacity and 
capability so that they will be on par with global Islamic players in terms of efficiency, effectiveness 
and financial soundness. As we enter into an increasingly challenging environment, the ability of the 
Islamic  financial  institutions  to  compete  by  creating  innovative  and  differentiated  products,  and  by 
adopting strategic positioning to increase unique and tangible value to their customers will be the key 
to determining performance and relevance. It is imperative that players in the Islamic financial industry 
reposition  themselves  to  create  a  unique  and  sustainable  competitive  position  in  responding  to  the 
changing environment. 
Islamic  financial  institutions  may  now  also  take  the  opportunity  under  these  new  institutional 
arrangements to explore opportunities for building strategic partnerships to acquire new expertise and 
develop new value added activities. The move toward strategic partnerships would create potential for 
greater innovation and expansion of the market. Such strategic partnerships would also enable Islamic 
financial institutions to tap the best talents from a broad range of fields.  
With the experience that has been built up in Islamic banking and finance over the years, it is timely 
and desirable to extend our wings beyond our shores. New markets need to be identified to expand 
business  operations,  especially  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region,  which  offer  considerable  opportunities. 
There  is  a  vast  business  potential  to  be  tapped  as  several  regional  countries  are  progressively 
opening up their economies to greater foreign participation. Islamic financial institutions are strongly 
encouraged  to  continue  their  efforts  by  taking  the  lead  to  establish  collaborative  partnerships  and 
develop new approaches for financing facilities in this region. To succeed, adequate resources would 
need  to  be  allocated  to  build  distinct  capabilities  in  these  areas  and  to  put  in  place  the  proper  risk 
management systems and sound corporate governance practices.  
It is equally critical that institutions play their role effectively and efficiently to generate improvements 
and  growth  in  Islamic  finance.  Of  importance,  is  the  firm  commitment  towards  performance  and 
capacity enhancements with the readiness to invest in talent and skills to spearhead the development 
of  Islamic  financial  industry.  Therefore,  it  is  important  for  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry  to 
continually promote human capital development and expertise to create a larger pool of experts and 
high calibre professionals. This involves attracting not only the existing talent pool, but also building a 
robust pipeline of skilled human resources for the future. This is vital to drive the development of the 
industry to greater heights.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On this occasion of the official launch of Hong Leong Islamic Bank Berhad, it is with pleasure that I 
congratulate Hong Leong Bank Berhad for its interest and commitment to contribute to the success of 
Islamic finance by allocating resources in having a dedicated subsidiary to drive its Islamic banking 
business  forward.  The  establishment  of  the  Islamic  subsidiary  is  a  positive  step  forward  in  the 
aspiration of making Malaysia as a leading and attractive integrated Islamic financial hub. 
I wish Hong Leong Islamic Bank Berhad every success in its endeavours. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Dengan  lafaz  Bismillahirrahmanirrahim,  saya  dengan  sukacitanya  merasmikan  pelancaran  "Hong 
Leong Islamic Bank Berhad".  
Terima kasih. 
   2/2 
