Timothy F Geithner: Further investments to strengthen the financial system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, before the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, 9 February 2005. 
 Good evening. I am honored to be here. It’s good to be back in Washington and to have a chance to 
talk with such a distinguished group.  
Much  of  our  nation’s  financial  history  and  the  history  of  our  central  bank  is  a  story  of  contest  for 
influence and over ideas between political leaders in Washington and the financial center of New York. 
I think it is important that ideas shuttle back and forth between our cities, and I am pleased to have a 
chance to share a few tonight. 
My  overall  argument  this  evening  is  this.  We  face  a  delicate  balance  between  genuinely  positive 
near-term economic conditions, and some fundamental challenges. If we are to increase the likelihood 
of continued strong growth in living standards, we should use this time of relative prosperity to address 
the imbalances that hang over our economy. Even with good policy choices, and with considerable 
luck, these imbalances will take time to unwind. During this time we face some risk of a more volatile 
and less benign overall financial environment. This makes it important that we continue to invest in 
making our financial system stronger and more resilient.  
Markets  now  reflect  a  fairly  positive  view  about  overall  economic  prospects.  Global  growth  is 
reasonably  strong  and  broad-based.  Underlying  inflation  is  low.  Estimates  of  structural  productivity 
growth in the United States remain high. The global economy has weathered the oil price shock and 
other recent shocks quite well. Most of the major emerging market economies look stronger than they 
have in some time. Overall volatility in output and inflation has moderated significantly in the United 
States and, to a lesser extent, in other economies as well.  
These favorable fundamentals are reflected in low risk premia of many forms - low credit spreads, low 
and quite stable inflation expectations, and low actual and implied volatility. Market participants appear 
to believe that future macroeconomic shocks will be more moderate, less frequent, and less damaging 
than past shocks have been. To say this another way, the price of insurance against a less benign 
world is now quite low. 
We face a number of significant challenges that threaten this positive outlook. I want to touch on the 
two that appear to me most important. 
The first is the growing imbalances at the center of the global economy.  
Fiscal  policy  in  most  of  the  major  economies  is  on  a  path  towards  rising  debt-to-GDP  ratios;  this 
trajectory gets dramatically worse as demographic changes reduce the ratio of workers to retirees.  
At the same time, external imbalances have reached unprecedented levels, most dramatically in the 
case  of  the  U.S.  current  account  deficit,  which  is  on  a  path  to  exceed  six  percent  of  GDP.  These 
imbalances  –  fiscal  and  external  –  cannot  be  sustained  indefinitely.  Each  magnifies  the  risk  in  the 
other.  
The  second  broad  challenge  involves  the  rise  of  China  and  the  other  major  emerging  market 
economies.  The  process  of  integrating  China  and  India  into  the  world  economy  offers  tremendous 
gains in global living standards. But the greater adjustment pressures that come with integrating the 
two most populous economies in the world will put a greater burden on the political sustainability of 
open trade policies. The framework of international institutions and arrangements for cooperation we 
now have will need to change to reflect the emerging importance of these economies.  
One  important  dimension  of  this  process  of  integration  will  be  a  necessary  evolution  in  the  global 
exchange rate system. The present system, where the major currencies adjust against each other, but 
many large emerging market economies tie their currencies to the dollar or shadow it closely, creates 
an awkward asymmetry. This system carries with it the seeds of future stress for the global economy.  
These challenges - the challenges of unwinding large fiscal and external imbalances and of managing 
the integration of emerging market economies - are likely to dominate the economic policy agenda for 
a considerable period of time. If they are not managed well, we risk lower and less stable future growth 
and unwelcome shocks to financial prices.  
BIS Review 9/2005 
 1
These are two different types of risks. One is the risk of lower average rates of future growth in living 
standards  if,  for  example,  rising  deficits  and  debt  levels  are  left  on  a  path  that  reduces  future 
investment and  productivity  growth.  Another  is  the  risk of  higher volatility  in  financial  and economic 
outcomes, which could also limit future growth in investment and in living standards.  
What are some of the things policy makers can do to mitigate the risks and challenges on the horizon?  
Let me begin with monetary policy. In the present context, the Fed’s most important contribution to 
sustaining  the  expansion  is  to  preserve  confidence  that  we  will  act  to  keep  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations stable, at low levels.  
Preserving  the  credibility  of  our  commitment  to  price  stability  is  vital.  It  is  important  because  price 
stability is critical to giving enterprises confidence to invest in the future. It is more important at a time 
when we are running very large external deficits, because countries investing their savings here must 
remain  confident  that  their  investments  will  not  be  eroded  by  future  inflation.  And  it  is  important 
because confidence in our commitment to price stability affords us more flexibility to act aggressively 
in the event of future shocks.  
If the economy follows the present forecast of slightly above-trend growth, then it would be appropriate 
for monetary policy to continue to move the real fed funds rate higher. The pace at which we move 
and the distance we move will depend, of course, on how the economy performs and how the forecast 
evolves. But we need to be careful to give the world confidence that we will conduct policy in a manner 
that will keep inflation expectations stable, at low levels.  
Second,  to  fiscal  policy.  We  now  face  a  substantial  and  unsustainable  gap  between  our  fiscal 
commitments  and  our  resources,  not  just  over  the  longer  term  with  respect  to  Social  Security  and 
Medicare, but also with respect to budget projections for the coming ten years. Reducing this gap to a 
more sustainable level is vital. The decisions we make this year and over the next few years will be 
important to building more confidence that we have the will to act in a manner commensurate with the 
challenge. 
Achieving a substantial and sustainable reduction in our fiscal imbalance is important to decrease the 
risk  of  lower  future  growth  in  private  investment  which  could  dampen  future  productivity  gains. 
Reducing our fiscal imbalances is also important for reducing the risk of adverse shocks to financial 
markets, and for maintaining the willingness of investors to invest in our economic future. Improving 
the  credibility  of  our  commitment  to  this  fiscal  challenge  is  the  most  important  contribution  we  can 
make towards improving the chance of a more benign adjustment in our external imbalance.  
Third, the U.S. and the major economies have an important role to play in guiding further evolution in 
the  international  monetary  system.  Policy  makers  in  Asia  are  well  aware  of  the  complications  and 
costs  involved  in  sustaining  their  current  regimes.  Many  are  moving  toward  more  flexibility  in  their 
exchange rate regimes. The challenge ahead is to help manage the transition to a monetary system 
that  provides  flexibility  in  the  exchange  rates  of  all  the  major  economic  areas,  and  this  has  to  be 
handled with care. 
Even with good policy choices here and in other countries, bringing these imbalances down to a more 
sustainable level will take time. During this period of adjustment, despite our fundamental economic 
strengths, we will be vulnerable to an elevated risk of volatility in financial markets.  
This prospect makes this a good time to examine the health of the financial system. The strength of 
the financial system is a major factor in determining how well economies respond to shocks - weak 
financial systems amplify the damage to growth.  
The stronger the financial system, the more effective policy - monetary policy in particular - can be in 
cushioning the effects of those shocks and helping to restore expansion.  
We  are  fortunate  in  the  United  States  today  to  have  a  strong  financial  system.  This  system  has  a 
tremendous capacity to match capital to ideas, reward innovation, and channel savings to the highest 
return.  And  it  has  demonstrated  a  capacity  for  very  considerable  resilience  and  stability  in  face  of 
shocks.  
What are the main sources of these strengths? Our banks are stronger than they have been in the 
past. Their larger earnings capacity, higher capital cushions, and the greater diversity of their activities 
help  shield  them  from  a  broader  range  and  greater  magnitude  of  shocks  than  in  the  past.  Capital 
markets  play  a  comparatively  larger  role  in  our  financial  system.  As  a  consequence,  shocks  get 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2005
diffused  more  broadly,  and  weakness  in  traditional  intermediation  channels  can  be  offset  by  the 
strength in other channels.  
Here in the United States, financial innovation has advanced farther and more rapidly than elsewhere. 
This reflects a regulatory model that is more supportive of competition, of financial innovation, and of 
market-driven  improvements  in  risk  management.  The  U.S.  financial  system  has  embraced 
opportunities for risk transfer much more rapidly and extensively than other systems.  
Finally, we have larger and more developed venture capital, private equity, and hedge fund segments 
within our financial system. These are important sources of liquidity, they add depth and breadth to 
capital  markets,  and  they  play  a  valuable  arbitrage  role  in  reducing  or  eliminating  mispricing  in  the 
financial markets.  
However, no system is invulnerable to stress and crisis. Recent U.S. financial history is not a history of 
the uninterrupted achievement of ever higher returns. The stock market crash of ’87, the stress that 
surrounded the Russian default and the collapse of Long Term Capital Management, and the more 
recent fall in equity prices that came with the collapse of the technology boom all posed significant 
potential  threats  to  financial  stability.  In  each case, however, with  a swift  monetary  policy  response 
and other actions the process of recovery and repair was reasonably quick.  
The  relative  ease  with  which  we  managed  through  these  events  has  reinforced  confidence  in  the 
stability of the system. This confidence is justified. But one of the consequences of the resilience of the 
system in the face of past shocks is a higher degree of confidence in a benign and stable future. And 
this confidence itself can increase the risk of future instability. 
It is critically important, then, that we continue to strengthen our financial system. The most important 
dimension of this challenge is to ensure that the size and the quality of the cushions maintained by 
financial institutions against the risk of adverse outcomes are sufficiently strong.  
This  is  particularly  important  in  the  case  of  the  relatively  small  number  of  bank-centered  financial 
institutions that now play a much more central role in our financial system. Their extraordinary size and 
diversity diminishes their vulnerability to shocks. However, it also exposes them to a broader array of 
potential shocks, and magnifies the potential damage to the system should one of these institutions 
stumble or fail.  
We need to ensure that the level of insurance these core institutions maintain against risk – insurance 
in the form of their capital and liquidity cushions, their operational resilience, and the quality of their 
risk  management  and  control  systems  –  are  calibrated  to  reflect  their  greater  systemic  significance 
and the greater complexity of the challenges they face in managing more diverse businesses.  
This is true not only for the largest banks, but also for GSEs like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and 
also for those non-bank financial institutions that play a critical role in the wholesale financial markets. 
The  payments  system  we  live  with  today  is  a  complex  mix  of  national  and  cross  border  systems 
originally  designed  for  a  safer,  slower,  less  complex,  more  segmented  financial  world.  While  many 
improvements have been made to this system over time, it is important that we work to strengthen 
further the core infrastructure of the payments system.  
We also need to promote further evolution in the framework of supervision and regulation of our more 
complex and integrated global financial system. To paraphrase Bob Rubin in a different context, we 
need a framework for supervision and regulation that is “as modern as the markets” and that stays 
abreast of the pace of change and innovation.  
Perhaps the greatest challenge we face – in macroeconomic policy and in financial supervision - is a 
challenge of imagination: How do we best prepare for the low probability of an extreme event; a crisis 
not  captured  by  past  experience?  How  do  we  generate  the  will  today  to  build  a  greater  degree  of 
insurance against a more uncertain future, particularly if the risk of adversity seems remote and the 
immediate future looks strong?  
We can take considerable reassurance from apparent moderation in overall macroeconomic volatility 
recently, and from the ease with which our system has handled recent stress.  
Prudent macroeconomic policy actions will increase the likelihood that these beneficial circumstances 
will continue. But we cannot know with confidence that the future will bring an enduring reduction in 
volatility and risk, and it would be imprudent to plan for such a world.  
BIS Review 9/2005 
 3
All  this  suggests  we  should  complement  sensible  macroeconomic  policy  choices  with  further 
investments to strengthen the financial system. 
Let me end by thanking Vernon Jordan and the Economic Club of Washington for providing a forum 
for thinking about the economic agenda of the country, and for giving me the opportunity to share a 
few thoughts with you tonight.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2005
