Villy Bergström: Is the present low inflation rate a problem?   
Speech by Mr Villy Bergström, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at the annual meeting of the 
Swedish Association of Independent Savings Bank, Vadstena, 30 May 2005. 
 As one of my colleagues said recently, it appears as though we are now undergoing the gloomiest 
economic  boom  of  our  time.  It  is  in  many  ways  an  unusual  economic  situation;  growth  is  healthy, 
productivity is very strong, export demand is stable, wage trends look good, households are borrowing 
away and house prices are developing well. However, employment is weak and inflation is low.  
The annual CPI inflation rate was 0.3 per cent in April and the UND1X rate was 0.4 per cent. This is 
below the interval of 2 per cent +/- one percentage point we have as our inflation target. 
Of  course,  this  is  a  failure,  albeit  one  that  is  largely  beyond  our  control.  Our  efforts,  analyses  and 
assessments are all aimed at keeping inflation as close to the target level as possible and within the 
interval we have specified ourselves. The question is what conclusions we should rightfully draw from 
this miscalculation, particularly with regard to employment. 
Monetary policy’s effect one to two years ahead – a challenge for communication 
To  begin  with  the  low  inflation  rate  makes  greater  demands  on  the  Riksbank’s  ability  to  explain  its 
policy.  When  the  Riksbank  is  portrayed  it  is  often  the  case,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  that  the 
present inflation figures are linked to the current monetary policy conducted. If the most recent inflation 
figures are above the target level, the conclusion is often drawn that the Riksbank should raise the 
repo rate. If inflation is below the target level, as now, it is often said that the repo rate should be cut. 
The  problem  is  that  today’s  monetary  policy  has  very  little  effect  on  today’s  inflation  rate.  The  way 
monetary policy functions in practice, the impulse from monetary policy decisions spreads through the 
economy  very  slowly.  By  affecting  the  cost  of  loans,  incentives  to  save,  exchange  rate  trends  and 
thereby exports and imports, etc. the interest rate has an effect on total demand in the economy and 
gradually also on inflation, but this process takes time. It is possible that the reaction time has been 
reduced somewhat as households have reduced the average period for fixing their loans, from around 
one  and  a  half  years  to  around  one  year.  However,  the  accepted  estimate  is  that  an  interest  rate 
decision makes its greatest impact one to two years after the decision was taken.  
The inflation figures registered today are thus largely due to interest rate decisions made one to two 
years ago, and the decisions we make now will not have their real effect until one or two years from 
now. The somewhat thankless situation for the Riksbank is therefore that we are always reviewed with 
hindsight. 
I intend to briefly discuss both perspectives in turn and first explain why we made the decisions we 
made one to two years ago and how they have affected economic developments today – and then I 
will discuss how we use the monetary policy we conduct now to try to achieve the inflation target over 
the coming years. 
Reasons for the current low inflation rate 
The reasons why we misjudged inflation trends earlier are fairly easy to pinpoint now. Although some 
forecasters  were  more  successful  than  others  in  their  assessments,  almost  all  made  the  same  two 
mistakes; we underestimated productivity growth (and thereby overestimated resource utilisation in the 
economy) and we overestimated import prices. We, like many other analysts, assumed that the rate of 
productivity growth had increased in a number of sectors, partly due to IT investments combined with 
restructuring. Similarly, we knew that globalisation was pushing down import prices for many products. 
What  we  and  many  others  misjudged  was  the  magnitude  of  the  changes.  Productivity  growth  was 
even stronger than we had anticipated, with strong growth in the service sector, for instance, where IT 
use  has  increased.  Import  prices  were  slightly  lower  than  we  had  expected,  partly  due  to  an 
unexpectedly high increase in the percentage of total imports from low-wage countries such as China 
and  Poland.  Consumer  prices  of  imported  goods  have  fallen  since  mid-2003.  It  is  perhaps  all  too 
common that forecasters are reluctant to stick their necks out with regard to large underlying changes. 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 1
Moreover, there is another new trend, which was less evident one to two years ago, namely the speed 
at which competition in the food retail sector would intensify. The restructuring of the retail trade that 
took place earlier in the United States has now come to Sweden, albeit in a different form. New foreign 
companies  and  new  business  models  reduce  the  labour-intensity  and  price  levels  in  the  retail  food 
sector, where prices for staple products can differ as much as 30 per cent from low-price chains to 
normal food stores. There were few who could predict the speed of this change, with new food store 
chains that all together plan to establish hundreds of new low-price stores in one year. 
The very nature of these forecasting errors is important to the way we assess the consequences. As 
employment has been weak during this economic upswing, and total unemployment is at a high level, 
many debaters have emphasised the link between low inflation and the labour market. They wish to 
imply that demand in the economy is insufficient because of an excessively tight monetary policy. But 
this is hardly the case; all of the effects the forecasters have underestimated are supply effects, which 
reduce  inflation  because  of  better  and  more  efficient  conditions  for  production,  and  not  effects  that 
reduce demand. What we are seeing is the reverse; that the expansionary monetary policy has a fairly 
tangible impact. Low interest rates are leading to unusually rapid growth in lending and to a rise in 
asset prices. Companies have ample liquidity and thereby good scope for investment. Nevertheless, 
employment is responding very slowly – instead of employing more staff, employers are using their 
existing labour more intensively and efficiently.  
There  are  parallels  here  to  what  we  have  seen  in  the  labour  market  during  previous  years  in  the 
similarly IT-intensive United States, where employment has increased with a lag relative to the cyclical 
upswing. This is because employers have initially pushed their organisations to the limit and got the 
most out of their earlier heavy IT investment before resorting to new recruitment. Given the intensive 
global competition and considerable scope for outsourcing operations, the labour market is constantly 
undergoing  change  with  new  opportunities  for  rationalising  organisations.  Many  people  are  moving 
from an increasingly labour-scarce manufacturing sector to a service sector that is also rationalising. 
Data show that few of the sectors cutting staff in an economic downswing begin re-employing when 
economic activity improves again. The redundant employees are instead forced to move on to other 
occupations. The Swedish labour market appears to find it difficult to meet these structural changes. 
The major differences in unemployment between regions and between professions indicate that there 
is  less  mobility  in  the  labour  market  than  there  could  be  and  that  few  people  are  finding  new  job 
opportunities in new sectors or new locations. 
At the same time, the labour market has been affected by changes both within the EU and in the world 
economy as a whole. Asia is rapidly expanding production and exports and reduced trade barriers are 
increasing the degree of competition even in markets that were not previously exposed to competition. 
The emancipation of the countries in eastern and central Europe has dramatically increased access to 
labour for manufacturing in these countries and also for work in Sweden. So far the temporary labour 
migration has been only a small, although growing, element in the Swedish labour market. However, 
the pressure from the labour supply from the new EU countries is bound to increase. The amount of 
foreign  labour  entering  the  various  sectors  will  depend  on  the  initial  wage  differences.  The  new 
member states’ wage levels are in the process of converging with Swedish wages in the long term, but 
it is dangerous to assume that neither wages nor employment in various sectors in Sweden will be 
affected. If we assume this, there is a risk that we will not be sufficiently willing to make changes and 
then unemployment will rise. 
The Swedish labour force is thus facing competition both directly from foreign labour coming here and 
indirectly through households and companies choosing to buy goods and now even services that are 
produced abroad. Phenomena such as offshoring and merchanting can also be linked to the relatively 
high  labour  costs  in  Sweden.  They  indicate  that  Swedish  companies  can  compete  in  the  global 
marketplace, but their operations are such that they do not require very much labour, at least not in 
Sweden. 
Different assessments have been made of how large a percentage of total unemployment is cyclical 
and in turn how much of this cyclical unemployment can be affected by monetary policy. The serious 
assessment attempts that I have seen usually end up with only a small fraction, according to some 
estimates only one or a few tenths of a percentage points, of total unemployment being affected by 
monetary  policy.  Those  are  calculations  that  are  highly  uncertain  and  should  be  taken  with  a  large 
pinch  of  salt.  However  my  point  is  that  it  is  a  gross  exaggeration  when,  in  the  present  debate,  the 
Riksbank’s  decision  to  lower  or  not  lower  the  interest  rate  is  presented  as  having  momentous 
consequences  for  unemployment  in  Sweden.  This  kind  of  claim  is  not  compatible  with  any  serious 
assessments or forecasts. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2005
On the whole, the reason for the problems in the labour market is not poor demand – on the contrary, 
lending is growing at a rapid pace and companies have ample liquidity – but these problems are rather 
related  to  structural  factors.  Even  if  the  Riksbank  had  conducted  an  even  more  expansionary 
monetary policy one to two years ago, it is not certain that this extra stimulation and the possibly even 
stronger  lending  that  would  have  ensued  would  have  affected  the  labour  market  in  the  way  some 
critics  believe.  The  situation  today  is  quite  simply  a  different  one  from  the  classical  shortage  of 
domestic demand, where lending and liquidity are weak and an interest rate stimulus would have a 
considerable effect on demand and thereby employment. 
Inflation outlook and future monetary policy 
This brings us to the other question – namely what monetary policy can do today to ensure inflation 
reaches the target level one to two years from now. What we have seen in the United States, which is 
considered  to  be  slightly  ahead  of  Sweden  in  the  economic  cycle,  is  that  productivity  growth  is 
gradually subsiding. When the stimulus from monetary policy and fiscal policy has been maintained 
sufficiently  long,  companies  are  unable  to  respond  with  more  efficient  organisation  and  outsourcing 
alone, they have to begin recruiting. Productivity growth is dampened, employment rises and in the 
United States we have recently seen that inflation also rises.  
This is also the kind of development we can expect to see in Sweden. The most likely scenario is that 
over the coming years we will see a more subdued growth in productivity, rising employment and an 
increase  in  resource  utilisation,  despite  the  pressure  for  change  in  the  economy.  Other  factors  that 
have  temporarily  held  down  inflation,  such  as  the earlier  krona  appreciation,  the  rapidly-intensifying 
competition in the food retail sector and price pressure on clothing resulting from the EU abolishing 
textile quotas, are effects that are likely to decrease over time. 
The  fundamental  factors are  all  in  place;  expansionary  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  strong growth  in 
real  wages,  good  underlying  productivity  growth  and  stable  export  demand,  particularly  from  the 
United States and rapidly-growing emerging markets such as China and the countries in central and 
eastern Europe. 
Therefore,  we  should  not  become  exclusively  preoccupied  by  the  current  inflation  rate.  Instead  we 
should keep the right perspective. When developments gradually approach the usual recovery pattern, 
the indications are that resource utilisation will increase and inflation will approach the target level.  
There  has  been  concern  that  an  interest  rate  cut  would  have  a  slight  effect  on  consumption  and 
investment,  as  interest  rates  are  already  low  and  lending  is  growing  rapidly  in  a  situation  where 
housing loans can be obtained at just over 2.5 per cent interest. Companies also have good profits 
and  ample  liquidity.  Meanwhile  there  is  believed  to  be  a  risk  that  even  lower  interest  rates  would 
further push up house prices through cheaper housing loans. An interest rate cut could thus have a 
misdirected effect with the risk of future setbacks; little or no effect on achieving the inflation target but 
a strong impact on the demand for assets such as houses. 
This line of reasoning applies when demand grows rapidly, as now, and when capacity utilisation rises. 
In my opinion, the interest rate effects would be different if the growth in demand slowed down, the 
labour  market  weakened  and  capacity  utilisation  ceased  rising.  Then  there  would  be  less  upward 
pressure on house prices and I believe that an interest rate cut would be less risky in these terms. 
International developments could also be so weak that insufficient export market demand would curb 
the recovery. The weak developments in our most important trading partner countries, the euro area, 
are particularly worrying. Like Sweden and the United States, Germany, France and Italy are affected 
by globalisation, but in these countries the labour market seems to be finding it particularly difficult to 
cope with change. Germany is at the same time undergoing extensive structural reforms, such as the 
reduction  of  compensation  levels  for  unemployment  benefits  and  other  transfers,  and  also  longer 
working hours without full compensation. In the long term, these measures are aimed at increasing the 
labour supply and competitiveness of the German economy. However, in the short term they lead to 
uncertainty  for  many  individuals  and  thereby  curb  consumer  confidence  and  demand.  At  the  same 
time, fiscal policy is tied by weak government finances due to a lack of fiscal consolidation during the 
good times at the end of the 1990s which has made the obligations under the Stability Pact more or 
less binding, while monetary policy is common to the entire euro area. Germany thus has a domestic 
demand  problem,  which  it  is  trying  to  solve  through  supply  side  reforms,  while  fiscal  and  monetary 
policy  are  tied  by  the  EU  and  ECB.  All  this  appears  to  have  contributed  to  further  prolonging  the 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 3
economic downswing in Germany and if the recovery in the euro area were to be delayed further, it 
would have an effect on Swedish export demand.  
If these negative risks are realised in full, it could be more difficult for domestic demand to relieve the 
export-driven growth of recent years. This could break the present recovery impetus, which would lead 
to a need for further stimulus of the economy from monetary policy. 
Conclusion 
All in all, we should continue to be vigilant of risks and possible changes in the direction of business 
tendencies.  However,  it  is  important  to  hold  on  to  a  stable  analytical  framework  and  a  consistent 
forecast assessment. The underlying factors still indicate a rise in resource utilisation and thereby a 
rise in inflation. 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2005
