Jean-Claude Trichet: Monetary policy and private expectations  
Text of the Zolotas Lecture given by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
at the Bank of Greece, Athens, 25 February 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Xenophon Zolotas, long-serving Governor of the Bank of Greece and Prime Minister of his country, 
once said, with supreme synthesis, that “Political magic has always been anti-economic.” In history, 
monetary  policy  has  sometimes  reverted  to  magic  in  an  attempt  to  eschew  economic  reality.  The 
outcomes of such attempts are well-known and their magic has proven short-lived.  
A decisive change in direction started, in a large part of the industrial world, 30 years ago as a result of 
a deeper understanding of the role of expectations in shaping economic behaviour. Today, solid and 
credible  institutions  have  been  put  in  place  in  many  countries  and  have  earned  a  respectable 
reputation  of  good  policy  management.  Decades  of  experience  accumulated  from  institutional 
evolution and advances in economic thinking have provided us with guidelines for designing credible 
institutions that are based on sound economic principles. 
Clearly,  the  open-ended  nature  of  economic  progress  confronts  central  banks  with  new  and 
unprecedented challenges and will no doubt keep central banks occupied in the years to come with 
the issue of how to maintain expectations of low inflation and preserve credibility. The creation of the 
Euro is an example of such a challenge. 
These  will  be  my  themes  today.  Governor  and  Prime  Minister  Zolotas  was  an  early  advocate  of  a 
monetary  regime  in  which  the  formation  of  prices  is  fully  protected  from  the  influence  of  short-term 
considerations. So, some thoughts on expectations and their subtle interactions with institutions and 
policies might be an appropriate tribute to his memory. 
Central banks’ long quest for macroeconomic stability  
30 years ago the formation of expectations moved from a peripheral area of theoretical enquiry into 
the very core of macroeconomic thinking. Today, the economics of expectations and macroeconomics 
itself  are  largely  coextensive.  The  trigger  of  this  transformation  was,  as  is  well  known,  the  rational 
expectations  revolution,  which  started  with  the  pioneering  work  by  Robert  Lucas  (1972,  1973)  and 
Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace (1975).1 
The upshot of the Rational Expectations hypothesis is that – at least in a world in which information is 
largely publicly available and speedily disseminated – individuals should not make predictable errors 
when  formulating  conjectures  about  their  future.  This  does  not  imply  that  individuals  will  invariably 
forecast accurately if random movements are inevitable. But guesses about the future must be correct 
on average if individuals are to remain satisfied with the mechanism by which their anticipations are 
formulated. When agents diagnose systematic errors, they have an incentive to amend the basis of 
their forecasts. Expectations are thus the outcome of a decision process and this process responds 
and adapts to changing circumstances, in particular to possible changes in the behaviour of monetary 
authorities.  
Understanding  expectations  formation  as  a  process  underscores  the  strategic interdependence  that 
exists between expectations formation and economic institutions. Recognition of this interdependence 
by central bankers and legislators profoundly changed the way in which macroeconomic authorities 
view the nature of policymaking. Central bankers came to hold the view that monetary policy is not a 
sequence of isolated policy actions. If agents, when forming their expectations, seek to capture the 
general pattern of monetary policy, then the relevant problem to solve for central banks centres not 
only on the size and the timing of a given interest rate move in response to a particular state of the 
                                                      
1   Robert Lucas (1972), “Expectations and the neutrality of money,” Journal of Economic Theory, 4, pp. 103-124 and Robert 
Lucas  (1973),  “Some  international  evidence  on  output-inflation  trade-off”,  American  Economic  Review,  Vol.  63(3),  pp. 
326-334.  Thomas  Sargent  and  Neil  Wallace  (1975),  “Rational  Expectations,  the  optimal  monetary  instrument  and  the 
optimal money supply rule,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 83(2), pp. 241-254. 
BIS Review 12/2005 
 1
economy, but also and overall it relates to the strategy for repeatedly adjusting the policy instrument in 
response to the state of the economy, whatever this might be.  
So, monetary policymakers and, gradually, legislators came to recognise that the meaningful set of 
choices that societies face relates to alternative monetary policy regimes, that is a clear specification 
of  the  central  bank  objective  and  of  its  strategy  in  managing  economic  events.  The  notion  that 
monetary regimes are very powerful in shaping public expectations had received dramatic evidence 
when  the  old  monetary  policy  order,  the  Bretton  Woods  arrangements,  foundered.  In  those 
circumstances, private sectors in a large portion of the industrial world were left for years in the dark 
about the “true” objectives of monetary policy, and about the determination with which central banks 
were prepared to pursue it.  
A new monetary order could not be established unless it tackled the problem of the mandate and of 
the strategy squarely. Building on a time-tested tradition of prudent central banking – which after all 
had survived in Germany, in Switzerland and in a number of other economies – a number of authors 
laid out the essence of the mandate problem.2 It appeared that the anchoring of inflation and inflation 
expectations is primarily a matter of delegating monetary policy to an independent central bank with 
one overriding long-term objective: the maintenance of price stability.  
As  the  collective  reflections  progressed,  this  notion  was  sharpened  to  a  considerable  extent. 
Throughout the 1990s many central bank charters were stipulated with institutional independence and 
the  primary  mandate  of  monetary  stability.  The  1998  decision  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  to 
characterise  its  understanding  of  price  stability  in  quantitative  terms  can  be  traced  to  a  shared 
perception that such stipulations could help focus inflation expectations more tightly. Recent empirical 
work  indeed  offers  support  to  that  perception.  Monetary  institutions  that  have  been  more  explicit  in 
delineating what they mean – in numerical terms – by “price stability” have been more successful in 
promoting lower inflation and lower output variability.3 
However,  an  appropriate  mandate  is  a  necessary  but  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  lasting 
macroeconomic stability. Important sources of instability in inflation expectations could still arise if the 
central bank – even one endowed with a clear mandate to preserve price stability – is not sufficiently 
clear as regards its own monetary policy concept and strategy. The decision taken by the Governing 
Council of the ECB in October 1998 to spell out the contours of its monetary policy strategy attests to 
the extent to which the notion of a monetary policy strategy has become operationally meaningful. 
To secure stability, a central bank has to act forcefully and pre-emptively to nascent signs of inflation 
or deflation.4 
 To be sure, a world in which central banks’ intended policy measures and market views are perfectly 
aligned  is  likely  to  appear  only  in  textbook  analysis.  However,  central  banks’  preoccupation  with 
private  expectations  has  established  a  new  climate  of  mutual  understanding  with  economic  agents 
and the public at large. Central banks have stepped up the number of institutional fora and occasional 
gatherings  at  which  they  document  their  strategies  and  carefully  explain  their  actions  to  broad 
audiences. In 1998, when designing its mode of communication on monetary policy, the ECB chose to 
be in the vanguard of this new practice.  
As a consequence, the leverage of central bank pronouncements and actions over private economic 
behaviour  has  considerably  strengthened.  One  of  the  central  banks’  key  tasks  has  become  today 
guiding the markets and stabilising sentiment.  
                                                      
2   Robert Barro and David Gordon (1983), “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a natural rate model”, Journal of Political 
Economy, Vol. 91, pp. 589-610; Kenneth Rogoff (1985), “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to and Intermediate Monetary 
Target”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.100, pp.1169-1189. 
3   Antonio Fatás, Ilian Mihov and Andrew Rose (2004), “Quantitative Goals for Monetary Policy”, working paper, available at 
http://www.insead.fr/%7Efatas/quant.pdf.  Further  evidence  on  the  stability  and  anchoring  properties  of  expectations  is 
provided  in  Efrem  Castelnuovo,  Diego  Rodriguez-Palenzuela  and  Sergio  Nicoletti-Altimari  (2003)  in  “Definition  of  price 
stability, range and point inflation targets: the anchoring of long-term inflation expectations”, ECB Working Paper No 273. 
4   Richard Clarida, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (1999) provide extensive discussion of the so-called “Taylor principle” in “The 
Science  of  Monetary  Policy:  a  New  Keynesian  Perspective”,  Journal  of  Economic  Literature,  American  Economic 
Association, Vol. 37(4), pp. 1661-1707.  
2 
 BIS Review 12/2005
These reflections might inspire two questions. The first is: how did the new European monetary regime 
successfully impose itself in the broad perceptions of the public? And the second is: to which kind of 
new  challenges  and  new  battles  should  we  be  prepared?  Let  me  try  to  respond  to  these  two 
questions.  
The transition to Economic and Monetary Union 
How expectations react to a major change in policy regime is still an issue of contention. 20 years ago, 
the  fathers  of  the  rational  expectations  revolution  espoused  an  optimistic  position:  if  an  institutional 
change –  even  an abrupt  one  –  is sufficiently  credible,  expectations will  focus  instantly  on  the  new 
equilibrium. Other scholars are more inclined to think that instant refocusing is unlikely. Agents should 
be expected to learn gradually about the new regime, and probe and test it with the benefit of time. 
The extraordinary episode of the convergence towards Economic and Monetary Union in Europe in 
the  second  half  of  the  1990s  offers  a  laboratory  case  for  discriminating  between  these  two 
hypotheses. 
The Maastricht Treaty came into force in November 1993. Its fundamental inspiration was the need to 
ensure that participants in EMU are like-minded in their pursuit of stability in economic and monetary 
affairs. It vested the European System of Central Banks with a very high degree of independence and 
safeguarded it against external interference. The new single monetary authority was to be indisputably 
devoted to one overriding objective, the maintenance of price stability in the euro area. In that respect, 
the  Treaty  embodied  both  the  best  monetary  tradition  available  in  Europe  and  the  essence  of  the 
principles that had been distilled through years of academic reflection. 
In addition, convergence criteria were designed to provide countries with yardsticks against which to 
measure  their  progress  toward  a  true  culture  of  stability  in  the  run-up  to  Monetary  Union.  But  the 
interpretation of the entry criteria remained a matter of debate for most of the years that followed the 
promulgation of the Treaty. Observers were divided. Some took the position that the Treaty’s criteria 
were too strict and ambitious, given the initial conditions from which a number of member countries 
had to start convergence. Others, from the perspective of the most stable economies in the EU, were 
convinced that they granted considerable, in fact excessive, latitude.  
This  debate  between  strictness  and  latitude  left  a  margin  of  ambiguity,  which  largely  affected  the 
evolution of expectations prior to 1998. The perception that the criteria might be impossible to meet for 
countries  too  far  off  the  benchmarks  produced  uncertainty  over  the  number  of  countries  able  to 
participate in Monetary Union from the outset. On the other hand, the suspicion that the Maastricht 
criteria would tolerate a large dispersion of economic performances across countries produced anxiety 
that Monetary Union – if it were ever to materialise – could mean convergence to the average, rather 
than the best, standards of macroeconomic discipline.  
The power of a credible institutional change to bend expectations became evident in late 1996 and 
1997. The latter part of 1996 saw a determined drive toward fiscal consolidation in Italy and Spain. 
This facilitated in those countries a sharp fall in interest rate premia at long maturities and an easing in 
monetary conditions more generally [see Charts 1d and 1a]. In June 1997, the Stability and Growth 
Pact was sealed in Amsterdam. It reassured the markets that the adjustment made in public finances 
in a large portion of the European Union would be lasting and would survive a country’s adoption of 
the euro. By the first half of 1997 interest rate differentials had been compressed to levels not seen in 
decades.  Uncertainty  surrounding  the  breadth  of  Monetary  Union  at  its  starting  date  thus  quickly 
disappeared. 
But a measure of anxiety remained about the standards that would apply in the new economic and 
monetary  entity.  This  source  of  anxiety  came  to  the  surface  in  summer  1997,  when  the 
intermediate-maturity  yields  paid  by  those  core  countries  which  had  reached  complete  alignment 
started  to  rise  in  sync  [see  Chart  1b  and  1c].  The  balance  of  market  expectations  seemed  to  be 
shifting toward a loose interpretation of the new regime. A conviction that was gaining ground was that 
the rapid descent of short-term rates in the converging economies of Italy, Spain and Portugal would 
be matched by a gradual increase in the short-term rates of the low-yield economies. The two paths 
would meet somewhere half-way.  
This instability of market expectations did not go unnoticed in particular in the Central Banks issuing 
the currencies that had already converged. Signs of an upswing were still tentative and price strains 
were not yet fully in sight in this core currency area. Nevertheless, in October, pre-emptive action took 
place to forestall the build-up of an inflationary potential in the delicate phase of transition to monetary 
BIS Review 12/2005 
 3
union. This interest rate move was a strong sign of determination. The policy message was reinforced 
through a consistent communication campaign which the Central Banks concerned, together with the 
European Monetary Institute, launched in the last few months of the year to explain the meaning of 
their action. The essence of the message was the following.  
The assumption made by some observers and by part of the market literature, according to which the 
entry interest rates in the Euro on 1 January 1999 would be some kind of average of the interest rates 
of the composing currencies was totally wrong. On the contrary, the very construction of the Euro was 
based on total continuity with the most credible national currencies. The concept of the transition was 
based upon “benchmarking”, namely convergence towards the best performers and not convergence 
towards a mean. The modest interest rate increase that took place in a small number of economies 
was  designed  exclusively  to  preserve  monetary  stability  and  inflationary  expectations  for  the 
corresponding currencies which were the benchmark for the Euro. The ECB itself, the soon to be born 
monetary  authority,  would  be  uncompromising  in  its  role  as  guardian  of  price  stability,  in  close 
continuity  with  its  forebears.  It  was  therefore  fully  justified  that  interest  rate  convergence  inside  the 
future Euro area would take place progressively on the basis of a merge of the different yield curves of 
the various currencies with the benchmark yield curve corresponding to the core currencies that had 
already converged. 
How did markets react to that action? In particular, what was the impact of the October 1997 interest 
rate hike on long-term interest rates?  
Before I answer that question, it could be instructive to reflect on the way markets typically react to an 
interest rate hike. A shift to a tighter policy raises short-term interest rates. Since longer-term rates are 
determined in good part as averages of expected future short-term rates, an initial tightening of policy 
– not to be immediately reversed – should exercise an upward pull on the yields paid by instruments 
with longer maturities. However, the factors determining long-term rates, notably those at the very long 
end of the term structure, are mostly associated with the premium to compensate for expected inflation 
and for the risk that inflation might vary widely over those horizons. Therefore, if the policy tightening is 
perceived  as  an  effective  action  to  restore  or  preserve  conditions  of  price  stability,  then  a  hike  in 
short-term  rates  does  not  necessarily  suggest  a  rise  in  market  rates  on  instruments  with  very  long 
maturities. In fact, by soothing concerns about inflation looking far into the future, a policy hike could 
be reflected in a lower inflation premium and a decline in nominal long bond rates.  
Indeed, empirical tests find that the sign of the overall response of long rates to a change in policy is 
not  independent  of  the  credibility  rating  that  markets  assign  to  the  monetary  regime  in  which  they 
operate.  With  some  simplification,  two  polar  regimes  have  been  identified.  On  the  one  side,  a 
full-credibility  environment  is  one  in  which  there  is  no  dispute  over  the  “true”  objective  of  monetary 
policy and about the central bank’s determination to do all it takes to keep inflation low and steady 
around that objective. Markets are not inclined to project an observed inflationary shock far into the 
future, as expectations are well-anchored. So, long-term rates are minimally affected by any inflation 
shock  that  might  hit  the  economy  in  the  current  period,  and  by  the  monetary  policy  move  that 
authorities  might  execute  in  response  to  it.  Presumably,  this  is  a  world  in  which  nominal  long-term 
bond rates are most unresponsive to changes in policy. A world in which long bonds are regarded as a 
conservative type of investment, with stable and dependable real returns.  
The  opposite  happens  when  inflation  expectations  are  not  firmly  secured.  In  circumstances  of 
incomplete  credibility,  an  inflationary  shock  is  more  likely  to  be  extrapolated  far  into  the  future, 
because inflation itself is more persistent, and because changes in the short-term rate are viewed as 
less effective in restraining inflationary pressures. In this regime, a policy tightening comes together 
with expectations of higher and more obstinate inflation in the future. So, long-term nominal yields will 
tend to move up in the aftermath of an interest rate hike.  
A third typology is also conceivable: a situation in which markets perceive a shift from one regime to 
the other. Imagine that market participants were to regard a policy move as a signal dissipating all the 
ambiguity that might have existed before about the true objectives of monetary policy. Imagine that a 
single move in a particular situation were to show the foundations of a new regime, and show it to be 
more  likely  than  the  past  regime  to  operate  according  to  the  rules  of  a  full-credibility  monetary 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2005
standard.  In  this  situation,  one  would  expect  to  see  an  interest  rate  hike  being  accompanied  by  a 
decline in long-term rates.5 
This  brings  me  back  to  1997.  The  evidence  that  we  gather  from  that  episode  is  very  difficult  to 
rationalise  and  highly  controvertible,  especially  because  the  financial  crises  in  Asia  and  Russia  – 
which  took  place  around  the  same  time  –  might  blur  the  picture  as  we  look  back  to  those  times. 
Overall, the evidence certainly warrants closer and better scrutiny. But my reading of the episode is 
that it is consistent with a shift to a more credible policy regime.  
After the announcement of October 1997 and the communication thereafter market rates reacted in a 
direction that few could have anticipated. Not only did the remaining spread between the converging 
economies and the core countries progressively disappear. Thus, the remaining ambiguity about the 
very  nature  of  the  convergence  process  finally  dissipated.  But  many  commentators  and  market 
participants – not to mention policymakers – noted that the benchmark yield curve itself was changing 
shape in a direction that demonstrated an additional clear break in expectations.6 
This  is  without  doubt  a  remarkable  success.  Yet,  it  is  not  one  grounded  in  magic  but  based  on  a 
sequence of sound institutional, economic and monetary decisions. 
Securing and reinforcing credibility 
To  sum  up  my  understanding  of  why  we  have  so  impressively  succeeded  in  mastering  a  smooth 
transition to the euro, I will mention six necessary conditions that had to be met and were met. Had 
only  one  of  these  conditions  not  been  met,  the  transition  would  not  have  been  a  success.  These 
conditions are the following: 
1. 
Independence: full guarantee for the independence of the ECB was given by the Treaty and 
guaranteed by it; 
Clarity: clear primary objective of price stability given by the Treaty to the new independent 
institution, the ECB; 
Continuity:  choice  by  the  new  institution  of  an  arithmetic  definition  of  price  stability  in  the 
medium run for the euro area identical to the previous core definition of price stability; 
Conceptual anchoring: choice by the new institution of the monetary policy concept based on 
a two pillar approach, with not only an economic pillar, but also a monetary pillar – helping, in 
particular, to anchor the long term side of the inflation expectations. 
Transparency: decision to make public, from the very beginning, the arithmetic definition of 
price  stability,  the  monetary  policy  strategy  that  would  be  applied  by  the  ECB,  as  well  as 
giving in real time the monthly diagnosis of the Governing Council and the reasons of the 
decisions  taken  on  interest  rates  on  the  occasion  of  the  press  conferences  following  the 
meeting of the Governing Council; 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
                                                      
5   That  the  response  of  long-term  rates  to  a  change  in  policy  depends  on  the  credibility  of  the  monetary  policy  regime  is 
conjectured in Marvin Goodfriend (1998), “Using the term structure of interest rates for monetary policy”, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, Vol. 84/3. Empirical confirmation of that conjecture is provided in Jagjit Chadha and 
Joe Ganley (1998), “Monetary policy, inflation persistence and the term structure of interest rates: Estimates for the United 
Kingdom, Germany and the United States” in Ignazio Angeloni and Riccardo Rovelli (eds.), “Monetary policy and the term 
structure  of  interest  rates”,  London:  McMillan.  Further  support  is  found  in  Tore  Ellingsen  and  Ulf  Söderström  (2001), 
“Monetary policy and market interest rates”, American Economic Review, Vol. 91(5), pp. 1594-1607. 
6   One possible interpretation is that markets were growing more convinced that the new regime would embody an even larger 
amount of credibility than they had attributed to the national central banks with the best monetary record in Europe. In this 
respect,  it  should  also  be  noted  that  in  January  1997  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  had  revised  its  “price  norm,”  i.e.  the 
“unavoidable inflation rate” that was used for the calculation of the monetary target, from 2% to a range between 1½ and 
2%, whilst the Banque de France, for instance, was referring to less than 2 per cent as its definition of price stability. It is a 
remarkable achievement that the definition of price stability as “less than 2 per cent” was shipped intact to the whole union. 
This  remarkable  transition  might  have  been  helped  by  the  fact  that  international  financial  markets  were  internalising  the 
dawn of a new era of low inflation and high credibility across a wide range of industrial countries in precisely that very same 
period.  This  interpretation  receives  some  support  from  the  fact  that  US  long-term  bond  rates  and  the  implied  forward 
short-term rates were declining as well. 
BIS Review 12/2005 
 5
6. 
Fiscal consistency: guarantees for sound fiscal policies enshrined in the Treaty in the form of 
the Maastricht criteria and appropriate implementation of these principles by the Stability and 
Growth Pact regulations. 
It is my conviction that each and every of these six conditions were and are necessary. My personal 
conjecture  is  that  the  6  together  have  proved  to  be  a  sufficient  set  of  conditions  to  permit  the  full 
success  of  the  transition.  That  being  said,  it  remains  absolutely  remarkable  that  the  real  progress 
made in reducing inflation expectations in the core currency area in the few months leading up to the 
final decision over EMU participation in May 1998 was fully preserved at the moment of the transition 
and afterwards. I would suggest that economic research continue to work actively on the question of 
the  optimality  of  the  transition.  After  all,  the setting up  of  the  euro  is historically  the  most  important 
monetary reform of all times and this transition contains a wealth of information and lessons that have 
not yet been fully explored. 
Anchoring solidly inflation expectations at a low level at the birth of the currency was a success. But 
credibility is never gained once and for all. It has to be permanently preserved and enhanced. That is 
the reason why for central bankers vigilance is always of the essence. To exert vigilance effectively 
and efficiently the anchoring and monitoring of inflation expectations, particularly on the long end of 
the time horizon, are both very important. Let me elaborate a little bit on that.  
We  know  that  excess  volatility  of  expectations  can  be  signalled  by  abnormal  developments  in 
monetary and credit conditions. This is likely to be the case when unsustainable surges in asset prices 
– propelled by flights of optimism, and sustained by unanchored expectations – are built on conditions 
of excess liquidity. The drifting of expectations away from the central bank objective toward chronic 
inflation or debilitating deflation has historically very often been associated with monetary imbalances 
foreshadowing and facilitating the process. So, broadening the scope of macroeconomic analysis to 
include  a  systematic  monitoring  of  monetary  and  credit  developments  can  offer  a  strong  failsafe 
mechanism against the risk that, with inflationary pressures apparently at bay, the central bank might 
be encouraged to favour or tolerate boom-bust developments of credit and liquidity. The central bank 
committing to monitoring monetary developments and referring to a given path of long-run monetary 
growth  –  compatible  with  price  stability  and  with  steady-state  growth  for  the  real  economy  –  has  a 
powerful  tool  for  anchoring  long-term  inflation  expectations.  The  possibility  that  these  expectations 
might  not  find  a  focal  point,  or  might  settle  on  a  point  inconsistent  with  the  central-bank  declared 
objective will be minimised.7 
Monitoring a wide range of expectation indicators 
The  ECB  also  monitors  a  range  of  indicators  that  provide  more  direct  evidence  on  inflationary 
expectations in the euro area.  
It seems obvious that the way private agents form their anticipations will most likely differ in important 
dimensions across different types of agents. A central bank should thus not rely on a single indicator 
when  monitoring  these  expectations  but  rather  take  a  comprehensive  and  pragmatic  approach  that 
balances  the  information  provided  by  various  sources.8  From  this  perspective,  a  single  measure  of 
expected inflation – one constructed on the basis of the central bank’s own internal analysis – might 
be particularly misleading.  
By their very nature, inflation expectations are not directly observable. However, there exist two main 
ways  to  construct  measures  of  inflation  expectations.  A  direct  way  consists  in  asking  people  about 
their  expectations  of  future  inflation.  A  more  indirect  way  is  to  extract  the  information  revealed  by 
observable financial data. The ECB makes constant use of both measures.  
                                                      
7   Lawrence  Christiano and Massimo Rostagno  (2001) present a theoretical framework that highlights the role  of money in 
anchoring  long-term  inflation  expectations  in  “Money  Growth  Monitoring  and  the  Taylor  Rule”,  NBER  Working  Paper  No 
8539. Lawrence Christiano, Roberto Motto and Massimo Rostagno (2003) discuss the role of money in restoring stability 
under a liquidity trap situation in “The Great Depression and the Friedman-Schwartz hypothesis,” Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking, Vol. 35(6), pp. 1119-1197. 
8   The monetary policy implications generated by a heterogeneously informed private sector are discussed in Klaus Adam, 
(2004),  “Optimal  Monetary  Policy  with  Imperfect  Common  Knowledge”,  CEPR  Discussion  Paper  No  4594;  the  value  of 
private sector expectations for a stability-oriented central bank is discussed in Athanasios Orphanides and John Williams 
(2003),  “Inflation  scares  and  forecast-based  monetary  policy”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Atlanta  Working  Papers  No 
2003-21. 
6 
 BIS Review 12/2005
Direct measures of inflation expectations in the euro area are provided by a number of surveys. These 
are regularly analysed in the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin. One comes from the ECB Survey of Professional 
Forecasters. This is a quarterly survey conducted by the ECB. It asks experts affiliated with financial or 
non-financial  institutions  based  within  the  European  Union  to  forecast  euro  area  inflation  up  to  five 
years  ahead.  Importantly,  survey  respondents  also  provide  a  quantitative  assessment  of  the 
uncertainty surrounding their forecasts in the form of ranges. The dispersion and asymmetry around 
the mean provide useful information about shifts in inflation expectations that might be in the pipeline.  
Another  measure  of  inflation  expectations  is  provided  by  the  survey  conducted  by  Consensus 
Economics,  a  private  firm.  It  asks  private  sector  economists  to  give  their  short-term  and  long-term 
inflation expectations. A further source of information is the European Commission’s monthly Business 
and  Consumer  Survey.  It  asks  a  large  number  of  manufacturing  firms  about  their  selling  price 
expectations  and  consumers  about  their  inflation  expectations.  This  survey  has  some  limitations 
however. It provides qualitative information only.9 In addition, it is available only for a very short time 
period ahead (12 months). Despite these limitations, detected changes in the direction towards which 
firms’ and consumers’ expectations are heading may provide useful information. 
The information that we gather from these diverse sources at present is consistent with a picture of 
stability. The mean point estimate for HICP inflation indicated by the respondents to the ECB survey in 
the 4th quarter of 2004 is close to and below 2%, in line with the ECB’s quantitative definition of price 
stability.  This  holds  true  for  the  expectations  relating  to  the  years  2005  and  2006,  but  also  for  the 
five-year period up to 2009. The uncertainty surrounding these forecasts is fairly small, implying that 
survey respondents assign only small probability to inflation outcomes outside the main scenario.  
It has to be taken into account that a number of these measures – particularly those stemming from 
the  “break-even”  inflation  rates  extracted  from  the  indexed  bonds  –  remain  imperfect  indicators  of 
inflation  expectations,  as  several  premia,  most  importantly  an  “inflation  risk  premium”  but  also  a 
“liquidity premium,” are potentially embodied in their calculation. Changes in break-even inflation rates 
over  time  could  therefore  reflect  changes  in  the  level  of  expected  inflation,  changes  in  perceived 
uncertainty about future inflation, changes in the perception of the liquidity risk, or a combination of the 
three.  In  addition,  their  information  content  could  be  temporarily  distorted  by  technical  market  or 
institutional factors and should therefore be interpreted with caution.  
During  the  first  half  of  2004  break-even  inflation  rates  for  the  euro  area  displayed  a  slight  upward 
movement,  unlike  the survey  evidence  reviewed  before.  In  recent  months  this  movement  has  been 
partially reversed. While the different behaviour of break-even inflation rates and survey expectations 
may reflect a time variation in the risk premium contained in nominal bond yields, due for instance to 
uncertainties associated with the recent increases in energy price, these recent developments have 
not gone unnoticed at the ECB.10 Whether the movements in the break-even inflation rates, which are 
fairly small in absolute terms, reflect or not underlying changes of various risks premia is not yet clear. 
We are looking at it very carefully.  
Concluding remarks 
A  renewed  fellowship  between  the  academic  community,  the  markets  and  central  banks  –  so 
uncharacteristic if viewed from the angle of the dissonances of the ancient past – has been beneficial 
to the design of appropriate institutions and monetary strategies that allow central banks to effectively 
deliver the results society ultimately needs: stability and predictability in monetary matters. 
What  matters  most  is  that  inflation,  thanks  to  these  conceptual  advances,  has  become  a 
mean-reverting process, making occasional deviations from price stability a temporary event. We are 
living  in  a  world  where  the  possibility  of  solidly  anchoring  long  term  inflation  expectations  and 
                                                      
9   Research at the ECB has derived quantitative estimates from the qualitative survey data. See Magnus Forsells and Geoff 
Kenny  (2002),  ‘The  Rationality  of  Consumers’  Inflation  Expectations:  Survey-Based  Evidence  for  the  Euro-Area’,  ECB 
Working Paper No 163. 
10   Ongoing research at the ECB aims at quantifying and modelling the risk premium contained in nominal bond yields but it is 
still too early to draw definite conclusions. See Peter Hördahl, Oreste Tristani and David Vestin (2005), ‘A joint econometric 
model  of  macroeconomic  and  term  structure  dynamics’,  Journal  of  Econometrics  (forthcoming).  A  recommendation  that 
central  banks  should  carefully  monitor  private  sector  expectations  is  strongly  made  in  George  Evans  and  Seppo 
Honkapohja (2003), “Adaptive learning and monetary policy”, CEPR Working Paper No 3962. 
BIS Review 12/2005 
 7
eliminating  the  correlation  between  these  long-term  inflation  expectations  and  actual  inflation  has 
become reality.  
The ECB and the Eurosystem are proud to have been at the forefront of these advances. Not only 
have they fully preserved the solid anchoring of inflation expectations all along the past six years, but 
they have proved that it was possible to ship to the new currency, from day one of its existence, the 
best anchoring that was available in Europe, which was a major contribution for sustainable growth 
and job creation. I am fully conscious of the exceptionally high level of confidence and trust the private 
sector  is  bestowing  on  us.  This  trust  is  well  placed.  Economic  agents,  market  participants  and  our 
fellow citizens of Europe can be assured that we are determined to remain worth it in all the years to 
come. 
Charts 
Chart 1. Interest rates in Germany, France, Spain, Italy and the Netherlands (1991-2005)  
Annual percent  
Chart 1a: 3-month interest rates 
Chart 1b: 2-year interest rates 
Chart 1c: 5-year interest rates 
Chart 1d: 10-year interest rates 
Sources: Datastream.  
8 
 BIS Review 12/2005
Chart 2. German implied forward overnight interest rates ten years ahead  
Sources: Consensus Economics, Deutsche Bundesbank and ECB calculations. Last observation: January 2005.  
Note:  The  implied  forward  overnight  rate  is  the  nominal  rate  expected  to  prevail  in  10  years  time.  It  is  constructed  on  the 
assumption that the terminal value of a portfolio invested in t-period bond is equal to that of the portfolio continually reinvested at 
the overnight interest rate.  
 BIS Review 12/2005 
 9
