I J Macfarlane: What are the global imbalances? 
Speech by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Economic Society of 
Australia Dinner, Melbourne, 28 September 2005. 
 Introduction  
1.  
I have given a number of speeches to the Economic Society over the years, and it is a pleasure to be 
doing so again tonight. The last time I gave the closing address to the Conference of Economists was 
in 1997 in Hobart. The subject I want to speak about tonight is one which has loomed particularly large 
in  international  macro-economic  discussion  in  the  period  since  then.  I  refer  to  the  subject  of  global 
imbalances in international payments.  
Most of the discussion, at least until quite recently, focussed on the large US current account deficit 
and questioned its sustainability and the risks it posed to the world economy. Tonight I would like to 
approach  the  subject  of  global  payments  imbalances  from  a  broader  perspective.  In  doing  so,  the 
focus  of  attention  is  shifted  towards  Asia,  recognition  is  given  to  the  weakness  of  Europe,  and  the 
United States is cast into an accommodating role, rather than an initiating one.  
When  we  look  at  the  global  economy  over  the  past  half  dozen  years,  there  are  a  number  of 
developments  that  have  been  difficult  to  satisfactorily  understand  and  explain.  I  suggest  that  the 
following five developments are the central ones in need of an explanation. 
1. 
Why did the US current account deficit start to widen sharply after 1997, reach such a high 
percentage of GDP, and yet has been relatively easily financed?  
Why  has  Asia  run  such  large  current  account  surpluses  and  built  up  such  a  high  level  of 
international reserves?  
Why did the world's central banks push short-term interest rates to their lowest level for a 
century, and why has this apparently easy monetary policy not led to an appreciable pick-up 
in inflation?  
Why have bond yields been so low, and why have they stayed low even when short-term 
interest rates have been raised?  
Against  this  background  of  wide  payments  imbalances,  why  have  the  margins  for  risk  in 
corporate and emerging market debt been so exceptionally low?  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
A  number  of  explanations  have  been  put  forward  to  account  for  each  of  these  developments.  The 
most common explanation has started with the widening US current account deficit, and attributed it 
mainly  to  excessive  spending  and  borrowing  and  insufficient  saving  by  US  households  and  the  US 
Government.1 While this explanation is consistent with the widening US current account deficit, it has 
a number of shortcomings because it is inconsistent with some other developments we observe in the 
global  economy.  For  an  explanation  to  have  any  plausibility,  it  must  be  consistent  with  all  the  five 
simultaneous developments listed above.  
In my view, the most promising explanation at present is one which starts with the surplus countries 
and focuses on why national savings are so much higher than national investment in those countries.2 
                                                      
1   See Mann (1999 and 2002), Obsfeld and Rogoff (2000 and 2004) and Peterson (2004). 
2   Ben Bernanke, while a Governor of the US Federal Reserve Board, gave the best explanation along these 
lines. He originally called it the “glut of savings” argument, but it could more appropriately be called the “dearth 
of investment” argument because there has not really been an increase in world savings, only a redistribution. 
Alternatively,  we  could  call  it  the  “glut  of  savings  in  surplus  countries”  argument.  See  Bernanke  (2005A, 
2005B). 
   1/10 
Although  it  is  not,  in  itself,  a  complete  explanation  of  everything  that  has  happened,  it  is  the  most 
plausible in that it is consistent with all the five developments listed above.  
The excess of savings in the surplus countries  
2.  
The best starting point for any explanation is to recognise that there is a wide disparity between saving 
rates in different countries. Broadly speaking, Asian countries tend to have high saving rates, Anglo-
Saxon  ones  low  saving  rates,  and  other  countries  somewhere  in  between  (row  1  of  Table  1).  For 
balance of payments purposes, this would not matter if investment rates in each country matched the 
saving rate, but this is not the case (row 2 of Table 1). In countries with high saving rates, investment 
rates,  while  high,  are  not  as  high  as  the  saving  rate,  and  these  countries  run  a  current  account 
surplus.  The  opposite  applies  in  the  low  saving  countries.  To  understand  developments  in  current 
accounts, we have to understand developments in saving and investment ratios in different countries 
and regions.  
 
  
In short, Asian countries have more savings than they wish to invest in their own countries, and so 
they have to invest or lend abroad. This is the most basic of all balance of payments identities. Other 
countries  that  invest  more  than  they  save  have  to  finance  their  investment  by  using  the  savings  of 
foreigners. The actual channel can take many forms, but that is not crucial to the story.  
To  complicate  the  story  slightly,  it  is  not  only  Asian  countries  that  are  running  surpluses  at  the 
moment. As a result of the high oil price, the Middle East and Russia are also doing so, as are the 
Latin American countries for different reasons. While acknowledging these surpluses, I intend to leave 
them out of the rest of my account on the grounds that they are a good deal smaller than in Asia, and 
that,  on  past  experience,  they  are  likely  to  be  temporary.  For  those  who  want  to  follow  them  up,  I 
recommend a recent paper on our website.3  
Returning to Asia, we can ask why these countries do not invest more in themselves, and can find 
several explanations which I will outline later. Whatever the explanation, we should probably accept 
that in the medium term, a surplus of Asian saving over Asian domestic investment will be a fact of life; 
hence,  Asia  will  run  large  current  account  surpluses  and  therefore  will  have  an  excess  supply  of 
savings to be invested abroad.  
Given that this is going to happen, some other countries must run deficits – this is another important 
balance of payments identity which must hold. If no other country was prepared to run a deficit, then 
the  world  economy  would  enter  a  downward  spiral  with  ex  ante  saving  greater  than  ex  ante 
investment. Clearly, the countries that will run the deficits will be those where consumers, businesses 
                                                      
3   For a fuller account of these developments, see Orsmond (2005) and IMF (2005). 
   2/10 
and  governments  are  most  willing  to  spend  and  whose  financial  systems  are  most  efficient  at 
intermediating the flow of world savings.  
For ease of exposition, we can focus on three main regions of the world – Asia, the Euro area and the 
anglosphere  (mainly  the  United  States,  but  also  the  United  Kingdom,  Canada,  Australia  and  New 
Zealand). Asia runs a large current account surplus, and we might expect it to be balanced by deficits 
in the other two regions. In fact, the entire deficit shows up in the Anglosphere, with the Euro area in 
approximate balance. While balance sounds like a good thing, the Euro area has achieved this largely 
because of weak domestic demand and high unemployment over recent years. So what appears to be 
a balance in European payments, is in fact an important imbalance in the global economy.  
 
 
As explained before, the Asian surplus has to be invested in the rest of the world, and it will tend to 
flow  to  those  regions  which  offer  the  highest  return  on  capital.  While  foreign  investment  flows  both 
ways, in net terms it has flowed from Asia mainly to the United States and has underpinned the level 
of the US dollar, despite the US current account deficit, and provided easy access to finance for US 
borrowers in the business, household and government sectors.  
3.  
How does this explanation fit the five questions?  
The ease of financing the US current account deficit  
(i)  
There have been widespread fears expressed over the past half dozen years that the United States 
would have difficulty financing its deficit, that the US dollar would fall sharply, and that real interest 
rates in the United States would rise as borrowers competed for funds. In fact, the US current account 
deficit has been relatively easily financed despite it continuing for fifteen years and reaching 6 per cent 
of GDP. The US dollar in real effective terms today is at or slightly above its level of fifteen years ago 
when  the recent  run  of  deficits started (Graph 1).  Although  it  has  fallen  in  net  terms since its  early 
2002 peak, this has only unwound its rise since the mid 1990s. This is not what one would expect for a 
country  having  difficulty  attracting  the  funds  to  finance  its  deficit.  Similarly,  the  real  interest  rate  at 
which borrowing has occurred is a lot lower than a decade ago, a subject I will address later. Overall, 
the  US  experience  is  consistent  with  a  plentiful  supply  of  internationally-mobile  savings  rather  than 
one where it has had to struggle to find the funds to finance its spending.  
   3/10 
  The continuation of Asian surpluses  
 (ii)  
This  is  the  starting  point  of  my  explanation,  not  something  that  has  to  be  explained  by  the  other 
developments.  Even  so,  it  is  of  some  interest  to  know  why  Asian  countries  seem  content  with  the 
situation.  
Although  there  are  some  common  factors  among  these  countries,  there  are  also  some  interesting 
differences.  Japan  is  the  easiest  to  deal  with  as  it  has  had  a  large  surplus  for  a  long  time,  as  you 
would expect from a high-income country with a rapidly-ageing population. But the situations of China 
and other East Asia are more interesting as they have only moved into significant surplus over the 
past half dozen years. 
 
   4/10 
 
In the case of other East Asia , I think it is very clear that this occurred as a reaction to the pain they 
suffered during the Asian crisis of 1997/98. Both the Asian private and government sectors cut back 
sharply and this shows up as a fall in the investment ratio of about 7 or 8 per cent of GDP to a lower 
level, at which it has stayed (see Graph 3). The governments of the region reached the conclusion that 
they “had to make their economies more resilient to international capital flows. The simplest way of 
doing this was to cut expenditure (particularly investment expenditure), keep savings high, run current 
account surpluses and build up international reserves”.4
 
                                                       
4   Macfarlane (2005). 
   5/10 
 
In China 's case, the story is more complicated.5 It did not suffer in the Asian crisis, but it still absorbed 
the same lesson as the countries that did. That is one of the reasons that China has chosen to run 
current  account  surpluses  and  build  international  reserves.  But  a  more  over-riding  reason  is  the 
awareness by its government that, as a result of its economic liberalisation, it has to create about 20 
million jobs per year just to absorb the exodus of workers from the countryside. In other words, it has 
to run its economy at an exceptionally fast pace,  and is reluctant to adopt policies which might run 
counter  to  this  aim  in  the  short  run,  even  if  they  would  contribute  to  maintaining  longer-run 
sustainability. 
                                                       
5   See Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2003 and 2005) for an interesting account of the Asian approach to 
balance of payments adjustment. 
   6/10 
I think historians will regard the economic liberalisation of China as the major economic event of the 
past 30 years, with its effects showing up in countries and economic variables that at first sight seem 
remote from it. To date, the size of the Chinese surpluses have been smaller than for Japan and other 
East  Asia  ,  but  China  's  influence  in  other  ways  has  been  greater.  All  Asian  countries  are  acutely 
aware of their level of competitiveness vis-à-vis China, both in international trade and investment, and 
this is an additional reason why they have resisted appreciations of their own currencies. The rapid 
increase  in  Chinese  manufactured  output  and  exports,  based  on  its  exceptionally  low  labour  costs, 
has affected its competitors in Asia as much as its customers such as the United States.  
  Low central bank interest rates  
(iii) 
The high supply of Asian savings is not the explanation for the sharp fall in central-bank-determined 
interest rates in 2001 and 2002. That fall was a response by central banks in the developed countries 
to the collapse of the global equity market boom and associated recession that occurred in most of 
their countries. But the interesting question is why did those interest rates go so low; for the United 
States , Japan and the Euro area they fell below their 1930s levels. And why have they stayed so low, 
even accepting that the United States has gone some way to restoring them to a more neutral level? 
The answer has to be that inflation has remained so low. If inflation had picked up in the way that it did 
in earlier cyclical recoveries, central-bank-determined interest rates would have risen more by now.  
So the real issue is why have inflationary pressures stayed so low? An ex ante excess supply of world 
saving  means  that  it  would  be  unlikely  for  a  situation  of  generalised  excess  demand  in  the  world's 
goods  markets  to  occur,  and  hence  for  inflationary  pressures  to  emerge.  Another  way  of  thinking 
about  this  is  to  remember  that  a  surplus  of  savings  in  a  given  country  means  that  the  country  is 
producing more goods and services than it absorbs in domestic spending. In China's case, there has 
been a massive increase in its capacity to produce manufactured goods, and its domestic spending 
has not kept pace with the expansion in supply. The result has been a rapidly growing supply of low-
cost manufactured goods supplied by China to the rest of the world. The same has been true on a 
smaller scale for other Asian countries running surpluses. The increased productive capacity in China 
and  other  parts  of  Asia  can  be  seen  as  part  of  the  mechanism  by  which  their  trade  and  current 
account surpluses have been exerting downward pressure on global inflation.  
   7/10 
(iv)   Why bond yields have remained at historically low levels  
The fact that bond yields have remained low despite rising oil prices and the Fed raising short-term 
interest rates is really the nub of the issue. If excessive US spending and inadequate saving were the 
main story affecting the world economy, bond rates would be rising not falling. Clearly, developments 
in  the  bond  market  are  far  more  consistent  with  a  world  of  plentiful  saving  than  one  of  excessive 
spending and borrowing.  
 
The low level of nominal interest rates may be partly explained by the forces already cited which have 
held down inflation. But real interest rates have also fallen to extremely low levels.6 (Graph 5). Thus, it 
is not only inflation and inflationary expectations that are at work – the real demand and supply for 
borrowed funds must have changed. In economic terms, a fall in price suggests that the supply curve 
of saving has moved outwards relative to the demand curve.  
 Why risk margins have narrowed  
(v)  
Again, this is entirely consistent with a world of excess supply of funds looking for attractive yields. 
With yields on high quality government paper having been driven down to low levels, investors have 
been  attracted  to  other  securities  that  can  offer  something  higher.  Thus,  margins  on  all  grades  of 
corporate  debt  and  emerging  market  debt  have  been  driven  down.  This  has  occurred  despite  the 
recent  history  of  US  corporate  scandals  and  the  default  by  Argentina,  which  would  normally  have 
heightened perceptions of risk in these securities. Of course, this search for yield has not just affected 
debt;  it  also  explains  rising  prices  on  assets  of  all  types  from  houses  to  equities  as  investors  take 
advantage of low borrowing costs and seek alternative investments.  
                                                      
6   Only in periods of unanticipated sharp rises in inflation have they been lower. 
   8/10 
Two counterfactuals  
4.  
Some  observers  may  think  that  in  my  explanation  of  global  developments,  US  profligacy  and 
excessive reliance on debt have been let off too lightly. What, they may ask, would have happened if 
increased  US  spending  and  reduced  savings  had  not  been  accommodated  by  Asian  saving  and 
lending?  The  answer  is  that  the  increased  US  spending  and  lower  US  saving  would  not  have 
occurred, or would only have occurred on a greatly reduced scale.  
If  the  excess  world  saving  had  not  been  available,  the  global  economy  would  have  been  in  the 
opposite position, namely excess demand in goods and capital markets. US demand for funds would 
have pushed up bond rates, inflationary pressures would mean US monetary policy would be tighter, 
and the US Government would have difficulty funding its budget deficit. Businesses and households in 
the  United  States  would  face  tougher  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  and  spending  would  be  more 
restrained. Despite higher US interest rates, the US dollar would probably be weaker because foreign 
demand for US assets would be lower. The US current account deficit would be smaller due to the 
weaker domestic demand and lower US dollar.  
It is not clear whether the world economy would be weaker or stronger. On the one hand, the extra 
Asian  spending  would  have  pushed  up  world  demand.  On  the  other  hand,  higher  inflation,  higher 
world  interest  rates  and  reduced  US  spending  would  have  held  it  down.  But  the  imbalances  in 
international payments would have been smaller.  
I do not want to give the impression that the large US current account deficit is not an imbalance, or 
that it can go on rising forever. Clearly, that is not the case. My view is only that we should not start 
our  analysis  with  the  US  current  account,  or  look  to  its  remediation  as  the  key  to  unwinding  the 
imbalances. For example, the most commonly heard prescription is for the United States to reduce its 
call on world savings by reducing its fiscal deficit. However, if my analysis is correct, a reduction in the 
US fiscal deficit by itself would be unlikely to have a major impact on international imbalances.7 In the 
absence of policy changes in Asia, the Asian countries would be likely to continue running surpluses, 
and so a fiscal contraction in the United States would only add a contractionary influence to a global 
economy already characterised by surplus saving and unusually low interest rates.  
Another view that has recently been put is that it was excessively loose monetary policy rather than 
saving/investment imbalances that was at the heart of the problem. This view is generally bolstered by 
some  reference  to  excessive  liquidity,  although  the  concept  is  left  undefined.  I  do  not  find  this 
argument at all convincing. There is no doubt that world interest rates have been exceptionally low, 
but does that of itself mean that monetary policy has been exceptionally loose? To maintain this view, 
you would have to believe, for example, that monetary policy in Japan and Europe , where there has 
been weak demand growth and negligible inflation for a number of years, should have been tightened, 
i.e. European and Japanese interest rates should have been raised. This would make no sense. The 
low level of interest rates in most developed countries is not the first cause of the global imbalances, it 
is the result of them.  
Conclusions  
5.  
In making Asia the focus of my account, I hope I did not give the impression that I am blaming Asia for 
the  imbalances.  This  is  not  the  case,  partly  because  I  have  never  been  a  pessimist  about  the 
sustainability of the imbalances, and partly because I can sympathise with much of the recent Asian 
experience, particularly during the Asian crisis. My account takes its form purely from the fact that it is 
the only one that seems to me to be consistent with the five questions I posed at the beginning. It is 
the only one that explains why there is downward pressure on CPI inflation and interest rates, and in 
consequence upward pressure on asset prices. As a central banker, I cannot complain about these 
events because they have made my central task of maintaining low inflation easier. Similarly, as an 
                                                      
7   Bernanke (2005A) reported a Federal Reserve study which estimated that balancing the federal budget would 
reduce the current account deficit in the medium term by less than 1 per cent of GDP. The IMF estimate that a 
permanent  1  percentage  point  of  GDP  improvement  in  the  US  budgetary  position  would  lower  the  current 
account deficit by ½ of one per cent of GDP. 
   9/10 
Australian,  I  can  see  that  the  impressive  economic  development  of  Asia  has  benefited  our 
complementary economy in many ways.  
I have not provided any assessment of the risks involved in the current situation because that would 
involve another talk at least as long as tonight's. But, if it is any reassurance, I think we are seeing 
some early signs of a return to normality, even if they are small and the process likely to be a long 
one. The Fed's policy of gradually moving up US interest rates towards neutrality is the most obvious 
sign. The other one is China 's abandonment of its fixed parity to the US dollar. Although its upward 
movement so far is extremely modest, they have clearly set the direction for the future. To me, it is an 
extremely significant move and suggests that they will countenance policy changes which in the short 
run might slightly restrain demand, but in the long run increase the chances of sustainable growth.  
 
   10/10 
