Niklaus Blattner: Developments in the Swiss banking sector  
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Niklaus  Blattner,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 16 June 2005. 
 With its Financial Stability Report, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) informs the public of the state of the 
financial  system  and  presents  its  assessment  of  system  stability.  Moreover,  the  Bank  provides 
indicators that may be used for an in-depth analysis. 
The  SNB  tracks  developments  in  the  banking  sector  from  a  macroprudential,  i.e.  a  system-wide 
perspective. In so doing, it complements the task of the Swiss Federal Banking Commission (SFBC), 
which is responsible for microprudential oversight, i.e. for individual institutions. 
The part of the report that focuses on the banking sector mainly highlights strains or imbalances which 
could pose a threat to system stability in the short or longer term. In addition, the SNB reports on its 
activities in connection with the oversight of payment and securities settlement systems. This year it 
also  provides  information  on  the  “Business  Continuity  Planning”  (BCP)  project,  i.e.  on  preventive 
measures  to  overcome  disruptions,  thus  strengthening  the  operational  resistance  of  the  Swiss 
financial centre. 
Banking sector 
The  banking  sector  is  currently  stable.  The  stress  index  developed  by  SNB  –  an  indicator  which 
combines comprehensive information on potential stress symptoms in the banking industry – shows 
that the strains on the Swiss banking industry were extraordinarily low compared with the historical 
average. This is mainly attributable to three factors. 
Firstly,  the  Swiss  banking  industry  found  itself  in  a  predominantly  positive  environment:  economic 
activity and the stock markets exhibited favourable development, interest rates remained low, and the 
credit standing of borrowers tended to improve. Consequently, profits in the banking sector not only 
remained  high,  but  in  most  cases  had  increased  over  the  previous  period.  While  the  satisfactory 
results  achieved  already  in  2003  were  mainly  due  to  cost-cutting  measures,  the  figures  during  the 
period under review can be ascribed to higher operative earnings. 
Secondly,  the  banks’  reinforced  capital  resources  improved  the  sector’s  resilience.  The  majority  of 
banks took advantage of the favourable environment to strengthen their capital base. Excess capital at 
the  end  of  2004  significantly  exceeded  the  historical  average.  One  exception,  however,  are  the  big 
banks,  which  –  despite  better  profits  –  hardly  increased  their  capital  base  at  all.  The  risk-weighted 
capital ratio is relevant for regulation. The big banks are quite well placed by international standards in 
this regard. However, if the unweighted capital ratio is used as a benchmark (in Switzerland, it is not 
subject  to  any  minimum  requirements),  the  capital  levels  of  the  big  banks  are  more  modest  when 
viewed  internationally.  The  reasons  for  this  discrepancy  are  the  comparatively  low  proportion  of 
off-balance-sheet business at the Swiss big banks on the one hand, and the low average weighting of 
trading and loan books on the other hand. 
Thirdly,  there  is  no  indication  –  from  our  perspective  –  that  the  risks  entered  into  in  the  banking 
industry have risen: market and interest rate risk have only increased slightly on an aggregate level, 
and credit risk even seems to have fallen. 
Consequently, the banking sector is in good shape at the moment. As far as prospects for the near 
future are concerned, we believe that the macroeconomic environment and financial market conditions 
pose no major threat to the stability of the Swiss banking system. The outlook for 2005 indicates that 
economic growth in most regions will only slow down at a moderate pace. In addition, the available 
indicators suggest that there is currently little risk of contagion effects causing a crisis in the Swiss 
banking sector. 
Nevertheless, there are still potential sources of risk. They pertain to credit risks in particular. Firstly, 
an  unexpectedly  sharp  economic  downturn  could  have  a  serious  impact  on  the  quality  of  the  loan 
portfolios and the stock market. Secondly, should we witness a swift economic recovery, however, a 
sharp rise in the still very low interest rates could also result in a deterioration of the loan portfolio. This 
is because the growing interest burden would suddenly put considerable pressure on households and 
companies with mortgages to pay off. Banks would also be directly affected by the steep interest rate 
hike,  as  the  interest  rates  on  their  assets  tend  to  be  fixed  for  a  longer  period  than  those  on  their 
liabilities. In view of the interest rate risks taken and the now extremely low provisions in the Swiss 
banking sector, the negative consequences of an unexpectedly sharp interest rate increase could be 
relatively far-reaching. The Swiss banking sector should nevertheless have sufficient capital to bear 
up, even under such circumstances. 
Hedge funds might pose an indirect threat to stability in that their failure affects systemically important 
banks. In our opinion, this is an unlikely scenario, however. Hedge fund risk management at Swiss big 
banks  is  adequate.  The  SFBC  supervises  the  big  banks’  hedge  fund  activities.  Their  exposure  to 
hedge  funds  must  be  backed  by  capital  as  in  the  case  of  any  other  market  and  credit  risks.  It  is, 
however, undisputable that, given the rapid developments in the hedge fund industry, activities must 
be monitored closely. 
In 
the  meantime, 
the  “systemically 
System oversight 
In  December,  we  reported  on  the  situation  with  regard  to  the  oversight  of  systemically  important 
payment  and  securities  settlement  systems. 
important” 
classifications  of  the  interbank  payment  system  Swiss  Interbank  Clearing  (SIC),  the  securities 
settlement  system  SECOM,  the  central  counterparty  SIS  x-clear  and  the  multi-currency  payment 
system  Continuous  Linked  Settlement  (CLS)  have  become  definitive,  and  the  preparations  for  the 
oversight  measures  stipulated  in  the  National  Bank  Ordinance  are  going  ahead  as  scheduled.  In 
particular,  detailed  guidelines  were  drawn  up  in  order  to  examine  whether  or  not  the  regulatory 
minimum  requirements  are  complied  with.  With  these  guidelines,  the  different  systems  can  be 
monitored consistently, while at the same time keeping the administrative effort of the operators at an 
acceptable level. 
Business Continuity Planning (BCP) 
Different experiences in the recent past – from the 9/11 terrorist attacks in the United States to minor 
local  technical  difficulties  –  suggest  that  measures  to  strengthen  the  operational  resistance  of  the 
Swiss financial sector must be taken. During the past year and a half, the SNB has headed a sectoral 
working group in cooperation with the SFBC secretariat. The group consists of representatives from 
infrastructure  providers,  financial  institutions  and  the  authorities  and  has  conducted  an  in-depth 
analysis of the business continuity plans of the major players in the financial markets. The Business 
Continuity  Planning  (BCP)  project  focuses  on  precautionary  measures  to  prevent  the  likelihood  of 
disruptions. In addition, measures are taken to help cope as efficiently as possible with disruptions, 
once they have occurred. 
In its analysis, the working group focused on the two business processes which were considered to be 
especially critical for system stability and which must be maintained without fail even in exceptional 
circumstances. Firstly, the supply of liquidity to the financial system with central bank money by means 
of  repos  and,  secondly,  large-value  payment  transactions  between  the  commercial  banks  in  Swiss 
Interbank Clearing (SIC). 
The analysis began with the following scenario: a severe disruption causing the failure of an important 
operational centre and incapacitating its staff. Requirements were defined with regard to the maximum 
tolerable  downtime  before  the  resumption  of  normal  operations.  A  distinction  was  made  between 
critical  and  non-critical  business  processes,  activities  and  participants.  Business  processes  were 
deemed to be critical if their functioning is absolutely vital for the system-wide provision of liquidity. 
• 
The central infrastructures (SNB, SIS, Telekurs), which are crucial for the critical business 
processes, must be able to resume critical business activities within two hours without losing 
any confirmed transactions.  
Critical system participants must be able to resume defined critical business activities within 
four hours.  
The other system participants must be able to resume operations within 24 hours.  
• 
The  results  of  the  analysis  show  that  adequate  preparations  have  been  made  both  for  central 
infrastructures  and  the  major  system  participants.  Nevertheless,  areas  in  which  there  is  room  for 
improvement  were  identified.  For  instance,  existing  precautionary  measures  should  not  only  be 
 tailored to cater for the failure of physical components (such as buildings or hardware), but particularly 
to events that interfere with staff availability. 
The final report of the working group will be completed in the second half of 2005. It will not be limited 
to issuing specific recommendations, but also to showing how they can be implemented. 
Financial Stability Report 2005 (950 kb) 
