European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
3 February 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is our pleasure to welcome you to this press conference. The Vice-President 
and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB. 
All in all, the information which has become available since the last meeting of the Governing Council 
means that our assessment of price stability over the medium term is unchanged. While short-term 
HICP inflation rates remain subject to certain volatilities, particularly in relation to oil prices, there is no 
significant  evidence  of  underlying  domestic  inflationary  pressures  building  up  in  the  euro  area. 
Accordingly,  we  have  left  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged  at  their  historically  low  levels. 
However, upside risks to price stability over the medium term remain. Continued vigilance is therefore 
of the essence with regard to those risks.  
I shall now explain our assessment in more detail.  
Turning  first  to  the  economic  analysis,  recent  data  on  economic  activity,  as  well  as  survey 
information, suggest ongoing moderate growth in the fourth quarter of 2004 and a broadly unchanged 
situation around the new year. Looking ahead, the conditions remain in place for economic growth to 
pick  up  and  become  more  self-sustained  in  the  course  of  the  year.  Global  growth  remains  solid, 
providing  a  favourable  environment  for  euro  area  exports.  On  the  domestic  side,  investment  is 
expected  to  continue  to  benefit  from  very  favourable  financing  conditions,  improved  earnings  and 
greater business efficiency. Moreover, consumption growth should develop in line with real disposable 
income growth. 
High and volatile oil prices and persistent global imbalances pose downside risks to growth. On the 
domestic  side,  reducing  uncertainties  associated  with  the  extent  and  pace  of  fiscal  and  structural 
reforms  would  support  consumption,  as  such  uncertainties  seem  to  be  limiting  private  sector 
expectations  of  future  real  disposable  income  growth.  As  regards  exchange  rates,  we  confirm  our 
position, expressed when the euro rose sharply, that such moves are unwelcome and undesirable for 
economic growth.  
Turning  to  consumer  prices,  annual  HICP  inflation  stood  at  2.4%  in  December,  up  from  2.2%  in 
November.  Data  for  January  are  not  yet  available,  but  there  are  indications  of  a  decline  from 
December’s inflation rate. Over the coming months, volatility in annual inflation rates is likely to persist, 
reflecting in particular oil price developments. Looking further ahead, on the basis of the information 
available so far, HICP inflation is expected to fall below 2% in the course of 2005, provided no further 
adverse shocks occur. At the current juncture, the evidence does not suggest that stronger underlying 
domestic  inflationary  pressures  are  building  up  in  the  euro  area.  Wage  increases  have  remained 
contained over recent quarters and, in the context of ongoing moderate economic growth and weak 
labour markets, this trend should continue in the future.  
However,  several  upside  risks  to  price  stability  need  to  be  taken  into  account.  Concerns  relate  in 
particular to future oil price developments and, more generally, to the potential risk of second-round 
effects in wage and price-setting throughout the economy. In addition, developments in indirect taxes 
and administered prices need to be monitored closely.  
Further insight into the outlook for price developments at medium to longer-term horizons is provided 
by the monetary analysis. The latest monetary data confirm the strengthening of M3 growth observed 
since  mid-2004.  This  increasingly  reflects  the  stimulative  effect  of  the  historically  very  low  level  of 
interest rates in the euro area. As a result of the persistently strong growth in M3 over the past few 
years,  there  remains  substantially  more  liquidity  in  the  euro  area  than  is  needed  to  finance  non-
inflationary  economic  growth.  This  could  pose  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and 
warrants vigilance. 
The very low level of interest rates is also fuelling private sector demand for credit. Growth in loans to 
non-financial  corporations  has  picked  up  further  in  recent  months.  Moreover,  demand  for  loans  for 
house purchase has continued to be robust, contributing to strong house price dynamics in several 
BIS Review 8/2005 
 1
euro area countries. The combination of ample liquidity and strong credit growth could, in some parts 
of the euro area, become a source of unsustainable price increases in property markets. 
To  sum  up,  the  economic  analysis  suggests  that  underlying  domestic  inflationary  pressures  remain 
contained.  However,  medium-term  upside  risks  to  price  stability  persist  and  need  to  be  monitored 
closely. It is important that higher inflation in the short term does not become entrenched in long-term 
inflation  expectations  and  wage  and  price-setting  behaviour.  Cross-checking  with  the  monetary 
analysis supports the case for continued vigilance with regard to the materialisation of risks to price 
stability over the medium term.  
With regard to fiscal policies, a thorough assessment of the most recent updates of Member States’ 
stability programmes is under way. It is essential that Member States comply with their commitments 
under  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  in  the  implementation  of  2005  budgets  and  in  the  setting  of 
medium-term objectives. Where relevant, this implies a correction of excessive deficits this year and 
determined  progress  towards  budgetary  positions  which  are  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus.  Such 
measures  should  prevent  a  repeat  of  past  outcomes,  when  insufficient  adjustments  were  made.  In 
light  of  the  need  to  prepare  for  population  ageing,  fiscal  strategies  should  also  be  part  of  a 
comprehensive reform strategy aimed at raising Europe’s growth potential.  
Discussions on the European fiscal framework now need to be brought to a convincing conclusion. 
With  a  view  to  fostering  confidence,  the  Governing  Council  supports  proposals  that  strengthen  the 
preventive  arm  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  deals  with  the  surveillance  of  budgetary 
positions. As regards the corrective arm of the Pact, the mechanisms in place must remain strong and 
credible in all respects. It would therefore be counterproductive to change the Regulations, dilute the 
3%  deficit  limit  or  weaken  the  excessive  deficit  procedure.  The  fiscal  framework  enshrined  in  the 
Treaty  on  European  Union  and  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  a  cornerstone  of  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union  and  thus  of  central  importance  for  the  cohesion  of  Monetary  Union  itself.  It  is 
important to avoid any doubts about the effectiveness of the surveillance process and the soundness 
of the fiscal policies of the single currency area in the long run, as such doubts would ultimately lead to 
higher risk premia and higher real interest rates in the euro area. 
Regarding  structural  reforms,  the  ECOFIN  Council  has  recently  endorsed  the  Annual  Report  on 
Structural Reforms 2005, prepared by the Economic Policy Committee. The Governing Council fully 
supports  the  ECOFIN  Council’s  conclusion  that  “particular  attention  should  be  given  to  increasing 
employment  rates,  especially  in  the  context  of  ageing  populations,  within  the  continuing  need  to 
increase growth by raising both employment and productivity.” To this end, we strongly support the 
Commission in its determination to promote the renewed Lisbon Strategy and we encourage national 
governments to show their determination in this regard by implementing structural reforms in Europe. 
Closing the existing implementation gap is essential in order to reap the benefits of reforms, in terms 
of  both  a  higher  growth  potential  in  the  medium  term  and  improved  consumer  and  business 
confidence in the short run. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2005
