Shyamala Gopinath: Recent developments in forex, money and g-sec markets - 
account and outlook 
Address  by  Ms  Shyamala  Gopinath,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
16th National Forex Assembly, Cochin, 13 August 2005. 
 Introduction 
I.  
It gives me immense pleasure to address this distinguished gathering of forex professionals from all 
over the country. Coming to these visually beautiful surroundings, it is easy to get oblivious to the fact 
that this state is a large contributor of ‘invisibles’ for our balance of payments. Both tourism earnings 
and  private  remittances  have  had  a  significant  impact  on  Kerala’s  economy  and  the  state  has 
benefited substantially as a result of liberalisation since 1991. Putting numbers to this gain, as per a 
study by the Centre for Development Studies, Trivandrum1, the average yearly gain to the state since 
the start of reforms has been in the range of Rs. 2000 crore.  
I begin this address, Ladies and Gentlemen, in the background of this interesting perspective.  
Forex  market  in  India  is  undergoing  rapid  transformation  and  exciting  things  are  engaging  us 
professionally.  At  the  same  time,  it  can  no  longer  be  seen  in  isolation  –  it  is  increasingly  getting 
integrated within the broad ambit of financial markets. Over the last fifteen years, momentous changes 
have happened in the financial sector, which are well known. While the initial reforms concentrated 
more  on  the  institutions  like  banks  or  non-banking  financial  companies,  the  recent  years  have 
witnessed emphasis on financial markets.  
With the financial markets in India acquiring greater depth and maturity in the recent years, the issue 
of greater integration of various market segments among themselves, on the one hand, and with the 
global markets, on the other, has come to the forefront. In my address I intend to take stock of the 
major initiatives that have been taken to reform the financial markets in India in the past, reflect on the 
present scenario and articulate the future course of reforms.  
As  you  all  are  aware,  the  development  of  financial  markets  in  India  has  been  pursued  for  bringing 
about  a  transformation  in  the  structure,  efficiency,  and  stability  of  markets  as  also  facilitating 
integration of markets. The emphasis has been on strengthening price discovery, easing of restrictions 
on flows or transactions, lowering of transaction costs, and enhancing liquidity. During the post-reform 
period, the structure of financial market has witnessed a remarkable change in terms of the types, the 
number and the spectrum of maturity of financial instruments traded in various segments of money, 
gilts and foreign exchange markets. I now dwell on the three segments of the financial markets which 
fall  directly  under  the  purview  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  As  this  is  a  gathering  of  Forex 
Professionals, it would be in the fitness of things to dwell on the reform process of the forex market 
first. 
II. 
Forex Market 
Global Scenario  
The  global  foreign  exchange  markets  have  grown  manifold  in  the  recent  years.  The  latest  BIS 
Triennial  Central  Bank  Survey  on  forex  and  derivatives  markets  2004  indicate  a  substantial  rise  in 
activity in foreign exchange markets across the world. Average daily turnover at US $ 1.9 trillion in 
April 2004 showed an increase of 57 per cent and 36 per cent at current and constant exchange rates 
compared  to  April  2001,  reversing  the  fall  in  global  trading  volumes  between  1998  and  2001.  Both 
global factors, such as search for yield and a secular deepening in Asian financial markets contributed 
                                                      
1  
“Kerala’s Gulf Connection : Emigration, Remittances and their Macroeconomic Impact 1972-2000”, Kannan K.P and Hari 
K.S, Centre fro Development Studies, Working Paper No. 328. 
BIS Review 55/2005 
 1
to the strong growth. In this context, it is important to note that the share of trading between banks and 
financial customers rose significantly from 28 per cent in 2001 to 33 per cent in 2004. However, the 
currency composition of turnover has not changed significantly. The US dollar was on one side of 89 
per cent of all transactions, followed by the euro (37 per cent), the yen (20 per cent) and the Pound 
sterling (17 per cent). In terms of currency pairs, US dollar/euro continued to be by far the most traded 
currency pair in April 2004, accounting for 28 per cent of global turnover, followed by US dollar/yen 
with 17 per cent and US dollar/Pound sterling with 14 per cent. The percentage share of the Indian 
rupee,  though  miniscule  in  comparison,  has  almost  trebled  to  constitute  0.3  per  cent  of  total  daily 
turnover.  
Indian Forex Market 
In  an  open  economy  environment,  the  foreign  exchange  market  assumes  critical  importance  for 
stability  of  the  financial  system  since  banks’  balance  sheets  are  influenced  by  the  foreign  capital 
inflows  and  various  other  external  transactions  directly  or  indirectly  through  credit  exposures.  The 
Indian  forex  market  has  widened  and  deepened  since  the  1990s  on  account  of  implementation  of 
various  measures  recommended  by  the  High  Level  Committee  on  Balance  of  Payments  in  1993 
(Chairman:  Dr.  C.Rangarajan),  the  Expert  Group  on  Foreign  Exchange  Markets  in  India  in  1995 
(Chairman:  Shri  O.P.Sodhani)  and  the  Committee  on  Capital  Account  Convertibility  in  1997 
(Chairman: Shri S.S.Tarapore). With the transition to a market-determined exchange rate system in 
March 1993 and the subsequent gradual liberalisation of restrictions on various external transactions, 
ensuring orderly conditions in the forex market in India has become one of the key objectives. The 
Reserve  Bank  has  undertaken  various  measures  towards  development  of  spot  as  well  as  forward 
segments of foreign exchange market. As a result, the average gross daily turnover increased to US $ 
12.1  billion  in  2004-05  (April-March)  from  US  $  3.7  billion  in  1996-97.  The  top  30  banks  in  India 
account for approximately 90 per cent of the overall turnover in the market.  
Approach to Reforms in Foreign Exchange Market 
While the operating environment is no doubt relatively more flexible in countries with current account 
convertibility and open capital accounts, the approach in other countries, the approach has remained 
cautious with a clear emphasis on the need for safeguards against potential financial instability that 
could arise due to excessive speculation in the foreign exchange market even when macroeconomic 
fundamentals  are  reasonably  good.  The  Indian  approach  to  opening  the  external  sector  and 
developing the foreign exchange market in a phased manner from current account convertibility to the 
ongoing process of capital account liberalization is now considered a prudent and desirable approach 
for liberalization. 
The  recent  past  has  witnessed  significant  changes  in  the  external  sector  policy  approach  of  the 
Reserve Bank. The focus of the measures has been to gradually dismantle controls and provide an 
enabling environment to all entities engaged in external transactions. The approach to liberalisation, 
adopted  by  Reserve  Bank  has  been  characterised  by  greater  transparency,  data  monitoring  and 
information  dissemination  and  to  move  away  from  micro  management  of  foreign  exchange 
transactions to macro management of forex flows. The emphasis has been to ensure that procedural 
formalities are minimised so that individuals are able to obtain hassle free remittances facility for all 
current account transactions and exporters and other users of the market are able to concentrate on 
their core activities rather than engage in avoidable paper work. Besides, the Reserve Bank has also 
striven  to  ensure  that  strong  Know-Your-Customer  (KYC)  guidelines  are  in  place.  In  this  enabling 
environment, today the Indian corporate sector is reaching out to the global production and distribution 
networks  not  only  through  greater  orientation  towards  exports  or  imports  but  also  through  strategic 
takeovers, overseas acquisitions and joint ventures. Apart from attracting Fortune 500 companies to 
open shops  in  India,  Indian  corporates  are  making  their  own  places  in  the  list  at  scales  which was 
hitherto unimaginable. 
Significant Policy Developments  
Keeping in view the robustness of the external sector, a number of far-reaching changes have been 
effected in a phased manner in the recent years to liberalise the capital account, which include more 
flexible  and  liberal  investments  norms  in  order  to  promote  Indian  investment  abroad  and  to  enable 
Indian  companies  to  reap  the  benefits  of  globalization  and  become  globally  competitive.  The  other 
measures  relate  to  allowing  two-way  fungibility  in  the  case  of  GDRs  /  ADRs,  permission  to  Indian 
mutual  funds  to  invest  in  overseas  equity  market  subject  to  certain  limits,  permission  to  Indian 
companies  to  make  acquisitions  of  foreign  companies  or  make  direct  investment  abroad  in  Joint 
Ventures/Wholly-  owned  Subsidiaries,  permission  to  various  participants  in  the  foreign  exchange 
market, including FIIs, to avail forward cover subject to genuine underlying exposure, permission to 
residents to open foreign currency denominated account, etc  
Alongside the measures taken to encourage overseas investment by resident corporates, steps were 
taken to contain and calibrate debt-creating inflows. The thrust of the new ECB policy is to encourage 
investment  in  the  real  sector  and  infrastructure  while  at  the  same  time  restricting  debt  flows  for 
purposes other than those adding to the capital stock.  
RBI  also  encouraged  the  setting  up  of  CCIL  to  reduce  settlement  risk.  CCIL  has  functioned  as  an 
efficient enabler of settlement offering netting and operational benefits, in addition to substantial risk 
mitigation.  CCIL  settled  over  900,000  deals  for  a  gross  volume  of  USD  900  billion  in  the  last  year 
alone.  
Issues for the road ahead 
The Report of the Internal Technical Group on Forex Markets, set up by the RBI and announced last 
year  at  the  same  conference,  has  made  various  recommendations  for  further  liberalization  of  the 
extant  regulations.  Some  of  the  recommendations,  such  as,  freedom  to  cancel  and  rebook  forward 
contracts  of any  tenor,  delegation of  powers  to  ADs  for grant  of  permission  to  corporates to  hedge 
their  exposure  to  commodity  price  risk  in  the  international  commodity  exchanges/  markets  and 
extension  of  the  trading  hours  of  the  inter-bank  foreign  exchange  market  have  already  been 
implemented.  The  Reserve  Bank has placed  the report  in  the  public  domain  for comments  and  the 
feedback received will be taken into consideration for arriving at a final decision in this regard.  
Greater  liberalisation  requires  banks  to  act  responsibly  in  order  to  provide  confidence  to  corporate 
entities  going  in  for  derivative  transactions  in  addition  to  satisfying  regulations.  In  this  context, 
customer  suitability  and  appropriateness  issue  has  assumed  significance.  The  “appropriateness 
standard” ensures that banks use the same principles for taking credit decisions in respect of complex 
derivative transactions as they do for non-derivative transactions. Banks are expected to evaluate the 
purpose of the derivative transaction and make an assessment as to whether it is appropriate to the 
customer’s  needs  and  level  of  sophistication.  While  some  banks  already  have  an  appropriateness 
policy  in  place,  many  banks  do  not.  Instances  of  international  banks  encountering  compensation 
claims  due  to  slackness  on  their  part  in  this  area  are  well  known.  It  is,  therefore,  important  that  all 
banks introduce a customer suitability and appropriateness policy.   
Further, greater clarity is required in the area of derivative accounting in the books of corporates as 
well as banks in regard to revenue recognition and valuation of assets and liabilities. In general it may 
be a desirable practice to have convergence in the accounting standards for both foreign currency and 
INR  derivatives  and  between  on  balance  sheet  and  off  balance  sheet  items.  There  is  also  need  to 
eliminate incentives to drive a wedge between on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet items. Clarity is 
essential to differentiate between hedge and trading transactions. In respect of transactions classified 
as trading, and hence marked to market, an important issue that needs to be addressed is whether 
there is a liquid market for these products. If not, what should be a prudent approach for recognizing 
income  or  losses.  RBI  is  in  the  process  of  compiling  a  master  circular  on  all  derivatives  including 
issues related to accounting and valuation for banks in consultation with industry associations and the 
ICAI. We also welcome suggestions from the Forex Association in this regard.  
However,  there  is  equal  need  and  urgency  to  formulate  accounting  standards  for  interest  rate  and 
certain foreign currency derivatives for all corporates. Indian accounting standards are still in formative 
stage as regards derivative accounting both in regard to hedge and fair value/ cash flow accounting as 
well  as  coverage  of  the  products.  ICAI  is  seized  of  the  issue  and  it  is  important  that  the  forex 
association also facilitates the process by providing suggestions to the Institute. 
In the context of good corporate governance, the issue of greater disclosure on the part of banks and 
corporates has become important. In the case of complex structured products, it is imperative on the 
part  of  the  banks  /  corporates  to  be  transparent  and  disclose  the  nature  and  quantum  of  risks 
contracted and the systems put in place to monitor these risks.  
While accounting and disclosure issues are engaging our attention, the RBI is also examining other 
recommendations of  the  Technical  Group  for  phased  implementation.  One  of  the  recommendations 
relates  to  covered  options.  As  things  stand,  the  corporates  are  only  allowed  to  purchase  options 
supported  by  genuine  underlying  transaction/receivable.  Any  structured  product  involving  cost 
reduction  is  allowed  provided  it  does  not  increase  underlying  risk  and  there  is  no  net  receipt  of 
premium. Covered options, allow the corporates to write covered calls and puts subject to adequate 
risk management systems being in place. This is expected to impart greater depth and liquidity to the 
options market and provide greater flexibility to the market participants.  
Similarly, we propose to revisit the procedures in respect of crystallization of unpaid export bills which 
were formulated long ago. Another recommendation of the Group relates to price fix hedge. Currently, 
residents  engaged  in  import/export  activity  can  hedge  the  price  risk  of  these  commodities  in 
international commodity exchanges. The suggestion is to allow price fix hedges to the extent of the 
average  quantity  of  commodity  bought/sold  during  the  previous  three  years,  or  during  the  previous 
year,  whichever  is  higher.  This  would  be  applicable  both  to  commodities  imported/  exported  and 
procured  domestically.  RBI  welcomes  inputs  from  the  Forex  Association  in  regard  to  the 
recommendations under examination.  
A proposal from CCIL to extend guaranteed settlement of US$/INR forward transactions from trade 
date is being currently examined by us. Since settlement guarantee will extend from the trade date, we 
expect  the  liquidity  and  depth  in  the  forward  market  to  increase  significantly.  The  risks  that  banks 
today  carry  on  their  books  on  account  of  large  outstanding  forward  positions  will  be  significantly 
reduced. 
Let me now turn to the G-Sec market. 
G-Sec market 
III.  
As a debt manager to the Government, the development of a deep and liquid market for Government 
securities is of critical importance to the Reserve Bank as this would result in better price discovery 
and reduce the cost of Government borrowing. Such markets also provide an effective transmission 
mechanism for monetary policy, facilitate the introduction and pricing of hedging products and serve 
as benchmarks for other debt instruments. Efforts towards development of the Government securities 
market  have  focused  on  three  areas:  institutional  measures,  innovations  through  instruments,  and 
enabling measures. As a result of gradual reform measures taken over the years, the Indian G-Sec 
market has seen a transition for the better, as reflected in the following developments: 
• 
• 
the market has become increasingly broad based. 
consolidation of securities, albeit in a passive manner, has resulted in the development of 
several benchmark securities,  
a  high  degree  of  sophistication  achieved  in  the  auction  process  has  narrowed  the  gap 
between the cut-off price and the weighted average cut-off price and has resulted in a strong 
correlation between the bids at the primary auction and secondary market yields, indicating 
improved price discovery.  
the  increased  volume  of  trading  in  the  secondary  market  has  resulted  in  a  reasonably 
smooth yield curve;  
the  yield  curve  has  been  elongated  up  to  30  years  maturity  to  reduce  bunching  of 
redemptions and minimise the rollover risk;  
through a process of novation, a central counterparty, like the Clearing Corporation of India 
Limited  (CCIL)  has  provided  excellent  infrastructure  and  contributed  to  better  risk 
management.  
to address important issues regarding pricing, choice of benchmark, and liquidity in respect 
of floating rate bonds (FRBs), a Sub-Group of the Technical Advisory Committee on Money, 
Forex and Government securities markets has been constituted.  
RBI  has  enhanced  the  efficacy  of  NDS  by  incorporating  screen  based  anonymous  order 
matching system under its ambit with effect from August 1, 2005. 
      Given this backdrop, let me now turn to some of the recommendations made by the Technical Group 
on Government Securities which are under examination.   
First, since RBI would not be able to participate in the primary auction market with effect from 2006-07, 
an internal Technical Group in RBI examined and recommended an appropriately restructured primary 
issuance process. The Technical Group suggested that Primary Dealers(PDs) may have to take up a 
greater  role  in  underwriting  and  may  accordingly  need  to  underwrite  100  per  cent  of  the  notified 
amounts in future auctions. 
Second,  the  larger  responsibility  cast  on  the  PDs  may  need  to  be  compensated  with  appropriate 
incentives and one of the suggestions is to extend exclusivity in auctions, which is a typical feature in 
most countries with PD system. However, another view is that this may disadvantage other players in 
the Government securities market who have been participating directly in auctions.  
Third,  PDs  are  also  required  to  play  the  role  of  market-makers  by  always  offering  two-way  quotes, 
thereby  imparting  liquidity.  However,  it  has  been  represented  that  the  absence  of  short  sales 
constrains  the  market-making  role  of  PDs.  The  issue  for  consideration  is  whether  short  sales,  with 
appropriate safeguards would be necessary for PDs to play this role of market-making.  
Fourth,  a  numbers  of  challenges  have  emerged  in  monetary  and  debt  management:  To  meet  the 
emerging challenges, the Reserve Bank is taking steps to fine-tune its open market operations. This 
would  need  greater  accuracy  in  forecasting  market  liquidity  over  the  short-  to  medium-term. 
Operationally, open market purchases and sales may have to be undertaken, necessitating a review of 
processes and technical infrastructure consistent with market development.  
Other recommendations made by the Group to further develop the efficiency and liquidity of secondary 
market  for  Government  securities  include  (i)  active  consolidation  of  securities,  (ii)  introduction  of  a 
‘When Issued’ market in a phased manner, and (iv) a securities borrowing window for PDs. 
As  per  the  announcement  in  the  Union  Budget  2005-06,  a  Bill  to  amend  the  RBI  Act,1934  for 
providing,  among  other  things,  legality  to  OTC  derivatives  has  been  introduced  in  the  Parliament. 
Similarly, the Government Securities Bill seeks to broaden the market for Government securities by 
facilitating  retail  interest  while  also  ensuring  an  orderly  secondary  market.  Some  of  the  substantive 
improvements expected in the management of public debt on account of this Bill are: (i) stripping and 
reconstitution of Government securities to facilitate improved secondary market liquidity, on the one 
hand and to enable better risk allocation in the appropriate investor class, on the other, (ii) provision 
for hypothecation, pledge and creation of lien on Government securities, etc.  
Let me now turn to money market. 
Money Market  
IV.  
The  money  market  forms  an  important  part  of  the  financial  system  by  providing  an  avenue  for 
equilibrating the surplus funds of lenders and the requirements of borrowers for short periods. It also 
provides a focal point for central bank’s intervention for influencing the liquidity in the financial system 
and  thereby  transmitting  the  monetary  policy  impulses.  The  primary  aim  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
operations  in  the  money  market  is  to  ensure  that  the  liquidity  and  short-term  interest  rates  are 
maintained  at  levels  consistent  with  the  monetary  policy  objectives.  In  recent  years,  the  Reserve 
Bank’s  approach  has  been  to  foster  balanced  development  of  different  segments  of  the  money 
market, introduce new instruments, reduce dependence of participants on uncollateralised exposures, 
facilitate price discovery in the short-end and upgrade the payment system infrastructure. Accordingly, 
the Reserve Bank’s strategy has focused on developing pure call/ notice money market, instituting full-
fledged  Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility(LAF),  developing  infrastructure,  promoting  transparency,  and 
various measures pertaining to instruments for non-bank participants. The following are some of the 
important developments pertaining to the money market: 
• 
With a view to transforming the call/ notice money market into a pure inter-bank market with 
participation of banks and primary dealers (PDs) only, a phased exit of non-banks from the 
call/notice  money  market  was  started  in  May  2001.  With  effect  from  August  6,  2005,  
non-bank participants have been completely phased out of the call money market. 
Several new financial instruments have been introduced. The traditional refinance support on 
fixed  terms  has  been  replaced  by  a  full-fledged  Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility  (LAF)  was 
introduced  on  June  5,  2000  with  a  view  to  modulating  short-term  liquidity  under  diverse 
market conditions. 
The  development  of  the  payment  system  infrastructure  was  strengthened  with  the 
introduction  of  the  Negotiated  Dealing  System  (NDS)  in  February  2002,  formation  of  the 
    Clearing  Corporation  of  India  Ltd.  (CCIL)  in  2001,  and  the  implementation  of  Real  Time 
Gross Settlement (RTGS) system in March 2004 
Measures have also been taken to make various other money market instruments (such as 
CDs, CPs, etc.) freely accessible to non-bank participants. These measures were intended 
to improve the depth of as well as the efficiency and transparency of operations in the money 
market. 
As part of the development of new instruments, a major initiative pertains to Collateralised 
Borrowing and Lending Obligation (CBLO), which was operationalised as a money market 
instrument through CCIL on January 20, 2003. With a view to developing the market for the 
CBLO, the Reserve Bank allowed certain exemptions in the form of CRR relaxation. 
Interaction between Forex, Government Securities and Money Markets 
V.  
The far-reaching financial sector reforms have also facilitated India’s movement to an open economy 
framework in which interaction between forex, Government securities and money market has become 
quite important. The opening of the economy has brought about gains in terms of inflows of foreign 
investments,  which  have  contributed  to  growth  and  employment.  However,  these  gains  have  also 
posed new challenges for managing the macroeconomy amidst large and volatile capital flows. This 
has had implications for monetary management. We have addressed this challenge with appropriate 
monetary-fiscal  coordination.  Suitable  changes  were  made  in  the  LAF  scheme  and  MSS  was 
introduced to address more enduring portion of the liquidity overhang.  
In view of the growing integration of markets across borders, it is imperative that domino effects are 
minimised  by  refining  and  upgrading  the  financial  infrastructure  in  all  its  vital  components,  such  as 
accounting standards, including income recognition and provisioning norms, disclosure standards and 
insolvency laws. This upgradation is to be attained in conformity with international best practices. In 
this regard, the Reserve Bank has strengthened the consultative process for all major policy steps in a 
transparent manner by involving market participants and other experts.  
Concluding Observations 
VII. 
The  reforms  have  been  successful  in  bringing  significant  improvements  in  various  financial  market 
segments  improving  their  depth,  liquidity  and  efficiency.  The  money  market  is  now  reasonably 
developed with a wide array of instruments. The character of the Government securities market has 
changed from being a captive market to a broad-based, deep and liquid market enabling the Reserve 
Bank to pursue its monetary policy through market-based instruments. Various reform measures have 
resulted  in  sharp  growth  of  the  foreign  exchange  market.  Reforms  have  also  been  successful  in 
creating  and  sustaining  orderly  conditions  in  the market.  These  factors  have  led  to  increased  inter-
linkages across financial institutions and markets. In the more recent period, the various segments of 
the financial market in India have, by and large, exhibited stability.  
RBI will endeavour to provide an enabling environment for healthy development of financial markets. 
The enabling environment also encompasses harmonization of reforms in financial sector with the real 
sector. Large gaps exist in demand supply of infrastructure services such as transport, electricity, ports 
etc. It needs to be emphasized that sound macroeconomic policies and a competitive domestic sector 
improve  the  capacity  of  the  economy  to  absorb  higher  capital  inflows,  reduce  the  cost  of  capital, 
translate external flows into higher investment levels and provide cushion against unexpected shocks 
in more liberalized external markets.  
With progressive financial sector reforms, various segments of the financial market, including Forex, 
money and G-Sec markets, have made tremendous strides. While we have come a long way from the 
controlled regime of the yester years, we believe in following a gradualist approach to opening up. A 
calibrated  approach  towards  financial  sector  liberalization  has  been  the  hallmark  of  financial  sector 
reforms  process  and  has  paid  rich  dividends  to  the  economy  by  insulating  it  from  the  vagaries  of 
international  capital  flows  and  the  contagion  effect  of  various  crises  faced  by  emerging  market 
economies in the 1990s. Let me conclude by thanking the Association for giving me this opportunity. I 
am sure the deliberations in this conference will be quite useful and I wish the conference all success.  
Thank You. 
This BIS Review is available on the BIS website at www.bis.org. 
