T T Mboweni: The challenge of stronger economic growth and 
development in South Africa 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Fedusa 
Third National Congress, Gold Reef City, 15 and 16 September 2005. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for your invitation to speak at the Fedusa Third National Congress. A constructive 
dialogue  between  labour  and  the  other  social  partners  is  crucial  for  fostering  community 
consensus  on  those  issues  that  are  important  for  accelerating  growth  and  improving  the 
quality of life of all South Africans. I welcome the opportunity to be part of this dialogue. 
In  speaking  about  the  challenge  of  stronger  economic  growth  and  development  I  will  first 
briefly  review  where  our  economy  currently  stands,  paying  due  attention  to  the  statutory 
mandate of the South African Reserve Bank. The second part of the address will be directed 
at  the  debate  on  how  much  growth  is  needed  for  South  Africa  to  absorb  the  unemployed 
within a reasonable timeframe, and – perhaps more importantly – what needs to be done to 
boost our growth and development momentum accordingly. 
Recent economic developments 
By this time we all know that South Africa's economic growth rate in the second quarter of 
2005 amounted to 4,8 per cent, compared with 3,5 per cent in the first quarter. Most analysts 
forecast  that  real  gross  domestic  product  will  increase  by  around  4  per  cent  in  the  full 
calendar  year  2005,  signifying  an  increase  of  more  than  2½  per  cent  in  real  income  per 
capita.  What  is  particularly  gratifying  about  the  current  growth  environment  is  that  our 
economy  has  enjoyed  twenty-three  quarters  of  uninterrupted  economic  expansion.  This  is 
the longest upswing in the recorded economic history of South Africa. The current recovery 
has the properties of a well-trained long-distance runner, rather than the characteristics of an 
unfit sprinter loaded with steroids performing admirably for just a fleeting moment. 
The improvement in growth in the second quarter of 2005 was mainly brought about by  a 
sharp  increase  in  real  value  added  in  manufacturing,  which  reflected  rising  domestic  final 
demand and stronger export demand for certain categories of goods, alongside a somewhat 
more  competitive  level  of  the  exchange  value  of  the  rand.  Real  output  of  the  agricultural 
sector  was  bolstered  by  a  bumper  maize  crop  which  was  predominantly  harvested  in  the 
second  quarter,  while  simultaneously  almost  all  the  other  main  sectors  of  the  economy 
displayed solid growth too. 
Enterprise-surveyed  employment  outside  the  agricultural  sector  recorded  successive 
increases  in  each  of  the  five  quarters  to  September  2004.  Private-sector  job  opportunities 
benefited  most  from  the  economic  recovery,  but  there  was  also  a  moderate  increase  in 
public-sector  employment.  The  pick-up  in  enterprise-surveyed  employment  was,  however, 
not sustained in the last quarter of 2004 and the first quarter of 2005. Over the year to March 
2005  enterprise-surveyed  employment  rose,  on  balance,  by  111  000.  The  strongest 
increases were recorded in the community, social and personal services and trade sectors, 
while  employment 
this  
one-year period. 
Whereas  the  enterprise  survey  measures  formal  employment  in  the  main  non-agricultural 
sectors  of  the  economy,  results  from  household  surveys  measures  all  employment. 
Household  survey  data  indicate  that  total  employment  in  South  Africa  expanded  by  some 
500  000  jobs  over  the  year  to  March  2005,  but  roughly  half  of  this  increase  was  in  the 
informal, domestic service and agricultural sectors. 
finance  and  manufacturing  shrank  over 
in  gold  mining, 
   1/5 
Returning to the narrower data based on the enterprise surveys, it is estimated that labour 
productivity rose by 2,6 per cent in the year to the first quarter of 2005. 
Workers engaged in more strike action in the recent past: Man-days lost to industrial action 
increased  more  than  three-fold  from  the  first  half  of  2004  to  the  first  half  of  2005. 
Nevertheless,  nominal  remuneration  per  worker  rose  by  8,7  per  cent  in  the  year  to  March 
2005, noticeably slower than previously. Allowing for productivity changes, unit labour cost 
increased by 5,9 per cent in the year to March 2005, i.e. 1,3 percentage points lower than the 
average rate of increase in 2004. Wage settlements averaged 6 per cent in the first half of 
2005.  
These  wage  settlements  and  remuneration  increases  are  modest  compared  to  the  high 
nominal increases recorded in the 1970s and 1980s. However, those distant increases were 
eroded  by  equally  high  inflation.  After  allowing  for  fiscal  drag  they  did  little  if  anything  to 
improve the average worker's real disposable income. Currently inflation is much lower, and 
as a consequence there is far less money illusion and inflationary distortion which misdirect 
economic  decisions.  In  July  2005  CPIX-inflation  amounted  to  4,2  per  cent,  registering  its 
23rd  successive  month  within  the  inflation  target  range  of  3  to  6  per  cent.  Although  one 
cannot  deny  that  it  has  been  a  difficult  journey  to  low  inflation,  the  benefits  are  apparent: 
More  certainty  regarding  the  future  purchasing  power  of  the  money  in  our  pockets,  better 
planning,  especially  of  cash-flows  for  those  households  and  businesses  using  credit  and 
accordingly having to make interest payments. The cash-flow improvement follows because 
sustained low inflation creates the scope for nominal interest rates to move to lower levels. 
The  achievement  of  sustained  lower  inflation  made  it  possible  for  the  household  sector  to 
incur  more  debt  –  largely  for  housing  and  durable  consumption  purposes  –  without  a 
significantly  heavier  interest  burden.  Since  1999  the  household-debt-to-disposable-income 
ratio, on balance, rose from 57 per cent to more than 60 per cent, whereas the debt-service-
to-disposable-income ratio decreased from around 10 per cent to about 7 per cent. 
Revealing  as  they  are,  these  aggregate  numbers  do  not  show  that  numerous  households 
that are already over-indebted and facing uncomfortable circumstances are included in the 
totals. Nor do they show that there is a further significant number of people who just make 
ends meet but who would be in dire straits if a fairly small interest rate increase were to take 
effect. 
Nevertheless,  with  employment  and  real  disposable  income  rising  and  the  average  debt-
service ratio well contained, most households are still in a comfortable position and this is 
likely to persist, provided they continue to live within their means and allow for some cushion 
to shield them against unforeseen events. 
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  is  committed  to  ensuring  that  the  hard-won  gains  in  the 
fight against inflation are not forfeited. With international oil prices recently recording record-
high  levels,  there  is  no  shortage  of  factors  waiting  to  fuel  the  inflation  spiral.  While  the 
immediate or first-round effects of rising energy prices would have to be accepted, monetary 
policy  will  not  allow  this  to  develop  into  an  inflationary  spiral.  The  Bank  will  continue  to 
honour its mandate as enshrined in the Constitution and the South African Reserve Bank Act 
and given explicit content through the adoption by the Government of a 3-to-6-per-cent target 
range for CPIX inflation.  
Towards stronger growth and accelerated development 
These  promising  economic  conditions  are  clouded  by  the  high  rate  of  unemployment  in 
South  Africa:  26  per  cent  of  the  workforce  is  unemployed.  Recently  debate  intensified 
regarding ways to enhance the growth capacity of South Africa in order to make meaningful 
inroads into unemployment, poverty and underdevelopment. A sustained real growth rate of 
around 6 per cent per annum is often mentioned in this context. It is worthwhile to reflect on 
   2/5 
some of the key strands in this debate and to provide a central banker's perspective on some 
of these.  
At a G-20 conference on economic growth which was recently held in South Africa and co-
organised by the Bank, it was argued that there is more to sustained and vibrant growth and 
development than just "good macro". In other words, prudent and consistent monetary and 
fiscal policies, while necessary in order to achieve sustained strong growth and development, 
are not sufficient. 
What  is  needed  beyond  a  prudent  and  stable  macroeconomic  policy  arrangement  is 
unfortunately  not  available  in  standard  recipe  format,  but  depends  on  the  specific 
circumstances in each country. Allow me to discuss a handful of reforms which are likely to 
be crucial to enhancing the long-term health and vigour of the South African economy. 
The  maintenance,  upgrading  and  expansion  of  infrastructure  deserve  a  prominent  position 
among any list of reforms needed to propel growth to a higher plane. The real fixed capital 
stock of South Africa rose by just 2 per cent in 2004, and by between 1 and 1½ per cent per 
annum in the preceding four years. A continuation of such low rates of increase in the capital 
stock is clearly not supportive of a real GDP growth rate of 6 per cent per annum. Assuming 
that the capital stock would have to increase by 4½ to 5 per cent per year to support a real 
growth rate of 6 per cent per annum, it would require the ratio of fixed capital formation to 
gross domestic product to rise from the current 17 per cent to around 22 per cent in order to 
achieve such growth on a sustainable basis. 
Government  –  at  all  levels  –  and  public  corporations  have  committed  themselves  to 
ambitious  capital  programmes.  However,  implementation  almost  invariably  seems  to  take 
longer  than  initially  planned.  Institutional  capacity  rather  than  money  seems  to  be  the 
problem  in  many  instances.  Much  has  been  said  about  the  inadequate  road  and  rail 
infrastructure which hinders the efficient movement of workers between their residences and 
places of work, while also inhibiting the movement of goods between producers and markets. 
Similar concerns have been voiced regarding certain ports. 
Unfortunately  sweeping  statements  discrediting all  infrastructural  installations  are  not  at  all 
helpful.  The  challenge  lies  in  identifying  specific  current  and  future  bottlenecks  at  the 
microeconomic  level,  followed  by  the  often  thankless  processes  of  budgeting,  planning, 
implementation  and  maintenance  management.  In  each  of  these  processes  dedication, 
appropriate  skills  and  long-term  commitment  are  required  to  deliver  the  goods.  Those 
overseeing these processes should stay committed to each project, infrastructure creation, 
with lengthy gestation periods, clearly would not benefit from high turnover at management 
level. 
Several  exciting  microeconomic  reforms  involving  South  Africa's  infrastructure  are  in  the 
pipeline. The introduction of a second fixed-line telephone operator, for example, seems set 
to  increase  competition  and  reduce  communications  costs.  De-mothballing  of  power 
generating  plants  and 
the  upgrading  of  power  distribution  networks,  water-supply 
infrastructure, railway lines and rolling stock are all to be welcomed. While our main airports 
currently seem to cope well, projected further increases in passenger numbers and freight 
volumes  necessitate  further  expansion.  The  cluster  of  industries  linked  to  infrastructure  is 
evidently going to experience buoyant times in the coming years. The accompanying imports 
of  machinery  and  equipment  might,  of  course,  initially  widen  the  deficit  on  the  current 
account  of  our  balance  of  payments.  However,  foreign  finance  usually  accompanies  such 
imports, and later on the improved infrastructure is likely to boost exports as the supply side 
of our economy is streamlined. 
A  particularly  sensitive  area  is  that  of  land  reform.  Patterns  of  land  ownership  which  have 
evolved over time are not sustainable, and need to change. However, great care needs to be 
taken in this process. What South Africa cannot afford is the kind of reform where agricultural 
land which is being used productively is purchased with taxpayers' money, transferred, and 
ends up being used far less productively than before, subtracting from the country's output 
   3/5 
and destroying job opportunities. Farming is a modern business requiring specialised skills 
as  well  as  financial  capital.  Adequate  attention  has  to  be  paid  to  the  training  of  newly 
empowered farmers, advisory services, and financial support for a limited period.  
Success  in  improving  growth  and  creating  jobs  hinges  critically  on  appropriate  skills 
development. This does not require throwing money at the problem, but aligning the system 
of education and training to the requirements of a modern economy. Agriculture's share in 
total value added in the economy has dwindled from 7,7 per cent in 1975 to 3,4 per cent last 
year,  and  that  of  mining  from  11,1  per  cent  to  7,1  per  cent  over  the  same  period. 
Construction's share fell from 5,1 per cent in 1975 to 2,4 per cent in 2004 (but this should, of 
course, rise as infrastructure spending gets underway). At the other extreme, the share of the 
finance, real-estate and business services sector in the economy grew from 12,5 per cent in 
1975 to 20,1 per cent last year, and that of community, social and personal services from  
16,1 per cent to 21,0 per cent over the same period. Product lines and production processes 
within the various sub-sectors have undergone revolutionary change with the introduction of 
sophisticated  information  and  communications  technologies.  The  skills  requirements  of  a 
modern  services-oriented  economy  (the  tertiary  sector  currently  generates  65  per  cent  of 
total  value  added  in  South  Africa)  are  dramatically  different  from  the  requirements  which 
faced entrants to the labour market 30 years ago. 
In reflecting on ways to systematically improve prospects for growth, the role of the exchange 
rate merits some consideration. Firstly, it should be emphasised that the authorities have a 
target for the inflation rate and not for the exchange rate. The exchange rate is essentially 
determined by supply and demand in the foreign exchange market, reflecting the decisions of 
numerous participants – tourists, investors, importers, exporters and the like. But for various 
reasons  the  Bank  cannot  be  blind  to  the  exchange  rate,  and  has  a  clear  preference  for  a 
relatively stable and competitive level of the exchange value of the rand. 
The preference for a relatively stable exchange value of the rand originates from the painful 
adjustment  costs  which  accompany  large  movements  in  the  exchange  rate.  Adjustment  at 
the margin is a natural economic phenomenon, but large movements in the exchange rate 
can  render  entire  sectors  uneconomical  and  others  extremely  viable  within  a  very  short 
period of time. The preference for a competitive level of the exchange rate reflects the need 
for sustainability – for exporters to move into foreign markets and to stay there. 
The preference for a relatively stable and competitive exchange value of the rand is seldom 
perfectly matched by economic outcomes. The foreign exchange market in South Africa is 
highly liquid (turnover nowadays exceeds US$13 billion per day) and powerful forces beyond 
our control, such as the international prices of commodities, have a considerable bearing on 
price formation in the foreign exchange market. Practical experience in the central bank with 
large-scale  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  has  been  sobering.  Zealous 
intervention in a liquid market with numerous financially strong participants can be a costly 
and largely futile exercise. 
In  practice,  the  Bank  prefers  to  leave  the  determination  of  the  exchange  rate  to  market 
forces. The Bank disseminates data on the balance of payments, foreign exchange reserves 
and  related  matters,  thereby  helping  to  inform  market  participants'  decisions.  On  rare 
occasions  the  Bank  may  comment  on  evidence  pointing  to  possible  excesses  in  price 
formation in the foreign exchange market. The best medicine for the one-way view regarding 
the direction of the rand's exchange value which prevailed from the early 1980s up to 2001, 
however,  was  the  recovery  of  the  rand  over  the  past  four  years,  which  bit  deeply  into  the 
pockets of rand pessimists. 
The  Bank  may  also  build  up  or  reduce  its  international  reserves;  in  recent  years  the 
emphasis has been on accumulating international reserves, which naturally has had some 
price consequences but did not signify the adoption of a target level for the exchange rate. 
When abundant amounts of foreign exchange are available in the market (and the rand is 
comparatively  strong)  it  presents  the  Bank  with  a  good  opportunity  to  buy  more  foreign 
   4/5 
exchange from the market, since its holdings of gold and foreign exchange are on the low 
side. On balance the Bank has increased its gross gold and foreign exchange reserves from 
US$8 billion at the end of 2003 to just below US$19 billion at present.  
Conclusion 
Despite some progress made in recent years, high levels of unemployment necessitate more 
ambitious  steps  to  strengthen  South  Africa's  growth  potential.  The  Reserve  Bank  is 
committed to containing inflation, thereby providing a launching pad for enhanced growth and 
development.  But  this  is  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  economic  success.  Enhanced 
infrastructural development, the implementation of education and training programmes which 
deliver the skills necessary for a modern economy, and careful land reform are but a handful 
of the key ingredients necessary for boosting economic performance. And, as with monetary 
policy, all of these elements need to be nurtured carefully as it takes a while before they bear 
fruit.  They  require  total  dedication  and  sustained  attention  to  detail  if  they  are  to  be 
successful. Success is in our hands. 
 
   5/5 
