Jean-Claude  Trichet:  The  European  economy  -  current  situation,  prospects, 
challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  “Forum 
économique international des Amériques” Conférence de Montréal, Montreal, 30 May 2005.  
 Mr Prime Minister, 
Mr Mayor, 
Mr President, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  have  come  to  attend  the  debate  and  discussion  at  the  international 
economic forum of the Americas/Montreal conference, and more especially to address you today. The 
issue chosen for the forum this year, “Success at a time of turbulence”, is especially relevant in a world 
beset by constant economic, financial and technological change. So I would like today to share the 
European experience with you. Allow me first of all to discuss the recent development of economic 
activity in the euro area, the better to underscore the prospects and to describe the challenges to be 
faced  if  Europe  is  to  make  its  own  contribution  to  the  growth  of  a  world  undergoing  in-depth 
transformation and thus tending to be turbulent.  
The economy of the euro area: a stable macroeconomic situation, but economic dynamism that 
requires further stimulation 
Since its establishment over six years ago, Economic and Monetary Union has helped to provide a 
stable macroeconomic environment. Over the past few years, the annual inflation rate in the euro area 
has remained slightly higher than our own definition of price stability, that is a rise in prices of less than 
2 % and close to 2%. Yet this situation is more a reflection of temporary shocks linked in particular to 
the trend in the price of crude oil, than to any underlying inflationary trend, which remains generally 
moderate today. Inflation expectations have remained anchored at under 2%, in line with our definition 
of price stability. The fact  that the run of oil price hikes has not jeopardised the stability of inflation 
expectations is no mere coincidence. It is a mark of success, showing the high credibility level of the 
young European Central Bank, which has proven capable of convincingly providing businessmen in an 
economic  area  with  a  population  of  some  306  million,  with  a  stable  anchorage  point  for  their  price 
expectations.  Thus,  as  long  as  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  remain solidly  anchored  to  levels 
compatible with price stability, monetary policy will make a crucial contribution to economic growth by 
fostering  an  exceptionally  low  interest  level  on  the  short,  medium  and  long-term  markets,  and  by 
creating an economic environment that entails minimal distortion and that helps businessmen to make 
the best decisions. 
In the medium term, the euro area’s prospects rest on crucial factors that should not be overlooked. 
Allow  me  to  briefly  run  through  them.  On  the  external  level,  worldwide  activity  is  fated  to  remain 
healthy and it is expected to help sustain European exports. On the internal level, investment should 
continue to benefit from financial conditions that are, historically speaking, exceptionally favourable in 
the euro area. It should benefit also from an improvement in businesses’ results and their increased 
productivity due to past restructuring. Moreover, private consumption is likely to grow in keeping with 
the growth in real income that is expected to continue. 
Yet  in  the  shorter  term,  since  the  second  half  of  2004,  growth  in  the  euro  area  has  been  modest, 
below the area’s potential growth rate. It is still positive, of course, but modest. There can be no doubt 
that  the  increasing  cost  of  raw  materials  (with  crude  oil  heading  the  list)  has  led  to  increasing 
uncertainty  over  economic  prospects  and  that  it  continues  to  loom  as  a  risk  of  far  from  secondary 
importance, as indeed do imbalances at the global level. Furthermore, consumers are taking their time 
to  rediscover  the  path  of  confidence,  doubtless  on  account  of  a  still  difficult  situation  in  the  labour 
market, of difficulties and delays in the implementation of basic reforms, and of a feeling of insecurity 
due to insufficient budget consolidation. 
Sure  enough,  a  good  monetary  strategy  guaranteeing  the  solid  anchoring  of  price  stability  is  a 
necessary precondition for economic growth. It is not a condition that is sufficient in itself, however. A 
budget strategy guaranteeing healthy public finances and structural reforms making it possible to raise 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 1
the  level  of  potential  economic  growth  are  also  crucial.  An  examination  of  the  trend  in  labour 
productivity in Europe and in the United States is particularly enlightening in this connection.  
Over the past few years, despite tangible progress in terms of overall employment growth and activity 
rates, a slowdown in the rise in hourly productivity in the euro area has been the main cause of the 
gap  in  economic  growth  between  the  euro  area  and  the  other  major  economy  in  the  industrially 
advanced world, namely the United States. This, especially because over the same period of time the 
United States has enjoyed a strong boost to its hourly productivity, thanks in particular to its efficient 
use of new information and communication technology. Thus while growth in hourly productivity in the 
1980s stood at 2.4% on average in the euro area and at 1.3% in the United States, that trend inverted 
between 1996 and 2004, with an annual average in the euro area and in the United States of 1.3% 
and of 2.5% respectively. 
The lack of sufficient structural reform in Europe is, in my view, the main cause of the gap in economic 
growth between Europe and the United States that we have seen over the past few years. If we are to 
impart  a  fresh  thrust  to  Europe’s  growth  potential  and  to  help  boost  consumer  and  business 
confidence, we need to work on the European economy’s most crucial underlying weaknesses and to 
implement basic reforms. Allowing the labour market to work better with a view to boosting growth in 
employment and productivity, completing the establishment of a large single market, and promoting 
investment  and  innovation  will  be  the  best  way  of  allowing  the  European  economy  to  adapt  to 
international competition, to foster the development of businesses, and to accelerate economic growth 
and the creation of lasting employment.  
Structural reforms 
I  must  say  that  –  although  uneven  across  European  countries  –  significant  progress  in  the 
implementation  of  structural  reforms  has  been  made,  and  such  an  effort  should  be  recognised. 
However,  there  is  still  a  long  way  to  go.  In  Lisbon  in  2000,  Heads  of  State  and  governments  have 
committed  to  make  the  European  Union  “the  most  competitive  and  dynamic  knowledge-based 
economy in the world, capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and greater 
social  cohesion”.  The  decision  on  the  specific  structural  reform  measures,  their  design  and  actual 
implementation should be left to the Member States. While getting closer to one another, EU countries 
still differ in many respects: in their structure, economic development and institutional setting. Leaving 
it  up  to  the  national  actors  to  decide  on  their  reforms  is  just  the  natural  consequence  of  such 
differences. However, these reforms should take the EU consensus on policy priorities and objectives 
as a clear and common reference point. Again, let me stress that implementing structural reforms is 
not an easy task; it needs a lot of courage and determination on the part of governments, parliaments 
and social partners. However, these reforms are most definitely needed, along with stability-oriented 
monetary and fiscal policy, as an essential ingredient to ensure higher prosperity and job creation in 
Europe. Let me now focus on two areas where I think further progress is most urgently needed: labour 
and product markets. 
In product markets, there are still considerable productivity gains to be reaped in Europe by removing 
the  remaining  barriers  to  competition  that  still  remain  at  national  and  EU  level.  The  creation  of  a 
common market based on the free movement of goods, services, people and capital is a cornerstone 
of the European Union since the Treaty of Rome. The completion of the single market, in particular in 
the sector of financial services, is of the essence.  
An  essential  factor  of  technological  progress  and  diffusion  is  human  capital.  Indeed,  thanks  to 
technological advancements, economic activity becomes increasingly knowledge-based and jobs shift 
from  low  to  high-skilled  workers.  However,  investment  in  human  capital  development  in  Europe 
remains insufficient, and a strong focus should be put on improving education and training systems. 
Europe  also  suffers  from  insufficient  quantitative  and  qualitative  efforts  as  regards  investment  in 
research and development (R&D). As an example at present only two EU countries exceed the target 
for R&D spending of 3% of GDP. All the other EU countries lag behind. More efforts in this field are 
clearly needed. 
Further  reforms  in  labour  markets  are  also  crucial  in  order  to  improve  the  flexibility  of  the  labour 
market.  It  is  essential  to  provide  incentives  for  more  people  to  enter  the  labour  market.  Increasing 
labour participation and utilisation is a core challenge for policy, particularly for females, the young and 
older workers. Some countries have started to implement reforms in order to reduce the disincentives 
to work. Unemployment insurance schemes have been amended and early retirement incentives have 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2005
been  reduced.  Take  for  instance  Denmark  and  Sweden,  where  various  reforms  to  improve  work 
incentives and avoid labour supply constraints have been implemented. In Denmark, measures aimed 
at reducing taxes on labour income. In Sweden, reforms mainly targeted older workers, immigrants 
and  younger  workers.  Well,  both  Denmark  and  Sweden  have  already  exceeded  all  the  EU 
employment targets, including those for women and for older workers. These are two examples where 
the  reform  progress  in  this  area  has  produced  clear  benefits.  However,  although  unemployment 
insurance systems have been streamlined, in a number of cases, together with high marginal tax rates 
and social security contributions, they continue to provide a disincentive to take up work.  
EU enlargement 
Meeting  these  challenges  has  become  even  more  important  with  the  historic  enlargement  of  the 
European Union in May last year from 15 to 25 Member States. Let me first stress that I am convinced 
that  the  enlargement  entails  opportunities  and  benefits  for  the  EU.  The  economic  benefits  of 
enlargement are sometimes neglected in discussions, often overshadowed by fears, such as the risk 
of mass migration after opening up borders with the new Member States, involving increased pressure 
on  labour  markets  and  welfare  systems  of  the  other  Member  States.  I  do  believe  that  the  EU 
enlargement  will  contribute  positively  to  economic  growth  and  welfare  in  the  EU  as  a  whole.  It  will 
provide new opportunities to trade and investment flows. The enlargement of the Internal Market will 
strengthen the degree of competition as the accession of the new Member States has increased the 
number of suppliers within the Internal Market. In addition, enlargement has enhanced the scope for 
economies of scale, as the extension of the Internal Market increased the size of the market available 
to suppliers. This should translate in lower prices and increased productivity, thereby contributing to a 
higher  potential  growth.  However,  these  benefits  will  not  be  realised  automatically.  Again,  in  this 
respect too, there are substantial benefits associated with the implementation of structural reforms. In 
particular, a forceful and prompt completion of the enlarged Internal Market in both the old and the 
new Member States is essential to fully exploit the benefits of the present enlargement.  
Let me say a few words on the ERM II membership which has already been decided for six currencies 
out of the ten currencies of the new Member States. Having proceeded with the necessary structural 
adjustments,  participation  in  ERM  II  can  be  an  important  means  of  anchoring  exchange  rate  and 
inflation  expectations,  and  of  promoting  discipline.  It  can  help  orient  macroeconomic  policies  to 
stability, while at the same time allowing for a degree of flexibility, if needed, through the wide standard 
fluctuation band and the possibility of adjusting the central parity. In any case, there is not a uniform 
path to the adoption of the euro and each country will be judged on its own merits before adopting the 
euro. And, as required by the Treaty, the sustainable convergence of the economies concerned will be 
carefully checked both in the interest of the country concerned and in the interest of the euro area as a 
whole. 
Fiscal discipline 
Finally, I would like to discuss another major challenge that Europe is going to have to face over the 
next  50  years:  an  ageing  population.  A  few  figures  may  help  to  illustrate  the  magnitude  of  this 
challenge: According to the forecasts of Eurostat, the European statistics institute, the population of 
working age (people aged between 15 and 64) is going to drop from 67.2% of the overall population in 
2004 to 56.7% in 2050. At the same time, the proportion of retired people (in other words, people aged 
65  or  over)  is  going  to  rise  from  16.4%  of  the  overall  population  in  2004  to  29.9%  in  2050.  These 
figures are self-explanatory. We are on the eve of an unprecedented demographic upheaval which is 
going to put a major strain on public finances. Ageing is going to translate into significant additional 
budget costs, generally estimated for the next few decades (and only for pensions) at between 3 and 
5%  of  GDP  in  the  majority  of  European  countries.  These  forecasts  show  quite  clearly  that 
demographic change without appropriate reform is likely to weigh down very heavily on public finance. 
I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  most  important  effects  of  these  developments  on  the 
sustainability of public finance and growth. 
The pressure that an ageing population will have on public spending could threaten the sustainability 
of public finance. Without a change in policy, public spending due to ageing will lead to a growth in 
deficits  and  to  an  inevitable  increase  in  the  public  debt.  These  developments  will  also  reflect  on 
businessmen's  forecasts.  A  drop  in  confidence  in  Government  signatures  due  to  forecasts  of  an 
BIS Review 41/2005 
 3
increased  risk  of  default  on  the  public  debt  could  multiply  “risk  premia”  and  foster  a  financial 
environment less conducive to investment and growth. 
With an ageing population, spending on share-out pension systems is going to increase at the same 
time as the social security contribution base decreases. In the light of such a situation, adjustments in 
the parameters of these systems, such as for instance a rise in the real retirement age, seem to be 
essential. And more fundamental changes to the structure of pension funding seem to be essential 
too. Growing pressure on the funding of public health systems also calls for courageous reforms. 
Reform  of  social  safety  nets  is  one  of  the  crucial  factors,  among  many  others,  that  will  allow  us  to 
control the public debt, to guarantee the sustainability of public finance, and to boost growth potential. 
The  immediate  adoption  of  a  strategy  of  ambitious  reforms  along  with  a  firm  and  credible  budget 
consolidation policy would help to boost Europe’s growth potential without delay. In the case of the 
euro  area  economies,  boosting  businessmen’s  confidence  in  budget  sustainability  and  in  long-term 
economic  stability  as  well  as  in  the  maintenance  of  a  suitable  welfare  policy  and  of  reasonable 
compulsory contribution rates would more than make up for the negative effects that the reforms and 
budget consolidation might have on demand in the short term. The larger the imbalances forecast, the 
more  these  “Ricardian”,  non  “Keynesian”,  effects  are  likely  to  be  seen.  And  an  ageing  population 
means major budgetary imbalances in Europe’s future, naturally if the countries concerned fail to take 
appropriate action. 
In  the  face  of  a  challenge  of  this  nature,  it  is  crucial  to  implement  the  new  version  of  the  Pact  for 
Stability and Growth in a stringent manner. The Pact is essential from the standpoint of the Economic 
and  Monetary  Union’s  cohesion,  and  in  that  connection  it  is  one  of  the  keystones  of  confidence  in 
Europe’s economic stability, thus one of the keystones of investment and growth. So it is necessary to 
work with determination on budget consolidation and on bringing down the public debt in order to take 
on the challenge of an ageing population and to safeguard the credibility of the European budgetary 
framework. 
Mr President, Ladies and Gentlemen, Europe is facing today five major challenges. Three of them are 
major  challenges  that  equally  apply  to  all  the  long  industrialised  countries.  The  last  two  others  are 
specific to Europe and do not exist anywhere else in the world. 
The diagnosis is now clear as regards the first three challenges – the challenge of new technologies, 
the challenge of globalisation, the challenge of population ageing – which does not mean either that 
they are easy to solve… For the first challenge, facilitate the deepening and broadening in the whole 
economy of science and technology, in particular - but not only - of information technologies. For the 
second,  organise  the  new  economic  framework  stemming  from  the  generalisation  of  the  market 
economy and the very fast economic development of Asian emerging countries. For the third, draw the 
consequences of population ageing in order to ensure the sustainability of public finances. The US, 
Canada and other industrialised countries must tackle the same issues. 
But in addition – and this is a unique situation in the world, a privilege and at the same time a great 
historic responsibility – Europe must face two other challenges. 
On one hand, Europe has engaged into a long-term process aimed at ensuring its unity on the basis of 
a voluntary Union between States. These States share in common some elements of their sovereignty 
and have already decided to create a single market with a single currency. This is a very ambitious 
historic transformation. 
On the other hand, Europe must a the same time meet the challenge of a rapid geographic expansion 
of  an  immense  historical  magnitude.  We  were  still  12  countries  when  the  Maastricht  Treaty  was 
negotiated.  We  are  now  25,  and  virtually  already  27.  In  Europe,  are  therefore  intertwined  a  unique 
“vertical”  economic  and  political  transformation  and  a  geographic  “horizontal”  expansion  of  an 
immense significance. 
Five major challenges to face, two more that the other industrialised countries. All these challenges 
are  exciting,  all  stem  from  important  successes  –  scientific  progress,  the  economic  take-off  of  big 
developing countries, progress in medicine, the deepening of the pacific unity of Europe, the fall of the 
iron curtain – but these challenges are also demanding and difficult. After the French referendum and 
before the Dutch referendum, we are facing today a difficult moment for Europe and for our 458 million 
European fellow citizens. It is not the first time, and probably not the last time. In his Memoirs Jean 
MONNET, whose ideas and action are at the roots of the European endeavour writes: “Those who do 
not want to start an endeavour because they are not fully sure that things will go as they have planned 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2005
in advance, are condemning themselves to be immobile.” I am sure that Europeans will together find 
the way allowing them to overcome present difficulties as they did it in the past. 
The European Central Bank has a clear mandate given by the Maastricht Treaty. It preserves today 
and will preserve tomorrow, as it did in the past, price stability and confidence in the currency, which 
are necessary conditions to sustainable growth and job creations. Confidence is a key word in present 
circumstances. Europeans can rely on the ECB and on the Eurosystem as a whole to preserve and 
consolidate this confidence. 
I thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 41/2005 
 5
