Jean-Claude Trichet: Ensuring price stability and confidence - five ideas 
English  translation  of  a  contribution  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, published in Le Monde, in the edition dated 16 June 2005. 
 Europe  is  experiencing  a  significant  and  demanding  episode  in  our  profoundly  original  historic 
undertaking, namely a  voluntary Union  of  peoples  and  nations, which began  55  years  ago  with  the 
launch of the Schuman Plan. More than half a century of economic and democratic construction, with 
its highs and lows, its latent periods and its periods of acceleration. This is not the first time that a new 
idea or project has been put aside for some time or rejected. The rejection by France of the European 
Defence  Community  in  August  1954  was  initially  regarded  as  signalling  the  end  of  European 
construction.  However,  Europe  then  set  itself  new  objectives,  objectives  which  have  proved  to  be 
historically successful. Did Jean Monnet not write in his memoirs that “those who never want to do 
anything  because  they  have  no  guarantee  that  things  will  happen  as  planned  are  condemning 
themselves to immobility”?  
The historical evolution of Europe progresses at its own pace, which can be assessed only in the long 
term.  I  have  confidence  in  the  ability  of  Europe  to  overcome  its  present  difficulties  and  I  share  the 
sentiment  of  confidence  and  resolve  expressed  in  the  joint  statement  issued  by  Josep  Borrell 
Fontelles,  Jean-Claude  Juncker  and  José  Manuel  Barroso,  the  Presidents  of  the  European 
Parliament, the European Council and the European Commission respectively. 
The  European  Central  Bank  is,  in  its  domain,  a  totally  executive  body.  Together  with  the  national 
central  banks  of  the  euro  area,  i.e.  the  other  members  of  the  Eurosystem,  it  has  been  tasked  with 
ensuring  price  stability  for  our  307 million  fellow  euro  area  citizens.  I  feel  it  is  important  today  to 
highlight five ideas. 
First,  there  is  the  issue  of  responsibility.  An  independent  monetary  institution  is  ultimately 
responsible  to  public  opinion.  It  implies  that  the  bank  regularly  answers  questions  put  to  it  by  the 
European Parliament. Indeed, at an average of six times per year, I am invited to appear before the 
European  Parliament,  more  often  than  my  American  counterpart  appears  before  the  US  Congress. 
And the ECB Vice-President and I are, within the G7, unique among central bank representatives in 
holding  a  press  conference  immediately  after  every  monetary  policy  decision  by  the  Governing 
Council,  11 times  per  year,  tirelessly  explaining  the  Eurosystem’s  analysis  of  the  situation  and  the 
reasons why the Governing Council has taken the decision it has.  
The second idea is the importance of being faithful to our mandate – price stability – in the eyes of the 
citizens  of  the  euro  area.  I  am  not  just  thinking  of  the  Germans,  who  coined  the  term  “Teuro”  to 
express  concern  about  the  “expensive  euro”,  or  the  Italians,  who  consider  that  price  rises  remain 
excessive.  I  am  thinking  about  all  consumers,  the  307 million  in  the  euro  area,  and  particularly  the 
least fortunate, who are in all European opinion polls sending us a clear message, asking us to be 
vigilant.  That  is  the  reason  why  we  say  to  everyone:  “If  you  are  hesitant  in  your  decisions  as  a 
consumer because you fear the future erosion of your purchasing power, hesitate no longer, as you 
can count on us to guarantee the purchasing power of your money.” 
The  third  idea  is  that  our  faithfulness  to  our  mandate  also  allows  us  to  offer  the  most  favourable 
financial environment possible for growth and job creation. As all savers and investors in Europe and 
throughout the world are convinced of our credibility, they are incorporating in their expectations future 
inflation in line with our definition of price stability, i.e. “below and close to 2%”. This remarkable result 
is due entirely to the very high level of confidence in the Eurosystem. This result explains in particular 
why the euro is today recording the lowest rates ever observed and the growth rate of outstanding 
loans to the private sector is (at 7.4%) twice that of nominal GDP. As I write, ten-year rates on the best 
ratings have settled at 3.1%. Who would have dared envisage that before the creation of the euro? 
This is why we are saying to businesses: “Investment is your decision, a decision based on a number 
of criteria. One of those criteria is the level of interest rates. Is this not the moment to invest?” 
The fourth idea is that, contrary to a wrongly-held but widespread belief, the euro area has the same 
characteristics  as  the  United  States  in  terms  of  interregional  differences  relating  to  growth  and 
inflation. In the United States, as in Europe, there are considerable differences from State to State and 
from region to region, and the growth and inflation differentials are of the same magnitude in the two 
economies. On both sides of the Atlantic the central bank looks at the relevant area’s economy as a 
whole, for all States or member countries together. I would also like to mention that for each European 
economy,  belonging  to  the  euro  area  is  a  "win-win"  situation:  not  only  in  terms  of  achieving  the 
concept  of  the  internal  market  and  enjoying  the  lowest  interest  rates  because  all  risk  premia  by 
comparison with the best-performing currencies are eliminated, which is of particular benefit for those 
countries which had high market interest rates; but also because all risks associated with exchange 
rates  are  eliminated  within  one  vast  integrated  economy,  which  is  good  for  all  countries,  including 
those whose market rates were already low. 
Turning  to  the  fifth  idea,  on  the  question  of  whether  we  can  contribute  further  to  growth  and  job 
creation while fulfilling the requirements of our mandate, some say: “You should be less demanding in 
your definition of price stability. 2% is too low. Make it 3%. You could then reduce your intervention 
rates!”  But  such  advice  would  backfire:  by  opting  for  3%  we  would  not  only  lose  the  confidence  of 
households but also push all rates up, not down, with those rates incorporating the increase of 1% in 
expectations  of  future  inflation.  And  that  would  be  totally  counterproductive…  Others  make  a  more 
admissible remark and say: “Your definition of price stability is in line with a good anchoring of inflation 
expectations. This is good for growth. But are you not doing too much? Perhaps you could achieve the 
same  result  with  lower  intervention  rates!”  Yet  this  is  not  what  the  information  we  currently  have 
available suggests: if we had been too cautious not only would our fellow citizens share that view (and 
then  they  would  find  the  price  rises  reasonable)  but  also  this  would  have  had  an  impact  on  the 
observed price rises (which would then be significantly lower than our definition of price stability) and 
above all on inflation expectations, which would then be significantly less than 2%. This is not the case 
at  present.  Regarding  inflation  expectations  in  particular,  all  of  the  public  and  private  surveys  and 
market indicators converge to 1.9% or 2%. We cannot be arithmetically closer to 2%! These objective 
surveys show that we are doing what it necessary to ensure stability and credibility, no less…no more. 
And  that  is  why  the  Governing  Council  considers  our  interest  rates  to  be  appropriate.  We  are  not 
biased – I have said that I was not preparing the markets for a rate cut. Nor am I preparing them for a 
rise in interest rates. We remain vigilant, realistic and pragmatic.  
 A good monetary policy is necessary but not sufficient alone – it cannot achieve everything. European 
citizens know that the Eurosystem is doing and will do all it can, thanks to and by being faithful to its 
mandate.  A  sound  budgetary  policy  which  complies  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  also 
essential. Structural reforms also have a decisive role to play in strengthening competitiveness, raising 
the potential growth rate and stimulating job creation.  
Behind all this is a key word in today's Europe: confidence. Confidence on the part of households and 
firms, which must be nurtured and strengthened. We are fortunate to have a European Central Bank 
which inspires such a level of confidence among Europeans and the rest of the world such that our 
market rates are at exceptionally favourable levels. Let us maintain this precious confidence which has 
been entrusted to Europe. 
