M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Economic and financial crimes - challenges to 
sustainable development 
Remarks by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Eleventh United 
Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, Bangkok, 19 April 2005. 
 Mr. Chairman 
Thank  you  for  allowing  me  an  opportunity  to  share  with  you  some  thoughts  on  the  issue  of 
"Economic and Financial Crimes: Challenges to Sustainable Development". 
From the topic of this Plenary Session, I assumed the organizer would probably want an answer as to 
whether  economic  and  financial  crimes  are  obstacles  to  sustainable  development.  The  answer  is  a 
definite YES. The ultimate objective of managing the development of an economy is the well being of 
the  people.  There  is  little  need  to  elaborate  on  how  activities  such  as  Drug  trafficking, 
Exploitation  of  natural  resources,  Exploitation  of  child  labour,  Corruption,  Misappropriation  of  funds 
from  banks,  Cheque  or  credit  card  fraud,  Stock  price  manipulation,  and  Tax  evasion  affect  the 
economic  well  being  of  the  people.  The  message  I  would  like  to  highlight  today  is  rather  that  the 
consequences of these undesirable activities go well beyond the financial loss and the economic well 
being of society and the country. 
In my opinion, what is more important than economic well-being is the feeling of living in a fair and just 
society. If drug lords continue to live well on their ill-gotten wealth, corrupt politicians continue to exert 
influence in the political arena, fraudulent bank executives continue to go unpunished with no loss of 
status, and stock price manipulators continue to get wealthier at the expense of other shareholders, 
people would ultimately feel that the society in which they live is unfair and unjust. This places a heavy 
toll on people's emotional resource and negatively affects their well-being. 
Thus, when economic or financial crimes are committed, it is imperative that prompt actions be 
taken  against  the  perpetrators.  Otherwise,  people  in  the  society  would  harbour  negative  feelings 
towards  the  government  and  the  system.  If  left  unchecked,  their  feelings  of  resentment  and 
unfairness would accumulate and get bottled up. People would feel alienated, hating their own society 
and resenting the government. 
The feeling that one lives in a fair and just society is as important as, or even more important than the 
economic  well-being.  If  the  public  feel  void  of  this  social  well-being,  they  will  feel  thoroughly 
disheartened, unwilling to be good law-abiding citizens, unwilling to invest, unwilling to contribute to 
the society they live in. 
So, the question is how do we prevent this feeling from deepening such that it erodes the confidence 
and  trust  in  the  democracy  and  the  government.  What  differentiates  a  "normal  crime"  from  an 
"economic crime" is that the harmful consequences of a normal crime, which directly affects people's 
lives and properties, can be easily felt and observed. This creates fear and the obvious need 
to  fight  and  prevent  them.  But  common  crimes  do  not  involve  huge  monetary  benefits.  They  are 
therefore less likely to be compromised in the law enforcement process. 
On the other hand, economic crimes generally do not have direct immediate impact on the publics' 
lives  and  properties  because  of  their  non-violent  nature.  Hence,  such  crimes  do  not  receive  public 
attention  and  could  easily  be  excused  as  non-priority  cases.  Furthermore,  the  enormous  financial 
benefits  gained  from  economic  crimes  usually  made  it  possible  for  the  perpetrators  to  exploit  their 
financial  powers  to  intervene  in  the  law  enforcement  process  thus  keeping  this  matter  away  from 
public scrutiny. 
People who are behind economic or financial crimes are usually quite smart and sophisticated. They 
tend to make use of their financial resources to build extensive connections in various organizations 
involved  in  the  law  enforcement  process  as  well  as  the  political  system.  Thus,  quite  different  from 
fighting  common  crimes,  the  authorities  combating  economic  crimes  also  have  to  fight  the 
interferences  from  influential  powers,  which  often  times  are  far  more  difficult  than  the  investigation 
itself. 
It is clear that in order to effectively fight against economic and financial crimes in any society, a strong 
political will and full commitment of the government is needed. The government must also recognize 
BIS Review 29/2005 
 1
that economic and financial crimes  are  vicious  and  destructive  enemies  of  the  country,  which 
need to be unreservedly eradicated and prevented in every way possible. 
Besides the obvious economic crimes such as drug trafficking and corruption, governments also need 
to fight against economic and financial crimes in every other shape and form. Any type of such crimes 
can generate feelings of resentment about an unfair society, not just the drug trafficking cases. Stock 
price manipulation, insider trading, or tax evasion, which even though do not directly harm people's 
lives,  can  still  make  people  feel  slighted.  This  is  especially  so  if  these  white-collar  perpetrators  are 
quite influential or are close friends with politicians or the administrations. 
In  all  these  cases,  the  role  model  set  by  the  government  is  the  most  important  element  in  winning 
people's confidence that the government is truly and sincerely committed to fighting against economic 
and financial crimes. If the perpetrators are members of the government, swift and decisive actions 
taken against them will make society confident in the government's policy  on  this  issue  and  thus 
encourage law enforcement officers to fearlessly do the right things. 
What I have been talking about so far concerns economic crimes within a country. Things get more 
complicated  and  much  more  difficult  to  combat  when  it  comes  to  cross-border  economic 
crimes.  These  require  close  cooperation  of  law  enforcement  authorities  in  every  country.  Today's 
United  Nations  Congress  on  Crime  Prevention  and  Criminal  Justice  is  a  good  example  of  the 
collaboration effort at the international level. 
To combat transnational crime, the willingness to collaborate is strong when authorities hold the same 
view on such crimes. These include crimes such as trafficking in drugs, women and children, as well 
as  trading  of  illegal  weapons.  But  there  are  more  subtle  forms  of  economic  crime  where 
authorities find it difficult to agree on the risks. In such cases, cooperation in combating such crimes 
would be more difficult. Examples of such cases are when bigger nations exploit the natural resources 
of smaller nations, which have been a practice for over 100 years since the days of colonization. 
Modern fortes of such crimes can be seen in cases where influential businessmen from large countries 
move  into  smaller  countries  under  the  pretext  of  technological  advancement  to  exploit  the  latter's 
natural resources, which often are claimed for the mutual benefits of both parties. But it is clear that 
the allocation of such benefits is often not balanced. There is also a case of exploitation of consumers 
in  smaller  nations  when  products  which  are  hazardous  to  health  in  bigger  nations,  have  been 
relocated for production and sale in less developed nations. 
An example of this is tobaccos and cigarettes, which come under  stringent  restrictions  on  sales 
and advertisement in bigger nations but have been sold in other nations with highly persuasive but 
subtle  advertisement  campaigns  aimed  at  teenagers  and  women.  There  are  also  cases  of  certain 
medicines which  have  been  banned  in  more  developed  markets  and  yet  can still be found on 
the shelves of other less developed markets. 
There is no way for the authorities of two nations to agree that such dubious practices constitute 
economic crimes. But it is clear that they are exploitation of smaller countries by bigger nations with 
more economic clout and technological advancement. These practices still continue to the detriment of 
the public in smaller nations. Such resentment comes not from the physical harm or destruction of 
personal  properties,  but  from  the  feeling  that  they  are  living  in  an  unjust  world,  where  the  rules 
favour big nations at the cost of smaller nations. 
I do not have any solution to this problem, and I do not foresee any elected leader, whose rise to office 
have been supported by influential business sectors, to make a move on this issue. I only hope that an 
internationally  neutral  body  such  as  the  United  Nations  which  is  the  hope  and  voice  of  all 
nations, big and small, would look at the issue of economic exploitation of bigger nation on smaller 
nations and set appropriate rules of the game to protect the interests of smaller nations. This would 
help people feel that they are living in a just and fair world. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2005
