Kishori Udeshi: Financial system stability and Basel II - way forward 
Address by Ms Kishori Udeshi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 17th 
Annual  Convention  of  the  Association  of  Professional  Bankers,  Colombo,  Sri  Lanka,  
26 August 2005. 
 The  initiative  of  the  Association  of  Professional  Bankers  –  Sri  Lanka  in  organising  this 
conference  on  Financial  System  Stability  and  Basel  II  –  Way  Forward  is  indeed 
commendable. Basel II is an important milestone in banking regulation and supervision and 
ought to be viewed as a necessary process for promoting the safety and soundness of the 
banking sector and thereby strengthening financial stability.  
What is financial stability? 
In  a  situation  of  financial  stability,  financial  institutions  and  markets  are  able  to  efficiently 
mobilise savings, provide liquidity and allocate investment.  The growing role of the financial 
sector  in  the  right  allocation  of  resources  at  appropriate  prices  could significantly  enhance 
the  efficiency  with  which  our  economies  function.  If  financial  markets  work  well,  they  will 
direct resources to their most productive uses. Risks will be more accurately priced and will 
be borne by those who have appetite for absorbing risks. Real economic activity with higher 
investments, in both quantity as well as quality, would result in growth with macroeconomic 
stability and fewer financial uncertainties.  The objectives of financial and macro-economic 
stability  are,  thus,  mutually  reinforcing.    As  Governor  Reddy  has  put  it,  ‘financial  stability 
needs to be particularly ensured when the financial system is undergoing structural changes’. 
Financial stability does not mean total absence of failure of individual financial institutions, 
and  fluctuation  of  prices  in  markets  for  financial  assets.  Such  events  become  a  cause  for 
concern only if they lead to an impairment of the basic intermediation function or a severe 
misallocation of capital.  
Before talking about the Indian financial system I must commend the efforts made by the Sri 
Lankan authorities towards strengthening the financial sector.  Its resilience is borne out by 
the fact that the Tsunami devastation at the end of 2004 did not affect the stability of the Sri 
Lankan financial sector. 
Indian financial system 
In  recent  years,  there  has  been  a  considerable  widening  and  deepening  of  the  Indian 
financial system, coupled with the increasing globalisation of financial services. India is fast 
approaching an era of financial conglomerisation and ‘bundling’ in the provision of financial 
services. These developments are opportunities for the market participants but nevertheless 
pose serious challenges to regulation and supervision of the banking system.  
In  India,  the  pursuit  of  financial  and  macroeconomic  stability  has  emerged  as  the  central 
plank of financial sector reforms.  Stability of the financial system has a critical influence on 
price  stability  and  sustained  growth,  which  constitute  the  principal  objectives  of  policy.    A 
stable financial system facilitates efficient transmission of monetary policy initiatives and the 
smooth operation of payment systems.  From the perspective of regulation and supervision, 
safeguarding  depositors’  interest,  and  ensuring  strong  risk  management  within  payment, 
clearing and settlement systems, is the mandate of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI).  The 
RBI has put in place Prudential Supervisory Reporting System, covering all vital aspects and 
a  wide  range  of  indicators,  which  serves  as  an  early  warning  signal  as  well.    Macro-
Prudential  Indicators  (MPIs)  are  being  compiled  since  March  2000,  collating  data  from 
   1/7 
various reports that are received in the regulatory and supervisory wings of the Bank.  The 
review  of  MPIs  covers  the  areas  of  capital  adequacy,  asset  quality,  risk  management, 
management soundness, earnings and profitability liquidity, interest rate, maturity structure of 
assets  and  liabilities,  and  various  indicators  pertaining  to  major  segments  of  financial 
markets  such  as  debt,  forex,  capital  market  segments,  besides  macroeconomic  indicators 
such as growth, inflation, interest rate and exchange rate.  The MPI review is accompanied 
by a review of developments in the global environment.  As part of the efforts to disseminate 
these Financial Soundness Indicators (FSIs), the Reserve Bank has started publishing the 
core set of indicators in its various publications. 
Financial  sector  reforms  adopted  in  the  1990s  have  enhanced  the  strength  of  banks  and 
financial institutions in India.  A striking feature of these institutions has been their improved 
resilience to the domestic and the external environment.  The reform process has changed 
the relationship between the RBI and commercial banks from one of micro regulation to that 
of  macro  management.    Aided  by  the  robust  macroeconomic  environment,  banks’  bottom 
lines  have  improved  significantly  over  the  last  two  years.    The  aggregate  capital  ratios  of 
scheduled commercial banks at 12.83 per cent as at end March 2005 have been well above 
the stipulated level of 9 per cent.  
The Reserve Bank, along with the Government, has initiated several institutional measures 
to contain the levels of NPAs.  Notable among these include establishment of Debt Recovery 
Tribunals,  Lok  Adalats  (people’s  courts),  Asset  Reconstruction  Companies  (ARCs)  and 
Corporate  Debt  Restructuring  (CDR)  mechanism.    Settlement  Advisory  Committees  have 
been  formed  at  regional  and  head  office  level  of  commercial  banks.    Enactment  of  the 
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest 
(SARFAESI)  Act,  2002  has  helped  in  improving  the  recovery  climate  in  the  country.    The 
Government amended the relevant provisions of the Act to address the concerns expressed 
by  the  Supreme  Court  regarding  a  fair  deal  to  borrowers  through  an  ordinance  dated 
November 11, 2004. The declining trend in gross and net NPLs for scheduled commercial 
banks has continued despite the adoption of 90-day delinquency norm and unprecedented 
surge in growth of advances.  
Legislation has since been enacted to facilitate the compilation and dissemination of credit 
information  including  data  on  defaults  to  the  financial  system  by  the  Credit  Information 
Bureau  of  India  Ltd.  (CIBIL).  The  legal  provisions  and  practice  in  bankruptcy  of  the  real 
sector are however still inadequate and need further reform.     
The Reserve Bank is also making efforts to formulate policies to deal with risks arising on 
account of operations of large and complex financial institutions as these pose a systemic 
risk.    As  a  first  step  in  this  direction,  an  inter-agency  Working  Group  on  Financial 
Conglomerates  (FC)  comprising  three  supervisory  bodies,  viz.,  the  Reserve  Bank,  the 
Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  and  Insurance  Regulatory  and  Development 
Authority, in June 2004, identified 23 FCs and a pilot process for obtaining information from 
these conglomerates has been initiated.     
The year 2004-05 has witnessed a surge in credit off-take leading to a sizeable decline in the 
liquid assets of the bank. Consistent with the shift to functioning in a competitive economy 
and  to  the  adoption  of  prudential  best  practices,  the  major  challenges  facing  the  banking 
sector are the deployment of funds in quality assets and the management of revenues and 
costs. 
Basel II  
Unlike Basel I, which is simple, Basel II is complex. Therefore, the BCBS does not expect 
Basel II to be adopted widely or quickly. They believe that countries should adopt the options 
and  approaches  that  are  most  appropriate  for  the  state  of  their  markets,  their  banking 
   2/7 
systems,  and  their  supervisory  structures.  Supervisors  can  adopt  the  framework  on  an 
evolutionary basis and use elements of national discretion to adapt it to their needs.  
Why move to Basel II 
Under Basel II the capital requirements are more risk sensitive as these are directly related 
to  the  credit  rating  of  each  counter-party  instead  of  counter-party  category  as  it  is  under 
Basel I. Further, it requires banks to hold capital not only for credit and market risk but also 
for  operational  risk  (OR)  and  where  warranted  for  interest  rate  risks,  credit  concentration 
risks, liquidity risks etc. This makes Basel II more comprehensive than Basel I. Where banks 
were  required  to  hold  a  uniform  level  of  8  per  cent  as  minimum  capital  under  Basel  I, 
supervisors  have  the  discretion  to  require  banks  to  hold  higher  levels  of  minimum  capital 
under  Basel  II.  Basel  II  has  other  advantages  such  as  providing  a  range  of  options  for 
counter-party  capital  requirements  and  in  the  process  reducing  the  gap  between  required 
capital and regulatory capital. Basel II recognises a wider range of collaterals and provides 
incentives for improved risk management practices. 
An interesting point to note here is that Basel II recognises the element of diversification of 
risk in the SME sector and has assigned a lower risk weight for retail SME exposure under 
standardised approach. The non-retail SME exposure would also attract a lower risk weight 
where they have better external ratings under the standardised approach. Shifting to Basel II, 
therefore,  could  be  advantageous  for  economies  whose  banks  have  significant  SME 
exposure.   
Indian Approach to Basel II 
With the commencement of the banking sector reforms in the early 1990s, the RBI has been 
consistently  upgrading  the  Indian  banking  sector  by  adopting  international  best  practices.  
The approach to reforms is one of having clarity about the destination as also deciding on the 
sequence and pace of reforms to suit Indian conditions. This has helped us in moving ahead 
with  the  reforms  without  disruption.    With  the  successful  implementation  of  banking  sector 
reforms  over  the  past  decade,  the  Indian  banking  system  has  shown  substantial 
improvement  on  various  parameters.    It  has  become  robust  and  displayed  significant 
resilience to shocks.  There is ample evidence of the capacity of the Indian banking system 
to migrate smoothly to Basel II norms. 
The  policy  approach  to  Basel  II  in  India  is  such  that  external  perception  about  India 
conforming to best international standards is positive and is in our favour.  Commercial banks 
in  India  will  start  implementing  Basel  II  with  effect  from  March  31,  2007.  They  will  initially 
adopt  the  Standardised  Approach  for  credit  risk  and  the  Basic  Indicator  Approach  for 
operational  risk.  After  adequate  skills  are  developed,  both  by  the  banks  and  also  by  the 
supervisors,  some  banks  may  be  allowed  to  migrate  to  the  Internal  Rating  Based  (IRB) 
Approach.  
Some of the regulatory initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank of India, relevant for Basel II 
are as follows: First, we have tried to ensure that the banks have suitable risk management 
frameworks  oriented  towards  their  requirements  dictated  by  the  size  and  complexity  of 
business, risk philosophy, market perceptions and the expected level of capital. Second, Risk 
Based Supervision (RBS) in 23 banks has been introduced on a pilot basis. Third, we have 
been encouraging banks to formalize their capital adequacy assessment process (CAAP) in 
alignment with their business plans and performance budgeting systems. This, together with 
the adoption of RBS, would enable factoring in of the Pillar II requirements under Basel II. 
Fourth,  we  have  been  expanding  the  area  of  disclosures  (Pillar  III),  so  as  to  have  greater 
transparency in the financial position and risk profile of banks. Finally, we are trying to build 
capacity  for  ensuring  the  regulator’s  ability  for  identifying  and  permitting  eligible  banks  to 
adopt IRB / Advanced Measurement approaches.  
   3/7 
As  per  normal  practice,  and  with  a  view  to  ensuring  a  smooth  migration  to  Basel  II,  a 
consultative  and  participative  approach  has  been  adopted  for  both  designing  and 
implementing  Basel  II.  A  Steering  Committee  comprising  senior  officials  from  14  banks 
(public, private and foreign) has been constituted with representation from the Indian Banks’ 
Association  and  the  RBI.  The  Steering  Committee  had  formed  sub-groups  to  address 
specific issues. On the basis of recommendations of the Steering Committee, draft guidelines 
to the banks on implementation of the New Capital Adequacy Framework have been issued.  
Implementation  of  Basel  II  will  require  more  capital  for  banks  in  India  due  to  the  fact  that 
operational risk is not captured under Basel I, and the capital charge for market risk was not 
prescribed until recently. Though the cushion available in the system, which at present has a 
CRAR of over 12 per cent, is comforting, banks are exploring various avenues for meeting 
the capital requirements under Basel II.  
Even while we have decided to take the Indian banking system on to the simple approaches 
under Basel II, we have taken some initiatives which would clearly demonstrate that we have 
no intentions of either diluting the standards or picking on the less stringent options laid down 
in Basel II. Through these initiatives, we have prescribed stringent prudential requirements 
for  banks  in  India  e.g.  with  regard  to  adoption  of  risk  weights  for  claims  on  State 
Governments,  Public  Sector  Enterprises,  banks  and  for  capital  market  and  real  estate 
exposures.  Further even though banks can be allowed to use unsolicited ratings under the 
Standardised Approach, we would not allow the use of unsolicited ratings. 
Also, we have been expanding the area of disclosures so as to have greater transparency 
with  regard  to  the  financial  position  and  risk  profile  of  banks.  Illustratively,  with  a  view  to 
enhancing  further  transparency,  all  cases  of  penalty  imposed  by  the  RBI  on  the  banks  as 
also directions issued on specific matters, including those arising out of inspection, are to be 
placed  in  the  public  domain.  Such  proactive  disclosures  by  the  Regulator  are  expected  to 
have a salutary effect on the functioning of the banking system. In addition to the above, any 
penal action taken against any foreign bank branches in India are also shared with the Home 
country  regulator  with  a  view  to  enhance  the  quality  of  consolidated  supervision.  These 
initiatives will be an important supplement to the Pillar 3 disclosures prescribed under Basel 
II, which in our opinion will further the cause of a stable banking system. 
The way forward 
On  the  way  forward  it  has  to  be  recognised  that  implementation  of  Basel  II  will  make 
considerable demands on scarce resources in terms of both economic resources and human 
resources.  Banks must take on the challenges and convert these into opportunities.  
Here I would like to quote Ms. Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the 
US Federal Reserve System: 
“Banking  will  remain  a  highly  dynamic  industry.  Supervisors  will  have  to  be  especially 
attentive to changing best practices and ensure that Basel II does not inhibit adoption of new 
banking practices and financial instruments” 
“Maintaining  financial  stability  in  global  banking  and  financial  markets  continues  to  be  an 
important  objective  of  regulators,  bankers,  and  other  market  participants,  particularly 
because of the negative impact that financial instability has on economies as a whole. Basel 
II, in my view, will help improve financial stability…Even though minimum regulatory capital 
ratios are likely to be more volatile under Basel II, this reflects greater risk sensitivity.” 
Some of the issues which emerging economies in particular would need to address on the 
way  ahead  are  higher  capital  requirements,  improved  IT  architectures,  data  issues, 
consolidation,  capacity  building,  external  ratings,  use  of  national  discretion,  validating  the 
concept of economic capital and corporate governance. 
   4/7 
Higher  capital  requirements  –  The  Basel  document  prescribes  the  minimum  capital 
requirements and banks need to be encouraged to hold more capital than the minimum. As a 
part  of  their  strategy,  banks  are  expected  to  operate  at  levels  above  the  minimum  to  take 
care of the fluctuations in capital requirements in response to the fluctuations in the quality of 
risk exposures. Further, it will be necessary to ensure that all elements of expected losses 
should  be  fully  met  by  provisioning  and  that  capital  is  available  exclusively  to  support 
unexpected losses.  
Higher capital requirements could pose difficulties if there are state owned banks. This may 
require  consideration  of  options  such  as  preference  shares  and  other  innovative  tier-I 
instruments, hybrid tier-II capital instruments and tier-III capital instruments. 
Improved  IT  architecture/MIS  –  The  basic  requirement  for  implementation  of  Basel  II  is 
improved  information  systems  for  managing  and  using  data  for  business  decisions.  Banks 
should, therefore, be encouraged to strengthen their IT architecture and also improve their 
information and reporting systems. This would also equip banks to cope appropriately with 
the Pillar 3 disclosure requirements.  
Consolidation – In the normal course of operations banks would be constantly looking for 
opportunities  of  inorganic  growth.  Banks  which  operate  with  capital  above  the  minimum 
levels have an edge over the other banks to the extent that they would be able to seize an 
opportunity  for  merger  /  acquisition  as  and  when  it  is  available  without  any  loss  of  time. 
However,  it  would  be  necessary  for  such  banks  to  improve  their  internal  controls  and  risk 
management  systems  before  embarking  on  a  path  of  inorganic  growth.    Basel  II 
implementation would enable banks to meet the  above pre-requisites and place them in a 
situation where they can take advantage of opportunities as and when they arise.  
Data  issues  –  Implementation  of  Basel  II,  both  under  Standardised  Approach  and  IRB 
Approaches, would involve utilisation of data for computing capital requirements. While the 
dependence on data under the Standardised Approach would be largely similar to Basel I, 
the  data  requirements  are  considerable  under  the  Advanced  Approaches.  Banks  would 
require adequate and acceptable historical data to compute capital requirement under these 
Approaches. At the minimum banks need to have historical data for computing the probability 
of  default,  loss  given  default  and  operational  risk  losses.  While  building  up  this  data  base 
banks also need to ensure purity and integrity of such data.  
Capacity Building – Above all, capacity building, both in banks and the regulatory bodies is 
a serious challenge, especially with regard to adoption of the advanced approaches. Banks 
would  need  to  focus  on  equipping  their  staff  suitably  to  handle  the  advanced  risk 
management  systems  and  supervisors  need  to  equip  themselves  with  equal  skills to  have 
effective supervision. Given the demand for skills in the sector, the level of attrition is likely to 
be high. Hence, banks need to focus on motivating the skilled staff and retaining them. We 
have  initiated  supervisory  capacity-building  measures  in  India  to  identify  the  gaps  and  to 
assess  as  well  as  quantify  the  extent  of  additional  capital,  which  may  be  required  to  be 
maintained by such banks. The magnitude of this task, which is scheduled to be completed 
by December 2006, appears daunting since we have as many as 90 scheduled commercial 
banks in India.  
External ratings – In a situation where countries do not have domestic rating agencies or 
where the extent of rating penetration is low the capacity of banks in these countries to relate 
capital requirements to the actual underlying risk will be seriously handicapped. It would be 
necessary to develop domestic rating agencies and look at methods for increasing the rating 
penetration of the rating agencies. 
Use of national discretion – As I have mentioned earlier, discretion is available to national 
supervisors  under  Basel  II  framework  on  many  aspects.  It  would  be  necessary  for  the 
national supervisors to exercise this discretion with caution. There could be various sectors 
of the economy which may deserve a preferential treatment taking into account their national 
relevance. It would be in order to lighten the burden of Basel II on these sectors within the 
   5/7 
limitations  of  national  discretion  provided  the  resulting  capital  requirements  reflect  the 
underlying risks in these sectors. In case the situation prevailing in a country reflects higher 
risks then it would perhaps be necessary for the supervisor to factor this while formulating 
the national rules for Basel II implementation.  
Validating  the  concept  of  economic  capital  –  The  Basel  II  Framework  will  promote 
adoption of stronger risk management practices by banks which will address all major risks 
comprehensively.  Basel  II,  by  being  risk  sensitive,  will  enable  banks  to  bridge  the  gap 
between  economic  capital  and  regulatory  capital.  Through  the  Pillar  II  requirements  under 
Basel II, banks are expected to have their own internal methodologies for assessing the risks 
and computing the capital requirements to support those risks even for banks adopting the 
standardised approach for credit risk.  This would aid the banks to move in the direction of 
building their own economic capital models, which can direct their business strategies. It is 
possible  that  many  of  the  banks  in  emerging  economies  might  not  have  developed  their 
internal capital adequacy assessment processes (ICAAP). Implementation of Basel II would 
now require these banks to have in place an ICAAP which meets the Basel II specifications. 
The regulators would perhaps be required to take the initiative in this regard to enhance the 
level of understanding of ICAAP in banks, the benefits that may accrue to them by adoption 
of ICAAP and the likely focus of supervisory assessments in this regard.    
Improving  governance  standards  and  oversight  –  The  Basel  II  framework  places 
considerable  emphasis  on  internal  processes  for  managing  risk  and  for  managing  capital 
requirements.  This  along  with  the  Pillar  3  disclosure  requirements  places  tremendous 
demand on the Governance and oversight standards within a bank. Banks should therefore 
focus their energies on raising their governance and oversight standards to greater heights.  
The Basel Committee recognises that primary responsibility for good corporate governance 
rests with boards of directors and senior management of banks. Corporate Governance can 
be  improved  by  addressing  a  number  of  legal  issues  such  as  protecting  and  promoting 
shareholder  rights,  clarifying  governance  roles.  Ensuring  that  corporations  function  in  an 
environment that is free from corruption and bribery; and aligning the interests of managers, 
employees and shareholders through appropriate laws, regulations and other measures. All 
of  these  can  help  promote  healthy  business  and  legal  environments  that  support  sound 
corporate  governance  and  related  supervisory  initiatives.    In  India  the  governance  issues 
have  been  addressed  by  prescribing  guidelines  on  corporate  governance  in  banks.  These 
include  fit  and  proper  standards  for  not  only  the  Board  of  Directors  but  also  for  the 
shareholders and the chief executives. In this regard, it might be appropriate to mention that 
importance of corporate governance is relevant for the state owned banks also. The focus of 
the standards should be, at the least, to equip the boards of banks to ask the right questions.  
Conclusion 
Basel II is expected to foster financial stability through its risk sensitive framework which will 
encourage  banks  to  adopt  improved  risk  management  practices;  require  supervisors  to 
review 
the  efficiency  of  banks’  risk  management  practices  and  capital  allocation 
methodologies;  and  empower  market  participants  to  make  informed  judgements  on  the 
efficiency of banks and accordingly punish or reward banks.  
While it is true that implementation of Basel II is not the be all and end all on the subject of 
financial stability it must be recognised that banks are “special”.  Their sound and efficient 
functioning is critical not only to the growth of the real sector but also for strengthening the 
social  infrastructure.    Internationally,  therefore,  banks  have  moved  centre-stage  and  their 
performance is the cynosure of all eyes. 
Acknowledgements for inputs are due to K. Damodaran and Dr. N.D. Jadhav, Reserve Bank of India.    
   6/7 
References: 
Y  V  Reddy:  Banking  sector  reforms  in  India  -  an  overview  -  the  Institute  of  Bankers  of 
Pakistan, Karachi, May 2005. 
Jaime  Caruana:  Overview  of  Basel  II  and  its  reflections  on  financial  stability  -  the 
International  Conference  on  Financial  Stability  and  Implications  of  Basel  II,  Istanbul,  May 
2005 
Jaime Caruana: Consequences of Basel II for SMEs – the European Parliament Workshop, 
Brussels, July 2003  
Susan Schmidt Bies: Financial stability benefits and implementation challenges of Basel II – 
the International Conference on Financial Stability and Implications of Basel II, Istanbul, May 
2005.  
   7/7 
