Niklaus Blattner: Three nations, two currencies, one economic area 
Speech by Mr Niklaus Blattner, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Freiburger Montags-Gesellschaft, Freiburg im Breisgau, 6 June 2005. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The  Upper  Rhine  EuroRegion  comprises  Baden,  the  Südpfalz  region,  Alsace  and  Northwestern 
Switzerland. In what shape is the economy in this region? Is it as dynamic as we would like? Are the 
national borders that transect the region a handicap or have we come to accept them? What are the 
implications of the fact that the region has two currencies? 
Firstly, the Upper Rhine EuroRegion is economically sound. This is due not least to the capital goods 
sector  and  the  pharmaceutical/chemical  industry,  with  the  latter  ensuring  high  added  value  in 
Northwestern Switzerland in particular. However, the Upper Rhine EuroRegion does not rank among 
the very best in Europe. While its level of economic added value is perfectly acceptable, its growth in 
recent years has been significantly lower than that in other regions. The region’s situation is, therefore, 
no different to that of many other economic areas in Continental Europe. 
Secondly,  cross-border  integration  in  the  Upper  Rhine  EuroRegion  is  high.  The  diversity  of  the 
economic  interrelationships  between  the  national  regions  is  reflected  in  the  brisk  trade  in  goods, 
capital flow and free movement of persons. It is clear from this economic integration that the fear of the 
region’s borders considerably compromising economic development cannot be confirmed. Rather, the 
diminishing,  relative  importance  of  intra-regional  foreign  trade  and  intra-regional  cross-border  direct 
investment is due more to globalisation and the ensuing increase in the influence of Eastern European 
and Asian economies than to weakening ties within the Upper Rhine region. 
Thirdly,  the  most  notable  aspect  of  the  relationship  between  the  region’s  two  currencies  since  the 
introduction  of  the  euro  in  1999  is  its  stability.  That  does  not  mean,  however,  that  the  issue  of 
Switzerland’s ascension to the EU is of no consequence. Having its own currency allows Switzerland 
to conduct an independent monetary policy that is tailored to suit its needs. 
Finally, the economic policy can help the region thrive further by removing remaining hurdles, such as 
those in the labour market and in the exchange of goods and services (Cassis de Dijon principle). A 
well-integrated economic region is the key to a prosperous future. 
“Three nations, two currencies, one economic area” - the title of the paper - not only describes the 
reality, it also maps out the way forward. 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 1
