Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz:  Benchmark  market  indices  -  milestones  in  financial  market 
progress  
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the launch of Citigroup 
Malaysian  Government  Bond  Index  & Dow  Jones-RHB  Islamic Malaysia  Index,  “Benchmark  Market 
Indices - Milestones in Financial Market Progress”, Kuala Lumpur, 23 June 2005. 
 Yang Berbahagia Dato' Sri Sulaiman Abdul Rahman Taib, Executive Chairman, RHB Capital,  
Dr. Zaha Rina Zahari, Chief Executive Officer, RHB Securities, 
Mr. Piyush Gupta, Country Officer and Chief Executive of Citibank Berhad,  
Distinguished Guests, Members of the media and Ladies and Gentlemen,  
"The use of benchmark market indices emerged on the financial scene as early as in the 1880's. In 
1884, Charles Dow, journalist and founder of Dow Jones & Company produced the first Dow Jones 
Index,  published  in  the  company's  'Customer  Afternoon  Letter'  which was  later  to  become the  Wall 
Street  Journal.  Of  what  we  know,  Charles  Dow  had  always  been  a  keen  market  observer.  The 
haphazard idiosyncratic price movements of shares of individual or group of companies indeed did not 
lend  itself  to  a  coherent  assessment  of  the  performance  of  the  market  nor  enable  any  meaningful 
analysis of market direction and investors' inclinations. This gave rise to the need for an index that 
reflects the broad market performance and investors' interest.  
This  first  market  index  was  simple.  Prices  of  11  stocks,  the  most  actively  traded  on  the  New  York 
Stock Exchange, were averaged. Charles Dow himself chose these stocks, nine of them being railroad 
companies,  the  key  growth  industry  at  the  time.  Over  time,  he  would  revise  the  index  as  he  saw 
appropriate to be reflective of ongoing market and industry developments.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  construction  and  use  of  benchmark  market  indices  today  has  undergone  much  advancement 
since  then.  Indeed,  financial  markets  have  undergone  dramatic  transformation.  Economic,  industry, 
and corporate expansion; the sophistication, proliferation and diversity of instruments; the expanding 
investment  communities  are  all  factors  that  have  led  to  an  increase  in  the  number  of  benchmark 
indices and their greater use. Benchmark committees deliberate over the construction of the index and 
determine  the  rules  of  the  benchmark.  Investors  need  the  benchmark  indices  to  be  used  as 
performance indicators of the broad market and for an indication of the market direction and investors' 
sentiment on the corporate sector and economy. The representative stocks within a benchmark index 
need to be highly liquid and reflective of the key corporate sectors that drive growth in the economy. At 
the same time the index should also reflect the underlying changes in the economy incorporating the 
emergence  of  new  industries.  Thus,  for  an  index  to  be  a  useful  benchmark  and  to  be  used  as  a 
reference  by  investors  and  market  players,  the  index  needs  to  be  regularly  reviewed  and  adjusted 
accordingly  in  line  with  market  developments  and  the  transformations  taking place  in  the  economy. 
Indeed,  benchmark  market  indices  would  reflect  the  broader  investor  participation  and  growing 
maturity of a markets.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Today's launching of the Citigroup Malaysian Government Securities Index and the Dow Jones-RHB 
Islamic Malaysia Index, marks another step forward in the development of Malaysia's capital markets. 
The importance of these two indices should not be underestimated. This initiative by the Citigroup and 
RHB and Dow Jones is an important contribution to the development of our domestic markets.  
With  globalization,  increased  connectivity  and  rapid  financial  market  integration,  investors  are  no 
longer restricted to investing within their own domestic borders. Indeed the 'home bias' or tendency of 
investors  to  invest  almost  all  their  assets  domestically,  has  been  rapidly  dissipating.  Investors  look 
abroad for enhanced returns and diversification opportunities. For more than a decade now, the pace 
of  diversification  across  borders  by  pension  and  insurance  funds,  asset  management  companies, 
hedge funds and high net worth individuals has increased dramatically. 
A region that has emerged strongly in the international investors radar screen is the East Asian region. 
Strong, sustainable economic growth, rapid expansion in intra-regional trade and investment have led 
to a correspondingly accelerated pace of development of the capital markets and to an increase in the 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 1
pace of financial liberalization and integration. In this environment, it becomes important to promote 
well-developed, deep and liquid capital markets.  
Today's  launch  of  the  Malaysian  Government  Securities  index  will  assist  investors  who  have 
increasingly been attracted to Malaysian fixed income securities as an important asset class.  
As  I  understand,  the  Citigroup  MGS  Index  will  potentially  be  part  of  their  global  bond  index,  an 
inclusion that would indeed contribute to increasing the significance of the MGS market in the global 
bond  markets.  The  Citigroup's  global  bond  index,  previously  known  as  the  Salomon  World  Bond 
Index, has been one of the most referenced benchmark market index by the international investment 
community. It would promote Malaysia in the investors' investment horizon, whether as a long-term 
benchmark  holding  in  their  portfolio  or  as  a  tactical  investment  in  seeking  market  out-performance. 
When  this  becomes  a  reality,  the  Citigroup  Global  Bond  Index  will  be  the  first  benchmark  that  has 
Malaysia as a component.  
The  index  could  also  serve  to  facilitate  enhanced  trading  or  liquidity  in  the  market,  with  the 
commitment  to  make  market  or  provide  prices  for  the  bonds  comprised  within  the  index.  Besides 
enhancing the trading volume and related business prospects, it would also spur competition among 
dealers and the growth of derivative products. Increased market activity and continuous availability of 
prices in a benchmark government debt market would, in turn, enable other markets; namely private 
debt securities and asset backed securities to be appropriately priced relative to the degree of risks, 
and for such securities to be further developed.  
The Dow Jones-RHB Islamic Equity Index heralds another milestone in the growing Islamic financial 
markets. The merger of the Dow Jones Islamic Index for Malaysia and the existing RHB Islamic Index, 
besides achieving some form of economies of scale with reduced duplication of efforts, will have the 
significant added advantage of both international and domestic recognition. Moreover, as one of the 
leading  countries  that  support  the  growth  and  development  of  Islamic  financial  markets,  it  is  most 
appropriate for the development of the index to be part of the Dow Jones Islamic World Index.  
Within a global index such as the Dow Jones Islamic World Index, the inclusion of the Dow Jones-
RHB Islamic index will increase the potential for further investments into Malaysian Islamic equities. 
Malaysia is well positioned to benefit greatly from this as the infrastructure and marketplace for Islamic 
financial  instruments  and  investment  has  long  been  developed.  Indeed,  in  our  equity  market,  more 
than  80%  of  the  counters  in  Bursa  Malaysia  or  previously  known  as  the  Kuala  Lumpur  Stock 
Exchange, are Syariah compliant.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Certainly,  the  development  of  benchmark  market  indices  is  an  important  part  and  parcel  of  the 
continued progress, contributing to the further deepening of capital markets. Two particular areas of 
heightened focus are in the regional bond market and international Sukuk market.  
In the region, the Asian Bond Fund 2, launched by the EMEAP central banks in December 2004, is 
aimed at promoting the further integration of the regional countries' bond markets and the creation of a 
new asset class for Asia and global investors. One of the important pillars of this development has 
been the construction of benchmark indices. Indeed the launch of Asian Bond Fund 2 is accompanied 
by  the  development  of  benchmark  indices  that  are  fully  replicated  by  the  fund  manager  of  each 
individual country sub fund, as well as in the umbrella Pan Asian Index Fund.  
Meanwhile,  the  Islamic  Sukuk  international  market's  expansion  is  gaining  momentum.  Wider 
acceptance  by  investors  and  greater  awareness  of  issuers  of  this  alternative  structure  has  seen 
increased issuances over the past few years. In the sovereign markets; Malaysia, Qatar and Bahrain 
have  come  to  the  market  with  Sukuks.  Supranational  institutions  such  as  the  Islamic  Development 
Bank,  World  Bank  and  the  International  Finance  Corporation  (IFC)  have  also  ventured  into  issuing 
Sukuks,  with  the  latter  two  institutions  issuing  the  ringgit-denominated  instruments  in  our  domestic 
bond market. The first USD1 billion-issue size was launched in 2004 by the Government of Dubai. In 
2005,  it  is  estimated  that a  total of  more  than USD5  billion  of  Sukuk  is  in  the  pipeline  globally  in a 
range of currencies. The market is indeed growing. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The introduction of a benchmark index can act as a catalyst for a more rapid pace of development of 
the financial market and the recognition of a new asset class. The conditions are timely for the crafting 
of a benchmark index to further spur the growth of the Islamic financial and capital market to meet the 
needs of a larger pool of Muslim savers and investors. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2005
On the domestic front, the ringgit denominated Islamic debt market continues to grow encouragingly. 
In  the  private  debt  securities  market,  a  total  of  42%  of  securities  outstanding  as  at  end  2004  were 
Islamic  securities.  For  the  debt  markets  as  a  whole,  Islamic  securities  comprised  25.7%  of  total 
outstanding bond issues at the conclusion of 2004. Coupled with increased turnover volume, the size 
and  liquidity  of  the  Islamic  debt  markets  are  improving,  possibly  paving  the  way  for  even  greater 
demand  for  Islamic  financial  products.  The  formulation  of  a  benchmark  index  to  reflect  the  ringgit 
Islamic debt market could well be a strategic opportunity for market players to take up as the next step 
forward.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The  future  growth  and  development  of  the  Malaysian  capital  market,  including  a  dynamic  Islamic 
financial  market  with  breadth  and  depth,  has  never  been  brighter.  As  we  witness  in  the  current 
environment, cross-border flows, joint ventures and partnerships with global players have become the 
norm.  New  growth  markets,  enhanced  integration  and  liberalization  of  economies  and  financial 
markets are the themes that will increasingly dominate our business activities. Positioning ourselves 
for these developments is imperative in these highly competitive markets. Part of that positioning is 
certainly transpiring before us today, right here. 
With  that,  it  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  officially  launch  the  Citigroup  Malaysian  Government 
Securities Index and the Dow Jones-RHB Islamic Index. Thank you. 
BIS Review 49/2005 
 3
