Ishrat Husain: Why privatisation is necessary for economic growth in 
Pakistan? 
Address by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the 11th Get Together of the 
Overseas  Universities  Alumni  Club  and  the  21st  Century  Business  &  Economics  Club,  Karachi, 
12 August 2005. 
 The decade of 1970s in Pakistan witnessed a massive redistribution of national assets from the private 
owners to the state. The reason underlying the then Government’s thinking for this extremely radical 
action was that the national wealth was being concentrated in the hands of few families and the rich 
were getting richer and the poor getting poorer. It was asserted by the proponents of this strategy that 
the state control over allocation of the resources would promote the best interests of the poor. The 
intellectual support for this strategy was drawn from the success of the Soviet Union and the socialist 
economic model practised in that part of the world.  
Two decades later it turned out that these assertions and assumptions that drove this particular line of 
action  i.e.  nationalization  was  not  only  unrealistic  and  flawed  but  the  consequences  were  exactly 
opposite  to  what  the  intentions  were.  The  collapse  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  the  bankruptcy  of  the 
socialist  model  eroded  the  ideological  underpinning  of  this  strategy  and  the  actual  results  on  the 
ground in Pakistan and almost all the developing countries shattered the ideal and utopian dreams of 
the proponents of this philosophy. Pakistan’s public enterprises including banks became a drain on the 
country’s  finances  through  continuous  hemorrhaging  and  leakages  and  a  drag  on  the  economic 
growth  impulses.  The  poor  instead  of  benefiting  from  the  state’s  control  over  these  assets  were 
actually worse off as almost Rs. 100 billion a year were spent out of the budget annually on plugging 
the losses of these corporations, banks and other enterprises. These public enterprises became the 
conduit for employing thousands of supporters of political parties that assumed power in the country in 
rapid succession and a source of patronage, perks and privileges for the ministers and the favoured 
bureaucrats appointed to manage these enterprises. These employees and managers had neither the 
managerial  expertise  nor  technical  competence  to  carry  out  the  job.  Instead  of  providing  goods  & 
services  to  the  common  citizens  at  competitive  prices  efficiently,  the  public  enterprises  turned  into 
avenues for loot and plunder, inefficient provision of services and production of shoddy goods. It was a 
common knowledge that getting a telephone connection in Pakistan required years not months and 
that too with the help of sifarish and exchange of bribes. No wonder the country was able to install less 
than 3 million telephones in the entire 50 years of its history while under a deregulated and private 
sector  driven  environment  an  additional  6  to  7  million  mobile  phone  connections  were  given  to 
Pakistanis from all walks of life without any favour or discrimination in one year alone i.e. 2004. 
The hangover of the past in general and the lingering fascination for the socialist model among some 
of our intellectuals in particular continue to have a dominant influence on our thinking. Some of the 
resentment  against  private  profit  making  is  also  quite  legitimate  and  understandable.  In  the  past, 
private  entrepreneurs  in  Pakistan  did  not  make  ‘profits’  in  the  real  economic  sense  of  the  word  by 
earning  a  return  on  their  investment  in  a  competitive  world.  On  the  contrary,  they  earned  ‘rents’ 
through  the  maze  of  permits,  licences,  preferred  credit  by  the  banks,  subsidies,  privileges, 
concessions  and  specific  SROs  granted  to  the  favoured  few.  Naturally  when  one  sees  people 
becoming rich not through the dint of their hard work and enterprise but by manipulation, back door 
entry, connections, reciprocity, paying bribes, adopting extra legal means, bypassing the established 
rules and laws, getting scarce foreign exchange quotas, evading taxes, defaulting on bank loans and 
rigging the markets etc., we should not be surprised to see the venom against the so called ‘private 
profits’. 
The  policy  reforms  introduced  in  Pakistan  by  the  Nawaz  Sharif  Government  in  1991  and  more 
importantly followed by that strong citadel of socialist raj – India – were a watershed reflecting the new 
realities of economic life. These reforms, though quite extensive and diverse, could be summed up for 
the sake of simplification in three words – Liberalization, Deregulation and Privatization. The results of 
Indian reforms are quite evident before us. During the first 45 years of its independence until 1991, 
India was hardly able to achieve per capita income growth of 1 percent per year and the incidence of 
BIS Review 55/2005 
 1
poverty  remained  persistently  high.  In  the  12-year  period  since  1991,  India’s  average  per  capita 
income  growth  has  been  4  percent  per  year,  poverty  has  been  declining  ever  since  and  has  fallen 
below 25 percent. Pakistan, unfortunately, could not follow through these reforms in a continuous and 
consistent  manner  despite  the  fact  that  both  Benazir  and  Nawaz  Sharif  governments  were  fully 
committed to these reforms. For example, 12 percent shares of PTCL were first sold to the general 
public in 1993-94 and it has been on the privatization agenda of every successive government since 
then. The short term political expediency may dictate a different behaviour at present, but I am quite 
sanguine that the PPP and PML(N) would have pursued the same path were they at the helm of the 
affairs.  Thus,  there  is  a  broad  political  consensus  in  the  country  that  privatization  is  in  the  larger 
national interest of the country. 
Privatization has to be seen in the overall context of the respective roles of the state and markets. The 
State has to be strong to combat the excesses of the market and cope with market failures. It is not 
that  the  state  should  play  a  lesser  or  reduced  role  but  a  different  role  in  so  far  as  it  provides  an 
enabling environment for equitable development and creates necessary conditions for growth through 
investment  in  human  development  and  infrastructure.  The  government’s  effective  role  in  regulating 
and  monitoring  the  market  has  to  be  strengthened  to  promote  healthy  competition  and  avoid  the 
rigging  of  the  market  by  a  few.  Markets  are  the  best  known  vehicle  for  efficient  allocation  and 
utilization of resources and thus the decisions as what goods and services to produce, how much to 
produce, distribute and trade can be done well only by the private sector and not by the bureaucrats. 
This  division  and  redefinition  is  also  essential  to  reduce  corruption  and  generate  sustained  and 
equitable growth in the country. Market-based competition, privatization of public banks and a strong 
regulator have successfully reformed the banking sector in Pakistan during the last several years and 
this  model  should  be  replicated  elsewhere  in  the  economy.  It  is  not  ideology  but  pragmatism  and 
learning from the past mistakes that should drive our economic policies and strategies. Growth takes 
place only when productivity from the existing resources keeps on rising. The global experience shows 
that  by  and  large,  productivity  actually  declines  or  remains  stagnant  when  the  businesses  are 
managed and operated by the government thus slowing down or hurting the pace of growth. 
I  will  now  turn  to  the  economic  rationale  of  privatization  that  is  not  fully  understood  by  many.  In 
particular, there is a popular view that it is okay to sell the loss making enterprises but retain the profit 
making entities such as PTCL and PSO in the public sector. It is true that the budgetary stress and 
commercial bank borrowing factors are not valid in such cases but there is a larger economic case for 
the divestiture of even such profit making enterprises. The main logic behind this divestiture is that it 
will  promote  efficient  allocation  of  scarce  resources,  optimal  utilization  of  resources,  making  sound, 
timely  and  market  responsive  investment  choices,  winning  and  retaining  customer’s  loyalty  through 
better service standards and lower product prices or user charges and contributing to the expansion of 
the economy through taxes, dividends etc. I would take the most debated example – that of the PTCL 
– as an illustration of the general point I am making about the economic rationale for privatizing profit 
making public sector enterprises.  
The most oft pronounced arguments against privatization of profit making enterprises are (a) why fix it 
when  it  ain’t  broke?  (b)  Protection  of  workers  (c)  a  better  and  more  professional  management  can 
bring about the same results as under privatization. The basic reason for privatizing these enterprises 
is that the government should not be in the business of running businesses but regulating businesses. 
The role of the government should be that of a neutral umpire, who lays down the ground rules for 
businesses to operate and compete, to monitor and enforce these rules, to penalize those found guilty 
of contraventions and to adjudicate disputes between the competing business firms. If the government 
owned firm itself is one of the players in the market, there is a strong conflict of interest and the other 
market players lose confidence in the neutrality of the umpire. Under these circumstances, the market 
becomes  chaotic,  disorderly  and  unruly  as  there  is  no  neutral  ‘person’  to  monitor  and  enforce  the 
rules. The economy thus pays a heavy price for this loss of the market mechanism in the production, 
sale  and  distribution  of  goods  and  services.  The  present  controversy  between  the  PIA  and  private 
airlines is a manifestation of this tendency. If the ‘umpire’ favours its owned enterprise i.e. PIA and 
discriminates  against  the  rival  private  airlines,  the  ultimate  result  would  be  the  winding  up  of  these 
airlines. The growth of aviation industry would suffer as the present competition is cutting down the 
prices and stimulating demand for air travel in the country. In absence of such competition, the PIA 
would have the sole monopoly and the planes would fly with empty seats as the ticket prices would not 
be market based but arbitrarily high. The consumers of airline industry – existing and potential – will be 
the loser in this bargain.  
The same argument can be applied in case of PTCL. If the Government had continued to own and 
manage PTCL, the private sector competing firms would have felt that they would always remain at a 
disadvantage in relation to the PTCL. The constant fear that the government’s coercive powers and 
full  force  of  policy  making  ability  would  always  be  used  to  safeguard  and  enhance  the  interests  of 
PTCL. This would have kept the private firms away from investment in the fixed telephone or wireless 
loop segments. If this may not be true under one particular set of rulers, the apprehension that such an 
eventuality may happen at some time in the future keeps prospective investors away from that field of 
business.  The  growth  of  a  dynamic  private  sector  in  the  economy  is  thus  stifled.  The  PTCL  would 
under  that  scenario  preserve  its  monopoly,  pass  on  its  inefficiencies  to  the  customers,  charge 
exorbitant prices and resort to seeking concessions of various kinds from the government. The result 
would be stagnation in the growth of fixed telephony in the country and poor service to the customer. 
So while the PTCL is not broke and is indeed profitable it needs to be privatized to provide a level 
playing  field  for  fostering  competition,  stimulating  demand,  expanding  telecom  customer  base, 
improving  service  delivery  and  contribute  to  rapid  economic  growth.  None  of  this  will  happen  if  the 
PTCL remains a public owned and managed firm. 
A lot is being made of the fact that the PTCL was making huge profits for the exchequer and these 
profits will now  be  diverted  to  the  private  owner.  The  facts are quite contrary  to  this assertion.  The 
Government of Pakistan will still retain 62 percent of the shares while the private operator will have 
only 26 percent. Thus out of each billion rupees of profits earned by PTCL, the GoP will receive Rs. 
620 million while the private operator only Rs. 260 million. In addition, the PTCL will continue to pay 
the corporate tax on its income. The burning desire to transfer the management to a private investor 
was that the profits earned by the PTCL were largely derived not from its own efficient operations but 
from its monopoly status as the sole provider of fixed telephony in the country. In the coming years, 
the PTCL will have to compete for its market share as it has lost its monopoly and it was quite likely 
that the public sector ownership will act as a serious constraint and the level of profits will be eroded 
over time. 
Since the private sector competitors of PTCL will have more flexibility, agility and capacity to respond 
and seize the opportunities for expansion and improved customer service, they will give a hard time to 
rule bound, inflexible and slow moving public sector owned PTCL. However, competent and able top 
managers and the Board of Directors may be, they have to follow set procedures, prior clearances and 
approvals  by  multiple  ministerial  bodies  before  they  can  make  any  operational  decisions  of 
significance. U-Fone lost 18 months’ valuable time facing various inquiries into its procurement while 
its competitors were enhancing their market share at its cost. Such a scenario is likely to recur once a 
government owned PTCL is pitted against several private competitors. 
The fears about employment losses in the industry as a result of privatization are also, by and large, 
unfounded.  The  example  of  the  banking  industry  privatization  controverts  those  who  claim  that 
privatization means jobs are lost. In 1997 when the restructuring, down-sizing and privatization of the 
nationalized  commercial  banks  picked  up  speed  there  were  105,000  employees  working  in  the 
financial sector. After privatization was completed, the banking industry has expanded and the work 
force  has  expanded  to  114,000.  It  is  true  that  the  pattern  of  employment  has  changed  and  more 
productive and skilled workers have been taken in at the expense of low skilled or unskilled. There is 
no doubt that the PTCL will also expand under its new owners and employ more people but in the 
skilled category. This upgradation of skills will raise productivity of the firm as well as of the industry. 
The skill mix of the staff employed by the PTCL and its numbers at present are inappropriate to meet 
the  new  challenges  of  providing  high  standards  of  value  added  services  and  new  product 
development.  One  of  the  difficulties  faced  by  the  public  sector  businesses  is  that  they  cannot  pay 
market  based  remunerations  to  their  executives  or  highly  technical  manpower.  If  the  PTCL  is  not 
allowed  to  pay  more  than  MP1  scale  to  its  Chief  Executive  i.e.  Rs.  200,000  per  month  which  is  a 
fraction of what senior executives in the rival private firms get, should we expect the PTCL to attract, 
retain or motivate high performing manpower. The field gets tilted against a public sector company as 
it has skill gaps and redundancies and is unable to provide value added services of the same quality 
as provided by the private sector rivals.  
The  process  of  hiring  and  firing  of  employees  in  a  public  sector  company  such  a  PTCL  is  highly 
convoluted,  complex  and  cumbersome.  Those  found  guilty  of  infractions  or  negligence  of  duties  or 
even corruption can only be dispensed with after a protracted process of disciplinary proceedings that 
sometimes take several years to complete. In the meanwhile, the employee continues to stay put in 
service and receives all the emoluments and perks. In a rare case, a departmental inquiry comes up 
with  a  guilty  verdict,  the  employee  can  appeal  to  the  Federal  Services  Tribunal  and  if  he  is 
unsuccessful, then all the way to the Supreme Court. Why will any right minded boss choose to go 
through such an ordeal?  
The  alarm  of  employment  losses  after  privatization  is  also  unjustified  for  another  reason.  Telecom 
sector has already generated, after deregulation, hundreds of thousands of new jobs through public 
call  offices,  calling  cards  and  pre-paid  card  companies,  Internet  Service  Providers,  mobile  phone 
companies,  broad  band  services,  and  other  value  added  services  under  the  private  sector.  As  the 
penetration ratios in Pakistan are still quite low, there is going to be a large expansion in the telecom 
sector.  
The losses of redundant jobs in PTCL, if any, will be more than offset by new productive jobs in the 
Local Loop, Wireless Loop and LDI companies being set up in the private sector. Industry estimates 
that 100,000 new jobs will be added during next 3 – 5 years. The substitution of unskilled jobs in the 
PTCL by the skilled jobs in the telecom industry as a whole will raise the productivity of the sector as 
well as that of the user companies and institutions. Those among the unskilled who can be retrained or 
redeployed could be retained minimizing the overall loss of jobs within the PTCL itself. If the PTCL 
itself  is  able  to  expand  its  services  and  operations,  the  manpower  that  is  surplus  to  its  present 
requirements  can  be  productively  employed.  Thus  the  fears  of  8  workers  losing  protection  under  a 
privatized  entity  appear  to  be  misplaced.  After  all,  the  PTCL  is  the  only  telecom  company  that  has 
been in the business for the last 58 years.  
The  oversight,  monitoring  and  guidance  capabilities  of  public  enterprises  are  ridden  with  the 
aggravated  problems  of  principal  –  agent  relationship.  As  the  Board  Members,  however  able  and 
honest they may be, have no direct personal stakes in the well-functioning of a public enterprise, they 
cannot be expected to devote as much time or energy to the Board’s affairs as the private strategic 
investors  would.  Thus,  the  PTCL’s  governance  structure  would  always  remain  second  best  to  its 
private  sector  competitors  and  put  it  at  a  comparative  disadvantage.  If  a  more  callous  Minister  is 
unfortunately appointed to chair the Board, the appointments, award of contracts and transfers and 
postings will do further damage to the performance of the PTCL. 
The temptation by the elected political leaders or other rulers to interfere in the affairs of the public 
sector companies is not only high but natural. They are constantly accosted by their constituents for 
jobs, contracts, postings and transfers and it is not possible for them to keep on saying no to everyone 
all the time. In some cases, they have to yield to pressures. It is, therefore, necessary to sever the 
connection between the government and the business. 
How  can  a  public  sector  company  then  be  expected  to  show  same  results  as  its  private  sector 
competitors  whose  compensation  structure  is  driven  by  performance,  whose  managers  enjoy  full 
powers  of  hiring  and  firing  without  any  restraint,  their  Boards  have  direct  stakes  in  ensuring  good 
governance and the political interference is almost non existent?  
The legacy of PTCL inherited from the culture of the Post and Telegraph Department cannot therefore 
be washed away if it operates under these constraints. This culture can only be replaced by a dynamic 
competition-oriented culture under the leadership of a private sector operator.  
As a government entity, PTCL is considered a rich cash cow to meet the fiscal needs rather than a 
business enterprise that requires funds for its own maintenance and operations and more important for 
its investment needs. The compulsions of extracting as much profits and cash for meeting fiscal deficit 
will  always  predominate  and  the  imperatives  of  expanding  the  network,  infrastructure  and  services 
through retained earnings will be neglected. Even assuming that a perceptive government does allow 
PTCL the funds to make investment, it is not obvious if these will be used in an efficient and cost-
effective manner. The World Bank has recently blacklisted 200 firms for padding contracts and bribing 
officials in public sector procurement awards in a number of developing countries. 
It  must  once  again  be  stressed  that  private  sector  ownership  and  efficient  functioning  of  market 
mechanism  require  certain  legal  and  regulatory  institutions.  In  absence  of  these  institutions,  private 
monopolies or oligopolies can surface, market distortions can accentuate and markets can be rigged 
for  the  benefit  of  few.  Strong  legal  and  regulatory  institutions  would  be  able  to  counter  these  evils 
forcefully  and  provide  a  level  playing  field  for  all  market  participants.  We  have  to  strengthen  these 
legal and regulatory institutions in the country.  
Public policy should also be geared at removing preferential treatment or granting of concessions or 
privileges to a particular segment of the population. During the last five years, the Government has 
endeavoured to move in this direction and act in an even handed manner. No firm specific SROs have 
been  issued to  favour  a  particular enterprise at  the expense  of others. Under these circumstances, 
private sector will earn true ‘profits’ through competition and not ‘rents’ and the justified grudge against 
the private sector will be minimized. 
Conclusion 
Privatization  contributes  to  economic  growth  through  productivity  gains,  efficient  utilization  of 
resources,  better  governance  and  expansion  in  output  and  employment.  Profit  making  enterprises 
under the public sector may be making profits due to the unique market structure such as monopoly or 
other privileges or concessions conferred upon them by the government but it does so at the expense 
of the consumer who has to pay higher than market price for the product or the services. The ordinary 
consumer gets a benefit only through competition among private sector firms in form of lower prices 
and better services as has been demonstrated in the cases of banking, telecommunications and, more 
recently, air travel.  
In  a  deregulated  market  environment,  public  ownership  becomes  a  serious  constraint  as  the  rule  – 
bound procedures and the rigidity in the structure do not allow public sector companies the flexibility to 
respond  promptly  to  dynamic  market  conditions.  Furthermore,  the  government’s  role  as  a  regulator 
and neutral umpire becomes questionable once it is itself a participant in the game through its own 
company.  This  stifles  competition  and  subverts  expansion  and  growth  by  the  private  sector 
companies. 
