Savenaca Narube: Balance of payments - a central banker’s view  
Opening  address  by  Mr  Savenaca  Narube,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  Regional 
Course on Balance of Payments and International Investment Position, Suva, 11-22 April 2005. 
 Introduction 
Mr Jon Craig and Mr Michael Andrews at PFTAC 
Our Course Facilitators - Mr Jens Reinke of the IMF, Mr Mahinder Gill - a former division chief of the 
Balance of Payments and External Debt at the IMF) and Mr Paul Mahoney of the Australian Bureau of 
Statistics. 
Distinguished Delegates 
On behalf of the Government of Fiji and the Reserve Bank I would like to welcome you to and the 
workshop participants to this regional training course on Balance of Payments. This is the first regional 
course  and  supplements  the  existing  courses  held  by  the  IMF  in  Washington  D.C.  and  at  the 
Singapore  Training  Institute.  I  would  like  to  extend  my  appreciation  to  the  IMF  and  PFTAC  or 
organizing this course. These forums provide an excellent opportunity for statisticians and economists 
in the region to exchange knowledge and experiences. 
Why is the Balance of Payments important? 
The Balance of Payments show a country’s transactions with the rest of the world. The Balance of 
Payments records all the flows of goods and services of a country with the rest of the world, and flows 
of other types of income into and out of the country. 
The current account brings all these flows together. It is important for domestic policy making because 
it shows that calls on a country’s foreign savings equals net savings in the domestic economy. So a 
deficit  can  reflect  domestic  conditions.  This  may  be  good  -  if  it  comes  about  because  investment 
exceeds domestic savings, but it’s bad if its due to excess consumption. 
Regardless of the cause of a deficit, a deficit has impact on debt and this can lead to crisis if debt 
becomes too large and reserves become too low. Debt and reserves are recorded in the international 
investment position. 
So  the  balance  of  payments  system  is  vital  in  economic  policy  making,  because  of  the  important 
relationship  between  external  and  domestic  economic  developments, 
timely,  reliable,  and 
comprehensive  balance  of  payments  statistics  are  an  indispensable  tool  for  economic  analysis  and 
policy making. Indeed, with the growing interdependence of the world’s economies, the need for such 
statistics - which reflects in part the underlying movement towards greater liberalization and integration 
of markets - has increased over time. 
Also, balance of payments and international investment position data constitute an indispensable link 
in the compilation of data for various components of the national accounts (e.g., production accounts, 
income  accounts,  capital  and  financial  accounts,  and  the  related  measurement  of  national  wealth). 
The balance of payments is directly aligned and integrated with the system of national accounts. For 
example,  trade  statistics  used  in  the  balance  of  payments  are  also  included  in  the  measure  of 
expenditure on GDP. 
What is the purpose of course? 
This  course  has  been  arranged  to  help  countries  to  build  their  capability  to  compile  balance  of 
payments statistics. The conceptual framework will be explained, sources and methodologies for the 
various  components  described,  and  discussions  held  on  the  many  issues  that  are  of  particular 
concerns to the Pacific island countries. The fishing industry, for example, provides the opportunity to 
discuss many issues including the definitions of residency and national boundaries, flows of goods, 
services, royalties, salaries of fishermen and so on. 
BIS Review 33/2005 
 1
I realise that there is a very wide spread of experience of participants - from countries that have been 
compiling Balance of Payments for many years including quarterly statistics, through to those that do 
not  currently compile  any Balance  of  Payments  statistics.  This will  be a  particular  challenge  for  the 
presenters  and  the  participants  to  ensure  everyone  gains  what  they  want  from  the  course.  The 
outcomes aimed for in the course will therefore range from increased knowledge to enable participants 
to  return  to  their  countries  and  make  refinements  to  existing  estimates,  through  to  an  increased 
awareness of the benefits from compiling BOP which will hopefully lead to plans for development of 
Balance of Payments stats in future for countries not yet producing them. 
What resources are available to Balance of Payments compilers? 
There  are  a  number  of  manuals  and  handbooks  available  to  assist  in  developing  and  compiling 
Balance of Payments and International Investment Position statistics. These include both conceptual 
materials and very practical guidance in terms of sources and methods that are most suitable for the 
various elements of the system. 
PFTAC  here  in  Suva  has  provided  a  significant  amount  of  technical  assistance  to  Balance  of 
Payments  compilers  in  the  region  for about  12  years.  Staff  at  the  IMF  headquarters  in Washington 
provides backstopping support to PFTAC and can also provide additional advice and assistance. 
I wish you well in this course, and hope that you will learn enough of the concepts and practical issues 
involved in the Balance of Payments to take home to your countries and work toward improving the 
range and quality of the statistics you produce. I also hope you have an enjoyable stay here in Suva. 
Thank You. 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2005
