Shyamala Gopinath: Human development and state finances - some thoughts 
Speech by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Programme 
on Human Development and State Finances (jointly organised by the Reserve Bank of India and the 
UNDP) at the College of Agricultural Banking, Pune, 4 April 2005.  
The assistance of H R Khan, C P Mohan and Partha Ray in preparation of the speech is gratefully acknowledged. 
 It gives me great pleasure to be here on the occasion of the first programme on "Human Development 
and State Finances" being jointly organised by the UNDP and the RBI with the support of the Planning 
Commission. The UNDP, ever since its inception in 1965, and the other UN organisations before that, 
have been actively involved in the development priorities of developing countries like ours over the last 
five  decades.  They  have  gained  insights  and  understanding  of  our  economy  and  polity  which  will 
substantially help in achieving our goals of growth with equity, dignified life for all our people and in our 
pursuit of reforms with a human face. 
As all of us are well aware, the Government of India is irrevocably and unequivocally committed to the 
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals (MDG). In fact, the progress that will be achieved by 
India, home to about one sixth of the world's population, will take the entire mankind much nearer to 
the  MDG.  This  is  because  India  accounts  for  significant  proportions  of  the  under  privileged  and 
marginised sections of the world with almost one third of the global rural poor living in India. Yet, our 
economy is poised at a point of take off, where our achievements can be accelerated. I believe that we 
have reached a stage in our development process, wherein we have gathered critical momentum to 
achieve far more in the next 10-15 years than we have done in the last 55 years. 
What have been the contours of Human Development? What have been our achievements in India? 
How is State finance related to it? Let me in the present address look into some of these questions. 
Contours of human development  
Let  me  begin  with  a  brief  look  at  the  concept  of  Human  Development.  While  doing  so,  I  have  a 
confession  to  make.  I  am  no  expert  of  the  vast  discipline  concerning  human  development. 
Nevertheless, as a common citizen I believe that issues relating to human development concern us all. 
Hence, with some trepidation I approach the issue.  
How do we measure the well being of an individual or group of individuals? It is widely accepted that a 
uni-dimensional measure of income does not capture the various dimensions of personal welfare or 
happiness.  The  weaknesses  in  the  income  indicators  have  led  to  use  of  other  measures  to 
complement the per capita income. The quest for other approaches became necessary to neutralise 
the information distortions in the income measure.  
One  of  the  approaches  has  been  the  Physical  Quality  of  Life  Index  (PQLI)  which  combines  three 
indicators, viz. adult literacy rate, infant mortality and life expectancy. Another approach is the ‘basic 
needs  approach’  which  moves  from  the  philosophy  of  maximising  output  to  minimising  poverty.  It 
argues that the basic needs of adequate nutrition, primary education, health, sanitation, water supply 
and  housing  should  be  available  to  the  poorest  to  a  reasonable  extent.  The  Human  Development 
Index (HDI) approach is the third and most widely used index.  
The credit for popularising the Human Development approach mainly lies at the door of the visionary 
economist, Mahbub Ul Haq. His quest to find ways and means of enhancing the quality of life people 
experience in the miserable world led to the eventual evolution of the HDI as a composite measure of 
development. Nobel Laureate Professor Amartya Sen awarded for his work in welfare economics, a 
close  friend  of  Mahbub  Ul  Haq,  is  renowned  for  his  contributions  to  the  concept  of  Human 
Development. Professor Sen’s work is embedded in his enquiries into social choice, distribution and 
poverty.  The  HDI  is  a  composite  index  measuring  these  basic  dimensions  of  human  development, 
such as, a) long and healthy life (measured by life expectancy at birth), b) knowledge (as measured by 
adult  literacy  rate,  and  the  combined  gross  enrolment  ratio  for  primary,  secondary  and  tertiary 
schools), and c) decent standard of living [as measured by GDP per capita in purchasing power parity 
(PPP) in terms of US Dollars].  
BIS Review 23/2005 
 1
The UNDP's discourse, based on the above, focus on the broader attributes of human well-being. It 
has  defined  human  development  as  a  process  of  enlarging  people's  choices  as  well  as  raising  the 
level  of  well  being.  In  our  country,  we  have  prepared  the  National  Human  Development  Report  by 
capturing  the  process  of  development  and  well  being  of  people  from  two  perspectives,  the 
“conglomerative” perspective, which takes into account advances made by the society as a whole and 
the “deprivational” perspective which assesses the status of the deprived in a society. It is believed 
that both these perspectives should be measured and assessed to adequately understand the process 
of  development.  Hence,  the  National  Human  Development  Report  (NHDR)  of  the  Planning 
Commission  uses  indicators  that  extend  beyond  those  of  economic,  educational  and  health 
attainments.  The  NHDR  measures  indicators,  such  as,  infant  mortality  rate,  life  expectancy,  formal 
education, literacy, availability of pucca house, safe water, level of poverty and per capita expenditure. 
I  am  aware  of  the  efforts  on  the  part  of  various  State  governments  to  come  up  with  State-specific 
Human Development Reports.  
The task is not easy. In the Nobel lecture delivered on December 8, 1998, Professor Sen articulated 
the  intricacies  or  the  inscrutable  involved  in  any  measurement  of  human  welfare  when  he  sought 
rational explanations to questions like:  
• 
How do we judge how well a society as a whole is doing in the light of the disparate interests 
of different members?  
How do we measure aggregate poverty in view of varying predicaments and miseries of the 
diverse people that make up the society?  
How  can  we  accommodate  the  rights  and  liberties  of  persons  while  giving  adequate 
recognition to their preferences?  
  These  are  difficult  questions  to  which  we  do  not  have  ready-made  answers,  but  these  questions 
eloquently speak of the difficulties in achieving all-round development of the society.  
India’s performance in human development 
We, in India, have done remarkably well in many areas of human development. On the social front, we 
have seen increase in our primary school enrolments, including for girls, which was a major concern. 
There has been secular and universal reduction in our infant and child mortality rates. Life expectancy 
has shown significant upward change. The life expectancy at birth that was abysmally low at below 
40 years in 1951 increased to 63.9 years for males and 66.9 years for females. Similar upward trends 
are noticeable in indicators like literacy or access to clean drinking water. All these have culminated in 
an improvement in human development. As per the National Human Development Report, 2001 the 
combined HDI value has improved from 0.302 in 1981 to 0.381 in 1991 and further to 0.472 in 2001. 
Indications are that this uptrend has been continued in the recent years as well.  
Yet, concerns remain. As per the UNDP’s Human Development Report 2004, India ranked 127 in HDI 
in 2002 out of 177 countries and the rank for Gender Development Index has been 133. The inequities 
in our socio-cultural fabric are still quite stark. Quality of maternal health is another area that needs to 
be addressed. Child health is certainly not what it ought to be. Many children suffer from anaemia, 
indicative of pervasive under nourishment. Severe malnutrition has been reported in several States. 
Despite  having  fairly  comfortable  level  of  food  availability,  food  security  for  all  remains  elusive, 
particularly  for  the  vulnerable  sections  of  population  who  have  poor  livelihood  access  or  have 
livelihood susceptible to natural disasters. Gender bias continues to haunt progress as millions of girl 
children  are  kept  away  from  higher  education.  Demographic  analysis  continues  to  show  that 
scheduled castes and tribes have lagged compared to the general category population in education 
and health. 
An important issue in this context is volatility of agricultural output in India. Indian agriculture is tested 
time and again by the harsh realities of the weather. Repeated droughts wreck havoc with more than 
60 per cent of our almost 150 million farm based households who have no access to water other than 
rains.  The  basic  principle  of  water  management  is  to  conserve  water  where  it  falls.  Sporadic  but 
monumental  success  has  been  achieved  by  small  communities  in  Uttar  Pradesh,  Rajasthan, 
Maharashtra,  Tamil  Nadu,  etc.  Ralegaon  Siddhi  near  here  is  one  shining  example.  Much  more 
remains to be done.  
2 
 BIS Review 23/2005
  Another  issue  is  the  diverse  performance  of  the  States  as  per  various  indicators  of  development. 
Among the parameters indicating human development, States that do well on one may not be doing 
so well in another. For example, while Kerala has achieved very high levels of social development like 
literacy, sex ratio, health, or higher education, it has not done so well in per capita income. Punjab, on 
the other hand, has the highest per capita income but has the worst sex ratio in the country.  
High  regional  disparity  in  HDI  across  States  is  also  a  source  of  concern.  Nevertheless,  analysis  of 
State-level HDIs by the Planning Commission indicated a decline in such regional disparity during the 
last two decades.  
What do we aim for the future? It is instructive to turn to a select set of targets for the Tenth Plan:  
• 
Reduction of poverty ratio by 5 percentage points by 2007 and by 15 percentage points by 
2012;  
All children in school by 2003;  
Reduction in gender gaps in literacy and wage rates by at least 50 per cent by 2007; 
Increase in Literacy Rates to 75 per cent within the Tenth Plan period (2002-03 to 2006-07); 
Reduction  of  Infant  Mortality  Rate  (IMR)  to  45  per  1000  live  births  by  2007  and  to  28  by 
2012; 
Reduction of Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) to 2 per 1000 live births by 2007 and to 1 by 
2012; 
All villages to have sustained access to potable drinking water within the Plan period; 
• 
I am sure that these goals, on implementation, are going to make significant difference to the lives of 
millions in India.  
As you are aware, Government of India has launched major efforts to realise these goals. Health is 
paramount to good living. The National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) with focus on grass root level 
public  health  interventions  based  on  community  ownership  has  been  announced  for  roll  out  in 
2005-06. The budget for the Department of Health and the Department of Family Welfare has been 
increased  by  22  %  to  Rs.10,280  crore  in  2005-06.  In  the  all  important  sector  of  education  the 
Government has responded to the needs by allocating Rs.4,754 crore for the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan 
programme  which  is  the  cornerstone  of  the  Government’s  intervention  in  basic  education  for  all 
children.  This  constitute  an  increase  of  55%  over  2004-05.  A  non-lapsable  fund  called  “Prarambhik 
Shiksha  Kosh”  has  been  created  for  funding  this  programme  with  increased  allocation  of  Rs.7,156 
crore in 2005-06. The National Food for Work programme which was launched in November 2004, is 
being  supported  with  an  overall  allocation  of  Rs.11,000  crore.  The  Government  has  proposed  to 
convert  this  programme  into  the  National  Rural  Employment  Guarantee  Scheme  which,  when  fully 
rolled out, will provide livelihood security to crores of poor families.  
State finance and human development 
The above enumeration of the goals of human development clearly points out to the necessity of funds 
for achieving higher quality of life. Interestingly, many of the constituents of such a package, are in the 
domain of the State Governments. It is here that that State finance and human development develops 
a strong bondage.  
What  has  been  the  state  of  the  States’  finances  in  recent  years?  The  Economic  Survey,  2004-05 
pointed out that the deterioration in the finances of State Governments has been sharper than that of 
the  Central  Government.  All  the  major  fiscal  indicators  reveal  a  worsening  of  the  fiscal  situation  as 
compared  with  the  position  obtaining  in  1990-91.  Fiscal  deficit  of  States  as  a  proportion  of  GDP 
increased  from  3.3  per  cent  in  1990-91  to  5.1  per  cent  in  the  revised  estimates  for  2003  –  04  . 
Revenue deficit too witnessed a sharper rise to 2.6 percent of the GDP as per the revised estimates 
for 2003-04. The factors responsible for such a deterioration are many and include factors, such as, 
growing  burden  of:  a)  interest  payments,  b)  pension  liabilities,  and  c)  administrative  expenditure, 
mounting losses of State owned public enterprises, inappropriate user charges, increased contingent 
liabilities and deceleration in Central transfers.  
Such fiscal stress seriously erodes the States’ capability to discharge its paramount responsibility for 
developing social and economic infrastructure. It has increasingly been recognised that it is the State 
BIS Review 23/2005 
 3
finances  where  the  government  sector’s  interface  with  the  people  is  the  maximum.  Hence,  fiscal 
consolidation and progressive implementation of fiscal and institutional reforms by the States will have 
a direct bearing on the quality of life of people. The RBI on its own part have taken several initiatives to 
create  awareness  about  the  urgent  need  for  fiscal  correction  by  the  States  and  initiated  many 
measures,  such  as,  advising  States  to  set  up  Consolidated  Sinking  Fund  for  debt  servicing, 
constitution of Guarantee Redemption Fund to meet guarantee obligations, sensitising them towards 
the fiscal risk arising out of guarantees extended by States besides undertaking several studies and 
preparing reports, mainly through the forum of State Finance Secretaries on important fiscal issues 
like pension liabilities, fiscal responsibility legislation, restructuring of the State level enterprises, etc. 
It is, however, heartening to note in this regard that a number of States have been making serious 
endeavours  to  carry  forward  the  fiscal  reform  process  and  have  either  enacted  the  Fiscal 
Responsibility  Act  or  are  in  the  process  of  doing  so,  particularly  after  the  recent  publication  of  the 
report of the State Finance Secretaries’ Group on Model Fiscal Responsibility Legislation at the State 
level.  In  a  major  shift  in  approach,  the  12th  Finance  Commission  has  linked  the  enactment  of  the 
Fiscal Responsibility Legislation as a precondition for debt relief. This has assumed significance at the 
macro level as large deficits at the State level can cause distortions to the overall fiscal discipline in 
the country. The 12th Finance Commission has also provided a framework for substantial increase in 
Central devolutions and transfers to states. This would result in beneficial impact on revenue account. 
More grants-in-aid will  also  be  available  for  expenditure  in  the  social  sectors  which  will  be  an 
additionality over the normal expenditure by the States in these sectors. 
Availability of resources alone cannot generate social sector development. It is in this context that the 
Finance Minister in his Budget speech has distinguished between the outlay and the outcome. A major 
element  would  be  the  development  of  proper  institutions.  NGOs  or  local  self  government  like 
Panchayati Raj have a lot to do with the attainment of outcome in the social sector development. The 
lowest  sub-State  administrative  level  in  the  country  is  the  district  which  plays  a  critical  role  in  the 
outcomes  of  the  government  programmes  and  interventions.  Large  number  of  monitoring  studies, 
evaluations, and research have found that the outcomes have large variations across States and even 
across  districts  in  the  same  State.  It  is  here  that  the  participants  of  this  programme  do  have  an 
extremely significant role.  
Concluding observations 
I am glad that the first among this series of programmes is being attended mostly by the officials from 
the State Governments. You are the people who remain at the level of implementation and, thus, are 
at  the  cutting  edge  of  societal  transformation.  In  conclusion,  it  is  to  be  realised  that  the  onus  of 
practicing  such  principles  for  enhancing  human  development  lies  on  all  of  us,  while  the  nation  is 
waiting and, may I add, impatiently. 
Let me end by quoting from one of the last notes left behind by Mahatma Gandhi in 1948 : 
“Whenever you are in doubt, or when the self becomes too much with you, apply 
the following test. Recall the face of the poorest and the weakest man whom you 
have seen, and ask yourself, if the step you contemplate is going to be of any use 
to him. Will he gain anything by it? Will it restore him to a control over his own life 
and destiny? In other words, will it lead to freedom for the hungry and spiritually 
starving millions? Then you will find your doubts and your self melt away.”  
4 
 BIS Review 23/2005
