Zhou Xiaochuan: Rules for developing a financial center and the reform of the 
RMB exchange rate regime  
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the inauguration ceremony 
of The People’s Bank of China Shanghai Head Office, Shanghai, 10 August 2005. 
 Honorable General Secretary Chen, 
Honorable Mayor Han, 
Colleagues and friends from the financial industry 
Dear guests, and 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
First of all, I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to all the concern and support 
you have kindly rendered to the People’s Bank of China over so many years, and I would also like to 
thank you for availing yourself from your busy schedule to attend the inauguration ceremony of the 
People’s  Bank  of  China  Shanghai  Head  Office.  On  today’s  significant  occasion,  I  wish  to  focus  my 
remarks on two specific issues. The first issue explores the rules for developing a financial center, and 
the second issue aims to clarify questions concerning the reform of the RMB exchange rate regime. 
For the first issue, the answer is quite straightforward. The People’s Bank of China Shanghai Head 
Office is established for the purpose of strengthening functions of the central bank head office related 
to improving financial market operations and financial services. 
First, both international experiences and the Chinese practices in the process of reform and opening 
up have well demonstrated that greater marketization of the economy could lead to increased cross-
region economic activities, and consequently an improved integration and scale of the economy which 
calls for strengthening of the functions of the central bank head office in terms of market operation and 
provision  of  financial services.  Marketization  and  internationalization  expose economic development 
undergo constant changes, leading to increased reliance of monetary policy conduct and transmission 
on the money market and foreign exchange market. The development of the financial market itself will 
also help to expand financial services to clients in different regions of the country and to cultivate a 
limited  number  of  financial  markets  serving  the  whole  nation  and  even  the  world,  not  segmented 
financial markets dotted across the country serving different regions. For the time being, Shanghai has 
already  become  the  harbor  for  some  financial  markets  with  national  influence,  such  as  the  foreign 
exchange market, the gold market, securities market, futures market and the inter-bank bond market 
etc. 
However in the past when the centralized economic system was prevalent or in the early periods of 
reform  when  marketization  was  barely  developed,  financial  organizations  favored  an  institutional 
structure featuring “parallel set-up of business departments at the subordinate and head office level” 
which means branch offices of a financial institution in different locations must establish corresponding 
business departments as contact points to interface with relevant departments at the head office. By 
doing  so,  information  could  be  collected  and  centralized  to  the  highest  authority  that  could  in  turn 
decompose  the  centrally  made  plans  level  by  level  to  different  regions  and  localities  for 
implementation. With the socialist market economy preliminarily established and improved in China, 
the outdated organizational structure of the People’s Bank of China no longer fits in with its mandate 
to improve market operation and financial services. Likewise, large financial institutions in China also 
face such an organizational problem. 
Second, the development of technologies and transportation facilities is producing a profound impact 
on the economy and the financial industry. In the past, the underdeveloped telecommunication and 
computer technology as well as backward transportation tended to restrict the economic activities and 
trade to localities with little cross-region business interactions. While now, the development of scientific 
technology  and  transportation  has  facilitated  cross-region  and  even  cross-country  commercial 
activities, increased the economic scales of financial markets and financial services and fostered the 
modernization of financial infrastructures. This development has brought about dramatic changes to 
financial business mode and created great challenges to the regionalized structure of institutions and 
organizations.  Under  such  circumstances,  financial  organizations  more  and  more  prone  to  set  their 
views on the whole country rather on different regions and financial information and professionals also 
increasingly flow to financial centers providing services to the whole country. This in turn could help to 
its  responsibility 
facilitate  the  development  of  infrastructures  of  the  financial  centers  and  the  cultivations  of  high-end 
technologies and financial products.  
Finally, in today’s world, a country’s competitiveness depends on whether it has a dynamic financial 
center. A financial center has cluster effect, i.e., it attracts and fosters financial institutions, skilled labor 
force  and  various  services,  including  intermediate  institutions,  such  as  legal,  accounting,  rating  and 
appraisal  services.  Naturally,  some  activities  can  and  will  be  out-sourced,  but  the  rest  is  fostered 
based on the clustering of financial institutions and skilled labor force. In this regard, the existence of a 
financial  center  is  the  yardstick  of  whether  a  country  is  internationally  competitive  and  whether  the 
efficiency of domestic financial services can be elevated by large scales. General Secretary Hu Jintao 
called  for  continued  efforts  to  make  Shanghai  four  centers  of  the  nation,  and  most  importantly  a 
financial center. In this sense, to build a national financial center is not based on the interest of a city 
or  a  particular  region.  Given 
in  conducting  monetary  policy,  exercising 
macroeconomic  management,  fostering  financial  market  development  and  maintaining  financial 
stability,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  must  give  considerations  to  the  development  of  a  national 
financial center and carry out central bank functions based on the platform of the financial center. In 
this regard, the setup of PBC Shanghai Head Office is of historical significance.      
Regarding the reform of the RMB exchange rate regime, I would like to elaborate a little bit about the 
contents of the basket of currencies. 
As  you  all  know,  with  authorization  of  the  State  Council,  on  July  21,  2005  China  moved  into  a 
managed  floating  exchange  rate  regime  based  on  market  supply  and  demand  with  reference  to  a 
basket of currencies. The RMB will no longer be pegged to the US dollar. Instead, the RMB exchange 
rate will be determined based on a basket of certain major currencies with assigned weights selected 
in  line  with  the  real  situation  of  China’s  external  sector  development.  At  the  same  time,  proper 
measures could be taken to manage and adjust the RMB exchange rate based on market supply and 
demand  while  considering  the  changes  of  the  basket  of  currencies,  so  as  to  maintain  the  RMB 
exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In this sense, it is quite natural that 
people are increasingly concerned about how the composition of the basket currencies is determined. 
To enhance public understanding of China’s exchange rate policy, I would like to make the following 
clarifications regarding the determination of the basket currencies. 
As a reference for the floating of the RMB exchange rate, the selection of the basket currencies and 
the determination of the weights assigned to these currencies must abide by a fundamental principle 
which is to give due considerations to the countries standing as China’s trading counterparts in current 
account transactions and their national currencies. As you all know, there are four items under current 
account,  namely,  trade  in  goods,  trade  in  services,  income  (including  interest  income  and  dividend 
income) and current transfers (such as remittance of overseas Chinese). To put it more simply, the 
basket should be composed of currencies of the countries to which China has a prominent exposure in 
terms of foreign trade, external debt (interest repayment) and foreign direct investment (dividend). And 
the  weights  respectively  assigned  to  these  currencies  should  also  consist  with  the  proportional 
importance of these countries in China’s external sector. 
 -    Shares  of  trade  in  goods  and  services  should  be  the  fundamental  considerations  in  the 
selection of the basket currencies and the weights assigned to the currencies in the basket.   
Current account is a major component of China’s balance of payments, whereas trade in goods and 
services is the predominant item of current account. The current situation in China shows that trade in 
goods and services dominates current account balance. Therefore, the shares of trade are the major 
considerations in the determination of the currency components of the basket. China’s major trading 
partners  are  the  United  States,  the  Euro  land,  Japan,  Korea,  etc.,  and  naturally,  US  dollar,  euro, 
Japanese yen and Korean won become major currencies of the basket. In addition, China also trades 
significantly  with  Singapore,  UK,  Malaysia,  Russia,  Australia,  Thailand,  and  Canada,  currencies  of 
these  countries are  also  important  in  determining China’s  RMB exchange rate.  Generally speaking, 
annual  bilateral  trade  volume  in  excess  of  US$10  billion  is  not  negligible  in  weight  assignment, 
whereas  that  exceeding  US$5  billion  should  also  be  considered  as  a  significant  factor  in  currency 
weight deliberation. When you look at currencies used in trade settlement, although some countries 
and regions prefer US dollar as the currency for trade settlement with China, this situation is changing 
gradually  and  trade  settlement  in  local  currencies  are  increasingly  the  choice  of  trading  partners. 
Moreover,  we  encourage  this  development.  Since  the  basket  represents  currencies  of  countries 
covering  a  significant  share  of  China’s  external  trade,  the  RMB  exchange  rate  against  a  basket  of 
currencies  is  therefore  a  better  indicator  of  the  value  of  RMB  and  the  changes  in  China’s  terms  of 
trade than that against the US dollar, and consequently serves as an important reference in achieving 
basic trade balance in goods and services.  
 -  currency structure of foreign debt should be considered 
As  China  further  opens  to  the  outside  world,  the  size  of  foreign  debt  incurred  continue  to  grow 
significantly. By the end of last year, China’s foreign debt reached US$228.6 billion with the origins 
increasingly  diversified.  In  most  cases,  foreign  debt  repayment  would  require  purchasing  a  specific 
foreign currency with RMB. The resulting conspicuous demand for this specific foreign currency in the 
market  would  become  a  factor  influencing  the  RMB  exchange  rate.  As  such,  in  determining  the 
currency weights in the basket, we also take into consideration of the currency structure of China’s 
foreign debt.  
 -  FDI should be considered 
In recent years, rapid growth has been witnessed in FDI which has been gaining importance in our 
foreign economic relations. By now, the accumulated FDI flowed into China has reached over US$560 
billion, a significant part of which was denominated in the currencies of the originating economies. The 
investment returns in the form of dividends will need to be exchanged into relevant foreign currency 
before  being  repatriated.  Therefore  the  factor  of  FDI  has  to  be  considered  in  the  selection  of  the 
basket currencies.  
 -  current transfer items under the current account should also be considered 
Though current transfers are not as important proportionally as other items in the current account, the 
currency structure of these transfers still needs to be considered in the determination of the weights 
assigned to the currencies in the basket.  
In sum, the reform of RMB exchange rate regime to allow RMB exchange rate float with reference to a 
basket of currencies is in line with the needs of diversifying foreign economic and trade relations as 
well as the development of the international economic and financial system. Referring to a basket of 
currencies  is  not  equal  to  pegging  to  such  a  basket.  Pegging  means  mechanically  adjusting  the 
exchange  rate  of  RMB  against  the  US  dollar  according  to  the  exchange  rate  movements  of  the 
currencies in the basket in an attempt to keep the nominal effective exchange rate unchanged. Quite 
differently,  what  we  are  having  now  is  a  managed  floating  exchange  rate  regime  based  on  market 
demand  and supply  with  reference  to a  basket  of currencies.  In comparison with  an  exchange rate 
regime  of  pegging  to  the  US  dollar  solely,  it  can  better  reflect  the  competitiveness  of  RMB  against 
major  currencies,  better  absorb  the  impact  generated  by  an  unstable  US  dollar  and  moderate  the 
fluctuations of RMB exchange rates at the multilateral level, safeguard the overall stability of China’s 
foreign economic and trade environment and consequently promote the basic equilibrium of balance 
of payments as well as the sustained, coordinated and healthy growth of the Chinese economy.  
Thank you very much. 
