Kristina Persson: Why is inflation so low? The example of the retail sector 
Speech by Ms Kristina Persson, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at the Nordic Retail College, 
Norrtälje, 24 May 2005. 
 Introduction 
Strong  forces  are  affecting  the  developments  in  the  world  economy  today.  Globalisation  and  stiffer 
international  competition  are  having  an  impact  on  individual  countries'  economies  in  many  different 
ways. In Sweden, this has contributed, among other things, to a very low inflation rate in recent years. 
The subdued developments in the prices of imported goods partly reflect the integration of countries 
such as China and India into the world economy. Likewise, the surprisingly robust productivity growth 
can probably to some extent be attributed to the increased international competition. 
Also contributing to the low inflation is the increasing establishment of low-price chains in the Swedish 
non-durables  sector  in  recent  years.  This  increases  competition  and  helps  squeeze  Swedish  food 
prices. 
I intend to begin by briefly discussing global structural change in general and thereafter to concentrate 
primarily  on  the  changes  that  we  are  seeing  in  the  Swedish  non-durables  sector  at  the  moment. 
Finally, I also intend to touch upon the current economic situation. 
Globalisation raises the demands on flexibility 
Globalisation  means  ”the  growing  mutual  dependence  between  countries  around  the  world  through 
the  increasing  volumes  and  amounts  of  cross-border  transactions  in  goods,  services  and  capital 
flows”.1  This process has intensified in recent years, partly reflected in a sharp pick-up in world trade, 
an even faster increase in direct investment and a very steep rise in global equity and currency trade. 
Globalisation has given rise to rapid structural change, resulting in jobs being shed in certain sectors 
or being relocated to countries with lower production costs.  
Sweden  has,  for  a  long  time,  experienced  fast  structural  change,  which  contributed  to  the  strong 
economic  performance  in  the  1990s.  Less  than  100  years  ago,  around  half  of  Sweden’s  employed 
worked  in  agriculture  and  forestry;  today,  that  figure  is  only  2  per  cent.  Over  the  same  period,  the 
proportion of the employed in the services sector has risen from roughly 20 per cent to 75 per cent, at 
the same time as the proportion in manufacturing increased at first from about 30 per cent to just over 
40 per cent and then fell to 20 per cent. Among other things, we saw during the 1960s and 1970s that 
large  parts  of  Swedish  manufacturing,  in  the  shape  of  the  textile  and  shipbuilding  industries,  were 
outsourced from Sweden. 
One consequence of structural change is that when old sectors or companies fail to survive, scope for 
new  employment  is  created  in  sectors  where  the  country  enjoys  a  comparative  advantage  or  in 
domestic services that are not exposed to competition to the same extent as the goods sector. For a 
long time, the growth of the public sector compensated for the drop in employment in manufacturing 
and created new jobs at an even faster rate than the old ones disappeared. 
If such a change process is to proceed quickly and smoothly, it requires a lot in terms of the ability to 
adjust and the flexibility of people and companies. It also requires that policy facilitates the ability to 
adapt through the design of regulatory systems. The labour market has to function in a satisfactory 
way and it must be feasible to make the time difference between closure and new establishment as 
short as possible. In other words, it is a question of reducing the frictional unemployment that arises 
when industries or companies are wound up and people need to move or retrain in order to find work 
in  a  new  location  or  in a new  company  or  industry.  The  fact  that  employment  is so  low  in Sweden 
today, given the state of the economy, may be a sign that the labour market is not flexible enough to 
meet the demands imposed by tougher competition or that the economy is not sufficiently dynamic. 
                                                      
1  
IMF’s definition. 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 1
Among other things, support is needed in the form of education and retraining to mitigate the effects of 
structural change on the labour market. Likewise, changes are necessary to facilitate innovation and 
entrepreneurship in Sweden so that new companies are created. It is also important to lay foundations 
for Swedish business to be competitive in foreign markets and to be able to attract capital, as well as 
for the economy as a whole to be able to attract labour to Sweden. 
Globalisation has contributed to the low inflation 
In the past decade or so, inflation has gradually fallen, both in Sweden and globally. Swedish inflation 
is very low today compared with the inflation rate we had in the 1980s and in the early 1990s (Chart 
1). The same is true of inflation in the OECD area. One explanation is the shift that has occurred in 
economic  policy  and  the  establishment  in  many  countries  of  independent  central  banks  with  the 
objective of price stability. But the deceleration in inflation has also been facilitated by globalisation, 
which,  among  other  things,  has  resulted  in  higher  competition  from  low-wage  countries,  forced  old 
industrial countries to boost productivity and furthered the prospects for cheaper imports. This trend is 
reinforced by the opportunities that are created by the new information technology. 
The low inflation is a result of several factors 
If we consider the most recent years, inflation has been so low that it has undershot the Riksbank’s 
inflation target of 2 per cent. In addition to the shift in economic policy and the globalisation process, 
other factors, of course, have played a part, including the Riksbank’s rate cuts, which lower mortgage 
interest costs. The effects of sharp but temporary rises in energy prices have also contributed, e.g. in 
2001 and 2003. But even when excluding these transitory effects, inflation has been very low. 
The consumer price index, CPI, is the inflation measure on which the Riksbank’s target is focused. 
The  CPI  measures  the  price  of  a  basket  of  goods  and  services  for  household  consumption.  By 
breaking  down  the  CPI  into  prices  of  goods  and  services,  excluding  electricity,  oil  and  mortgage 
interest rates, it becomes evident that falling goods prices have been the main contributor to the low 
price pressures (Chart 2). But services prices, too, are currently rising somewhat less than motivated 
by the generally lower productivity growth in the services sector. 
Developments in goods prices are firstly influenced in part by price developments for the goods that 
we  produce ourselves  in Sweden,  and  in  part  by  the  price  level and  the  price  developments  in  the 
countries from which we import. Finally, movements in the exchange rate are important. The rate of 
increase  in  producer  prices  of  domestic  goods  has  been  low  in  recent  years.  When  we  have 
investigated this in more detail we have concluded that it is a combination of low price increases for 
intermediate goods, subdued wage inflation and robust productivity growth in manufacturing that has 
caused lower domestic producer prices. 
As regards producer prices of imported goods, these have dropped since the end of 2002. This partly 
reflects the more or less continuous strengthening of the krona between 2001 and 2004, which has 
had an impact on the prices with a slight lag. Moreover, consumer price inflation in the international 
market  was  muted  during  the  last  economic  slowdown.  We  have  also  seen  a  rise  in  the  share  of 
imports  from  low-cost  countries,  which  has  also  contributed  to  the  low  rate  of  price  increases  for 
consumer  goods.  The  effect  of  this  shift  towards  cheaper  import  countries  is  not  fully  captured, 
however, by the method that we so far have used to forecast import prices. This could be one reason 
why our forecasts have not completely managed to predict the fall in import prices. This is a problem 
that we are working on at the moment. 
The distribution sector also important for inflation 
The prices of consumer goods have fallen more than the aggregate producer prices of imported and 
domestic goods. That is because consumer goods prices, in a second step, are also affected by what 
happens  in  the  distribution  sector,  i.e.  the  part  of  the  business  sector  that  distributes  goods  from 
producers  to  consumers.  It  is  difficult  to  find  comprehensive  data  for  the  distribution  sector,  but  we 
have seen that unit labour costs in the sector that includes transportation fell in 2004. In the wholesale 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2005
and retail trade, unit labour costs have increased at a slower and slower rate in recent years, not rising 
at all in 2004, and profit margins, moreover, have continued to shrink.2  
The  retail  trade  is  a  significant  part  of  the  distribution  sector  and  is  half  composed  of  non-durable 
goods,  which  largely  comprise  the  food  sector,  while  the  other  half  consists  of  durables  such  as 
electronic goods and clothing. 
Competition in the retail sector has increased considerably in recent years, to a great extent due to 
globalisation. For several years we have been able to buy home electronics at increasingly cheaper 
prices. Likewise, particularly in the recent period, we have seen greater downward price pressure in 
the  Swedish  non-durables  sector,  which  has  long  been  dominated  by  a  few  major  players.  We  are 
seeing the establishment of more and more low-price chains, both foreign and Swedish chains, as well 
as massive advertising campaigns in which one large operator after the other announces price cuts. 
This development can to a large degree be seen as an effect of tougher competition and of the price 
consciousness  that  globalisation  has  entailed.  I  now  intend  to  mainly  concentrate  on  what  is 
happening in the food sector and to put this into a slightly broader perspective. 
Developments in food prices as a component of the CPI 
Food is an important component of the CPI, comprising just over 13 per cent. That means that falling 
food prices can have a significant impact on the CPI. In the past two years, developments in consumer 
food prices have been well below the inflation rate in terms of both the CPI and the measure we use to 
look at underlying inflation, UND1X, as well as in terms of domestic inflation, UND1X (Chart 3). 
Food prices are greatly affected by weather conditions, e.g. the fluctuations in inflation around the turn 
of the year 2001/2002 were largely attributable to the effects on fruit and vegetable prices of the floods 
in Europe. But temporary factors also play a part, such as mad cow disease, which first caused meat 
prices to rise and then to fall back in 2003. However, it is reasonable to assume that the recently low, 
and periodically negative, rate of price increases for food is due in some measure to stiffer competition 
in the non-durables sector. 
Increased competition and new trends in the retail food sector 
For a long time three large food chains have dominated the Swedish non-durables sector, and still do 
so.  All  three  have  integrated  their  businesses,  meaning  that  their  retail  network  and  wholesale 
activities  are  part  of  the  same  company,  thus  making  them  active  in  both  the  wholesale  and  retail 
markets.  As  a  result,  the  Swedish  non-durables  sector  is  strongly  concentrated  to  a  few  players; 
together, they accounted for roughly 90 per cent of the non-durables market in 2004.3 
It is not obvious what effects such a concentrated market will have on food prices. On the one hand, 
one can argue that fewer players should result in higher prices (market-power hypothesis), but on the 
other hand economies of scale should give rise to lower prices (efficiency-market hypothesis). So the 
fact that there are only three major participants in the Swedish market does not have to be a problem 
from  the  point  of  view  of  competition  as  long  as  they  are  exposed  to  pressures  from  potential 
competitors.  That  presupposes,  though,  that  it  is  possible  for  new  players  to  enter  the  market.  In 
Sweden,  the  municipal  planning  process  for  local  site  development  has  long been  an  obstacle  and 
may  well  have  hindered  competition.  The  fact  that  food  prices  in  Sweden  are  higher  than  in  many 
other countries could be an indication that the first effect is the dominant one. 
Since  2002,  however,  we  have  seen  a  number  of  changes  in  the  retail  food  sector.  New  foreign 
participants  have  entered  the  market  and  previously  local  players  have  branched  out,  shops  have 
become bigger and the proportion of own brands has increased. 
• 
Several foreign-owned low-price chains have set up both outside cities and in city centres. In 
addition,  Swedish  low-price  chains  are  increasing  their  number  of  establishments.  An 
”unscientific” random sample that we have taken for a number of common food products – 
with the aim of representing the most important goods categories in the CPI – points to large 
                                                      
2   Source: National Institute of Economic Research. 
3   Source: Fri Köpenskap. 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 3
  price  differences  between  low-price  chains  and  traditional  food  shops  in  the  Stockholm 
region; differences of up to 30 per cent. The prices at low-price chains outside the city centre 
were a further 10-20 per cent cheaper than those of the traditional chains in the city centre. 
Other surveys also indicate large price differences. The stiffer competition is being facilitated 
by  a  greater  ambition  on  the  part  of  politicians  to  increase  the  number  of  shop  sites  for 
low-price chains. For example, in Stockholm there are plans to raise the number of new sites 
considerably. 
Another  trend  we  are  seeing  is  that  shops  are  becoming  bigger  and  the  share  of  sales 
accounted for by hypermarkets is rising. The total shop space is increasing at the same time 
as  small  food  shops  are  being  driven  out  of  business.  That  entails  a  drop  in  costs  and 
enables lower prices, partly in order to respond to the new chains’ lower prices. 
Food chains are also concentrating more and more on private labels, which is clearly evident 
on their shelves in terms of the greater share of products that bear the shops’ own brands as 
a  complement  to  the  different  suppliers'  brands.  The  purpose  of  private  labels  is  to 
strengthen the chain’s brand name and to reduce costs through lower marketing expenses 
and fewer middlemen. In Switzerland and the UK, where this trend has been going on the 
longest, 30-40 per cent of the shops’ products are private labels.4  Sweden has long been 
one of the countries with the lowest share of private labels, around 10 per cent. According to 
a limited survey by the Swedish Competition Authority of typical low-price goods, the prices 
of supplier brands have developed in line with the CPI while the prices of private labels have 
fallen sharply. 
Increased competition and lower prices 
Food prices in the CPI have dropped more or less since the start of last year. Tougher competition 
increases the pressure on food retailers to cut prices in order to keep customers, even though other 
factors, such as service and quality, are important to consumers in their choice of shop. Lower prices 
are made possible by reduced profit margins, lower taxes or lower costs resulting from, for instance, 
lower wages, higher productivity or a more limited product range. 
VAT rates in the Swedish non-durables sector have not changed during the current decade. However, 
wage costs have increased at a slower rate, which has led to lower unit labour costs in the wholesale 
and  retail  markets,  despite  a  decline  in  productivity  growth  in  recent  years.  Moreover,  companies' 
profit  margins  have continued  to  narrow.  So  it  seems  that  the  stiffer  competition  has  contributed  to 
lower food prices primarily through smaller profit margins and low wage increases. 
How much lower can Swedish food prices go? 
One interesting question to ask is how large the scope is for lower Swedish food prices in the future. 
Current theory has it that the prices of identical products should be the same regardless of country or 
region  if  transportation  costs  and  other  trade  barriers  are  excluded.  According  to  the  theory,  price 
differences  lead  to  cross-border  trade  and  eventually  to  equal  prices.  Food  prices  in  Sweden  are 
substantially  higher  than  the  EU  average,  and  large  regional  differences  exist  in  Sweden.  One 
possible way to investigate the scope for price cuts would be to take as a starting point the difference 
in Swedish food prices in relation to the prices of other countries and adjust for the other factors that 
affect  the  prices  and  that  are  different  between  the  countries.  Alternatively,  one  can  look  at  the 
regional differences in food prices in Sweden. 
Last year, Eurostat published two price comparisons, the first in cooperation with the OECD in order to 
measure purchasing power in different countries, while the second investigated price levels in capital 
cities.  According  to  these  surveys,  Swedish  food  prices  are  17  per  cent  above  the  average  for  the 
EU15, and 16 and 19 per cent, respectively, above those in Germany and the UK, while Stockholm’s 
food  price  level  is  some  14  per  cent  above  the  average  for  the  EU15,  and  17  and  18  per  cent, 
respectively, above the level in Berlin and London. 
                                                      
4   Source: Gfk. 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2005
Before we can draw any conclusions from such surveys, however, we have to adjust these figures for 
transportation costs as well as differences in taxes and wage costs. Transportation accounts for only a 
few per cent of the final food price, and the differences in transportation costs between EU countries in 
turn  are  so  small  that  they  do  not  have  any  great  significance  for  the  price  differences.  Nor  are 
transportation  costs  likely  to  be  lower  in  Finland,  for  example,  which  has  a  lower  price  level  than 
Sweden. 
The differences in VAT on food, however, are considerable. Swedish VAT on food is 12 per cent, and 
the general VAT rate is 25 per cent, while the rate is between 0 and 10 per cent in several comparable 
EU countries and just over 19 per cent on average in the EU15.5 If we adjust for the respective VAT 
rates,  the  differences  in  food  prices  between  Sweden  and  other  European  countries  turn  out  to  be 
smaller,  but  the  majority  of  comparable  countries  still  have  up  to  10  per  cent  lower  prices.  In 
comparisons  between  Stockholm  and  other  European  capitals,  too,  the  price  difference  averages 
roughly 10 per cent when VAT is excluded. 
Payroll taxes in Sweden are clearly higher than in many other countries; employers’ payroll taxes and 
social  security  contributions  comprise  around  15  per  cent  of  GDP  while  the  median  in  the  EU15  is 
roughly  7  per  cent.  Given  that  wage  costs  make  up  a  large  portion  of  the  food  sector’s  costs,  this 
difference in itself could explain the difference in prices. 
Detailed studies show that taxes, labour costs and other economic factors (e.g. GDP per capita and 
population density) may account for around half of the differences in food prices in Sweden and the 
EU.6 The other half appears to be largely attributable to lower competition pressures in Sweden than 
in other countries. 
That the price differences in relation to EU countries are due in large measure to the relative price 
competition is reinforced by the fact that there are also large price differences within Sweden, where 
the differences in wages and other costs between regions are small and the taxes the same. Studies7  
show  that  the  prices  in  the  south-east  and  west  of  Sweden  are  around  8  and  5  per  cent  lower, 
respectively, than in the eastern part of the country. The prices in Greater Stockholm are some 6 per 
cent higher than those in the Greater Gothenburg area. This reflects the differences in shop structure 
in various parts of the country, with a much larger market share for low-price chains and other chain 
stores than for the three major players in southern and western Sweden than in eastern Sweden. 
Ongoing price squeeze in the non-durables sector 
So far we can say that the retail food sector is seeing a price squeeze following the arrival of new 
foreign players, and the current operators have begun to compete through low-price subsidiaries or 
jointly owned companies. This price squeeze appears to have been made possible by shrinking profit 
margins  and  low  unit  labour  costs.  The  potential  for  price  reductions  is  difficult  to  estimate,  but 
comparisons with other countries as well as between different regions in Sweden indicate that there is 
scope for lower food prices in Sweden. 
For some time now the price squeeze has become increasingly noticeable to people in general in so 
far as we have more low-price shops to choose between and there is a wider range of cheap products 
in the traditional shops, but also through greater downward pressure on the prices of “ordinary” goods. 
It  is  difficult,  however,  to  ascertain  how  long  the  price  squeeze  will  continue  and  when  it  will  have 
reached its full impact on the recorded CPI. 
Concluding remarks 
Globalisation and tougher competition have entailed effects both on price developments and on the 
labour market in Sweden and requires much in terms of the ability to adapt in the economy and in 
society on the whole. If the structural changes do not generate new employment quickly enough, the 
competition risks driving companies out of business and reducing the number of employees without 
                                                      
5   Source: International Tax Comparisons 2004, the Swedish Taxpayers Association. 
6   See, e.g., the Swedish Competition Authority 2002a, 2002b and 2000:2. 
7   Swedish Competition Authority, in cooperation with the Pensioners’ National Organisation. 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 5
this reduction being compensated for in other areas. We can also see how productivity in Sweden has 
grown stronger than what is usual at this stage of the business cycle. 
In the current debate there have been claims for some time that the Riksbank is responsible for the 
fact that employment has not risen faster, by not having lowered the policy rate earlier and by more, 
which  the  presently  low  inflation  would  have  permitted.  Like  other  forecasters,  the  Riksbank 
underestimated the effects on inflation of the increasingly strong global competition and productivity 
growth.  It  cannot  be  ruled  out  that  employment  could  have  been  somewhat  higher  today  if  we  had 
been able to better foresee the developments, but we are talking about small differences and far from 
the figures that have been mentioned in the debate. It is important to remember that the repo rate is 
unusually  low  today,  which  means  that  monetary  policy  is  already  expansionary  and  thus  not  an 
obstacle to consumption and investment. The main reasons behind the weak employment are rather 
to be found in supply factors that the Riksbank cannot influence; among other things, the incentives to 
start businesses and hire staff as well as the willingness of people to accept employment, move and 
look for new jobs. 
In the recent period, the Swedish economy has mainly been driven by firm export demand. This has 
generated  healthy  profits  for  companies  and  higher  incomes  for  employees,  and  we  are  now  at  a 
stage  where  domestic  demand  is  expected  to  take  over  as  the  driving  force  in  the  economy  and 
employment to rise. But there is a risk that an improvement in the labour market will be held back by 
structural factors, i.e. that production and the labour market will not adapt quickly enough to changed 
conditions abroad, which could impair the prospects for a pick-up in domestic demand. 
In  addition,  we  have  recently  seen  signs  of  somewhat  weaker  economic  activity  than  we  had 
previously expected. Should this tendency prove to be more persistent, there is a risk of an economic 
downturn, with a softer inflation outlook as a consequence. I have previously noted a risk that rising 
interest rates and falling house prices could lead to unnecessary strains in the real economy in the 
long  run,  with  a  drop  in  demand  as  a  result.  This  remains  a  risk,  but  in  a  situation  with  clearly 
weakening  economic  activity  it  may  prove  necessary  to  conduct  monetary  policy  in  a  more 
expansionary direction. However, we are currently in a position where the uncertainty regarding what 
course the developments will take is still considerable. Therefore, we will as usual be monitoring the 
situation very closely up to the next monetary policy meeting. 
CPI developments since 1980
(Annual percentage change)
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
jan-80
jan-85
jan-90
jan-95
jan-00
jan-05
 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
 6 
 BIS Review 39/2005
Inflation: goods and services 
(excl. oil, energy and mortgage interest)
12-month changes in per cent
Goods Services
Varor
Tjänster
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
jan-95 jan-96 jan-97 jan-98 jan-99 jan-00 jan-01 jan-02 jan-03 jan-04 jan-05
Note. Inflation measures computed according to Statistics Sweden’s new method.
Source: The Riksbank
 Underlying inflation, domestic inflation and 
food prices in the CPI 
(Annual percentage change)
UND1X
UND1X
KPI, livsmedelspriser
CPI, food prices
UNDINHX
UNDINHX
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05
  14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
BIS Review 39/2005 
 7
