Toshihiko Fukui: Toward achieving strong economic growth in Japan 
Summary  of  a  speech  given  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Keizai 
Doyukai (Japan Association of Corporate Executives) Members’ Meeting, Tokyo, 13 May 2005. 
 Introduction  
Semiannually  in  April  and  October,  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  decides  the  text  of  the 
Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices,  or  the  Outlook  Report  as  we  call  it,  and releases  it.  This 
report  describes  the  Bank's  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  which  provides  the  basis  for 
conducting  monetary  policy.  We  decided  to  extend  the  projection  period  for  the  April  issues  of  the 
Outlook Report by one year to two fiscal years, and hence the report released at the end of April 2005 
covers the outlook for fiscal 2005 and 2006. In deciding on the extension, the Bank gave consideration 
to  the  fact  that  it  takes  a  certain  amount  of  time  for  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  to  spread  to 
economic activity and prices, and also looked at the practice of other central banks for reference.  
Today, I would like to explain first the current situation and the outlook for Japan's economic activity 
and prices, particularly the content of the April Outlook Report, focusing on the underlying mechanism 
of developments in economic activity and prices. I will then talk about the conduct of monetary policy 
in such an economic and price situation.  
The current situation and the outlook for Japan's economic activity and prices  
I.  
The  Bank's  projections  for  fiscal  2005  and  2006  presented  in  the  April  Outlook  Report  were,  in 
summary, that the economy is expected to experience a relatively long period of growth, albeit at a 
moderate pace. The economy is currently experiencing the third recovery phase since the bursting of 
the bubble. In the past two recovery phases, the recovery soon ran out of steam, and the economy 
slipped back into recession. This time, however, the economy has been on a relatively long recovery 
trend, and this is likely to continue.  
Recently, Japan's economy has been experiencing a temporary pause, with the real GDP growth rate 
standing almost at the same level for three consecutive quarters from the second quarter of 2004. The 
major  factor  behind  this  is  the  progress  in  global  adjustments  of  production  and  inventories  of 
IT-related sectors. This has been evidenced by the sluggishness of exports of capital goods and parts, 
particularly  those  for  semiconductor  manufacturing  equipment,  and  of  IT-related  goods  such  as 
electronic parts, and the continued decrease in production of IT-related goods. Given this situation, 
there was a view that the current economic recovery might stall.  
However,  exports  have  started  to  pick  up  and  production  has  stopped  declining  recently,  and  it  is 
gradually  becoming  clear  that  the  current  pause  is  only  a  temporary  one,  leading  to  a  sustainable 
growth path in the not so distant future, and not the prelude to a descent into an economic recession.  
Adjustments in IT-related sectors are likely to be completed around the middle of 2005 on the whole, 
although  the  degree  of  progress  has  differed  by  type  of  product:  while  adjustments  for  digital 
appliances  have  shown  considerable  progress,  there  has  not  been  much  in  the  case  of  mobile 
phones. Compared to the time of the bursting of the IT bubble in 2001, the current adjustments are 
likely to be mild and completed in a shorter period of time. Learning from the lessons of the IT bubble, 
firms  have  improved  their  global  inventory  management  and  were  cautious  about  building  up 
inventories. In addition, they started to make adjustments in inventories at a relatively earlier stage as 
soon as signs of weak demand emerged. All this contributed to alleviating the degree of adjustment. 
Furthermore, unlike the situation at the time of the IT bubble when demand concentrated on personal 
computers,  there  is  a  wider  range  of  demand  for  IT  products,  such  as  digital  appliances,  in  which 
Japan has a comparative advantage. This demand-side factor has also contributed greatly.  
Next, I would like to explain the background to the Bank's outlook that the economy is expected to 
experience a relatively long period of growth, albeit at a moderate pace, after adjustments in IT-related 
sectors  are  completed  in  the  not  so  distant  future  and  the  economy  emerges  from  the  temporary 
pause.  
BIS Review 35/2005 
 1
Our projection of continuing recovery is based on the fact that, in summary, both the economic and 
financial fundamentals have been strengthening.  
On  the  economic  side,  there  has  been  progress  in  adjustments  of  firms'  excessive  production 
capacity,  holdings  of  labor,  and  debts.  Corporate  profits  have  exceeded  the  level  at  the  end  of  the 
bubble period and excess production capacity as perceived by firms has almost been eliminated, as 
was  evidenced  in  the  March  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan).  In 
addition,  the  diffusion  index  for  employment  conditions  indicated  that  the  number  of  firms  that 
perceived they had insufficient holdings of labor exceeded those that perceived they had excessive 
holdings of labor for the first time since the 1992 survey on an all industries basis.  
On  the  financial  side,  measures  have  also  been  taken  to  restore  the  soundness  of  the  financial 
system,  particularly  in  terms  of  reducing  nonperforming  loans  (NPLs),  and  these  have  made  good 
progress.  Against  this  background,  blanket  deposit  insurance  was  fully  lifted  in  April  2005  and  the 
financial environment to support positive corporate activity is being established.  
Despite these improvements, the behavior of firms remains cautious on the whole. Although it may 
sound paradoxical, the economic recovery is projected to be sustainable but remain moderate against 
the background of such behavior. Business fixed investment continues to grow, and some firms have 
started to show a positive stance in their investment, however only to a limited extent. The majority of 
firms  are  still  placing  priority  on  using  the  high  level  of  corporate  profits  to  reduce  interest-bearing 
liabilities and, in most cases where firms increase investment, the amount does not exceed cash flow.  
Given this cautious stance of Japanese firms, the tempo of the economic recovery is likely to remain 
moderate.  At  the  same  time,  the  moderate  pace  of  recovery  itself  implies  that  Japan's  economy  is 
expected to experience a relatively long period of growth. While external shocks played a significant 
role  in  some  past  large  fluctuations  in  the  economy,  there  were  cases  where  changes  in  domestic 
demand amplified cyclical fluctuation. When over-optimistic expectations about future growth emerge 
and an excessive level of business fixed investment and inventory investment is encouraged in the 
situation where the economy is becoming more active, it helps to boost the peak of the business cycle, 
but causes the trough to be deeper through additional adjustment stemming from the overshoot. Such 
large swings in the business cycle stemming from changes in domestic demand are not likely to occur 
in the current economic recovery, owing to the cautious behavior of firms.  
To translate this view into actual figures, the GDP growth rate is expected to be around 1.5 percent for 
both fiscal 2005 and 2006, slightly above the potential growth rate.  
As for the outlook for prices, the cautious behavior of firms, particularly firms' stance on restraining 
labor costs, will also play an important role.  
The  rise  in  the  prices  of  commodities  at  home  and  abroad,  including  crude  oil,  has  pushed  up 
materials costs, and therefore awareness of a risk of inflation on a global basis has begun to increase. 
However,  the  rise  in  materials costs has  been  significantly  offset by  increases  in  productivity  in  the 
corporate sector and by the restraint on labor costs.  
Particularly in Japan, the consumer price index (CPI) has not increased. Japanese firms are making 
more efforts to increase their productivity. Even though the percentage share of labor costs compared 
to the total added value created by the corporate sector has declined to the level recorded in the early 
1990s, many firms seem to be maintaining their cautious stance of restraining labor costs. In addition, 
the  effects  of  the  decline  in  rice  prices  and  the  reduction  in  electricity  and  telephone  charges  are 
expected to continue for a while. The projected rate of change in the CPI on a year-on-year basis is 
around zero percent for fiscal 2005, and slightly positive for fiscal 2006, as these factors are having a 
strong effect on consumer prices, although gradual upward pressures basically continue reflecting the 
strength of the economy.  
Positive and negative deviations from the projected outlook  
II.  
As I have said before, our most likely projection is that Japan's economy will experience a relatively 
long period of growth, albeit at a moderate pace.  
Of course, in the two-year projection period, the possibility cannot be ruled out that shocks significantly 
affecting economic activity and prices might occur and cause upward or downward deviations from the 
projected outlook. The Outlook Report pointed out factors to which the Bank should pay due attention, 
as  they  could  cause  economic  activity  to  deviate:  developments  in  energy  and  materials  prices, 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2005
developments in the U.S. and Chinese economies, and developments in domestic private demand. I 
would like to comment on two points regarding the downside risks, namely, developments in energy 
and materials prices and developments in the world economy.  
With regard to the first point, nominal crude oil prices have been at historically high levels, although on 
a  real  basis  they  are  substantially  below  their  historical  peak.  This  basically  reflects  the  tight 
supply-demand situation due to a decline in spare production capacity in oil-producing countries with 
continuing expansion in the global economy. From a broader perspective, China and East European 
countries have joined the global market economy since the 1980s, and dramatically expanded their 
production capacity of various goods using their comparative advantage in labor costs. These changes 
have been putting downward pressure on the prices of final goods, and they have been causing the 
prices of raw materials to rise significantly by consuming substantial amounts of natural resources. It 
should be said, however, that some speculative movements have been observed in the recent rise in 
crude oil prices as evidenced in the fact that there were sharp price reactions to weather forecasts in 
the United States and Europe and reports on oil inventories in the United States.  
As  evident  in  the  fact  that  the  crude  oil  consumption  per  unit  of  real  GDP  in  Japan  is  only  about 
70 percent  of  that  in  the  United  States,  Japan's  energy  efficiency  is  high  compared  to  other 
economies, and this alleviates the negative effect of high crude oil prices on the economy. In addition, 
the  yen's  appreciation  in  the  past  two  years  has  partially  restrained  the  rise  in  crude  oil  prices 
denominated in yen. However, closer monitoring is required of the risk of downward deviation of the 
economy, due to possible emergence of a profit squeeze and decline in real purchasing power, as the 
price of Middle Eastern crude oil, which accounts for a significant proportion of Japan's imports, has 
risen  in  the  current  situation  unlike  during  the  price  hike  last  year.  In  addition,  as  evident  from 
continuing high price levels in the futures market, the possibility cannot be ruled out that expectations 
that  crude  oil  prices  will  remain  high  may  become  more  widespread.  If  the  high  price  is  actually 
sustained, the trajectory of global economic growth might deviate downward, and we need to be aware 
of the indirect effects of any deceleration of the global economy on the Japanese economy through 
the resulting reduction in exports.  
The second point I would like to discuss as downside risk is the outlook for the world economy.  
The world economy continues steady expansion, occurring mainly in the United States and China, and 
it  is  thought  very  likely  that  it  will  continue  expanding  at  a  rate  roughly  equivalent  to  the  potential 
growth  rate.  At  the  meeting  in  April,  the  G-7  countries  concurred  that  global  expansion  remained 
robust and economic growth in 2005 is likely to be solid. The IMF forecast of real GDP growth for 2005 
and 2006 is 4 to 5 percent. Regarding price developments, the rise in energy and materials prices, 
including  crude  oil,  has  so  far  been  absorbed  by  the  corporate  sector  partly  through  productivity 
increases, and as a result, inflation has been contained.  
However, with the possibility of high materials prices continuing for a considerable period, awareness 
of  a  risk  of  inflation  on  a  global  basis  has  begun  to  increase.  In  the  U.S.  economy,  although 
inflationary pressures are most likely to be contained, due consideration has been given to a possible 
increase in inflation expectations, since productivity growth has been decelerating and unit labor cost 
has been increasing in a situation where domestic supply-demand conditions are already tight. The 
U.S.  Federal  Reserve  indicated  its  judgment  on  prices  in  the  press  release  issued  after  the  policy 
change in May as follows: "Pressures on inflation have picked up in recent months and pricing power 
is  more  evident.  Longer-term  inflation  expectations  remain  well  contained."  The  Bank  will  closely 
monitor,  with  consideration  of  their  implications  for  the  Japanese  economy,  changes  in  the  global 
circumstances surrounding prices and the effects on the global economy through financial markets, for 
example, a rise in long-term interest rates.  
In  China,  strong  economic  growth  is  continuing  supported  by  firm  domestic  and  external  demand. 
However, it is pointed out that fixed asset investment continues relatively high growth and there is the 
risk  of  an  infrastructural  bottleneck  arising,  for  example  from  the  shortage  of  electricity.  China  has 
structural  problems,  including  the  large  income  gap  between  metropolitan  and  rural  areas.  The 
Chinese  economy  should  be  watched  carefully  from  the  viewpoint  of  whether  it  can  continue  to 
achieve sustainable growth.  
Characteristics of corporate behavior and future prospects  
III.  
One of the characteristics of Japan's current economic recovery is that the economy is growing at a 
moderate  pace.  As  I  have  already  mentioned,  this  is  against  the  background  of  cautious  corporate 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 3
behavior. In other words, if corporate behavior becomes more active, it could cause the outlook for 
economic activity and prices, which I have just explained, to deviate upward.  
One  might  wonder  why  firms  continue  to  be  cautious  even  in  a  situation  of  continued  economic 
recovery  with  improved  profitability.  I  will  present  some  possible  explanations  for  their  cautious 
behavior.  
First,  it  is  rational  of  firms  to  want  to  repay  interest-bearing  liabilities  and  increase  capital  as 
appropriate,  because  they  have  become  more  conscious  of  business  risk  and  financial  risk  after 
experiencing the severe downturn in the business cycle after the bursting of the bubble and instability 
in  the  financial  system.  Firms  have  been  strongly  aware  of  the  necessity  of  strengthening  their 
resilience  to  unexpected  shocks  by  squeezing  inventories  and  fixed  costs.  They  have  also  been 
making  efforts  to  reduce  their  debt-to-capital  ratios  in  light  of  the  heightened  awareness  of  credit 
ratings and financial markets' evaluation with the progress of globalization of financial markets.  
Second,  the  intensified  global  competition  accompanying  emerging  economies'  transition  to  market 
economy, which I mentioned earlier, is likely another factor.  
Cautious  corporate  behavior  can  be  seen  in  most  advanced  nations,  including  the  United  States, 
though to a varying degree. The yield spread derived by subtracting the expected earnings on stocks 
from long-term interest rates has been on a declining trend in these countries. This means that the 
stock markets' expectations for economic growth have been declining.  
While  corporate  scandals  in  the  United  States  related  to  accounting  rules  and  delayed  structural 
reforms  in  Europe  may  also  have  had  some  effect  on  investors'  sentiment,  intensified  global 
competition seems to have contributed to the cautiousness of corporate behavior.  
It is quite natural for Japanese firms to feel that they are most exposed to global competition pressure 
partly due to Japan's geographical proximity to other Asian countries. In addition, there is increased 
awareness that there will be greater changes in the business environment in the future, such as further 
population  aging  as  well  as  the  lower  birth  rate  resulting  in  a  decrease  in  population.  With  the 
experience of a prolonged period of low economic growth, expected growth for the Japanese economy 
may  have  declined somewhat.  According  to a survey  of  firms conducted  by the  Cabinet Office,  the 
expected growth rate over the next five years was declining from the level of 4 percent in the early 
1990s.  Although  it  has  recently  bottomed  out  and  started  to  increase  slightly,  it  is  still  at  around 
1 percent.  
Third and last, some point out that the present high profitability of firms has been supported by the 
extremely low interest rates and that this situation cannot continue forever.  
However,  with  advances  in  the  process  of  structural  adjustment,  an  environment  is  in  fact  being 
established for firms to take positive action.  
On the financial front, firms have been making progress in reducing debt. The ratio of corporate debt 
outstanding to sales for nonmanufacturers has declined, but is still slightly higher than in the first half 
of the 1980s. As for manufacturers, the ratio has declined to lower levels than in that period. In this 
situation,  an  uptrend  in  the  capital  ratio  has  become  more  marked  for  both  manufacturing  and 
nonmanufacturing firms. Firms have recently been active in equity financing, which has been a primary 
factor promoting these developments. In the extremely low long-term interest rate environment since 
2000,  the  cost  of  corporate  debt  has  declined  significantly  due  to  the  progress  in  repayment  and 
refinancing of past borrowings with high funding costs. Some say that the cost of corporate debt may 
have declined as far as it can. On the other hand, the profitability of large firms is above the levels 
during the bubble period and even that of small and medium-sized firms is at the highest level since 
the  bursting  of  the  bubble.  As  a  result,  profitability  exceeds  the  cost  of  debt.  This  means  that  an 
environment is being established that encourages firms to use cash flow for business fixed investment 
rather than repaying debt.  
In view of the situation, an increasing number of firms are expected to use free cash flow for business 
fixed  investment  and  other  investments,  and  research  and  development,  both  for  the  purpose  of 
growth, rather than for repaying their debt, with a view to enhancing corporate value in the medium to 
long term. Firms that have developed a strategy to diversify their business may make use of mergers 
and acquisitions. Due partly to strengthening corporate governance, firms may increasingly buy back 
their own stocks or increase their propensity to pay dividends, both of which would increase payouts to 
shareholders. An increasing number of firms will be taking a more positive attitude to business activity 
with funds they raise, taking advantage of an accommodative financial environment.  
4 
 BIS Review 35/2005
On the employment front, an increasing number of firms may raise nominal wages and bonuses and 
recruit  a  larger  number  of  new  graduates  in  order  to  ensure  that  they  have  a  sufficient  number  of 
skilled workers and to better attain a more balanced composition of workers.  
Such movements should spread in the process of the economy taking a balanced growth path, and 
this is in turn expected to enhance economic growth, creating cyclical momentum.  
So far, I have focused on corporate behavior in relation to overall economic activity. I intend to pay 
close attention to how these developments in the corporate sector affect prices.  
Looking at factors that push down prices, the price fall in Japan in 2001-02 was, to a large extent, due 
to the weakness in demand. Recently, however, downward pressure on prices stemming from weak 
demand has been abating, and that stemming from other factors is increasing. While the reduction in 
electricity  and  telephone  charges  against  the  background  of  deregulation  is  one  of  the  factors, 
significant  factors  behind  the  fall  in  prices  of  final  goods  and  services  are  higher  productivity  and, 
above all, firms' persistent stance of restraining labor costs.  
Two  notable  characteristics  of  the  recent  Japanese  economy  -  that  the  economy  is  growing  at  a 
moderate pace and that consumer prices remain relatively unresponsive to the output gap - are both a 
reflection  of  firms'  cautious  behavior.  Therefore,  close  attention  should  be  paid  to  whether  firms' 
activities become more positive and whether their stance of restraining labor costs might change. As 
expected  economic growth  increases,  views  on  prices  are  expected  to  change.  In  fact,  deflationary 
expectations  of  households  and  firms  have  been  subsiding  steadily  since  they  peaked  in  2001,  as 
evident in recent surveys that show an increase in the percentage of individuals and firms expecting a 
rise in prices. The fact that land prices in the Tokyo metropolitan area are beginning to rise after the 
decline came to a halt may be a sign of an increase in expected economic growth. Attention should 
also be paid to how price expectations and land prices will develop in the future.  
Monetary policy  
IV.  
The  Bank  currently  implements  a  quantitative  easing  policy  with  the  outstanding  balance  of  current 
accounts held at the Bank as the main operating target. The framework is based on the following two 
key elements.  
First, the Bank continues to provide ample liquidity to the money market. To be more specific, it has 
been  providing  ample  liquidity  so  that  the  outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  at  the  Bank 
substantially exceeded the amount of required reserves, which is about 6 trillion yen at present. This 
will continue to generate confidence among market participants about raising funds and has resulted 
in an overnight call rate of almost zero.  
Second, the Bank has made a commitment, unprecedented in the history of central banks, to continue 
this  policy  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (excluding  fresh  food,  on  a  nationwide 
basis) registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis. This commitment will continue to have 
the effect of lowering longer-term interest rates by causing market participants to expect short-term 
interest rates to remain at zero for longer.  
The effects of monetary policy  
V.  
More than four years have passed since the Bank adopted the quantitative easing policy. While the 
framework of the policy has remained unchanged, the policy effects should continue to change over 
time depending on developments in economic activity and prices, and also the conditions of financial 
markets and the financial system.  
At around the time of the introduction of the quantitative easing policy, the real GDP growth rate was 
minus 1.1 percent year on year and the CPI decreased by 1.0 percent year on year for fiscal 2001. 
Furthermore, anxiety about financial system stability persisted as financial institutions were burdened 
with  a  large  amount  of  NPLs.  In  this  situation,  there  was  a  risk  of  a  credit  crunch  as  financial 
institutions  became  extremely  cautious  about  extending  credit  to  firms  unless  they  were  confident 
about raising enough liquidity, and there was strong awareness of the risk of the economy falling into a 
deflationary spiral.  
In such an economic and financial situation, the Bank needed to firmly maintain an accommodative 
financial environment by providing ample liquidity flexibly and in a timely manner, thereby easing the 
BIS Review 35/2005 
 5
public's and market participants' concerns about the availability of funds and ensuring stability in the 
financial  markets.  As  a  result  of  the  Bank's  provision  of  ample  liquidity,  financial  markets  remained 
stable and rapid tightening in corporate financing was not observed, even when financial institutions' 
liquidity  demand  had  continued  to  rise  in  a  situation  where,  for  example,  bank  stocks  plunged  and 
there was heightened uncertainty regarding measures to deal with the NPL problem in the fall of 2002.  
During this period, in a sense, the policy effects stemming from the ample liquidity provided by the 
Bank, through which concern about the availability of liquidity was eased, may have been greater than 
those of the Bank's policy commitment, namely, its commitment in terms of policy duration.  
Since then, both the economy and the financial situation have been on an improving trend. Since fiscal 
2002, the year-on-year growth rate of real GDP has been positive, and the year-on-year rate of decline 
in  consumer  prices  has  diminished  to  almost  zero  percent.  An  accommodative  corporate  financing 
environment  has  been  supporting  these  developments.  Together  with  an  increase  in  financial 
institutions'  capital  adequacy  ratios  and  an  improvement  in  firms'  financial  strength  and  profitability, 
increased  confidence  among  financial  institutions  and  firms  about  the  availability  of  funds  brought 
about by the quantitative easing policy has produced this desirable environment.  
The quantitative easing policy framework provides stronger support for economic recovery, the more 
the economic recovery gains momentum. Here, the effects stemming from the Bank's commitment in 
terms of policy duration are gradually playing a larger role than those stemming from ample liquidity 
provision by the Bank.  
Interest  rates  usually  rise  with  an  improvement  in  economic  activity  and  an  increase  in  prices.  The 
Bank's commitment, however, keeps longer-term interest rates low by stabilizing expectations about 
the future level of interest rates, and this will allow firms to continue to enjoy low funding costs. While 
funding  costs  remain  low,  the  rate  of  return  on  investment  increases  with  economic  recovery,  and, 
accordingly net returns on investments in economic activity will improve.  
The  quantitative  easing  policy  has  continued  to  contribute  to  the  Japanese  economy  with  some 
changes in the way it affects the economy, as I have just described. Recently, the market situation that 
surrounds  the  policy  is  changing  significantly  with  the  enhanced  soundness  of  the  financial  system 
and  abatement  of  anxiety  about  financial  system  stability.  Financial  institutions  have  become  more 
confident about raising funds in the market. Furthermore, they are increasingly placing emphasis on 
strengthening  their  profitability  with  a  view  to  improving  their  credit  ratings  and  raising stock  prices, 
and this may have been reducing their incentive to maintain funds in current accounts at the Bank that 
yield no interest.  
As  financial  institutions'  demand  for  liquidity  has  been  declining,  their  demand  for  funds  supplied 
through the Bank's market operations has decreased. Recently, as a result, undersubscription, where 
financial  institutions'  bids  fall  short  of  the  Bank's  offers,  has  occurred  frequently  in  funds-supplying 
operations.  This  phenomenon  can  be  considered  as  an  encouraging  sign  that  the  conditions 
surrounding the financial system have improved.  
This situation, in turn, is causing difficulty in providing funds through the Bank's market operations. At 
Monetary  Policy  Meetings,  Policy  Board  members  have  been  discussing  whether  to  maintain  the 
current high target range for the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank. I must stress 
that the discussions have been from the viewpoint of examining what is the most appropriate way for 
the  Bank  to  maintain  the  current  quantitative  easing  policy  framework,  in  response  to  the  current 
situation where financial institutions' demand for liquidity is declining and financial market conditions 
are changing. The Bank will firmly maintain the framework whereby the Bank provides ample liquidity 
significantly  exceeding  the  required reserves  in  accordance  with  its  commitment  based  on  the  CPI, 
thereby firmly maintaining monetary easing.  
I would like to explain our thinking in relation to the timing of the change in the policy framework.  
As I explained earlier, the forecasts of Policy Board members for the year-on-year rate of change in 
the  CPI  are  around  zero  percent  for  fiscal  2005  and  slightly  positive  for  fiscal  2006.  Price 
developments may deviate from the forecasts due to deviations of economic activity from the projected 
path,  and  also  to  factors  unique  to  prices,  for  example,  emergence  of  inflationary  sentiment  or  the 
effects of various measures to promote competition such as deregulation. Therefore, it is not certain 
whether the conditions in the Bank's commitment will be fulfilled and there will be occasion to change 
the  present  framework  of  the  quantitative  easing  policy  during  the  projection  period  covered  in  the 
April Outlook Report. However, assuming that our projections regarding prices in fact materialize, it is 
likely that this possibility will gradually increase over the course of fiscal 2006.  
6 
 BIS Review 35/2005
Nevertheless, if economic activity and prices continue to be in line with our projections presented in 
the Outlook Report, that is, higher productivity and other factors continue to contain to a large extent 
upward pressure on prices as the economy follows a sustainable and balanced growth path, this will 
likely  give  the  Bank  latitude  in  changing  the  policy  framework  and  in  conducting  monetary  policy 
thereafter.  
I hope that the management of Japanese firms, including those of you present at this meeting, will 
take  advantage  of  the  current  accommodative  financial  environment  and  take  up  new  business 
opportunities  in  a  more  positive  manner.  I  am  confident  that  this  will  lead  to  more  dynamic 
development of the Japanese economy.  
BIS Review 35/2005 
 7
