Rodrigo de Rato: The IMF in a changing world (keynote address) 
Keynote address by Mr Rodrigo de Rato, Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, at the 
Joint IMF-Bundesbank Symposium “The IMF in a changing world”, Frankfurt, 8 June 2005. 
 Thank you, Mr. Stark, for that opening and introduction. Good morning – It is a great pleasure to be 
here  today  among  this  impressive gathering of  experts  from  many  countries. Let  me  first  thank  the 
German  authorities  for  graciously  hosting  this  conference.  Their  organization  of  this  event  is  much 
appreciated. 
As  you  know,  the  IMF  was  established  about  60  years  ago.  The  world  economy  has  witnessed 
dramatic  changes  since  that  time.  For  instance,  our  membership  has  grown  four-fold,  from  around 
40 to  184.  The world’s  financial  landscape has  also  been  dramatically  altered  by  the  rise of  private 
international capital flows. Throughout the changes of the last six decades, the IMF has continually 
evolved to meet the needs of its members and the international economic system. It is in that spirit of 
evolution  and  renewal  that  we  meet  today  to  discuss  issues  related  to  the  international  monetary 
system, financial stability and, more broadly, the IMF’s role in the world economy. 
My remarks this morning may be conveniently divided into three sections: 
• 
• 
• 
In going through these subjects, it is my hope that the developments and ideas in each section will 
provide useful context for your panel discussions later today. 
The origins of the IMF, addressing its purposes, objectives, and mandates. 
Main changes to the IMF since its establishment, and the reasons for those changes. 
Some thoughts on the future role of the IMF in the international monetary system. 
The IMF and its origins 
We live today in a highly globalized and integrated world. However, some analysts may suggest that 
the global economy was actually more integrated at the end of the 19th century than it is now. In the 
first half of the 20th century, nationalism and protectionism disrupted this integration, setting off the 
Great Depression and contributing to World War II. The IMF – and the World Bank, its sister institution 
– were established to restore an open system of trade and finance, help countries rebuild from the war 
and, in the process, hopefully build a new era of world peace and prosperity. 
Against that background, a key part of the IMF’s mandate today is the promotion and maintenance of 
monetary and financial stability, both in individual countries and at the international level. Stability is 
the foundation for sustained economic growth, and crisis prevention and resolution is an integral part 
of  our  work.  The  IMF  discharges  this mandate  in  a  variety  of  ways,  including  the  following.  First,  it 
provides  the  framework  and  mechanisms  for  international  economic  cooperation.  With  increasing 
integration in the world economy, the importance of this aspect cannot be overstated. Second, it helps 
countries  design  macroeconomic  policies  that  achieve  and  maintain  high  levels  of  employment  and 
income. The promotion of open economies and trade is a key element of these policies. Third, the IMF 
helps in the orderly correction of a country’s balance of payments problems by providing temporary 
financing. 
The ways in which we carry out our operations are also unique in several respects. Broadly-speaking, 
these may be divided into three categories of activities: 
• 
Surveillance – This involves the monitoring of economic and financial conditions, both at the 
global level and in individual countries. For the IMF, surveillance is a central instrument for 
maintaining monetary and financial stability. By obliging each IMF member to engage in a 
regular consultation with us on its economic policies, the surveillance process also explicitly 
recognizes the role that all countries play in maintaining global stability. 
Lending  –  Our  financing  role  is  focused  in  assisting  members  with  balance  of  payments 
adjustments.  Through  the  temporary  provision  of  funds,  IMF  lending  gives  members 
breathing room to implement policy measures to overcome underlying economic problems. 
 BIS Review 43/2005 
 1
For the poorest countries, financing may be provided on concessional terms, and with longer 
maturities. The availability of IMF funds to assist in economic adjustment gives confidence to 
members and the international system as a whole, since it lowers the incentive for countries 
to  take  adjustment  measures  which  are  damaging  to  the  national  and  international 
economies. 
Technical Assistance – Technical advice and assistance is provided to member countries 
in areas of the IMF’s expertise, primarily in macroeconomic and financial policymaking. By 
helping to build institutional and human capacity for the making of sound economic policies, 
IMF technical assistance contributes to the building of strong economies and stable growth. 
 The  IMF’s  purposes,  and  its  operational  activities,  were  therefore  designed  with  a  key  objective  in 
mind  –  that  is,  the  fostering  of  healthy  national  economies,  linked  by  finance  and  trade,  as  the 
foundation for a robust global economic system. I think it correct to say that this vision for international 
peace  and stability  has produced remarkable results,  for  the  past  fifty  years  have  been  a period  of 
growing economic prosperity and freedom. Global per capita income has more than tripled, and most 
of the world has experienced major improvements in literacy and life expectancy. Among the biggest 
gainers have been the developing nations, home to half of the world’s population. Many of them have 
been quick to take advantage of the opportunities afforded by the global economy, especially during 
the last two decades. These countries – whose ranks include Brazil, Chile, China, India, Korea, and 
Mexico – were able to double their share in world trade, raise per capita incomes, and lift millions out 
of poverty. Their experience demonstrates that integration into the global economy can bring major 
benefits. 
The IMF’s evolution 
The world has witnessed many changes and developments – in technology, politics, culture, as well as 
economics  –  over  the  years,  and  the  IMF  has  adapted  itself  accordingly.  At  the  time  of  IMF’s 
establishment,  our  economic  policy  advice  focused  mainly  on  helping  members  to  shape  sound 
macroeconomic  and  financial  policies,  within  the  disciplines  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  fixed 
exchange  rates.  The  breakdown  of  that  system  in  the  early  1970s,  and  the  resultant  Second 
Amendment  of  the  IMF’s  Articles  of  Agreement,  led  to  a  re-orientation  of  the  IMF’s  functions.  In 
particular,  the  revision  of  Article  IV,  and  the  introduction  of  the  surveillance  process,  explicitly 
recognized the close relationship between domestic economic policies and international stability. To 
this day, this forms the basis for our systematic and comprehensive review of economic conditions and 
policies in each member country. 
Similarly, the wave of de-colonization that swept the world from the 1950s onwards placed new and 
complex responsibilities on the Fund. The IMF quickly found that countries looked to it for advice and 
assistance  beyond  the  traditional  macroeconomic  areas  of  fiscal  policy,  monetary  policy,  and 
exchange rate systems. In addition to these subjects, IMF advice and assistance were also sought on 
establishing the institutions of monetary and fiscal policy, and on supply-side structural policies to help 
promote sustained growth. In the last fifteen years, following the end of the Cold War, new challenges 
were created in this regard by the transition of former centrally-planned economies to market-based 
systems.  Through  our  work  in  these  areas,  it  also  became  increasingly  clear  that  structural  and 
institutional issues were important for stability and growth in other member countries too, including the 
major industrial economies. 
The  area  of  IMF  financing  has  also  seen  great  transformation.  For  example,  although  IMF  lending 
continues to be targeted at short-term balance of payments needs, our financing instruments have, for 
nearly two decades, included concessional lending for low-income countries. In response to the rapid 
development of international capital markets as a major source of financing for countries, special IMF 
financing policies have also been put in place to assist countries facing capitalaccount driven crises. 
Related to these capital market developments, the Fund also began to play an unanticipated role in 
facilitating  the  resolution  of  sovereign  debt  problems.  This  function  became  critically  important 
following the emergence of the debt crisis in 1982, and it remains so today. 
All of these changes – ranging from de-colonization and transition, to the rapid development of private 
international capital flows and new instruments, to the emergence of capital-account driven crises – 
posed new challenges for the IMF. In many cases, these developments touched upon issues which lay 
at  the  frontiers  of  economic  knowledge  and  research.  Addressing  them  has  led  to  a  significant 
transformation of the Fund, including a broadening of the skills mix of Fund staff, greater dialogue with 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2005
private financial sectors, and more involvement in institutional development in member countries. In 
the process, the IMF has also become a more open and transparent institution. 
Meeting the needs of the future 
To continue to serve the interests of our member countries and the international community at large, 
the  IMF  has  to  be  in  a  position  to  deal  with  the  influences  that  are  expected  to  shape  the  global 
economy  in  the  coming  years.  We  must  not  remain  static,  nor  must  we  change  only  in  a  reactive 
manner when forced to. For that reason, I have initiated an examination of the Fund’s medium-term 
strategic direction. We hope to use this opportunity to explore a variety of issues and their implications 
for the work of the IMF. These include matters like global financial flows, regional integration, efforts to 
reduce poverty, and questions concerning global governance, transparency, and accountability. 
We are still in the early stages of the review, and there have been many preliminary ideas floated and 
discussed. At this juncture, it is important for all of us to remain flexible and open-minded, particularly 
to views and opinions from outside the IMF. However, there is a sense that the continuing evolution of 
the  Fund  must  remain  grounded  in  the  institution’s  key  areas  of  responsibility,  as  specified  in  our 
Articles  of  Agreement  –  that  is,  to  facilitate  international  monetary  cooperation,  to  foster  a  liberal 
system of international trade and payments, and to promote macroeconomic and financial stability, as 
a condition for sustained growth. As we ponder how best to meet the challenges of the future, there 
appears a strong case that the IMF should remain anchored to its core macroeconomic and financial 
areas of mandate and expertise. 
The  Fund’s  governing  organs  –  including  our  Executive  Board  and  the  International  Monetary  and 
Financial  Committee  (IMFC)  –  are  already  actively  engaged  in  this  review.  They  have  had  various 
occasions to consider this matter, and I would like to use this opportunity to present some of the key 
ideas that have emerged in discussion, in the following five areas: surveillance, financial sector and 
capital markets work, Fund financing and lending, our assistance to low-income countries, and internal 
management and governance. 
First, on surveillance, both the IMF’s Executive Board and the IMFC share my vision that a central 
task of the Fund lies in a stronger and better-focused surveillance process. IMF surveillance provides 
the  foundation  for  cooperation  among  our  members  in  the  promotion  of  stability  and  growth  in  the 
global economy. With increased trade and financial linkages among nations, and strong connections 
between  economic  performance,  poverty,  and  security  issues,  such  cooperation  to  address  shared 
problems is now more important than ever. For instance, the IMF has repeatedly pointed to the need 
to address current global imbalances, so as to reinforce the basis for more balanced and sustainable 
global  growth.  The  existing  relatively  benign  global  outlook  provides  an  excellent  window  of 
opportunity  to  do  that,  and  the  IMF  serves  as  a  ready  vehicle  through  which  to  cooperate  on  the 
necessary actions. 
With  respect  to  individual  countries,  we  should  continue  working  to  strengthen  the  bilateral 
surveillance  process.  While  focused  on  the  country  at  hand,  it  would  be  important  that  bilateral 
surveillance  be  fully-informed  by  regional  and  global  perspectives  as  well.  Systemically  important 
countries will clearly continue to deserve special attention. Operationally, our respective country teams 
will remain the focal points for our activities in individual members. At the same time, country teams 
will continue to draw upon specialized expertise where necessary, from both inside and outside of the 
Fund. To maintain overall coherence, it would be important for efforts to continue in the integration and 
sharing of information among country teams and specialized experts. 
Second,  our  work  in  financial  sectors  and  capital  markets.  The  IMF  is  the  one  international 
organization  capable  of  carrying  out  financial  sector  surveillance  universally  and  comprehensively. 
Further  efforts  will  be  needed  to  realize  this  potential,  not  least  by  deepening  the  IMF’s  role  in 
anticipating  sources  of  instability  in  national  and  global  financial  markets,  and  in  generating  timely 
action  to  address  them.  The  IMF  will  continue  to  help  countries  strengthen  their  financial  sectors, 
including  in  following  up  on  the  findings  of  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  (FSAP) 
exercises.  One  important  aspect  of  this  will  be  to  help  members  adapt  their  prudential  and 
administrative frameworks to benefit more from private capital flows. 
As national financial sectors become increasingly integrated and interdependent, another top priority 
for us must be to strengthen our understanding of the factors that drive global capital asset allocation, 
and  the  reasons  for  capital  flows  across  sectors  and  national  borders.  Early  identification  and 
assessment of capital flows will help us evaluate vulnerabilities in a timely manner, as well as enhance 
BIS Review 43/2005 
 3
countries’  ability  to  address  them.  The  effectiveness  of  our  bilateral  and  multilateral  surveillance 
activities will also be strengthened as a result. For members who wish to access international capital 
markets  and  integrate  their  economies  more  fully  into  the  global  financial  system,  we  can  provide 
advice on the appropriate sequencing of measures, such as how to strengthen their financial sectors 
and reduce their vulnerability to shocks as preparatory steps. 
Third, IMF financing and lending. The Fund’s traditional role of providing financing to help smooth 
the adjustment of temporary current-account imbalances remains vital for many countries. For others, 
our main task is to help prevent, or mitigate, capital account crises and their cross-border contagion 
effects.  To  succeed  in  these  roles,  the  IMF  must  be  able  to  exercise  selectivity  in  supporting  only 
those adjustment programs that will put the relevant members firmly on the path to external viability. 
The existence of robust domestic institutional frameworks, and strong national ownership of programs, 
would be key. Building on these principles, we will continue working towards a clearer consensus on 
the  appropriate  circumstances  and  scale  for  IMF  lending,  the  possible  need  for  additional  financial 
instruments, and the adequacy of the present framework for the orderly resolution of sovereign debt 
problems. 
Fourth, the Fund’s role in low-income countries. Low-income countries present the international 
community with some profound challenges. Over a billion people live on less than a dollar a day, and 
hundreds of millions are affected by disease. Addressing the HIV/AIDS pandemic, in particular, will be 
critical  for  growth and poverty  reduction  in  many  developing countries.  Achieving  durable  economic 
growth in these countries – which is essential for lasting poverty reduction and reaching the Millennium 
Development  Goals  –  will  therefore  require  a  strong  social  framework  as  well  as  sound  economic 
policies.  On  our  part,  the  IMF  can  help  countries  put  in  place  policies  and  systems  to  effectively 
manage the increased and large inflows of aid that could be forthcoming in response to the HIV/AIDs 
crisis. 
Importantly, lasting poverty reduction can only be achieved with stable and sustained growth. The IMF, 
with  our  mandate  in  promoting  economic  stability,  can  help  countries  to  put  in  place  strong 
macroeconomic  frameworks  that  will  lead  to  economic  expansion  and  debt  sustainability.  As  in 
everything else that we do, we must ensure that our assistance to low-income countries continues to 
fit  their  particular  needs  and  circumstances.  Some  issues  which  may  warrant  closer  examination 
include: 
• 
Ensuring  that  resources  in  the  Poverty  Reduction  and  Growth  Facility  –  our  main  lending 
instrument for developing countries – remain adequate to meet future demands; 
New ways to help low-income countries deal with economic shocks; 
In the case of low-income countries which do not need or want IMF lending, how to enhance 
the IMF’s role in signaling to others the strength of these countries’ policies; 
The role of the Fund in supporting low-income countries’ poverty reduction strategies; and 
Our relationship with donors and aid agencies. 
• 
• 
As a partner of the 2002 Monterrey Consensus, the IMF is committed to supporting countries in their 
efforts to reduce poverty and reach the Millennium Development Goals. Our unique position gives us 
the potential to contribute to building both pillars of the Monterrey Consensus. On one side, we can 
work with countries to design policies and build institutions that will help them grow out of poverty. On 
the other, we can advocate for more and better international support, and help with its coordination. 
Nevertheless, examining the issues highlighted earlier will help frame a better understanding of the 
areas of low-income country work for which the IMF can take responsibility, and those that will fall to 
other institutions and actors. It would be helpful to have greater definition in this area as we approach 
the U.N. Millennium Summit in September. 
Fifth, the IMF’s internal governance and management. To maintain the IMF’s effectiveness, it is 
essential  for  our  membership  to  resolve  the  difficult  issues  that  have  been  raised  about  our  own 
governance  –  notably,  the  voice  and  participation  of  emerging  market  economies  and  developing 
countries in our institution. All members countries should have adequate voice and participation in the 
IMF’s  decision-making,  and  the  distribution  of  our  quotas  should  reflect  developments  in  the  global 
economy. In this connection, the ongoing 13th general review of IMF quotas provides an opportunity 
to make progress on this front. 
 4 
 BIS Review 43/2005
Further,  given  the  demands  placed  on  the  IMF  by  its  members,  it  is  clear  that  the  institution’s 
resources must be commensurate with the tasks it is asked to perform. This ongoing strategic review 
will help us to identify needs, define priorities, and consider possibilities to redeploy resources from 
lower-priority  areas.  Regardless  of  the  outcome,  IMF  management,  and  our  Executive  Board,  are 
committed to making the most effective use of resources entrusted to them by our membership. Efforts 
must  therefore  continue  in  the  search  for  greater  efficiency  gains.  One  important  aspect  of  this 
concerns  the  cooperation  and  division  of  labor  between  the  IMF,  the  World  Bank,  and  other 
international organizations. This is an issue which may bear revisiting, and I am very much looking 
forward to working with President Wolfowitz, and to learning his views and vision for the Bank. 
Conclusion 
This  conference’s  organizers  have  put  together  an  excellent  program  that  addresses  many  of  the 
points  I  have  touched  upon  –  from  international  financial  stability,  to  capital  market  integration,  to 
financial  crisis  resolution,  to  IMF  governance.  In  these  and  other  areas,  work  is  underway  on  a 
medium-term strategy that will guide the IMF’s priorities and decision-making over the next few years. 
Your discussions will therefore provide valuable insights for that medium-term strategy, which we hope 
to finalize by the time of the 2005 Annual Meetings in September. Subsequently, I anticipate that the 
debate on longer-term issues, relating for instance to global governance and the future structure of the 
international monetary system, will continue, both within and outside the Fund. I look forward to your 
contributions to that debate as well. 
Thank you once again for your presence and participation in this symposium. As we consider how the 
IMF can best serve its membership and the world, it is indeed a great privilege to be able to tap into 
your wealth of experience and knowledge on some of the issues that lie at the heart of our institution’s 
mandate. 
BIS Review 43/2005 
 5
