Radovan Jelasic: 121-year anniversary of the National Bank of Serbia 
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelasic,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  on  the  occasion  of  the 
121-year anniversary of the National Bank of Serbia, Belgrade, 16 March 2005. 
 Dear ladies and gentlemen, honoured guests, 
On  this  day,  exactly  121  years  ago,  the  Privileged  National  Bank  of  Serbia  obtained  the  licence  to 
operate as Serbia’s central banking institution in charge of domestic money, or, to cite the words used 
in the Law on its foundation, the bank has been founded “with a view to upgrading trade and economy 
in the Kingdom of Serbia by means of inexpensive capital and well-regulated credit.” 
Celebrating  its  anniversary,  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  has  enriched  its  museum  exhibition  of  the 
numismatic collection of coins and banknotes that originated and have been in use on the territory of 
Serbia since the seventh century B.C. to the present day by another interesting exhibition, “Dinar – 
Our Money”, which will be open for public as of today, here in the NBS building in the Kralja Petra 
Street. 
In addition to banknotes and coins from our recent and remote history, we also exhibited a selection of 
foreign  and  domestic  banknotes  in  higher  denominations,  showing  both  the  original  banknotes  and 
their counterfeits. The visitors to this part of the exhibition will be afforded an opportunity to compare 
the former with the latter, and become acquainted with security features incorporated in banknotes, in 
order to reduce the risk of their ever owning counterfeits. We have thus exhibited banknotes and their 
respective  counterfeits  in  denominations  of  1,000  and  5,000  dinars,  and  foreign  banknotes  in 
denominations of 200 and 500 euros. The exhibited “super dollar”, a 100-dollar banknote, produced 
with a high degree of success, as well as the 200-euro “super euro”, another significantly “improved” 
counterfeit,  indicate  to  what  extent  technological  development  has  contributed  to  the  upgrading  of 
counterfeits, adding to the difficulty of recognizing the foregoing. 
Although the share of counterfeit dinars remains low, at only 0.05 percent relative to the total number 
of banknotes in circulation, we, at NBS, would like to offer assistance to citizens in this respect as well, 
so that they should be able to protect themselves more efficiently against the reception of counterfeit 
money, as well as with a view to contributing to a still faster spreading of electronic forms of payment. 
This  all  the  more  so  since  counterfeiters  today  have  no  limits,  while  counterfeit  dinar  and  euro 
banknotes may enter the country from all over the world. 
By preserving the stability and the strength of the national currency, Serbia ought to prove that it can 
successfully go through the transition phase, however demanding and difficult it may be, and qualify in 
that manner for accession to the European Union and for the switch to the euro, the single currency in 
the EU, without taking any shortcuts. Serbia is a serious country and should not use another country’s 
currency,  especially  without  prior  approval!  However,  I  must  point  out  that  the  stability  of  the  dinar 
entails a responsible fiscal policy, a wage policy based on productivity, as well as implementation of 
structural reforms in practice. If the quality and speed of reforms were measured in words, in particular 
those said in the past several months and weeks, we would have entered the European Union a long 
time ago! 
In September last year, when talking about the necessity of implementing structural reforms, I stated 
that it is high time something were done in this respect, which at first came as a surprise for some 
people, only to be confirmed later on, but only in words, and not by any concrete steps taken by the 
Government. As the time goes by, all we are left with is the hope that the reason for such state of 
things is lack of readiness, rather than any lack of understanding regarding what needs to be done. 
Dragging  out  “mothballed”  ideas,  such  as  the  distribution  of  free  shares  to  employees  in  public 
companies,  pushes  structural  reforms  more  than  10  years  back.  The  concept  of  “patching  up”  the 
economy and standard of living through monetary and foreign exchange policy, while sitting idly and 
observing the inefficiency, abuse of monopolist status, and, to be entirely honest, significant political 
influence in a large number of public companies, cannot and should not be allowed and is also fully 
unsustainable. The time has come for all of us to stop for a moment and remember pre-October 5th 
programmes and proclamations, and ask ourselves whether anything real is being done today or is 
this just a way to buy time! 
BIS Review 19/2005 
 1
I believe that personal example is the best example and that no one can give advice and lectures on 
reforms to others unless they are implementing these same reforms in their own house – the National 
Bank of Serbia. In the past year, we have reduced the number of employees by 1,500. These were 
mostly employees engaged for a temporary period of time. Owing to that, today, the number of people 
working  in  NBS  has  declined  28.9  percent  relative  to  end-2003.  At  the  same  time,  the  least  cost 
efficient branches have been closed. The wage fund this year has remained unchanged at the level 
from  the  year  before,  whereas  any  salary  increases  in  2005  will  occur  only  with  respect  to  a 
corresponding reduction in the number of employees! The objective of the National Bank of Serbia is 
to continue increasing in efficiency and I am sure that we can do this still more and still better in order 
to create an elite institution, on a par with European and world standards. We try to talk less but to do 
far more. 
The next major challenge is certainly the issue of the share of public consumption which is not only 
extremely  high,  but  continues  on  the  increase,  both  at  the  level  of  the  Budget  of  the  Republic  of 
Serbia, and at the level of practically all local governments. It is almost as if someone had started a 
competition  to  see  who  can  take  more,  and  then  allocate  the  taken  funds,  proving  thus  their 
“efficiency”. However, a game of football should not be played by referees, but by real football players, 
i.e.  the  economy,  whereas  the  role  of  the  state  is  to  set  the  rules  of  the  game  and  manage  the 
process,  in  other  words,  it  is  the  state  that  ought  to  be  the  referee.  The  RS  Budget  and  local 
government budgets ought not to see a rise this year in real terms, and if additional incomes do occur, 
these ought to be reflected through lower taxes and contributions, all with the aim of lending support to 
the economy! 
As regards the banking system, I would like to point out that it is not only growing in terms of quantity, 
but is also strengthening in terms of quality. Banks’ balance sheet sum rose by 39 percent last year, 
banks’  lending,  excluding  the  public  sector,  by  over  52  percent  (by  CSD  100  billion),  whereas 
aggregate  citizens’  deposits  increased  by  48.5  percent  (or  EUR  348  million).  Positive  growth  of  all 
these indicators will continue this year as well; so, for instance, since 1 January until today, household 
savings rose by over EUR 100 million. With respect to the further restructuring and privatisation of the 
banking sector, I would like to point out that the NBS is not an owner in that process, but a supervisor, 
and that it is guided exclusively by the quality of banks, their manner of management, degree of risk, 
etc, and not by nationality of individual shareholders. My personal advice that I would like to give to 
those bankers who are aware that their time is ticking away is this: 
• 
• 
• 
Not to waste time by arbitrarily proclaiming their own selves as national interest, 
Not to organize the purchase of their own shares at bank counters for cash, 
Not to fritter away precious time seeking political connections, even family connections in the 
country and abroad, 
but simply to do what the Law expects them to do with a view to creating a stable and sound banking 
system. NBS moves on without turning back! 
As  regards  the  measures  taken  by  NBS  in  the  field  of  insurance,  I  may  freely  say  that  we  did  not 
“pursue” the supervisory capacity in respect of insurance companies, but rather that such capacity was 
entrusted  to  us.  However,  once  we  have  been  given  this  responsibility,  we  intend  to  perform  it 
conscientiously, equally well as we perform control over the banking sector. NBS will take all legally 
envisaged measures with a view to ensuring the introduction of financial order in the insurance market 
and its development, as well as the protection of rights and property of policyholders. Whether it will be 
the  citizens  who,  through  costlier  insurance  policies,  will  bear  consequences  of  unconscientious 
business practices of closed insurance companies, and to what extent, does not depend on the NBS – 
it is the rule of law and judiciary system that are now put to the test! If insurance companies - which 
“invest” up to as much as EUR 20,000 in one square meter of business space, which tie policyholders’ 
deposits with  banks  to  loans  to  the  owner,  and  buy  nail  polish  using  your  and  my  insurance  policy 
funds – do all this with impunity, and, what is more, remain in possession of the real estate acquired in 
that  way,  then  it  is  equally  justified  to  raise  the  question  as  to  whether  laws  in  Serbia  have  equal 
application  to  all  citizens  or  the  judiciary  system  may  be  influenced  by  money  and  partisan  and 
“godfather” connections. 
We all hope for the fastest practicable accession to the EU, with Feasibility Study as the road leading 
to  that  objective.  That  is  why  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  no  bypasses,  no  shortcuts,  or  “partial” 
transitions are possible on that way. What we have failed to do with respect to the implementation of 
structural  reforms  of  the  public  and  real  sectors,  with  respect  to  privatisation  or  harmonisation  of 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2005
consumption  with  real  possibilities  and  requirements  of  our  country’s  development,  with  respect  to 
financial discipline at all levels, may not be compensated for by political yarns. Work on the Feasibility 
Study does not supplant work on structural reforms! Neither structural reforms nor the Feasibility Study 
“recognize” party interest, pre- or post-election times, “specific needs” of the transition in Serbia, but 
only the things that have actually been done. 
The  National  Bank  of  Serbia  does  not  need  either  IMF  or  the  World  Bank  to  “propel”  it,  as  these 
institutions are real partners rather than ordering parties for us. We know what we ought to do and it is 
our hope that other economic policy actors will, if not follow our lead, then at least not try to stop us on 
our way. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 19/2005 
 3
