Alan Greenspan: Government-sponsored enterprises 
Remarks  by  Mr  Alan  Greenspan,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, to the Conference on Housing, Mortgage Finance, and the Macroeconomy, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, (via satellite), 19 May 2005.  
 Let me begin by thanking the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and President Guynn for hosting this 
conference  -  "Housing,  Mortgage  Finance,  and  the  Macroeconomy."  Clearly,  housing  and  the 
financing of housing purchases have been critical components of economic activity in recent years. 
Understanding  better  how  the  financial  structure  of  housing  transactions  influences  households' 
economic decisions is crucial both for academics and for policymakers. 
In the United States, few financial innovations in recent decades have had so widespread an impact 
as  the  development  of  the  secondary  home-mortgage  market  and  the  attendant  diversification  of 
funding sources for depository institutions and other mortgage originators. Critical to the success of 
this innovation has been the role of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in promoting mortgage securitization 
-  the  key  to  the  development  of  secondary  mortgage  markets  in  the  United  States.1  Their  efforts 
spawned the vast asset-backed securities market that, along with credit derivatives, has contributed to 
the transfer of credit risk from highly leveraged originators of credit - especially banks and thrifts - to 
less-leveraged insurance companies and pension and mutual funds, among other investors. 
The  stated  intent  of  the  Congress  is  to  use  the  housing-related  government-sponsored  enterprises 
(GSEs)  to  provide  a  well-established  channel  between  housing  credit  and  the  capital  markets  and, 
through this channel, to promote homeownership, particularly among lower-income families. Although 
prospectuses for GSE debt are required by law to stipulate that such instruments are not backed by 
the  full  faith  and  credit  of  the  U.S. government,  investors  worldwide  have  concluded  that  our 
government will not allow GSEs to default. As a consequence, market participants offer to purchase 
GSE  debt  at  interest  rates  substantially  lower  than  those  required  of  comparably  situated  financial 
institutions without direct ties to government.2 Given this advantage, which private competitors have 
been unable to fully overcome, the housing-related GSEs have grown rapidly in recent years. Fannie 
and Freddie essentially dominate the market for purchasing conforming home mortgage loans.3 
The strong belief of investors in the implicit government backing of the GSEs does not by itself create 
problems of safety and soundness for the GSEs, but it does create systemic risks for the U.S. financial 
system as the GSEs become very large. As I have recently testified before the Banking Committee of 
the  U.S. Senate,  systemic  risks  are  difficult  to  address  through  the  normal  course  of  financial 
institution  regulation  alone.  But  in  the  case  of  the  GSEs,  these  risks  can  be  effectively  handled  by 
limiting their investment portfolios, which are funded by implicitly subsidized debt. 
The  government  guarantee  for  GSE  debt  inferred  by  investors  enables  Fannie  and  Freddie  to 
profitably  expand  their  portfolios  of  assets  essentially  without  limit.4  Private  investors  have  granted 
them a market subsidy in the form of lower borrowing rates, which staff at the Federal Reserve Board 
has estimated at 40 basis points in recent years. This market subsidy is a formidable advantage in our 
                                                      
1   Under securitization, mortgages are bundled into pools and then turned into securities that can be easily bought and sold 
alongside other debt securities. Combining a diversified pool of home mortgages into a single package in this way reduces 
the sum of the risks associated with the individual mortgages and enables the packager to sell claims against the package 
that pay interest rates below the average yield of the package as a whole. 
2   For example, the government provides the housing-related GSEs with a line of credit from the Department of the Treasury, 
fiscal agency services through the Federal Reserve, exemptions from securities registration requirements, exemptions from 
bank regulations on security holdings, and tax exemptions. 
3   Fannie and Freddie can buy a single-family home mortgage only if the principal balance is below the "conforming loan limit." 
For 2005, that limit for most loans is $359,650. 
4   The boards of directors of Fannie and Freddie are allowed to invest in almost anything so long as there is some link, direct 
or indirect, to their mission of supporting conforming mortgage markets. As demonstrated by recent innovations in the home 
equity lending and asset-backed securities markets, much of the $9 trillion in household credit can potentially be secured by 
real estate and thus appears to be available to the GSEs as investments. Moreover, the GSEs have been allowed to invest 
in many forms of non-mortgage debt, such as corporate bonds and commercial paper, to the degree that the GSEs can 
argue such investments support their liquidity goals and thus indirectly support mortgage markets. 
BIS Review 37/2005 
 1
highly competitive Aaa market, where a few basis points are often competitively determinant. Unlike 
subsidies explicitly mandated by the Congress, the implicit subsidies to the GSEs are initiated wholly 
at the discretion of the GSEs. They choose when to borrow and gain the advantage of the subsidy, 
and  because  markets  perceive  such  debt  as  government  guaranteed,  GSEs  can  effectively  borrow 
without limit. 
Investors  have  provided  Fannie  and  Freddie  with  a  powerful  vehicle  for  achieving  profits  that  are 
virtually  guaranteed  through  the  rapid  growth  of  their  balance  sheets,  and  the  resultant  scale  has 
given them an advantage that their potential private-sector competitors cannot meet. As a result, their 
annual return on equity, which has often exceeded 30 percent, is far in excess of the average annual 
return of approximately 15 percent that has been earned by other large financial competitors holding 
substantially similar assets. Virtually none of the GSE excess return reflects higher yields on assets; it 
is almost wholly attributable to subsidized borrowing costs. 
In  a  market  system,  lenders  and  investors  typically  monitor  and  discipline  the  activities,  including 
leverage,  of  their  counterparties  to  assure  themselves  that  these  entities  are  financially  sound. 
Because  the  many  counterparties  in  GSE  transactions  assess  risk  based  mainly  on  the  GSE's 
perceived  special  relationship  to  the  government,  rather  than  on  the  underlying  soundness  of  the 
institutions, regulators cannot rely on market discipline to contain systemic risk. 
 The profit potential created by subsidized debt has been available to the GSEs for decades. However, 
the  management  of  Fannie  and  Freddie  chose  to  abstain  from  making  profit-centers  out  of  their 
portfolios  in  earlier  years,  and  only  during  the  mid-1990s  did  they  begin  rapidly  enlarging  their 
portfolios. At the end of 1990, for example, Fannie's and Freddie's combined portfolios amounted to 
$132 billion, or only 5.6 percent of the single-family home-mortgage market. 
Indeed, in 1989, before the rapid expansion of its portfolio, Freddie testified before the Congress that 
the need for safe and sound operation and the need to provide affordable mortgages to homebuyers 
were  inconsistent  with  holding  a  substantial  portfolio.  As  Freddie's  CEO  argued  at  that  time,  by 
financing  mortgages  with  mortgage-backed  securities  sold  to  investors  rather  than  with  a  portfolio, 
Freddie avoided interest rate risks and thus could keep mortgages flowing when depository institutions 
were suffering an interest rate squeeze.5 Moreover, Freddie's 1990 annual report stated that Freddie 
could  provide  ample  liquidity  to  mortgage  markets  and  make  profits  by  financing  mortgages  with 
mortgage-backed securities sold to investors rather than by holding a mortgage portfolio. To quote, 
"Freddie  Mac  maintains  a  presence  in  the  secondary  market  each  and  every  day  -  regardless  of 
economic conditions - by buying mortgages from lenders, pooling and packaging them into securities, 
and selling these securities to investors"(emphasis added). 
When  Freddie Mac  became  owned  by  private  shareholders  and  began  to  realize  the  potential  for 
exploiting the risk-adjusted profit-making of a larger portfolio, the message changed. Freddie stated in 
its 1993 annual report that "in short, to achieve our earnings objective, we are striving to increase our 
total portfolio at a rate faster than residential mortgage debt growth ... [and] generate earnings growth 
in  excess  of  revenue  growth  through  focused  management  of  credit  and  operating  expenses."  By 
2003,  Freddie's  portfolio  had  grown  tenfold,  and  Fannie  and  Freddie  together  held  $1.5 trillion  in 
assets, or 23 percent of the home-mortgage market. 
Today, the interest rate and prepayment risks inherent in mortgages with a low-cost refinancing option 
is concentrated in the large portfolios at Fannie and Freddie. These concentrations cannot be readily 
handled by private-market forces because there are no meaningful limits to the expansion of portfolios 
created with debt that the market believes to be federally guaranteed. 
As Fannie and Freddie increase in size relative to the counterparties to their hedging transactions, the 
ability of these GSEs to quickly correct a misjudgment in their complex hedging strategies becomes 
more difficult, especially when vast reversal transactions are required to rebalance portfolio risks. We 
are  thus  highly  dependent  on  the  risk-managers  at  Fannie  and  Freddie  to  do  everything  right. 
Moreover,  the  success  of  interest-rate-risk  management,  especially  the  exceptionally  rapid  timing 
required  by  dynamic  risk  adjustments,  requires  that  the  ultimate  counterparties  to  the  GSEs' 
transactions provide sufficient liquidity to finance an interest-rate-risk transfer that counters the risk. 
                                                      
5 
Leland  C.  Brendsel,  "Government-Sponsored  Enterprises,"  Hearing  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Oversight  of  the 
Committee on Ways and Means, House of Representatives, the 101st Congress, September 28, 1989. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2005
Otherwise,  large  and  rapid  dynamic  adjustments  will  result  in  sharp  changes  in  the  prices  for 
rebalancing  and  hedging  a  mortgage  portfolio.  The  consequence  would  be  added  to  interest  rate 
volatility. 
In the end, we cannot eliminate the risk inherent in mortgages with refinancing options. But we can 
markedly contain the accompanying risks to systemic stability by diversifying the concentration of risk 
away from large, highly leveraged portfolios for which misjudgments can have quick and devastating 
consequences. A system of diversified and less-leveraged interest-rate-risk management would be far 
more  resilient  to  the  inevitable  mistakes  and  shocks  of  individual  risk-mitigating  strategies.  Such 
diversification would thus pose much less systemic risk, largely because of lowered leverage, which in 
turn  is  the  consequence  of  the  private-market  discipline  imposed  on  commercial  and  investment 
banks, mutual funds, insurance companies, and other current or potential holders of mortgage-backed 
securities. 
Some argue correctly that, although the borrowing rates of the GSEs are subsidized, so are those of 
commercial  banks  because  of  deposit  insurance  and  access  to  the  Federal Reserve's  discount 
window and payments system. But interest rates on the long-term debentures of banks exceed the 
rate of interest required on GSE debt, suggesting that market participants perceive banks as far less 
subsidized than GSEs. Banks accordingly have access to significantly less-subsidized credit than do 
GSEs. 
To be sure, banks do have access to insured deposits at low rates. But large banks find it difficult to 
grow using only  insured deposits.  Interest rates  on banks'  insured  deposits, while  usually  less  than 
those on GSE  debentures,  do  not  account  for  the  substantial  costs  that banks  incur  to  collect,  and 
provide  services  for,  core  and  small  time  deposits.  If  larger  banks  could  rely  on  low-cost  insured 
deposits  as  their  effective  marginal  source  of  funds,  why  would  they  pay  higher  interest  rates  to 
holders of their debentures? 
The borrowing edge of the GSEs prevails even though the biggest banks must maintain at least twice 
the  capital  ratio  of  Fannie  and  Freddie  and  smaller  banks  hold  even  more.  Moreover,  with  the 
additional  capital  available  at  banks  to  absorb  the  inevitable  hedging  misjudgments,  reversals  of 
fortune are likely to create less disruption to the banking system relative to the disruption possible at 
Fannie and Freddie. 
 The Federal Reserve Board has been unable to find any credible purpose for the huge balance sheets 
built  by  Fannie  and  Freddie  other  than the  creation  of  profit  through  the  exploitation  of  the  market-
granted  subsidy.  Fannie's  and  Freddie's  purchases  of  their  own  or  each  other's  mortgage-backed 
securities with their market-subsidized debt do not contribute usefully to mortgage market liquidity, to 
the  enhancement  of  capital  markets  in  the  United States,  or  to  the  lowering  of  mortgage  rates  for 
homeowners. 
The  key  activity  of  the  GSEs  -  the  provision  of  liquidity  to  the  primary  mortgage  market  -  can  be 
accomplished exclusively through the securitization of mortgages; GSE portfolios of mortgage-related 
assets  cannot  serve  this  function.  Indeed,  during  a  crisis,  the  GSEs'  portfolios  of  mortgage-backed 
securities  (MBS),  in  contrast  to  portfolios  of  liquid  assets  such  as  Treasury  bills  or  cash,  cannot 
provide liquidity to either the primary or the secondary mortgage market. To sell mortgaged-backed 
securities to purchase other mortgage-backed securities clearly adds no net support to the mortgage 
markets. 
GSE portfolios could act as a source of strength to the mortgage markets only if they contained highly 
liquid,  non-mortgage  assets  such  as  Treasury bills,  which can  be  readily  turned  into cash  under  all 
possible  scenarios  without  importantly  affecting  the  prices  of  home  mortgages.  Indeed,  only  such 
highly  liquid  portfolios  would  be  consistent  with  the  GSEs'  mission  of  providing  primary  mortgage 
market liquidity during a crisis, particularly during a financial crisis. 
Fannie  and  Freddie  do  need  to  hold  in  portfolio  some  mortgage-related  assets  to  achieve  their 
mission.  In  the  normal  course  of  securitization,  timing  differences  between  purchases  of  home 
mortgages and sales of MBS imply an inventory of home loans, although most such transactions are 
simultaneous  swaps  of  packages  of  home  mortgages  for  MBS.  Moreover,  there  may  be  some 
affordable  housing  mortgages  unsuitable  for  securitization  that  serve  the  chartered  mission  of  the 
GSE. But in total, the assets required for Fannie and Freddie to achieve their mission are but a small 
fraction of the current level of their assets. 
BIS Review 37/2005 
 3
Thus, if the Congress legislates a mission-only need for GSE portfolio assets, a substantial liquidation 
of  MBS  over  time,  coupled  with  an  equivalent  redemption  of  GSE  debt,  will  doubtless  be  required. 
Such liquidation would entail not solely a removal of demand but an equal removal of both supply and 
demand  for  MBS.  Accordingly,  the  implementation  of  portfolio  limits  should  pose  no  significant 
difficulties: The amassing of GSE portfolio assets is a simple grossing-up of mortgage assets, which 
can be initiated and reversed in quite large volumes with relative ease. 
 The average paydown rate of the GSEs' portfolios from 1997 to 2004 was about 25 percent. Even if 
outright sales of MBS were required to shrink portfolios, the proceeds would presumably be employed 
to  redeem  GSE  debt.  In  effect,  a  private  investor  whose  holding  of  GSE  debt  has  been  redeemed 
receives, in exchange, either the mortgage-backed security sold by the GSE or other assets sold by 
those who acquire the mortgage-backed security. In either case, the grossing-up or its reversal does 
not affect the net demand for high-quality securities.6 
The concern of some observers that large sales of MBS will be difficult to absorb runs counter to the 
evidence  that  GSE-backed  MBS,  being  Aaa-rated  securities,  already  trade  as  part  of  the  large 
worldwide  market  for  high-quality  corporate  debt  and  U.S. Treasury  issues.  GSE  sales  of  MBS, 
matched  with  redemptions  of  debt,  will  be  readily  absorbed  in  the  vast  market  without  a  significant 
change  in  the  relative  interest  rate  spreads  of  such  investments.  At  the  most,  the  grossing-up  and 
liquidation of MBS and the corresponding GSE debt might conceivably affect the MBS-GSE interest 
rate spread at the margin. 
Moreover,  unwinding  MBS  financed  by  GSE  debt  does  not  affect  the  level  of  home  mortgage  debt 
outstanding or of mortgage interest rates. Indeed, we have found little, if any, evidence that the spread 
of  home-mortgage  interest  rates  over  comparable-maturity  U.S. Treasuries  are  affected  at  all  by 
variations  in  the  size  of  GSE  portfolios.7  In  fact,  contrary  to  the  expectations  that  MBS  portfolio 
accumulation lowers home mortgage interest rates, the spreads apparently widened as the portfolios 
grew from 1995 to 2003. 
In any event, since the development of the MBS market, the determinants of interest rates that finance 
home  purchase  have  exhibited  little,  if  any,  response  to  the  size  of  GSE  portfolios.  The  past  year 
provides  yet  more  evidence  of  this  independence,  with  GSE  portfolios  not  growing  and  mortgage 
spreads, as well as the spread between yields on GSE debentures and Treasury securities, declining 
further. Despite the turmoil at Fannie and Freddie during the past two years, home mortgage markets 
have functioned well. Indeed, as an indication that the yield on debt owed by GSEs is wholly a function 
of the yield's perceived status as government guaranteed, the credit default swaps of both Fannie and 
Freddie have barely budged as the disruption in the markets for GSE equities has deepened. 
The MBS-GSE or GSE-Treasury interest rate spreads seem to be insensitive to changes in the degree 
of  intermediation  because  of  the  extraordinary  substitutability  of  Aaa  mortgages  and  their  financing 
vehicles for high-quality corporate debt and Treasuries. The method of GSEs' intermediation may be 
another reason that we find so little effect of the size of the GSEs' MBS portfolio on home-mortgage 
interest rates. The decision by a GSE to purchase and securitize a mortgage is made independently of 
the  decision  to  place  the  mortgage  or  mortgage-backed  security  in  the  GSEs  own  portfolio.  Thus, 
whatever effect the GSEs have on primary home-mortgage rates appears to flow from the decision to 
purchase and securitize the mortgage, not from the decision of whether to put the mortgage-backed 
security into the GSEs' portfolios or sell the MBS in the private market.8 
                                                      
6  
In effect, investors who purchase MBS use their own savings or the savings of others to fund the asset. But purchasers of 
GSE debt fund in the same manner. Thus, if Fannie securitizes and sells an MBS, it has no need to fund it. But if Fannie 
does  fund  it,  the  private  investor,  of  course,  does  not.  In  effect,  the  same  amount  of  the  nation's  saving  is  drawn  upon 
whether a purchased origination is sold as MBS to investors or Fannie funds the mortgage or MBS. 
7   See Wayne Passmore (2005), "The GSE Implicit Subsidy and the Value of Government Ambiguity," Finance and Economic 
Discussion Series 2005-5 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January) (forthcoming in Real 
Estate  Economics);  Wayne Passmore,  Shane M. Sherlund,  and  Gillian Burgess  (2005),  "The  Effect  of  Government 
Sponsored  Enterprises  on  Mortgage  Rates,"  Finance  and  Economic  Discussion  Series  2005-6  (January)  (forthcoming  in 
Real Estate Economics); and Andreas Lehnert, Wayne Passmore, and Shane M. Sherlund (2005), "GSEs, Mortgage Rates, 
and Secondary Market Activities," Finance and Economic Discussion Series 2005-7 (January). 
8   One issue that has been raised in the debate about the size of GSE portfolios is the following: In the event of a shrinkage of 
GSE debt, would the reduction of foreign holdings of GSE debt deprive the U.S. housing market of a net source of savings 
not otherwise available? Foreign holders whose GSE debt is redeemed will reinvest the proceeds in U.S. Treasury issues, 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2005
 Some observers have suggested that the availability of fixed-rate mortgages is tied to the size of GSE 
portfolios. We see little empirical support for this notion. For example, we have found no evidence that 
fixed-rate mortgages were difficult to obtain during the early 1990s, when GSE portfolios were small. 
Indeed, the share of fixed-rate mortgage originations averaged slightly less than 80 percent in 1992, 
when GSE portfolios were small, and averaged 66 percent in 2004, when GSE portfolios were large. 
Clearly,  these  data  do  not  support  the  proposition  that  the  size  of  the  GSEs'  portfolios  positively 
contributes  to  the  availability  or  popularity  of  fixed-rate  mortgages.  It  is,  of  course,  mortgage 
securitization, and not GSE portfolios, that is the more likely reason for the continued market support 
for the popular thirty-year fixed-rate mortgage. 
 Without a notable direct or indirect effect on primary home-mortgage rates, it is difficult to see how the 
GSEs'  portfolios  can  influence  homeownership.  The  evident  de minimis  to  small  changes  in  home 
mortgage interest rates owing to GSE mortgage market intermediation suggested by recent studies 
would have little effect on homeownership. Indeed, a comprehensive survey by Ron Feldman (2001) 
finds that a change in mortgage rates would have to be at least 200 basis points before it would have 
more than a trivial effect on homeownership.9 
Most  analysts  conclude  that  the  primary  determinants  of  homeownership  appear  to  be  the 
loan-to-value,  debt-to-income,  and  payment-to-income  ratios  associated  with  the  mortgagor and  the 
mortgage.  Over  the  1990s,  homeownership  rates  in  the  United  States  increased  from  about 
64 percent  to  about  67 percent.  Much  of  this  increase  seems  to  be  due  to  growing  incomes  of 
households,  a  generally  lower  level  of  interest  rates,  and  an  increased  ability  to  extend  loans  to 
borrowers who require higher loan-to-value ratios. The generally declining level of mortgage rates that 
occurred in the 1990s reflects the fact that worldwide interest rates have been generally lower and that 
worldwide development cannot be a consequence of GSE portfolio growth. 
Even with smaller portfolios, Fannie and Freddie would remain formidable institutions and their profits 
would  provide  more  than  sufficient  support  for  their  special  affordable-housing  programs.  GSE 
mortgage  securitization  is  a  profitable  activity  and,  with  its  modestly  subsidized  guarantee,  earns 
above-normal rates of returns. 
 As I testified before the Congress both this year and in 2004, the GSEs need a regulator with authority 
on par with that of banking regulators, with a free hand to set appropriate capital standards, and with a 
clear and credible process sanctioned by the Congress for placing a GSE in receivership, where the 
conditions  under  which  debt  holders  take  losses  are  made  clear.  However,  if  legislation  takes  only 
these actions and does not limit GSE portfolios, we run the risk of solidifying investors' perceptions 
that the GSEs are instruments of the government and that their debt is equivalent to government debt. 
The GSEs will have an increased facility to continue to grow faster than the overall home-mortgage 
market; indeed because their portfolios are not constrained, by law, to exclusively home mortgages, 
GSEs  can  grow  virtually  without  limit.  GSE's  mortgage  securitization,  in  contrast  to  their  portfolio 
holdings, is the key to maintaining and enhancing the benefits of Fannie and Freddie to homebuyers 
and  secondary  mortgage  markets.  And  mortgage  securitization,  unlike  the  GSE  portfolio  holdings, 
does not create substantial systemic risks. 
Thus,  one  way  to  limit  the  GSE  portfolios  is  to  create  a  strong  presumption  that  almost  all 
mortgage-related assets can be securitized. The GSEs would need to establish, with their regulator, 
that  any  asset  held  in  their  portfolio  could  not  be  securitized.  In  other  words,  the  method  of  GSE 
financing most consistent with their missions is to securitize assets first and to hold in their portfolios 
only those assets that are very difficult or unduly expensive to securitize. 
                                                                                                                                                                      
as  GSE  debt  was  perceived,  in  effect,  as  higher-yielding  Treasury  debt.  Accordingly,  the  effect  on  the  financing  of  our 
current account deficit would likely be nil. Moreover, there is no reason to believe that the effect on interest rates for MBS 
and home mortgages from reduced foreign holdings of GSE debt would be any different from the evident quite small change 
owing to reduced domestic holdings of GSE debt. 
9   Ron  J.  Feldman  (2001),  "Mortgage  Rates,  Homeownership  Rates,  and  Government-Sponsored  Enterprises,"  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Annual Report, pp. 3-23.  
BIS Review 37/2005 
 5
Without the needed restrictions on the size of the GSE balance sheets, we put at risk our ability to 
preserve  safe  and  sound  financial  markets  in  the  United States,  a  key  ingredient  of  support  for 
housing. 
Financial instability coupled with the higher interest rates it creates is the most formidable barrier to the 
growth, if not the level, of homeownership. Huge, highly leveraged GSEs subject to significant interest 
rate risk are not conducive to the long-term financial stability that a nation of homeowners requires. 
6 
 BIS Review 37/2005
