Antonio Fazio: Franco Modigliani 
Address by Mr Antonio Fazio, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei 
International Conference, Rome, 18 February 2005. 
 Some personal recollections 
1.  
Franco  Modigliani  occupies  a  central  role  in  20th  century  economic  analysis.  For  his  work  on  the 
theories of saving and finance he was awarded the Nobel Prize. He made considerable contributions 
on innumerable topics, as is borne out by the five volumes of his Collected Papers. 
His participation in the debate on Italian economic policy answered to the profound need of the man 
and the economist, who, after analyzing problems, threw into the search for solutions the whole weight 
of  his  civic  passion,  his  commitment  to  the  welfare  of  the  community,  of  those  he  regarded  as  his 
fellow citizens. Discussions, whether with economic policymakers or with young people eager to learn 
from  him,  were  always  lively  and  directed  to  conclusions  that  were  analytically  well-founded  and 
socially fair. 
I first met Franco Modigliani in 1957. During a trip to Italy, the first since the end of the war, he gave a 
lesson in Piazza Borghese to Professor Travaglini’s political economy students. 
We had studied Bresciani Turroni, including his attempts to make an empirical analysis of the demand 
for Egyptian cotton, and were tackling Value and Capital. I was struck by Franco’s description of the 
way the consumption function was estimated, in the United States, of course. Political economy did 
not end with sophisticated analyses of isoquants, the income effect and the substitution effect: it was a 
practical science. 
After graduating and spending some time in the Bank of Italy’s Economic Research Department on a 
scholarship,  I  was  encouraged  by  Professor  Cutilli  to  write  to  a  number  of  American  universities  in 
order to specialize in monetary theory and econometrics. In the end I chose Northwestern, because 
Professor Modigliani taught there, and it was partly thanks to him that I was admitted. 
At the beginning of 1962 Franco announced to me that he was moving to the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology and suggested I should follow him. I did, without hesitating. Under Paul Samuelson’s 
influence, MIT was already at the forefront of the academic world, for the originality of its research, the 
quality of its teaching staff, and the constant wrestling with practical problems; among the latter, I have 
pleasure in recalling Kennedy’s new economic policy, which was under discussion in the States at the 
time. 
Franco advised me to take Samuelson’s course in Advanced Monetary Theory, which was also taught 
by Albert Ando. These were the years of fierce debate between Keynesians and monetarists regarding 
the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  economic  growth  and  in  controlling  inflation.  Let  me  recount  an 
anecdote. One day, someone came into the lecture hall with a large pile of Xerox copies, which he 
placed  on  the  table:  it  was  the  typescript  of  Friedman  and  Schwartz’s  Monetary  History.  Professor 
Samuelson remarked, ‘Milton, Milton! We set up the Fed to adjust the quantity of money to the needs 
of the economy’. In its simplicity this comment touched on one of the main points of the debate on the 
importance  of  the  quantity  of  money.  I  also  attended  –  how  could  I  fail  to  –  Solow’s  lectures  on 
economic growth, based on Denison’s Sources of Economic Growth in the U.S.; I had confirmation of 
their topical relevance when discussing total factor productivity in the United States and Europe with 
colleagues from the Federal Reserve. 
Professor Modigliani offered me the opportunity to attend a course in monetary theory ad personam. It 
consisted in a sort of two-man seminar, in which he assigned me reading to complete, which we would 
then analyze together. Inter alia, I was given the instruction that “…although I do not agree with a word 
of Milton Friedman’s conclusions regarding monetary policy, he is an author you must study, starting 
with his reformulation of the quantity theory of money”. Our discussions could last hours; if it was late 
in the afternoon, Professor Modigliani would sometimes take me to his home in Belmont to continue 
thrashing out various points over dinner; we would talk on into the evening, until Serena remonstrated 
and told him to drive his student home. 
Modigliani was working on a new version of his 1944 essay “Liquidity Preference” to correct a mistake 
he thought he had made in that article by expressing income and wage variables in nominal instead of 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 1
real  terms.  I  had  also  studied  Patinkin  in  depth,  and  Modigliani  explained  an  aspect  that  I  had  not 
understood: the application of Walras’ Law to macroeconomics. He “skewered” me again on this point 
some years later with a criticism of the early version of the model of the monetary sector of the Italian 
economy:  I  had  included  one  market  too  many,  a  redundant  one.  After  some  sharp  but  unfailingly 
gallant exchanges he acknowledged, however, that I was right about the importance of the concept of 
monetary base, as distinct from money, as a central bank tool for controlling credit. 
Another field of research in which Franco sought to involve me concerned the relationship between 
demographic  structure  and  formation  of  savings;  we  pursued  a  line  of  thought  initiated  by  Giorgio 
Mortara, an author I had also studied for my thesis. 
I never had any doubt, thanks also to Guido Carli’s encouragement, that I wanted to work for Italy’s 
central bank. In recalling Franco Modigliani, I shall concentrate on some aspects of his thinking that 
have  a  major  bearing on economic  policy.  His  many  important contributions  to  theory  have  already 
been discussed by the other economists of note taking part in this conference. 
The role of money and the econometric model 
2.  
The complexity of macroeconomic theory, and of monetary theory in particular, is attested to by the 
heated controversies that have marked it in the course of time. I have recalled the monetarists and the 
Keynesians; much earlier there had been the protracted dispute between the Currency School and the 
Banking School, more recently the debate on the new classical macroeconomics. 
The contraposition between distinct strands of thought derives not only from alternative visions of the 
working of the economy but also from a different emphasis, as a result of a different assessment of 
their empirical importance, on certain aspects of the phenomena investigated. Antithetical economic 
policy ideas and suggestions may then emerge. In academic debate the different approaches proceed 
in  parallel;  often,  the  prevalence  of  one  over  another  is  connected  with  the  occurrence  of  shocks 
strong enough to cause a change of paradigm. 
The Great Depression created a break in the secular progress of economic analysis. 
The  classical  model,  dominant  until  then,  proved  inadequate  in  the  face  of  a  crisis  of  catastrophic 
dimensions. In a speech broadcast by radio on 21 November 1934 with the eloquent title “Poverty in 
Plenty:  Is  the  Economic  System  Self-Adjusting?”,  Keynes  took  up  the  question  of  the  economic 
system’s intrinsic stability and answered it in the negative. While recognizing the validity of much of 
classical  economics,  Keynes  called  himself  a  “heretic”  and  proposed  an  alternative  model.  He 
identified an error in the prevailing theory: “There is, I am convinced, a fatal flaw in that part of the 
orthodox reasoning which deals with the theory of what determines the level of effective demand and 
the volume of aggregate employment; the flaw being largely due to the failure of the classical doctrine 
to develop a satisfactory theory of the rate of interest.” 
In the Keynesian tradition, the problem of the instability of capitalist systems, especially those in which 
financial  intermediation  is  highly  developed,  was  the  subject  of  a  penetrating  essay  by  our  friend 
Fausto Vicarelli, who died so prematurely. How many episodes of instability we have seen in the last 
ten or fifteen years, characterized by a rapid expansion of global finance. Episodes of instability that 
caused severe hardship and social malaise in the countries affected by the crises; efforts by all the 
components of society were necessary to overcome them. 
Starting out from The General Theory and his rereading of Hicks, Modigliani, in his article of 1944 and 
in his subsequent paper, “The Monetary Mechanism”, published in 1963, analyzed the implications for 
employment of the downward rigidity of wages. With the money supply constant in nominal terms, a 
diminution of aggregate demand entails a movement away from the full-employment equilibrium and 
hence the necessity for an activist monetary policy. 
Different  aspects  of  the  monetary  and  economic  policy  transmission  mechanism,  which  Modigliani 
analyzed  and  which  he  discussed  in  our  Economic  Research  Department  with  reference  to  Italian 
economic reality, are incorporated in the structure of the Bank’s econometric model. Modigliani let us 
have the benefit of his advice regularly during the 1960s and on numerous occasions in the following 
decades. We discussed the problems of growth, of employment and of investment, in general and in 
the Italian economy. The specification and estimation of the individual equations of the econometric 
model were also carefully considered. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2005
In this setting the lines of a wage policy that was later applied with good results took form with Ezio 
Tarantelli through studies of the labour market. 
The hallmark of the Bank’s econometric model was that it combined an extensive part referring to the 
real economy −employment, wages, investment, prices, effective demand −with a detailed analysis of 
financial flows. This second part stemmed from the theoretical contributions of Gurley and Shaw, from 
Tobin’s Manuscript and from Copeland’s studies on the flow of funds, a subject empirically developed 
for the Italian economy by Ercolani and Cotula. 
Modigliani was greatly interested in this structure of the model and threw himself into the discussions 
on  the  Italian  financial  system,  which  also  engendered  ideas  for  improving  the  structure  of  the 
markets. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  has  constantly  used  the  econometric  model  since  then  as  a  logical  frame  of 
reference and a tool for knowing some fundamental parameters of the Italian economy. 
We used the model in intense discussions with the International Monetary Fund in order to design and 
define the parameters of the policy to stabilize the Italian economy in 1974 in the wake of the first oil 
crisis.  This  had  caused  an  enormous  imbalance  in  the  external  accounts  and  a  surge  in  inflation, 
which was followed by a wage explosion due in part to the indexation of wages to prices. 
The  success  of  the  policy  of  credit  restriction  was  immediate,  thanks  also  to  the  resoluteness  with 
which Governor Guido Carli implemented it. 
Inappropriate budget policies created new imbalances in the following years. We used the model and 
its parameters again to define, under Governor Paolo Baffi, the stabilization policy of 1977-78 carried 
out by the government led by Giulio Andreotti. The budget correction amounted to 5 per cent of GDP. 
The positive effects on the external accounts came through within a year. 
Over a span of thirty years Franco Modigliani’s analyses, his diagnosis of the ills of our economy and 
the  suggested  cures,  encompassed  manifold  subjects,  from  the  labour  market  to  the  problems  of 
retirement provision. He was motivated by the desire to penetrate the reality of the Italian economy in 
order to correct its malfunctions, increase efficiency and expand employment. His interventions, above 
partisan interests, were always highly appreciated by Governors Carli, Baffi and Ciampi. 
Modigliani and economic policy 
3.  
In the 1960s, the dominance of Keynesian economics was uncontested. Milton Friedman proposed an 
alternative line of thought, but his ideas were not considered, save to dismiss them out of hand. But 
not by Franco Modigliani. 
In the 1970s the collapse of the Bretton Woods monetary order created the conditions for a worldwide 
inflationary drift. As a result of restrictive monetary policies, there was also a generalized slowdown in 
economic activity. Inflation refocused attention on Friedman’s ideas. In the United States the Federal 
Reserve  had  long  restricted  its  monetary  action  to  stabilizing  interest  rates  –  the  policy  of  William 
McChesney Martin. In this way the rise in costs and prices was financed almost automatically. With 
the  policy  shift  instituted  by  Paul  Volcker  in  1979,  the  Fed  focused  on  controlling  the  quantity  of 
money.  For  a  short  time  administrative  ceilings  were  also  imposed  on  lending  by  Federal  Reserve 
System member banks. Market interest rates soared. Inflation was curbed. 
The  so-called  monetarist  counter-revolution,  which  blamed  activist  economic  policy  for  destabilizing 
effects, sought to confine policymakers’ actions within the bounds of a set of “simple rules”. In reality, 
this prescription reflected the basic postulate of the economy’s automatic return to equilibrium, which, 
as Keynes had underscored, was the keystone of classical economic theory. 
In  his  presidential  address  to  the  American  Economic  Association  in  September  1976,  Modigliani 
intervened in the debate between Keynesians and monetarists, with acute arguments defending the 
need for both fiscal and monetary countercyclical measures. 
Modigliani  was  sceptical  about  the  hypothesis  of  rational  expectations  underpinning  the  alleged 
ineffectiveness of stabilization policies, because of the conflict with the empirical evidence. Deviations 
of  unemployment  from  its  natural  rate  were  neither  transient,  nor  small.  The  factors  preventing  the 
economy  from  returning  to  an  equilibrium  position  within  a  relatively  short  time  are  incomplete 
information and institutional rigidities. The hypothesis of rational expectations may apply in the long 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 3
run. Exogenous shocks necessitate stabilization measures. The postwar experience, he said, offered 
confirmation of this view, but overemphasis on fine-tuning was a mistake. 
Modigliani recoiled from partisan thinking and pinpointed the weaknesses of all the different models, 
including the Keynesian, which he criticized for failing to consider long-term effects. He once confided 
to  me,  “For  decades  we  have  focused  exclusively  on  flows;  in  our  analysis  we  need  to  go  back  to 
considering the role of stocks.” 
The  ratio  of wealth  to  disposable  income  in  Italy  today  is  about  8  to  1,  the  highest  among  the  G-7 
countries. 
The  conclusion  that  stabilization  policies  are  effective  anticipated  by  a  quartercentury  the  thesis 
sustained  by  Robert  Lucas  in  his  presidential  address  in  January  2003.  Lucas  offered  a  positive 
judgment  on  the  economic  policies  of  the  postwar  period  based  on  advances  in  macroeconomic 
theory, both Keynesian and monetarist. Countercyclical policies did stabilize the economy and prevent 
another  large-scale  depression,  but  more  intensive  recourse  to  these  measures  would  not  produce 
additional welfare gains; such gains can be attained by supply-side policies. 
In  the  classical  tradition,  Lucas  stresses  incomplete  markets  and  the  existence  of  rigidities  and 
frictions that impede adjustment. 
On  these  points  and  on  the  compatibility  of  a  theory  of  money  and  prices  with  an  essentially 
Keynesian  model,  Patinkin’s  analyses  in  “Price  Flexibility  and  Full  Employment”  first  and  then  his 
Money, Interest, and Prices tie in with specific passages in the last part of the General Theory and 
provide a synthesis that, to my mind, is still valid today. 
This was a lesson that served me in the mid-1990s, when I had to impose a highly restrictive monetary 
policy in Italy to support the exchange rate of the lira and curb inflation. In doing so, I had in mind an 
idea of the working of the economy in which the level of activity is determined essentially by effective 
demand. 
Perhaps, if monetarists today cannot but call themselves Keynesians, I should be tempted to assert 
that – as far as stocks and sound analysis are concerned – Keynesians must similarly own to being 
monetarists. 
Economic theory is a great help to central bankers. In practical action, however, we must not forget 
that the complexity of theory is such that it is not always possible to reach unequivocal conclusions or, 
as a consequence, unquestionably correct and effective policy prescriptions. One may be confronted 
with  hypotheses  that  suggest  completely  different  economic  policy  measures.  It  is  important  for 
policymakers to bear in mind the multiple facets of each problem, so as to choose the model that has 
the greatest explanatory power. History provides numerous examples of policy errors that were the 
consequence of an inadequate theoretical apparatus. It is sufficient to recall the monetary policies of 
the early 1930s and the dysfunctions of the gold exchange standard, which helped to spread the Great 
Depression, with dire consequences for the world economy. 
In the second place, it is necessary to have empirical knowledge of the phenomena to be acted on. 
We are regularly faced with discussions of topical problems based on abstract models unrelated to the 
real world. The search for solutions must begin from concrete situations. As Pareto suggested in his 
Manual,  to  approach  the  optimum  one  must  also  take  account  of  non-economic  factors  and 
constraints. Insufficient understanding of the complex workings of a market economy affects our ability 
to operate and can produce erroneous solutions. 
Expectations  play  a  decisive  role  in  determining  economic  performance  and  the  transmission  of 
economic policy impulses. 
The lesson to be learned from Modigliani in this respect is important: he sought to grasp the essentials 
of the problems, independently of preconceived notions. Together with Emile Grunberg, he made a 
major  contribution  to  our  understanding  of  the  role  of  expectations  as  early  as  1954;  this  issue 
recurred frequently in his thinking. 
Governing  an  economy  –  through  fiscal  policy,  monetary  policy  and  structural  reforms  –  is  a 
complicated task. Today, more completely than in the past, we read the various signals coming from 
the  economy,  but  even  so  their  informational  content  is  incomplete,  not  sufficient  to  plot  a  secure 
course. Our knowledge, at micro and macro level, of the behavioural functions of economic agents has 
improved. Yet like all the applied disciplines, economic policy remains an art. 
4 
 BIS Review 10/2005
Conclusions 
4.  
The  international  economy  and  national  economies  are  dominated  today  by  the  phenomenon  of 
globalization. 
It is the sign of the times. 
Globalization not only transforms economies and finance but it also impinges on social and cultural 
models;  it  raises  the  urgent  question,  especially  at  international  level,  of  the  institutions  required  to 
govern the phenomenon. To cope with the changes and anticipate the future, an approach is needed 
in which ever greater specialization is combined with elements of humanistic culture. In this context 
institutions such as this glorious Academy have a task to perform in the higher reaches of knowledge. 
The  financial  system  has  gained  a  sort  of  primacy  and  autonomy  at  global  level.  Within  it  are 
determined  the  levels  and  structure  of  interest  rates,  exchange  rates,  the  cost  of  capital  −here  too 
Modigliani  docet  −on  the  equity  markets.  The  global  financial  system  receives  impulses  from  the 
performance of the major economies and from central banks; by its nature it is always exposed to the 
risk of instability; its raison d’être lies in bringing together the capacity for saving of some sectors with 
the investment expenditure of others. 
In closed systems, the major actors were firms, households and the state; in the global system the 
imbalances between states and monetary areas come into play. 
The  international  financial  system  is  also  tending  to  adapt  the  characteristics  and  scope  of  its 
operations to the need to transfer resources from countries and economic areas with current account 
surpluses to those with deficits. Capital flows to where productivity and, hence, profits and returns are 
highest and security greatest. Basically, for closed systems −and the world is a closed system – this 
has already been theorized in the Turnpike Theorem. 
But the global system is a sort of free banking regime with no anchor. 
The central bank governors are striving to define rules for intermediaries in order to increase stability. 
Notwithstanding  failures  along  the  way,  we  appear  able  to  succeed  in  this  intent.  The  Basel  rules, 
continual  consultations  and  banking  supervision  in  the  individual  countries  make  a  fundamental 
contribution to stability. Derivatives, this new invention of finance, provide the lubricant; they reduce 
and redistribute the risks. Sometimes they are transformed into fuel, pushing the system beyond the 
limits of prudence. 
National economies are linked with the global system through trade, but today, much more than in the 
past,  through  finance  as  well.  The  efficiency  and  stability  of  national  financial  systems  and  their 
coordination with the global market are necessary for the vitality and proper working of an economy; 
they are not sufficient to ensure growth and prosperity. 
Policies  must  in  the  first  place  correct  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  hence  promote  the  full 
utilization  of  productive  factors;  in  open  systems,  they  must  foster  competitiveness.  From  a  broad 
perspective,  competitiveness  is  simply  the  ability  of  an  economy  to  supply,  through  its  working,  an 
adequate  and  growing  flow  of  value  added.  Accordingly,  it  appears  to  me  that  in  open  systems 
competitiveness comes to coincide with potential growth. 
In Europe, and especially in Italy, the potential growth of GDP has diminished in recent years. The 
introduction  of  the  euro  has  not  been  accompanied  by  reforms  capable  of  accelerating  growth. 
Monetary stability and low interest rates have brought benefits, but growth still has not ensued. 
The Lisbon Agenda, valid in its general formulation, must be applied with the support of the Union and 
the Member States in the individual economies by identifying the instruments for its implementation. 
To judge by its public statements, the European Commission is working on these issues. 
Demographic ageing −to whose implications for government budgets and macroeconomic equilibria, 
related in turn to those of individuals, Modigliani devoted so much attention −is looming over Europe, 
Italy and other advanced economies. 
The  public  pension  and  health  systems,  conquests  of  great  social  value  of  the  past  century,  must 
continue to provide their benefits to future generations. A wisely regulated immigration policy can be a 
resource, as the experience of the most advanced economy demonstrates. 
It is a policy that has substantial effects on the social, institutional and legal plane; following thorough 
analysis  based  on  solid  principles,  the  problems  must  be  addressed  in  ways  that  avoid  extreme 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 5
solutions. Our interests must be borne in mind, but also the expectations of those who leave their own 
country in search of dignified living conditions, the aspiration and right of every human person. 
It has been affirmed by a high authority that every person, upon coming into the world, becomes a 
citizen of the world community, with the right to partake of the goods that the system can offer. 
The economy is one aspect of a vaster civil society. Welfare, including economic wellbeing, is attained 
through  analysis,  determination,  cooperation  and  enterprise  that  glimpses  new  horizons  and  works 
and struggles to reach them. Increased employment, the spread of work, is the goal that negates the 
idea  of  economics  as  the  “dismal  science”.  It  is  crucial  today  in  Italy  to  activate  all  the  necessary 
means to reverse the trends, to catch the updraft of the recovery, to increase the propensity to invest, 
to trigger an expansionary drive. 
The  solutions  and  the  proposals  must  come,  albeit  in  the  necessary  dialectical  process,  from  the 
convergence of all the parties, institutional, economic and social. 
The  prospects  of  an  economy  can  be  seen  in  the  willingness  of  firms  to  venture  and  invest.  The 
formation of capital, essential to raise potential growth, is tending to be dematerialized, to take on the 
form  of  knowledge,  organization  and  the  ability  and  quality  of  men  of  Smithian  memory.  We  must 
recover the commitment to growth of every component of society and confidence in the future. 
Practice  must  be  founded  on  good  theory.  Economists  offer  recommendations  for  which  they  are 
competent. Action and synthesis, in the concrete context of civil life, are up to politics. 
I think these reflections would not have displeased Franco Modigliani. He would certainly have offered 
criticisms and observations, suggested additions and changes. Fundamentally, however, it is his moral 
strength, his passion for the good of his fellow citizens, which he passed on to us with his teachings, 
that have inspired these reflections. 
6 
 BIS Review 10/2005
