Jaime Caruana: Overview of Basel II and its reflections on financial stability 
Speech by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  International  Conference  on  Financial  Stability  and  Implications  of 
Basel II, Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Istanbul, 16 May 2005. 
 Introduction and Overview 
Thank you, Governor Serdengeçti, for your kind words of introduction and your opening remarks on 
what promises to be a timely and interesting conference. I am honoured to have the opportunity to 
share with you some thoughts on two related topics that are near and dear: financial stability and the 
Basel II capital framework.  
As I will be discussing this morning, the financial sector and banking supervisors are in the midst of a 
period  of  great  change.  Change  and  growth  must  be  second  nature  to  this  great  city  on  the 
Bosphorus,  where  the  remains  of  the  Roman,  Byzantine,  and  Ottoman  Empires  reside  within  a 
modern, forward-looking city. Istanbul has thrived over the centuries in the face of constant evolution, 
and  today  serves  as  a  bridge  between  Europe  and  Asia,  east  and  west,  ancient  and  modern.  Of 
course,  the  challenges  of  Basel  II  cannot  truly  compare  to  the  development  of  a  city  with  almost 
3,000 years of history, but certainly Istanbul seems to me a very appropriate place in which to discuss 
the role of banking supervisors in a rapidly changing world.  
My  talk  this  morning  will  address  several  issues.  First,  I  will  talk  about  why  the  Basel  Committee 
developed the Basel II capital framework and what it intends to accomplish. Second, I will share some 
thoughts  on  how  prudential  banking  supervision  contributes  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system. 
Next, I will discuss how I see Basel II contributing to financial system stability. Finally, I will offer some 
thoughts on steps countries can take in preparation for adopting Basel II.  
But let me advance the main conclusion of my presentation: 
In a nutshell, I think that the new capital framework represents a significant step towards achieving a 
more comprehensive and risk sensitive supervisory approach. Basel II is about much more than just 
setting  better  quantitative  minimum  capital  requirements.  It  is  about  establishing  incentive-based 
approaches  to  risk  and  capital  adequacy  management,  within  a  comprehensive  framework  of  three 
mutually-supporting pillars. In my view, the combination of better risk management, a stronger capital 
structure  and  improved  transparency  standards  in  the  banking  system  can  significantly  improve 
financial stability.  
Why Basel II? 
Let me begin with an overview of the Basel II capital framework, which was released in June last year. 
As you may be aware, Basel II has probably attracted more public attention than any other banking 
supervision reform. While I will not go into the details of the new framework, it is important to spend a 
few minutes talking about what the Basel Committee hopes to achieve with Basel II. 
Any discussion of Basel II should probably start with the 1988 Basel Accord, which established the first 
internationally  accepted  definition  and  measure  of  bank  regulatory  capital.  In  many  ways,  the  1988 
Accord was a tremendous success story. It was adopted in over 100 countries, and contributed to the 
strengthening of bank capital at a time when a number of countries had experienced problems in their 
banking systems. It has become one of the benchmark measures of a bank’s financial health. 
While the simplicity of the 1988 Accord helped to foster its widespread acceptance, that simplicity has 
become a liability for some banks and supervisors. Almost 20 years later, industry developments in 
risk measurement and management have widened the gap between the regulatory capital measure 
under the 1988 Accord and the internal capital measures used at many internationally active banks. 
More sophisticated technology and telecommunications, as well as market innovations, have enabled 
banks to better measure and manage their risks. As a result, the Basel Committee determined that a 
new capital framework was needed that would address these developments for the most complex and 
sophisticated banks, but that would also be appropriate for less complex banks. The Committee also 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 1
determined that the new capital framework should provide incentives for banks to improve their risk 
management practices without reducing the overall level of capital held in the banking system.  
Basel II, in my view, is fundamentally about better risk management and corporate governance on the 
part  of  banks,  as  well  as  improved  banking  supervision  and  greater  transparency.  It  is  also  about 
increasing  the  stability  of  the  global  financial  system,  to  the  benefit  not  only  of  banks,  but  also 
consumers and businesses. 
The new capital framework attempts to achieve these objectives with three mutually reinforcing pillars. 
The first pillar aligns minimum capital requirements more closely with banks’ actual underlying risks. 
Qualifying banks may also rely partly on their own measures of those risks, which will help to create 
economic  incentives  to  improve  those  measures.  In  concept  the  first  pillar  is  similar  to  the  existing 
capital framework in that it provides a measure of capital relative to risk. What is new are the second 
and third pillars.  
The second pillar – supervisory review – allows supervisors to evaluate a bank’s assessment of its 
own risks and determine whether that assessment seems reasonable. It is not enough for a bank or its 
supervisors  to  rely  on  the  calculation  of  minimum  capital  under  the  first  pillar.  Supervisors  should 
provide  an  extra  set  of  eyes  to  verify  that  the  bank  understands  its  risk  profile  and  is  sufficiently 
capitalised against its risks. 
The third pillar – market discipline – ensures that the market provides yet another set of eyes. The 
third pillar is intended to strengthen incentives for prudent risk management. Greater transparency in 
banks’ financial reporting should allow marketplace participants to better reward well-managed banks 
and penalise poorly-managed ones.  
That, in sum, is what Basel II is all about. I believe that the incentives for better risk management that 
are built into the new capital framework, and the flexibility to adapt the framework to local needs, will 
ensure its validity. I also believe it marks a major step forward in the right direction, and that it will 
contribute  to  a  more  resilient  and  stable  banking  system  that  is  capable  of  promoting  sustainable 
economic growth.  
The Committee recently announced its intention to verify that Basel II meets our long-stated objective 
of maintaining the overall level of capital in the banking system while keeping incentives to adopt the 
most  advanced  and  risk-sensitive  approaches.  As  a  result  we  intend  to  conduct  a  fifth  Quantitative 
Impact Study, or QIS 5, in the last quarter of this year. It is important to understand sooner rather than 
later what the impact of the framework will be. The Basel Committee will continue its work based on 
the existing timetable, and supervisors and bankers planning to implement Basel II should continue 
their preparations accordingly. 
Banking supervision and financial stability 
Let  me  turn  now  to  my  second  topic,  which  is  the  link  between  effective  banking  supervision  and 
financial stability. I’m sure we can all agree that a stable banking system is critical to the long-term 
growth of an economy. But discussing financial stability issues is always a challenge because we don’t 
have a framework for financial stability as comprehensive as in the case of price stability. However, in 
recent  years,  we  have  learned  more  about  the  concurrent  need  for  macroeconomic  stability  and  a 
stable financial system. That concept includes the need for businesses and consumers to have access 
to credit on fair and reasonable terms through all stages of the business cycle so that they can build 
and grow. We need an efficient and resilient payments system to maintain the flow of funds through 
the economy at all times. We need financial markets that remain active, liquid, and trusted regardless 
of events in the economy.  
The challenge  for  supervisors  is  to  promote  the  health  of  the banking sector with  a  broad range  of 
tools. We have certainly found that problems in the banking sector tend to have a “ripple effect” across 
the  wider  economy.  Therefore,  it  is  in  everyone’s  interest  that  a  country’s  banks  should  be  able  to 
manage  their  risks  today  and  respond  to  challenges  tomorrow.  This  is  first  and  foremost  the 
responsibility of the banks themselves, but supervisors also have an important role to play in ensuring 
that banks are prudently managed and capitalised. 
Banking  is  fundamentally  about  trust.  Banks  are  charged  with  a  special  public  trust  to  safeguard 
customers’  wealth.  We  have  all  seen  what  happens  when  customers  lose  trust  in  the  ability  of 
individual banks or the banking system as a whole to protect their savings. This puts a special onus on 
banking supervisors to ensure that banks operate soundly. No bank can maintain public trust for long if 
2 
 BIS Review 34//2005
it lacks sufficient capital, so supervisors impose capital requirements to safeguard the banking system. 
Since capital is the last line of defence against bank insolvency, regulatory capital requirements are 
one of the fundamental elements of banking supervision.  
I should note that strong banking supervision is not enough to ensure financial stability. While I believe 
that a sound financial system requires robust regulatory and supervisory frameworks, there are many 
other potential sources of financial instability outside the financial system. Many financial crises have 
not resulted from shocks arising in the financial system. Any regulatory or supervisory framework must 
be built on a series of preconditions and on the foundations of a sound supervisory system.  
With respect to preconditions, there is a set of issues that may be considered. Firstly, I think there is a 
broad  consensus  among  all  of  us  about  the  importance  of  promoting  the  implementation  of 
appropriate  macroeconomic  policies  consistent  and  sustainable  over 
time.  Secondly,  an 
appropriate institutional framework is also needed. In particular, a set of mercantile and civil laws 
must be in place to safeguard agents' property rights. A legal and judiciary structure which provides 
legal security must thus be in place, together with the so-called safety net institutional arrangements, 
core principles. etc. Moreover, it will be necessary to consider microeconomic aspects related to 
payment-system and market structures. 
All these considerations allow us to underline the notion that the achievement of financial stability must 
be  based  on  a  broad  range  of  tools  which  we  should  all  seek  to  strengthen.  Achieving  a  coherent 
approach to financial stability may be challenging, if only because it requires a consistent combination 
of macro and micro elements and because of the large number of interested and participating parties. 
Also,  it  should  foster  financial  innovation,  and  ensure  a  level  playing  field.  I  believe  that  prudential 
supervisors should analyse the extent to which conditions are in place so that the banking system can 
remain  resilient  in  the  face  of  internal  and  external  shocks.  This  should  contribute  to  the  proper 
functioning of the economy under a wide range of circumstances. 
Basel II and financial stability 
That leads me to my third topic, which is a discussion of the impact the new capital framework will 
have  on  financial  stability.  You  are  probably  not  surprised  to  hear  that  I  believe  the  framework  will 
enhance stability. But let me elaborate on several areas where I believe Basel II will foster stability. 
Incentives for better risk management 
First,  I  believe  that  Basel  II  is  a  major  step  forward  in  strengthening  the  incentives  for  the  ongoing 
improvement of banks’ risk measurement and management systems. The new capital framework is an 
incentives-based system and it is a risk-based framework. By creating a right set of market friendly 
incentives to improve risk management, Basel II offers us the opportunity to ensure that supervision 
and regulation takes a forward-looking view on risk, that it remains up-to-date with sound practices in 
the  industry  and  that  our  supervisory  framework  motivates  responsible  risk-taking  and  prudent 
behaviour in our markets.  
Improved and more formalized risk management will bring better assessment better quantification and 
more  awareness  of  risks.  To  the  extent  that  risk  assessment  and  control  methods  become  more 
formalised  and  rigorous,  this  will  lessen  the  likelihood  of  making  bad  decisions  and  will  improve 
risk-adjusted  pricing  policies.  It  will  also  contribute  to  the  prompt  detection  of  errors  and  deviations 
from  targets,  allowing  banks  to  implement  corrective  measures  at  an  early  stage.  Increased 
awareness of the risks and early reaction to problems is likely to lead to a smoother adjustment to 
new conditions or to the correction of mistakes, making decisions less abrupt 
However, we should remember that despite the significant progress made in the banking industry in 
the  use  of  models  and  new  technologies,  banks  still  depend  largely  on  risk  managers’  expert 
judgement. Such judgement is valuable and will always be necessary, but should be reinforced with 
the best possible information in conjunction with up-to-date techniques and tools for processing that 
information.  Banks  should  be  encouraged  to  develop  systems  that  allow  managers  to  identify  and 
understand  the  risks  they  are  facing,  consider  the  risks  that  may  arise  in  the  future,  and  respond 
promptly and actively to both. Basel II will not only help banks to measure and allocate the provisions 
and capital necessary to withstand expected and unexpected losses, but it will also help supervisors 
and market participants to ensure that banks have done so in a way that will maximise the likelihood 
that they can continue to operate, even in the most difficult of circumstances. 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 3
Sound corporate governance 
The second reason I believe Basel II will promote financial stability is that it promotes more effective 
corporate  governance.  Risk  management  must  be  based  on  a  strong  foundation  of  corporate 
governance. A bank can have the most sophisticated measurement tools in the world, but if it is poorly 
governed, it will be vulnerable to financial and operational weaknesses.  
The Basel Committee recognised this when it developed the qualifications that banks must meet in 
order to adopt the most advanced approaches under Basel II. While much attention has been paid to 
some  of  the  more  complex  quantitative  aspects  of  Basel  II,  I  believe  the  most  important  qualifying 
criteria are those that address how the bank’s risk management framework is governed. Banks that 
adopt Basel II will be expected to have a comprehensive and sound planning and governance system 
to oversee all aspects of their risk measurement and management process. The board of directors, 
senior management, and audit and other control functions will be expected to exercise their duties in a 
rigorous manner. I believe that better managed banks under Basel II will be safer, sounder, and more 
resilient.  
Shock absorbers adequate and risk sensitive. 
Third,  I  have  already  mentioned  that  no  bank  can  maintain  public  trust  for  long  if  it  lacks  sufficient 
capital. One of the fundamental tenets of risk management is that banks need to create provisions to 
absorb  expected  losses  and  to  have  sufficient  capital  to  absorb  unexpected  losses.  Accordingly, 
capital and provisions are an essential part of any supervisory framework. I believe Basel II reinforces 
the need to implement sound policies in both areas. 
I will just add in this point that given the unique positions of banks at the crossroads of businesses and 
consumers  in  every  economy  –  and  their  special  role  as  intermediaries  of  credit  to  both  –  nothing 
threatens  financial  stability  more  than  the  presence  of  poorly  managed  and  poorly  capitalised  and 
provisioned banking institutions.  
Appropriate time horizon and counter-cyclical elements. Stress testing 
Fourth,  the  solid  and  stable  functioning  of  banks  requires  an  additional  consideration,  a  macro 
perspective. Namely, risk management decisions, capital and provisioning policies should be set with 
an  appropriate  time  horizon  that  allows  at  least  a  full  business  cycle  to  be  considered  and  avoids 
excessive emphasis on the short term when assessing risks. The aim is not to promote the uniformity 
of time horizons, but to encourage managers to consider how risk determinants alter over the cycle 
and in conditions of stress. 
The need for capital in a full range of economic scenarios has resulted in a requirement that banks 
consider  stress  scenarios  when  assessing  capital  adequacy.  One  of  the  fundamental  tenets  of  risk 
management is that banks need to create provisions to absorb expected losses and to have sufficient 
capital to absorb unexpected losses. Accordingly, capital and provisions are an essential part of any 
supervisory  framework.  I  believe  Basel  II  reinforces  the  need  to  implement  sound  policies  in  both 
areas.  In  this  respect,  it  is  important  to  analyse  provisions  and  capital  over  at  least  one  complete 
economic  cycle.  Moreover,  a  range  of  potential  future  scenarios,  with  an  emphasis  on  stress 
scenarios, should be considered, taking into account past experience and current conditions. Indeed, 
Basel  II  requires  banks  adopting  the  more  advanced  approaches  to  credit  risk  to  apply  a 
forward-looking  approach  to  credit  risk  management  by  meaningfully  stress  testing  their  credit 
portfolios.  
Gaining room for manoeuvre and shoring up finances during good times in the business cycle is not 
only  prudent  policy,  but  is  also  consistent  with  sound  risk  management.  Many  would  say  that  risks 
increase during bad times, but I believe this is only partly true. In my view, the exposures of banks, 
and therefore their risks, actually increase during economic upturns. These risks may not materialise 
until times of difficulty, but the seeds are generally planted during good times. In sum, when designing 
their capital and provisioning strategies, managers should have the aim of strengthening banks during 
good times and should remember that the imbalances that foster financial instability usually build up 
during the best parts of the economic cycle. 
4 
 BIS Review 34//2005
Transparency 
Fifth, a very important reason why I believe Basel II will contribute to financial stability involves greater 
transparency.  The  exercise  of  market  discipline  should  be  considered  a  vital  element  of  successful 
prudential  policies.  In  particular,  in  order  to  ensure  responsible  and  prudent  behaviour  by  bank 
managers,  supervisory  action  is  not  sufficient.  Majority  and  minority  shareholders,  depositors  and 
debt-holders should also have the capacity to evaluate banks and reward or penalise them according 
to  how  prudently  they  are  managed.  As  mentioned  earlier,  Basel  II,  via  the  third  pillar  of  the 
framework,  provides  for  greater  transparency.  This  should  serve  to  curb  excessive  risk-taking  in 
advance, and should reduce surprises that arise from opacity that can result in a shock to the financial 
system. 
Risk-based supervision 
Sixth,  the  assessment  of  risk  has  begun  to  play  a  predominant  role  in  supervisory  procedures. 
Banking  supervision  traditionally  sought  to  ensure  the  solvency  of  banks  by  emphasising  an 
accounting review of their financial and capital position. There is certainly still a role for this type of 
review, particularly in assessing asset quality and ensuring proper provisioning and risk concentration 
policies.  The  traditional  approach  is  no  longer  sufficient,  however.  Today  it  is  necessary  for 
supervisors  to  place  a  greater  emphasis  on  anticipating  problems.  It  is  vital  to  complement  the 
traditional accounting approach with a greater emphasis on the analysis of the risks that affect banks 
and the management and control systems that mitigate such risks. 
Basel II places a firm emphasis on taking a risk-based approach to supervision. Banks are expected to 
conduct  their  own  internal  assessments  of  risk  and  capital  adequacy.  Supervisors,  in  turn,  are 
expected to regularly review these assessments. The intent is not to have supervisors functioning as 
bank  management.  Rather,  supervisors  should  evaluate  the  degree  to  which  a  bank  has  a  sound 
internal process in place to assess capital adequacy.  
This assessment should take into account not only credit and market risk, which are part of the current 
capital framework, but also other critical risks such as interest rate risk in the banking book and credit 
concentration risk. In addition, banks are expected to manage and hold minimum regulatory capital 
against their exposures to operational risk, which is the risk of losses stemming from failures in internal 
processes or systems or from external disruptions. Indeed, we have found that some of the largest 
bank losses in recent years have been the result of operational loss events.  
Responsiveness to rapid changes in the financial sector 
Seventh,  Basel  II  is  an  evolutionary  framework  that  is  responsive  to  recent  trends  in  the  financial 
sector  and  capable  of  adapting  to  future  changes.  Technological  advances  and  institutional 
developments  have  provided  for  more  mature  financial  markets  and  more  reliable  and  efficient 
payment systems. The banking business has grown more sophisticated, in large part as a result of 
technological  progress.  Technology  allows  banks  to  offer  solutions  which  not  only  provide  a  more 
individualised  approach  to  customers,  but  also  allow  banks  to  operate  more efficiently.  Competition 
has required banks to control their costs and operate with a higher level of efficiency in order to ensure 
their survival. This has occurred both within national borders and internationally as well.  
The growing sophistication and internationalisation of financial institutions, combined with their greater 
sophistication,  have  contributed  to  the  emergence  of  new  risks  and  to  the  intensification  and  rapid 
transmission of previously existing risks. A number of bank managers have responded by improving 
their risk management systems and allocating more resources to risk identification, measurement and 
control.  Banking  supervisors  face  the  challenge  of  responding  meaningfully  to  these  trends  without 
curbing financial innovation, and I believe Basel II will help supervisors to meet this challenge.  
Greater cross-border co-operation among supervisors 
The final reason that I believe Basel II will contribute to financial stability is that the growing scope and 
complexity  of  banking  groups  and  financial  markets  make  it  necessary  to  increase  international 
co-operation  between  supervisors.  While  not  new,  this  issue  is  increasingly  important.  Effectively 
combining the necessary supervision at the local level in the host country with effective supervision at 
the consolidated level in the home country requires greater co-operation, a more thorough exchange 
of information, and better knowledge of financial instruments and links within financial groups. 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 5
in  evaluating  banks’  capital  adequacy.  This  will  promote  consistency 
Basel II not only encourages such co-operation; its success will largely depend on the effectiveness of 
such co-operation. It will be necessary in the future to foster greater co-operation, co-ordination, and 
consistency 
the 
implementation  of  standards,  a  level  playing  field,  and  the  reduction  of  unnecessary  regulatory 
burdens.  It  will  also  diminish  banks’  incentives  to  engage  in  regulatory  arbitrage  across  different 
jurisdictions. 
Work is underway on a variety of fronts to promote such co-operation. First and foremost, the Basel 
Committee’s  Accord  Implementation  Group,  or  AIG,  is  working  to  foster  information-sharing  among 
supervisors  to  promote  consistency  of  Basel  II  implementation.  The  AIG  is  encouraging  home  and 
host supervisors, including those from non-G10 countries, to use actual banks’ implementation plans 
as the basis for heightened co-ordination and communication.  
The Committee welcomes the work being done in a number of non-member countries and believes 
that continued outreach is essential. Dialogue with countries outside the Basel Committee played a 
critical role in the development of the revised framework, and I am personally committed to continuing 
such dialogue in the future as the new capital framework moves into the implementation phase.  
in 
Adoption of Basel II: who and when? 
I  would  like  to  share  some  thoughts  on  when  and  how  the  new  framework  should  be  adopted  in 
different countries. I am not referring specifically to Turkey with these comments, as it is not for me to 
talk about your plans in this respect, but I would like to make some comments about how we see the 
process in general terms. 
Let me begin by emphasising that I cannot answer the question of when or how any country should 
adopt  Basel  II.  Whenever  I  speak  with  colleagues  from  other  countries,  I  stress  that  only  national 
authorities  can  decide  when  to  adopt  Basel  II.  Members  of  the  Basel  Committee  believe  that  it  is 
beneficial to move in the direction of Basel II, but no country should adopt Basel II if it feels that it is 
not yet ready. If a country does decide to adopt Basel II, the timing should be determined by its own 
circumstances, not the timetable for Basel Committee members.  
I  hope  you  will  pardon  my  pronunciation,  but  I  am  told  that  there  is  a  Turkish  proverb  that  says 
“hamama giren terler,” or “he who enters a Turkish bath sweats.” If I understand correctly, the point of 
this proverb is that you should understand the consequences of your actions. If the result is to be very 
positive, some work and thus some sweat is required. I don’t know whether adopting Basel II is similar 
to entering a Turkish bath, but I do know that it is important to understand that this is a high-quality and 
demanding standard. 
Unlike the 1988 Accord, which was relatively simple to adopt, Basel II is more complex and demands 
more  of  banks  and  supervisors.  Therefore,  we  don’t  expect  Basel  II  to  be  adopted  as  widely  and 
quickly  as  the  1988  Accord,  at  least  at  the  outset.  However,  we  do  believe  it  is  appropriate  for  all 
economies, and we expect and hope that the number of countries that adopt the new framework will 
grow  over  time.  We  believe  that  countries  should  adopt  the  options  and  approaches  that  are  most 
appropriate  for  the  state  of  their  markets,  their  banking  systems,  and  their  supervisory  structures. 
Basel II is not a “one size fits all” framework. Supervisors can adopt the framework on an evolutionary 
basis and use elements of national discretion to adapt it to their needs. 
For  any  country  that  is  considering  adopting  Basel  II  but  may  not  yet  be  ready,  I  like  to  suggest  a 
three-stage  approach  towards  building  a  foundation  for  the  new  framework:  (1)  strengthening  the 
supervisory  infrastructure;  (2)  introducing  or  reinforcing  the  three  pillars;  and  then  (3)  making  the 
transition from the 1988 Accord to Basel II.  
The first stage is strengthening the supervisory infrastructure. Basel II is not intended simply to ensure 
compliance  with  a  new  set  of  capital  rules.  Rather,  it  is  intended  to  enhance  the  quality  of  risk 
management and supervision. One of the things that I strongly encourage for all countries is a review 
of implementation of the Basel Committee’s Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision. These 
principles  are  key  to  laying  a  successful  supervisory  foundation.  Likewise,  sound  accounting  and 
provisioning standards are critical to ensuring that the capital ratios, however calculated, meaningfully 
reflect the bank’s ability to absorb losses.  
The second stage, then, is to consider how the second and third pillars of the new framework can be 
implemented. Supervisors do not need to wait for the formal adoption of Basel II to start introducing or 
using  the  principles  of  the  three  pillars.  On  the  contrary,  incorporating  these  principles  is  excellent 
6 
 BIS Review 34//2005
preparation  for  adopting  Basel  II  in  the  future.  For  example,  supervisors  might  choose  to  move 
towards  a  more  risk-based  approach  to  supervision,  developing  skills  in  assessing  the  quality  of  a 
bank’s risk management and its ability to assess risk exposures. At the same time, banks could be 
reminded of their responsibility to develop their own processes for evaluating their capital needs and a 
strategy for maintaining their capital levels, consistent with the principles of Pillar 2. With regard to the 
principles of market discipline in Pillar 3, supervisors may wish to focus initially on ensuring a baseline 
level of disclosures across all banks. This might include discussing with banks, investors, and other 
users of financial information their information needs and the tools available so that supervisors can 
tailor requirements accordingly.  
In  my  view,  these  two  preliminary  stages  provide  an  excellent  preparation  for  the  “final”  stage  of 
moving  to  Basel  II.  With  a  strong  foundation  in  place,  supervisors  can  then  select  the  alternatives 
within Basel II that are most appropriate for their own circumstances. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, let me insist on the general principle on which I think supervision should be built, which I 
mentioned before. Supervision needs to consider a broader analysis of the vulnerabilities internal and 
external to the banking sector, including the necessary macroeconomic and institutional elements, and 
those  relative  to  the  stability  of  financial  markets  on  which  banks  operate.  I  think  that  Basel  II 
recognizes the importance of a combination of micro and macro factors for achieving greater financial 
stability. Furthermore, I would say that Basel II incorporates some of the key basic principles that are 
also  built  in  modern  approaches  to  monetary  policy:  a  flexible  and  forward-looking  approach, 
anticipatory rather than reactive behaviour to risk, and the need to take into account market views. 
Looking into the future, we must direct our resources to ensure that banking supervision in the 21st 
century is more dynamic, more preventive, more flexible, more inclusive, and more transparent. We 
should continue adapting and learning. I believe the ultimate objective of financial stability increasingly 
requires  co-operation  and  properly  aligned  incentives  on  the  part  of  the  industry,  markets,  and 
supervisors. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 34/2005 
 7
