Ewart S Williams: Launch of AIC mutual funds 
Keynote address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at the 
launch of AIC mutual funds, 25 July 2005. 
 Thanks  to  the  Management  of  AIC  Financial  Group  Limited  for  inviting  me  to  present  the  Keynote 
Address on the launch of your family of funds, and sincere congratulations on this achievement.  
These  are  very  exciting  times  for  the  financial  sector  and  indeed  for  the  economy  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago. You must have seen that a few days ago, Standards and Poors raised the country’s credit 
rating from BBB to the coveted A- category. That upgrade has as much to do with the strength of our 
financial system as with the stance of our macro-economic policies.  
All  over  the  world,  banking  is  undergoing  rapid  transformation  -  firstly,  because  of  the  forces  of 
globalisation  which  have  resulted  in  the  elimination  of  barriers  to  trade  and  financial  flows;  and 
secondly,  because  of  advances  in  information  technology  which  have  facilitated  the  delivery  of 
financial products and services at sharply reduced costs.  
There is now a worldwide trend towards the formation of larger banking units through mergers and 
acquisitions, and these larger units are leveraging technology to transform both wholesale and retail 
financial  markets.  Another  dominant  trend  is  the  universalisation  of  banking  which  is  blurring  the 
boundaries between bank and non-banking services.  
While at a somewhat more measured pace, banking in Trinidad and Tobago is also undergoing rapid 
changes.  Following  financial  sector  liberalisation  in  the  early  1990’s  and  bolstered  by  a  decade  of 
robust  economic  growth, our  banking system  has expanded  rapidly  and  has  adopted  new  products 
and technologies, as well as many of the strategies of the more mature markets.  
Total assets of the banking system have increased by one and a half times over the past decade. And 
even with this rapid expansion, the main financial stability indicators have remained very strong. Non-
performing  loans  have  come  down  markedly  from  10  percent  to  just  over  2  percent  (close  to 
international  standards),  capital  adequacy  ratios  are  well  above  minimum  requirements  (as  is 
necessary for a small resource-based economy subject to exogenous shocks), and banks’ profitability 
levels have soared over the last five years or so.  
Some commercial banks have become universal banks offering banking insurance, securities, trading, 
leasing,  and  investment  management  under  one  roof.  The  conglomerate  model  is  becoming  more 
commonplace  in  the  financial  sector  and  the  larger  banks  are  pursuing  aggressive  regional  growth 
strategies. 
Regional expansion has provided additional growth opportunities to offset the constraints imposed by 
the small size of the local market. Of course, this very expansion has opened the financial sector in 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  to  potential  risks  because  of  the  greater  income  volatility  of  some  of  our 
Caribbean neighbours.  
Not  unexpectedly,  the  expansion  of  the  financial  system  and  the  emergence  of  new  and  liberal 
structures  are  proving  to  be  a  tremendous  challenge  for  our  supervisory  authorities  whose 
responsibility it is to ensure that institutions take adequate steps to manage exposure to systemic risk.  
Accordingly,  the  Central  Bank  is  currently  working  on  amendments  to  the  Financial  Institutions  Act 
which, inter alia, will give the Bank the authority to:  
(i)  
(ii)  
(iii)  
(iv)  
(v)  
conduct consolidated supervision of conglomerates;  
facilitate a better focus on cross-border risks;  
allow the regulator to prescribe system-wide capital adequacy levels;  
make mergers and acquisitions subject to the approval of the Central Bank; and  
authorise the exchange of information with other regulators both locally and regionally. 
BIS Review 53/2005 
 1
Ladies and Gentlemen, over the past few years, in the context of a lower interest rate environment, 
mutual funds (or as they are formally called, Collective Investment Vehicles) have assumed an ever-
growing presence on the financial landscape of Trinidad and Tobago.  As Mr. Benn has noted, the 
UTC established the first mutual fund in Trinidad and Tobago in 1981, but since the opening of the 
mutual  fund  market  in  1993,  subsidiaries  and  affiliates  of  commercial  banks  have  become  major 
players in the mutual fund market.  
[In 1981, the local mutual fund market started with $25 million under management, invested in equity-
based  and  money  market  funds.  Today  the  mutual  fund  market  has  in  excess  of  $24  billion  under 
management with resources invested in equities, debt and real property or hybrids of these, as well as 
money market instruments.]  
The growing importance of mutual funds as a savings vehicle is highlighted when compared with what 
is  happening  in  the  commercial  banks.  In  1997,  commercial  bank  deposits  amounted  to  $14  billion 
while  mutual  funds  totalled  $3.3  billion.  However,  by  2003  mutual  funds  accounted  for  $20  billion, 
while  commercial  bank  deposits  accounted  for  $23  billion.  The  data  clearly  indicate  that  over  the 
period,  the  rate  of  growth  of  mutual  funds  was  significantly  higher  than  that  for  commercial  bank 
deposits.  
There are no indications that there will be an abatement of the growth of the mutual funds sector. In 
fact, it is becoming evident that mutual funds are quickly becoming the preferred form of investment in 
Trinidad  and  Tobago.  Moreover,  in  addition  to  the  UTC  and  the banks,  other institutions  (from  less 
regulated environments) have entered or are seeking to enter the market. These developments have 
prompted the Central Bank and the Securities and Exchange Commission to initiate a study that would 
help clarify a number of issues pertaining to the market. Specifically, we are seeking to know more 
about:  
- 
- 
- 
- 
the structure of the funds;  
the value of the funds under management according to the jurisdiction of origin of the funds;  
the degree of cross-listing of the various funds in the market place; and  
the  fund  management  strategies  employed,  with  special  emphasis  on  fund  nomenclature, 
fee structures and performance presentations.  
At the same time, the SEC is formulating urgent mutual funds legislation that would cover:  
(i)  
Increased disclosure: for example, mutual fund managers will be required to reveal in their 
prospectuses, the general and specific risks, the suitability of the funds for various types of 
investors,  fees  and  expenses,  relationships  that  may  give  rise  to  potential  conflicts  of 
interests.  
The  new  regulations  would  make  all  actors  in  the  mutual  funds  industry  (managers, 
custodians, trustees and sales persons) subject to licensing requirements.  
The regulations will seek to address the practice of imprecise or misleading nomenclature 
(for instance a bond fund must be investing in public or private sector bonds and an energy 
fund must be investing in energy projects); and  
Finally,  the  regulations  would  deal  with  risk-based  capital  requirements  for  promoters  of 
mutual funds.  
(ii)  
(iii)  
(iv)  
Conclusion  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Government’s  vision  is  to  make  Trinidad  and  Tobago  a  Pan-Caribbean 
Financial Centre that is globally competitive, well diversified, responsive and market–driven.  
AIC fits very well into that vision. AIC has a regional and international reach but with a local feel. In its 
short  existence,  AIC  has  already  demonstrated  the  spunk  to  challenge  the  status  quo  and  to  bring 
greater competition to a financial sector, which, if anything, suffers from too much concentration. AIC’s 
entry, in the banking market and now in the mutual funds industry is good for the industry because it 
will prompt greater efficiency, lower cost and provide more consumer choice. We wish AIC a long and 
successful and mutually-beneficial involvement in the financial sector of Trinidad and Tobago. 
