Shyamala Gopinath: Foreign exchange regulatory regimes in India - from 
control to management 
Address by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Conference 
organised by the Forum for Free Enterprise, Mumbai, 25 January 2005. 
The  assistance  of  S/Shri  H.  Bhattacharya,  Vinay  Baijal,  Deepak  Kumar,  and  Partha  Ray  in  preparation  of  this  address  is 
gratefully acknowledged. 
 Shri Minoo Shroff, Mr Gazaria, Mr. Thakkar, ladies and gentlemen. 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  in  Forum  of  Free  Enterprise  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  at  this 
programme  on  FEMA  for  executives  and  professionals.  The  Forum  of  Free  Enterprise  has  been 
engaged  in  educating  public  focusing  special  attention  on  the  youth  with  a  view  to  helping  today’s 
younger  generation  to  become  good,  responsible,  active  and  well  informed  citizens  of  tomorrow. 
Towards that end stalwarts like the late A.D. Shroff, the late Murarji J. Vaidya, the late Nani Palkhiwala 
and the late M. R. Pai had played a great role.  
In my address, I would like to set out the rationale of the liberalisation and simplification of process and 
procedures for foreign exchange transactions. What has been the philosophy behind India’s policies in 
regard to the external sector? What are the current challenges for India as it integrates with the global 
economy? What has been the policy measures taken for simplification and liberalisation of process 
and procedures for foreign exchange transactions? In the present address I intend to cover some of 
these questions.  
Context of foreign exchange regulations 
There is a German word called zeit-geist which, I am told, can broadly be translated as the ‘spirit of 
time’. Nothing better describes the evolution of foreign exchange regulation in India. Let me start with 
a  brief  brush  of  history.  Soon  after  independence,  a  complex  web  of  controls  were  imposed  for  all 
external transactions through a legislation i.e., Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA), 1947. These 
were  put  into  a  more  rigorous  framework  of  controls  through  FERA,  1973.  Severe  restrictions  on 
current  account  transactions  had  continued  till  mid-1990s  when  relaxations  were  made  in  the 
operations of the FERA, 1973. The control framework was essentially transaction based in terms of 
which all transactions in foreign exchange including those between residents and non-residents were 
prohibited, unless specifically permitted.  
Control- to- management: FERA-to-FEMA 
In the 1990s, consistent with the general philosophy of economic reforms a sea change relating to the 
broad approach to reform in the external sector took place. The Report of the High Level Committee 
on Balance of Payments (Chairman: Dr. C. Rangarajan, 1993) set the broad agenda in this regard. 
The  Committee  recommended,  inter  alia,  the  introduction  of  a  market-determined  exchange  rate 
regime  within  limits;  liberalisation  of  current  account  transactions  leading  to  current  account 
convertibility;  compositional  shift  in  capital  flows  away  from  debt  to  non  debt  creating  flows;  strict 
regulation  of  external  commercial  borrowings,  especially  short-term  debt;  discouraging  volatile 
elements  of  flows  from  non-resident  Indians;  full  freedom  for  outflows  associated  with  inflows  (i.e., 
principal, interest, dividend, profit and sale proceeds) and gradual liberalisation of other outflows; and 
dissociation  of  Government  in  the  intermediation  of  flow  of  external  assistance,  as  in  the  1980s, 
receipts  on  capital  account  and  external  financing  were  confined  to  external  assistance  through 
multilateral and bilateral sources.  
The sequence of events in the subsequent years generally followed these recommendations. In 1993, 
exchange rate of rupee was made market determined; close on the heels of this important step, India 
accepted Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund in August 1994 
and adopted the current account convertibility. In June 2000 a legal framework, with implementation of 
FEMA, has also been put into effect to ensure convertibility on the current account. As emphasized by 
the Rangarajan Committee that there could be capital outflows from residents in the guise of current 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 1
   account  transactions  after  current  account  convertibility,  certain  safeguards  were  also  built  into  the 
system after FEMA came into effect. For example: 
• 
First, the requirement of repatriation and surrender of export proceeds was continued, with 
provision  of  Exchange  Earners  Foreign  Currency  (EEFC)  account  for  use  by  exchange 
earners. 
Second, all authorized dealers were allowed to sell foreign exchange for underlying current 
account transactions supported by documentary evidence. 
Third, a proactive approach in the development of money, government securities and forex 
markets has been adopted. 
Fourth, effort has been made to improve the information base on transactions in the forex 
markets  with  respect  to  its  nature  and  magnitude  through  reports  and  statements.  The 
insistence  on  adequate  and  timely  reporting  requirements  from  authorised  dealers  for 
various  foreign  exchange  transactions  also  helped  in  simplification  and  liberalisation 
process.  
Fifth, as a general rule, genuine hedging of exposures under specified conditions is allowed.  
• 
This consistent approach has lent credibility to the liberalisation process of both current and capital 
account transactions. 
In 1997, the Tarapore Committee on Capital Account Convertibility (CAC), constituted by the Reserve 
Bank,  had  indicated  the  preconditions  for  Capital  Account  Convertibility.  The  three  crucial 
preconditions were fiscal consolidation, a mandated inflation target and, strengthening of the financial 
system. Drawing from the lessons of international experience, the Committee noted that, in general, 
countries which initiated the move to CAC on the basis of strong fundamentals were able to modulate 
the  pace  of  instituting  CAC  without  undertaking  large  and  dramatic  shifts  in  the  stance  of  macro 
economic  policies.  Furthermore,  these  countries  were  less  vulnerable  to  backtracking  and  the 
reimposition of controls in the face of exogenous shocks. In fact, the pursuit of reforms in other areas 
by these countries instilled confidence in the process of opening up of the capital account. Countries 
with weak initial conditions have to adopt drastic measures in macro economic policies to facilitate the 
move to CAC. Some of these countries had to face interruptions and reintroduction of capital controls 
in the evolution of CAC. In this context, I recall the observations of former Governor, Dr. Bimal Jalan 
and  I  quote,  “...It  must  be  understood  that  merely  by  lifting  all  capital  controls,  the  markets  of  a 
developing country do not get as deeply integrated as a developed country’s markets. As such, each 
country would need to decide on its own path of capital account liberalization with regard to the timing 
and sequencing”.   
The  Tarapore  Committee  had  also  recommended  change  in  the  legislative  framework  governing 
foreign  exchange  transactions.  Accordingly,  the  Foreign  Exchange  Regulation  Act  (FERA)  which 
formed  the  statutory  basis  for  exchange  control  in  India  was  repealed  and  replaced  by  the  new 
Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) with effect from June 2000. The philosophical approach 
has shifted from that of conservation of foreign exchange to one of facilitating trade and payments as 
well  as developing orderly  foreign  exchange market.  This definitive  shift  in  the  objectives of  foreign 
exchange management could be seen in the preamble to the new legislation.   
FEMA provided a de jure status to the shift in the policies with regard to the external sector reforms 
that  began  in  1990-91.  Further  and  more  importantly,  FEMA  has  diluted  the  rigorous  enforcement 
provisions which were the hallmark of the erstwhile legislation. Unlike in FERA, the prosecution has to 
prove the guilt of the accused person. Further, under FEMA only monetary penalty are provided for 
contraventions. The categorisation of offences under FEMA as civil and not criminal constitutes one of 
the most important differences between the two statutes. Contravention of FEMA provisions are dealt 
with under civil law procedures, for which separate administrative procedure and mechanism in the 
form of Compounding Rules, Adjudicating Authority, Special Director (Appeals) and Appellate Tribunal 
have been established. Another significant change has been that for each process of law a time-frame 
has been provided in the Act. For example, the process of compounding is required to be completed 
within 180 days.  
The  concept  of  compounding  in  FEMA  is  another  distinguishing  feature,  especially  from  the 
perspective  of  customers.  Under  FERA,  all  violations  were  subject  to  separate  investigation  and 
adjudication of the Directorate of Enforcement. However, FEMA provides for an opportunity of seeking 
compounding of contraventions, in terms of which a contravener has a suo moto opportunity of making 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2005
an  application  to  the  compounding  authority  seeking  the  contravention  to  be  compounded.  The 
compounding authority is required under the Act to dispose of the application within 180 days. The 
Government  of  India,  in  one  of  its  recent  Notifications,  has  designated  the  Reserve  Bank  as  the 
compounding authority for all contraventions, except for those involving hawala transactions for which 
the  Directorate  of  Enforcement  would  be  the  compounding  authority.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  in  the 
process  of  issuing  the  necessary  direction  for  implementation  of  the  process  for  compounding  of 
contravention under FEMA. I am sure the new procedure will go a long way in providing a quick and 
hassle-free disposal of cases involving contravention(s) of FEMA. 
Having  delineated  the  context  let  me  now  turn  to  specifics  of  capital  account  liberalisation  and  the 
accompanying challenges.  
Capital account liberalization approach 
Globalization  of  the  world  economy  is  a  reality  that  makes  opening  up  of  the  capital  account  and 
integration with global economy an unavoidable process. Today capital account liberalization is not a 
choice. Governor, Dr. Reddy once commented that, “capital account liberalisation is a process and it 
has to be managed keeping in view the elasticity in the economy, and vulnerabilities or potential for 
shocks.  These  include  fiscal,  financial,  external,  and  even  real  sector  say,  oil  prices  and  monsoon 
conditions for India.”1   
The  capital  account  liberalization  primarily  aims  at  liberalizing  controls  that  hinder  the  international 
integration and diversification of domestic savings in a portfolio of home assets and foreign assets and 
allows  agents  to  reap  the  advantages  of  diversification  of  assets  in  the  financial  and  real  sector. 
However,  the  benefits  of  capital  mobility  come  with  certain  risks  which  should  be  categorized  and 
managed  through  a  combination  of  administrative  measures,  gradual  opening  up  of  prudential 
restrictions and safeguards to contain these risks.  
The discussion on capital flows and monetary policy inevitably begins with the well-known “trilemma” 
or the impossible trinity in the sense that a country can choose no more than two of the following three 
features of its policy regime: (1) free capital mobility across borders, (2) a fixed exchange rate, and (3) 
an  independent  monetary  policy.  Various  combinations  of  these  features  have  dominated  world 
monetary  arrangements  in  different  eras.  The  question  of  how  developing  and  emerging-market 
countries like ours should resolve the trilemma is very crucial. At best a medium-term goal of achieving 
free capital mobility could be set with measured steps and optimal control.  
Recent policy initiatives 
India adopted a gradualist approach while initiating a process of gradual capital account liberalisation 
in the early 1990s and treated it as a process rather than an event. In recent past, there has seen 
significant changes in the external sector policy of the Reserve Bank. The Department concerned of 
the Reserve Bank has been rechristened from the Exchange Control Department to Foreign Exchange 
Department, highlighting the change in the intent and content of the policy framework. Let me assure 
you that this change is not just a matter of semantics but is reflective of the changed mind-set. The 
focus  of  the  measures  has  been  to  dismantle  controls  and  provide  an  enabling  environment  to  all 
entities  engaged  in  external  transactions.  The  current  approach  to  liberalisation  has  been 
characterized  by  greater  transparency,  data  monitoring  and  information  dissemination  and  to  move 
away from micro-management of foreign exchange transactions to macro management of forex flows 
and forex market. The emphasis of the Reserve Bank has been to ensure that procedural formalities 
are minimised so that exporters and others are able to concentrate on their core activity rather than 
engaging  in  avoidable  paper  work,  while  ensuring  observance  of  Know-Your-Customer  (KYC) 
guidelines.  
The  details  of  the  various  initiatives  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  will  be  discussed  later  by  other 
speakers.  Let  me,  for  the  sake  of  completeness,  present  a  quick  run-down  of  the  significant  policy 
measures in this context: 
                                                      
1   Remarks  on  Capital  Account  Liberalisation  and  capital  controls  by  Dr.  Y.  V.  Reddy,  Governor,  Central  Bank  Governors' 
Symposium, 2004, Bank of England, June 25, 2004. 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 3
Investment overseas 
To further the process of capital account liberalisation, steps were taken to encourage the strategic 
presence of the Indian corporates overseas. Overseas investment are also permitted for undertaking 
agricultural activities including purchase of land incidental to this activity either directly or through the 
overseas  offices.  These  measures  would  enable  the  Indian  companies  to  take  advantage  of  global 
opportunities  and  also  acquire  technological  and  other  skills  for  their  adoption  in  India.  Indian 
companies are now free to invest up to their net worth outside India without any ceiling.   
External commercial borrowing 
Keeping  in  view  India’s  external  sector  position,  as  reflected  in  country’s  various  external  debt 
sustainability indicators, a comprehensive review of the ECB guidelines was carried out in consultation 
with  the  Government  and  revised  ECB  guidelines,  effective  February  1,  2004,  were  announced  to 
encourage corporates to access ECB for undertaking real investment activity in India and for overseas 
direct investment in JVs and Wholly Owned Subsidiary (WOS). The maximum amount of ECB that can 
be  accessed  under  the  Automatic  Route  is  enhanced  to  USD  500  million  (from  USD  50  million 
previously) per financial year. Further, transparency in policy implementation is evident from the fact 
that the Reserve Bank now posts data of all ECB raised, both through the automatic route and the 
approval route in the public domain on its website for information of all concerned. The thrust of the 
new policy is to encourage investment in the real sector including infrastructure, while restricting debt 
flows  for  purposes  other  than  those  adding  to  the  country’s  capital  stock.  Higher  amount  can  be 
accessed with prior approval of the RBI.  
Foreign  Direct  Investment:  The  FDI  policy  followed  has  been  to  encourage  investment  in 
manufacturing  and  infrastructure.  A  person  resident  outside  India  or  an  incorporated  entity  outside 
India  can  invest  either with  the  specific  prior  approval  of  the  Government  of  India  (12  activities),  or 
under the Automatic route (21 activities). There are 11 activities in which investment is not permissible. 
Investment under automatic route is permissible without approval of the Government or the Reserve 
Bank subject to the prescribed sectoral cap.  
Portfolio  Investment:  Foreign  Institutional  Investors  (FIIs)  registered  with  SEBI  and  Non-resident 
Indians  are  eligible  to  purchase  shares  and  convertible  debentures  under  the  Portfolio  Investment 
Scheme subject to certain limits.  
ADR / GDR: An  Indian  corporate  can  raise  foreign  currency  resources  abroad  through  the  issue  of 
American  Depository  Receipts  (ADRs)  or  Global  Depository  Receipts  (GDRs)  subject  to  certain 
conditions.  Two-way  fungibility  of  ADRs/GDRs  was  operationalised  to  bring  about  alignment  in  the 
prices of Indian stocks in the domestic vis-à-vis international markets. 
Non-Resident Deposits: There have been significant changes in the policy framework for non-resident 
Indian (NRI) deposits held by the Indian banking system, which constitute a major portion of external 
debt  for  India.  The  interest  rate  on  the  deposits  were  rationalized  and  linked  to  international 
benchmark LIBOR. 
Liberalised  remittance  of  USD  25,000  p.a.  by  Resident  Individual:  In  order  to  provide  hassle  free 
remittance facility based on a declaration resident individuals were allowed in early 2004 to remit up to 
USD  25,000  per  annum  for  any  permitted  purpose  both  under  current  and  capital  account  or 
combination of both. Resident individuals were also permitted to acquire property overseas and open 
accounts with banks outside India.   
Students:  Indian  students  studying  abroad  are  treated  as  Non-Resident  Indians.  As  non-residents, 
they  are  eligible  for  all  the  facilities  available  to  NRIs,  in  addition  to  remittance  facilities  presently 
available to students as residents. 
Procedural simplifications  
No  liberalisation  effort  is  complete  unless  the  customers  or  the  end-users  of  the  forex  market  can 
access the same through simple and transparent procedures. A number of initiatives have been taken 
towards  procedural  simplification  with  an  objective  of  reducing  the  transaction  cost.  In  the  case  of 
individuals,  foreign  exchange  for  current  account  transactions  such  as  education,  medical,  travel, 
emigration, maintenance of close relatives abroad can be drawn from the Authorised dealer based on 
simple  declaration  up  to  certain  indicated  limits.  Having  regard  to  the  liberalised  approach  in  trade 
matters, specific steps were taken to allow exporters greater flexibility and freedom in the matter of 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2005
seeking regulatory compliances. The system of self write off and self extension of due date for export 
realisation  for  exporters  was  introduced  followed  by  raising  the  threshold  limit  for  GR  declaration. 
Similarly, the simplifications of procedures for import remittances have also been introduced. Overall, 
measures for simplification of procedures have been made subject to KYC and Anti Money Laundering 
guidelines. 
In keeping with its commitment to ensure hassle-free service to the customers the Reserve Bank has 
constituted  the  Committee  on  Procedures  and  Performance  Audit  on  Public  Services  (CPPAPS) 
(Chairman:  Shri  S.S.  Tarapore)  in  December  2003  to  address  the  difficulties  faced  by  common 
persons  in  getting  services  from  the  banking  sector.  The  Reserve  Bank  also  advised  banks  to 
constitute  an  adhoc  committee  in  each  of  them  to  review  the  procedure  followed  by  them  and  to 
ensure that the instructions issued by the Reserve Bank are properly implemented. The CPPAPS, in 
its  Report  No.1  on  Exchange  Controls  relating  to  the  Individuals,  focused  its  attention  on  the 
assessment  of  facilities  and  procedures  for  both  residents  and  non-resident  individuals.  The 
recommendations of the CPPAPS have been examined by the Reserve Bank and a number of steps 
had already been taken for their implementation, securing procedural simplification. Further, measures 
have  been  initiated  to  institutionalise  the  system  for  procedural  simplification  in  respect  of  foreign 
exchange transactions both at the level of the Reserve Bank and authorised dealers.    
In recent years, the Reserve Bank has delegated authorities to authorised dealers to such an extent 
that  there  is  hardly  any  need  for  the  individuals  to  approach  the  Reserve  Bank  for  any  approval. 
However, we have come across instances where the liberalised procedures have not permeated to the 
grassroot level in banks possibly due to lack of knowledge about various rules and regulations and 
also procedures to be followed for various types of forex transactions. While, we at the Reserve Bank 
would continue our efforts to improve the customer service rendered at the Reserve Bank and banks, I 
request that any difficulties in getting facilities which are permissible may be brought to the notice of 
the Reserve Bank.    
Way ahead  
India’s  capital  account  liberalisation  measures  have  been  largely  effective.  Among  other  factors, 
suitable policy measures in respect of the external sector insulated India from the 1997 Asian crisis. 
We have moved forward gradually towards Capital Account Convertibility with a broad reform agenda 
that encompasses trade, competition, reform of the financial system and industrial restructuring.  
As  evident  from  various  economic  indicators,  the  liberalisation  process  that  has  been  underway  for 
some time created a more competitive environment for Indian industry vis-à-vis what existed earlier. 
Consequently, the Indian companies have upgraded their technology and expanded to more efficient 
scales  of  production  and  refocused  their  activities  to  areas  of  competence.  Increasingly,  Indian 
companies are looking to become global players. Reform measures in the external sector, including 
dismantling of exchange control have been a contributor to this development.   
We  would  continue  to  participate  actively  in  the  process  of  economic  and  financial  globalisation, 
accelerate domestic economic reform and continue with our firm commitment to liberalisation so as to 
serve  the  needs  of  economic  growth  and  development  of  the  country.  An  increasingly  liberalising 
foreign exchange regulatory regime will be an essential ingredient to this vision.   
Thank You. 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 5
