Donald L Kohn: Regulatory relief 
Testimony  of  Mr  Donald  L  Kohn,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Financial  Institutions  and  Consumer  Credit,  Committee  on 
Financial Services, US House of Representatives, Washington DC, 9 June 2005. 
 Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on issues 
related to regulatory relief. The Board strongly supports the efforts of Congress to review periodically 
the  federal  banking  laws  to  determine  whether  they  can  be  streamlined  without  compromising  the 
safety and soundness of banking organizations, consumer protections, or other important objectives 
that  Congress  has  established  for  the  financial  system.  In  2003,  at  Chairman  Oxley’s  request,  the 
Board provided the Committee with a number of legislative proposals that we believe are consistent 
with this goal, and the Board recently agreed to support several additional regulatory relief proposals. 
A summary of the proposals supported by the Board is included in the appendix to my testimony. In 
my remarks, I will highlight those that would provide the most meaningful regulatory relief. 
For its part, the Board strives to review each of our regulations at least once every five years to identify 
those provisions that are out of date or otherwise unnecessary. The Board also has been an active 
participant in the ongoing regulatory review process being conducted by the federal banking agencies 
pursuant  to  the  Economic  Growth  and  Regulatory  Paperwork  Reduction  Act  (EGRPRA).  EGRPRA 
requires  the  federal  banking  agencies,  at  least  once  every  ten  years,  to  review  and  seek  public 
comment on the burden associated with the full range of the agencies’ regulations that affect insured 
depository institutions. The Board and the other banking agencies are in the midst of the first ten-year 
review cycle, and I am pleased to report that we are on track to complete this process by the 2006 
deadline.  The  agencies  already  have  solicited  comments  on  five  broad  categories  of  regulations  - 
including  those  governing  applications,  activities,  money  laundering,  and  consumer  protection  in 
lending  transactions  -  and  have  conducted  outreach  meetings  throughout  the  country  to  encourage 
public participation in the EGRPRA process. In response to these efforts, the agencies have received 
comments from more than 1,000 entities and individuals on ways to reduce the regulatory burden on 
banking  organizations.  The  Board  will  consider  and  incorporate  the  comments  relevant  to  our 
regulations as we move forward with our own regulation review efforts. 
While  the  banking  agencies  can  achieve  some  burden  reductions  through  administrative  action, 
Congress  plays  a  critical  role  in  the  regulatory  relief  process.  Many  proposals  to  reduce  regulatory 
burden require congressional action to implement. Moreover, the Congress has ultimate responsibility 
for  establishing  the  overall  regulatory  framework  for  banking  organizations,  and  through  its  actions 
Congress  can  ensure  that  regulatory  relief  is  consistent  with  the  framework  it  has  established  to 
maintain the safety and soundness of banking organizations and promote other important public policy 
goals. 
Interest on reserves, reserve requirements and interest on demand deposits 
I am pleased to note that some of the Board’s most important regulatory relief suggestions - including 
those authorizing the Federal Reserve to pay interest on balances held by depository institutions at 
Reserve  Banks,  enhancing  the  Board’s  flexibility  to  set  reserve  requirements,  and  permitting 
depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits - recently were passed by the House as part 
of  H.R.  1224,  the  Business  Checking  Freedom  Act  of  2005.  Let  me  briefly  explain  why  the  Board 
supports passage of these amendments, either in a stand-alone bill or as part of a broader regulatory 
relief bill. I will also discuss a little later why the Board does not support those aspects of H.R. 1224 
that would, for the first time, authorize industrial loan companies that operate outside the supervisory 
framework  established  for  other  insured  banks  to  offer  interest-bearing  transaction  accounts  to 
business customers. 
For  the  purpose  of  implementing  monetary  policy,  the  Board  is  obliged  by  law  to  establish  reserve 
requirements on certain deposits held at depository institutions. Because the Federal Reserve does 
not pay interest on the balances held at Reserve Banks to meet reserve requirements, depositories 
have an incentive to reduce their reserve balances to a minimum. To do so, they engage in a variety of 
reserve  avoidance  activities,  including sweep  arrangements  that move  funds  from deposits  that  are 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 1
subject to reserve requirements to deposits and money market investments that are not. These sweep 
programs  and  similar  activities  absorb  real  resources  and  therefore  diminish  the  efficiency  of  our 
banking system. H.R. 1224 would allow the Federal Reserve to pay depository institutions interest on 
their  required  reserve  balances,  which  would  remove  a  substantial  portion  of  the  incentive  for 
depositories  to  engage  in  reserve  avoidance  measures.  The  resulting  improvements  in  efficiency 
should eventually be passed through to bank borrowers and depositors. 
Besides  required  reserve  balances,  depository  institutions  also  voluntarily  hold  two  other  types  of 
balances  in  their  Reserve  Bank  accounts  -  contractual  clearing  balances  and  excess  reserve 
balances. H.R. 1224 would authorize the Federal Reserve to pay explicit interest on these balances as 
well.  This  authority  would  enhance  the  Federal  Reserve’s  toolkit  for  efficiently  conducting  monetary 
policy. 
In order for the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to conduct monetary policy effectively, it is 
important that a sufficient and predictable demand for balances at the Reserve Banks exist so that the 
System  knows  the  volume  of  reserves  to  supply  (or  remove)  through  open  market  operations  to 
achieve the FOMC’s target federal funds rate. Authorizing the Federal Reserve to pay explicit interest 
on  contractual  clearing  balances  and  excess  reserve  balances,  in  addition  to  required  reserve 
balances, could potentially provide a demand for voluntary balances that would be stable enough for 
monetary  policy  to  be  implemented  effectively  through  existing  procedures  without  the  need  for 
required  reserve  balances.  In  these  circumstances,  the  Board  could  consider  using  the  authority 
granted  in  H.R.  1224  to  reduce  -  or  even  eliminate  -  reserve  requirements,  thereby  reducing  a 
regulatory  burden  for  all  depository  institutions,  without  adversely  affecting  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
ability to conduct monetary policy. 
Having the authority to pay interest on excess reserves also could help mitigate potential volatility in 
overnight interest rates. If the Federal Reserve was authorized to pay interest on excess reserves, and 
did so, the rate paid would act as a minimum for overnight interest rates, because banks would not 
generally lend to other banks at a lower rate than they could earn by keeping their excess funds at a 
Reserve Bank. Although the Board sees no need to pay interest on excess reserves in the near future, 
and any movement in this direction would need further study, the ability to do so would be a potentially 
useful addition to the monetary toolkit of the Federal Reserve. 
The  Board  also  strongly  supports  the  provisions  of  H.R.  1224  that  would  repeal  the  statutory 
restrictions  that  currently  prohibit  depository  institutions  from  paying  interest  on  demand  deposits. 
Repealing the prohibition of interest on demand deposits would improve the overall efficiency of our 
financial  sector  and,  in  particular,  should  assist  small  banks  in  attracting  and  retaining  business 
deposits.  To  compete  for  the  liquid  assets  of  businesses,  banks  have  been  compelled  to  set  up 
complicated  procedures  to  pay  implicit  interest  on  compensating  balance  accounts  and  they  spend 
resources - and charge fees - for sweeping the excess demand deposits of businesses into money 
market  investments  on  a  nightly  basis.  Small  banks,  however,  often  do  not  have  the  resources  to 
develop  the  sweep  or  other  programs  that  are  needed  to  compete  for  the  deposits  of  business 
customers.  Moreover,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  overall  economy,  the  expenses  incurred  by 
institutions  of  all  sizes  to  implement  these  programs  are  a  waste  of  resources  and  would  be 
unnecessary if institutions were permitted to pay interest on demand deposits directly. 
The costs incurred by banks in operating these programs are passed on, directly or indirectly, to their 
large  and  small  business  customers.  Authorizing  banks  to  pay  interest  on  demand  deposits  would 
eliminate  the  need  for  these  customers  to  pay  for  more  costly  sweep  and  compensating  balance 
arrangements to earn a return on their demand deposits. 
H.R. 1224 contains a provision that is intended to address the potential federal budgetary impact of 
this proposal by requiring the Reserve Banks to transfer some of their capital surplus to the Treasury 
to cover the budgetary costs of paying interest on required reserves through 2009. As the Board has 
consistently  pointed  out,  these  transfers  would  not  provide  any  true  offsets  to  budgetary  costs. 
Although  these  transfers  would  allow  the  Treasury  to  issue  fewer  securities,  the  Federal  Reserve 
would  need  to  lower  its  holdings  of  Treasury  securities  by  the  same  amount  to  make  the  required 
transfers.  Thus,  the  level  of  Treasury  debt  held  by  the  public  sector  would  be  unchanged,  and  the 
Treasury’s interest payments, net of receipts from the Federal Reserve, would be unaffected. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2005
De novo interstate branching 
The Board has proposed an amendment that would remove outdated barriers to de novo interstate 
branching by banks. Since enactment of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency 
Act of 1994 (Riegle-Neal Act), all fifty states have permitted banks to expand on an interstate basis 
through the acquisition of an existing bank in their state. Interstate banking is not only good for banks, 
it is good for consumers and the economy. While the number of banks has fallen in recent years, the 
number  of  branches  has  risen  sharply  to  more  than  71,000  in  2004  compared  with  approximately 
50,000 in 1990. More than 2,000 branches were opened by banks in 2004 alone. The creation of new 
branches  helps  maintain  the  competitiveness  and  dynamism  of  the  American  banking  industry  and 
improve  access  to  banking  services  in  otherwise  under-served  markets.  It  results  in  better  banking 
services for households and small businesses, lower interest rates on loans, and higher interest rates 
on  deposits.  Interstate  branching  also  increases  convenience  for  customers  who  live,  work,  and 
operate across state borders. 
However,  the  Riegle-Neal  Act  permitted  banks  to  open  a  branch  in  a  new  state  without  acquiring 
another  bank  only  if  the  host  state  enacted  legislation  that  expressly  permits  entry  by  de  novo 
branching  (an  opt-in  requirement).  To  date,  twenty-one  states  and  the  District  of  Columbia  have 
enacted some form of opt-in legislation, while twenty-nine states continue to require interstate entry 
through the acquisition of an existing bank. 
This limitation on de novo branching is an obstacle to interstate entry for all banks and also creates 
special problems for small banks seeking to operate across state lines. Moreover, it creates an unlevel 
playing  field  between  banks  and  federal  savings  associations,  which  have  long  been  allowed  to 
establish de novo branches on an interstate basis. 
The  Board’s  proposed  amendment  would  remove  this  last  obstacle  to  full  interstate  branching  for 
banks and level the playing field between banks and thrifts. The amendment also would remove the 
parallel provision that allows states to impose a minimum requirement on the age of banks that are 
acquired  by  an  out-of-state  banking  organization.  These  changes  would  allow  banks,  including  in 
particular  small  banks  near  state  borders,  to  better  serve  their  customers  by  establishing  new 
interstate  branches  and  acquiring  newly  chartered  banks  across  state  lines.  It  also  would  increase 
competition by providing banks a less costly method for offering their services at new locations. The 
establishment and operation of any new interstate branches would continue to be subject to the other 
regulatory  provisions  and  conditions  established  by  Congress  for  de  novo  interstate  branches, 
including the financial, managerial, and community reinvestment requirements set forth in the Riegle-
Neal Act. 
Small bank examination flexibility 
Another amendment that the Board has supported would expand the number of small institutions that 
qualify for an extended examination cycle. Federal law currently mandates that the appropriate federal 
banking  agency  conduct an  on-site examination of  each  insured  depository  institution  at  least  once 
every twelve months. The statute, however, permits institutions that have $250 million or less in assets 
and  that  meet  certain  capital,  managerial,  and  other  criteria  to  be  examined  on  an  eighteen-month 
cycle.  As  the  primary  federal  supervisors  for state-chartered  banks,  the Board  and  Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (FDIC) may alternate responsibility for conducting these examinations with the 
appropriate  state  supervisory  authority  if  the  Board  or  FDIC  determines  that  the  state  examination 
carries out the purposes of the statute. 
The  $250  million  asset  cutoff  for  an  eighteen-month  examination  cycle  has  not  been  raised  since 
1994. The Board’s proposed amendment would raise this asset cap from $250 million to $500 million, 
thus potentially allowing approximately an additional 1,100 insured depository institutions to qualify for 
an eighteen-month examination cycle. 
The proposed amendment would provide meaningful relief to small institutions without jeopardizing the 
safety  and  soundness  of  insured  depository  institutions.  Under  the  proposed  amendment,  an 
institution with less than $500 million in assets would qualify for the eighteen-month examination cycle 
only  if  the  institution  was  well  capitalized,  well  managed,  and  met  the  other  criteria  established  by 
Congress in Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991. The amendment also 
would  continue  to  require  that  all  insured  depository  institutions  undergo  a  full-scope,  on-site 
examination at least once every twelve or eighteen months. Importantly, the agencies would continue 
to have the ability to examine any institution more frequently and at any time if the agency determines 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 3
an  examination  is  necessary  or  appropriate.  Despite  advances  in  off-site  monitoring,  the  Board 
continues to believe that regular on-site examinations play a critical role in helping bank supervisors 
detect and correct asset, risk-management or internal control problems at an institution before these 
problems result in claims on the deposit insurance funds. 
Permit the Board to grant exceptions to attribution rule 
The Board has proposed another amendment that we believe will help banking organizations maintain 
attractive benefits programs for their employees. The Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act) generally 
prohibits a bank holding company from owning, in the aggregate, more than 5 percent of the voting 
shares of any company without the Board’s approval. The BHC Act also provides that any shares held 
by a trust for the benefit of a bank holding company’s shareholders or employees are deemed to be 
controlled  by  the  bank  holding  company  itself.  This  attribution  rule  was  intended  to  prevent  a  bank 
holding company from using a trust established for the benefit of its management, shareholders, or 
employees to evade the BHC Act’s restrictions on the acquisition of shares of banks and nonbanking 
companies. 
While this attribution rule has proved to be a useful tool in preventing evasions of the BHC Act, it does 
not  always  provide  an  appropriate  result.  For  example,  it  may  not  be  appropriate  to  apply  the 
attribution rule when the shares in question are acquired by a 401(k) plan that is widely held by, and 
operated for the benefit of, the employees of the bank holding company. In these situations, the bank 
holding  company  may  not  have  the  ability  to  influence  the  purchase  or  sale  decisions  of  the 
employees or otherwise control the shares that are held by the plan in trust for its employees. The 
suggested amendment would allow the Board to address these situations by authorizing the Board to 
grant exceptions from the attribution rule where appropriate. 
Reduce cross-marketing restrictions 
Another amendment proposed by the Board would modify the cross-marketing restrictions imposed by 
the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act) on the merchant banking and insurance company investments 
of financial holding companies. The GLB Act generally prohibits a depository institution controlled by a 
financial  holding  company  from  engaging  in  cross-marketing  activities  with  a  nonfinancial  company 
that  is  owned  by  the  same  financial  holding  company  under  the  GLB  Act’s  merchant  banking  or 
insurance  company  investment  authorities.  However,  the  GLB  Act  currently  permits  a  depository 
institution subsidiary of a financial holding company, with Board approval, to engage in limited cross-
marketing activities through statement stuffers and Internet websites with nonfinancial companies that 
are held under the act’s insurance company investment authority (but not the act’s merchant banking 
authority). 
The Board’s proposed amendment would allow depository institutions controlled by a financial holding 
company  to  engage  in  cross-marketing  activities  with  companies  held  under  the  merchant  banking 
authority  to  the  same  extent,  and  subject  to  the  same  restrictions,  as  companies  held  under  the 
insurance company investment authority. We believe that this parity of treatment is appropriate, and 
see  no  reason  to  treat  the  merchant  banking  and  insurance  investments  of  financial  holding 
companies differently for purposes of the cross-marketing restrictions of the GLB Act. 
A second aspect of the amendment would liberalize the cross-marketing restrictions that apply to both 
merchant banking and insurance company investments. This aspect of the amendment would permit a 
depository institution subsidiary of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities 
with  a  nonfinancial  company  held  under  either  the  merchant  banking  or  insurance  company 
investment authority if the nonfinancial company is not controlled by the financial holding company. 
When a financial holding company does not control a portfolio company, cross-marketing activities are 
unlikely  to  materially  undermine  the separation  between  the  nonfinancial  portfolio  company and  the 
financial holding company’s depository institution subsidiaries. 
Industrial loan companies 
As  I  noted  earlier,  the  Board  strongly  supports  allowing  depository  institutions  to  pay  interest  on 
demand  deposits  and  allowing  banks  to  branch  de  novo  across  state  lines.  The  Board,  however, 
opposes proposals that would allow industrial loan companies (ILCs) to offer business NOW accounts, 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2005
as  H.R.  1224  does,  or  open  de  novo  branches  nationwide  if  the  corporate  owner  of  the  ILC  takes 
advantage  of  the  special  exemption  in  current  law  that  allows  the  owner  to  operate  outside  the 
prudential framework that Congress has established for the corporate owners of other types of insured 
banks. 
ILCs are state-chartered FDIC-insured banks that were first established early in the twentieth century 
to make small loans to industrial workers. As insured banks, ILCs are supervised by the FDIC as well 
as by the chartering state. However, under a special exemption in current law, any type of company, 
including  a  commercial  or  retail  firm,  may  acquire  an  ILC  in  a  handful  of  states  -  principally  Utah, 
California, and Nevada - and avoid the activity restrictions and supervisory requirements imposed on 
bank holding companies under the federal BHC Act. 
When  the  special  exemption  for  ILCs  was  initially  granted  in  1987,  ILCs  were  mostly  small,  local 
institutions that did not offer demand deposits or other types of checking accounts. In light of these 
facts,  Congress  conditioned  the  exemption  on  a  requirement  that  any  ILCs  chartered  after  1987 
remain  small  (below  $100  million  in  assets)  or  refrain  from  offering  demand  deposits  that  are 
withdrawable by check or similar means. 
This special exemption has been aggressively exploited since 1987. Some grandfathered states have 
allowed  their  ILCs  to  exercise  many  of  the  same  powers  as  commercial  banks  and  have  begun  to 
charter  new  ILCs.  Today,  several  ILCs  are  owned  by  large,  internationally  active  financial  or 
commercial firms. In addition, a number of ILCs themselves have grown large, with one holding more 
than $50 billion in deposits and an additional eight holding more than $1 billion in deposits. 
Affirmatively  granting  ILCs  the  ability  to  offer  business  NOW accounts and  open  de  novo branches 
across state lines would permit ILCs to become the functional equivalent of full-service insured banks 
and  operate  across  the  United  States.  This  result  would  be  inconsistent  with  both  the  historical 
functions of ILCs and the terms of their special exemption in current law. 
Because the parent companies of exempt ILCs are not subject to the BHC Act, authorizing ILCs to 
operate  essentially  as  full-service  banks  would  create  an  unlevel  competitive  playing  field  among 
banking  organizations  and  undermine  the  framework  Congress  has  established  for  the  corporate 
owners of full-service banks. It would allow firms that are not subject to the consolidated supervisory 
framework of the BHC Act - including consolidated capital, examination, and reporting requirements - 
to own and control the functional equivalent of a full-service bank. It also would allow a foreign bank to 
acquire control of the equivalent of a full-service insured bank without meeting the requirement under 
the BHC Act that the foreign bank be subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis in 
its home country. In addition, it would allow financial firms to acquire the equivalent of a full-service 
bank  without  complying  with  the  capital,  managerial,  and  Community  Reinvestment  Act  (CRA) 
requirements established by Congress in the GLB Act. 
Congress has established consolidated supervision as a fundamental component of bank supervision 
in  the  United  States  because  consolidated  supervision  provides  important  protection  to  the  insured 
banks that are part of a larger organization and to the federal safety net that supports those banks. 
Financial trouble in one part of an organization can spread rapidly to other parts. To protect an insured 
bank  that  is  part  of  a  larger  organization,  a  supervisor  needs  to  have  the  authority  and  tools  to 
understand  the  risks  that  exist  within  the  parent  organization  and  its  affiliates  and,  if  necessary, 
address  any  significant  capital,  managerial,  or  other  deficiencies  before  they  pose  a  danger  to  the 
bank. This is particularly true today, as holding companies increasingly manage their operations - and 
the  risks  that  arise  from  these  operations  -  in  a  centralized  manner  that  cuts  across  legal  entities. 
Risks  that  cross  legal  entities  and  that  are  managed  on  a  consolidated  basis  simply  cannot  be 
monitored properly through supervision directed at one, or even several, of the legal entities within the 
overall organization. For these reasons, Congress since 1956 has required that the parent companies 
of full-service insured banks be subject to consolidated supervision under the BHC Act. In addition, 
following the collapse of Bank of Commerce and Credit International (BCCI), Congress has required 
that  foreign  banks  seeking  to  acquire  control  of  a  U.S.  bank  under  the  BHC  Act  be  subject  to 
comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis in the foreign bank’s home country. 
Authorizing  exempt  ILCs  to  operate  as  essentially  full-service  banks  also  would  undermine  the 
framework  that  Congress  has  established  -  and  recently  reaffirmed  in  the  GLB  Act  -  to  limit  the 
affiliation  of  banks  and  commercial  entities.  This  is  because  any  type  of  company,  including  a 
commercial firm, may own an exempt ILC without regard to the activity restrictions in the BHC Act that 
are  designed  to  maintain  the  separation  of  banking  and  commerce.  While  H.R.  1224  attempts  to 
address concerns related to mixing banking and commerce by placing certain limits on the types of 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 5
ILCs that could offer business NOW accounts, the limits in H.R. 1224 do not adequately address this 
issue. For example, H.R. 1224 would allow any ILC that received FDIC insurance before October 1, 
2003,  or  had  an  application  for  deposit  insurance  pending  on  that  date,  to  offer  NOW  accounts  to 
business customers so long as the institution does not experience a change in control. Thus, the bill 
would allow the commercial and retail firms that acquired an ILC before October 1, 2003, to transform 
the institution into the functional equivalent of a full-service insured bank. The bill also would allow any 
ILC that was established or acquired after October 1, 2003, to offer business NOW accounts so long 
as the ILC’s appropriate state supervisor determined that the companies controlling the ILC derived at 
least 85 percent of their annual gross revenues from activities that are “financial in nature or incidental 
to a financial activity.” 
Importantly, the bill does not define these terms by reference to the GLB Act or otherwise establish 
any  standards  for  a  state  authority  to  use  in  determining  what  activities  are  “financial  in  nature  or 
incidental to a financial activity.” Instead, the bill leaves this important determination - which has the 
potential to undermine the nation’s longstanding policy of maintaining the separation of banking and 
commerce - to the discretion of the ILC’s state supervisor. Moreover, unlike the grandfather provisions 
of the GLB Act on which the ILC provisions of the bill purportedly are based (see 12 U.S.C. § 1843(n)), 
H.R.  1224  would  not  require  a  company  that  acquires  an  ILC  after  October  1,  2003,  to  divest  its 
non-financial, commercial activities within a specified period of time. 
The limits contained in H.R. 1224 also do not address the other risks and issues presented by ILCs. 
For example, the bill fails to address the supervisory issues associated with allowing domestic firms or 
foreign  banks  that  are  not  subject  to  consolidated  supervision  to  own  and  control  the  functional 
equivalent of a full-service insured bank. 
Let me be clear. The Board does not oppose granting ILCs the ability to offer business NOW accounts 
or open de novo branches if the corporate owners of ILCs engaged in these expanded activities are 
covered by the same supervisory and regulatory framework that applies to the owners of other full-
service  insured  banks.  Stated  simply,  if  ILCs  want  to  benefit  from  expanded  powers  and  become 
functionally indistinguishable from other insured banks, then they and their corporate parents should 
be subject to the same rules that apply to the owners of other full-service insured banks. 
The Board believes that important principles governing the structure of the nation’s banking system - 
such as consolidated supervision, the separation of banking and commerce, and the maintenance of a 
level playing field for all competitors in the financial services marketplace - should not be abandoned 
without careful consideration by the Congress. In the Board’s view, legislation concerning the payment 
of interest on demand deposits or de novo branching is unlikely to provide an appropriate vehicle for 
the thorough consideration of the consequences of altering these key principles. 
Conclusion 
I  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  discuss  the  Board’s  legislative  suggestions  and  priorities  concerning 
regulatory relief. The Board would be pleased to work with the Subcommittee, the full Committee, and 
their staffs as you move forward in developing and considering regulatory relief legislation. 
Appendix: 
Regulatory Relief Proposals Supported by the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System1 
1. Authorize the Federal Reserve to pay interest on balances held at Reserve Banks* 
Amendment  gives  the  Federal  Reserve  explicit  authority  to  pay  interest  on  balances  held  by 
depository institutions at the Federal Reserve Banks. 
                                                      
1 
Items identified with an asterisk (*) were included in H.R. 1375, the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2004, as 
passed by the House of Representatives. 
6 
 BIS Review 44/2005
2. Grant the Board additional flexibility in establishing reserve requirements* 
Amendment  provides  the  Federal  Reserve  with  greater  flexibility  to  set  the  ratio  of  reserves  that  a 
depository  institution  must  maintain  against  its  transaction  accounts  below  the  current  ranges 
established by the Monetary Control Act of 1980. 
3. Authorize depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits* 
Amendment  repeals  the  provisions  in  current  law  that  prohibit  depository  institutions  from  paying 
interest on demand deposits. If adopted, the amendment would allow all depository institutions that 
have the authority to offer demand deposits to pay interest on those deposits. 
4. Ease restrictions on interstate branching and mergers in a competitively equitable manner 
Amendment  affirmatively  authorizes  national  and  state  banks  to  open  de  novo  branches  on  an 
interstate basis. Currently, banks may establish de novo branches in a new state only if the state has 
affirmatively authorized de novo branching. This existing limitation places banks at a disadvantage to 
federal savings associations, which currently have the ability to branch de novo on an interstate basis. 
The  amendment  also  would  remove  a  parallel  provision  that  allows  states  to  impose  a  minimum 
requirement on the age of banks that are acquired by an out-of-state banking organization. 
The  amendment  would  not  allow  industrial  loan  companies  (ILCs)  that  operate  under  a  special 
exemption in federal law from opening de novo branches on a nationwide basis. The corporate owners 
of  these  ILCs  are  not  subject  to  the  type  of  consolidated  supervision  and  activities  restrictions  that 
generally  apply  to  the  corporate  owners  of  other  banks  insured  by  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC). Granting exempt ILCs nationwide branching rights also would be inconsistent with 
the terms of their special exemption in federal law. 
5. Small Bank Examination Flexibility 
Amendment  would  expand  the  number  of  small  institutions  that  may  qualify  for  an  eighteen-month 
(rather than a twelve-month) examination cycle. Under current law, an insured depository institution 
must have $250 million or less in total assets to qualify for an eighteen-month examination cycle. See 
12 U.S.C. § 1820(d). The amendment would raise this asset cap to $500 million, thereby potentially 
allowing approximately an additional 1,100 institutions to qualify for an extended examination cycle. 
6. Permit the Board to grant exceptions to the attribution rule concerning shares held by a trust 
for the benefit of a bank holding company or its shareholders or employees* 
The amendment would allow the Board, in appropriate circumstances, to waive the attribution rule in 
section 2(g)(2) of the Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act). This attribution rule currently provides 
that, for purposes of the BHC Act, a company is deemed in all circumstances to own or control any 
shares that are held by a trust (such as an employee benefit plan) for the benefit of the company or its 
shareholders  or  employees.  The  amendment  would  allow  the  Board  to  waive  the  rule  when,  for 
example,  the  shares  in  question  are  held  by  a  401(k)  plan  that  is  widely  held  by  the  bank  holding 
company’s employees and the bank holding company does not have the ability to control the shares 
held by the plan. 
7. Modification of the cross-marketing restrictions applicable to merchant banking and 
insurance company investments* 
Amendment allows the depository institution subsidiaries of a financial holding company to engage in 
cross-marketing activities with portfolio companies that are held under the merchant banking authority 
in  the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act  (GLB  Act)  to  the  same  extent  as  such  activities  are  currently 
permissible for portfolio companies held under the GLB Act’s insurance company investment authority. 
The amendment also would allow the depository institution subsidiaries of a financial holding company 
to  engage  in  cross-marketing  activities  with  a  portfolio  company  held  under  either  the  merchant 
banking or insurance company investment authority if the financial holding company does not control 
the portfolio company. 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 7
8. Allow insured banks to engage in interstate merger transactions with savings associations 
and trust companies* 
The  amendment  would  allow  an  insured  bank  to  directly  acquire,  by  merger,  an  insured  savings 
association  or  uninsured  trust  company  in  a  different  home  state  without  first  converting  the  target 
savings association  or  trust  company  into  an  insured  bank.  As under current law,  the  insured  bank 
would have to be the survivor of the merger. 
9. Authorize member banks to use pass-through reserve accounts* 
Amendment permits banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System to count as reserves the 
deposits in other banks that are “passed through” by those banks to the Federal Reserve as required 
reserve balances. Nonmember banks already are able to use such pass-through reserve accounts. 
10. Shorten the post-approval waiting period for bank mergers and acquisitions where the 
relevant banking agency and the Attorney General agree the transaction will not have adverse 
competitive effects 
Amendment  allows  the  responsible  federal  banking  agency,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  Attorney 
General, to reduce the post-approval waiting periods under the Bank Merger Act and BHC Act from 
fifteen days to as few as five days. The amendment would not alter the time period that a private party 
has to challenge a banking agency’s approval of a transaction for reasons related to the Community 
Reinvestment Act. 
11. Eliminate requirement that the reviewing agency request a competitive factors report from 
the other banking agencies in Bank Merger Act transactions* 
Amendment would eliminate the requirement that the reviewing agency request a competitive factors 
report  from  the  other  banking  agencies  on  Bank  Merger  Act  transactions.  The  reviewing  agency 
would, however, continue to be required to (i) conduct a competitive analysis of the proposed merger, 
and  (ii)  request  a  competitive  factors  report  from  the  Attorney  General  and  provide  a  copy  of  this 
request to the FDIC (when the FDIC is not the reviewing agency). 
12. Streamline Bank Merger Act procedural requirements for transactions involving entities 
that are already under common control 
The amendment eliminates the need for the reviewing agency for a bank merger involving affiliated 
entities to request a report on the competitive factors associated with the transaction from the other 
banking agencies and the Attorney General. The amendment also would eliminate the post-approval 
waiting period for Bank Merger Act transactions involving affiliated entities. The merger of depository 
institutions that already are under common control typically does not have any impact on competition. 
13. a. Restore Board’s authority to determine that new activities are “closely related to 
banking” and permissible for all bank holding companies 
Amendment  would  restore  the  Board’s  ability  to  determine  that  nonbanking  activities  are  “closely 
related to banking” under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act and, thus, permissible for all bank holding 
companies,  including  those  that  have  not  elected  to  become  financial  holding  companies.  Bank 
holding companies would still have to become a financial holding company to engage in the types of 
expanded activities authorized by the GLB Act - including full-scope securities underwriting, insurance 
underwriting, and merchant banking activities - as well as any new activities that the Board determines 
are financial in nature or incidental or complementary to financial activities under the GLB Act. 
b. Allow bank holding companies to engage in insurance agency activities (Alternative to Item 
13.a.) 
Alternative amendment would allow all bank holding companies, including those that have not elected 
to  become  financial  holding  companies,  to  act  as  agent  in  the  sale  of  insurance.  Currently,  bank 
holding companies that do not become a financial holding company may engage only in very limited 
insurance  sales  activities  (primarily  involving  credit-related  insurance).  However,  most  banks  are 
8 
 BIS Review 44/2005
permitted to sell any type of insurance, either directly or through a subsidiary. The amendment would 
rectify this imbalance by permitting all bank holding companies to act as agent in the sale of insurance. 
Insurance agency activities involve less risk than insurance underwriting and other principal activities. 
Bank  holding  companies  would  continue  to  be  required  to  become  a  financial  holding  company  to 
engage in insurance underwriting activities. 
14. Repeal certain reporting requirements imposed on the insiders of insured depository 
institutions* 
Amendment repeals the provisions of current law that require: (i) an executive officer of a bank to file a 
report with the bank’s board of directors concerning the officer’s indebtedness to other banks; (ii) a 
member  bank  to  file  a  separate  report  each  quarter  concerning  any  loans  made  to  its  executive 
officers during the quarter; and (iii) executive officers and principal shareholders of a bank to report to 
the bank’s board of directors any loans received from a correspondent bank. The Board has found that 
these reporting requirements do not contribute significantly to the monitoring of insider lending. These 
amendments  would  not  alter  the  statutory  limits  or  conditions  imposed  on  loans  by  bank  to  their 
insiders. 
15. Provide an adjustment for the small depository institutions exception under the Depository 
Institution Management Interlocks Act (DIMIA)* 
Currently,  the  DIMIA  generally  prohibits  a  management  official  of  one  institution  from  serving  as  a 
management official of any other non-affiliated depository institution or depository institution holding 
company if the institutions or an affiliate of such institutions have offices that are located in the same 
metropolitan statistical area. The statute provides an exception from this restriction for institutions that 
have  less  than  $20  million  in  assets,  but  this  dollar  figure  has  not  been  updated  since  1978.  The 
amendment would increase this amount to $200 million. 
16. Flood insurance amendments 
These amendments would: 
(a) 
Allow lenders to rely on information from licensed surveyors to determine whether a property 
is in a flood zone, if the flood map is more than ten years old; 
Increase  the  “small  loan”  exception  to  the  flood  insurance  requirements  from  $5,000  to 
$20,000 and adjust this amount periodically based on changes in the Consumer Price Index; 
Reduce the forty-five-day waiting period required after policy expiration before a lender can 
“force  place”  flood  insurance  by  fifteen  days  to  coincide  with  the  thirty-day  grace  period 
during which flood insurance coverage continues after policy expiration, which would better 
enable lenders to avoid gaps in coverage on the relevant collateral; and 
Give the federal banking agencies discretion to impose civil money penalties on institutions 
found to have engaged in a pattern or practice of violating the flood insurance requirements. 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
17. Periodic interagency review of Call Reports 
Amendment requires that the federal banking agencies jointly review the Call Report forms at least 
once  every  five  years  to  determine  if  some  of  the  information  required  by  the  reports  may  be 
eliminated.  The  federal  banking  agencies  would  retain  their  current  authority  to  determine  what 
information  must  be  included  in  the  Call  Reports  filed  by  the  institutions  under  their  primary 
supervision. 
18. Ensure protection of confidential information received from foreign supervisory authorities* 
Amendment ensures that a federal banking agency may keep confidential information received from a 
foreign regulatory or supervisory authority if public disclosure of the information would violate the laws 
of  the  foreign  country,  and  the  banking  agency  obtained  the  information  in  connection  with  the 
administration  and  enforcement  of  federal  banking  laws  or  under  a  memorandum  of  understanding 
between  the  authority  and  the  agency.  The  amendment  would  not  authorize  an  agency  to  withhold 
BIS Review 44/2005 
 9
information from Congress or in response to a court order in an action brought by the United States or 
the agency. 
19. Restricting the ability of convicted individuals to participate in the affairs of a bank holding 
company or Edge Act or agreement corporation 
Amendment would prohibit a person convicted of a criminal offense involving dishonesty, breach of 
trust, or money laundering from participating in the affairs of a bank holding company (other than a 
foreign  bank)  or  an  Edge  Act  or  agreement  corporation  without  the  consent  of  the  Board.  The 
amendment also would provide the Board with greater discretion to prevent convicted individuals from 
participating in the affairs of a nonbank subsidiary of a bank holding company. 
20. Clarify application of section 8(i) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act* 
Amendment clarifies that a federal banking agency may take enforcement action against a person for 
conduct  that  occurred  during  his  or  her  affiliation  with  a  banking  organization  even  if  the  person 
resigns  from  the  organization,  regardless  of  whether  the  enforcement  action  is  initiated  through  a 
notice or an order. 
10 
 BIS Review 44/2005
