Datuk Zamani Abdul Ghani: Role of development financial institutions in 
the financial system 
Speech by Datuk Zamani Abdul Ghani, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at 
the International CEO Forum of the Development Finance Institutions 2005, Kuala Lumpur, 
12 September 2005. 
 I would like first of all to express my sincere appreciation to the Association of Development 
Finance Institutions of Malaysia for inviting me to say a few words this morning on "The Role 
of  Development  Financial  Institutions  (or  DFIs)  in  the  Financial  System".  It  is  indeed  an 
honour to address such a distinguished gathering of CEOs and senior officials of DFIs from 
many  parts  of  the  world.  Before  going  further  into  the  subject  at  hand,  allow  me  to 
congratulate the organisers for jointly putting up this international forum. This forum provides 
a platform for CEOs and senior officials to exchange views and ideas on SME development 
and  just  as  important,  the  roles  of  DFIs  in  this  endeavour.  I  would  also  like  to  specifically 
welcome  the  foreign  participants  to  Malaysia  and  wish  that  you  will  have  a  pleasant  and 
enjoyable stay in Kuala Lumpur.  
My remarks this morning will consist of three parts. The first provides an overall perspective 
on the universal establishment of DFIs in many parts of the world; the second will look at the 
prospects and some of the challenges for DFIs in carrying out their roles; and the final part 
will provide an insight into the roles of DFIs from the Malaysian perspective. 
There  are  at  present  approximately  550  DFIs  worldwide.  These  are  special  financial 
institutions  established  and  mostly  owned  by  governments  aimed  at  promoting  and 
supporting  national  economic  development  agenda.  Indeed,  o  ver  the  years,  history  has 
shown, and reinforced the view, that DFIs do have an important role to play in a country's 
socio-economic development. For instance, in Europe, the advent of development banking 
can be traced back to the mid-nineteenth century, and was established to meet the increased 
demand  for  medium  to  long-term  capital  by  new  and  emerging  enterprises  during  the 
industrial revolution. The years following World War II saw the establishment of DFIs in many 
developing  countries  to  provide,  in  particular,  medium  and  long-term  financing  that  was 
identified  to  be  so  critical  in  supporting  the  economic  development  agenda  of  these 
countries.  
In  a  laissez-faire  economy,  an  efficient  financial  intermediation  system  mobilises  and 
allocates scarce resources towards activities that would optimise the rates of return. On this 
basis, the commercially-driven and profit-maximising banking institutions would often tend to 
take a short-term view and consider solely the private benefit of a project, at the expense of 
the potential long-term social benefit that could be derived from financing a particular project. 
This  has,  therefore,  created  a  gap  in  the  market  place  whereby  certain  segments  of  the 
economy  have  been  underserved  by  the  banking  system.  These  include  development 
projects which involve high potential risk and long gestation period, but yet have significant 
long-term benefits to the overall economic development of a country. Similarly, there are also 
some sectors or groups of businesses which, due to their business characteristics and lack 
of track record, limited credit history and inadequate collateral, do not have adequate access 
to financing from the banking system. These are clearly instances of market failure, and the 
establishment of the DFIs is indeed an attempt to rectify this shortcoming.  
In this regard, in achieving national policies for economic and social development, the DFIs 
are established as a strategic conduit to bridge the gaps in the supply of financial services, 
by channelling the resources and funds in the financial system to areas and sectors that are 
deemed  as  strategic  for  long-term  economic  development  purposes.  In  essence,  the  DFIs 
are  complementing  the  banking  institutions  in  meeting  the  financing  requirements  of  the 
   1/5 
economy, particularly in supporting the economic and social development of a nation. The 
establishment of DFIs is part of the national development plan itself.  
As  policy-based  financial  institutions,  the  DFIs  have  roles  and  mandates  which  are  linked 
closely  to  the  country's  national  development  objectives.  This  is  evidenced  from  the 
establishment of DFIs with specific purposes to promote development of identified sectors, 
ranging  from  industrial  and  agriculture  sectors  to  areas  such  as  export  promotion, 
infrastructure development as well as the small and medium enterprises (SMEs).  
It  is  notable  that  the  roles  of  DFIs  have  evolved  in  the  course  of  a  country's  economic 
development and transformation. This is important in ensuring that the DFIs remain relevant 
to support the changing financing needs of the economy. In some instances, the DFIs have 
widened and diversified their scope of activities, to cater to the financial needs of new growth 
areas, such as information and communication technology (ICT), and biotechnology. Many of 
them have expanded their financial products to include providing short-term working capital 
loans, equity participation and investment banking. While operating with the widened scope 
of  activities,  it  is  observed  that  the  majority  of  DFIs  continue  to  maintain  the  provision  of 
medium to long-term finance and project finance as the core of their activities. At the same 
time, the DFIs still fundamentally remain complementary,  especially in supporting strategic 
sectors such as the SMEs and agriculture.  
As reflected by the term, "development financial institution", DFIs are not only expected to 
provide  development  finance  for  nation  building,  but  also  to  undertake  a  higher  degree  of 
developmental role to nurture and develop the targeted sectors. With regard to this, the DFIs 
have been demonstrating outstanding performance in their developmental role. For instance, 
the  KfW  Mittelstandbank,  a  prominent  DFI  in  fostering  SME  development  in  Germany,  is 
providing  credit  facilities  to  not  only  the  established  SMEs  but  also  the  new  start-ups. 
Another  example  is  the  Organisation  for  SMEs  and  Regional  Innovation  of  Japan  which 
focuses on providing advisory and consultancy services, and training to nurture and develop 
the SMEs.  
Let's  now  look  at  the  prospects  and  challenges  for  DFIs,  i.e.,  the  second  part  of  this 
presentation.  
With  the  growing  and  changing  global  economy,  I  have  no  doubt  that  DFIs  will  remain 
important  and  relevant  to  meet  the  increasing  developmental  needs  of  their  respective 
countries. This development, indeed, presents both opportunities and challenges to the DFIs 
in the way forward. While the expanding economies, both in the developed and developing 
countries,  would  create  greater  business  activities  for  the  DFIs,  this  also  means  that  they 
have  to  remain  innovative  in  their  products  and  services  by  exploring  new  ways  of  doing 
business,  to  be  able  to  respond  effectively  to  the  different  financing  and  developmental 
requirements.  DFIs  must  continuously  evolve  and  review  their  areas  of  comparative 
advantage in order to remain relevant, effective and strategic.  
To drive performance, one important aspect is to clearly identify key performance indicators 
for the DFIs, in order to measure efficiency and effectiveness in performing their mandated 
roles. Recognising DFIs' developmental role, the performance measurement of a DFI should 
go  beyond  the  standard  financial  measurement  to  encompass  quantitative  and  qualitative 
non-financial  indicators  that  evaluate  the  economic  and  social  contribution  of  DFIs, 
consistent  with  their  objectives  of  establishment.  For  DFIs  that  are  involved  in  SME 
development,  the  key  performance  indicators  should  include  the  number  of  new  start-ups 
financed, the extent of borrowers receiving advisory services and the number of SMEs that 
have "graduated" from the DFIs.  
An important aspect to highlight is the need for DFIs to be financially sound and sustainable 
in their operations. This is critical so that the DFIs could fulfill their roles without continuously 
drawing resources from the government and the public sector. It is indeed heartening to note 
that  many  DFIs  have  been  successful  in  balancing  the  challenge  to  fulfill  developmental 
roles,  while  ensuring  that  their  operations  are  financially  sustainable.  For  instance,  the 
   2/5 
in 
line  with 
the  overall 
Development  Bank  of  Japan,  which  is  focusing  on  the  provision  of  supplement  long-term 
funding to qualified infrastructure projects, has shown favourable financial performance with 
a return on equity of 6.5% in 2004. Similarly, the Business Development Bank of Canada, a 
leading SME development bank in the country, has also recorded encouraging performance 
with an average return on equity of 7.1% in the past five years.  
The  experiences  of  these  DFIs  have  proven  that  despite  the  specific  mandates  to  finance 
development  activities,  business  operations  of  DFIs  can  be  financially  sustainable.  These 
success  stories  essentially  share  several  key  factors,  including  a  high  focus  on  their 
mandates;  dynamic  leadership  and  proper  accountability  within  the  DFIs;  continuous 
development  of  human  resource  capability;  intensive  use  of  information  technology  to 
improve  efficiency;  and  last,  but  not  least,  the  adoption  of  sound  and  prudent  financial 
principles as well as best practices in their operations.  
At the same time, given their relatively limited access to funds, it is recognised that financial 
support  from  the  Government  is  important  to  enable  the  DFIs  to  play  their  role  on  a 
sustainable basis. This, however, does not mean that DFIs should solely rely on government 
funding. In order to remain relevant and effective in meeting the growing financial needs of 
an expanding economy, DFIs need to increasingly draw funds from alternative sources, such 
as the capital market. Sourcing funds directly from the market would also help instil certain 
form of discipline on the operations of the DFIs.  
Allow me this opportunity to now share with you an overview on the roles and developments 
of  DFIs  in  Malaysia.  There  are  currently  14  DFIs  in  Malaysia.  Like  those  found  in  other 
countries, the DFIs were established and funded by the Government to develop and promote 
identified  strategic  sectors, 
industrialisation  and  economic 
development objectives of Malaysia. The first DFI was the Malaysian Industrial Development 
Finance  Berhad  (MIDF),  which  was  established  in  1960,  to  provide  medium  to  long-term 
financing to promote the development of private industrial enterprises. Subsequently, several 
major DFIs were established, including Bank Pertanian Malaysia (or the Agriculture Bank of 
Malaysia) to promote agricultural development, Bank Pembangunan Malaysia Berhad (or the 
Development Bank of Malaysia) to promote Bumiputera indigenous community development 
in  commerce  and  industry,  Bank  Industri  Malaysia  Berhad  (or  the  Industrial  Bank  of 
Malaysia) to support development in the industrial and manufacturing sectors, as well as the 
Export-Import  Bank  of  Malaysia  (EXIM  Bank)  and  the  Malaysia  Export  Credit  Insurance 
Berhad  (MECIB)  to  promote  international  trade  and  support  export  diversification  and 
expansion, especially to the non-traditional markets.  
Over the years, the DFIs in Malaysia have evolved in tandem with the country's economic 
transformation,  especially  to  support  developments  in  the  strategic  and  new  growth  areas 
such  as  high  technology,  infrastructure,  SME  development  and  micro  finance.  Bank 
Pembangunan  was  entrusted  by  the  Government  to  support  infrastructure  development  in 
expediting economic recovery following the financial crisis in 1997. Likewise, in line with the 
strategy  to  promote  capital-intensive  and  high  technology  industries,  Bank  Industri  was 
entrusted with the task of supporting advanced industrial development, such as engineering 
activities and computer software development.  
In the Malaysian financial system, the banking institutions form the largest component of the 
financial system, constituting about 51% and 78%, respectively, of the total assets and loans 
of  the  financial  system.  In  contrast  ,  the  total  assets  and  loans  of  DFIs  as  a  group, 
respectively accounts for about 5% of the financial system. Nevertheless, these DFIs have 
been  instrumental  in  providing  the  complementary  financial  services  needed  to  support 
development of the targeted sectors and activities.  
One particular notable development is the support provided by the DFIs for SMEs. Like many 
other  economies,  in  Malaysia,  the  SMEs  form  the  backbone  of  the  economy  with  high 
potential in fostering the forward and backward linkages of activities along the value chain. 
While SMEs constitute about 90% of total establishments in the manufacturing sector, at the 
   3/5 
moment they only provide about 30% of employment in the sector and contribute about 6% 
to Malaysia's GDP. Clearly, there is room to further unlock the potential of SMEs in Malaysia.  
While the banking system remains the main provider of funds to support the activities of the 
SMEs, there is the tendency for this system to focus on the more established SMEs. It can 
also be argued that the banking institutions also lack the appropriate skills and experience to 
develop and nurture the SMEs. This is where the presence of DFIs is so critical, that is to 
provide the complementary services, both financial and non-financial, particularly to support 
viable but smaller SMEs which are unable to obtain financing from the banking institutions.  
In Malaysia, there are at present two major DFIs specialising in supporting the development 
of  the  SMEs.  These  are  Bank  Pembangunan  dan  Infrastruktur  Malaysia  Berhad  and  the 
Credit Guarantee Corporation (CGC). Each of these DFIs has been assigned the specified 
mandated roles in assisting the SMEs in Malaysia. Bank Pembangunan is entrusted with the 
mandate of promoting entrepreneurial development by not only providing financial services to 
the  SMEs,  but  also  assume  the  nurturing  and  developmental  role  through  the  provision  of 
advisory and consultancy services to this targeted group.  
Meanwhile, the CGC is mandated to assist the SMEs that lack track record and collateral to 
have access to financing, by providing credit guarantees to enhance the SMEs' accessibility 
to  credit  facilities.  To  supplement  its  guarantee  schemes,  the  CGC,  under  its  Business 
Advisory  Service  Entity  programme,  has  identified  and  engaged  a  panel  of  consultants  to 
assist the SMEs, particularly in drawing up business plans and other financial documents.  
Bank Negara Malaysia recognises the important complementary role of DFIs in the financial 
system and their developmental role in supporting the national socio-economic agenda. As 
such, Bank Negara Malaysia in its Financial Sector Masterplan (FSMP) has drawn out the 
roadmap on the development of the DFIs, with the objective of developing a group of DFIs 
that are able to perform their mandates in an effective and efficient manner at minimal cost to 
the  Government.  In  order  to  achieve  this  objective,  three  broad  development  thrusts  have 
been  outlined  for  the  DFIs,  namely,  strengthening  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework  of  the  DFIs,  capacity  and  capability  building  as  well  as  institutional  efficiency 
enhancement of DFIs. A total of eight recommendations have been formulated premised on 
these development thrusts.  
One of the significant milestones in the strategies to strengthen the DFIs is the enactment of 
the Development Financial Institutions Act 2002 (DFIA). The Act provides a comprehensive 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  DFIs,  with  the  primary  objective  of  ensuring  that 
the  DFIs  perform  their  mandated  roles  and  that  their  activities  are  carried  out  prudently, 
effectively and efficiently. Bank Negara Malaysia was appointed as the single regulatory and 
supervisory  body  for  DFIs  under  the  Act.  In  carrying  out  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
function,  the  Central  Bank's  focus  is  primarily  to  promote  the  development  of  sound  and 
robust DFIs capable of performing their mandated roles effectively. Seven DFIs are currently 
placed under the purview of the Act.  
Recognising  the  unique  characteristics  of  each  DFI,  regulations  and  policies  have  largely 
been  tailored-made  to  suit  the  different  roles  and  functions  of  each  DFI  with  the  view  of 
facilitating  and  strengthening  their  operations.  In  general,  the  DFIs  are  required  to  ensure 
that their operations and activities are in line with their mandated roles, underpinned by good 
corporate governance and best practices. They are required t o operate with transparency, 
especially with regard to information disclosure on their corporate performance, in order to 
enhance credibility and to harness greater confidence from the public that they serve as well 
as from the Government.  
Strategies  formulated  have  also  been  focussed  on  enhancing  the  clarity  in  the  roles  and 
functions of the DFIs, with a view of minimising the overlapping of functions and increasing 
DFIs' effectiveness in serving the targeted sectors. This has led to a number of initiatives to 
realign and enhance the strategic focus through the restructuring of selected DFIs. One is 
the merger of the EXIM Bank and MECIB to enhance their synergy in export promotion. The 
   4/5 
other  important  initiative  is  the  rationalisation  of  Bank  Pembangunan  and  Bank  Industri, 
which will result in the establishment of an SME Bank. The SME Bank, a specialised agency 
dedicated to the promotion of SME development, will commence operations in October 2005 
and  is  envisaged  to  better  serve  the  needs  of  SMEs  through  the  provision  of  a 
comprehensive range of financial and non-financial services. In particular, the SME Bank will 
focus  on  nurturing  the  SMEs  and  promoting  entrepreneural  development,  through  the 
provision  of  financial  and  business  advisory  services,  including  financial  management, 
business diagnosis and marketing support.  
Recognising  the  importance  of  human  resource  development  as  part  of  the  capacity  and 
capability enhancement strategy, several initiatives have also been undertaken to enhance 
the  skills  of  DFIs,  particulary  in  the  provision  of  advisory  services  and  micro  financing.  In 
collaboration  with  the  Japan  International  Cooperation  Agency,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is 
currently  embarking  on  a  project  to  enhance  the  capabilities  of  DFIs  in  providing  advisory 
services to the SMEs. It is envisaged that the provision of quality advisory support can be 
used to supplement the financial services of DFIs, in order to enhance their effectiveness in 
supporting the development of the SMEs. In addition, Bank Negara Malaysia has developed 
and  distributed  a  set  of  micro  finance  manuals  to  DFIs  engaging  in  the  provision  of  micro 
finance, for use as reference to acquire the knowledge of micro finance principles and best 
practices. This is to ensure a sustainable provision of micro finance by these DFIs.  
Going  forward,  the  role  of  DFIs  would  not  diminish,  but  continue  to  remain  important  and 
relevant, providing greater complementary and developmental role in addressing the nation's 
development strategies. Nevertheless, it is envisaged that the DFIs are expected to evolve 
from being the direct financiers to function as a strategic conduit to facilitate financing by the 
banking system, especially through the provision of credit enhancement. In addition, the DFIs 
would  also  increasingly  become  specialised  institutions  to  render  advisory  and  business 
support  services,  in  order  to  increase  their  effectiveness  in  meeting  the  financing  and 
developmental needs.  
At the same time, the need for DFIs to remain financially sustainable while performing their 
mandated  roles  cannot  be  over-emphasised.  This  would  require  continuous  capacity  and 
capability enhancement of the DFIs, especially the strengthening of human capital skills and 
institutional  efficiency,  together  with  the  adoption  of  good  corporate  governance  and  best 
practices  by  the  DFIs.  In  addition,  to  ensure  that  available  resources  are  channeled 
adequately  and  appropriately  to  support  the  targeted  sectors,  DFIs  would  need  to 
strategically reduce the channeling of funds to the sectors and businesses that have matured 
and, on their own, would be able to obtain financial resources from the banking institutions or 
the capital market.  
In conclusion, I must say that the theme for today's forum on "Revving up the SMEs as the 
engine  of  growth"  is  both  timely  and  appropriate  given  the  importance  and  potential 
economic  contributions  of  SMEs,  particularly  in  the  developing  countries.  Therefore,  it  is 
important that the SME sector continues to receive adequate and appropriate financial and 
ancillary  support  to  ensure  their  sustainable  development  towards  meeting  a  nation's 
development  objectives.  In  this  regard,  the  DFIs  play  an  important  role  in  providing  the 
necessary financial and developmental support to complement the banking institutions in the 
promotion of SME development.  
I am pleased to note that we have distinguished speakers and panellist here to share their 
views on various issues relating to DFIs and their roles in SME financing. I am confident that 
your  endeavour  to  learn  and  share,  as  well  as  to  exchange  views  on  areas  that  are  of 
particular interests and benefits to you, will, in the final analysis, be very rewarding.  
 
   5/5 
