Caleb M Fundanga: Monetary policy issues and the process of foreign 
payments 
Presentation by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Zambian Heads of 
Missions Briefing Seminar, Lusaka, 19 July 2005. 
 The Hon. Minister of Foreign Affairs, Lt. Gen. Ronnie Shikapwasha, MP 
Hon. Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Permanent Secretaries 
Your Excellencies, High Commissioners and Ambassadors 
Senior Government Officials 
Distinguished Invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 
It is an honour for me to be here this morning to talk to you on the topic of “Monetary Policy Issues 
and the Process of Foreign Payments”. This topic provides me with an opportunity to explain the 
role of the Bank of Zambia in the economy and the process of foreign payments which has been a 
topical issue.  
As you may be aware, the Bank of Zambia’s mission is to formulate and implement monetary and 
supervisory policies that will ensure price and financial system stability. However, in line with 
the topic above, my presentation this morning will focus on the first aspect of the mission of the Bank, 
namely, price stability.  
There are generally three prices of major concern to the Bank of Zambia. These are general prices of 
goods  and  services,  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate  of  the  kwacha  against  major  foreign 
currencies. I will now deal with each of these in turn.  
The central bank deals with general prices of goods and services in the context of inflation. In simple 
terms,  inflation  may  be  defined  as  the  change  in  the  general  price  level  of  goods  and  services. 
However, in every day usage, inflation may be defined as “too much money chasing too few goods”. 
Describing inflation this way makes it easier to link it to monetary policy which is the control of money 
supply in an economy. 
The Bank of Zambia is concerned that inflation has remained stubbornly high for quite sometime now. 
As  at  end-June  2005,  inflation  was  at  19.2%  which  we  consider  too  high  to  foster  sustainable 
economic  growth.  The  poor  weather  patterns  over  the  last  agricultural  season  resulted  in  low  crop 
output, particularly that of maize, which induced inflationary pressures. The unyielding rise in world oil 
prices on account of high demand from China and India, due to high economic activity, disruptions in 
supply,  arising  from  war  in  the  Middle  East,  as  well  as  processing  capacity  constraints  in  many  oil 
consuming countries have  also  caused  a  general  rise  in  the  domestic  prices  of  petroleum  products 
thereby increasing the cost of domestic production. 
In order to moderate the inflationary pressures arising from low crop output, on a sustainable basis, 
efforts  should  be  directed  at  diversifying  and  improving  agricultural  output  away  from  rain-fed 
agricultural practices. Government’s commitment to increased investment in the agricultural sector is 
therefore commendable as this should assist in improving the supply of agricultural output, in particular 
that of food items. This has an important bearing towards reducing consumer food inflation. Similarly, 
although it is not possible to completely eliminate inflationary pressures stemming from rising world oil 
prices, efforts are nonetheless needed to moderate their impact on the economy. To this end, such 
efforts  as  conserving  the  use  of  petroleum  products  can  go  a  long  way  in  reducing  the  attendant 
inflationary pressures.  
Allow me now to turn to the issue of interest rates. As you may be aware, interest rates refer to the 
price  of  money.  Over  the  last  few  years  the  general  trend  in  commercial  banks’  weighted  average 
lending rates has been largely downwards. As at end-June 2005, the weighted average base lending 
rate  had  reduced  to  28.6%  from  36.2%  in  January  2004.  The  fall  in  lending  rates  has  in  large  part 
been induced by a fall in yield rates on Government securities as banks in Zambia have tended to use 
yield rates as anchors. 
BIS Review 53/2005 
 1
However,  at  the  current  levels,  lending  interest  rates  are  too  high  to  contribute  to  sustainable 
productive  investment.  This  calls  for  concerted  efforts  among  other  key  stakeholders,  namely,  the 
Government, commercial banks and the borrowing private sector to continue playing their respective 
roles  effectively  to  bring  about  a  further  reduction  in  the  lending  interest  rates.  It  has  also  to  be 
appreciated that inflation is another major contributing factor to high interest rates as banks set their 
lending  interest  rates  above  the  rate  of  inflation  thus  the  need  to  reduce  the  high  inflation  that  has 
characterised the economy. On our part, we will do all we can, using all monetary instruments at our 
disposal, to contribute to reducing inflation and therefore, interest rates. 
As regards the exchange rate, this refers to the price of one currency in terms of another. In our case, 
it refers to the relative price of the kwacha against other currencies. The price of the kwacha against 
other  currencies  is  directly  determined  by  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  foreign  exchange 
market and indirectly through the conduct of monetary policy. To improve the operations of the foreign 
exchange  market,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  developed  the  broad-based  inter-bank  foreign  exchange 
system  where  suppliers  (traditional  and  non-traditional  exporters)  and  users  (importers)  of  foreign 
exchange can trade transparently. 
Following the introduction of this system, there has been a significant improvement in the supply of 
foreign exchange on the market owing to the confidence in the system by market participants, efficient 
flow  of  information  among  all  players  and  improved  external  sector  performance  brought  about  by 
increased  copper  output  and  unprecedented  high  world  copper  prices  in  recent  times.  These 
developments  have  contributed  to  the  relative  stability  of  the  kwacha  against  major  currencies  and 
thus  moderating  inflationary  pressures.  In  addition,  the  containment  of  growth  in  money supply  has 
contributed  to  this  outcome.  Furthermore,  the  anti-dollarisation  campaign  that  the  Bank  of  Zambia 
waged some two and half years ago has had an equally important role to play in the observed relative 
stability of the kwacha against major currencies. 
However, continued relative stability of the exchange rate of the kwacha against major currencies is 
heavily  dependent  on  longer  term  initiatives  for  sustained  improvement  in  the  supply  of  foreign 
exchange. Among these strategies is a sustained increase in export earnings through the stimulation 
and maintenance of a strong export sector.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me now turn to the other part of the topic, namely, the process of foreign 
payments. The Bank of Zambia has issued Directives that put limits on cash transactions in foreign 
exchange with authorised dealers. For instance, bureaux de change cannot transact in excess of US 
dollars  1,000  or  equivalent  foreign  currency  per  transaction  per  day  with  any  one  individual.  This 
arises from their primary purpose of being money changers. The corresponding limit for commercial 
banks is US dollars 5,000 or equivalent foreign currency per transaction per day for account holders 
and US dollars 1,000 or equivalent foreign currency for non-account holders. It is important to stress 
that  these  limits  for  commercial  banks  pertain  to  cash  transactions  only.  Account  holders  and  non-
account holders alike wishing to transact above these limits can do so by choosing other modes of 
payments, such as, direct transfers, drafts, etc. 
Any remittance in excess of US dollars 5,000 has to be channelled through commercial banks and the 
person remitting the funds is required to support the transaction with appropriate documentation for 
statistical purposes, as well as guarding against money laundering and financing of terrorism. 
The convenience of making foreign payments from Kwacha bank accounts has also been improved by 
introduction of new products. One such product is the VISA based electronic debit card where holders 
of  such  cards  can  access  their  kwacha  balances  from  anywhere  in  the  world  where  the  card  is 
accepted. This has not only reduced the need for people to carry huge amounts of foreign currency 
but also has made the kwacha a truly convertible currency. All these innovations have come about 
because of the relative stability of the exchange rate of the Kwacha against major currencies. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, in conclusion, I wish to emphasise that the role of the Bank of Zambia is to 
formulate and implement monetary and supervisory policies that will ensure price and financial system 
stability. We are committed to playing our part and will do all that is necessary to make an effective 
contribution to a stable macroeconomic environment. In this regard, I call upon all other stakeholders 
including  Your  Excellencies  to  promote  and  support  these  positive  efforts  in  the  countries  of  your 
accreditation. I hope you found my short presentation useful in understanding the conduct of monetary 
policy and the role that the Bank of Zambia plays. 
I thank you. 
