Toshihiko Fukui: Reflections on what is happening in the global 
economy today 
Summary of a speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 2005 IIF 
Annual Meeting, Washington DC, 25 September 2005. 
 Introduction  
It  is  a  pleasure  to  appear  before  you  this  morning  and  share  my  thoughts  on  what  is 
happening in the global economy today.  
Before  I  go  any  further,  let  me  express  my  deepest  condolences  for  the  great  suffering 
caused by Hurricane Katrina just a few weeks ago.  
My  remarks  will  be  divided  into  three  parts.  In  the  first,  I  will  comment  on  the  currents  of 
structural changes in the global economy from a long-term perspective. Against the backdrop 
of  these  changes,  I  would  then  like  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  changing  role  of  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF)--a medium-term issue for all of us in this room. Finally, I 
will  comment  briefly  on  a  conjunctural  issue--the  state  of  the  Japanese  economy  and  the 
monetary  policy  of  the  Bank  of  Japan.  I  hope  to  answer  a  few  questions,  if  we  have  time 
before I have to head to Dulles Airport to catch my plane to Tokyo.  
Structural changes in the global economy  
The  global  economy  has  undergone  significant  structural  changes  in  the  last  decade.  Of 
those  changes,  in  my  view,  three  are  most  important.  The  first  is  the  entry  of  emerging 
market economies into the market-based economic system. The second is the progress we 
have  observed  in  information,  communications,  and  telecommunications  (ICT)  technology. 
The third is the aging of the population, especially in mature industrialized economies. Let 
me take up these developments in turn.  
Since  the  1990s,  emerging  market  economies--China,  India,  and  countries  in  Central  and 
Eastern  Europe--have  progressively  been  integrated  into  the  market-based  economic 
system. Taking advantage of their relatively low wages and foreign direct investment (FDI) 
and  technology  transfers  from  mature  industrialized  economies,  these  countries  have 
increased their supply of goods and services to the global economy. In this process, these 
countries  have  broadened  their  exports  as  well.  They  are  now  exporting  not  only  light 
industry products, such as textiles, but also heavy and high-tech industry products. Exports 
now also include services, such as operating call centers.  
The  advances  in  ICT  technology,  such  as  the  widespread  use  of  the  Internet,  have 
significantly reduced the costs of processing and transmitting information. This has, in turn, 
enabled firms to expand their operations globally. Production of goods and services is now 
spread out over many economies. At the same time, ICT technology has also enabled firms 
to enhance efficiencies of so-called middle-management functions, resulting in the flattening 
of  corporate  organizations.  The  confluence  of  these  developments  with  the  integration  of 
emerging markets into the market-based economic system has reduced the costs of doing 
business worldwide, and enhanced competition in the global marketplace.  
Meanwhile,  the  importance  of  the  third  structural  change  that  I  just  mentioned--the  rapid 
aging of the population especially in the industrialized economies--is just beginning to sink in. 
We now realize that the shift in demographics may have profound effects on various aspects 
of the global economic system. For example, it may change the savings-investment balance; 
it  may  change  flows  of money  through  financial  intermediaries;  and  it may  influence  asset 
allocation among investors.  
   1/6 
Today, I have chosen to focus on these issues, because various developments in the global 
economy--sometimes  puzzling  developments--flow  out  from  these  changes.  One  is  the 
subdued  rate  of  consumer  inflation,  which  has  defied  extremely  elevated  price  levels  of 
commodities and raw materials such as crude oil. Another is the relative stability of long-term 
interest rates.  
At the end of August, crude oil prices reached US$70 a barrel. Though prices have come off 
the peaks, this starkly illustrates the rapidly rising prices of commodities and raw materials. 
Factors  such  as  political  unrest  in  producer  countries  and  bad  weather  have  certainly 
influenced  such  developments.  Looking  at  crude  oil,  production  capacity  for  petroleum 
products is constrained, because not enough money was invested in exploration, extraction, 
and refining in the wake of collapsing prices after the Second Oil Crisis. Nevertheless, the 
most significant factor seems to be the tightness in supply and demand conditions caused by 
strong  demand.  In  particular,  the  combination  of  relatively  high  growth  and  relatively 
inefficient energy use in emerging market countries seems to be contributing to higher than 
expected growth in crude oil demand.  
As I noted a few moments ago, emerging market countries are now being integrated into the 
market-based  economic  system.  Being  new  members  of  the  system,  however,  their 
economies are still evolving. There remain rigidities, such as price controls. Consequently, 
they are not able to use resources as efficiently as mature industrial economies. Given this 
environment,  it  seems  we  will  have  to  live  with  higher  prices  of  commodities  and  raw 
materials, at least for the time being.  
While input prices are thus rising, pass-through to output prices is rather limited. In fact, since 
the 1990s, we are observing significantly lower rates of consumer price index (CPI) inflation 
around  the  globe.  Productivity  growth  in  the  corporate  sector  is  providing  some  cushion. 
However,  the  most  important  factor  behind  this  development  is  again  the  integration  of 
emerging  market  countries  into  the  market-based  economic  system.  With  increasing 
integration,  more  goods  are  brought  onto  the  market.  In  turn,  competition  is  enhanced 
globally,  producers'  pricing  power  is  weakened,  and  consumers  benefit  from  downward 
pressures on prices.  
Lower  inflation  is  accompanied  by  smaller  fluctuations  of  the  economy.  Not  only  are  we 
seeing  lower  inflation  rates,  we  are  also  seeing  lower  inflation  volatility.  The  volatility  of 
growth is also declining. The increasing importance of services, the demand for which is less 
volatile than that for goods, is one contributing factor. As individual firms take advantage of 
ICT in managing their output, economic activity at the macro level may see less fluctuation. 
At  the  same  time,  greater  flexibility  in  products  and  labor  markets  may  help  firms  adapt 
smoothly to changing business conditions.  
Obviously, factors other than structural changes have also lowered inflation and volatility of 
inflation and growth. Central banks have also contributed to enhancing stability. Independent 
central  banks,  pursuing  price  stability  through  monetary  policy,  have  successfully  tamed 
inflation. This has enhanced the credibility of monetary policy, and, in turn, stabilized inflation 
expectations.  
In  financial  markets,  low  and  stable  rates  of  inflation  have  led  to  lower  long-term  interest 
rates around the world. Since I do not wish to repeat Chairman Greenspan, I will merely say 
that  the  structural  changes  I  have  touched  on  today  are  definitely  influencing  interest  rate 
developments.  
The  three  broad  trends--globalization,  ICT,  and  aging--will  be  sustained  for  some  time. 
Considering that there are still millions if not billions of underemployed workers in emerging 
market countries, the integration process will probably continue for many more years. Since 
human  ingenuity  is  unlimited,  we  will  find  new  and  innovative  uses  for  ICT  in  the  years 
ahead. Institutional changes to mitigate the effects of rapid aging have only just begun.  
   2/6 
As  a  result  of  the  interactions  between  these  trends,  we  are  sure  to  see  economic 
developments  that  we  would  never  have  imagined  before.  We  have  no  crystal  ball  to 
accurately identify the changes ahead of us or their consequences. This means that our well-
being  will  only  be  maintained  if  we  can  efficiently  and  effectively  adapt  to  the  changing 
environment.  We  must  monitor  events  closely  as  they  unfold,  and  be  ready  to  respond 
flexibly.  I  am  optimistic  that  central  banks  can  adapt  to  changing  economic  conditions,  as 
they have done so over many years.  
The changing role of the IMF  
Structural  changes  are  not  confined  to  the  real  economy.  The  forces  of  globalization  are 
influencing the international monetary system as well.  
Yesterday,  at  the  meeting  of  the  IMF  Council,  we  discussed  the  results  of  the  Strategic 
Review of the IMF, initiated by Managing Director, Rodrigo de Rato. Rodrigo's project was 
extremely helpful, drawing up a comprehensive list of issues that we have to address. The 
consensus on where we stand was already described by Gordon Brown yesterday, and I will 
not repeat it here.  
The Strategic Review was necessary and useful in defining what needs to be done today. It 
is, however, the first step.  
Sixty years ago, the Fund was created to maintain a network of exchange rates anchored on 
the  U.S.  dollar  backed  by  gold.  There  was  also  a  mechanism  to  facilitate  adjustments. 
Member countries were obliged to enter into annual consultations. In this process, the Fund 
identified economic policies that would undermine the network of fixed exchange rates. The 
Fund  then  suggested  remedies,  and  lent  money  if  necessary  to  buy  time  for  policy 
adjustments  to  take  effect.  If  exchange  rates  really  fell  out  of  line  with  economic 
fundamentals, it was possible to tweak the rates.  
Fast-forward  to  today,  and  we  no  longer  have  fixed  exchange  rates,  particularly  between 
systemically important countries. As a result, policy advice from the Fund is losing the force 
and  urgency  it  once  had.  At  the  same  time,  we  are  witnessing  increasingly  stronger  and 
more mobile private capital flows. These flows are, of course, generally beneficial. Though it 
is  hard  to  measure  precisely,  private  capital  has  played  a  significant  role  in  the  robust 
investment-led growth of many countries.  
Private flows are not only getting bigger, they are getting more nimble. In the seventies and 
eighties, banks were the main financiers for emerging market economies. On the other hand, 
much of today's private capital flows are in the form of bond issues. Compared with banks, 
bondholders tend to react very quickly. Bankers cannot call a loan until it is due. On the other 
hand, when bondholders sense a problem brewing, they can sell their bonds immediately. If 
everyone heads for the exit at once, bond prices will collapse and exacerbate problems for 
the  issuing  country.  There  will  also  be  coordination  problems.  You  can  cram  a  few  dozen 
bankers into one room and cut a deal, but we cannot do the same for bondholders.  
No wonder that emerging market and developing countries tapping the international financial 
market sometimes feel so insecure and helpless. The welcome rug could be pulled quickly 
from under their feet, as many of them found out in the late 1990s. They can turn to the Fund 
for  help,  but  private  flows  could  even  overwhelm  the  Fund.  Fund  quotas,  essentially 
equivalent  to  paid-in  capital,  total  about  US$330  billion.  This  is  only  a  fraction  of  global 
financial flows.  
In our recent efforts to reform the international monetary system, we have tried to deal with 
these changes. As I said a few minutes ago, the Strategic Review is an important milestone. 
Nevertheless,  the  recommendations  will  soon  be  overtaken  by  developments  in  the 
international financial landscape. The three trends I mentioned in the first part of my talk--
globalization,  ICT,  and  aging--will  continue.  This  means  that  capital  movements  between 
   3/6 
economies will accelerate, broaden and expand. The Fund must continue to evolve, if it is to 
remain relevant in tomorrow's international monetary system.  
Though we cannot predict the exact consequences of the structural changes, a general idea 
of  what  we  can  expect  seems  to  be  clear  enough.  If  private  flows  become  increasingly 
important, we should emphasize private solutions as well as public interventions. There are 
two significant developments in this context.  
One  is  the  collective  action  clauses  (CACs)  in  bond  covenants,  advocated  by  the  G-10 
countries in September 2002. Now almost all new international bond issues are governed by 
CACs. In the near future, when bonds without CACs are all retired, CACs would govern the 
resolution  of  sovereign  debt  crises.  A  typical  CAC  allows  the  terms  of  a  bond  issue  to  be 
changed with the consent of 75% of bondholders. This means that if a country cannot pay its 
debts in full, it needs to come up with a restructuring plan that satisfies 75% of the lenders. 
The clear and transparent rules also reduce the chances for holdouts or rogue investors to 
disrupt an orderly workout process. In turn, the market can more appropriately price the risks 
and costs of defaults.  
Another  notable  development  is  the  "Principles  for  Stable  Capital  Flows  and  Fair  Debt 
Restructuring  in  Emerging  Markets,"  released  about  a  year  ago.  I  know  that  Managing 
Director, Charles Dallara and his colleagues at the IIF worked hard to see its publication. The 
Principles  offer  a  framework  for  enhancing  flows  of  information  between  borrowers  and 
lenders.  They  also  provide  guidance  for  productive  engagements  between  them.  These 
improvements should enable lenders to assess and price risks more precisely, enhance the 
stability  of  flows  to  developing  and  emerging  market  countries,  and  facilitate  resolution  of 
problems when they occur.  
These  developments,  especially 
the  Principles,  would  strengthen  market  discipline. 
Borrowing  countries  would  be  encouraged  to  improve  their  institutions  and  adopt  sound 
economic  policies.  As  a  result,  we  should  see  fewer  international  financial  crises.  In  the 
unfortunate and hopefully rare event that problems do arise, a borrowing country and private 
lenders can negotiate orderly settlements, under the framework of CACs. The public sector, 
including  the  Fund,  would  only  be  called  on  in  the  rarest  cases,  where  the  speed  and 
magnitude of the problems might overwhelm efforts to formulate private solutions.  
What does this mean for the Fund?  
In terms of giving out policy advice, the Fund's role would be more relative. If private lenders 
become more important, borrowing countries would be inclined to listen to what the market 
wants.  The  Fund  is  facing  formidable  competition,  but  I  think  it  can  build  on  its  excellent 
reputation. I am especially looking forward to the efforts currently underway to enhance the 
Fund's work related to financial issues.  
Meanwhile, as I noted a moment ago, Fund lending will be necessary only when there is a 
rapidly  unfolding  crisis  of  considerable  magnitude.  We  should,  therefore,  consider  if  the 
current rules for releasing Fund resources could appropriately cope with such a situation. In 
the jargon of the Fund, this is a question of improving the rules for exceptional access. To 
say  that  the  Board  is  responsible  for  approving  such  lending  is  sidestepping  the  question. 
Can  the  Board  form  a  consensus  quickly  enough?  Is  the  Board  representative  enough  so 
that  members  can  subscribe  comfortably  to  its  decisions?  Who  is  going  to  be  held 
accountable if something goes wrong? Answering these questions will tax our imaginations 
to the fullest extent, but we must not dodge them. Disasters do happen.  
Recent developments in the japanese economy  
Before closing my remarks, let me briefly speak on the Japanese economy and the monetary 
policy of the Bank of Japan.  
   4/6 
If we put aside quarter-to-quarter fluctuations in the rates of growth, the Japanese economy 
has  been  on  a  recovery  track  for  three  and  a  half  years,  since  the  beginning  of  2002. 
Nevertheless, from the summer of 2004, we had a period of sluggish growth in exports and 
industrial production. This pause in growth was brought about by the global adjustment in the 
ICT sector.  
The Bank of Japan stated all along that slower growth was temporary, and that the Japanese 
economy  would  eventually  regain  momentum.  There  were,  however,  concerns  that  Japan 
had slipped back into recession. Fortunately, recent developments seem to indicate that the 
pause in growth is finally over: the adjustment in the ICT sector is almost complete; domestic 
demand components, private capital investments, and household consumption in particular, 
are generally showing firm growth; and exports, which were flat for some months, seem to be 
regaining traction.  
I  believe  that  this  trend  will  be  sustained  for  some  time.  The  Japanese  economy  should 
remain on a moderate but enduring growth path, supported by both domestic and external 
demand. There are two particularly encouraging factors.  
The  first  is  that  Japanese  firms  are  at  last  seeing  the  end  to  structural  adjustments 
necessitated by the bursting of the bubble economy. For more than a decade, the Japanese 
economy was under the yoke of "three excesses"--excess capacity, excess employment, and 
excess debt. Japanese firms worked very hard to get rid of these excesses. They are now 
adopting new strategies that enhance efficiency and competitiveness. As a result, they are 
becoming more profitable. In fact, measured by the profits-to-sales ratio, Japanese firms are 
more profitable than they were in the end of the 1980s, at the peak of the bubble economy. 
Against  this  background,  the  growth  of  capital  investment  is  relatively  strong,  not  only  at 
large  manufacturing  firms  but  also  at  manufacturing  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises 
(SMEs) and at non-manufacturing firms.  
The  second  encouraging  factor  is  that  households  are  increasingly  benefiting  from  the 
recovery in the corporate sector. Employment is growing, and the jobless rate has dropped to 
a  seven-year  low  of  4.4%.  Looking  past  the  headline  numbers,  we  see  even  more 
encouraging signs. Until recently, Japanese firms hired part-time and temporary workers in 
order  to  keep  labor  costs  in  check.  Today,  firms  are  stepping  up  their  efforts  to  hire 
permanent  workers,  against  the  background  of  improving  profitability  and  thus  business 
confidence. Consequently, employee income, which was depressed by the rising proportion 
of  part-time  and  temporary  workers,  is  rising  moderately.  The  promising  employment  and 
income environment is firmly supporting personal consumption, in both goods and services. 
These trends in employment, income and consumption are expected to continue for the time 
being.  
Coming  back  to  the  broad  trend,  the  Japanese  economy  grew  by  2.7%  in  2004  and  is 
expected to grow by 2.0% in 2005 according to the Fund's World Economic Outlook (WEO). 
This  is  not  as  spectacular  as  the  United  States,  which  grew  by  4.2%  in  2004  and  whose 
WEO  growth  forecast  is  3.5%  for  2005.  Nevertheless,  it  is  a  respectable  growth  path 
compared  to  some  other  mature  industrialized  economies.  I  believe  that  this  moderate 
growth trend can be sustained for some time.  
What does this mean for monetary policy?  
The Bank of Japan is maintaining the policy framework of quantitative easing. As you know, 
under this framework, the Bank supplies liquidity far in excess of required reserves, creating 
an environment where short-term interest rates stay very close to zero. Another element of 
our  present  policy  framework  is  a  firm  commitment  to  maintaining  that  environment  until 
year-on-year inflation, as measured by core CPI, is stably zero or above.  
   5/6 
Currently,  Japanese  core  CPI  is  still  declining  slightly,  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  steadfastly 
adheres  to  the  commitment  I  have  just  explained.  By  doing  so,  we  are  supporting  the 
Japanese economy's return to a stable and sustainable path of growth.  
Thank you for your attention. It has been a pleasure speaking to you.  
 
   6/6 
