Zhou Xiaochuan: Improve legal system and financial ecology 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the “Forum of 50 Chinese 
Economists”, Beijing, 2 December 2004. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very glad to have this opportunity to attend the conference organized by the Forum of 50 Chinese 
Economists  and  wish  to  stimulate,  through  the  anticipated  discussions,  academic  research  and  to 
contribute  to  policy-making  and  reforms.  In  the  process  of  financial  reform,  we  have  spent  a  huge 
amount of resources in addressing non-performing loans (NPLs), resolving potential financial risks and 
avoiding financial crisis. In the next round of financial reforms, there are important areas in which that 
we must take actions, such as financial legislation, especially the insolvency law and laws concerning 
loan frauds, and certainly accounting rules and standards. Legal issues have a direct bearing on the 
financial ecology of our economy. At present, some related issues have become acute and important. I 
would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  share  my  views  with  you  and  hopefully  provide  some  initial 
thoughts for further study. 
I. 
With the deepening of economic transition, financial risks have taken variable forms 
and the potential risks that need to be addressed continue to change 
There are many underlying reasons for financial risks. First, the rapid global economic, technological 
and  financial  development  has  made  it  difficult  to  address  new  problems  with  existing  theories  and 
experiences.  Among  these  are  the  uncertainties  in  financial  stability.  Second,  in  the  transition  from 
planned to market economy, some aspects of institution building is still in a vague, non-planned and 
non-market, or conflicting stage. Third, reality has proved that all kinds of problems in the economy are 
reflected  in  the  workings  of  the  financial  system,  which  was  particularly  evident  during  the  Asian 
financial  crisis.  Financial  risks,  if  not  addressed  in  a  timely  manner,  could  continue  to  grow  and 
develop into economic and financial crisis. We must put more emphasis on understanding the financial 
risks and the uncertainties involved. Only by taking timely measures, could potential risks be removed. 
It is a world-wide experience that the longer the risks are left unattended, the harder it is to solve them. 
When the economy is in transition, financial risks at different stages takes different forms with their 
nature and characteristics constantly changing. Some of the important problems we faced yesterday 
are  no  longer  important  today,  and  some  of  the  minor  issues  of  yesterday  have  developed  into 
significant ones today. For instance, in the recent past, the most important problem we faced was the 
disposal of large NPLs. In 1998, 270 billion yuan of special treasury bonds were issued to re-capitalize 
the  state  commercial  banks.  In  1999,  asset  management  companies  were  set  up  to  take  over 
1000 billion yuan of NPLs. At the end of 2003, Bank of China and China Construction Bank introduced 
share-holding  reform  on  a  trial  basis.  The  two  banks  wrote  off  non-performing  assets  with  existing 
capital,  which  was  followed  by  state  capital  injection  with  foreign  exchange and  gold  reserves.  The 
reform of rural credit unions was stepped up with financial support from the government. 
In order to tackle the NPL problem at its root, we conducted a detailed survey and obtained a general 
picture  of  the  historical  causes  of  NPLs.  This  work  provided  a  basis  for  addressing  the  NPLs  and 
designing the blueprint of state commercial bank reform. According to this survey, 30 percent of the 
NPLs resulted from state planning and administrative intervention, 30 percent was due to defaults of 
state enterprises after state banks providing financing based on state policy, 10 percent came from 
structural  adjustments  as  a  result  of  state  orchestrated  closure,  merge  and  transformation  of 
enterprises,  10  percent  stemmed  from  intervention  of  local  governments  including  poor  creditor 
protection  in  the  judicial  and  enforcement  process,  while  20  percent  was  due  to  the  inappropriate 
internal  management.  In  addition,  factors,  such  as  poor  credit  culture,  intentional  defaults  and 
inadequate application of accounting standard, can be found in all above categories. One striking truth 
is that many of these causes related to legal, judicial and enforcement practices. 
As old problems are gone with reforms, new ones begin to emerge. For instance, some of the past 
causes of NPLs, such as policy lending, inappropriate administrative intervention, unbalanced central-
local  relations  and  poor  internal  control  within  commercial  banks  have  begun  to  dissolve.  At  the 
beginning of reforms, the thinking of administrative separation of powers between the central and local 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 1
governments had an adverse impact on the effectiveness of internal controls within commercial banks. 
In such a setup, loan organization was decentralized to provincial, regional, city and even county level 
and a “three-eye practice” being followed with each eye looking separately at the head-office of the 
bank, the local government and the supervisor, the local branch of the People’s Bank of China (PBC). 
At the early stage of reform, telecommunication was not as developed as today so the daily operation 
and  supervision  were,  to  a  great  extent,  subject  to  the  control  of  local  interests.  This  led  to  weak 
internal controls within banks. When I was working at a commercial bank in the early 1990s, I found 
that there were many detailed rules and regulations. From appearance, the institutional building was 
sound, but people at the head-office knew that implementation was usually another story. Therefore, 
making rules and regulations was to a great extent a means of shirking responsibility. The branches 
were operating with three eyes and any mistakes resulted would not be the responsibility of the head-
office. 
It was not until the convening of the 3rd Plenary Session of the 14th National Congress of the CPC in 
1993  that  emphasis was  placed  on strengthening  internal controls  within  banks.  At  the  time,  it  was 
stressed  that  specialized  banks  needed  to  be  transformed  into  comprehensive,  enterprise-like, 
commercial banks without direct administrative controls. However, changes always take time. It was 
not until 1997 when lessons from Asian financial crisis were learned and when the Central Financial 
Work  Conference  was  held  that  the  commercial  banks  started  to  introduce  vertical  management  of 
business and staff, creating needed conditions for strengthening internal controls. 
Other causes of NPLs, such as those associated with inadequate supervisory system and the state 
owned enterprises, have been changing and gradually diminishing. For instance, one problem with the 
supervisory  system  at  the  early  stage  was,  put  it  simply,  “tighten  licensing  and  loose  supervision”, 
i.e. once a license was issued, no supervisory follow-up. After the Asian financial crisis, the Chinese 
government  basically  stopped  administrative  intervention  in  state-owned  commercial  banks  as  laws 
defining banks’ lending autonomy were put into place. Starting from the beginning of this century, the 
government  has  gradually  refrained  from  asking  the  state-owned  banks  to  follow  policies  that  favor 
state  owned  enterprises.  As  the  SOEs  reform  deepened,  some  big  SOEs  became  public  listed 
companies and the improvements in business operation also allowed commercial banks to improve 
asset quality. In general, the old NPL problem is being resolved. As the economy enters a new stage 
of development, there are going to be many new problems that would require our attention. 
It is for the above reasons, the Research Department of the PBC finished a report on the potential 
financial risks facing China. According to the report, financial risks may arise from nine aspects: the 
high saving rate and the rapid rise of M2 lead to high concentration of financial risks in the banking 
sector; the stability of the value of RMB is still under great potential pressures; the experiences around 
the globe prove that financial instability may arise from fiscal deficits; rigid exchange rate system and 
imbalances  of  payments contain significant  risks;  bank clients  and  bank-enterprise relationship  also 
hold significant risk; some existing governance problems may require further state financial rescue if 
not addressed timely; the lack of autonomy and scientific techniques in pricing loans may give rise to 
significant  financial  risk;  the  inadequate  innovation  mechanism  may  lead  to  rigidity  that  constrain 
competition; and, a balance needs to be struck between maintaining financial stability and preventing 
moral hazards. 
Many of the above relate to the legal problems in our financial ecological environment. For instance, 
looking at the bank-enterprise relationship, the Chinese enterprises have high financial leverages with 
low  self-owned  capital  and  relying  mainly  on  bank  lending.  Can  banks  completely  rely  on  external 
information or have to resort to internal information to some degree? When default happens, would the 
legal arrangements be helpful to protect creditor rights and minimize the losses? Risks in the economy 
make the forming of NPLs unavoidable, yet in the process of disposing of NPLs, how much control do 
banks have as the creditors? As for the bank-enterprise relationship should it be control-oriented or be 
at-arms-length? Answers to the above relate closely to legal conditions or “established practices” and 
concern  accounting  standard,  external  auditing,  disclosure,  law  enforcement,  and  accessibility  of 
market  information.  In  bank-enterprise  relationship,  in  addition  to  normal  checks  and  balances,  the 
more  important  thing  is  whether  the  banks  have  a  deterrence  of  last  resort  against  the  borrowing 
enterprises. As a creditor, the bank would wish the borrowing enterprise to fix its problems as soon as 
possible. Even so, it is inevitable that some enterprises go default. In the later case, it is a key issue 
whether the legal arrangements and claims can be ensured effectively and efficiently in line with the 
insolvency law. 
Maintaining  financial  stability  and  preventing  moral  hazards  are  also  closely  related  to  the  legal 
environment. Without an explicit legal framework for closing and liquidating financial institutions, we 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2005
may take measures without legal basis and cannot guarantee being “fair and square” in addressing 
financial stability issues. This may have social stability consequences as the laws do not define clearly 
the rights and responsibilities of the investors and depositors and that the market participants have no 
expectation of risks and could not make informed decisions. Whether the market participants can and 
how they should discipline financial markets and financial institutions also demand clarifications on the 
base of law. 
Issues currently under debate 
II. 
Today, I would like to raise a number of topical issues again, namely, insolvency law, loan frauds, and 
accounting standards that relate to loan frauds. 
Insolvency law 
1. 
It has been long since financial reform and enterprises waited for an up-to-date insolvency law. The 
provisional Enterprises Insolvency Law was enacted in the early stage of economic transition. As the 
market  economy  evolves,  the  law  has  become  out  dated  in  terms  of  coverage,  liquidation  and 
restructuring arrangement. Despite subsequent amendments and legal interpretations of the law when 
it  was  applied  in  the  GITIC  case,  the  law  in  its  present  form  cannot  provide  the  standard  financial 
discipline and constraints required by socialist market economy. I learnt about some of the arguments 
over the new draft of the law. My concerns lie in four aspects. 
First, the process of liquidation, which involves giving priority to secured claims. Some are in favor of 
employees’  entitlements  being  paid  ahead  of  the  secured  claims.  Unpaid  entitlements  usually  are 
understood  to  be  unpaid  salary,  yet  in  a  broader  interpretation  they  could  also  cover  unpaid  basic 
social security, pension, healthcare and displacement or reemployment of workers. Without a clear-cut 
definition  of  unpaid  employees’  entitlements,  the  ambiguity  may  result  in  a  low  recovery  rate  of 
secured claims. In addition, issues concerning pension, healthcare insurance, re-employment are still 
in the stage of debate and are not clearly defined themselves. 
Second,  the  test  for  entry  into  formal  insolvency  process.  According  to  legal  theories,  generally  an 
enterprise can be sued for bankruptcy if failing to honor its due debts, which implies that the creditor 
can use bankruptcy suits as a deterrence to force an enterprise to repay debt. If this cannot succeed, 
court procedure could begin, in which case, an administrator will be appointed, creditors committee 
established,  and  all  rights  of  control  and  management  over  the  enterprise  be  taken  over  by  the 
creditors.  The  process  is  crucial  for  protecting  the  interests  of  a  creditor.  In  reality,  many  of  the 
lawsuits  brought  up  against  debtors do  not  intend  to  force  enterprises  into  bankruptcy  but  rather  to 
either  increase  the  pressure  for  the  enterprises  to  honor  their  debts  or  provide  an  opportunity  for 
enterprises  to  restructure.  In  the  restructuring  process,  the  creditors  can  revive  the  insolvent 
enterprises through debt relief, extension and rollover in contrast to dismantling them and collecting a 
heap of useless wreckages. However, if using “balance sheet test”, the effectiveness of bankruptcy 
litigation  will  be  compromised,  leaving  a  seemingly  good-looking  shape  without  any  meaningful 
substance.  Especially,  balance  sheet  insolvency  involves  accounting  issue  and  thus  is  subject  to 
distortion and manipulation, to which I will come back later. This relates to whether the insolvency law 
plays a role of hard constraint or soft constraint and this concerns whether the transition can go out of 
what Cornell called “soft financial constraint”. 
Third,  whether  insolvency  law  is  a  specialized  law  that  requires  the  establishment  of  a  specialized 
court. In appearance, there is nothing complicated about insolvency law. If an enterprise fails to honor 
its due debt, it will be sued for bankruptcy. However, a court may need very specialized knowledge to 
render the case when it involves complicated claim structure, conflicting tax requirements, employees’ 
claim, and especially restructuring. For instance, different claims, such as collaterals, superior debts, 
subordinate  debts,  have  different  repayment  priority;  while,  restructuring,  similar  to  merger  and 
acquisition, is a very complicated process. There are always doubts about whether local courts can do 
a good job in dealing with insolvency cases. 
Fourth, whether financial institutions should be covered under a general insolvency law. According to 
international practice and recommendations of IFIs, financial institutions should be subject to a general 
insolvency  law.  Another  view  is  that  as  bankruptcy  of  financial  institutions  would  involve  depositors 
and creditors, without a deposit insurance system and investor compensation fund, the liquidation of 
financial institutions would be much more complicated. For this reason some people are in favor of 
“special treatment by the State Council” when it comes to financial institutions. Whether this will result 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 3
in a prolonged process of enacting a financial institution insolvency law? Then there will be endless 
debates and may prevent a deposit insurance system and investors compensation system being put 
into place in the near future. 
Loan frauds 
2. 
Based on what have happened in the country, financial frauds can be classified into two categories. 
One  is  that  through  providing  false  information  to  reach  the  goal  of  illegal  possession  of  financial 
assets.  What  is  typical  of  such  frauds  is  that  the  criminal  has  the  intention  of  gaining  ownership  of 
financial assets through illegal means such as making false use of funds or providing false certificates 
for ownership of funds. Letter of credit frauds and frauds with financial bills are all examples of such 
schemes  which  are  regarded  as  illegal  by  the  Chinese  laws.  Second,  the  agent  does  not  have  the 
intention  of  illegal  possession  of  funds,  but  it  is  carried  out  through  intentionally  providing  false 
financial  information  in  order  to  obtain  loans  from  banks  for  the  benefit  of  the  enterprise.  In  such 
frauds,  the  agent’s  statement  of  the  purpose  of  the  loans  is  true,  i.e.  the  agent  does  not  have  the 
purpose  of  taking  the  money  for  himself,  but  it  intentionally  provides  the  banks  with  false  financial 
information of the enterprise to misguide banks in decision-making. At present most of the financial 
frauds are of the second kind. 
At  present,  Article  193  of  the  Criminal  Law  of  China  has  explicit  stipulations  against  frauds  with 
intended illegal possession of funds. However, as for the second kind of frauds, they are not regarded 
as financial frauds by law since the purpose of providing false information is not illegal possession of 
funds but rather to obtain bank loans. Criminal charges will only be filed when illegal possession of 
loans  has  happened.  Otherwise,  only  civil  charges  can  be  brought  up  against  the  agent  under 
Contract  Law.  The  lack  of  legal  deterrence  will  have  significant  impact  on  setting  up  strict  financial 
disciplines and whether banks will accumulate large amounts of NPLs. 
According  the  international  comparison  done  by  KPMG,  frauds  stemmed  from  false  financial 
information has come to the center of attention in many countries. Germany, U.S. and U.K. have made 
it  very  clear  that  financial  frauds  using  falsified financial  information  is  subject  to  punishment  under 
criminal law rather than civil law. For example, in German Criminal Code, Article 265 b stipulates that 
using untrue or incomplete documents, submitting untrue or incomplete written statement or giving no 
references about the true financial situation that is of significance for lending decisions of a bank are 
financial frauds. The US criminal law also contains similar stipulations with emphasis on the agent’s 
intent rather than whether a purpose was fulfilled. And the credit or loans include all kinds of loans, 
loan commitments and guarantees and cover not only the application stage but also the credit renewal 
and rollover stage. The truthfulness requirements of the British law are similar to those in German and 
US laws, and treat reckless forecast as one of the conditions for criminal charges. 
Accounting standards 
3. 
Frauds  using  falsified  financial  information  have  direct  connection  with  accounting  standards.  False 
information is either made-up information with no support from actual projects or relates to accounting 
standards  and  codes.  Since  the  beginning  of  reform,  China  has  made  progress  in  improving 
accounting codes. Apparently, the designing and implementation of accounting codes can influence 
information truthfulness and give rise to the opportunities to produce false information. 
Accounting codes is a very technical issue. Many think the accounting codes as a “steel ruler” that 
allows no vagueness. However, the complexity of modern economy has put some areas of accounting 
subject  to  discretion  and  interpretation  or  even  personal  preference  which  result  in  a  ruler  with 
flexibility. The issue of accounting codes did not attract much attention at the beginning of the reform. 
It was not until 1993 that reforms were witnessed in corporate accounting and regulations. During the 
Asian  financial  crisis  we  made  more  concrete  progress  in  improving  the  account  rules,  which  we 
should recognize and value. At the same time, we should also be mindful that more should be done to 
bring our accounting rules up to the international standards. Some people still think in China we have 
too complicated an accounting system including a corporate accounting system and also distinctive 
accounting  systems  for  different  industries.  For  instance,  some  corporate  accounting  rules  require 
enterprises  to  build  value-loss  reserves  based  on  the  recoverability  of  assets.  Although  accounting 
rules of different industries have similar requirements, they are all inadequate in terms of soundness 
comparing to corporate accounting rules. Another issue is that, since we did not have the luxury of a 
strong  accounting  industry  and  external  auditing  facilities,  when  banks  assessed  the  reliability  of 
enterprises’ financial information, they did not require borrowers to provide external auditing results. In 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2005
the  future,  banks  may  consider  require  financial  information  audited  by  accounting  firms  and 
assessment on enterprises’ compliance and borrowing conditions made by law firms, and valuation of 
collaterals  made  by  evaluation  firms  and  bond  classes  given  by  rating  firms.  However,  it  may  take 
years  for  the  above  intermediate  services  to  develop,  and  the  expertise,  reputation,  brand-name, 
service  quality  also  take  tens  of  years  to  build.  Are  the  audited  statements  trustworthy?  It  really 
depends and relates to the expertise and internal control of the firms. The development of intermediate 
financial service providers is affected by market liberalization as well. If all of these issues cannot be 
dealt with effectively, probability of enterprises’ providing false information and engaging in financial 
frauds will continue to be high. 
I  would  very  much  like  to  hear  the  comments  on  what  I  have  said  from  experts  and  researchers 
present today. Your opinions will be instrumental to our work. 
Impact of legal environment on financial ecology 
III. 
Legal environment has a direct impact on financial ecology. To some extent, in the transition from a 
planned economy to a market economy, one fundamental issue is “soft financial constraint”. Whether it 
will  continue  to  exist  depends  to  a  large  extent  on  the  transition  and  improvement  of  law  and 
enforcement. There are many interesting cases. Here I would talk about a few and stay away from the 
theories. 
The first one is of the recovery rate of AMCs. When they were established in 1999 to take over the 
NPLs from state commercial banks, we invited renowned and very experienced experts and officials 
from the World Bank and Eastern European countries to make an estimation of the recovery rate. In 
private  they  thought  it  could  reach  40  percent  to  45  percent  with  a  precondition  that  improvements 
being made in legislation, judiciary system and enforcement to buttress the recovery and restructuring 
work. Seeing that the enterprises were running and selling products as usual even with low capital and 
heavy  historical  and  social  burdens,  they  thought  these  enterprises  could  survive  as  long  as  their 
burdens could  be removed.  However,  judging  from  the  actual outcome,  the  NPL  recovery  rate was 
lower than 20 percent. Even though NPL disposal has not come to an end, as time goes by, only the 
assets  of  worse  quality  left  and  the  recovery  rate  would  be  even  lower.  The  overall  recovery  rate 
depends on many factors, such as the process of diversification of ownership, but most importantly, it 
hinges on the legal system of the financial ecology: is there an applicable insolvency law? Are there 
specific  laws  regarding  asset  disposal?  In  1989  the  Financial  Institutions  Reform,  Recovery  and 
Re-enforcement Act of the US laid a specific legal framework for restructuring RTC. In Poland, banks 
are  given  semi-judicial  powers  in  negotiations  with  debtors  in  enterprise  restructuring  and  bank-
dominant  “out-of-court  settlement”  has  strong  legal  power.  In  addition,  Sweden,  Romania,  Bulgaria 
and  other  countries  have  made  protective  arrangements,  giving  priority  to  creditors  in  asset 
restructuring and recovering. Whether a specialized court should be set up? Whether foreclosure of 
collaterals can be removed in order to uphold ownership of collateral in a simple and expedient way? 
These questions are the preconditions for setting up AMCs and raise recovery rate. For this reason, a 
book entitled Reconstruction and Rejuvenation-International Experiences in Resolving Non-performing 
Loans  was  published  when  4  AMCs  were  set  up  in  1999.  While  pointing  out  the  importance  of 
improving banks internal controls, the book emphasized the importance of improving the legal system, 
including  Guarantee  Law,  Negotiable  Bills  Law  and  Securities  Law,  and  strengthening  law 
enforcement and especially clarifying creditors’ and debtors’ rights and responsibilities. Furthermore, 
the book calls for revamping of the bankruptcy law as in reality, a large proportion of NPLs derived 
from abusing the bankruptcy procedure with a certain amount of false bankruptcies and those either 
due to loopholes in the legal system or administrative impediments. Certainly, the low recovery rate 
can be partially attributed to internal incentives, bureaucratic working style and ineffective work with 
the  AMCs.  But  the  impact  of  inadequate  legal  system  on  low  recovery  rate  as  well  as  on  national 
economy should not be underestimated. This is not only because 1 trillion yuan worth of NPLs were 
transferred  to  the  AMCs  but  also  that  Bank  of  China  and  the  China  Construction  Bank  transferred 
another 300 billion yuan NPLs at market price to Sinda AMC. Similar things will happen in the reform 
of the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China and the Agricultural Bank of China. The difference of a 
good legal, judicial and enforcement system and that of a bad one can be in the scale as much as 
several hundred billion to a trillion yuan of cost to the country. 
The second example is about a bank that sold its NPLs in a package to the local government. So far 
the recovery rate is an encouragingly 30 percent, higher than expected. This could be contributed to 
the active role played by the local government, which has wielded its power in re-enforcing judicial, 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 5
enforcement and restructuring processes and making arrangement to deal with employee entitlements 
such  as  retirement,  laid-off,  and  health  care  benefit.  Despite  the  better  outcome  than  what  a  bank 
alone  could  have  achieved,  this  practice  itself  is  not  without  controversy.  Because  it  raises  two 
questions:  first,  whether  the  bank  as  the  creditor  is  in  a  disadvantaged  position  in  that  it  has  no 
controlling power over the borrowing enterprise; second, whether the administration is more powerful 
than the market. There is a saying about law suits concerning defaults, which is that even if a creditor 
sues, the court may not take the case; even if it takes the case, it may not hear the case; even if it 
hears the case, it may not adjudge; even if it adjudges, the ruling may not be enforced. Banks often 
complain they lose money even when they win default lawsuits. In bankruptcy cases, this is common 
too, and of course banks don’t always win. As a result, commercial banks and AMCs seldom resort to 
bankruptcy procedures against debtors, because it may result in a series of unknown events, such as 
whether it may bring even bigger moral hazard risks? An enterprise may think if it defaults on a loan, 
the  debt  servicing  responsibility  may  be  transferred  to  the  local  government  that  may  help  to 
restructure the loan. This may lead to moral hazards in financial discipline. According to the general 
rule  of  market  economy,  the  defaulter  may  face  risks  of  going  bankrupt,  and  the  debt  cannot  be 
restructured  without  consent  of  the  creditor.  Second,  the  reform  is  heading  for  lesser  government 
involvement  in  enterprise  management.  If  the  practice  in  the  above  case  was  to  be  promoted  as  a 
successful  experience,  it  might  lead  to  deeper  involvement  of  the  administration  in  enterprise 
management. Would this be a desirable outcome? In addition, the reason why local government was 
invited in disposing of the NPLs may be that it can influence the judicial and enforcement institutions. 
But is this indeed a good thing? 
The third example concerns the need for judicial specialization. In some cases, when a rumor surfaces 
that an enterprise is in trouble, local court officials will quickly go to the local offices of securities firms 
or commercial banks in other cities or provinces asking that the enterprise’s accounts and assets be 
frozen.  If  the  staff  of  these  institutions  does  not  cooperate,  they  are  accused  of  obstructing  law 
enforcement. For example, recently officials from one local high court came to the People’s Bank of 
China and asked that the accounts of a local government of another province be frozen. Many similar 
cases  continue  to  arise  and  underline  the  need  for  the  establishment  of  a  specialized  court  to 
adjudicate complex financial issues. 
A  fourth  example  is  of  bankruptcy  dictated  by  government  policy.  In  such  cases,  the  state-owned 
enterprises  must  first  pay  their  historical  debts  and  entitlements  to  employees.  According  to 
government policy, an enterprise may sell its land rights to raise money to make payment even if the 
land rights have been used as collateral for other loans. If this is not enough, the enterprise can begin 
disposing of its assets to satisfy its obligations. In this case, the enterprise must first dispose of assets 
not used as collateral. After these assets have been sold, the enterprise then may sell assets used to 
secure  loans.  Accordingly,  in  these  cases  banks  recoup  on  average  less  than  1.2  percent  of  their 
loans, many times lower then they expected. If priority is given to employee entitlements over secured 
debt, and such payment order and conditions be generalized and promoted to apply to all enterprises, 
banks  might  be  forced  to  take  defensive  measures  and  create  unfavorable  financial  conditions  for 
enterprises. 
Microeconomic analysis of financial ecology 
IV. 
The soundness of legal system can visibly change expectations of economic entities at the micro level. 
From  the  point  of  view  of  borrowers,  as  long  as  there  are  legal  loopholes,  the  borrowers  can  use 
intermediate  institutions,  or  through  setting  up  relationship  with  bank  officials  or  take  advantage  of 
incomplete  information  or  using  falsified  information  to  obtain  bank  loans.  Without  the  act  of  illegal 
possession of funds, it is hard for banks to bring charges against the borrowers. Even when banks 
want  bring  forward  bankruptcy  law  suits,  the  borrowers  can  use  accounting  rules  to  manipulate 
statements to show that they do not meet criteria of insolvency to avoid going to court. Even when 
banks  successfully  sued,  before  the  court  decision,  enterprises  could  postpone  paying  wage, 
healthcare and pension or create some entitlement items in order to deplete the liquidation funds and 
leave nothing to creditors. Anyone who is smart may want take advantage of opportunities given by 
law. And this obviously has significant adverse impact on establishing financial constraints of a market 
economy. 
The  perceptions  of  commercial  banks  may  change  too.  General  Rules  on  Loans  requires  to 
differentiate  credit  and  guarantees  (including  secured  loans).  The  Rules  require  secured  loans 
including collateral for payment commitment and LC. Secured loans are often guaranteed. However, if 
6 
 BIS Review 4/2005
their priority in liquidation is being lowered, it may create chaos in bank managers’ perception as to 
whether all loans are treated as credit loans? In a microeconomic sense this may create confusion in 
banks’ lending practice. In this vein the banking sector earnestly looks forward to an insolvency law 
that is in line with international practice. 
In  terms  of  liquidation  order,  giving  priority  to  employees’  entitlement  definitely  makes  social  and 
political  sense.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  social  security  issues  should  be  dealt  with  by  the 
social  security  system  through  setting  up  good  pension  system,  healthcare  system,  social  security 
system and unemployment insurance system to protect employees’ interests. While the insolvency law 
should define insolvency procedures with emphasis on fair liquidation rights and protecting creditors’ 
right. Different issues should be dealt with different rules. Any mismatch of issues and solutions, which 
is like giving John the medicine to treat the sickness of Joe, would result in the continued existence of 
soft  budget  constraint  that  has  been  there  from  the  beginning  of  reform.  With  problems  not  being 
addressed at their roots, larger amount of NPLs may continue to emerge. 
Macroeconomic analysis of financial ecology 
V. 
First, if the NPLs remain at a high level and continue to accumulate, a financial crsis may be in the 
making. Based on lessons learnt from the Asian financial crisis, at the appearance, the crisis started 
from Thailand and was induced by exchange rate and foreign debt pressures. While in fact, factors 
such  as  corporate  governance,  asset  and  liability  mismatch  and  out-of-date  insolvency  law  also 
contributed to the crisis. At present, our financial institution reform is at its most crucial stage. Higher 
than  normal  NPL  ratio  should  be  avoided.  Should  we  not  succeed  in  our  reform  of  the  financial 
ecology, the NPL ratio would be high and might lead to financial crisis eventually. 
To prevent financial crisis, we can certainly intensify efforts to absorb NPLs through such means as 
increasing interest rate spread and loan loss provisioning. In regard to interest rate spread, we cannot 
strive for the level seen in industrial countries, but rather aiming at those in big developing countries 
and countries in transition. From this point of view, the interest spreads in China are in the low range. 
For  deposit  and  loan  of  one-year  maturity,  the  interest  spread  is  3.33  percent  compared  to  3.6  to 
8.5 percent  in  other  transitional  countries,  3.82  to  45.11  percent  in  Latin  America  and  1.78  to 
3.59 percent  in  industrial  countries.  Strictly  speaking,  the  interest  spreads  can  be  compared  and 
categorized in many different ways. But I don’t have time to go into details today. From the medium- 
and  long-term  perspective,  the  present  interest  spreads  do  not  go  along  with  the  conditions  in  our 
financial  ecology.  We  look  forward  to  improving  the  financial  environment  but  should  avoid  making 
only optimistic assumptions. 
In theory, NPLs can be absorbed through increasing interest spread. In reality, effectiveness of the 
insolvency law should be taken into account in determining interest spreads. In the case of ineffective 
insolvency law, some consider an increase of one percent in the interest spread should suffice, some 
think 3 percent appropriate. It might actually bring shocks if we did raise interest rate. For instance, 
when  we  raised  the  lending  rate  by  0.27  percentage  points  on  October  20,  2004,  the  market  was 
shocked. Raising interest spread could have profound impact on the financial conditions of enterprises 
and  the  economy  as  a  whole.  At  present,  the  overall  earning  in  the  corporate  sector  is  favorable. 
Given the high financial leverage of enterprises, an increase in interest spread can quickly translate 
into high financial costs for enterprises and big impact on the economy as well. 
Another situation that may arise is that banks may be reluctant to give loans when facing risks and 
uncertainties in creditor protection. The resulting macroeconomic impact is evidenced by the Japanese 
experience. Reluctant to lend is a common phenomenon around the world. For instance, last year the 
loan to deposit ratio in Hong Kong was less than 50 percent. The ratio in China was about 70 percent. 
If financial bills issued by development banks were counted the ratio could be as high as 80 percent. If 
the banks cannot extend loans with confidence due to uncertainties in the financial environment and 
have  to  lower  loan  to  deposit  ratio  as  a  result  of  new  risk  management  requirement  and  banking 
supervision, the impact on growth, employment, and the goal of achieving a wealthy society should not 
be underestimated. While if neither increasing spreads nor withholding lending is feasible, the result 
may be that NPLs grow and accumulate and new actions are required. 
When it comes to absorbing NPLs, I would like to cite an analogy. When you think the tail of your cat 
needs a trim, you’d better cut it once and for all. If you cut it one time after another, each time both you 
and  your  cat  have  to  endure  pain  and  struggling.  Unfortunately  this  is  a  high  probability  event. 
Hungary, a country that started reform much earlier and experienced radical transition, has had to cut 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 7
the “tail” three times so far in reforming its banks. Very few countries can claim success after just one 
operation. Even the very few that had succeeded had to endure the painful cost of high inflation. In 
sum,  the  impact  of  financial  environment  on  macroeconomy  is  an  issue  that  deserves  special 
attention. 
Emerging international consensus and standards 
VI. 
The  legal  issues  concerning  financial  ecology  have  always  been  at  the  center  of  attention  in  the 
evolution of the views of international organizations and the emergence of international standards. At 
the G20 ministers meeting held on November 20-21, 2004 in Berlin, Germany, the G20 issued a paper 
entitled Financial Institutional Building, which summarized the consensus among the G20 members on 
the  priorities  of  institution  building  in  the  financial  sector.  Out  of  all  of  the  elements,  the  G20  first 
stressed  the  importance  of  improving  the  legal  framework,  and  pointed  out  that  implementing  and 
enforcing  credit  rights  (such  as  collaterals)  protection  can  contribute  to  improving  financial  services 
and  deepening  financial  markets.  In  order  to  strengthen  the  effectiveness  of  court  adjudication  and 
clarify expectations toward court system, reducing corruption and stepping up training for judges and 
administrators are also very important. The G20 noted that providing collaterals is one of the standard 
measures for preventing credit risk and reducing the cost of capital. Indeed, collaterals are usually a 
necessity for obtaining long-term loans from banks. For collaterals to play its role，one basic condition 
is  that  to  “ensure  effective  liquidation  and  solvency  mechanism  are  in  place”.  In  this  regard, 
G20 Deputies welcome and support the efforts of World Bank in drafting the Principles and Guidelines 
for Effective Insolvency and Creditor Rights Systems. They also emphasized that the drafting of these 
principles should take into consideration legal situations in different countries and the special needs of 
the emerging market economies. 
In  order  to  prepare  an  economically  viable,  flexible  and  broad-based  principles  and  guidelines  that 
reflect  the  varied  legal  systems  and  cultural  backgrounds,  the  World  Bank  enlisted  more  than 
70 international experts during the consultation process. Since 2001, the World Bank had carried out 
assessments in 20 countries with different legal culture against the Principles and Guidelines (draft) 
with the purpose of learning experiences and improving the draft. 
The  revised  Principles  and  Guidelines  will  be  released  in  the  near  future.  By  now  consensus  has 
formed on four aspects in regard to the revised draft. For emerging market economies, the revised 
version  stressed  the  importance  of  streamlining  the  claim  recovery  process.  The  revised  draft 
emphasized the protection of creditors’ right and the priority of creditors’ claims in liquidation. At the 
same time the revised draft also recommended the general liquidation process and insolvency law be 
applicable to all enterprises, minimizing the number of exceptions. In this regards, the World Bank will 
not recommend to separate financial institutions’ liquidation from the general insolvency law. On the 
process of liquidation, the revised draft no longer recommends, “automatic freezing of debtors assets”, 
but rather, “orderly freezing and requiring the court to notify the public.” 
International financial institutions, including the IMF, have put the emphasis on developing countries’ 
putting  into  place  well-designed  insolvency  law,  liquidation  process  and  well-designed  legal  and 
enforcement  system  and  process  on  disposal  of  NPLs.  In  its  2001,  Principles  and  Guidelines  for 
Effective Insolvency and Creditor Rights Systems, the World Bank proposed 35 basic principles and 
guidelines. 
Among  them,  the  Principle  3  stresses  “security  interest  legislation”,  which  includes,  “the  legal 
framework should provide for the creation, recognition, and enforcement of security interests” and that 
the law should provide for the following features, “security interests in all types of assets, movable and 
immovable,  tangible  and  intangible,  including  inventory,  receivables,  and  proceeds;  future  or  after-
acquired  property,  and  on  a  global  basis;  and  based  on  both  possessory  and  non-possessory 
interests”;  “security  interests  related  to  any  or  all  of  a  debtor’s  obligations  to  a  creditor,  present  or 
future,  and  between  all  types  of  persons;”  “Methods  of  notice  that  will  sufficiently  publicize  the 
existence of security interests to creditors, purchasers and the public generally at the lowest possible 
cost;”  “Clear  rules  of  priority  governing  competing  claims  or  interests  in  the  same  assets,  reducing 
priorities over security interests as much as possible.” 
The  Principle  4  recommends  “recording  and  registration  of  secured  rights”.  And  the  Principle  5 
recommends “enforcement of secured rights,” which includes, “enforcement systems should provide 
efficient, inexpensive, transparent and predictable methods for enforcing a security interest in property. 
Enforcement procedures should provide for prompt realization of the rights obtained in secured assets, 
8 
 BIS Review 4/2005
ensuring the maximum possible recovery of asset values based on market values. Both non-judicial 
and judicial enforcement methods should be considered.” 
The Principle 11 stresses, “governance,” which says, “in liquidation proceedings, management should 
be replaced by a qualified court-appointed official (administer) with broad authority to administer the 
estate in the interest of creditors.” 
The  Principle  16  is  on  “claims  resolution:  treatment  of  stakeholder  rights  and  priorities”.  It 
recommends, “the rights and priorities of creditors established prior to insolvency under commercial 
laws should be upheld in an insolvency case to preserve the legitimate expectations of creditors and 
encourage greater predictability in commercial relationships. Deviations from this general rules should 
occur  only  where  necessary  to  promote  other  compelling  policies,  such  as  the  policy  supporting 
rehabilitation or to maximize the estate’s value. The bankruptcy law should recognize the priority of 
secured  creditors  in  their  collateral…In  distributing  proceeds  to  secured  creditors,  public  interests 
generally should not be given precedence over private rights. The number of priority classes should be 
kept to a minimum. 
The Principle 27 is about the “role of courts”, which includes, “bankruptcy cases should be overseen 
and  handled  of  by  an  independent  court  or  competent  authority  and  assigned,  where  practical,  to 
judges  with  specialized  bankruptcy  expertise.  Significant  benefits  can  be  gained  by  creating 
specialized bankruptcy tribunals.” 
The Principle 28 concerns “performance standards of the court, qualification and training of judges”. It 
recommends, “standards should be adopted to measure the competence, performance and services 
of a bankruptcy court. These standards should serve as a basis for evaluating and improving courts. 
They should be enforced by adequate qualification criteria as well as training and continuing education 
of judges.” 
In sum, the reason that I chose to talk about financial ecology was because I hope China will soon 
enact an insolvency law which supports the socialist market economic reform and hope amendments 
will  be  made  with  regard  to  loan  fraud  articles  in  the  criminal  law  and  improvements  be  made  in 
accounting  standards.  From  the  perspective  of  the  central  bank,  I  wish  all  of  you  work  together  to 
further  explore,  intensify  research  and  lend  support  to  the  development  and  reform  of  our  financial 
system in regard to putting into place normal financial order, establishing hard financial constraints and 
establishing the fundamental framework of socialist market economy. 
BIS Review 4/2005 
 9
