Tom K Alweendo: Crime and money laundering - the challenges 
Address by Mr Tom K Alweendo, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the African Banking Congress, 
Johannesburg, 8-10 March 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  thank  the organizers  of  this  event  for  inviting  me  to  give  an  address  on  the  topic  of 
Crime and Money Laundering. The choice of this topic is so appropriate because of the challenges 
money  laundering  poses  to  the  banking  sector  in  Africa.  Financial  crime  and  money  laundering  is 
increasingly becoming a global phenomenon and this is not only a threat to the global banking sector, 
but it has the potential to become a threat to the civil and political spheres. 
Money laundering is conventionally defined as any process that is carried out to disguise or conceal 
the nature or source of or entitlement to money or property from criminal activities. Although countries 
have  come  up  with  different  money  laundering  definitions  in  their  statutes,  it  is  important  that  any 
useful definition should recognize that crime of any nature is an act against society and as such, to 
launder  any  proceeds  from  unlawful  activity  or  the  contravention  of  any  law  followed  by  laundering 
should be encompassed in the definition.  
A new dimension to what constitutes money laundering is with respect to terrorism, whereby legitimate 
or clean money is committed to the financing of unlawful activity. The definition of money laundering 
that encompasses any unlawful activity would be well inclusive and would provide law enforcement 
with a wider legal arm. The combating of financing of terrorism, which is an unlawful act, is in most 
jurisdictions  provided  for  in  separate  legislations  but  linked  to  the  mainstream  national  anti  money 
laundering laws, especially in respect of detection. 
The anti money laundering legislations that are being promulgated by most jurisdictions have and are 
criminalizing the act of money laundering as defined above. This in essence means that these laws 
make the act of money laundering a criminal offence and that to launder money derived from criminal 
acts  constitutes  committing  a  crime  punishable  by  law.  In  addition,  the  anti  money  laundering  laws 
places  a  requirement  for  reporting  institutions  to  report  suspicious  transactions,  failure  of  which 
constitutes an offence by both the institution and/or officers of that institution.  
The  Meirium-Webster  dictionary  describes  crime  as  an  “act  or  the  commission  of  an  act  that  is 
forbidden or the omission of a duty that is commanded by a public law and that makes the offender 
liable to punishment by that law”. This definition pre-supposes the existence of a public law that sets 
out the details of the acts or omissions that national legislators consider to be punishable by that law. 
Laws  are  therefore  designed  to  protect  us  and  ensure  our  safety  in  all  aspects:  physical,  financial, 
psychological and social. 
The  extent  to  which  money  is  laundered  globally  is  estimated  to  be  between  $500  billion  and 
$1 trillion. The wide range of the estimate highlights the difficulties associated with obtaining accurate 
data on this problem. This is the case because only a limited number of countries have set up anti 
money laundering regimes that are up and running and therefore able to provide appropriate statistics. 
The  problem  of  lack  of  accurate  money  laundering  statistics  in  Africa  is  compounded  where  the 
setting-up of anti-money laundering regimes is only gaining momentum now. It will take some time for 
Africa to build up accurate statistics on money laundering as this would have to be sourced from actual 
cases investigated and finalized.  
Further, a good understanding of the national money laundering activities requires concerted national 
research and studies of the money laundering typologies commonly practiced in each country. In this 
regard,  it  is  worth  mentioning  that  the  Institute  for  Security  Studies  in  South  Africa  has  initiated  a 
number  of  researches  and  studies  aimed  at  documenting  the  extent  of  money  laundering  in  Africa, 
especially  Southern  Africa.  However,  the  sufficiency  and  integrity  of  the  statistics  provided  by  the 
Institute is only as good as the national sources supplying the information. It is therefore imperative 
that national efforts to determine the extent of money laundering must be improved as these statistics 
are important for convincing the legislative and political processes on the need for legislative changes 
necessary for effective combating of money laundering. 
BIS Review 18/2005 
 1
The anti money laundering laws protect the rights of individuals by providing for the articulation of what 
crime  is,  the  acts  of  crime  and  the  punishment  thereof.  Legislators,  in  consultation  with  their 
constituents through legislation on crime, lay the foundation for basic individual human rights and the 
attainment of inner individual self fulfillment. Crime and criminal acts work towards eroding these very 
basic individual rights. 
Despite the enactment of laws designed to curb crime and acts of crime, these evils still take place 
and  are  in  most  cases  on  the  increase.  The  law  enforcement  agencies  the  world  over  are 
overwhelmed by the sheer size and sophistication that criminals are now employing to perpetrate their 
illegal deeds. The efforts on crime prevention are now compounded by globalization that has created 
what one may say is a global economy in which organized crime groups and individuals can and do 
generate  huge  sums  of  money  by  drug  trafficking,  financial  crime,  corruption,  intellectual  property 
crime, terrorism and human trafficking. 
Crime and money laundering is indeed a global problem which requires a concerted global response. 
In order to protect our respective financial systems from the destabilizing effects of crime and money 
laundering, it is imperative that we act and respond to this scourge with unprecedented resolve and 
commitment to combating it. Everybody has, therefore, a responsibility to combat money laundering, 
because  its  negative  impact  has  a  unique  way  of  creating  far  ranging  negative  consequences.  By 
tackling money laundering we would be attacking the criminals at their weakest and most vulnerable 
point - their money sources. 
In the past years since the start of the criminalization of money laundering and the enforcement of anti 
money laundering laws in the 1970s and more vigorously in the 1980s and 1990s, evidence from court 
cases  and  reported  suspect  transaction  has  given  an  indication  that  the  most  common  money 
laundering  typologies  has  been  in  the  realm  of  drug  trafficking,  organized  crime,  corruption,  illicit 
dealing in weapons, human trafficking, fraud and theft. The act of successful money laundering fuels 
the perpetration of the above crimes by providing the criminals with avenues to conceal their deeds 
from law enforcement agencies and ultimately provides them with the rewards for their criminality in 
the form of money which would then appear to be legitimate.  
The  concealment  cycle  for  the  proceeds  of  money  laundering  involves,  firstly,  the  distancing  of  the 
criminals from the illegal proceeds (money or property), the obscuring of the money trail, hiding of the 
origins to eventually posses what would appear as clean money. The role played by globalization and 
ICT in the concealment process in money laundering has been aptly described by the following quote 
from  a  central  banking  thriller  “Nest  of  Vipers”  by  Linda  Davies:  “the  money  screamed  across  the 
wires, its provenance fading in a maze of electronic transfers which shifted it, hid it, broke it up into 
manageable wads which would be withdrawn and re-deposited elsewhere, obliterating the trail”.  
The linkage between money laundering and crime denotes that everybody as individuals is affected by 
money  laundering.  Crime  erodes  basic  individual  liberties  in  that  it  threatens  their  rights  to  life  and 
entitlement  to  property.  The  consequences  of  crime  and  money  laundering  are  bad  for  business, 
development,  and  the  general  rule  of  law.  Governments  have  therefore  got  real  reasons  for 
spearheading the combating of money laundering. Another reason why money laundering should be 
combated is that if left unchecked, it would lead to the accumulation of economic power to organized 
crime. This development has the potential of eroding our political and social systems based on elected 
representation as we know them today. In other words, the social consequences for allowing money 
launderers to operate unchecked could spell disaster for stability and the rule of law. 
The financial sector, in particular the banking sector, more than any sectors, needs to operate in a 
crime and money laundering free environments. Banks deal with other people’s money and therefore 
rely heavily on reputation for probity and integrity. Without the public confidence from the law abiding 
citizenry it would be difficult for banks to conduct business in the form they do now. In instances where 
banks  may  condone  and  are  active  parties  to  money  laundering,  the  end  result  is  that  legitimate 
business  would  avoid  such  banks.  It  is  also  conceivable  that  money  laundering  if  perpetrated  on  a 
high  scale  would  complicate  the  ability  of  banks  to  manage  their  operations  and  risks.  This  is  so 
because banks will not be able to predict the movement of laundered money. 
Banks  have  also  to  be  aware  of  the  consequences  of  doing  business  with  money  launders  or  for 
unwittingly  and  fraudulently  being  used  as  conduits  for  money  laundering.  In  jurisdictions  where 
national  anti  money  laundering  laws  have  been  promulgated,  non  complying  banks  and  institutions 
have been subjected to hefty fines and in some instances the banking licenses have been known to 
have been withdrawn.  
2 
 BIS Review 18/2005
As a central banker, my concerns regarding the money laundering would immediately be that it would 
erode the effectiveness and management of monetary policy. Money laundering on a grand scale has 
the potential of changing the demand for cash, make interest rates and exchange rates more volatile 
and  cause  high  inflation  rates  for  a  country.  Money  laundering  is  also  bad  for  the  economy  and 
development  in  that  it  undermines  legitimate  business,  competition  and  reduces  the  tax  revenue  to 
national  authorities  as  launders  would  be  operating  underground  outside  the  tax  net.  Money 
laundering is thus bad for the economy both nationally and internationally. Regulatory and supervisory 
agencies  have  a  good  reason  to  participate  in  the  combating  of  money  laundering  in  that  if  not 
contained, it would defeat their objectives and weaken the institutions under their supervision. 
The  combating  of  money  laundering  should  revolve  around  ensuring  the  ability  of  national  and 
international  agencies  to  find,  freeze  and  the  forfeiture  of  laundered  money.  This  presupposes  the 
existence of appropriate national and international laws and the capacity for implementation of those 
laws. In addition, the wide scope of affected stakeholders in anti money laundering efforts require an 
unprecedented level of co-operation both at national and international levels. 
Another important aspect of money laundering is the tendency and need for perpetrators to operate 
cross  border  schemes  for  the  purpose  of  concealment  and/or  to  take  advantage  of  the  uneven 
developments  in  the  national  anti  money  laundering  regimes.  This  requires  that  countries  should 
develop anti money laundering regimes that are moving in tandem in terms of speed and standards for 
detection and law enforcement. 
The  international  community  and  national  agencies  have  indeed  recognized  the  need  to  combat 
money  laundering.  To  this  end  the  first  pre-requisite  for  combating  money  laundering  is  to  have  in 
place  appropriate  national  legislation.  Appropriate  national  legislations  have  to  be  crafted  with  local 
circumstances in mind while recognizing the need for taking into account the international nature of 
money laundering. To this end, the participation of multi-lateral agencies such as the United Nations, 
the EU, the AU, etc. is important in the formulation of international instruments necessary to combat 
money laundering. 
Anti-money  laundering  international  instruments  are  essential  for  ensuring  that  the  international 
community reacts to money laundering as a global problem. The international instruments provide a 
forum for bringing national efforts on money laundering into the international loop. To mention but a 
few, the following are some of the important international instruments that the international community 
have crafted: the Basel Declaration 1988; the UN Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs 
and Psychotropic Substances 1988; FATF 40+9 Recommendations, 1990, with numerous revisions; 
UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 2000; UN Convention against Corruption; UN 
International Convention for the Suppressing of the Financing of Terrorism.  
These are but only a few of the various international instruments that are critical to the success in the 
fight against money laundering. In addition, various multilateral organizations have been instrumental 
in  advancing  the  cause  for  the  fight  against  money  laundering.  The  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  have 
been  very  active  in  providing  resources  for  capacity  building  and  technical  expertise.  National 
jurisdictions  are  encouraged  to  ratify  the  international  instruments  as  they  provide  the  basis  for 
ensuring appropriate national anti-money laundering laws and international cooperation. Critical to the 
international cooperation is the attendant national legislations pertaining to extradition of criminals who 
operate cross border money laundering schemes. Without having robust extradition laws, the criminals 
would have loopholes in the global sphere that would allow them to evade law enforcement agencies 
in a particular jurisdiction. 
The  existence  and  membership  to  regional  anti-money  laundering  groupings  is  important  in  that  it 
contributes to the harmonization of laws and standards. In Africa, a number of anti money groupings 
have  been  created  and  have  provided  the  needed  impetus  for  ensuring  that  Africa  as  a  whole  is 
moving towards a uniform approach regarding the money laundering problem. 
It is important to note that legislative gaps that may exist at international and national levels will be 
exploited by the money launderers and make national anti-money laundering regimes ineffective. In 
line with the need to formulate appropriate national legislations, there is a need to formulate standards 
for anti-money laundering practices and institutions that should provide maximum effectiveness both at 
national and international levels. The G7 created Financial Action Task Force (FATF) that has crafted 
40  +  9  recommendations  aimed  at  providing  international  standards  for  anti  money  laundering, 
improving  national  systems  for  combating  money  laundering,  strengthening  the  role  of  financial 
systems and for strengthening international co-operation. 
BIS Review 18/2005 
 3
The combating of money laundering presupposes the existence of capacity and resources at national 
level.  In  Africa,  this  is  a  real  challenge  in  that  there  are  competing  demands  with  regards  to  the 
procurement  and  utilization  of  scarce  resources.  The  resources  scarcity  is  more  critical  in  the  law 
enforcement  spheres,  since  most  national  jurisdictions  have  less  than  efficient  law  enforcement 
agencies which are in most cases overwhelmed by the demands to enforce other national laws. 
Another important ingredient for the effective combating of money laundering is the need for political 
commitment, as well the support from affected industries and general populace. It is worth noting that 
through  the  AU  and  other  multilateral  agencies  where  African  nations  are  members,  a  number  of 
efforts  are  being  made  to  ensure  that  Africa  is  not  lagging  behind.  In  Africa,  a  number  of  regional 
anti-money laundering bodies have been created and it is comforting to see the support these regional 
groupings  are  receiving  from  their  respective  authorities.  The  creation  of  necessary  anti-money 
laundering institutions such as the Financial Intelligence Centers is an issue that each of the African 
authorities  are  busy  working  on.  Financial  Intelligence  Centers  are  important  for  the  detection  of 
money launderers by linking the money flows to the perpetration of specific crimes. 
The pressures that the African banking sector is being subjected to for compliance with national and 
international  anti-money  laundering  requirements,  makes  me  to  want  to  compliment  our  banking 
sector in Africa for living up to those requirements despite the costs involved in some instances. In one 
way or another banks in Africa have been working to ensure compliance with the important aspect of 
customer  due  diligence  and  have  been  improving  on  their  institutional  capacity  to  ensure  that  their 
systems and personnel are geared for their discharge of their responsibilities as reporting institutions. 
The challenges for Africa with regard to ensuring effective anti money laundering are immense more 
so  in  that  innovative  thinking  may  be  necessary  in  some  respects  such  as  that  the  majority  of  the 
African economy is cash based. This may entail the setting of entirely home grown standards. 
The combating of money laundering has assumed an urgent impetus at both national and international 
levels as a result of the scale that money laundering has begun to assume, especially with respect to 
the financing of terrorist acts. The efforts being made to combat money laundering are beginning to 
bear fruits in that it is now taking center stage in all jurisdictions. No one wants to be left behind mainly 
due to the consequences of such a situation – those lagging behind might find it difficult to transact 
and do business with the rest of the complying world. In terms of setting up effective infrastructures 
necessary  for  combating  money  laundering,  one  can  conclude  that  Africa  and  the  international 
community is beginning to getting the upper hand on criminals. A word of caution is that despite the 
positive  developments,  the  criminals  are  constantly  devising  more  elaborate  and  evasive  means  to 
circumvent anti money laundering efforts. 
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that money laundering is a crime that affects every individual, 
business and government. It creates an important concern in that if unchecked it has the potential of 
fuelling  crime  and  ultimately  erodes  the  individual  rights  of  citizens  and  affects  national  and 
international economic performance. The combating of money laundering requires first and foremost 
the  crafting  of  appropriate  laws  and  the  creation  of  national  and  international  capacity  and  the 
coordination thereof. All the above presupposes the need for political commitment at all levels. 
I thank you for your attention 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2005
