Yves Mersch: The evolution of the European model of integration 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the AMCHAM (American 
Chamber of Commerce) Financial Services Committee’s Networking, Luxembourg, 15 February 2005. 
 The  year  2005  in  Europe  should  be  marked  by  the  ratification  of  the  European  Constitution.  This 
provides an opportunity for trying to assess the quality of European integration over the last 50 years, 
especially in view of a comment I have recently read in an American newspaper published in Europe, 
which describes this integration process as shaky and unsure. 
Before forming an opinion it is important to recall that the views we might have on our surroundings 
are deeply influenced by the historical dimension, as well as by the various systems of governance in 
our different countries and continents. 
We must not forget that for the United States an overriding event in its history was the Civil War (1861 
– 1865), which was followed by well over a century of peace on its own territory. That does not mean 
that the United States was not involved in wars overseas. But that is very different from having war on 
your own territory.  
A  second  essential  element  of  difference  concerns  personal  or  family  history.  The  vast  majority  of 
people living in the United States stem from the immigration of economically weak classes or people 
who were persecuted because of their religion or other ideological beliefs. This has led to a strong 
feeling  of  distrust  vis-à-vis  central  government  and  also  to  a  feeling  of  strong  individualism  that  is 
expressed in the national laws and the institutional framework, as well as in the prominence of moral 
values. 
Europe,  on  its  side,  has  a  quite  different  pattern  of  collective  and  family  memories.  In  order  to 
understand, one has to go back as far as the feudal Middle Ages, when there were many small states 
in Europe, which tried to gain power or wealth in 2 ways so as to achieve mergers and take-overs with 
other States: one way was to marry, another was to wage war. 
The  consequence  was  a  permanent  state  of  war  on  the  continent.  This  led  to  great  poverty  and 
ultimately  to  revolutions,  out  of  which  came  a  new  concept,  that  of  the  Nation  State,  which  is  also 
familiar to the US, as Madame Secretary of State so eloquently recalled at IEP in Paris a week ago. 
This  Nation  State  also  meant  in  many  cases  the  end  of  feudalism  and  the  transfer  of  sovereignty 
through marriage. The policy of acquiring lands through marriage was so successful in the case of the 
Habsburgs that the saying was: “Tu felix Austria, nube", or “Thou happy Austria, marry"? 
But it did not mean the end of war. Even though many small states coalesced to form larger Nations in 
the 19th century (for example Germany and Italy), that did not mean the end of war, but the start of 
more or less “holy alliances? that were continuously shifting. Thus larger Nations tried to grow even 
bigger  by  grabbing  up  smaller  nation  states,  and  we  had  at  least  one  war  per  generation  on  this 
continent. 
After  World  War  II  we  tried  another  way.  As  a  consequence,  larger  states  were  to  give  up  their 
sovereignty in two key areas, which used to be important for the war industry, coal and steel. They 
thus  vowed  to  renounce  war  and  yielded  a  disproportionately  large  share  of  decision-making  in 
common  affairs  to  smaller  countries.  Above  and  beyond  that  a  referee  was  appointed,  a  European 
centralized executive, even though its power was to be limited. 
As a consequence we now have inside the European Union a totally new situation in which for the first 
time in centuries, in Europe, one generation has been able to accumulate wealth and transfer it to the 
next generation, so creating a very strong sentiment of support in most countries of the continent and 
a quest for yet more progress in this sense which is still present in the agenda that Europe is pursuing 
right now. 
Of course the question could be asked whether this equilibrium of power can still be maintained in an 
enlarged Union, since the Union at the outset was not designed for such a large number of countries, 
and  especially  since  many  of  the  new  countries  belong  to  the  category  of  small  Member  States. 
Further, they have only recently recovered their sovereignty and might be rather reluctant to yield it 
again so soon to a super-power. Don’t forget that the latest new member countries represent less in 
economic terms than previous enlargements from 6 to 9 or 9 to 12. All the new countries have also 
BIS Review 13/2005 
 1
been very closely associated with the history of “core Europe". This question will of course be even 
more valid for future enlargements. 
But  the  divergences  in  Europe  are  not  only  due  to  the  different  histories  of  the  countries  of  the 
continent,  but  also  because  different  paths  for  development  were  taken  by  different  nations,  which 
brought about different policy approaches. 
In this respect the role of ideology is prominent. In most countries history shaped the understanding 
that each people has of the role and rights of the individual versus the role and rights of the collectivity. 
Do  not  forget  that  the  2  most  forceful  concepts  of  ideology  have  their  cradle  on  the  European 
continent;  nationalism  and  socialism,  which  have  galvanized  many  million  people,  while  creating 
problems for the whole continent. 
Though these 2 concepts are still embraced by many people in Europe; many others reject both of 
them. Others adhere to nationalism and reject socialism; yet others are internationalists and socialists 
at the same time. In the heads of people it is still very heterogeneous. 
This of course has an influence on how people organize themselves, how the institutional framework is 
shaped. We have had some very centralized states, like France for example, and to some extent even 
the  UK.  And  after  World  War  II  the  Americans  imposed  an  extremely  decentralized  constitution  on 
Germany, whose efficiency is now put into question. Italy is also a country that, moving from a federal 
state,  came  closer  and  closer  to  a  centralized  state,  while  now  moving  again  in  the  direction  of 
decentralization. 
How  does  this  affect  European  integration?  I  take  monetary  policy  as  an  example.  In  the  UK  the 
central bank acts through a certain small number of money centers which are large systemic banks, 
which act as primary dealers, while in the case of Germany the central bank has contacts with every 
single small bank and every single small bank feels also entitled to be part of this national framework. 
When  we  defined  European  monetary  policy,  we  had  to  bridge  these  differences  and  invent 
compromises  between  the  two.  As  a  result  we  have  centralized  decision-making,  but  decentralized 
preparatory work and also decentralized implementation of decisions. 
The  different  views  of  the  role  of  the  individual  and  the  collectivity  are  also  reflected  in  our  legal 
systems, which are very different. Again I would like to take my examples from the area of finance. 
Financial  assets  and  their  utilization  in  a  sophisticated  financial  and  monetary  system  depend  very 
largely  on  the  attitude  a  country  has  vis-à-vis  bankruptcies.  This  attitude  is  very  different  from  one 
country to another. The protection you give either to the debtor or the creditor can hugely influence the 
amount and the availability of collateral that is so much needed in order to leverage an economy. 
Another example is accounting. You have the French system, which is ruled like the legal system by 
concepts and where a credit is a credit whether it is given to a bank or to an individual, and the same 
goes  for  a  debt.  In  the  UK  you  have  a  functional  approach.  You  have  very  different  systems  for 
consumer credit or for corporate credit, and different levels of protection. 
It also depends on what you consider as more important, and this came to the fore once more again 
with  the  debate  on  the  IAS  39  Fair  Value  rule.  The  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (the 
members of which are dominated by people originating from the UK and from the US) considered in 
their logic that the information given to the investor about the financial value of an asset is paramount. 
In  the  rest  of  Europe  we  consider  that  there  are  other  values  to  be  respected.  For  example,  we 
consider that companies are not only financial assets; companies are also corporate citizens that give 
jobs to people and pay taxes to buy public goods. We consider that the fair value could be extremely 
destabilizing for the financial system, because it would favor erratic results and procyclical behaviour 
by banks. 
I  will  limit  myself  to  some  examples,  which  are  interesting  in  the  context  of  the  pension  system.  In 
Germany the social laws were part of the nation-building effort aimed at fostering cohesion. In a fast 
growing  nation  a  pay-as-you-go  pension  system  creates  inter-generational  solidarity,  while  in  other 
countries  the  responsibility  of  the  individual  to  behave  irresponsibly  is  his  own  decision,  and  it  is 
accepted therefore that his fate ought to depend on his own decisions to save and invest or not. In 
consequence, in these countries poverty is not considered a collective responsibility but a moral one. 
In other countries where poverty led to civil war, regime change and a loss of influence of religion, 
Governments had to step in. 
Progressive  income  tax  was  also  part  of  social  cohesion,  for  example  in  Germany,  invented  under 
Bismarck. In France more than half of all households do not pay direct taxes, and most of the income 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2005
from the budget has traditionally come from indirect taxation. France has also always had a tradition of 
taxing  wealth,  or  the  stock  rather  than  the  flow.  Is  what  is  appropriate  after  most  of  the  stock  has 
vanished, more appropriate today? All these decisions are influenced by history, and you imagine the 
difficult debates you have among nation states to harmonize any of these areas at European level. 
But it is not only history. It is also the diversity of economic thinking. And as I mentioned before, in the 
seventies  in many  French  universities, economics  meant  a centrally  planned  economy.  I  remember 
when I first went to working groups in Brussels, the discussion was on fine-tuning the economy. Not 
surprisingly, when the first oil shock created havoc on a global level, some EU countries resorted to 
financing deficits thinking this situation was temporary, while other countries resorted to a structural 
adjustment. 
The consequence of this was the implosion of the first attempt to create a monetary union in Europe. 
The Werner Plan (1970) failed largely, among other reasons, because of this difference in economic 
thinking. And in 1982, the beginning of the Mitterrand years, there was even a plan by a nationalist 
and  socialist  element  within  the  French  Government  to  resort  to  competitive  devaluation,  to  control 
capital and goods at borders, and to resort to protectionism vis-à-vis other European countries, the 
end of the Union. 
Fortunately  Mitterrand  sided  with  Delors,  and  the  Union  continued,  but  the  Germans  were  deeply 
distrustful of the ability of France to abide by a social market economy. And it was not until several 
years  later,  in  1989,  that  the  first  study  to  embark  on  an  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  was 
completed, because since the middle of the eighties, a true "pensée unique" in economic terms, a true 
belief in the same economic values, namely a social market economy had developed, that allowed the 
establishment of a single currency. 
In order to proceed you need agreement on the underlying objectives. Do we see a market economy 
as  an  instrument  to  achieve  the  individual’s  quest  to  maximize  his  happiness  expressed  by  his 
financial  balance?  Or  is,  alternatively,  the  market  economy  a  way  to  improve  collective  happiness 
measured by the Gini factor (wealth distribution), peace, culture and quality and quantity of common 
goods available to the largest number? The answer will hugely influence your tax system, your social 
security system, your accounting system and so on. 
In the US the democratic debate is not about socialism or a market economy, not even a social market 
economy, at most about the size of deficits or jobs. What decides elections is abortion, gay marriages, 
God. Do you recognize there the roots of US history? In Europe however, religion and its issues are a 
non-event as electoral movers. What is moving Europeans is war, and what is moving Europeans, is 
welfare. That is the agenda of Europe. 
If you use this grid of an explanation, it explains many of the gridlocks that are depicted with great 
pleasure in some newspapers. But it also explains some of the difficult moments of the transatlantic 
dialogue. However, I am not pessimistic. By being aware of our diversities and sensibilities, we still 
can squeeze a lot more of shared positions out of our relative societal frameworks, both inside the EU 
and between the EU and the United States. This is what we should concentrate on. 
BIS Review 13/2005 
 3
