David Dodge: Monetary policy and exchange rate movements 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Vancouver  Board  of  Trade, 
Vancouver, 17 February 2005.  
 Good afternoon. It is always a pleasure for me to return to Vancouver, a city I called home for a year. 
And now that I live in Ottawa, I can tell you that it is particularly nice to get the chance to come here in 
the middle of February. 
Every year, the Canadian Press surveys news directors and editors to select the top business story of 
the year. In 2004, they picked the rise of the Canadian dollar. That was not a surprising choice. The 
dollar's  appreciation  drew  a  lot  of  attention  from  the  media,  from  business  people,  from  individual 
Canadians, and indeed, from the Bank of Canada. Changes in the external value of the dollar are one 
of the key factors that we scrutinize and work hard to understand. We watched the dollar closely as it 
depreciated during the 1990s, as it fell to an all-time low against the U.S. dollar in early 2002, and as it 
rose by roughly 25 per cent between January 2003 and January of this year.  
With  the  rapid  appreciation  of  our  dollar  has  come  an  increase  in  public  commentary  about  the 
currency - its effects on the Canadian economy in general, and the Bank of Canada's monetary policy 
in  particular.  There  has  been  no  shortage  of  stories  broadcast  or  articles  written.  At  the  Bank,  we 
welcome this increased interest. Canadians should discuss important economic issues that affect their 
daily lives. However, some of this commentary has oversimplified how movements in the exchange 
rate  affect  the  Canadian  economy  and  monetary  policy.  I  don't  mean  this  as  a  criticism.  The 
relationship between the exchange rate, the economy, and monetary policy is complex. So today, I 
want  to  talk  about  the  various  factors  that  influence  the  exchange  rate,  examine  how  these  factors 
affect  the  Canadian  economy,  and  lay  out  how  the  Bank  takes  them  into  account  as  we  conduct 
monetary policy. In doing so, I will elaborate on the contents of a technical box in our latest Monetary 
Policy Report Update, published on 27 January.  
The exchange rate in an inflation-targeting framework 
Let me begin with a brief review of Canada's monetary policy framework. At the heart of our monetary 
policy is the idea that the best contribution the Bank can make to the Canadian economy is to keep 
inflation low, stable, and predictable. By aiming to keep the annual rate of inflation at the 2 per cent 
midpoint  of  a  1  to  3  per  cent  target  range  over  the  medium  term,  we  lay  the  groundwork  for  the 
economy to grow in a strong and sustainable way. 
To keep inflation low and stable, we aim to maintain a rough balance between demand and supply in 
the economy. When aggregate, or total, demand exceeds aggregate supply, the economy will push 
against its capacity limits - and inflationary pressures will tend to build over time. If we see that inflation 
is threatening to rise above target over the next 18 to 24 months, the Bank will tighten monetary policy 
to dampen demand. Similarly, if there is too little aggregate demand relative to supply, the economy 
will operate below its capacity. If this gap between aggregate demand and supply were to persist, the 
projected  trend  of  inflation  would  fall  below  target.  The  Bank  would  then  ease  monetary  policy  to 
stimulate  demand  and  close  the  gap.  That's  why  it  is  important  for  us  to  understand  how 
developments in the Canadian and world economies affect the balance between demand and supply 
in Canada.  
Now  let's  bring  the  exchange  rate  into  the  picture.  To  understand  the  effect  of  exchange  rate 
movements,  we  need  to  understand  why  exchange  rates  are  moving,  and  how  these  movements 
affect the balance between demand and supply. Exchange rate movements tell us something about 
economic developments that may be having a direct impact on Canadian aggregate demand. And the 
movements themselves have their own impact on aggregate demand, by changing relative prices for 
Canadian  goods  and  services  and  by  shifting  demand  between  domestic-  and  foreign-produced 
products. The challenge for the Bank is to evaluate these movements, together with other data, and 
set a course for monetary policy that works to keep demand and supply in balance and inflation low 
and stable.  
BIS Review 10/2005 
 1
Two types of exchange rate movement 
With this general framework in mind, let me now talk in more detail about the forces that can influence 
the exchange rate. Here, I want to emphasize a key point: From the Bank's point of view, the causes 
of  a  movement  in  the  exchange  rate  are  just  as  important  as  the  movement  itself.  I  will  spend  the 
balance of my time today explaining why this is so. 
For monetary policy purposes, there are two basic types of exchange rate movement - and no, I don't 
mean "up" and "down." I mean movements in the Canadian dollar that directly reflect changes in the 
demand for Canadian goods and services, and those that do not.  
Consider the first type of  movement, which I'll call Type One. Growing world demand for Canadian 
goods  or  higher  world  prices  for  Canadian  products  both  prompt  a  direct  increase  in  aggregate 
demand in Canada. And both tend to cause an appreciation of the Canadian dollar. Put simply, when 
demand for our goods and services increases, our currency tends to appreciate. Conversely, when 
demand for our goods and services decreases, our currency tends to depreciate.  
But  not  all  exchange  rate  movements  are  Type  One.  Some  movements,  let's  call  them  Type  Two, 
reflect  the rebalancing  of portfolios  in  financial  markets,  which  may  have nothing  to do  with  current 
demand for Canadian goods and services.1 One example of a Type Two movement would be a flight 
to so-called "safe havens" during an international financial crisis. Another example is a movement that 
relates to expectations of what might be necessary to resolve global imbalances. I'll say a bit more 
about  this  later  on.  But  for  now,  let  me  just  stress  the  key  point  about  Type  Two  exchange  rate 
movements. While they are more difficult to describe, their defining feature is that they do not reflect 
current changes in demand for our goods and services.  
It's important for us at the Bank to try to distinguish between exchange rate movements that reflect 
changes  in  demand  for  our  goods  and  services  and  those  that  do  not.  That's  because  these 
movements have different implications for aggregate demand and, hence, for monetary policy. This is 
a complicated issue, all the more so because both types of currency movement sometimes occur at 
the same time. So I want to spend some time talking about these two different types of exchange rate 
movement.  I'll  give  you  some  real  examples  and  explain  their  different  implications  for  monetary 
policy.  
Let  me  start  with  Type  One.  I've  already  noted  that  when  global  demand  for  Canada's  goods  and 
services  rises,  the  demand  for  our  dollar  also  increases,  so  it  tends  to  appreciate.  Similarly,  when 
global demand for Canada's goods and services falls, so will the demand for our currency, which then 
tends to depreciate. But the exchange rate, by reacting to these changes in demand, also acts as a 
shock  absorber.  For  example,  when  global  demand  for  our  goods  and  services  weakens,  and  our 
dollar depreciates in response, the lower dollar pulls down the relative prices of Canadian goods and 
services,  making  them  more  attractive.  And,  of  course,  the  opposite  happens  when  global  demand 
rises  for  Canadian  goods  and  services;  the  increase  in  demand  is  dampened  by  the  associated 
appreciation of our dollar.  
Let me give you an example from here in British Columbia. In 1997 and 1998, the world economy was 
dealing  with  the  effects  of  economic  crises  in  Asia,  Russia,  and  other  emerging  markets.  In  this 
environment, global demand for the primary commodities that Canada produces was very weak. That 
weakness  resulted  in  falling  prices  for  many  commodities,  including  some  of  the  raw  materials 
produced in British Columbia or shipped through its ports. At that time, there was a sharp depreciation 
of the currencies of countries that export raw materials - Canada, Australia, and New Zealand - while 
the U.S. dollar appreciated. While there were other forces driving the exchange rate at that time, the 
drop in global demand for raw materials was a direct, negative shock to Canadian aggregate demand, 
and this shock led to a depreciation of the Canadian dollar. The lower dollar, in turn, helped to offset 
the shock by making other Canadian exports more attractive to global markets, and by making foreign 
products and services less attractive to Canadians.  
                                                      
1   This is not to suggest that all Type Two movements in the exchange rate originate in the capital account of the balance of payments 
and  are  driven  by  investment  flows.  Although  most  of  the  examples  described  later  in  the  text  are  based  on  shifting  investor 
expectations  and  on  the  rebalancing  of  portfolios,  other  Type  Two  movements  are  possible  and  can  be  driven  by  non-financial 
factors.  Similarly,  while  most  of  the  discussion  in  this  text  focuses  on  aggregate  demand  and  the  effects  of  exchange  rate 
movements on net export sales, aggregate supply considerations can also be important and can exert a significant influence on 
exchange rates. My focus here on demand considerations reflects their greater relevance in the current economic context. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2005
Over the past two years, we have seen this movement work in the opposite direction. In 2003 and 
most of 2004, both the demand for, and prices of, Canadian products rose. Once again, there were 
other factors at work on the exchange rate during this time. But this direct, positive shock to Canadian 
aggregate  demand  led  to  increased  demand  for  our  currency  and  an  appreciation  of  the  Canadian 
dollar. The stronger Canadian dollar, in turn, increased the relative price of Canadian goods compared 
with foreign products, and helped to restore the balance between demand and supply. In these two 
instances, the flexible exchange rate helped to absorb positive and negative shocks to our economy. 
That's the first type of exchange rate movement. Let's now turn to Type Two. You may wonder: if this 
second type doesn't reflect changes in demand for Canadian goods and services, what does it reflect? 
What are the forces behind this type of movement? 
Quite  often,  it  reflects  changes  in  foreign  demand  for  Canadian  financial  assets  or  changes  in 
Canadian demand for foreign financial assets.2 For example, if investors develop a greater appetite to 
hold  Canadian  equities  or  bonds,  this  drives  up  the  demand  for  our  currency,  which  then  tends  to 
appreciate.  The  reverse  also  holds  true.  A  shift  in  investor  sentiment  away  from  our  bonds  and 
equities reduces the demand for the Canadian dollar, and it tends to depreciate. But let's remember 
that these changes in demand for equities and bonds are not related to current changes in aggregate 
demand for goods and services produced in Canada. The fact that these movements are not related 
to  changes  in  aggregate demand  is  the  essential  difference  between  a  Type One  and a  Type  Two 
currency movement. 
A textbook example of a Type Two currency movement occurred during the Mexican Peso Crisis of 
1994-95.  As  a  result  of  the  Mexican  situation,  investors  became  less  comfortable  with  holding  the 
financial assets of countries with governments that were heavily in debt - and this included Canada at 
the  time.  As  a  result,  investors  sold  the  financial  assets  of  those  countries  and  sought  the  relative 
safety of investments in the United States. This was one of the factors behind the sharp depreciation 
of the Canadian dollar during this period. 
Let  me  give  you  another  example  of  an  exchange  rate  change  that  is  not  driven  by  a  change  in 
Canadian  aggregate  demand.  The  period  near  the  end  of  the  1990s  saw  investors  become 
increasingly  optimistic  -  some  have  said  irrationally  exuberant  -  about  the  prospects  for  the  U.S. 
economy. The associated financial flows into the United States helped to drive up the U.S. dollar over 
this  period  -  at  the  expense  of  other  currencies,  including  the  Canadian  and  Australian  dollars,  the 
euro,  and  the  yen.  This  optimistic  view  about  the  U.S.  economy,  combined  with  the  decline  in 
commodity prices that I mentioned earlier, helped push down the value of the Canadian dollar from 
71 cents (US) in March 1998, to about 62 cents (US) in January 2002. 
Of course, the process also works in the other direction. During the past two years, investors have 
become more concerned about the large and growing U.S. current account deficit - which has arisen 
out of that country's large fiscal deficit and its very low level of private savings. While the United States 
saves  too  little,  Asian  countries  are  saving  too  much,  and  this  situation  cannot  be  sustained 
indefinitely. More domestic demand in Asia and some other countries, and more savings in the United 
States,  are  needed  to  help  restore  global  economic  balance.  Against  this  backdrop,  market 
participants have come to the view that further depreciation of the U.S. dollar will be needed to help 
resolve  these  imbalances.  The  earlier  "irrational  exuberance"  about  the  prospects  for  the  U.S. 
economy has been cooled by an increased focus on the risks facing that economy. And so we have 
seen the U.S. dollar fall against many major currencies, including the Canadian dollar. 
Let me stress the relevant feature that is common across all Type Two movements. These movements 
do not reflect a change in the aggregate demand for our goods and services. However, the exchange 
rate movements, by having the usual effect on relative prices, still lead to changes in Canada's net 
exports and, thus, in Canadian aggregate demand.  
The implications for monetary policy 
At this point, it might be tempting to say, "So what?" After all, Canadians looking to head south for a 
winter break probably don't care what is causing the exchange rate to move. They only want to know 
                                                      
2  
I am referring here to a change in demand for Canadian assets that does not involve a change in investment in physical capital in 
Canada. 
BIS Review 10/2005 
 3
how many U.S. dollars or Mexican pesos they can buy with their hard-earned Canadian dollars. But it 
is important for us at the Bank, and for those who follow our actions, to understand what is causing the 
exchange  rate  to  move.  This  is  because  the  monetary  policy  implications  of  a  currency  movement 
depend on its cause, and on what other forces might be at work in the economy. 
Let's look at examples of the two types of exchange rate movement that result in a stronger Canadian 
dollar.  In  Type  One,  we  start  with  an  increase  in  foreign  demand  for  our  goods  and  services  and, 
hence, an increase in aggregate demand. The Canadian dollar strengthens in response, increasing 
the  relative  price  of  Canadian  goods.  This  increase  offsets  some  of  the  higher  foreign  demand  by 
encouraging imports and dampening exports. In other words, the appreciation of the Canadian dollar 
works to dampen the initial increase in aggregate demand. To the extent that the dampening effect on 
aggregate  demand  exactly  offsets  the  direct  increase  in  demand,  there  would  be  no  need  for  a 
monetary policy response. 
A Type Two appreciation is a different story. Consider the example where the U.S. dollar weakens, 
driven  by  market  concerns  about  global  imbalances.  In  this  case,  there  is  no  initial  increase  in 
Canadian  aggregate  demand.  But  the  stronger  Canadian  dollar  still  raises  the  relative  prices  of 
domestic  products  and  leads  to a  decline  in  net  exports.  The  overall  effect on  Canadian aggregate 
demand  is  clearly  negative.  And  this  decrease  in  demand  -  if  it  persisted  -  would  likely  lead  to 
undesirable downward pressure on inflation. All other things being equal, this would require monetary 
policy to be more stimulative than it otherwise would have been. 
I  hope  that  this  helps  to  clarify  why  these  two  different  types  of  exchange  rate  movement  have 
different implications for monetary policy. However, I don't want anyone to think that we at the Bank 
have  a  mechanical  or  formulaic  approach  to  dealing  with  exchange  rate  movements.  The  truth  is 
exactly  the  opposite.  Analyzing  foreign  exchange  movements  and  determining  the  appropriate 
monetary policy response is a complicated business. 
Consider the sharp appreciation of the Canadian dollar against the U.S. dollar over the past couple of 
years. Which type of movement drove this appreciation? How much of this movement was related to 
stronger  demand  for  Canadian  goods  and  services,  and  how  much  was  related  to  widespread 
weakness in the U.S. dollar?  
As we noted in our Monetary Policy Report Update last month, both types of exchange rate movement 
seem  to  have  been  at  play  over  the past  year.  However,  their  relative  importance appears  to  have 
shifted  over  this  period.  And  that  made  it  difficult  to  determine  the  appropriate  monetary  policy 
response.  
Looking  at  the  economic  data  at  the  beginning  of  2004,  we  saw  that  net  exports  had  made  a 
significant negative contribution to Canadian economic growth in 2003. We were concerned that, on 
balance,  much  of  the  exchange  rate  appreciation  in  2003  was  of  the  Type  Two  variety.  This 
assessment was one of the factors that led the Bank to lower interest rates in early 2004. However, by 
late  last  summer  and  early  last  autumn,  we  had  seen  strong  commodity  prices  and  strong  world 
demand. And net exports had made a solid, positive contribution to Canadian growth in the first half of 
2004 - a typical Type One effect. With our economy approaching its capacity limits, we raised interest 
rates in order to reduce the amount of monetary stimulus in the economy. 
But towards the end of 2004, the balance of Type One and Type Two forces appeared to shift again, 
with Type Two dominating. The U.S. dollar weakened against all the major floating currencies, and the 
Canadian dollar rose to a 13-year high of about 85 1/2 cents (US). This occurred despite the fact that 
world  commodity  prices  had  declined  somewhat  and  the  outlook  for  the  global  economy  had 
weakened. The Bank's target overnight rate was therefore left unchanged at the fixed announcement 
dates in December 2004 and January 2005.  
Each monetary policy decision that we make is complicated by uncertainty about the persistence of 
exchange rate  changes  and  about  the  length of  time  it  takes  for  both  exchange  rate  and monetary 
policy movements to influence the economy. This has been one of the Bank's major challenges in the 
recent  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  It's  one  thing  to  observe  a  movement  in  the  exchange  rate.  It's 
quite another to determine its implications for aggregate demand and, hence, for monetary policy. 
We continue to struggle with the same complications today as we chart a path for monetary policy. 
Canadian  interest  rates  remain  low  by  historical  standards.  Eventually,  this  considerable  monetary 
stimulus will have to be reduced; that is, at some point, interest rates will have to rise. But as I said, 
the  second  type  of  exchange  rate  movement  appears  to  have  gained  relative  importance  in  recent 
months, which means that aggregate demand in Canada will be weaker than we had expected last 
4 
 BIS Review 10/2005
autumn. That is why in our recent Update we slightly lowered our growth projection for 2005, to 2.8 per 
cent from 2.9 per cent. And it is why we said in the Update that: "…the pace of reduction in monetary 
stimulus is likely to be slower than envisioned in the October Report." By slowing the pace at which we 
will reduce monetary stimulus, we will continue to provide support for domestic demand to offset the 
additional drag we expect from net exports. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  by  reminding  you  of  what  I  said  at  the  beginning  of  my  remarks  today.  The 
relationship  between  the  exchange  rate,  the  economy,  and  monetary  policy  is  complex.  And  the 
effects of movements in the currency are spread out over time. You can't look at one day's or one 
week's performance of the Canadian dollar and pinpoint the reason behind the movement. There is no 
precise way to measure the relative importance of the two types of movement that I have described, or 
their  likely  persistence.  So,  in  setting  monetary  policy,  we  at  the  Bank  use  an  analytical  framework 
based  on  historical  evidence,  assess  a  lot  of  current  data  and,  even  then,  we  must  apply  a  lot  of 
judgment to our analysis. And the analysis and the judgment can change over time as new information 
becomes available.  
Ultimately, the Bank of Canada's commitment to Canadians about monetary policy boils down to this: 
We will continue to work at maintaining a rough balance between demand and supply in the economy, 
in order to keep inflation low, stable, and predictable. And as we pursue this objective, we will continue 
to  explain  the  reasons  behind  our  policy  actions,  and  our  view  of  the  outlook  for  inflation  and  for 
economic growth in Canada.  
BIS Review 10/2005 
 5
