Jürgen Stark: The IMF in a changing world (opening address) 
Opening  address  by  Dr  Jürgen  Stark,  Vice  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Joint 
IMF-Bundesbank Symposium “The IMF in a changing world”, Frankfurt, 8 June 2005. 
 Welcome and introduction 
I 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On  behalf  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  I  would  like  to  welcome  you  to  the  joint  IMF-Bundesbank 
symposium. I would like to extend a warm welcome to the panellists and their chairs of today’s event. 
It is a particular pleasure and honour for me to welcome Mr Rodrigo de Rato, the Managing Director of 
the IMF, who will give the keynote address of this symposium in a few moments. 
Even though long planned in advance, I find this symposium is particularly timely. The role of the IMF 
continues  to  be  the  subject  of  lively  public  debate  around  the  world  –  mostly  supportive  in 
industrialized  countries,  but  recently  also  increasingly  critical  in  Asia  and  Latin  America.  A 
medium-term strategy for the IMF is now also a key agenda item not only at the IMF itself but also at 
the G7/G8. Related to this discussion about the role of the IMF is also a debate – and I mention only 
the  words  exchange  rate  flexibility  and  global  imbalances  –  about  the  evolution  of  the  international 
monetary  and  financial  system.  Another  important  dimension  in  a  rapidly  changing  world  is  the 
possible  role  of  the  IMF  in  low-income  countries.  All  of  these  issues  will  feature  prominently  at  the 
forthcoming G8 summit in Gleneagles in July and again at the annual meetings of the IMF and World 
Bank in September. On many issues a broad consensus has already been reached, on some issues 
the  consensus  formation  is  still work-in-progress.  So  it  will  be  interesting  to see  to  what  extent  this 
symposium  will  be  able  to  reflect  or  may  be  even  to  advance  the  current  state  of  the  international 
policy  debate,  and  I  am  very  pleased,  not  only  on  behalf  of  the  Bundesbank,  but  on  behalf  of  all 
participants that we have such a timely opportunity. 
Our symposium is organized in three panels: 
• 
§  in  the  first  panel,  we will  discuss  as to  whether  the  international  monetary system  does 
function efficiently at present; 
§ the focus of the second panel will be on international financial stability and the respective 
contributions from national policies and international institutions; 
§  the  third  panel will concentrate on  the role  of  the  IMF  in  the international monetary  and 
financial system: Can the IMF be a panacea for every problem? 
  Functioning of the international monetary system 
II  
Over the last few years, the major challenge of promoting financial stability has come from the growing 
size  of  international  capital  flows  and  the  greater  use  of  new  financial  instruments  and  technology, 
particularly the increasing role of complex and leveraged instruments. Moreover, many emerging and 
developing countries become increasingly integrated in the global financial markets. Although financial 
globalisation is an important vehicle to foster economic growth, it does not come without risks. 
First, the exchange rates of major currencies are prone to sharp short-term fluctuations. Moreover, it 
is  not  unusual  that  exchange  rates  substantially  deviate  from  underlying  fundamentals.  This  insight 
has given rise to criticism and triggered important questions: Does the existence of overshooting and 
misalignment  imply  market  failure?  Should  the  key  currency  countries  cooperate  more  closely  on 
monetary matters? 
A second risk of financial globalisation relates to the global pattern of current account imbalances that 
has reached unprecedented dimensions in recent years, so too have US gross external liabilities, and 
the accumulation of foreign reserves in East Asia. 
BIS Review 43/2005 
 1
   One school of thought believes that this pattern of current account imbalances does not pose 
a  problem  to  the  international  monetary  and  financial  system,  but  that  “current  account 
imbalances  will  be  defused  with  little  disruption”1.  This  argument  refers  to  the  marked 
increase of flexibility in domestic and international markets that has promoted the resolution 
of international imbalances and lessened the risk of a crisis. 
A second school of thought argues that the world has already arrived at a new arrangement 
which  they  have  called  the  “new  Bretton  Woods  system”.  Asian  economies  stabilise  their 
currencies against the dollar in order to sell goods to the United States, and simultaneously 
lend the funds to pay for them. They suggest that the present situation could remain stable 
for a long while, for the benefit of all. 
A  third  group  of  analysts  is  more  sceptical.  They  suggest  that  the  current  account  and 
foreign  reserve  imbalances  pose  the  risk  of  a  disorderly  currency  movement  and 
protectionist  pressures.  Even  more,  the  role  of  the  US  dollar  as  the  key  reserve  currency 
could be brought into question. 
I  am  keen  to  hear  the  views  of  the  panellists  on  these  issues  and  the  role  of  the  IMF.  The  key 
questions in this respect are: Is a new order for the international monetary system emerging? Does the 
IMF  efficiently  fulfil  its  mission  to  promote  international  monetary  cooperation  and  its  surveillance 
function over exchange rate policies? 
III  
International financial stability – what contributions from national policies and 
international institutions? 
In  the  second  panel  the  discussion  will  be  focussed  on  international  financial  stability  and  the 
respective contributions from national policies and international institutions. At the current junction, the 
benign prospects for global growth and inflation and strengthened balance sheet positions of financial 
institutions provide a positive backdrop for financial stability. Overall, risk premia and long-term interest 
rates  are  very  low  currently,  which  on  its  own  is  a  positive  indicator,  but  the  question  is:  Are  risks 
appropriately priced? Downside risks that have the potential to cause strains in financial systems do 
exist. In its recent Global Financial Stability Report the IMF warns that “the single most important risk 
factor  for  financial  markets  in  good  times  is  complacency”.  Other  risks  include  the  untested  risk 
management systems dealing with complex financial instruments, the risk transfer to the household 
sector and high and sometimes rising public and external debt levels in emerging market economies. 
Against  the  backdrop  of  various  risks  that  have  emerged  in  recent  years,  what  are  the  respective 
contributions  from  national  policies  and  international  institutions?  In  promoting  financial  stability, 
national policies should focus on sound macroeconomic policies. In addition, sound institutions are 
key to economic growth, as was highlighted by the G-20 last year. Presently another key question is 
whether we need more regulations or better ones to strengthen the supervision of the market for credit 
risk transfer. Should transparency be increased? 
Currency mismatches are an important factor in triggering or aggravating financial crises in emerging 
market  economies.  Currency  mismatches  arise  when  borrowers  incur  foreigncurrency  liabilities  to 
finance  domestic  activities.  Some  people,  the  so-called  “original  sin”  school,  traces  currency 
mismatches to a fundamental inability of emerging markets to borrow abroad in their own currency. 
They  recommend  that  IFIs  should  assume  an  intermediate  role  as  issuers.  Other  people  have 
countered that this reasoning is based on a misperception as to how capital markets work. Even large 
industrial countries do not issue in their own currency under foreign jurisdiction but issue domestically. 
At  the  G20  workshop  in  Ottawa  last  year,  participants  concluded  that  strong  domestic  financial 
markets are a key factor to reduce a country’s external vulnerability. The question emerges whether 
national authorities should do more to develop domestic local currency financial markets. Alternatively, 
should the IMF assume an intermediate role as issuer? 
Capital account liberalisation is one of the most controversial and least understood policies of the 
day.  Some  people  portray  the  Fund  as  relentlessly  pushing  countries  to  open  their  capital  markets 
prematurely, thereby making it the prime culprit in every financial crisis. It is an open question as to 
whether the Fund followed the right approach by emphasizing the benefits of greater access to global 
                                                      
1   Alan Greenspan, Current Account Balances, Bundesbank Lecture, Berlin, February 2004. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2005
capital flows for recipient countries. As the Fund set up an International Capital Market Department 
and  suggested  the  introduction  of  Collective  Action  Clauses,  should  the  Fund  have  done  more? 
Alternatively,  should  source  countries  do  more  to  help  to  reduce  the  volatility  of  capital  flows?  Are 
there ways to stabilize the increasingly synchronized risk appetite cycle in global markets? 
Some people claim that the mere existence of the Fund has led to an increase in international debt 
crises. Of course, this argument is obviously exaggerated as debt crises had happened many times 
before the Fund was established. However, in comparison to earlier decades, sovereign debt defaults 
have become more frequent in recent years. Accordingly, the Fund has been more frequently involved 
in  sovereign  debt  restructurings.  The  key  policy  question  is  how  pro-active  the  Fund  should  be  in 
determining the outcome of the crisis resolution process. 
The Fund has considerable leverage as it can determine the parameters for the negotiations between 
a  sovereign  and  its  private  creditors  through  several  channels,  for  example  its  debt  sustainability 
analysis. Conflicts of interests can arise, particularly when the country’s liabilities to the IMF itself are 
large and compete potentially with private claims for the country’s debt servicing capacity. In view of 
the  experience  from  sovereign  debt  crises,  has  the  balance  of  power  changed  between  sovereign 
borrowers,  private  lenders  and  the  IMF?  What  will  be  the  future  role  of  the  IMF  in  sovereign  debt 
restructurings? Do the IMF’s own exposures to countries in an unsustainable debt situation pose risks 
to the IMF itself? 
The IMF – panacea for every illness? 
IV  
According  to  the  IMF’s  Articles,  the  central  mission  of  the  Fund  is  to  help  member  countries  to 
overcome balance of payments crises. However, since Brazil and Uruguay were inflicted by crisis in 
2002,  no  further  crisis  in  major  emerging  market  economies  has  occurred.  Some  observers  even 
came to the conclusion that a crisis in emerging market economies is something of the past. 
Although this appears to be a rather optimistic assessment, various regional initiatives were launched 
aimed at crisis prevention and resolution. In Europe, previously emerging countries have graduated to 
become  members  of  the  European  Union.  As  Latin  American  countries  have  implemented  many 
reforms over the last few years, the region – with some exceptions – now appears to be a much safer 
place  financially.  Emerging  Asian  countries  –  and  to  some  extent  also  Russia  –  have  massively 
accumulated  foreign  exchange  reserves,  thereby  providing  self-insurance  against  financial  crisis.  In 
addition, proposals are again on the agenda for a closer monetary and financial cooperation in East 
Asia, based on existing swap agreements under the Chiang Mai Initiative. 
In view of improved fundamentals and the allegedly increasing role of regional assistance mechanism, 
the question has been raised as to whether the lending function of the Fund is still needed. And this 
has led to the more provocative question: If IMF lending is no longer needed, why do we need the 
Fund at all? 
By contrast, other people have suggested a more active role for the Fund before a crisis arises. They 
have suggested the introduction of new instruments for the Fund which, if accepted, would transform 
the IMF into an insurance arrangement with farreaching consequences. 
It  is  obvious  from  these  highly  controversial  proposals  that  the  Fund  is  currently  being  extensively 
assessed internally as well as by its shareholders and by third parties. The Fund’s appropriate future 
role and priorities have been vividly discussed, the design and effectiveness of its instruments have 
been reviewed and a discussion has been opened up to strengthen internal management, finances 
and governance. 
To  be  relevant,  any  discussion  about  the  Fund’s  strategic  direction  must  take  into  account  the 
financial risk  to  the Fund.  Recent  patterns  of  IMF  loan  exposures  have  triggered  concerns  about 
excessive  credit  and  risk  concentration  in  the  IMF’s  balance  sheet.  Exceptionally  high  access  was 
often  accompanied  by  prolonged  use  of  Fund  resources.  Moreover,  the  IMF’s  share  in  some  crisis 
countries’ total external debt has reached unprecedented and systemically problematic levels. While 
the Fund’s liquidity may not be constrained yet, its preferred creditor status is coming under increasing 
threat. Thus a key issue for further discussion is: How can financial risks to the Fund be reduced? 
As  Raghuram  Rajan  has  recently  indicated,  the  discussion  about  the  IMF  lending  role  is  an  issue 
about “rules versus discretion”. Many countries are now aiming at well-functioning, rules-based market 
economies.  Why  should  the  same  principles  not  govern  international  financial  relations  as  well?  In 
view of the overarching rules of economic governance, it should be clear that Fund financing must not 
BIS Review 43/2005 
 3
distort  the  functioning  of  the  market  mechanism.  Fund  policies  should  instead  leave  the  market 
participants fully responsible for their own decisions. 
Emergency cases may still occur, but Fund lending might be restricted to true emergency cases and 
not be used as an instrument without an emergency need. Under the strategic review, an important 
question is how the newly agreed framework for exceptionally large access to Fund credit could be 
strengthened in practice. In this vein, does the proposed introduction of ”exceptional precautionary 
arrangements” contribute to a strengthening of market rules or rather a weakening? Would such a 
step  towards  imposing  an  insurer role on  the  IMF  be  compatible  with  the  Fund’s “risk-free”  liquidity 
financing mechanism that designates official reserves as the source of short-term Fund credit? 
In February 2003 the IMF concluded that exceptional access should be reserved for truly exceptional 
cases, access limits must be strictly adhered to, and the four criteria for exceptional access must be 
fulfilled. Will the agreed principles pass future tests? Alternatively, should the Fund have a free hand in 
resolving crises? 
The role of the Fund in helping low-income countries is also being hotly debated. Admittedly, the 
Fund  has  a  role  to  play  in  contributing  to  macroeconomic  stability  as  an  essential  requirement  for 
sustained  growth  and,  thus,  for  effective  poverty  reduction  in  low-income  countries  through 
surveillance,  technical  assistance  and  financial  support.  However,  does  this  justify  a  long-term 
financial involvement of the Fund in these countries or should other development-oriented institutions 
accept chief responsibility? As a monetary institution, should the Fund not continue to focus on short-
term adjustment needs? 
Another key issue in the strategic review debate is surveillance. Many useful surveillance initiatives 
have already been launched in recent years, including Standards and Codes, ROSCs, FSAPs, and 
the  increase  in  transparency.  By  strengthening  bilateral,  regional  and  multilateral  surveillance,  the 
Fund can make useful key contributions aimed at achieving and maintaining stability worldwide and 
thus bolstering growth. Fund surveillance increases transparency in financial markets and improves 
the  functioning  of  the  market  mechanism.  Based  on  profound  experience  gained  from  the  different 
regions of the world, the Fund is an unbiased arbiter to give policy advice. 
I am convinced that the IMF has done an excellent job so far in helping member countries adapt to a 
changing economic environment. In a process of trial and error, the Fund has become a more open 
and accountable institution and a major source of information for the general public and capital market 
participants. 
The future role and priorities of the Fund and its instruments should be carefully reviewed. A greater 
selectivity with regard to functions and a sharper focus on the IMF’s core mandate appear reasonable. 
The  participants  of  this  symposium  –  which  brings  together  academics,  policy  makers  and  market 
participants – have the privilege of being able to speak freely outside their regular job constraints. I 
hope  they  will  make  active  use  of  this  freedom.  I  am  sure,  divergent  views  will  emerge  among 
panellists which is why we have this symposium in the first place. Divergent views can be helpful to 
better  understand  the  challenges  we  are  facing,  provided  they  are  all  expressed  under  a  shared 
objective – namely to try to explain to us and to the broader public which medium-term direction the 
IMF should take. 
But now I am very pleased to give the floor to Mr Rodrigo de Rato, who will give the keynote address 
for this symposium. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2005
