David Dodge: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press  conference 
following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 14 April 2005. 
 This  morning,  we  released  our  April  Monetary  Policy  Report.  In  the  report,  we  said  that  the  global 
economy  has  been  unfolding  largely  as  expected,  and  the  outlook  for  the  Canadian  economy  is 
essentially  unchanged  from  that  in  January's  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update.  There  is  increasing 
evidence  that  the  Canadian  economy  is  adjusting  to  major  global  developments,  including  the 
realignment of currencies and higher commodity prices.  
The Bank expects Canada's economy to grow by about 2 1/2 per cent in 2005 and 3 1/4 per cent in 
2006, with growth this year and next coming primarily from strength in domestic demand. To continue 
to  support  aggregate  demand,  we  decided  to  leave  the  target  for  the  overnight  rate  unchanged  at 
2.5 per cent on 12 April. 
The Bank continues to judge that the economy is operating slightly below its production capacity, and 
we expect that it will move back to full capacity in the second half of 2006. Core inflation is expected to 
return to 2 per cent around the end of 2006. Based on the scenario implied by oil-price futures, total 
CPI inflation is projected to remain slightly above 2 per cent this year, and to move slightly below 2 per 
cent  in  the  second  half  of  2006.  In  line  with  this  outlook  for  growth  and  inflation,  a  reduction  of 
monetary stimulus will be required over time.  
This outlook is subject to both upside and downside risks and to uncertainties. The risks include the 
pace of expansion in Asia and the prices of oil and non-energy commodities. A further risk relates to 
the  resolution  of  global  current  account  imbalances.  Should  these  imbalances  persist,  the  risk  of  a 
disorderly  correction  would  grow  over  time.  Most  of  the  uncertainties  with  respect  to  the  Canadian 
outlook  relate  to  how  the  economy  is  adjusting  to  the  relative  price  changes  associated  with  major 
global developments.  
Monetary  policy  continues  to  facilitate  the  adjustment  process  by  aiming  to  keep  inflation  at  the 
2 per cent target and the economy operating near its production capacity.  
BIS Review 25/2005 
 1
