Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Strengthening economic structures and fundamentals 
Statement  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Joint 
Annual Discussion of the Boards of Governors at the 2005 World Bank-IMF Annual Meeting, 
Washington DC, 26 September 2005. 
 As we strengthen our global relationships, there needs to be greater engagement with the 
entire spectrum of member countries. If we are to achieve a more balanced global growth, 
greater  stability  in  the  global  financial  system  and  significant  progress  in  the  fight  against 
poverty, there needs to be greater appreciation and understanding of the global issues from 
the perspective of the emerging and developing economies. 
In the current environment, the risks to global growth have increased, presenting us with an 
even  more  challenging  environment  to  achieve  these  goals.  Should  the  trend  of  higher  oil 
and asset prices, and rising interest rates continue, their combined effect could diminish the 
near-term  global  growth  prospects.  In  this  environment,  appropriate  policies  are  vital  to 
ensure  that  any  moderation  in  growth  does  not  evolve  into  a  fundamental  economic 
slowdown.  While  countries  have  strengthened  their  resilience,  international  cooperation 
becomes  important  in  addressing  these  issues.  At  the  national  level,  widespread  reform 
efforts  have  intensified.  These  have  been  reinforced  by  regional  initiatives.  Of  equal 
importance  are  reforms  at  the  international  level.  It  is  the  nature  of  the  leadership  that  is 
exercised  at  the  international  level,  and  the  actions  initiated,  that  will  determine  the 
effectiveness and relevance of the role of the international financial institutions in the global 
economy. 
In  Asia,  significant  progress  has  been  made  at  the  regional  level  in  strengthening  the 
underlying  economic  structures  and  fundamentals.  The  economies  in  Asia  continue  to  be 
among  the  fastest  growing  in  the  world,  and  thus  contributing  to  the  rebalancing  of  global 
growth and stability. In addition to promoting domestic sources of growth, economies in Asia 
have  also  enhanced  regional  economic  and  financial  cooperation,  including  measures  to 
strengthen  regional  surveillance  and  financial  support  mechanisms,  and  to  deepen  the 
regional capital market. The greater economic and financial integration in Asia has been a 
mutually reinforcing force in strengthening growth in the regional economies. Intra-regional 
trade and investment flows in Asia have continued to increase significantly in recent years. 
Progress has also been made in the further deregulation and liberalisation of the economic 
and financial sector, thereby increasing the potential for the Asian economies to contribute to 
global growth and stability. 
Malaysia's  own  performance  has  been  favourable,  with  continued  steady  growth  being 
experienced.  The  Malaysian  economy  has  continued  to  shift  to  new  areas  of  comparative 
advantage, to new areas of growth, with the private sector being the main driver of growth. 
Resources  have  continued  to  shift  towards  the  services  sector,  towards  strengthening 
linkages  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  and  to  the  resource-based  industries  and  the 
agricultural  sector.  This  has  contributed  to  a  well-diversified  economic  structure  and  has 
increased the resilience of the economy to external developments. The financial sector has 
also  seen  significant 
internal 
rationalisation  of  the  banking  sector  is  now  virtually  completed.  Governance  and  risk 
management practices have also been improved while structural enhancements have been 
made  in  the  capital  market,  significantly  enhancing  its  role  in  the  financial  system.  A 
comprehensive  and  robust  Islamic  financial  system  now  also  operates  in  parallel  with  the 
domestic, conventional financial system. 
Against  the  background  of  strengthened  economic  fundamentals  and  financial  system, 
Malaysia  has  taken  the  opportunity  to  sequentially  deregulate  and  liberalise  the  financial 
system. This includes the introduction of a new interest rate framework that is market-driven, 
transformation.  The  restructuring,  consolidation,  and 
   1/2 
the liberalisation of foreign exchange administration rules to promote greater efficiency and 
enhance  risk  management  in  foreign  exchange  transactions,  and  the  introduction  of  new 
foreign players into our financial system. In July this year, Malaysia adopted a managed float 
for the Ringgit exchange rate to better position Malaysia to respond to structural changes in 
the  global  and  regional  environment.  Under  this  arrangement,  the  Ringgit  is  monitored 
against a basket of currencies of Malaysia's major trading partners. 
In  this  world  of  greater  uncertainty,  there  has  been  significant  focus  on  the  issue  of 
surveillance  and  risks  and  vulnerabilities.  Experience  has  shown  that  surveillance  has 
improved policy performance as well as the ability to take pre-emptive action to contain the 
impact  of  disruptive  and  destabilising  developments.  These  efforts,  however,  need  to  be 
balanced by efforts to enhance the capacity of countries not only to manage the risks and 
vulnerabilities,  but  also  to  sustain  their  own  capacity  to  support  growth  and  development. 
Capacity  building  involves  helping  countries  to  help  themselves.  It  requires  enhancing  the 
institutional  capacity  of  the  country.  Support  in  putting  in  place  the  necessary  institutional 
structures, arrangements and systems would increase the potential for the sustainability of 
the development process. 
Strengthening these foundations are vital to the deregulation and liberalisation process. They 
represent  the  pre-conditions  to  any  reform  agenda.  In  this  regard,  capital  account 
liberalisation  needs  to  be  managed  in  accordance  with  the  country's  own  institutional 
capabilities  and  implementation  capacity.  Supporting  financial  infrastructures,  sound  and 
strong  financial  institutions,  developed  financial  markets,  and  a  more  market-driven 
environment are key to the success of the liberalisation process. 
On  the  support  for  the  low-income  and  poorer  countries,  the  uneven  progress  made  in 
meeting the Millennium Development Goals is of deep concern. The debt relief proposal of 
the  G-8  to  assist  the  Heavily  Indebted  Poor  Countries  (HIPC)  is  a  welcome  step.  Debt 
cancellation,  however,  addresses  the  symptoms  and  not  the  cause  of poverty.  Experience 
has shown only a few countries have graduated from the debt relief programme under the 
HIPC Initiative. Many still continue to be burdened with unsustainable levels of debt. 
It  is  important  to  recognise  that  the  task  of  assisting  the  lower-income  countries  does  not 
stop  short  at  providing  financial  assistance.  Development  of  education  and  health  is  an 
important part of the Millennium Development Goals. The IFIs also need to assume a greater 
role  in  encouraging  the  developed  nations  to  invest  and  create  job  opportunities  in  the 
Heavily-Indebted Poor Countries and other poor nations as a long-term plan to assist low-
income countries to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. 
Finally, we share the view that the legitimacy, credibility and effectiveness of the Fund and 
the Bank hinges on the degree to which its representation reflects the relative significance of 
its  respective  membership.  The  13  th  General  Review  of  Quotas  represents  an  important 
opportunity to ensure that all members, especially the developing and emerging economies, 
have  an  adequate  representation  in  the  institutions  that  is  consistent  with  their  relative 
positions  in  the  world  economy.  It  is  important  for  voices  from  this  constituency  of  the 
emerging and developing world to not only be heard but to be listened to. We look forward to 
the commitment of the international community in preserving the fundamental, core principle 
of  equality  in  the  governance  structure  of  the  Bretton  Woods  Institutions.  This  greater 
engagement within the international community will contribute to increasing the prospects for 
a greater shared global economic prosperity. 
 
   2/2 
