Antonio Fazio: Amintore Fanfani 
Address by Mr Antonio Fazio, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the inaugural meeting of the Amintore 
Fanfani Foundation, Rome, 9 March 2005. 
 1. Amintore Fanfani was a protagonist of Italian institutional and political life; possessed of a strong 
will, he always acted in the light of an elevated and internally consistent view of society and domestic 
and international reality that was rich in historical references and ideals. This breadth of vision was 
apparent when one had the opportunity to talk with him on economic and social issues. His action was 
directed to achieving concrete results, with the definition of objectives and instruments able to impinge 
on  reality.  His  declared  aim,  sometimes  enounced  amidst  polemics  and  disagreements  as  to  the 
means, was always that of serving the common good. 
His cursus honorum shows him to have emerged first as a scholar and teacher of economic history; 
subsequently,  as  a  political  leader,  member  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  government  minister  and 
holder  of  high  positions  in  State  institutions.  He  was  an  architect  of  projects  of  social  reform  and 
promoter of international peace initiatives. 
I have personal memories of Fanfani, as well, since he was one of my professors at Rome University. 
His historiographical work traced the thinking that over the centuries investigated the evolution of the 
economy and contains reconstructions covering long periods. He showed great ability in setting the 
relationships linking the economy, institutions and society within a unitary framework. 
His background, the debate on reconstruction, after the enormous material, civil and moral damage 
inflicted by the Second World War, and his vision of how the economy should operate, necessarily in 
man’s  interest,  led  him,  especially  as  a  government  minister,  to  foster  reforms  that  influenced  the 
organization of the State and left their mark on Italy’s history. 
2. In the Constituent Assembly Fanfani contributed to the search for agreement among the reforming 
forces − Catholic, leftist and liberal democratic − on a formula that is a synthesis of the fundamental 
features of the new State and the centrality of democracy. 
The  first  article  of  the  Constitution  states  that  the  Republic  is  founded  on  labour,  expression  of  the 
dignity of citizens, guarantee of everyone’s full participation in organized civil life, the means for all to 
exercise popular sovereignty, to the benefit of all. 
We have perhaps not yet reflected enough on the right to work; the political sphere and the economy 
must contribute to its realization; the former must preside over the latter’s autonomous operation. 
The right to work in many cases still has to be realized. 
The conditions for achieving a satisfactory level of employment vary with the changes in the economic 
context, the state of technology, the organization of society, and the relations between economies and 
States. The right to employment is realized in the first place through growth and development. 
In  the  3rd  Subcommittee  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  Fanfani  was  the  rapporteur  for  matters 
concerning the social control of economic activity. The text, approved after a series of amendments, 
affirms  the  freedom  of  private  initiative,  but  draws  attention  to  its  social  function.  While  recognizing 
economic  freedom,  a  proviso  is  introduced  allowing  the  public  authorities  to  set  limits  in  order  to 
protect the general interest. 
In recent years this principle has been widely debated; some have seen it as conflicting, in a changing 
economic  reality,  with  the  principle  of  competition,  which  in  the  meantime  has  become  widely 
established  in  the  legal  order.  But  it  needs  to  be  reaffirmed  that,  even  in  the  present  context,  the 
relationship between freedom of enterprise and public regulation and control remains valid, albeit to 
differing degrees. 
In the period of postwar reconstruction Fanfani, coming from the experience of the Great Depression, 
operated in a political and economic system characterized by an extensive presence of the State in 
the economy. It was certainly not a question of a planned economy; it was a conception of economic 
life that, based on social guidelines, lay somewhere between liberalism and statism. 
3.  After  the  catastrophe  of  the  Second  World  War,  state  intervention  in  the  economy  played  an 
essential role, mobilizing the nation’s best intellects and with the inefficiency that would later cripple it 
still far off. 
In  the  1930s  the  public  sector  accounted  for  about  15  per  cent  of  the  economy  in  the  industrial 
nations. The Depression that swept the private sector had a devastating impact, with major political 
repercussions,  in  the  absence  of  the  stabilizing  effect  of  a  substantial  sector  not  subject  to  cyclical 
swings. In the 1950s the State’s share of the economy in all the economically advanced countries was 
near  30  per  cent.  By  the  1980s  it  had  reached  and  in  several  countries  exceeded  50  per  cent. 
Problems of efficiency and rigidity became increasingly evident. 
In  the  1950s  Amintore  Fanfani  fought  to  put  the  principles  of  the  Constitution  into  practice  and 
guarantee economic and social rights and freedoms: the right to work, to housing, to a more equitable 
distribution of wealth. 
On various fronts he furthered projects to improve the condition of Italy’s economy and increase the 
use of manpower: reforestation programmes, public works and energy policy. 
As  Minister  of  Labour,  Fanfani  undertook  the  first  public  residential  construction  programme,  the 
INA-Casa Plan, financed by worker and employer contributions supplemented by State resources and 
the intervention of the banking system. In a situation of high unemployment, this programme helped to 
create  jobs.  As  Minister  of  Agriculture,  he  completed  the  land  reform  initiated  by  Antonio  Segni,  a 
reform of fundamental importance because it significantly affected not only economic but also political 
and social relations. 
During  the  1950s  and  1960s  the  Italian  economy  grew  at  remarkably  rapid  rates.  Employment  and 
labour productivity increased. There was substantial private investment alongside public investment. A 
whole  set  of institutional,  financial  and foreign  policy  instruments were created  that  enabled  Italy  to 
advance  by  leaps  and  bounds.  The  opening  of  the  economy,  investment  in  public  works,  the 
extraordinary programmes for Southern development, incentives for economic activity and the creation 
of new categories of banks were all factors that reinforced industry and enhanced competitiveness, 
creating a virtuous circle of unbroken expansion. 
These were also the years of postwar reorganization in banking, with the creation of new special credit 
institutions and the introduction of subsidized credit. Donato Menichella, who headed the Bank of Italy 
from 1948 to 1960, ensured monetary and financial stability, thereby creating conditions conducive to 
the long period of growth and Italy’s integration into the world economy. In this context he successfully 
combined a rigorous credit and monetary policy with the funding of rapidly expanding investment. He 
contributed decisively to the creation of the Southern Italy Development Fund, which was conceived to 
lay the institutional and structural foundations for economic growth. 
The  Cabinets  headed  by  Fanfani  during  those  years  helped  to  shape  new  patterns  in  the  relations 
between  business  and  labour.  The  convertibility  of  the  lira  was  achieved  in  December  1958.  The 
electricity  industry  was  nationalized.  Lower  secondary  schooling  was  made  compulsory  and 
standardized. Projects for the creation of regional governments were launched. 
It was above all in his fourth Cabinet, in office in 1962 and 1963, that Fanfani promoted a new policy 
which  revived  reform  and  initiated  an  as  yet  hesitant  experimentation  with  non-mandatory 
medium-term economic planning. 
Thanks  to  rapid  growth,  by  the  end  of  the  1960s  Italy  was  approaching  full  employment  and  had 
become one of the world’s leading industrial countries. 
The oil crisis of 1974 and the wage explosion of the following years slowed down economic growth 
worldwide and in Italy. Rapid inflation required drastic credit restriction. 
The balance-of-payments deficit, the devaluation of the lira, and the price-wage spiral, fueled in part by 
the wage escalator, further curbed growth and distorted the allocation of income. 
In the early 1980s, with Fanfani’s fifth Government, the wage escalator agreement was terminated and 
then revised as part of a process of disinflation in the framework of a policy of concertation with the 
social partners, based on the theoretical contribution of Ezio Tarantelli. This was the premise for a new 
approach to economic policy. 
His  last  term  as  prime  minister  saw  the  beginnings  of  foreign  exchange  liberalization  in  connection 
with Italy’s endorsement of the Single European Act. 
Serving three times as President of the Senate, from 1968 to 1973, 1976 to 1982 and 1985 to 1987, 
Fanfani  stood  out  for  his  dedication,  rigour  and  the  absolute  impartiality  with  which  he  fulfilled  this 
mandate. 
In his career as a politician, Fanfani also fought some lost battles, as he himself readily acknowledged. 
It is still early for serene reflection on these defeats, on the core issues involved, without the distraction 
of the polemics and conflict by which they were marked. What can be underscored is his forthright 
advocacy of the independence of political action, which led him to inquire into the relationship between 
modernization, ethical principles and the essence of truth. 
4. The bond between Fanfani and Giorgio La Pira, strengthened by their common vision of the values 
of man and their trust in dialogue, by their religious faith and their reference to Thomism and Maritain, 
led both to support courageous foreign policy initiatives for détente and peace. 
In 1975 La Pira telegraphed this message to Fanfani: “So many memories come to my heart and mind 
concerning your legislative and political interventions for a policy of reforms and renewal. But allow me 
to recall especially your role as a motor force of world politics for the liberation and social, political and 
economic development of the Third World countries and for peaceful coexistence, disarmament and 
peace in Europe, in Asia, in every continent.” 
The international stature Fanfani enjoyed in the different positions in which he represented Italy was 
due to his uncommon abilities, to his activity inspired by the ideals of peaceful coexistence, open to 
the creation of new opportunities for foreign policy, aimed at constructing relations of cooperation and 
solidarity among peoples. 
In his travels abroad and in international meetings he worked for the beginning of talks to halt the arms 
race, to establish more advanced relations with the Soviet Union, to promote a “thaw” between the 
opposing blocs, to develop fruitful relations with the countries of the Mediterranean area. 
On assuming the presidency of the United Nations General Assembly in 1965, Fanfani declared that it 
was necessary to make every effort to achieve the objective of “general and complete disarmament”, 
including  a  treaty  that  would  commit  all  countries  “to  cooperate  to  halt  nuclear  weapons”.  In  a 
statement that is striking today for its relevance, he stressed how important it was that the action of the 
United Nations in defence of peace and justice be made effective through concrete agreements, over 
and  above  generic  declarations  of  good  will:  “Specific  pacts  and  the  resolve  to  realize  constructive 
agreements will be necessary. Otherwise we will have to admit that we do not intend . . . to make our 
Organization something more than a simple international forum, that is to say the engine of peace, the 
keeper of law and the guarantor of security for us all.” 
In  Fanfani’s  conception,  social  justice,  democracy  and  protection  of  the  environment  were  both  a 
premise  and  an  effect  of  the  development  of  trade,  of  the  spread  of  technologies,  of  the  drive  for 
growth. 
At a time when we had yet to witness the acceleration of globalization, he foresaw the risks as well as 
the opportunities inherent in the nascent phenomenon. 
Today, facing the transformations that globalization has brought, we are pondering the ways to govern 
it, to create a new international order and guarantee every nation a fair share in the potential benefits. 
The free market, fundamental for the efficiency of the economy, needs to be regulated if it is to operate 
in the interest of society. It requires rules, controls, the reign of legality and security, the sharing of 
principles and values. Not a Manager State but a State that effectively regulates and at the same time 
is  able  to  ensure  the  provision  of  essential  public  goods  directly  or  indirectly.  These  are  goods  of 
collective interest, such as good administration, justice, basic infrastructure and, at global level, goods 
of primary interest for humanity: the climate and the preservation of the environment. That a good is a 
public good does not necessarily imply that it is supplied by a public entity; what is fundamental is the 
use to which it is put, the function it serves. 
Very  important  work  has  been  accomplished  in  recent  years  in  numerous  international  fora  and 
institutions to defend the essential interests of humanity, natural resources, the climate, international 
security. Its progress needs to be accelerated. 
What makes Amintore Fanfani’s work relevant today and prompts us to study its underlying thought is, 
above all, the perception of the close, organic links between all the factors of social, economic and 
political life at both national and international level. 
5.  In  view  of  the  complexity  and  originality  of  Fanfani’s  work,  the  fields  to  be  ploughed  in  the 
Foundation's research range from economic policy to foreign policy, from technological innovation to 
the transformation of markets and the globalization of the economy. Of the heritage he handed down 
together with La Pira, we have to rediscover and make actual the concern for The expectations of poor 
people, the ability to translate lofty visions of the dignity of man and society into the realm of practical 
action. 
In  the  years  of  Italy’s  great  economic  and  social  transformation  a  generation  of  thinkers, 
entrepreneurs, labour leaders and statesmen charted the country’s course. The drive to come together 
and plan with a view to objectives of general interest was present in all the components of society and 
politics,  even  though  they  clashed  fiercely  on  some  basic  decisions.  The  social  partners  likewise 
sensed the connection that the interests of a specific category must have with the general interest; a 
union plan for employment was drawn up. 
The  economic  policy  choices  effectively  accelerated  the  course  of  developments.  Among  the 
personalities  who  took  part  in  elaborating  those  guideline  I  should  like  once  more  to  recall  Donato 
Menichella, who enjoyed relations of mutual collaboration and respect with Fanfani, as did my other 
illustrious predecessors who followed him, Guido Carli, Paolo Baffi and Carlo Azeglio Ciampi. 
In the climate of rebirth, the emphasis laid on the role of the “public sector” reflected the need to plan, 
to  have  an  overview  of  the  evolution  of  economic  and  social  life  in  which  to  insert  the  action  of 
private-sector actors in a long-term perspective. It was a question of foreseeing, but also of fostering 
expectations and aspirations, the will to advance, to risk, to invest in the future, of giving young people 
a different future from the experience of those who had been young in the early part of the century. 
The  eminent  statesman’s  sense  of  service  drew  sustenance  from  the  force  of  his  personality. 
Fundamental among his qualities was his ability to act on the basis of an organic, far-sighted vision 
and rigorous study of the problems, to grasp the course of history. 
The  endowment  of  programmes and  institutional  instruments,  the  possibility  of  employing  unutilized 
capacities,  the  start  made  at  forging  international  links  prepared,  in  the  1950s,  the  great  burst  of 
economic growth. Confidence, a desire to test oneself and to improve, and expectations of a different 
future were the major driving forces. 
The  times  are  different  now,  but  the  ability  to  plan  ahead  and  an  organic  vision  are  fundamental 
components  of  our  action,  the  basis  of  shared  choices,  a  precondition  for  carrying  out  specific 
initiatives. 
In these absolutely different conditions, we must rediscover the élan of those times. 
