Antonio Fazio: The outlook for the global economy and Italy 
Address by Mr Antonio Fazio, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the AIAF - ASSIOM - ATIC FOREX, 
Modena, 12 February 2005. 
 The international economy 
1. 
NON PUBBLICARE PRIMA DELLE ORE 11,45 
The  world  economy  grew  by  5  per  cent  in  2004,  the  largest  increase  in  more  than  twenty  years; 
domestic demand in the United States and a number of emerging Asian economies contributed to the 
expansion. World trade increased by 9 per cent. Growth remained weak in the euro area and came to 
a halt during the year in Japan. The rise in oil prices slowed economic activity marginally. 
The US economy grew at an average annual rate of 3.1 per cent in the period 2002-04. The increase 
in  public  spending,  the  tax  relief  measures  and  the  large  reduction  in  interest  rates  sustained 
household consumption and encouraged a revival of investment. 
Output grew in 2004 by 4.4 per cent. The improvement in labour productivity, up by 4.1 per cent on 
average for the year, curbed inflation and buoyed corporate profits. 
Payroll employment rose by 2,200,000 during the year, making good all the decline that had occurred 
between  the  beginning  of  2001  and  the  middle  of  2003.  The  growth  in  employment  sustained 
consumption and compensated for the drying up of the effects of the tax cuts on disposable income; 
the liquidity provided by mortgage refinancing also decreased. 
The  business  sector’s  expectations  regarding  the  growth  of  the  economy  are  revealed  by  the 
performance of investment. 
At the beginning of 2003 investment in high-tech capital goods had already reversed the downward 
trend of the previous two years, rising at an annualized rate of 17 per cent. In 2004, with profit margins 
widening  and  financial  conditions  favourable,  purchases  of  machinery  also  picked  up  rapidly. 
Spending on machinery and software increased by 13 per cent, compared with 6 per cent in 2003. 
Household expenditure rose by 4.1 per cent on an annual basis in the second half of the year; the 
saving rate declined further. 
The increase in the consumer price deflator, excluding energy and food products, rose from 1.1 per 
cent at the end of 2003 to 1.5 per cent at the end of 2004. 
At each of the six meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee held between 30 June 2004 and 
2 February  of  this  year,  the  federal  funds  target  rate  was  raised  by  25  basis  points,  bringing  it  to 
2.5 per  cent.  As  the  Federal  Reserve  has  emphasized  in  its  press  releases,  monetary  conditions 
continue to be accommodative. The markets expect further increases in interest rates in the coming 
months, for a total of 50 basis points. 
The  federal  budget  deficit  rose  to  3.5  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2003.  In  the  fiscal  year  that  ended  last 
September  the  ratio  was  virtually  unchanged.  If  no  new  measures  are  adopted,  and  including  the 
additional funds being finalized to cover defence spending, the deficit is expected to decline to 3.3 per 
cent of GDP in 2005. 
The US President has announced that the objective of budget policy will be to halve the ratio of the 
deficit to GDP by 2009, mainly by curbing expenditure. He stated that the priorities for his new term of 
office included reforming the public pay-as-you-go pension system, which currently provides benefits 
to around 45 million people for an annual outlay of $500 billion, or less than 5 per cent of GDP. The 
aim of the proposed reform is to prevent the emergence of growing financial deficits from 2018 on; it 
hinges on the introduction of individual accounts which would progressively be credited with part of the 
contributions presently paid into the public system. 
Looking ahead, the imbalance in the US external accounts will be a drag on the American economy, 
and consequently on the world economy. 
The current account deficit continued to increase in 2004. The improvement in price competitiveness 
brought  by  the  weakening  of  the  dollar  has  had  very  little  effect.  In  2004  the  deficit  amounted  to 
5.5 per cent of GDP; in 2005 it will exceed 6 per cent. 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 1
The net international investment position of the United States, which was practically in balance at the 
beginning of the 1990s, subsequently deteriorated, with net foreign debt rising to a quarter of GDP in 
2004. The worsening of the external imbalance is basically linked to the growth gaps between the US 
economy on the one hand and the European and Japanese economies on the other. 
The Federal Reserve has announced that there have been no major difficulties in financing the current 
account  deficit,  but  it  has  also  stressed  that  the  growth  in  net  foreign  liabilities  cannot  continue 
indefinitely  at  the  present  rate.  In  order  to  maintain  a  rapid  pace  of  capital  formation,  the  Federal 
Reserve has called for a reduction in the budget deficit and measures to increase household saving. 
In Japan, economic activity slackened in the course of 2004, after expanding by around 7 per cent on 
an annual basis in the first quarter. Exports, which had been growing rapidly since 2003, were flat in 
the second half of the year; private investment slumped. It is estimated that output picked up slightly in 
the fourth quarter. Growth over the year is expected to have been close to 3 per cent. 
In the euro area, the recovery is struggling to gather momentum. It is hampered by the rapid ageing of 
the population. Structural factors hinder an improvement in productivity. The scope for macroeconomic 
policies remains limited: in the case of monetary policy this is due to the low flexibility of the economy; 
in that of budget policy to the size of the deficits. 
Buoyed by international trade, euro-area output grew at an annualized rate of 2.2 per cent in the first 
half  of  2004.  The  upturn  in  exports  was  accompanied  by  a  gradual  increase  in  purchases  abroad, 
partly in response to the lagged effects of the euro’s appreciation. Following a renewed slackening of 
consumer and investment demand, output slowed in the third quarter; over the year as a whole it is 
estimated to have risen by 2 per cent. 
We have kept the rate on main refinancing operations in the euro area unchanged at 2 per cent in 
view of the expectations of a fall in inflation to below 2 per cent and the still uncertain recovery. 
Short-term interest rates have been close to zero in real terms since the start of 2004. The market 
expects them to remain below 1 per cent until the middle of this year. 
An important contribution to the growth of the world economy has come from the emerging economies 
of Asia. In 2004 the increase in GDP was around 7.5 per cent. In China it was 9.5 per cent; investment 
rose by 26 per cent in nominal terms; signs of overheating have emerged on the price front. Despite 
the substantial increase in imports, the trade surplus widened from $26 billion in 2003 to $32 billion 
last year. The authorities are still endeavouring to bring the rate of expansion in economic activity back 
to a sustainable path. 
In India economic activity continues to expand at a rapid pace; in 2004 GDP grew by 6.4 per cent. 
Latin  America  experienced  growth  of  5  per  cent  in  2004,  compared  with  1.8  per  cent  in  2003.  The 
acceleration involved all the main countries; in Brazil, GDP grew by approximately 5 per cent. 
In Argentina, the recovery, which got under way two years ago, was driven by the strong expansion of 
domestic demand and the good performance of exports; in the last three years there has been a large 
trade surplus. In the first three quarters of 2004 the growth in GDP amounted to 8.8 per cent year on 
year. The peso’s exchange rate against the dollar, which at mid-2002 had weakened to nearly 4 to 1, 
subsequently  staged  a  recovery  and  has  stabilized  at  around  2.9  pesos  to  the  dollar  since  2003. 
Benefiting above all from the increase in revenue produced by the strengthening of economic activity, 
the  primary  surplus  on  the  federal  budget  rose  to  3.6  per  cent  of  domestic  output  in  the  first  nine 
months of 2004, from 2.8 per cent in the corresponding period of 2003. The problem of restructuring 
the debt remains open at international level. 
The financial markets 
2.  
As we have pointed out for some time now, conditions of abundant liquidity prevail in the international 
markets. The credit and monetary expansion has been very robust in recent years in the United States 
and Japan and has spread to the emerging economies of Asia whose currencies have been managed 
with reference to the dollar. Since the beginning of 2002 the broad measure of the money supply has 
grown by 56 per cent in China, by about 20 per cent in South Korea, and by between 12 and 16 per 
cent in the other Asian countries. 
In Europe, the 12-month growth rate of the M3 money supply, after falling to 4.9 per cent in May 2004, 
rose to around 6 per cent in December as a consequence of the expansion in currency in circulation. 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2005
The  plentiful  supply  of  credit  at  global  level  has  had  a  limited  impact  on  consumer  price  inflation, 
thanks to greater competition and the spread of products originating from countries where labour costs 
are extremely low and social protection is scanty. In the United States, large productivity gains have 
helped to contain inflation. 
Bond and share prices in the industrial and the emerging countries remained stable at the high levels 
of the start of 2004. By contrast, in most of the industrial countries house prices continued to rise. 
Yields on ten-year government bonds have stabilized since October at around 4 per cent in the United 
States and approximately 1.4 per cent in Japan. In the euro area, given the low inflation rate and the 
uncertainty about the strength of the recovery, longterm yields fell to 3.6 per cent in January of this 
year. 
The yield spread between the bonds of US companies with a high credit rating and ten-year Treasury 
paper was equal to 0.9 percentage points in January; the corresponding spread for the securities of 
riskier  companies  has  stood  at  2.8  points  since  last  October.  A  factor  helping  to  curb  the  cost  of 
financing has been the strengthening of the profitability and balance sheets of the corporate sector as 
a  whole,  which  is  also  reflected  in  the  persistent  reduction  in  defaults  and  the  improvement  in  the 
balance between corporate rating upgrades and downgrades. 
In the euro area, the growth in lending to the private sector was 7 per cent in December compared 
with the end of the previous year; the increase was nil in Germany, 7 per cent in Italy. 
In  Europe  too,  the  spreads  between  non-financial-sector  euro-denominated  bonds  and  government 
securities are currently at very low levels. According to Moody’s, at the end of 2004 defaults in the 
international market were equal to 0.2 per cent of the total amount of issues outstanding, the lowest 
rate  since  1997.  There  was  a  further  improvement  in  the  rating  agencies’  assessments  of  the 
creditworthiness of issuers. 
Thanks to the good performance of profits, in the United States and the euro area the ratio of share 
prices to earnings, declining since March 2002, has fallen further and is basically back in line with the 
long-term levels. 
House prices have accelerated in many industrial countries since the end of the 1990s: between 1999 
and  2003  they  rose  in  the  United  States,  France  and  Italy  at  average  annual  rates  around 
6 percentage points higher than the rise in consumer prices; in the United Kingdom and Spain, the 
increase in real terms was around 12 per cent. 
In 2004 property prices again rose sharply with respect to the previous year; in the third quarter their 
increase outpaced that in consumer prices by 19 percentage points in the United Kingdom, 10 points 
in the United States, and 13 points in France and Spain. In Italy house prices rose by 9 per cent in 
nominal  terms  in  2004,  compared  with  11  per  cent  the  previous  year;  in  Germany  and  Japan, 
continuing a trend under way since the early 1990s, they fell slightly again in 2004. 
In the main emerging countries, after the increase in risk premiums recorded last spring, there was a 
return  to  relaxed  financial  conditions;  in  mid-January  2005  the  spreads  stood  at  very  low  levels, 
reflecting  the  strengthening  of  economic  activity,  the  good  performance  of  exports  and  abundant 
liquidity. 
In general, current conditions in the international financial markets are characterized by low interest 
rates and risk premiums. The large expansion of derivative products in the course of the last two years 
has  redistributed  risk  towards  market  participants  better  able  to  absorb  it.  The  markets  are  not 
signaling risks of instability at global level. 
Exchange rates and external imbalances 
3.  
According to the indicator calculated by the Federal Reserve, between February 2002 and January 
2005 the effective exchange rate of the dollar fell by 15 per cent in both nominal and real terms. Over 
the  same  period  the  euro  appreciated  by  24  per  cent  in  nominal  terms  and  by  21  per  cent  in  real 
terms. The yen strengthened by 7 per cent; in real terms it depreciated by 3 per cent. 
In 2004 the central banks of the Asian countries again intervened on the foreign exchange market with 
massive purchases of dollars. In Japan the official reserves rose to $850 billion, in China they grew by 
about $200 billion to exceed $600 billion; in the other Asian countries they now amount to $830 billion. 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 3
Reserve assets, mostly denominated in dollars, are equal to about 18 per cent of GDP in Japan and to 
about 37 per cent in China. 
Generally  low  rates  of  inflation  and  the  peg  to  the  dollar  have  enabled  some  Asian  countries  to 
improve their competitiveness: since February 2002 the real effective exchange rates of the currencies 
of China, Hong Kong and Malaysia have fallen by between 9 and 17 per cent. The competitiveness of 
Thailand  and  Taiwan  has  remained  unchanged,  while  that  of  South  Korea  and  Singapore  has 
deteriorated slightly. 
After  the  financial  crisis  of  1997  the  reference  to  the  dollar  in  the  management  of  exchange  rates 
resulted  in  only  limited  changes  in  competitiveness  among  the  emerging  and  newly  industrialized 
Asian countries, thereby encouraging the growth of regional trade, which has increased to about half 
the  total.  This  integration  reflects  the  spontaneous  development  of  vertical  integration  of  production 
within the region, in which each country tends to specialize in one phase of production. 
In the last ten years China’s share of international trade has increased significantly. It takes 13 per 
cent  of  Japan’s  exports  and  17  per  cent  of  those  of  the  other  emerging  Asian  countries:  it  imports 
capital  goods  and  components  from  Japan,  South  Korea  and  Taiwan.  It  exports  manufactures,  for 
some ten years now mainly to the markets of the industrial countries. 
As  globalization  proceeds,  the  emerging  Asian  economies,  which  have  very  low  labour  costs  and 
faster  productivity  growth  than  the  United  States,  cannot  pursue  policies  aimed  at  stabilizing  the 
exchange rate against the dollar for ever. Such policies risk boosting inflation and fueling excessive 
increases in the prices of financial and real assets. 
In 2004 the large external deficit of the United States had a counterpart in the substantial surpluses of 
the  Asian  countries,  which  totaled  about  $330  billion.  The  surplus  of  the  euro  area  rose  from 
$26 billion in 2003 to about $50 billion, or 0.5 per cent of GDP. 
At present the bulk of Asia’s current account surplus is generated by Japan, which in 2004 contributed 
$170  billion;  another  major  contribution,  of  $90  billion,  was  made  by  the  newly  industrialized 
economies. According to the IMF, in 2004 the current account surpluses of China and the other Asian 
developing countries amounted to $38 billion and $30 billion, respectively. In the last few years India 
has recorded modest surpluses. 
Even  though  all  the  Asian  countries  have  been  running  large  current  account  surpluses,  their  net 
international investment positions differ. Japan has had a structural current account surplus from the 
postwar period onwards. China began to record current account surpluses in the early 1990s. In South 
Korea and other important emerging Asian countries surpluses are of more recent date. 
In the ten years prior to the crisis of 1997, the persistent deficits of the emerging Asian economies had 
resulted in their accumulating a high level of foreign debt. The crisis forced these countries to make an 
abrupt  adjustment;  a  substantial  current  account  surplus  followed.  Despite  the  subsequent  rapid 
recovery of economic activity in the region, the surplus continued to grow, rising in the last three years 
from 2.4 to 3.7 per cent of GDP as a consequence of the upturn in world trade and the favourable 
competitive position. 
The differing net investment positions affect countries’ propensity to keep on accumulating dollars and, 
more generally, foreign exchange reserves. 
Italy 
4.  
In  the  first  nine  months  of  2004  GDP  growth  in  Italy  was  1.2  per  cent  on  an  annual  basis,  0.7 
percentage  points  less  than  in  the  rest  of  the  euro  area.  The  growth  gap,  which  had  been  nearly 
closed in the course of the previous three years, thus widened again in concomitance with the less 
favourable performance of exports.  
In the first three quarters Italian exports grew by 3.3 per cent compared with the same period of 2003, 
approximately half the increase recorded by the other euro-area countries as a group. The balance-of-
trade data indicate they slowed down in the final months of the year. Given the buoyant expansion of 
world trade, Italy’s share of world exports of goods is estimated to have fallen to around 2.9 per cent in 
volume terms. 
The loss of world trade shares that began in 1996, when Italy returned to the European exchange rate 
mechanism,  has  continued.  The  substantial  stability  of  the  currency  has  not  been  accompanied  by 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2005
the 
first  nine  months  of  2004,  with  nominal  exchange  rates  essentially  stable, 
structural reforms capable of increasing competitiveness as much as in the other industrial economies. 
Italian exports continue to be held back by the loss of price competitiveness, due largely to the poor 
performance of productivity. 
The  deterioration  in  manufacturing  efficiency  by  comparison  with  the  leading  industrial  countries, 
under way since the mid-1990s, has been aggravated in recent years. Between 2000 and 2003, total 
factor productivity in industry fell by about 1 per cent a year. The competitiveness of Italian goods, as 
measured by unit labour costs, declined by nearly 15 per cent between the start of 2002 and the end 
of 2003, or 9 points more than the deterioration in Germany and France. 
In 
Italian 
competitiveness continued to suffer from a faster rise in unit labour costs. Earnings per employee rose 
by 2.8 per cent in the entire economy and by 2.3 per cent in the non-farm private sector. But there was 
no adequate gain in productivity. The rise in unit labour costs in Italy thus exceeded that in France and 
Germany by 1.4 and 3.5 percentage points respectively. 
Italian  household  consumption  rose  by  1.2  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2004  with  respect  to  the 
previous three months, but then remained almost flat for the next two quarters. 
Harmonized consumer price inflation was 2.3 per cent in Italy in 2004, as against 2.1 per cent in the 
euro area. According to the January Consensus Forecasts, inflation is expected to fall to 2.1 per cent 
this year in Italy and to 1.8 per cent in the area as a whole. 
Investment in machinery, equipment and transport equipment, which in the first half of 2004 recouped 
the contraction registered in 2003, turned downwards again in the third quarter, reflecting uncertainty 
over  the  recovery  in  economic  activity.  Investment  in  residential  construction  continued  to  expand. 
Public works activity slowed sharply in the second half of the year after a lively expansion in the first. 
The uncertain path of investment and the decline in industrial production have braked the expansion of 
employment. The more intensive utilization of labour in connection with wage moderation and with the 
greater flexibility produced by the reforms enacted since the early 1990s appears to have come to an 
end. In the third quarter the number of persons employed was 0.2 per cent higher than in the fourth 
quarter  of  2003.  In  industry,  following  the  moderate  expansion  recorded  between  2000  and  2002, 
employment began to contract again in line with production. 
The unemployment rate fell in 2004, mainly owing to the decline in labour force participation. 
The diminution in the supply of labour interrupted the decade-long process of convergence towards 
the average European participation rate. There was a decline in labour force participation by young 
people in the South, especially women. 
More systematic action, including training programmes, is needed to raise labour market participation 
rates. 
Bank lending was 6.7 per cent greater in December than a year earlier. There was a slowdown in the 
North and Centre, while the growth in lending accelerated further in the South to 10.5 per cent. Credit 
to consumer households, essentially for the purchase of houses, increased by 16 per cent. 
The value of new bad loans remained limited. Qualitative and quantitative indicators show that credit 
supply conditions continue to be easy. Interest rates are still extremely low. Secondary market yields 
on Italian corporate Eurobonds are in line with those on the bonds of other international issuers. 
The banking system and the corporate sector 
5. 
Since the early 1990s the Italian banking system has undergone a transformation on an historic scale. 
Initially, 68 per cent of total assets were held by banks controlled by the state or by foundations; today 
the figure is close to 10 per cent. 
Most  of  the  banking  groups  are  controlled  by  a  core  group  of  investors  comprising  intermediaries, 
foundations  and,  in  some  cases,  firms  with  minority  interests.  Important  international  financial 
intermediaries are present in a higher proportion than in other European banking systems. 
Foreign banks and financial institutions currently hold an average of 17 per cent of the capital of the 
four  largest  banking  groups;  for  the  10  largest  groups,  the  share  held  by  foreign  intermediaries  is 
11 per cent. 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 5
On the basis of BANKSCOPE data, foreign intermediaries hold 7 per cent of the capital of the four 
leading banking groups in Germany, 3 per cent in France and 2.6 per cent in Spain. 
In the privatization process, foundations’ and public entities’ sales of shareholdings were facilitated in 
the  second  half  of  the  1990s  by  buoyant  share  prices.  In  disposing  of  their  holdings  in  banks,  the 
foundations and public entities fostered the creation of stable core groups of controlling shareholders. 
Mergers and acquisitions have resulted in the number of banks operating in Italy falling from 970 in the 
mid-1990s to 785; 443 are mutual banks. Initially the market share of the four largest banking groups 
was 30 per cent; by June 2004 it had risen to 44 per cent. 
Some 80 per cent of total assets are held by groups headed by banks listed on the stock exchange. 
In the mid-1990s the return on equity of the Italian banking system was less than 2 per cent. Today, 
after rising to approximately 13 per cent in 2000, it is close to 11 per cent. 
All  the  indicators  point  to  a  considerable  increase  in  banking  competition;  this  is  confirmed  by  the 
evolution of the structure of the market and interest rates, and by the redistribution of intermediaries’ 
market shares. 
In  the  regional  loan  markets  there  has  been  a  marked  decrease  in  the  index  of  concentration. 
Compared  with  the  mid-1990s,  the  average  cost  of  short-term  bank  credit  has  fallen  by  more  than 
8 percentage  points  and  is  now  in  line  with  the  euro-area  average;  the  spread  between  short-term 
lending and deposit rates has narrowed from 6 to 4 percentage points. 
The Italian banking system is now in a position to compete in Europe. It is expanding its presence in 
Central and Eastern Europe. 
Italian banking groups are smaller than the major euro-area intermediaries; the indicators of operating 
profitability  and  efficiency  are  nonetheless  better  than  the  average  for  the  banking  systems  of  the 
area. 
The  integration  of  the  groups  formed  during  the  last  ten  years  is  at  an  advanced  stage  as  regards 
corporate  structure,  operating  procedures  and  information  systems.  Further  combinations  between 
large groups within the Italian banking system would entail serious problems in terms of the creation of 
dominant positions and a substantial reduction in competition in a number of regions and provinces. 
Account must also be taken of the uncertainty surrounding the productivity gains obtainable from the 
increase in size, owing to the organizational complexity of the entities that would be created. 
Combinations of regional and medium-sized banks are producing efficiency gains. 
There has been a revival of discussion on the possibility of additional mergers in Europe, where the 
size  of  banks  is  deemed  inadequate  compared  with  that  of  the  major  banks  of  the  other  main 
monetary areas. 
On the basis of the experience of recent years, the benefits of additional mergers are uncertain for 
large groups. At world level some of the largest banking groups have encountered serious difficulties. 
In  other  cases  obstacles  have  emerged  to  the  efficient  control  of  operations  in  different  lines  of 
business and countries. 
In wholesale banking there is already a fully-fledged single market at international level. For financial 
services,  the  key  factors  are  intermediaries’  technical  skills  and  reputation  and  their  links  with 
countries with developed capital markets. 
In  the  Italian  market,  from  the  beginning  of  2000  up  to  June  of  last  year,  foreign  banks  managed, 
through  their  branches,  30  per  cent  of  the  issues  of  securities  by  Italian  and  foreign  non-financial 
companies  and  a  quarter  of  the  issues  of  international  financial  institutions.  Foreign  banks  placed 
more than 70 per cent of the value of the roughly 200 issues of Eurobonds made by Italian firms. The 
leading international banks dominate M&A activity in the Italian market. 
As  for  retail  banking,  a  dominant  role  in  all  the  European  countries  is  played  by  domestic 
intermediaries.  These  have  detailed  knowledge  of  the  legal  and  institutional  context  and  of  the 
characteristics, needs and creditworthiness of customers, especially those of smaller size. 
A  recent  report  prepared  under  the  auspices  of  the  G-10  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank 
Governors shows that bank mergers and acquisitions mainly involve domestic intermediaries in all the 
leading  economies.  In  Europe  most  of  the  few  crossborder  mergers  that  occurred  were  between 
intermediaries based in countries with institutional, cultural and linguistic affinities or involved a bank in 
6 
 BIS Review 9/2005
financial  distress.  When  intermediaries  of  different  countries  are  combined,  legal  and  institutional 
differences and cultural barriers may hamper the transfer of managerial skills from the acquiring bank 
to the bank acquired. 
In  Italy  the  fruitfulness  of  collaboration  with  intermediaries  of  other  countries  is  attested  to  by  the 
extensive  participation  of  foreign  capital  in  the  Italian  banking  system,  by  numerous  cooperation 
agreements for the distribution of financial and credit products and by the significant role played by 
foreign intermediaries in wholesale banking. 
The Bank of Italy examines every proposal submitted to it for mergers or acquisitions of major equity 
interests  to  be  carried  out  by  Italian  banks  vis-à-vis  Italian  banks,  by  Italian  banks  vis-à-vis  foreign 
banks and by foreign banks vis-à-vis Italian banks. It applies Italian and Community law; it performs its 
statutory mandate of ensuring the sound and prudent management of credit, protecting the stability of 
intermediaries and of the system as a whole, and promoting competition. 
In the last few years Italian banks have provided financial support to firms, including large ones and 
some involved in extensive restructuring. They have directed very large volumes of credit to small and 
medium-sized enterprises, which are an important part of the Italian economy. In the financing of such 
businesses, there has been a steady increase in the proportion of credit provided by banks rooted in 
the local economy. 
For Italian banks, reducing costs and improving internal organization remain key objectives. Product 
innovation and the reduction of unit costs must be to the benefit of firms and households. They must 
be turned into an improvement in the quality of the products supplied and be reflected in the prices of 
retail services, above all for payment services and asset management. 
In a period of low inflation it is only right for banks to limit the fees charged on retail services. 
Progress  in  this  direction,  correct  and  professional  conduct  strengthen  the  relationship  of  trust  with 
customers and are conducive to the orderly growth of intermediation business. 
In  collaboration  with  the  Antitrust  Authority,  we  have  launched  a  fact-finding  inquiry  with  the  aim  of 
ascertaining the existence, for some services, of strategies and costs that discourage customers from 
changing bank. 
Over the last ten years, the banking system has been marked by a process of consolidation and a 
progressive  increase  in  the  average  size  of  individual  intermediaries,  whereas  the  industrial  and 
service  sectors  have  experienced  further  fragmentation,  with  inevitable  adverse  effects  on  the 
productivity and competitiveness of the whole economy. 
The number of large industrial groups, essential for the spread of new technologies, is limited. The 
system of industrial districts, which in past decades helped to generate the synergies and efficiencies 
typical  of  large  groups  within  clusters  of  small  firms,  now  seems  less  able  on  its  own  to  sustain  a 
further drive to improve competitiveness. 
The  shortage  of  infrastructure  and  the  cost  of  energy  and  services  for  firms  are  a  drag  at  national 
level. 
Spending on research by both the public sector and the private sector is particularly low in Italy by 
comparison with  the  other  advanced economies.  The  proportion of  value added  by high-technology 
sectors is very small. 
This  affects  Italian  products’  penetration  of  international  markets.  Italy’s  share  of  world  exports  of 
goods and services in volume terms was approximately 4.5 per cent in the mid-1990s; in 2004 it fell 
below 3 per cent. 
Industrial  production  follows  the  performance  of  exports.  For  several  years  now,  as  we  have 
documented on other occasions, its growth in Italy has fallen appreciably short of that recorded both in 
the euro area as a whole and in the area’s two largest countries, Germany and France. In 2004 Italy’s 
index of industrial production showed a slight tendency to decline. 
To  a  degree,  the  transfer  of  traditional  production  to  countries  with  low  labour  costs  and  rapidly 
expanding  demand  is  normal.  In  Italy  the  phenomenon  has  intensified  since  the  mid-1990s;  the 
number  of  workers  employed  in  foreign  companies  invested  in  or  controlled  by  Italian  firms  has 
reached  one fifth  of  the  total  number  employed  in  domestic  industry.  In  recent  years,  the prevalent 
reason for investment abroad appears to have been to cut costs; direct investment aimed at increasing 
firms’  presence  in  advanced  markets  has  contracted  sharply.  The  strategies  that  will  enable  the 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 7
system to reap the maximum benefit from internationalization need to be identified; better knowledge 
and thorough analysis of the phenomenon are necessary. 
An economic policy that intends to revitalize Italian industry must necessarily come to grips with the 
problem of firm size, in part by encouraging mergers and acquisitions. 
There are difficulties, above all in connection with the ownership structure of Italian firms. 
The  banking  system,  which  possesses  databases  and  extensive  and  detailed  information  on  the 
structure  and  profitability  of  firms,  can  promote  mergers  and  acquisitions,  provide  the  financial 
assistance and services needed to make the productive system more solid. 
The Italian economy contains instances of excellence in innovative and creative ability, not just in the 
traditional branches of activity but also in high technology. These more dynamic units can act as poles 
of aggregation for less productive firms. 
It’s a challenge in which we cannot fail, in order to improve an important part of our economy. 
The outlook 
6.  
The overall expansion of the world economy is set to continue this year. 
In the United States, GDP is expected to grow by about 3.5 per cent. 
Short-term interest rates were drastically reduced in the weak phase of economic activity. They are 
currently nil in real terms; increases are expected in the course of the year. 
The supply of dollar-denominated securities has been abundant in the past few years, reflecting the 
high public sector borrowing requirement and robust investment. 
From the low it touched in the closing days of last year, as of yesterday the dollar had recouped 6 per 
cent against the euro. 
Although,  as  mentioned  earlier,  the  level  and  structure  of  yields  do  not  signal  risks,  a  growing 
imbalance between the demand for and the supply of savings in the largest industrial economy looms 
over the global financial system. 
A current account deficit in 2004 of $600 billion, a little more than 1.5 per cent of world GDP at current 
exchange  rates,  was  absorbed  with  a  depreciation  of  the  dollar  but  without  serious  strains  in  the 
markets, in a year in which the world economy grew by 8 per cent in nominal terms and the demand 
for financial assets expanded even faster. 
The quantity of dollars as defined by M2 increased by 38 per cent between 1999 and 2004; over the 
same period the stock of public and private-sector bonds grew by 45 per cent. The sum of the two 
aggregates rose to 260 per cent of America’s GDP. 
For the euro, the money supply and the stock of bonds increased by 48 per cent over the same five 
years,  and  the  volume  of  assets  denominated  in  euros  rose  to  235  per  cent  of  the  area’s  GDP.  In 
Japan, the money supply and securities grew by 35 per cent; their ratio to GDP is far higher than in the 
other two main monetary areas.  
The expansion of the world money supply and, to an extent, that of private and public-sector bonds in 
relation to GDP have had bullish effects on share and especially property valuations. Consumer price 
inflation has been held in check by the increase in productivity and competition. 
The external current account deficit of the United States for the current year is expected to be of the 
order of $700 billion. 
The ability of the international markets to finance large imbalances between saving and investment in 
the major industrial countries has increased markedly in the last few years. The world economy will 
continue to absorb dollar-denominated financial assets; excessive repercussions on exchange rates 
and yield spreads can be avoided if the expansion of the quantity of dollars is not substantially greater 
than that of the other main currencies. 
Important factors, in this context, will be the overall balance sheet position of the private and public 
sectors in the three monetary areas, the growth expectations for the US economy, and the willingness 
of global financial intermediaries to increase the share of their dollar holdings further, while reducing 
that of other currencies and their domestic currency. 
8 
 BIS Review 9/2005
A large loss of value by the dollar would be harmful for the orderly functioning of the financial system 
and the world economy. 
The  increase  in  official  interest  rates  should  help  to  sustain  the  external  value  of  the  dollar  during 
2005. 
The  resolve  of  the  US  administration,  which  it  recently  reaffirmed,  to  reduce  the  budget  deficit 
substantially  is  crucial.  But  in  a  long-term  perspective,  a  more  balanced  relationship  between  the 
major currencies cannot come about without a return to faster growth in Europe and Japan. 
In Japan, according to the estimates of the central bank, the increase in GDP will be approximately 
2 per  cent  this  year.  In  the  emerging  areas  the  pace  of  growth  is  likely  to  slow  somewhat  but  will 
nevertheless  remain  very  rapid.  According  to  the  IMF,  growth  will  diminish  to  3.6  per  cent  in  Latin 
America, 7.5 per cent in China and 5.5 per cent in the other emerging Asian economies; at world level, 
the expansion in GDP is forecast at 4.3 per cent. 
In  the  euro  area,  the  cyclical  indicators  weakened  during  the  autumn.  In  November  manufacturing 
output registered its second consecutive decline, reflecting the contraction in activity in Germany and 
Italy and stagnation in France. 
Indicators  of  the  climate  of  confidence  have  not  yet  signaled  a  clear  reversal  of  trend  in  the 
expectations of households and firms in the main countries, except in Germany, where the last few 
months have seen an improvement. The international organizations forecast area-wide growth to be 
approximately 2 per cent this year, about the same as in 2004. 
In Italy, GDP growth in 2004 is estimated to have been approximately 1.5 per cent. 
According to preliminary estimates, industrial production declined by 0.5 per cent in the fourth quarter, 
and appears to have contracted slightly again in January. 
During 2005 the expansion in output is expected to gain pace, as a consequence of an acceleration in 
exports and in the domestic components of demand. 
A policy aimed at raising the Italian economy’s growth potential appears increasingly necessary. 
Prerequisites for this are the structural adjustment of the public finances and the lowering of the ratio 
of  debt  to  GDP.  The  Government  is  considering  a  set  of  measures  to  improve  the  economy’s 
competitiveness. Their prompt implementation is essential to bolster the still uncertain propensity of 
firms to invest. 
Factors of fundamental importance are the development of basic and applied research, in part through 
closer relationships between universities and firms, the transfer of matters from primary to secondary 
legislation, and the reduction in the number of authorization procedures. The prompt implementation of 
the  public  works  plan  requires  mechanisms,  including  extraordinary  instruments,  to  speed  up 
procedures and execution. The reform of bankruptcy law, which can no longer be put off and should 
be implemented in the form of a decree-law or enabling law, will benefit the protection of businesses, 
workers, creditors and banks. 
The Italian banking system can sustain a higher rate of economic and investment growth. It will also 
benefit  from  a  stronger  economy.  Its  stability  and  efficiency  are  the  guarantee  for  the  savings 
entrusted to it and for their fruitful investment to the advantage of economic activity. 
With  a  united  effort,  we  must  establish  the  conditions  for  faster  growth.  Among  the  measures  for 
competitiveness, special attention must be paid to the South, with its resources of labour, intelligence 
and initiative. 
Growth realizes the potential of labour flexibility through the employment it brings. 
Economic policy action, the response of the social partners and the institutions can create the climate 
of confidence that is necessary for enterprise and innovation. We must increase our commitment on 
behalf of those, especially young people, who are convinced that a better future can and must be built. 
BIS Review 9/2005 
 9
