Ooi Sang Kuang: Expanding ASEAN-EU economic links - the role of the euro 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Ooi  Sang  Kuang,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the 
Euro Conference - “Expanding ASEAN-EU Economic Links - The Role of the Euro", Kuala Lumpur, 
15 July 2005.  
 Yang Berhormat Dato' Mustapa bin Mohamed, Minister in the Prime Minister's Department 
Mr. Klaus Regling, Director General, European Commission 
Your Excellency Ambassador Thierry Rommel 
Excellencies 
Distinguished speakers and guests 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Indeed, we have come to the end of a very fruitful set of discussions at this Conference. I was pleased 
to  note  that  the  tone  of  our  discussions  has  underscored  that  the  bilateral  spirit  of  cooperation 
between ASEAN and the EU is intact and strong. I sensed a unanimous recognition that it is only by 
continuing  to  work  together  and  cooperate  with  each  other  that  we  can  reinforce  this  positive 
partnership to perpetuate continued shared prosperity. Against the background of strengthening our 
partnership,  I  sensed  the  acknowledgement  among  participants  that  we  do  have  a  dynamic 
partnership, but that there remains more to be done to foster greater symmetry in the relationship for 
increased wealth creating possibilities.  
I believe the Conference has set in motion how the prevailing economic and financial developments as 
well as prospects in ASEAN and the EU can contribute further to the agenda of taking our partnership 
forward. At the outset of the Conference, it has been clearly articulated by our EU speakers that the 
enlargement of the EU and the economic and monetary integration of acceding countries will not only 
strengthen  the  role  of  the  EU  as  a  global  player  in  the  long  term,  but  also  make  a  sustainable 
contribution to global stability and prosperity.  
On the developments and prospects for ASEAN, our ASEAN speakers have more than stressed that 
the  overall  economic  and  financial  transformation  that  has  occurred  in  ASEAN  since  the  Asian 
financial crisis has resulted in an ASEAN that is a mutually reinforcing region of growth; an ASEAN 
that has an increasing role in the creation of wealth; and an ASEAN that will remain as an important 
region in promoting and supporting global stability and growth.  
This Conference has revealed to us that both our regions are currently at the confluence of favourable 
factors;  factors  that  have  led  to  a  marked  expansion  in  the  base  of  opportunities  that  we  can  offer 
each other. It is imperative that our discussions on taking advantage of the emerging opportunities be 
translated into concrete actions. We are of course aware that implementing these actions will demand 
decision and leadership from both ASEAN and the EU. From the proceedings of the Conference, it 
seems to me that there may be a need to develop a more entrenched mechanism to leverage further 
on our respective core capabilities and which seeks to find simpler, faster and more effective ways 
that would enhance our joint endeavours. A combination of insights, leadership, technical capacity and 
adequate preparation needs to be channeled into a general enthusiasm for both our regions to rise to 
the potential challenges and in the process become greater partners for success. 
In  summary,  the  future  direction  of  the  ASEAN-EU  relations  will  be  dependent  on  several  multi-
dimensional  facets  that  would  include:  the  changing  strategic  landscape  amidst  globalisation, 
ASEAN's and the EU's desire to play a greater role in the global economy and international affairs, the 
EU's ability in managing its enlargement process, and ASEAN's commitment to forge greater regional 
integration. I am certain that the passage of time and closer analyses of the issues discussed at this 
Conference  will  yield  more  lessons  that  we  could  take  to  heart  in  making  progress  on  expanding 
ASEAN-EU economic and financial links. It is my hope that in the future we can continue to have such 
constructive  exchanges  of  views  and  experiences  that  will  further  nourish  the  broader  learning 
environment. 
In closing, allow me to thank the speakers for enriching the Conference with their presence and their 
cutting-edge  perspectives.  I  also  wish  to  again  thank  the  European  Commission  for  giving  Bank 
   1/2 
Negara the opportunity to co-host this Conference. To all our participants from abroad, we hope you 
stay in Kuala Lumpur has been pleasant, and we wish you a safe journey home.  
   2/2 
