Jean-Claude Trichet: What effects is EMU having on the euro area and its member 
countries (closing remarks) 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  ECB 
Workshop  “What  effects  is  EMU  having  on  the  euro  area  and  its  member  countries”,  Frankfurt, 
17 June 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure to make the closing remarks at the end of this very stimulating conference. Let 
me first thank the organisers of the conference for their excellent handling of a workshop which has 
been extraordinary successful in giving a lot of food for thought for all of us. 
Today  and  yesterday  you  have  debated  very  intensively  the  economic  effects  of  creating  a  single 
currency – the euro – for an increasingly integrated European single market. I have no doubt you all 
agree  with  me  that  the  achievements  in  terms  of  integration  and  convergence  have  been  very 
impressive. The introduction of the euro has not only helped consolidating the tremendous gains that 
have  been  made  in  the  process  of  European  economic  integration  since  the  establishment  of  the 
European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) in 1951. These gains have been both deep (covering an 
increasing number of markets) and wide (covering an increasing number of countries). I also strongly 
believe  the  euro  is  and  will  continue  to  be  a  key  catalyst  for  further  integration.  One  prominent 
example  is  the  effect  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  had  on  accelerating  financial  integration. 
Notably,  the  elimination  of  exchange  rate  risk  among  euro  area  countries  has  fostered  very 
significantly the depth and breadth of financial markets and boosted financial innovation. There is also 
evidence on much closer integration of stock markets in the euro area. Another important example is 
its effect on trade integration: evidence suggests that the euro has stimulated trade not only across the 
euro area, but also with the rest of the world. The export share with countries outside the euro area 
rose to almost 20% of GDP in 2003 from around 17% in 1997 (a similar development is recorded for 
imports). It is also remarkable that, possibly as a consequence of trade and financial integration, as 
well  as  the  increasing  degree  of  convergence  of  macroeconomic  policies,  dispersion  of  real  GDP 
growth  rates  in  the  euro  area  has  remained  very  close  to  its  historical  average  and  no  signs  of 
increased divergence in growth rates have emerged so far. 
Today,  I  will  not  try  to  comprehensively  review  each  and  every  of  these  important  achievements.  I 
would rather like to highlight one of them: the truly impressive process of inflation convergence in the 
euro area. In this context, I shall address the issue of inflation differentials within the area, in particular 
their size and recent evolution. I shall then focus on two particular issues. First, it has been argued that 
monetary union may contribute to a larger specialisation in production in the euro area. In this case, 
the need for relative price adjustments and inflation differentials to deal with sectoral developments 
may  increase.  I  will  briefly  discuss  the  current  evidence  on  sectoral  specialisation.  Second,  I  will 
elaborate  on  the  function  of  the  inflation  differentials  and  emphasize  the  importance  of  monitoring 
relative unit labour cost. 
Inflation convergence in the euro area 
Let me remind you that in the run-up to the formation of EMU, the dispersion of national inflation rates 
has  been  lastingly  reduced.  In  1992  the  difference  between  the  highest  and  lowest  inflation  rate  in 
terms  of  HIPC  across  the  euro  area  countries was  13.5  percentage  points.  The  dispersion  steadily 
declined  throughout  the  90s,  triggered  by  the  preparations  for  EMU,  and  broadly  stabilised  at  the 
beginning of Stage Three of EMU at around 3.3 percentage points. Since then, with the exception of a 
modest increase over the period 2000-02, the level of inflation dispersion across the euro area has 
changed  very  little,  with  the  average  standard  deviation  of  inflation  differentials  being  around  1. 
Current inflation differentials within the euro area are not unusually large. Rather, their magnitude is 
similar to those differentials seen in the United States among the 14 US Metropolitan Statistical Areas, 
namely 3.2 percentage points, with an average standard deviation of about 0.9. 
It should be emphasised that in a monetary union inflation differentials across regions or countries are 
the natural way of adjusting relative prices in the face of asymmetric demand or supply developments. 
I would like to make 4 remarks in this respect. 
BIS Review 46/2005 
 1
First, changes in relative prices within the single currency area have been larger and more frequent 
than anticipated. The idea that the euro area is an area where the single currency prevents adjustment 
of  relative  prices  is  clearly  refuted.  For  instance,  the  capacity  of  the  German  economy  to  catch  up 
rapidly  with  the  average  of  the  euro  area  in  terms  of  cost  competitiveness  after  the  loss  of 
competitiveness associated with German reunification is very impressive. From that viewpoint the euro 
area is more flexible and adaptable than had been anticipated by many observers. 
Second, the previous process is symmetric. In some cases the existence of inflation differentials is the 
natural  consequence  for  an  economy  that  has  been  outperforming  the  average  in  terms  of  cost 
competitiveness in order to progressively adjust towards a more normal level in line with the average. 
This  problem  had  been  observed,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  the  Netherlands  and  is  possibly  still 
relevant for Ireland. 
Third, inflation differentials are not only the necessary means of achieving relative price adjustments 
within the euro area, like in the case of Germany, but they are also a natural feature of the euro area in 
view of the gradual convergence or catching-up process regarding GDP per-capita. 
Fourth, there is one case where persistent inflation differentials are not advisable in terms of national 
economic  policies:  this  is  when  an  economy  having  an  already  relatively  low  level  of  cost 
competitiveness continues to face further deterioration due to higher inflation. In that case additional 
attention  must  be  given  to  increasing  the  flexibility  and  adaptability  of  both  institutions  and  market 
structures in the national economy concerned in order for the appropriate adjustment mechanism to 
function. 
Sectoral specialisation in the euro area  
An  interesting  issue  that  has  been  touched  upon  in  the  last  two  days  is  whether  the  European 
integration process will result in higher sectoral specialisation across countries. As mentioned above, 
this  is  potentially  important  because  a  higher  degree  of  specialisation  might  imply  a  greater 
vulnerability to asymmetric shocks and a greater need for relative price adjustments. 
As to the relevance of this argument, there are two lines of reasoning in the economic literature. The 
first, supported by Krugman (1991, 1993) and the new economic geography models, suggests that, as 
trade barriers are reduced, inter-industry trade increases and opportunities for exploiting economies of 
scale  and  specialisation  in  production  should  arise  whenever  countries  have  a  comparative 
advantage.  Consequently,  countries’  production  structures  would  become  less  diversified  and  thus 
increasingly vulnerable to asymmetric shocks while business cycles would become less synchronised. 
The second, and opposite, line of reasoning, developed by Frankel and Rose (1998), suggests that 
European  integration  would  instead  lead  to  greater  intra-industry  trade  integration  and  more  similar 
economic structures. In this case, business cycles would become more strongly synchronised through 
the convergence of factor endowments and technology, as well as reduced exchange rate variability, 
which otherwise would tend to weaken intra-industry trade.  
The evidence on whether EMU has favoured or prevented specialisation in the euro area is not clear 
yet. According to an overview published by the European Commission, there have so far only been 
modest changes in the pattern of industrial concentration and geographical specialisation within the 
euro  area.  While  production  specialisation  has  gradually  increased  since  the  1970s,  export 
specialisation  appears  to  have  decreased,  which  could  be  partly  explained  by  the  increased 
importance  of  intra-industry  trade.  Similarly,  a  study  of  sectoral  specialisation  carried  out  by  the 
European System of Central Banks in 2004 found the production structure of euro area countries to be 
relatively similar. Indeed, it appears more homogeneous than in the United States and relatively stable 
over  time.  In  contrast,  a  host  of  studies  have  highlighted  agglomeration  or  clustering  effects.  They 
suggest  that  the  agglomeration  of  production  factors  (by  generating  an  environment  that  creates 
positive externalities, the presence of competitors and informal links with complementary businesses, 
the  supply  of  qualified  labour  and  investment  capital,  and  the  proximity  of  research  capacity)  is 
increasingly important and could indeed increase specialisation and reduce cross-border trade within 
industries.  
At the same time, some recent research (for example, Kalemli-Ozcan et al., 2003, and Giannone and 
Reichlin, 2005) documents that risk sharing tends to increase in a currency union, bolstering the case 
for higher specialisation in production. The peculiarity of this channel is that any resulting asymmetries 
in  GDP  fluctuations  would  not  translate  in  income  volatility  because  ownership  is  diversified.  This 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2005
essentially will help to smooth consumption across countries and, therefore, limit the welfare cost of 
GDP fluctuations.  
Overall, the time span since the start of the EMU is too short for strong empirical conclusions and a 
view of the effects of EMU on specialisation is consequently still difficult to obtain.  
Determinants of inflation differentials 
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  determinants  of  inflation  dispersion  in  the  euro  area.  A  first  insight  into  the 
possible  causes  of  inflation  differentials  in  the  euro  area  can  be  gained  by  performing  an  inflation 
accounting exercise, which breaks down the euro area inflation differentials, measured in terms of the 
GDP deflator, into their underlying determinants, namely internal factors – such as unit labour costs, 
profit  margins  and  net  indirect  taxes  –  and  external  factors  –  such  as  import  prices.  This  kind  of 
analysis  suggests  that  during  the  period  1999-2003  internal  factors  were  the  most  important 
contributors  to  inflation  differentials  relative  to  the  euro  area  average  in  the  case  of  9  member 
countries, while import costs played a major role in the case of only 3 countries: Belgium, France and 
Luxembourg.  
As regards the internal sources of inflation differentials, the most important component explaining the 
dynamics of GDP inflation has been the dispersion in unit labour costs. Looking at the unit labour cost 
developments  in  more  detail,  the  compensation-per-employee  component  was  generally  the  most 
important in explaining inflation differentials. At the same time, productivity growth showed a relatively 
low  level  of  dispersion  across  the  euro  area.  This  points  to  relatively  significant  differences  across 
countries in those components of labour compensation that do not reflect productivity growth. In this 
regard,  part  of  the  differences  in  price  developments  may  stem  then  from  differences  in  wage 
developments, including inertial components of wage-setting rules, such as those caused by automatic 
indexation clauses of wages to prices, which exist in some euro area countries. 
To  the  extent  that  historical  inflation  differentials  within  the  euro  area  seem  to  largely  reflect 
differences  in  cost  developments  across  euro  area  countries,  I  would  like  to  stress  here  that  the 
relative  evolution  of  cost  competitiveness,  as  measured  for  instance  by  unit  labour  cost,  is  a  key 
equilibrating mechanism in the single currency area.  
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me make three remarks in conclusion. 
First, there is no doubt in my mind that the full benefits of the European common market could not be 
realised without the single currency. I propose to you the simple thought experiment: What would be, 
today,  the  US  market  if  we  would  have  had  different  currencies  in  California  and  Texas, 
Massachusetts and Wyoming? Would we call it an “achieved single market”? 
In  that  perspective,  the  single  currency  offers  us  all  the  economic  benefits  associated  with  an 
“achieved single market”. In this respect, as regards interest rates and exchange -rate risk for each 
particular  economy,  there  are  no  “winners”  and  “losers”.  It  is  a  “win-win”  game  ….  All  economies, 
without exception, are benefiting from the very low market interest rates that reflect the credibility of 
the currency: it is true that this is a considerable additional advantage given to those countries that 
had  previously  very  high  interest  rates.  At  the  same  time,  all  economies,  without  exception,  are 
benefiting  from  the  elimination  of  exchange  risk  within  the  single  currency  area,  which  is  a 
considerable improvement, including for those economies that had already very low interest rates, so 
that not only each economy is benefiting from a much better functioning of the single market itself, but 
also from a significant improvement of its own monetary situation. It is equally true for Germany, for 
Spain, for Italy. It is true for the 12 countries forming the euro area. The single currency area is, in my 
view, a solid and coherent economy with all partners having strong advantages. 
Second, I have associated myself with the strategic concept of “competitive disinflation” during all the 
period during which a previously high inflation economy, namely the French economy, was looking for 
being  more  effective  in  reinforcing  its  competitiveness  through  lower  production  cost  and  lower 
inflation rather than through monetary devaluation. Now we are in an area where monetary stability is 
fully ensured. This does not mean that our preoccupation with competitiveness should disappear. In 
this  new  environment  of  “competitive  stability”  the  careful  examination  of  national  competitiveness 
indicators, like the relative evolution of unit labour costs, reemains important. The ECB has set up a 
BIS Review 46/2005 
 3
benchmark of price stability in a medium and long term perspective - according to its definition - but a 
large part of economic policy remains national. In this respect I said, before the setting up of the single 
currency, that in the new monetary regime economic policy makers would substitute competitiveness 
indicators to previous indicators like exchange rates and market interest rates. 
Third, let me say to which extent we rely on research to analyse the structural transformation ongoing 
in the single currency area by the virtue of a fully achieved single market with a single currency. My 
intuition  is  that  this  phenomenon  is  extremely  complex.  That  explains  why  trends  are  so  difficult  to 
substantiate, and conjectures not easily proved or rejected: the two effects underlined by Krugman on 
the one hand and by Frankel and Rose on the other hand, are probably operating simultaneously in 
the euro area, together with the universal phenomenon of agglomeration or clusterisation. 
All my experience tells me that in such a rapidly changing world, where the progress of sciences and 
technology,  the  globalisation  process  and  the  very  profound  structural  changes  in  Europe  are 
simultaneous, we have to be humble in front of facts and figures and be ready to take on board, as 
soon as it is produced, the good research you are delivering 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2005
