Jean-Pierre Roth: Are we still on the growth track?
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  General  Meeting  of  the  Schaffhausen  Regional  Association  of  Industry  and 
Commerce, Stein am Rhein, 18 March 2005. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 After the economic downturn witnessed in the second half of 2004 and at the beginning of 2005, the 
question arises whether Switzerland will remain on the growth track. Jean-Pierre Roth believes it is 
and anticipates GDP growth to be in the range of 1.5% this year. Owing to the favourable international 
economic situation, the economy in Europe is likely to pick up again, which will also benefit the Swiss 
export industry. At the same time, we can assume that domestic demand will continue to grow at a 
moderate pace.  
The decline in important economic data during the last few months, however, suggests that economic 
growth in the first half of 2005 will remain weak. This notwithstanding, involves the risk of declining 
corporate and consumer confidence, which in turn would jeopardise economic development. It is also 
doubtful whether the weak dollar and high oil prices have already had their full impact or whether it is 
yet to unfold.  
Based  on  such  considerations,  the  National  Bank  decided  to  leave  the  three-month  Libor  rate  at 
0.75% in mid-March. It was a relatively easy decision to make for the Governing Board in that inflation 
prospects over the entire three-year forecasting period have improved. Consequently, an interest rate 
hike  became  less  critical,  and  there  was  greater  leeway  to  support  economic  recovery  with  an 
expansionary monetary policy. As soon as the recovery process is again under way, the National Bank 
will continue the normalisation of monetary policy. This is the only way of ensuring price stability in the 
medium term and preventing the economy from overheating.  
BIS Review 19/2005 
 1
