Alan Bollard: New Zealand’s potential growth rate 
Address  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  New  Zealand 
Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce, Christchurch, 28 January 2005. 
 New Zealand’s growth performance has improved 
1.  
What  a  difference  a  decade  makes.  If  we  look  at  New  Zealand’s  economic  growth  over  the  last 
decade,  and  compare  it  with  the  previous  decade,  we  see  that  there  has  been  a  large  lift  in  the 
country’s  growth  rate.  Average  growth  over  the  earlier  decade,  1984-1994,  was  1.5%  per  annum, 
while over the last decade it has averaged 3.4%. 
Clearly, there were difficulties in the 1980s as firms struggled to come to grips with the new economic 
environment: exports subsidies were gone, government trading entities were corporatised and some 
privatised, there was a move towards user pays for government services, and various markets were 
deregulated. Then there were the other factors. These included the sharemarket crash of 1987, which 
was to have large flow on effects, especially for some local property sector firms. Another factor was 
the international recession of the early 1990s.  
Neither has the last decade been all plain sailing. We had the Asian crisis of 1997-98, but fortunately 
this did not last long. The economy was also affected around this time by droughts. Then in late 2000 
and early 2001 we saw the onset of a major slowdown in the US following a sharp fall in the value of 
high  tech  shares.  Nevertheless,  the  New  Zealand  economy  did  more  than  simply  survive  these 
difficulties; over the decade it had a much improved growth performance.  
Two broad factors appear to have been influencing growth over the last ten years: 
• 
The  economic  reforms  of  the  1980s  and  early  1990s  have resulted  in  a  more  competitive 
environment  for  the  private  sector.  Also,  since  the  early  1990s  we  have  had  a  more 
decentralised  approach  to  wage  setting  in  the  private  sector,  which  has  given  firms  more 
flexibility in how they operate.  
Reforms  in  the  government  sector  have  resulted  in  more  stable  macroeconomic  policies. 
The Reserve Bank Act was passed in 1989; price stability was achieved by 1992, and has 
been  maintained  since  then.  We  have  also  seen  fiscal  stability  since  the  early  1990s, 
reinforced  by  the  passing  of  the  Fiscal Responsibility  Act.  We  have  seen a  more  medium 
term  approach  to  planning  and  undertaking  government  expenditure,  without  the  volatility 
associated with attempts to “pump prime” the economy. 
 Our growth performance over the last five years has been particularly strong, with growth averaging 
3.8% per annum. This was higher than growth over the same period for Australia, the US, and for the 
OECD as a whole (see Table 1). 
Table 1 
Economic growth over the last 20 years 
Average annual percent change 
Period 
New Zealand 
Australia 
United States 
OECD 
1984-1994 
1994-2004 
1999-2004 
1.5 
3.4 
3.8 
3.3 
3.9 
3.3 
 3.2 
3.3 
2.8 
2.9 
2.6 
2.3 
There are particular reasons as to why we have done so well over this period: 
BIS Review 6/2005 
 1
    In 2000 and 2001 we had a period where the exchange rate was low and commodity prices 
had  blipped  up.  Climatic  conditions  were  also  good  in  this  period,  lifting  the  volume  of 
agricultural exports. Consequently, many exporters got a major boost to their incomes. Many 
firms were able to pay off debt and improve their balance sheets.  
Following September 11 2001 New Zealand suddenly looked like a more attractive place to 
Kiwis, to would-be migrants, and overseas students, as well as tourists. The resulting large 
gains from net migration had a positive impact on the level of economic activity.  
World commodity prices have risen sharply over the last two years, reflecting both recovery 
in  the  US  and  continuing  strong  growth  in  China.  There  have  also  been  particular  factors 
affecting the prices of commodities that New Zealand trades in. These include: the outbreak 
of BSE in the US, which stopped the exporting of US beef to Japan; the continuing rundown 
of sheep numbers in the EU; and droughts in Australia, which have affected that country’s 
rural exports.  
Growth  in  private  consumption  has  been  very  strong,  aided  by  higher  employment  levels, 
and  also  by  increases  in  house  prices,  which  made  households  feel  wealthier.  Consumer 
confidence has remained high. 
Not all industries have experienced strong growth over the last five years. But the benefits from the 
strong  growth  in  the  macroeconomy  have  been  clear  to  see.  Job  growth  has  been  strong, 
unemployment  has  fallen,  household  incomes  have  risen,  company  profits  are  strong,  and  the 
government has a substantial fiscal surplus. These benefits are reflected in the rise in GDP per capita. 
(GDP is taken here, and throughout what follows, as being real GDP, or the volume of value added, 
rather than nominal GDP.) 
Given that GDP per capita is a broad measure of general living standards, it is the rise in GDP per 
capita that really matters to us, rather than the rise in just GDP itself. However, as can be seen from 
Figure 1, variations in GDP per capita have tended to reflect changes in GDP. (The gap between GDP 
and GDP per capita in Figure 1 reflects population growth.) Growth in GDP per capita averaged 2.2% 
in the 1994-2004 period, compared to 0.7% in the previous decade.  
The rise in GDP growth over the past decade has also lifted our growth in GDP per capita relative to 
the growth rate for the OECD as a whole (Figure 2). However, our level of GDP per capita in 2002, in 
terms of purchasing power parity (PPP), was still 14% below that of the OECD.  
Figure 1 
Real GDP and real GDP per capita 
Indexes, base 1980=100 
Having enjoyed a return to strong growth, and a rise in GDP per capita, we naturally want this situation 
to continue. Some of the factors which have lifted our growth rate recently, especially the impacts from 
 2 
 BIS Review 6/2005
policy  reforms,  can  be  expected  to  persist,  thus  improving  the  economy’s  productive  capacity  or 
potential output in the long run. 
However,  there  are  signs  that  the  level  of  economic  activity  is  currently  higher  than  the  level  of 
potential  output,  thus  giving  rise  to  inflation  risks.  The  capacity  utilisation  measure  from  NZIER’s 
quarterly survey of business opinion is at a record high level. Clearly many firms are stretched, running 
at  full capacity,  or close  to  it.  Furthermore,  firms  have  been reporting  for some  time now -  for over 
three years - that they are having increasing difficulty in finding both skilled and unskilled staff.  
Figure 2 
Changes in real GDP per capita 
Average annual percent change over 10 year period 
Source:  OECD.  GDP  per  capita  has  been  calculated  in  US  dollars  using  price  levels  and  PPPs  of  2000.  Data  is  currently 
available only to 2003. 
 2.   Monetary policy aims to keep the level of activity in line with potential 
We know that when output exceeds potential over extended periods, as has been happening recently, 
inflation tends to rise. Hence, the overnight cash rate (OCR) was lifted from 5.00% to 6.5% over the 
course of last year, in order to slow the pace of growth. Our forecast is for economic activity to move 
closer to its potential level over the next year, reflecting not only the effects of higher interest rates on 
private consumption and residential investment but also an easing in commodity prices. 
Determining the current level of potential output is a key issue for monetary policy.  
Analysis shows us that when GDP is significantly above its potential level, inflation increases. In this 
situation, aggregate demand is higher than what can be comfortably produced, and the result is a rise 
in  inflation.  Similarly,  when  GDP  is  significantly  below  its  potential  level,  inflation  falls.  The  role  of 
monetary  policy  therefore  is  to keep  the  economy  running close  to  potential, otherwise  inflation  will 
either increase or decline. 
Note  that  we  are  using  the  word  “potential”  in  a  slightly  different  way  to  its  normal  use.  When 
something achieves its potential, we usually mean that it achieves a maximum value. But in the way 
that we are using the word here, we can have the economy operating above its potential. However, 
potential output is a maximum value of a sort - it is the highest level of output that will not produce 
upward pressures on inflation. 
Potential output is not a variable that can be observed directly. It is often estimated as a smoothed 
track of GDP. The smoothing takes out the short-term fluctuations in GDP and it is assumed that the 
resulting smoothed series reflects changes in the productive capacity of the economy. In effect, it is 
BIS Review 6/2005 
 3
assumed that the smoothed series reflects the underlying growth in such things as capital equipment 
and labour. 
Estimating  potential  GDP  presents  some  challenges.  For  example,  we  are  more  confident  of  what 
potential  GDP  was  say  three  years  ago  than  of  knowing  what  it  is  today.  This  is  largely  because 
smoothing methods don’t work as well at the end of data series as they do in the middle of the series. 
This  is  frustrating,  given  that  it  is  the  end  value  -  the  latest  value  -  that  we  are  most  interested  in. 
Because of this “end point” problem, potential GDP is often estimated using methods that incorporate 
information from other cyclical series as well as actual GDP. 
Figure 3 shows the percentage difference between actual output and potential output. Potential output 
is estimated using an MV (multi-variate) filter. The method has been well documented. This MV filter, 
which is a smoothing mechanism, uses not only GDP data but also data on capacity utilisation and the 
unemployment  rate.  The  chart  also  shows  inflation  for  non-traded  goods  or  services,  which  can  be 
generally viewed as domestic inflation. The chart shows a strong relationship between the two series.  
Figure 3 
Domestic inflation v difference between actual and potential output 
Percent 
  The difference between actual and potential output is by no means the only factor driving inflation. For 
example, the world price of imports, the exchange rate, and wage settlements also have an impact on 
inflation, and these factors are taken into account. In general terms though, when output has moved 
significantly above its potential level, and looks likely to stay there, a tightening in monetary policy is 
likely to follow. 
There appears to be widespread community acceptance of the need to keep inflation under control. 
But some people may still have doubts, saying that they would be happy to put up with higher inflation 
if we were getting higher growth. The problem is that as inflation rises, peoples’ expectations regarding 
future  inflation  also  rise.  This  affects  behaviour  regarding  the  setting  of  prices  and  wages.  Inflation 
therefore tends to get locked in at a higher level. We had ample evidence of this in the 1970s and 
1980s. 
A tightening will affect economic growth in the short term, but does monetary policy also have an effect 
on long term growth? We have done some research on this at the Reserve Bank. 
A recent Bulletin article (Smith 2004) examined both theoretical and empirical studies on this issue. 
The  theoretical  studies  suggest  that  transitory  changes  in  interest  rates  are  likely  to  have  only  a 
transitory impact on factor accumulation (e.g. capital investment) and hence should not permanently 
affect the growth of output. The empirical studies suggest that high inflation, or even moderately high 
inflation, is harmful to growth. Studies have also looked at whether macroeconomic volatility is harmful 
to  trend  growth.  The  general  view  appears  to  be  that  the  costs  of  macroeconomic  volatility  -  in 
variables  such  as  the  exchange  rate  and  inflation  -  are  likely  to  outweigh  any  benefits.  The  article 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2005
notes that the maintenance of price stability appears to be the main contribution that monetary policy 
makes to growth. 
These overall findings or conclusions, the article suggests, are already embodied in the Policy Targets 
Agreement  (PTA).  The  PTA  charges  the  Reserve Bank  with  keeping  inflation  between  1%  and  3% 
over the medium term while avoiding unnecessary instability in output, interest rates and the exchange 
rate. 
The conclusions that we draw from this study and others are that: 
• 
A one-off easing of monetary policy will have no impact on long run real output - it will only 
affect the long run price level.  
Good monetary policy applied consistently over time is a necessary condition for achieving a 
high  long  term  average  growth  rate.  (Good  monetary  policy  is  defined  here  as  achieving 
stable and low rates of inflation while minimising short term disturbances to output and other 
variables i.e. successfully implementing the PTA).  
Good  monetary  policy  will  not  by  itself  ensure  that  long  run  growth  is  as  high  as  it  could 
possibly be. But bad monetary policy, if sustained, will prevent the economy from reaching 
its  maximum  growth  rate.  In  this  context,  ongoing  bad  monetary  policy  will  reduce  growth 
below its maximum rate over a period of many years, leading to a permanent loss of output. 
  Clearly, bad monetary policy, or the inadequate implementation of policy within the current framework, 
is something we want to avoid. 
Accounting for growth 
natural resources, including land and soils, rivers, ocean areas and climate,  
capital equipment (buildings, machinery, transport equipment),  
the amount of labour employed, and the skills and education that this labour has,  
infrastructure,  
a well functioning and effective government and judicial system. 
3.  
Determining  what  our  potential  level  of  output  is,  and  what  the  growth  in  potential  output  is,  are 
important issues in implementing good monetary policy. As we will see, potential GDP changes over 
time. We will look at what drives these changes.  
The  level  of  a  country’s  potential  output  at  any  point  in  time  is  dependent  on  a  number  of  factors, 
including: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
These  factors  generally  influence  the  productive  capacity  of  the  economy,  that  is,  they  affect  the 
supply side of the economy. However, demand factors can also ultimately affect the level of potential 
output. For example, suppose we have a permanent upward shift in the terms of trade. That is, we 
have  a  permanent  shift  up  in  export  prices  relative  to  import  prices.  The  end  result  of  this  would 
probably be a higher level of employment and an increase in the amount of capital equipment being 
used. In other words, there would have been a rise in the country’s productive capacity or potential 
output. 
In trying to determine what the level of potential output might be, economic analysts usually look at the 
relationship between output and the primary inputs of capital and labour. By capital, we mean here the 
capital stock, or the real value of existing capital equipment. However, in recent times there has been 
a growing interest in defining sustainable development in terms of the impact that development has on 
natural resources. However, we will focus here on the primary inputs, capital and labour. 
Another  factor  that  has  a  major  influence  on  productive  capacity,  and  which  is  not  listed  above,  is 
productivity. Productivity is a measure of the ability of inputs, like capital and labour, to produce output. 
In simple terms it is output divided by inputs.  
The ratio of output to labour input, usually measured in GDP per hour worked, gives us a measure of 
labour productivity. Another measure of productivity is multi-factor productivity (MFP). In general terms 
MFP is output divided by a weighted average of the capital stock and labour. Economists tend to see 
potential growth as depending on the capital stock, labour, and MFP. MFP is the “unexplained” part of 
BIS Review 6/2005 
 5
economic growth - it is that part of growth which is not accounted for by the primary inputs of capital 
and labour. One factor that influences MFP is technological change. We will come back to this later.  
As mentioned earlier, GDP per capita is the important variable, the one that we want to see growing. 
We can decompose GDP per capita into two factors as follows: 
GDP/population = [GDP/hours worked] [hours worked/population] 
That is, GDP per capita equals labour productivity times labour utilisation. Hence we can lift GDP per 
capita  by  raising  labour  productivity  or  labour  utilisation,  or  both.  This  simple  decomposition  is  the 
basis of the saying “We can lift our standard of living by either working harder, or by working smarter”. 
That is, we can do it by working more hours, or by lifting labour productivity. 
Lifting the hours we work can be achieved by higher labour force participation, which is something that 
has been happening over recent times. Another way of lifting hours worked is simply for those of us 
who  are  already  employed  to  work  longer  hours.  I  suspect  that  a  large  proportion  of  the  workforce 
wouldn’t  find  this  attractive,  at  least  on  a  sustained  basis.  This  underlines  the  importance  of  lifting 
productivity if we are to be better off.  
Figure 4 shows growth in GDP per capita, and the contributions to this growth coming from changes in 
labour  utilisation  and  labour  productivity.  The  recent  rise  in  labour  utilisation  reflects  higher 
participation rates and a decline in unemployment. Given that participation rates are currently higher 
than they have been for nearly 20 years, and the unemployment rate is at a historically low level, it 
seems that rises in labour utilisation are unlikely to be as high in future. This means that gains in GDP 
per capita are increasingly going to have to come from productivity gains.  
Labour productivity is currently increasing by around 1.5% per annum. Labour productivity growth has 
averaged  1.2%  per  annum  over  the  last  10  years.  In  the  previous  decade,  it  averaged  only  0.7%, 
despite the strong growth in labour productivity that occurred in the recession of the late 1980s and 
early 1990s. 
Figure 4 
Contributions to changes in GDP per capita 
Percent contribution to annual change 
Note:  The  chart  was  derived  using  3  year  averages  of  GDP  per  capita,  hours  worked,  and  population  in  order  to  show  the 
underlying trends in labour utilisation and labour productivity.  
The  importance  of  labour  productivity  growth  to  the  long  run  economic  outlook  becomes  very  clear 
when  we  look  at  demographic  trends.  Figure  5  shows  labour  force  projections  which  are  based  on 
three population projections. All three projections assume medium fertility and medium mortality but 
each has a different assumption regarding migration. With zero net migration the size of the labour 
force  begins  to  decline  from  2018.  Higher  levels  of  migration  push  the  track  up,  but  even  with  an 
 6 
 BIS Review 6/2005
annual net gain of 10,000 from migration, the growth in the labour force slows, and the labour force 
eventually levels off. Net gains from permanent and long term migration have averaged 13,600 per 
annum over the last decade, compared with -4,700 per annum in the previous decade. 
Figure 5 
Projected labour force 
People in the in labour force, millions 
 These projections reflect the ageing of the population. Birthrates underwent a long term decline from 
the 1890s through to the 1970s, although the post war baby boom provided a temporary interruption. 
Around 2010, the number of people leaving the labour force - mainly baby boomers - is projected to 
rise sharply. Even if these people were to put off retirement for a while, growth in labour utilisation is 
still likely to slow. Any substantial growth in the labour force would have to come via high levels of 
migration. 
Taking one of our labour force projections - the one based on annual net migration of 10,000 - we can 
derive  scenarios  for  future  GDP  per  capita  based  on  assumptions  about  labour  productivity.  Let’s 
assume that labour productivity grows at 1.5% per annum, which as we have seen, is similar to the 
present growth rate. For each year of the projection we add this growth to the projected growth in the 
labour force to get GDP growth. (In doing this, we are assuming that number employed will grow at the 
same rate as the labour force. That is, we are assuming that the unemployment rate will stay constant 
over the projection period.) For each year of the projection, we can then calculate GDP per capita, 
using the projected population figure.  
The  result  is  shown  in  Figure  6,  along  with  projections  using  alternative  labour  productivity 
assumptions.  The  lowest  scenario  assumes  no  growth  in  labour  productivity,  and  hence  annual 
changes  in  GDP  simply  reflect  changes  in  the  labour  force.  Under  this  scenario,  GDP  per  capita 
begins to decline from 2014. In this year, the growth in the labour force, and hence the growth in GDP, 
falls below the growth in the population. Reassuringly, the chart shows that labour productivity growth 
of 1% per annum is enough to keep GDP per capita increasing. However the chart suggests that in 
order for GDP per capita to keep growing at a rate similar to which it has done over the last decade, 
labour productivity needs to grow at 2% per annum rather than 1.5 % per annum. We will come back 
to this issue. 
The chart certainly illustrates the importance of labour productivity growth to ongoing improvements in 
the standard of living. The chart also illustrates the power of compounding. A lift in labour productivity 
by 0.5% annum will, if sustained, produce large differences in GDP per capita over time. 
BIS Review 6/2005 
 7
Figure 6 
GDP per capita, projected 
2004/05 dollars, thousands 
Perhaps the most direct and obvious way to go about lifting labour productivity is to raise the skills of 
workers.  That  is,  we  would  improve  the  quality  of  the  labour  which  is  an  input  to  production.  But 
workers cannot be the total focus of lifting labour productivity. With a bit of algebra it can be shown 
that labour productivity can be expressed in terms of MFP, or multifactor productivity, and the capital 
stock to hours worked ratio, which is often referred to as the capital to labour ratio. In general, a rise in 
the  economy’s  capital/labour  ratio  can  be  expected  to  lift  labour  productivity  since  labour  now  has 
more equipment to support it. 
 Figure 7 
Changes in capital and labour 
Annual percent change 
A rise in MFP will also lift labour productivity. Unfortunately, measuring MFP is never easy. There are 
always issues regarding the accuracy of data on the capital stock, hours worked, and even GDP. And 
when we combine all these variables to calculate MFP - the “residual” factor which affects output - the 
measurement errors in the component series can make analysis difficult. Furthermore, we are more 
 8 
 BIS Review 6/2005
interested  in  the  underlying  trends  in  MFP,  rather  than  short  term  changes.  One  way  of  deriving  a 
trend series for MFP is to use trend series for capital, labour, and GDP in calculating MFP. In fact, the 
GDP series that is used in deriving MFP in the context of the Reserve Bank FPS model is potential 
output. This is the smoothed series of GDP produced by using the MV filter. 
The labour input series used in the calculation is a smoothed series of total employment. The capital 
stock  series  is  “productive  capital”;  it  does  not  include  housing.  This  series  changes  gradually  over 
time and hence needs no smoothing. Figure 7 shows changes in these two series. Since 1996 the 
capital stock has increased at a higher rate than the labour input. Hence since 1996 there has been a 
rise in the capital/labour ratio. This rise, together with a slight lift in MFP, explains the rise in labour 
productivity over this period. 
This rise in the capital stock reflects strong investment growth. Real business investment accounted 
for around 13% of real GDP in 1994; it now accounts for nearly19%. 
Figure 8 shows the estimated contributions to potential output coming from capital, labour and MFP. 
The chart also shows total contributions, which is the annual percent growth in potential output. As can 
be seen the growth in potential output, as estimated using the MV filter, is currently around 3.7% per 
annum.  
To  some  people  this  might  seem  surprisingly  high.  However,  our  estimates  show  that  growth  in 
potential GDP has generally been high over the last decade, with the lowest annual growth rate being 
just under 2.5% in late 1998. And as we saw earlier in Table 1, growth in actual GDP was also high 
over the last 10 years. Estimated annual growth in potential output over the decade to March 2004 
averaged 3.3%, compared with average growth of 3.4% in actual GDP.  
Turning  now  to  the  contributions  to  potential  output  growth  in  Figure  8,  perhaps  the  first  thing  we 
should note is that the contribution from capital is generally lower than the contribution from labour. 
This  is  despite  capital  increasing  faster  than  labour  since  1996.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  in 
calculating these contributions to potential growth we give a lower weight to capital than labour. These 
weights  are  based  on  capital’s  and  labour’s  share  of  income  GDP.  The  weights  we  have  used  are 
0.29 for capital and 0.71 for labour. 
Figure 8 
Contributions to growth in potential output 
Contribution to annual percent change 
The  contribution  to  potential  growth  from  labour  has  been  high  in  recent  years,  reflecting  migration 
inflows, higher labour participation, and falling unemployment. However, the contribution from labour is 
now beginning to decline, as migration eases.  
 BIS Review 6/2005 
 9
The  contribution  from  capital  has  generally  increased  over  the  period  from  1993,  although  it  eased 
slightly during the Asian crisis/drought period of 1998-99.  
The contribution from MFP surged in the mid 1990s, reflecting the recovery from the recession of the 
late  1980s  and  early  1990s.  Since  this  surge  ended  in  1997  the  contribution  from  MFP  appears  to 
have trended upwards, although the rise has been gradual.  
Overall, the higher growth in potential output over the last five years ties in with the factors that we 
identified back at the start as influencing growth. The boost to export earnings that began in 2000 and 
which has largely been sustained through recent rises in world commodity prices has flowed through 
into firms’ balance sheets and has boosted investment. Also, gains from migration have lifted potential 
growth through their impact on the supply of labour. 
Looking  ahead,  growth  in  potential  output  is  expected  to  ease  slightly  during  the  coming  year.  The 
contribution from labour will continue to fall, reflecting lower net migration. However, this fall will be 
largely offset by continuing growth in the contribution from capital, as firms seek to alleviate current 
capacity constraints.  
Factors that might influence future potential growth 
4.  
We can lift our potential growth rate by increasing capital, increasing labour, and by lifting MFP. We 
will look briefly at each of these factors. 
We’ll look first at capital. We have seen the capital/labour ratio rise over recent years, indicating capital 
deepening.  Is  there  scope  to  go  even  further  in  this  regard?  We  know  from  recent  work  done  at 
Treasury  (Black  et  al  2003)  that  the  capital/labour  ratio  is  still  significantly  lower  than  in  Australia. 
However,  we  have  to  be  careful  about  making  international  comparisons,  particularly  at  the  macro 
level. The difference between countries might simply reflect the different industry composition of each 
economy. We know for example that, compared to New Zealand, Australia has a large mining sector, 
which  is  capital  intensive.  In  general,  any  comparison  between  countries  regarding  productivity 
measures  needs  to  be  done  at  the  industry  level,  and  even  then,  there  are  always  difficulties  in 
ensuring that the data is comparable across countries. 
Nevertheless, we expect the capital/labour ratio to rise in the longer term, as we use more capital to do 
our jobs. 
Turning to labour, a lot of attention is often given to lifting the quality of labour through education and 
training. The benefits of this would show up in higher MFP. Also, the quantity of the labour input can 
be  raised  by  increasing  average  hours  worked,  lifting  the  participation  rate,  and  increasing  net 
migration. However, while higher migration would lift potential growth, the impact on GDP per capita is 
not so clear cut. To have a direct effect on lifting GDP per capita, migrants would need to be more 
productive on average than the resident population. Or they would need to have skills which, when 
used here, enable some proportion of the resident population to lift their average level of production. 
That is, these migrants would be needed to alleviate bottlenecks. Current migration policy is largely 
based on ensuring that these criteria are met. There may also be scale or agglomeration effects from 
migration;  there  is  some  evidence  that  larger  population  centres  tend  to  have  higher  productivity 
growth and higher GDP per capita than smaller ones. 
What drives MFP? Two factors are likely to be most important. Technological change is one of the 
most  important  drivers.  The  measure  of  capital  stock  that  we  use  in  estimating  MFP  does  include 
some adjustments to take account of changes in technology that are embedded in new equipment. 
But  these  adjustments  are  only  partial.  Hence  many  improvements  in  potential  output  arising  from 
technological change would be accounted for by the growth in MFP. Research into why MFP has risen 
strongly  in  the  US  over  the  last  decade,  during  the  so  called  “productivity  miracle”,  often  points  to 
information and computer technology (ICT) as being a major factor. It is likely that ICT has played a 
role in the gradual rise in MFP that we have seen in New Zealand. And given that we tend to lag the 
US in implementing ICT, we may see larger MFP gains yet from ICT in the future.  
The  other  main  factor  influencing  MFP  is  the  ability  to  reorganise  and  redirect  resources  to  more 
productive  and  innovative  uses.  In  all  industries,  there  are  probably  still  many  efficiency  gains  that 
could  be  made,  if  only  we  could  find  them.  Government  activities,  such  as  the  provision  of 
infrastructure,  commercial 
town  planning  procedures  may  also  have 
consequences for productivity. Productivity, and how to improve it, are currently topics that are being 
extensively researched by Treasury (see McLellan 2004). 
legislation,  and 
law 
10 
 BIS Review 6/2005
Clearly, the issue is important. Productivity growth is a key issue in lifting potential output, and hence, 
in  lifting  our  sustainable  growth  rate.  It  is  an  important  issue  at  the  firm  level  too.  Most  people  in 
business  would  be  aware  of  the  links  between  productivity  and  price  setting  at  the  firm  level.  For 
example, a rise in a manufacturer’s productivity will produce a fall in average unit costs, enabling the 
firm to either increase profits or to pay higher wages without having to increase prices. This highlights 
the fundamental importance of productivity gains; not only do they lift real GDP per capita, they also 
inhibit inflation. 
The decade ahead 
5.  
We can use our analysis to give us an indication of what growth in GDP and GDP per capita could be 
in the coming decade. This is not a forecast, but rather an illustration of two scenarios. 
Table 2 sets out two scenarios for the 2004-2014 period. We have seen these two scenarios before, in 
Figure 6. The first scenario assumes that labour productivity will grow at 1.5% per annum, which is 
similar to the growth rate that we have had over the past 5 years. The second scenario assumes that 
labour productivity will grow at 2.0% per annum. 
Given that both scenarios are based on the same demographic projections, the changes in population 
and  labour  utilisation  are  the  same  for  each  scenario.  As  Table  2  shows,  the  projected  increase  in 
labour  utilisation  over  the  next  decade  is  much  lower  than  the  increase  that  we  saw  over  the  last 
decade. This reflects the participation rates in the official labour force projections that we have used, 
as well as our assumption that the unemployment rate remains constant. These projected increases in 
labour utilisation are indicative only. Nevertheless these low increases gel with what we know. With 
participation rates already very high, future rises are unlikely to be as large as they were over the last 
decade.  Furthermore,  from  around  2010  many  baby  boomers  will  be  retiring,  putting  downward 
pressure on the overall participation rate. Also, given that the unemployment rate is already low, we 
definitely won’t see the same falls in unemployment that occurred over the last 10 years.  
Table 2 
Contributions to growth in GDP per capita 
Average annual percent changes 
 1984-1994 
1994-2004 
2004-2014 
Scenario 1 
2004-2014 
Scenario 2 
Labour utilisation 
Labour productivity 
GDP per capita 
Population 
GDP 
0.0 
0.7 
0.7 
0.8 
1.5 
1.0 
1.2 
2.2 
1.2 
3.4 
 0.3 
1.5 
1.8 
1.0 
2.8 
0.3 
2.0 
2.3 
1.0 
3.3 
Our projections suggest that if we want to see GDP per capita grow at the same rate over the next 
decade as it did in the previous 10 years, we will need to lift our labour productivity. If labour utilisation 
was to grow by 0.3% per annum - which doesn’t seem to be unrealistic - then we would need to lift our 
productivity growth from its current rate of around 1.5% per annum to nearly 2% per annum. 
Conclusion 
6. 
What can we take out from this mass of data and evidence? 
• 
After a low growth decade economic growth has been high in New Zealand over ten years, 
and more importantly growth in GDP per capita has been encouragingly high relative to other 
members of the OECD.  
Partly  as  a  result  of  this  experience,  in  recent  years  the  Reserve  Bank  has  raised  its 
estimates  of  New  Zealand’s  potential  growth  rate.  Despite  this  higher  potential,  we  have 
 BIS Review 6/2005 
 11
    been growing at unsustainably high levels over the last year or two. We can’t keep growing 
near 5%.  
A significant amount of this growth improvement has come from increased labour utilisation, 
which is now high by international standards and unlikely to keep increasing at the same rate. 
Labour  productivity  growth  has  shown  more  recent  improvement,  lifting  in  the  late  1990s. 
This is important because strong economic growth will depend crucially on this improvement 
continuing. In fact we will probably need to raise labour productivity growth to around 2% per 
annum  (comparable  to  Australia  and  the  US)  to  continue  to  achieve  continuing  economic 
growth much over 3% per annum.  
Lifting labour productivity growth to 2% per annum seems potentially achievable, given the 
improvements in labour productivity that have already occurred. But it will require continued 
strong investment, clever innovation, good quality decision-making, and skilled labour. Lifting 
labour productivity will be mainly the role of the private sector.  
The Reserve Bank’s role is to help promote stability, including price stability, monetary policy 
stability,  and  financial  stability,  things  that  become  even  more  important  during  periods  of 
strong growth. 
References 
Black, Melleny, Melody Guy and Nathan McLellan (2003) Productivity in New Zealand 1988 to 2002, 
Working Paper 03/06, New Zealand Treasury. 
McLellan,  Nathan  (2004)  New  Zealand  performance:  context  and  challenges,  a  paper  presented  to 
Treasury’s 
2004,  New  Zealand  Treasury 
to 
www.treasury.govt.nz/productivity for this and other papers from the productivity workshop). 
Smith, Christie (2004) “The long run effects of monetary policy on output growth”, Bulletin Vol 67 no 3, 
September. 
productivity  workshop 
July 
(go 
in 
12 
 BIS Review 6/2005
