Michael C Bonello: EU membership - the challenge of change  
Speech  by  Mr  Michael  C  Bonello,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  at  the  conference  “EU 
Accession, One Year On - Quo Vadis Malta?”, organised by the Malta Business Bureau, St Julians, 
6 May 2005. 
 When  I  argued  the  economic  case  for  Malta’s  accession  to  the  EU  in  November  2002  I  described 
membership  as  a  concrete,  long-term  response  to  the  challenge  of  developing  a  modern  economy 
with the capacity to generate wealth in a sustainable manner. The experience of countries like Ireland, 
Portugal, Spain and Greece showed that the EU had indeed proved to be a most effective mechanism 
for this purpose. 
A year after Malta’s accession it is clear that membership has indeed opened up new opportunities. 
The  economy  now  enjoys  wider  access  to  export  markets,  increased  competition  at  home  and  a 
greater availability of financial resources under EU funding programmes. While it is too soon to draw 
definitive conclusions, it has become equally evident, however, that the successful exploitation of the 
Single Market will depend on our ability to adjust both institutional structures and operating practices to 
this  novel  environment  and 
implement  effective  competitiveness-enhancing  reforms.  The 
intensification of competition in world markets and the growing diversion of both consumption demand 
and investment to lower-cost countries adds urgency to this challenge. 
These developments cannot fail to have an impact on the Maltese economy given its small size and 
openness  and  its  position  as  a  price  taker  in  international  trade.  While  exporters  are  experiencing 
acute competitive pressures, the magnitude of this challenge from abroad, and the threat it represents 
for  employment  levels,  has  not,  however,  been  adequately  reflected  in  the  results  of  the  high-level 
social dialogue taking place in the country. It is in part for this reason that Malta appears less prepared 
than its competitors to face international competition. 
Against  this  background  I  shall  review  some  of  the  more  important  changes  brought  about  by  EU 
membership  and  the  attendant  opportunities  for  Malta.  Subsequently,  I  shall  analyse  the  current 
economic  performance  in  terms  of  the  country’s  ability  to  adjust  to,  and  capitalise  on,  the  new 
operating environment. Finally, I shall outline some policy orientations that could be useful in facing up 
to this challenge. 
to 
The consequences of EU membership 
The main consequences of EU accession for Malta can be broadly categorised under five headings. 
These are: 
(cid:131) 
a better access for exports to EU Member States and to other countries with whom the EU 
has negotiated trade agreements; 
heightened competition in the domestic market due to the removal of protectionist measures; 
the free flow of factors of production, including labour and capital, between Malta and other 
EU Member States; 
a greater availability of external financial resources; and 
an  enhanced  degree  of  policy  co-ordination  between  Malta  and  the  other  EU  Member 
States,  especially  in  the  area  of  macroeconomic  stabilisation,  the  promotion  of  economic 
growth and trade policy. 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
Of these, the free flow of goods, services and capital are the factors that are most likely to have an 
impact in the short term. They have, indeed, already left their mark on the Maltese economy over the 
past  year.  The  freedom  of  movement  of  labour,  together  with  funding  programmes  and  policy 
co-ordination are more likely to have medium- to long-term impacts. I shall therefore focus initially on 
the  main  opportunities  and  threats  attendant  upon  the  first  set  of  factors.  The  longer-term 
consequences of EU accession will be dealt with in the context of the proposed policy orientations. 
The  free  movement  of  goods  and  services  offers  new  opportunities  for  exporters,  not  least  among 
them  an  enhanced  access  to  an  internal  market  of  almost  500  million  consumers  accounting  for 
BIS Review 32/2005 
 1
one-fifth  of  world  trade  and  one-quarter  of  global  incomes,  with  a  single  set  of  trade  rules  and 
administrative procedures and free of tariff and non-tariff barriers. Maltese exports no longer need to 
adhere  to  the  country  of  origin  principle,  which  requires  a  minimum  amount  of  value  added  to  be 
produced in Malta, in order to benefit from preferential access to the EU. This creates opportunities for 
manufacturing and distribution operations, and opens up the possibility for Malta to serve as a hub for 
trade between the EU and North Africa. 
In addition, exporters can now benefit from all preferential third country arrangements which the EU 
has  with  major  trading  blocks  around  the  world.  Malta  also  stands  to  gain  in  international  trade 
negotiations when the EU acts to stave off threats of unfair competition originating from activities such 
as dumping. The sourcing of cheaper imported raw materials is another advantage, though this would 
to  an  extent  be  eroded  by  the  application  of  the  common  external  tariff,  especially  in  agricultural 
products. As an EU Member State, Malta is now also automatically included in the common Pan-Euro 
Mediterranean system of cumulation of origin for industrial products. This means that Malta can still 
retain activities associated with higher-value added components of products, such as textiles, which 
are more cost-effectively produced elsewhere. 
The free flow of goods in import-competing sectors such as agriculture implies unrestricted access for 
Maltese  products  to  EU  markets,  while  allowing  reciprocal  access  to  imported  products.  This 
represents  both  an  opportunity  and  a  threat,  however,  so  that  it  should  be  met  with  appropriate 
restructuring of the sector so as to enable it to face foreign competition. In this regard Malta can obtain 
considerable market and development assistance from the EU for the agricultural and fishing sector, 
including for processing activities. As an EU Member State, Malta can also benefit from programmes 
aimed at promoting industrial restructuring, particularly with regards to SMEs. 
The freedom of movement of capital which Malta is experiencing as a Member State of the EU has 
significant implications. For one, it signals to investors that Malta is a developed market economy with 
a  well  regulated  financial  system  where  financial  resources  can  find  profitable  employment.  This 
contributes to the development of the sector, including of its intermediation function of transforming 
savings  into  productive  investment.  It  also  encourages  the  inflow  of  capital  from  abroad.  For  these 
same reasons, however, international investors will maintain a close scrutiny of developments in the 
local  economy,  and  move  capital  according  to  their  evaluation  of  prospective  risks  and  returns. 
Freedom of movement of capital thus implies the need for more vigilance by the Central Bank of Malta 
not only to protect the exchange rate but also to preserve financial stability. 
The current state of the Maltese economy 
The prospects for the creation of new economic activities opened up by EU membership come at an 
opportune  moment.  For  while  Malta’s  growth  rate  in  2004,  estimated  at  around  1.5%,  registered  a 
marked turnaround since 2003, it was low compared to the rates achieved by other new EU members 
whose level of development is comparable to Malta’s. This relatively weak performance, moreover, did 
not suddenly materialise last year, but has now been persisting since 2001. 
A  relatively  sluggish  pace  of  export  activity  underpinned  the  low  growth  rate in  2004, while  imports 
rose at a faster pace, partly in response to the removal of tariffs on certain products. This wider trade 
gap led to a current account deficit of over 10% of GDP, a development that was to a certain extent 
anticipated. For, while it is possible to absorb larger volumes of imports at short notice, penetrating 
new export markets is a medium-term project. It is nevertheless imperative that the country manages 
to exploit the new market openings, because the current account deficit experienced in 2004 is not 
sustainable. 
The  economy’s  relatively  subdued  performance  last  year  can  also  be  attributed  to  the  short-term 
effects of the process of fiscal consolidation aimed at narrowing the budget deficit. Malta is still one of 
the EU Member States with the highest levels of general government deficit and debt expressed as 
percentages of GDP. The Government plans to satisfy the Maastricht criteria for fiscal performance by 
2006, but this means that the short-term effects on GDP growth of this fiscal adjustment will continue 
to be felt at least until then. 
Sound public finances are also critical to the role played by the Central Bank of Malta in the economy. 
Through  its  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  remains  committed  to  safeguarding  the  exchange  rate  peg 
against possible threats to the external reserves, whether they arise from changes in the international 
trading  or  financial  environment,  or  from  a  lack  of  competitiveness,  which  adversely  affects  the 
balance of payments. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2005
This commitment has now taken on an added dimension with Malta’s participation in the ERM II. As 
you are no doubt aware, in order to retain the same stability and benefits of a fixed exchange rate 
regime  enjoyed  over  the  past  three  decades,  we  have  decided  to  maintain  the  EUR/MTL  rate 
unchanged  during  the  ERM  II  phase  at  the  central  parity  level  of  0.429300.  The  Bank’s 
recommendation  to  the  Government  was,  however,  premised  on  the  assumption  that  fiscal 
consolidation is assiduously pursued and that a steady pace of structural reform is maintained. 
This  cursory  review  of  the  recent  performance  of  the  Maltese  economy  suggests  that  it  was  not 
sufficiently well prepared to exploit the opportunities that became available upon accession to the EU, 
so that the costs of adjustment are for the time being outweighing the positive effects. In this context it 
is  important  to  note  that  these  opportunities  are  now  also  available  to  the  other  nine  new  Member 
States, so that the benefits of membership cannot be taken for granted. On a macro level, success in 
this endeavour will depend on the overall competitiveness of the economy; and, on a micro level, on 
the  efficiency  with  which  the  country’s  resources  are  utilised  and  on  the  ability  of  the  business 
community to identify profitable opportunities and exploit them in the new operating environment. 
It is to these issues that I next turn my attention. 
Policy orientations for growth 
There are no easy or short-cut solutions to promote economic growth in Malta. Measures aimed at 
stimulating demand, through fiscal or monetary expansion, can only be effective in the short term. And 
in any case, their impact is limited. This is because they do not help to expand the economy’s supply 
capabilities, which is a prerequisite for sustained growth. In the current situation characterised by high 
fiscal and external deficits, moreover, the stimulation of aggregate demand would do more harm than 
good to the country’s economic prospects. Living standards can only be raised on a sustained basis if 
we  succeed  in  adding  value  to  imported  inputs  and  by  providing  services  in  a  manner  that  is 
cost-effective in relation to our competitors. 
With regard to growth-oriented policies, inspiration can be obtained from a number of EU programmes, 
including the Lisbon Agenda for Competitiveness and the Stability and Growth Pact. Although most 
Member  States  have  fallen  behind  in  meeting  the  targets  of  the  Lisbon  Agenda,  Malta  must  make 
even  more  pronounced  efforts  to  achieve  them,  particularly  in  the  areas  of  human  resource 
development and innovation. The National Action Plan for Employment is a step in the right direction, 
but it can only produce the desired results if all social partners take ownership of it. 
With  regard  to  macroeconomic  stabilisation,  the  successful  achievement  of  the  Convergence 
Programme  objectives  would  restore  the  use  of  fiscal  policy  as  an  instrument  of  economic 
management and lead to a better allocation of resources in the economy. It would also contribute to a 
smooth transition through ERM II and towards the adoption of the euro. As a small and highly open 
economy,  Malta  stands  to  benefit  significantly  from  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency,  mainly 
through the elimination of exchange rate risk and uncertainty and lower interest rates and transaction 
costs. 
On the microeconomic level there are a number of issues which need to be tackled to improve the 
efficient  allocation  and  use  of  resources  and  to  raise  productivity.  Unlike  macroeconomic  policies, 
which  tend  to  yield  results  only  in  the  medium-term,  efficiency improvements  at  the  micro  level  are 
likely to produce more immediate benefits in terms of new economic activity and job creation. The truth 
is  that  sustained  improvements  in  the  country’s  economic  fundamentals  cannot  be  attained  without 
enhanced efficiency and productivity in both the public and private sectors. 
The  achievement  of  such  improvements  requires  efforts  on  a  number  of  fronts.  First,  it  must  be 
understood that the quest for competitiveness can only succeed if it takes the form of a collective effort 
whose  sole  purpose  is  to  boost  the  economy’s  value  added.  Without  the  latter,  higher  wages  and 
profits cannot be paid. It cannot be an exercise in which one of the parties attempts to crowd out the 
other.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  a  more  focused  social  dialogue  is  needed  that  takes  a  stronger 
leadership  role  in  identifying  the  policies  and  measures  needed  to  improve  Malta’s  international 
competitiveness and to ensure their implementation. 
Second, there is absolutely no guarantee that the standard of living the country has been enjoying so 
far  can  be  maintained  in  the  face  of  increasing  global  competition.  The  threats  that  Malta  is  facing 
cannot be simply wished away or averted through quick fixes. What is required is a more flexible and 
BIS Review 32/2005 
 3
cost-conscious  attitude  towards  work  practices  and  the  setting  of  generally  higher  standards  of 
performance across the board. 
Third, we must accept that subsidies, transfers and services provided for free by Government do not 
come at zero cost, but must be paid for through resources generated by the economy. Their provision 
at  zero  cost  often  induces  excess  demand  and  waste,  and  imposes  unacceptable  burdens  on  the 
productive  sectors  of  the  economy,  thereby  compromising  their  competitiveness  and  the  very 
generation  of  income  through  which  such  benefits  must  be  financed.  It  is  possible,  and  indeed 
desirable, to introduce the concept of co-payment by beneficiaries at the widest possible level without 
compromising the satisfaction of genuine needs. 
Fourth, there must be acceptance of the need for everyone to contribute to the development of the 
economy,  including  through  the  payment  of  taxes  due.  It  is  highly  probable  that  unless  these 
community values are inculcated in to-day’s rising generations, the economy’s growth prospects will 
not improve because the resources necessary to undertake the required investments will simply not be 
available. 
Fifth, there must be a more effective and focused approach through which Government and its entities 
support existing export industries and the establishment of new foreign direct investment in Malta. The 
provision of business advisory and support services must be improved and bureaucratic procedures 
reduced  to  a  minimum  so  as  to  make  the  most  of  the  opportunities  available  in  a  more  difficult 
international trading environment. This new approach would also require a more active participation by 
Malta in international trade fora at an EU level. It also calls for better co-ordination on these matters 
within  the  public  administration,  and  also  between  Government  and  the  constituted  bodies 
representing the exporting community, whether in industry, tourism or financial and other services. 
Conclusion  
Malta’s accession to the European Union has opened up undoubted scope for economic and social 
advancement. The potential for Malta to successfully exploit this opportunity has been given a clear 
endorsement by the EU Member States and institutions with this week’s entry of the Maltese lira in 
ERM II. These momentous developments place on both policy makers and the social partners a heavy 
responsibility for doing what is necessary to bring this promise to fruition. 
We  must  all  re-double  our  efforts  within  the  context  of  the  Lisbon  Agenda  in  order  to  enhance  the 
economy’s competitiveness. With the cooperation of the social partners, the Government must pursue 
the  targets  set  for  fiscal  consolidation,  upon  which  sustained  economic  growth  and  the  eventual 
adoption of the euro are premised. Equally importantly, a series of reforms at the microeconomic level 
are also overdue so as to enhance efficiency and productivity. 
These  challenges  are  not  being  faced  exclusively  by  the  Maltese  economy,  but  also  by  larger  and 
more  advanced countries who  are  meeting  them  by adopting  measures - which often appear  to  be 
painful in the short run - to sustain the standard of living of their people over the medium term. It is up 
to all the components of Maltese society to rise to the challenge so as to defend the economic and 
welfare gains achieved in the past and improve on them in the coming years. 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2005
