Rakesh Mohan: Indian economy in the global setting 
Address by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 99th Foundation 
Day Celebration Function of the Indian Merchants’ Chamber, Mumbai, 8 September 2005. 
 I am extremely happy to be here in this at 99th Foundation Day Celebration Function of the 
Indian Merchants' Chamber at Mumbai on 8 September, 2005. Indian Merchants Chamber 
has a long heritage – and I wish them all the best for this year’s celebrations and next year’s 
centenary. In this age of globalization, I thought it would be apposite to share with you an 
account of India’s place in the global economy. Where do we stand? Have we improved our 
performance?  These  are  some  of  the  issues  that  I  will  attempt  to  delve  in  the  present 
address. 
In the recent decade, India along with China has emerged as the engine of global growth. 
This is well reflected in India’s share in world GDP increasing significantly from 4.3 per cent 
in 1991 to 5.8 per cent in 2004. This period has also been one when India initiated structural 
reforms which encompassed, inter alia, a phased opening up of the Indian economy to the 
external sector. These structural reforms have strengthened India’s external sector and have 
also imparted a degree of dynamism to the Indian economy. The opening up of the Indian 
economy has not only allowed it to reap benefits of globalisation but India is also contributing 
to global growth. Against this backdrop, I discuss India’s recent economic growth record in 
order to draw lessons for it to realize its potential in a globalised world. 
Recent economic growth: overview and issues 
Economic  developments  in  the  recent  years  indicate  a  growing  resilience  of  the  Indian 
economy.  Illustratively,  even  as  the  Indian  economy  was  buffeted  by  exogenous  shocks 
emanating  from  a  below  normal  monsoon  and  record  high  international  oil  prices,  overall 
GDP growth was almost 7 per cent during 2004-05. Effective macroeconomic management 
during the year ensured that India remained one of the fastest growing economies among 
emerging  market  economies  in  an  environment  of  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability. 
Looking at the post-reform period, real GDP growth has stepped up from 5.8 per cent per 
annum during the 1980s to 6.2 per cent per annum between 1992-93 and 2004-05. Over the 
same period, per capita growth has recorded a more impressive increase from 3.4 per cent 
to 4.3 per cent. 
Structural  reforms  have  increased  the  competitiveness  of  the  Indian  industry  and  this  is 
reflected quite vividly in the robust merchandise export growth since 2002-03 – exports have 
grown (in US $ terms) by more than 20 per cent per annum in each of the last three years. 
Concomitantly,  the  services  sector  contributes  more  than  one-half  of  GDP,  with  growing 
contributions 
information 
technology, 
telecommunication and transport sectors and a revival of foreign tourist arrivals. 
A noteworthy feature of macroeconomic management is the success with maintaining price 
and  financial  stability.  Inflation  has  averaged  close  to  five  per  cent  per  annum  since  the 
second half of the 1990s, significantly lower than that of around seven to eight per cent in the 
previous  three  and  a  half  decades.  This  was  possible  due  to  effective  monetary 
management, enabled by reforms in the fiscal-monetary interface. This has had a soothing 
influence  on  inflation  expectations.  Thus,  despite  poor  monsoon  conditions,  record 
international  crude  oil  prices  and  sharp  increases  in  a  host  of  non-oil  commodity  prices, 
inflation  could  be  contained  at  around  5  per  cent  by  the  end  of  fiscal  2004-05,  reflecting 
effective calibrated monetary measures supported by timely supply-side and fiscal measures. 
Inflation  in  the  current  year  so  far  has  eased  to  3.1  per  cent,  although  it  needs  to  be 
recognised  that  the  pass-through  of  international  oil  prices  to  domestic  oil  prices  remains 
impulses  of  growth  such  as 
from  new 
the 
   1/9 
incomplete.  We  may  also  note  that  unlike  previous  oil  price  rise  episodes  of  international 
inflation has also been contained this time. 
Another  notable  feature  of  the  post-reform  period  is  the  improvement  in  the  health  of  the 
financial sector. Reforms in the financial sector introduced since the early 1990s have had a 
major  impact  on  the  overall  efficiency  and  stability  of  the  banking  system,  reflected  in 
improvements  in  capital  adequacy  ratios  and  strengthening  of  the  balance  sheets. 
Furthermore, Indian banks have done a remarkable job in containment of NPLs considering 
the overhang issues and overall difficult environment. Net NPAs have now fallen to just two 
per cent of net advances. 
The external sector continues to be robust. Despite sharp increase in oil as well as non-oil 
imports,  India’s  balance  of  payments  has  recorded  large  and  persistent  surpluses,  with 
foreign exchange reserves at around US $ 144 billion. Increased earnings from exports of 
services and remittances coupled with enhanced foreign investment inflows have provided 
strength to the external sector. 
In brief, the Indian economy has exhibited a strong performance since the early 1990s in an 
environment of macroeconomic and financial stability – higher GDP growth, lower inflation, a 
resilient external sector and a strong financial sector. All these happened during the 1990s, 
which  was  otherwise  a  turbulent  decade  in  terms  of  financial  instability  in  many  other 
countries. Nonetheless, it is widely agreed that the growth of the Indian economy remains 
well-below its potential. Real GDP growth in the first three years (2002-03 to 2004-05) of the 
Tenth Plan period has averaged 6.5 per cent, lower than the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-
2007) target of eight per cent per annum. While the economy is doing well in many areas and 
these  gains  need  to  be  consolidated,  there  are  also  important  weaknesses,  which,  if  not 
corrected  could  undermine  even  the  potential  performance  level.  In  this  context,  it  is 
interesting  to  note  that  the  recent  years  (2001-02  to  2003-04)  have  seen  India  recording 
surpluses in the current account, i.e., we have not been able to find investment avenues to 
deploy  our  domestic  savings.  It  is,  therefore,  important  that  impediments  to  investment  be 
removed so that domestic savings can be deployed at home. Of course, to realise the growth 
potential of 8-9 per cent of the Indian economy, domestic savings will have also to record 
commensurate  increases.  Reforms  would  have  to  be  further  intensified  in  the  agricultural 
sector,  in  factor  markets  to  promote  flexibility,  in  bankruptcy  and  exit  procedures,  in  fiscal 
consolidation and in physical and social infrastructure sectors to accelerate investment. I will 
address some of these issues next.  
Although the poverty ratio has declined since the onset of the reforms process, the number 
of  people  below  the  poverty  line  still  remains  high,  with  wide  variations  across  states. 
Between 1977-78 and 1999-2000, the proportion of people living below the poverty line fell 
from  51.3  per  cent  to  26.1  per  cent;  over  the  same  period,  the  absolute  number  of  poor 
people fell from about 330 million to about 260 million, a number that is still sizable. In 2001-
03,  for  instance,  India’s  per  capita  income  was  equivalent  to  only  9  per  cent  of  the  global 
average and 2 per cent of the per capita income of the high income countries.  
With more than half of the people still dependent on agriculture, a key area of concern is that 
agricultural  growth  remains  low  and  continues  to  be  monsoon-dependent.  Growth  in  the 
agricultural and allied sectors has decelerated from 3.2 per cent per annum during 1980-96 
to 1.9 per cent subsequently. Per capita agricultural GDP has shown no significant upward 
trend after 1996-97. The slowdown is wide-spread across crops and reflects a broad based 
deceleration in productivity growth. The deceleration in output coincided with a downturn in 
world  prices,  and  this  has  impacted  domestic  farm  prices  more  than  in  earlier  decades 
because of greater openness. The consequence has been that farm incomes became more 
variable and decelerated more than output in many cases. 
A  related  cause  of  concern,  given  that  57  per  cent  of  population  is  still  agricultural 
dependent,  is  that  the  role  of  agriculture  in  providing  additional  employment  opportunities 
was virtually zero during the 1990s. Employment in agriculture remained virtually unchanged 
   2/9 
at about 190 million people during the 1990s. Concomitantly, annual employment growth for 
the economy, as a whole, decelerated from two per cent during the 1980s to only 1.1 per 
cent  in  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s.  With  employment  growth  trailing  the  additions  to  the 
labour force, unemployment rate for the economy as a whole is estimated to have increased 
from 8.87 per cent in 2001-02 to 9.11 per cent in 2004-05, a proportion that is far too high for 
a country like ours. The generation of productive employment is, therefore, a key issue that 
needs to be addressed on a continuous basis. 
The slowdown in the agricultural sector reflects subdued public investment in agriculture and 
inadequate crop diversification. A step-up in public investment in rural infrastructural areas 
such as irrigation, rural electrification and rural roads will become possible through reduction 
in  and  better  targeting  of  subsidies  that  would  then  enable  greater  public  investment  for 
promoting growth. Efforts are also needed to diversify the cropping pattern to non-traditional 
activities  in  line  with  the  changing  agricultural  demand  pattern  and  making  use  of  recent 
advances in bio-technology. The process of diversification calls for micro-level planning with 
emphasis  on  crop  specific  inputs,  creating  proper  marketing  infrastructure,  cold  storage, 
transportation  facilities  and  supportive  policies.  There  is  a  need  for  value  addition  in 
agricultural products through processing, packaging, and supply chain management so that 
farm  incomes  expand,  employment  is  generated  and  rural  poverty  is  alleviated.  Other 
initiatives to increase agricultural production could cover aspects such as better availability of 
commodity  derivatives  to  minimize  the  impact  of  prices  uncertainty;  reducing  monsoon-
dependency  through  schemes  like  water  harvesting;  and,  further  augmenting  the  flow  of 
credit  to  the  rural  sector.  Diversification  of  agriculture  would  also  provide  stable  additional 
avenues of employment generation in the rural sector and enable these sectors to emerge as 
the main source of growth and employment in rural areas. All these measures will promote 
competitiveness  of  the  agricultural  sector,  which  is  so  necessary  in  the  current  global 
context. 
As  regards  social  sector  indicators,  notwithstanding  some  progress  in  regard  to  education 
and health, India is still far behind its East Asian neighbours. Our social indicators are lower 
even in comparison with the levels achieved by these countries twenty five years ago, when 
they  first  began  to  grow  rapidly.  The  social  indicators  also  show  disturbing  gender  gaps, 
large rural-urban differences and wide variation across states. Although the literacy rate has 
improved encouragingly from 52.2 per cent in 1991 to 64.8 per cent in 2001 and the overall 
number of illiterates in the country declined from 329 million in 1991 to 306 million in 2001, 
there are at least seven major States with more than 15 million illiterates each, accounting for 
nearly  two-third  of  total  illiterates  in  the  country.  Concomitantly,  given  India’s  comparative 
advantage in services, it is important that the quality of secondary and higher education in 
the country is improved so that adequate skills are developed to realize the benefits of the 
knowledge  economy.  As  regards  health,  the  combined  government  (Centre  plus  States) 
expenditure on health as a percentage of GDP has stagnated at around one per cent of GDP 
over  the  last  decade  and  a  half.  Total  public  expenditure  on  health  in  India  remains  even 
lower than many other developing countries such as Brazil (3.4 per cent), Thailand (2.1 per 
cent), Sri Lanka (1.8 per cent), China (1.9 per cent) and Malaysia (1.5 per cent). Low public 
expenditure in India is to some extent compensated by private expenditure which at 4.0 per 
cent of GDP is comparatively higher than all of these countries except Brazil (4.9 per cent). 
However, low public expenditure is a cause for concern for the vast majority of the population 
and  primary  health  care  remains  of  poor  quality,  unavailable  and  inaccessible.  The  infant 
mortality rate in India is almost double that of China (63 in India versus 37 in China) while the 
maternal  mortality  rate  at  407  is  manifold  as  compared  to  China’s  56.  Hospital  beds  (per 
1000 population) at 0.7 for India are less than one-half of other developing economies such 
as  China  (2.4),  Thailand  (2.0)  and  Malaysia  (2.0).  A  significant  improvement  in  social 
indicators is necessary if we want to create the pre-condition for a general improvement in 
welfare of our population and for genuine equality of opportunity.  
   3/9 
Turning to the industrial sector, reforms which encompassed removal of industrial licensing, 
de-reservation, substantial opening of foreign direct investment and trade liberalisation have 
imparted a competitive edge to Indian industry. This is reflected in a resurgence of activity in 
the  manufacturing  sector  in  the  past  two  years,  and  the  present  phase  appears  to  be 
sustainable, in contrast to the exuberance – which turned out to be temporary - reflected in 
high  growth  in  investment  and  production  in  industry  during  1993-94  to  1996-97.  For 
industrial  activity  to  get  entrenched  and  gather  momentum,  efficiency  in  supply  of 
infrastructural  inputs  will  need  a  large  impetus.  The  subdued  performance  of  the 
infrastructure sector in the recent months is an issue of concern, given the sector’s strong 
forward and backward linkages in the economy. The increasing demand-supply gap in the 
availability  of  power  is  becoming  the  most  critical  issue  in  the  future  of  India’s  economic 
development.  In  the  recent  period,  shortage  of  coal  and  gas  has  emerged  as  a  serious 
constraint on power generation with the supply of both fuels falling far short of demand. In 
this context, given the fact that the Indian economy is among the more inefficient users of 
energy,  highest  and  urgent  priority  needs  to  be  given  for  energy-saving  measures,  which 
could include appropriate pricing policies and incentives to invest.  
With growing urbanisation, issues related to urban infrastructure have come to the forefront. 
At present, investment in urban infrastructure is hampered by the fact that local governments 
are  not  yet  creditworthy  and  urban  infrastructure  projects  are,  therefore,  not  found  to  be 
commercially  viable.  Strengthened  planning  and  better  coordination  between  various 
agencies entrusted with maintenance of urban infrastructure would have a positive impact on 
the  overall  productivity  of  economic  activity  in  cities.  Given  the  fact  that  there  is  a  heavy 
concentration  of  economic  activity  in  large  cities,  weak  infrastructural  facilities  impede  the 
growth  of  large  cities  and  of  overall  economic  productivity.  It  is,  therefore,  of  the  utmost 
importance that the quality of urban infrastructure in the large cities is improved significantly 
so  as  to  maintain  and  accelerate  the  momentum  of  economic  growth  and  productivity 
enhancement. For urbanising economies like India to replicate the experience of developed 
countries  in  the  provision  of  urban  infrastructure,  it  is  essential  that  all  aspects  of  city 
management, including the fostering of a professional workforce, are strengthened.  
The maintenance of vibrant growth in the manufacturing sector will depend crucially on the 
expansion  of  small  and  medium  enterprises  that  then  become  significant  players  in  the 
future. For this potential to be realized, there is a need to increase credit availability to this 
sector  at  reasonable  costs.  Banking  institutions  need  to  improve  their  credit  assessment 
capabilities with regard to small-scale enterprises and small-scale must not be equated with 
high  risk.  Recent  initiatives  of  the  government  and  the  Reserve  Bank,  such  as  the  new 
legislation aimed at developing credit information bureaus will help to reduce information and 
transaction  costs  that  should  then  lead  to  lower  cost  of  credit  to  the  SSI  sector.  Empirical 
evidence shows that wider availability of credit histories greatly expands the flow of credit as 
potential borrowers are no longer tied to their local lenders. 
The  services  sector  has  emerged  as  the  largest  contributor  to  growth  in  the  country. 
Advances  in  information  technology,  liberalisation  of  the  telecommunications  sector  and 
availability of skilled labour have permitted India to reap advantages through the globalisation 
of some services. The initial impetus provided by exports of software and services has now 
got additional support from the exponential growth of the IT-enabled sector (ITES). According 
to  the  National  Association  of  Software  and  Service  Companies  (NASSCOM),  India’s 
software  and  service  exports  recorded  a  strong  growth  of  34  per  cent  in  2004-05.  The 
software  sector  [including  ITES-Business  Process  Outsourcing  (BPO)]  now  employs  more 
than one million people, having recorded a compounded annual growth of nearly 30 per cent 
in  employment  during  the  period  1999-2005.  The  software  sector  also  provides  indirect 
employment  to  2.5  million  people.  These  data  bring  forth  the  growing  role  of  the  software 
sector, but at the same time, they suggest that for this order of growth rates to be maintained 
in the future, investment in social infrastructure – especially, education - needs to stepped-
up.  In  this  context,  it  is  necessary  that  public  expenditure  on  education  should  reverse  its 
   4/9 
declining  trend:  total  expenditure  by  the  State  Governments  on  education  is  budgeted  to 
decline from 2.5 per cent of GDP in 2003-04 to 2.3 per cent in 2005-06. Moreover, given the 
demographic profile, the demand for education is slated to increase further. Accordingly, the 
improvement  in  State  finances  will  enable  the  States  to  increase  their  expenditure  on 
education  and  other  social  services  and  thereby  improve  the  quality  of  overall  social 
infrastructure so that India can realise its potential.  
It  is  now  well-recognised  that  monetary  policy  can  contribute  to  long-run  growth  by 
maintaining low and stable inflation. International experience indicates that a prudent fiscal 
policy remains the single largest prerequisite for monetary stability. In India, reforms in the 
monetary-fiscal  interface  during  the  1990s  have  been  a  key  factor  that  imparted  greater 
flexibility  to  monetary  policy.  These  reforms  have  taken  a  significant  step  forward  with  the 
enactment  of  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget  Management  (FRBM)  Act,  2003  by  the 
Centre. With the Centre’s GFD/GDP ratio at 4.1 per cent in 2004-05 (provisional accounts), 
the FRBM target of 3.0 per cent by 2008-09 appears to be within striking distance. However, 
with revenue deficit at 2.7 per cent in 2004-05, the elimination of the revenue deficit by 2008-
09 will prove to be more difficult. Achieving this target requires continued focused action on 
containing expenditures, increase in tax revenues and reduction in tax exemptions. Revenue 
augmentation would critically depend upon improvement in tax/GDP ratio as non-tax revenue 
is set to decline in the coming years. With the acceleration in overall economic growth that is 
being observed currently, renewed efforts on tax compliance should yield beneficial results. 
Achievement  of  the  FRBM  target  of  revenue  deficit  at  zero  per  cent  of  GDP  will  free  up 
resources for public investment which will also crowd-in private investment. Overall, despite 
the  recent  improvements  in  the  fiscal  position  of  the  Central  Government  the  effort  in 
achieving fiscal consolidation will have to continue. 
International crude oil prices are touching a record high. In previous episodes of such high oil 
prices,  India  often  faced  balance  of  payments  crisis,  low  growth  and  high  inflation.  In  the 
most recent period, the economy has been able to absorb the oil shock relatively comfortably 
so far. However, in case international oil prices continue to remain at the existing elevated 
levels,  they  could  have  a  negative  influence  on  growth  prospects  internationally.  It  is 
important  to  note  that  oil  intensity  –  oil  consumption  per  unit  of  output  –  in  India  has 
increased  since  early  1970s  in  contrast  to  the  behaviour  of  major  economies  such  as  the 
Euro  area,  the  US  and  Japan.  Although  oil  intensity  in  India  is  still  lower  than  that  of 
advanced economies, there is scope for adopting measures to enhance efficiency of oil use 
in  the  economy.  Energy  conservation  measures  in  the  backdrop  of  high  and  volatile 
international  crude  oil  prices  could  help  the  Indian  economy  to  weather  the  adverse 
consequences with relatively lower output losses. In this context, there is a need for policies 
that permit flexibility in domestic oil prices that respond to the ups and downs in international 
prices, albeit with some mechanism that cushions the impact on the common man. This will 
also enable more efficient use of oil in the economy, especially in view of the fact that the rise 
in international oil prices appears to have a large permanent component. 
Given  the  volatility  in  the  inflation  rate  during  2004-05,  there  is  a  need  to  consolidate  the 
gains  obtained  in  recent  years  from  reining  in  inflationary  expectations.  While  sustained 
efforts over time have helped to build confidence in price stability, inflationary expectations 
can  turn  adverse  in  a  relatively  short  time  if  noticeable  adverse  movements  in  prices  take 
place. Credible commitment of policy to fight inflation is critical to stop translation of higher oil 
prices  into  wage-price  spirals.  In  addition,  the  international  prices  of  non-oil  primary 
commodities may continue to remain firm. On the domestic front, the manoeuvrability on oil 
prices  is  getting  limited  and  corporates  have  a  higher  probability  of  gaining  their  pricing 
power with a better industrial outlook. The pricing pressure, if it were to occur from the supply 
side, could get complicated by continuing overhang of excess domestic liquidity. While the 
economy has the resilience to withstand supply shocks, the upside risks do exist. As such, 
the  inflationary  situation,  both  international  and  domestic,  needs  to  be  watched  closely  to 
   5/9 
persevere  in  maintaining  inflation  expectations  and  any  complacency  on  this  count  could 
have adverse consequences for both stability and growth.  
Global economic integration 
With the growing external openness of the Indian economy, and given its pace of expansion 
and size, the debate in the recent period is not only on the contours of the public policy in the 
context of increasing global economic integration but also to the challenges likely to be faced 
by the global economy on account of progressively increasing global integration of the Indian 
economy. The emphasis is of course on successful integration which will no doubt depend 
on the appropriateness of our public policies and the private sector responses. These issues 
are addressed next. 
Globalization  has  several  dimensions  arising  out  of  enhanced  connectivity  among  people 
across national borders. In particular, economic integration occurs through three channels, 
viz., movement of people, of goods and, of finance or capital. In managing the process of 
economic  integration,  developing  countries  face  challenges  from  a  world  order  that  is 
particularly burdensome on them. It is necessary for public policy to manage the process with 
a view to maximizing the benefits to its citizens while minimizing the risks; but the path of 
optimal integration is highly country-specific and contextual. On balance, there appears to be 
a greater advantage in achieving a well-managed and appropriate integration into the global 
process,  which  would  imply  more  effective  –  but  not  necessarily  intrusive  or  extensive  – 
interventions  by  governments.  In  fact,  while  there  are  some  infirmities  in  interventions  by 
government, markets do experience market-failures and cannot exist without some externally 
imposed  rules  and  prescriptions  of  the  public  policy.  As  the  poor,  the  vulnerable  and  the 
underprivileged  continue  to  be  the  responsibility  of  the  national  governments,  there  is 
relevance of national public policy – particularly as it relates to global economic integration.  
Against this backdrop, external sector policies designed to progressively open up the Indian 
economy, as observed earlier, formed an integral part of the strategy for structural reforms. 
In this context, the Report of the High Level Committee on Balance of Payments (Rangarajan 
Committee, 1993) recommended improvement in exports, both merchandise and invisibles; 
modulation of import demand on the basis of the availability of current receipts to ensure a 
level of current account deficit consistent with normal capital flows; enhancement of non-debt 
creating flows to limit the debt service burden; adoption of market-determined exchange rate; 
building  up  the  foreign  exchange  reserves  to  avoid  liquidity  crises  and  elimination  of  the 
dependence on short-term debt. It is evident that the external sector policies of the 1990s, 
based  on  the  Report,  paid  rich  dividends  in  terms  of  growth  and  resilience  to  a  series  of 
external and domestic shocks.  
Various reforms in the trade policy regime have unlocked entrepreneurial energies, stepped 
up productivity gains and improved competitiveness and access to overseas markets. India’s 
merchandise exports have been rising at a rate of over 20 per cent per annum, in US dollar 
terms, during 2002-05. As a result, the secular decline in India’s share in world exports from 
two per cent in 1950 to 0.5 per cent in the 1980s has been reversed. This share began rising 
in the 1990s and is currently at 0.8 per cent. These positive developments in the external 
sector  provide  the  environment  of  pursuing  a  further  rationalisation  of  tariffs  with  a  view 
towards moving to a single, uniform rate on imports, say 10 per cent, and simplify all customs 
procedures strictly in line with best global practices. This should help to improve competition, 
exports and domestic consumers. The current external environment including the level of the 
foreign exchange reserves enables such a move to be made with little or no downside risks. 
While  the  recent  trend  in  imports  may  continue  to  persist  in  the  face  of  high  and  volatile 
crude  prices  and  the  large  increase  in  domestic  demand,  an  intrinsic  link  between 
merchandise  imports  and  exports  has  emerged  and  become  entrenched.  The  large 
expansion in imports is also spurring vigorous export growth. Given the recent experience, 
especially the fact that workers remittances seem to have acquired a semi-permanent, if not 
   6/9 
permanent, character, the current level of the trade deficit appears to be manageable at this 
stage and appears to be consistent with India’s growth aspirations. 
Given the adverse international experience with unfettered capital account liberalisation, we 
have  been  risk  averse  and  have  adopted  a  policy  of  active  management  of  the  capital 
account. The compositional shifts in the capital account have been consistent with the policy 
framework, imparting stability to the balance of payments. The sustainability of the current 
account  is  increasingly  viewed  as  consistent  with  the  volume  of  normal  capital  flows.  The 
substitution of debt by non-debt flows also gives us room for manoeuvre since debt levels, 
particularly, external commercial borrowings, have been moderate and can be raised in the 
event of a sustained pick up in the demand for external resources. There is also the cushion 
available from the foreign exchange reserves.  
India has made significant progress in financial liberalisation since the institution of financial 
sector  reforms  in  1992  and  this  has  been  recognised  internationally.  India  has  chosen  to 
proceed  cautiously  and  in  a  gradual  manner,  calibrating  the  pace  of  capital  account 
liberalisation  with  underlying  macroeconomic  developments,  the  state  of  readiness  of  the 
domestic financial system and the dynamics of international financial markets. Unlike in the 
case  of  trade  integration,  where  benefits  to  all  countries  are  demonstrable,  in  case  of 
financial integration, a 'threshold' in terms of preparedness and resilience of the economy is 
important for a country to get full benefits. A judgmental view needs to be taken whether and 
when  a  country  has  reached  the  "threshold"  and  the  financial  integration  should  be 
approached cautiously, preferably within the framework of a plausible roadmap that is drawn 
up by embodying the country-specific context and institutional features. The experience so 
far has shown that the Indian approach to financial integration has stood the test of time.  
The  optimism  generated  by  the  recent  gains  in  macroeconomic  performance  warrants  a 
balanced  consideration  of  further  financial  liberalisation.  At  this  stage,  the  optimism 
generated by impressive macroeconomic performance accompanied with stability has given 
rise to pressures for significantly accelerating the pace of external financial liberalisation. It is 
essential to take into account the risks associated with it while resetting an accelerated pace 
of  a  gradualist  approach.  The  recent  experience  in  many  countries  shows  that  periods  of 
impressive  macroeconomic  performance  generate  pressures 
financial 
liberalisation since everyone appears to be a gainer from further liberalisation, but the costs 
of instability that may be generated in the process are borne by the country, the government 
and the poorer sections. Avoiding crises is ultimately a national responsibility. The approach 
to managing the external sector, the choice of instruments and the timing and sequencing of 
policies are matters of informed judgment, given the imponderables. 
As  noted  earlier,  not  only  do  global  developments  influence  India,  but  the  growing  size  of 
India  has  also  implications  for  the  global  economy  which  would  have  also  to  take  in  to 
account the evolving demographic dynamics in countries such as India. Over the next half-
century, the population of the world will age faster than during the past half-century as fertility 
rates decline and life expectancy rises. In Europe, the demographic profile is already tilted 
towards  the  higher  age  group  and  by  2050,  this  is  projected  to  accelerate.  Projections 
suggest a turning point between 2010 and 2030 when the European Union, North America 
and Japan will experience a substantial decline in savings rates relative to investment which 
may be reflected in large current account deficits. Most of the high performers of East Asia 
and  China  are  in  the  second  stage  of  the  demographic  cycle.  Elderly  dependency  is 
expected to double in these countries by 2025. Their working age populations will increase 
modestly first and then shrink. These projections suggest that East Asia could increasingly 
become an important supplier of global savings up to 2025; however, rapid population ageing 
thereafter would reinforce rather than mitigate the inexorable decline of global savings. India 
is  entering  the  second  stage  of  demographic  cycle  and  over  the  next  half-century,  a 
significant  increase  in both  savings  rate  and share  of  working  age  population  is  expected. 
The share of the labour force in population in India is expected to overtake the rest of Asia, 
including  China,  by  2030.  Looking  ahead,  the  rest  of  the  world  may  increasingly  rely  on 
for  speedier 
   7/9 
China and India for supplies of both labour and capital and this could significantly influence 
the evolution of the global economy. It is evident that China and India will have to give high 
priority  to  generating  employment  and  both  are  poised  for  substantial  increases  in 
productivity.  
The  global  economy  will  have  to  contend  with  the  implications  of  these  developments  on 
prices, exchange rates, wages and structures of employment in industrialised countries. Over 
the  medium  term,  it  is  felt  that  outsourcing  will  grow  rapidly  and  may  also  cover  high-end 
research and development activities. In manufacturing, China has emerged as a leader and 
India is catching up rapidly. Though agriculture is heavily subsidised in major industrialised 
countries, such subsidisation would be difficult to sustain from a fiscal point of view, since 
many of the countries concerned are poised to meet the mounting pension liabilities not to 
speak of burgeoning health care costs of maintaining the deteriorating demographics. One 
sector  where  the  industrialised  economies  continue  to  show  considerable  strength  and 
dominance  is  the  financial  sector,  partly  attributable  to  the  confidence  factor  in  financial 
markets  that  favours  the  industrialised  economies  and  traditional  international  financial 
centres.  It  is  essential  for  India  to  carefully  monitor  the  developments  in  both  real  and 
financial sectors, and to frame the policies in tandem with the global developments so that 
global integration continues to be a positive sum game for all countries.  
While the economic integration of India with the global economy will continue to take place, a 
successful integration, with due regard to the interests of a vast majority particularly, the poor 
in  our  country  would  be  possible  only  through  sound  public  policies  –  evolved  and 
redesigned from time to time. Given India’s demographic advantages, the quality of labour 
force (in terms of relevant skills which need to be sustained, reoriented and upgraded in a 
globally competitive era) and the physical health of the workforce become crucial. Education 
and  health,  therefore,  provide  the  link  between  supply  and  demand  for  labour  through 
increases in productivity.  
In  this  context,  there  is  universal  recognition  of  the  need  to  improve  both  productivity  and 
output  in  the  agriculture  and  related  activities  to  meet  the  objectives  of  growth  and 
employment. There will have to be a massive shift of the workforce from agriculture to non-
agricultural  avocations  and  we  should  be  prepared  for  a  large-scale  migration  of  the 
workforce to the tune of 10 million per year, from rural to semi-urban and urban areas. The 
quality  of  urban  infrastructure  even  in  the  metropolitan  cities,  as  noted  earlier,  is  not 
conducive to globally competitive economic activity. The inevitable large scale redeployment 
of  the  migrating  workforce  would,  therefore,  need  institutional  arrangements,  be  they  in 
public or private sector, for skill-imparting and skill up gradation. In these two matters relating 
to the workforce, some supply-led approaches appear to be in order, rather than waiting for 
the demand to be generated.  
Enhanced investment activity, particularly in the infrastructure area, would necessitate higher 
domestic  savings,  especially 
financial 
intermediation. In addition, foreign savings need to be attracted and absorbed with a strong 
preference to Foreign Direct Investment in all sectors though in some sectors like banking, a 
calibrated approach may be warranted. At the same time, our enterprises should be enabled 
to attain a strong global presence in all sectors. In brief, our global integration has to be a two 
way  process,  encompassing  movement  of  people  with  some  caveats,  trade  in  a  free  and 
equitable manner and financial integration on a specially sequenced basis.  
the  public  sector  coupled  with  efficient 
in 
Concluding observations 
The  structural  reforms  initiated  in  the  early  1990s  coupled  with  a  cautious  and  calibrated 
approach to external sector liberalization has led to a step-up in economic growth and India 
has emerged as one of the fastest growing economies of the world. Notably, this growth has 
been  achieved  in  an  environment  of  monetary  and  financial  stability,  even  as  there  was  a 
series of exogenous shocks, both domestic and foreign, that hit the Indian economy in the 
   8/9 
period since the latter half of the 1990s. Looking ahead, the evolving demographic profile in 
favour  of  younger  population  suggests  that  the  growth  prospects  of  the  Indian  economy 
remain strong, provided their potential is effectively utilised. At the same time, a lot needs to 
be done to improve the quality of life. While the proportion of the poor in total population has 
come  down,  the  absolute  number  of  poor  people  remains  high.  India’s  rank  in  terms  of 
human development index and gender development index continues to be low compared to 
many developing countries. There is a need for linking growth with development and fill the 
gap  between  macroeconomic  performance  and  social  sector  development.  In  this  regard, 
globalisation throws both opportunities and challenges for benefit of societies. Opportunities 
offered by forces of globalisation offer India scope to improve the quality of life of its people, 
provided appropriate policies are put in place. 
 
   9/9 
