V Leeladhar: Basel II Accord and its implications 
Speech  by  Mr  V  Leeladhar,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Bankers’  Club, 
Mangalore, 11 March 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to share my thoughts with you on a subject which is currently 
engaging the attention of the banking community, not just in India but worldwide. Let me first admit 
upfront that although I am at the moment wearing the regulator’s hat, yet I have been a commercial 
banker for most part of my professional career. So, the banker in me still goads me to put myself in 
bankers’  shoes  before  evaluating  any  regulatory  options.  I  can  better  appreciate  some  of  nuances 
from  a  practical  stand  point,  and  therefore  shall  try  to  put  them  more  from  a  banker’s  perspective 
rather than that of a regulator. 
Managing risk is increasingly becoming the single most important issue for the regulators and financial 
institutions.  These  institutions  have  over  the  years  recognized  the  cost  of  ignoring  risk.  However, 
growing research and improvements in information technology have improved the measurement and 
management of risk. It’s but natural therefore, capital adequacy of a bank has become an important 
benchmark to assess its financial soundness and strength. The idea is that banks should be free to 
engage in their asset-liability management as long as they are backed by a level of capital sufficient to 
cushion their potential losses. In other words, capital requirement should be determined by the risk 
profile of a bank. 
The initial capital accord of 1988 was hugely successful with more than 100 countries accepting it as a 
benchmark.  One  of  the  major  reasons  for  the  success  of  this  framework  was  its  being  simple.  It 
brought  in  uniformity  and  attempted  to  make  regulatory  capital  requirement  consistent  with  the 
economic  capital.  Reserve  Bank  of  India  introduced  risk  assets  ratio  system  as  a  capital  adequacy 
measure in 1992, in line with the Basel accord of 1988, which takes into account the risk element in 
various types of funded balance sheet items as well as non-funded off balance sheet exposures. In 
fact, RBI norms on capital adequacy at 9% are more stringent than Basel Committee stipulation of 8%. 
Shortcomings in the present accord  
However, the present accord has been criticized as being inflexible due to its focus on primarily credit 
risk and treating all types of borrowers under one risk category regardless of credit worthiness. The 
major criticism against the existing accord stems from its 
• 
• 
• 
• 
As time passed, some of the major international banks began using sophisticated models to measure 
risk. This was when a need was felt to upgrade the Basel framework. Therefore, the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision  thought  it  desirable  that  the  present  accord  is  replaced  by  a  more  risk-
sensitive framework. 
Broad brush approach – irrespective of quality of counter party or credit 
Encouraging regulatory arbitrage by cherry picking 
Lack of incentives for credit risk mitigation techniques 
Not covering operational risk 
Three pillars 
The  new  Basel  Accord has its  foundation  on  three mutually  reinforcing  pillars  that  allow  banks  and 
bank supervisors to evaluate properly the various risks that banks face and realign regulatory capital 
more closely with underlying risks. The first pillar is compatible with the credit risk, market risk and 
operational risk. The regulatory capital will be focused on these three risks. The second pillar gives the 
bank responsibility to exercise the best ways to manage the risk specific to that bank. Concurrently, it 
also casts responsibility on the supervisors to review and validate banks’ risk measurement models. 
The third pillar on market discipline is used to leverage the influence that other market players can 
bring. This is aimed at improving the transparency in banks and improve reporting. 
BIS Review 17/2005 
 1
Issues and Challenges 
Having given you a brief overview of the current and proposed new framework, I shall now move on to 
the  implementation  challenges  for  the  banks  especially  in  a  developing  country  like  India.  Here,  I 
would skip the methodological details and technical  nitty-gritty associated with the new accord, and 
concentrate instead on more profound implications for the banking industry.  
ISSUES AND CHALLENGES 
While  there  is  no  second opinion  regarding  the  purpose, necessity  and  usefulness  of  the  proposed 
new  accord  -  the  techniques  and  methods  suggested  in  the  consultative  document  would  pose 
considerable implementational challenges for the banks especially in a developing country like India. 
Capital Requirement:  The new norms will almost invariably increase capital requirement in all banks 
across the board. Although capital requirement for credit risk may go down due to adoption of more 
risk  sensitive  models  -  such  advantage  will  be  more  than  offset  by  additional  capital  charge  for 
operational  risk  and  increased  capital  requirement  for  market  risk.  This  partly  explains  the  current 
trend of consolidation in the banking industry. 
Profitability:  Competition among banks for highly rated corporates needing lower amount of capital 
may exert pressure on already thinning interest spread. Further, huge implementation cost may also 
impact profitability for smaller banks. 
Risk Management Architecture:  The new standards are an amalgam of international best practices 
and call for introduction of advanced risk management system with wider application throughout the 
organization. It would be a daunting task to create the required level of technological architecture and 
human skill across the institution. 
Rating  Requirement:    Although  there  are  a  few  credit  rating  agencies  in  India,  the  level  of  rating 
penetration  is  very  low.  A  study  revealed  that  in  1999,  out  of  9640  borrowers  enjoying  fund-based 
working  capital  facilities  from  banks,  only  300  were  rated  by  major  agencies.  Further,  rating  is  a 
lagging indicator of the credit risk and the agencies have poor track record in this respect. There is a 
possibility of rating blackmail through unsolicited rating. Moreover rating in India is restricted to issues 
and not issuers. Encouraging rating of issuers would be a challenge. 
Choice  of  Alternative  Approaches:    The  new  framework  provides  for  alternative  approaches  for 
computation of capital requirement of various risks. However, competitive advantage of IRB approach 
may lead to domination of this approach among big banks. Banks adopting IRB approach will be more 
sensitive  than  those  adopting  standardized  approach.  This  may  result  in  high-risk  assets  flowing  to 
banks on standardized approach, as they would require lesser capital for these assets than banks on 
IRB approach. Hence, the system as a whole may maintain lower capital than warranted and become 
more vulnerable. It is to be considered whether in our quest for perfect standards, we have lost the 
only universally accepted standard. 
Absence of Historical Database: Computation of probability of default, loss given default, migration 
mapping and supervisory validation require creation of historical database, which is a time consuming 
process and may require initial support from the supervisor. 
Incentive to Remain Unrated:  In case of unrated sovereigns, banks and corporates, the prescribed 
risk weight is 100%, whereas in case of those entities with lowest ratting, the risk weight is 150%. This 
may  create  incentive  for  the  category  of  counterparties,  which  anticipate  lower  rating  to  remain 
unrated. 
Supervisory Framework:  Implementation of Basel II norms will prove a challenging task for the bank 
supervisors  as  well.  Given  the  paucity  of  supervisory  resources,  there  is  a  need  to  reorient  the 
resource  deployment  strategy.  Supervisory  cadre  has  to  be  properly  trained  for  understanding  of 
critical  issues  for  risk  profiling  of  supervised  entities  and  validating  and  guiding  development  of 
complex IRB models. 
Corporate Governance Issues:  Basel II proposals underscore the interaction between sound risk 
management  practices  and  corporate  good  governance.  The  bank's  board  of  directors  has  the 
responsibility for setting the basic tolerance levels for various types of risk. It should also ensure that 
management establishes a framework for assessing the risks, develop a system to relate risk to the 
bank's capital levels and establish a method for monitoring compliance with internal policies. 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2005
National Discretion:  Basel II norms set out a number of areas where national supervisor will need to 
determine the specific definitions, approaches or thresholds that they wish to adopt in implementing 
the  proposals.  The  criteria  used  by  supervisors  in  making  these  determinations  should  draw  upon 
domestic market practice and experience and be consistent with the objectives of Basel II norms. 
Disclosure  Regime:    Pillar  3  purports  to  enforce  market  discipline  through  stricter  disclosure 
requirement. While admitting that such disclosure may be useful for supervisory authorities and rating 
agencies,  the  expertise  and  ability  of  the  general  public  to  comprehend  and  interpret  disclosed 
information is open to question. Moreover, too much disclosure may cause information overload and 
may even damage financial position of bank. 
Disadvantage for Smaller Banks:  The new framework is very complex and difficult to understand. It 
calls for revamping the entire management information system and allocation of substantial resources. 
Therefore, it may be out of reach for many smaller banks. As Moody's Investors Services puts it, "It is 
unlikely that these banks will have the financial resources, intellectual capital, skills and large scale 
commitment that larger competitors have to build sophisticated systems to allocate regulatory capital 
optimally for both credit and operational risks." 
Discriminatory  against  Developing  Countries:    Developing  countries  have  high  concentration  of 
lower rated borrowers. The calibration of IRB has lesser incentives to lend to such borrowers. This, 
along with withdrawal of uniform risk weight of 0% on sovereign claims may result in overall reduction 
in lending by internationally active banks in developing countries and increase their cost of borrowing. 
External  and  Internal  Auditors:    The  working  Group  set  up  by  the  Basel  Committee  to  look  into 
implementational issues observed that supervisors may wish to involve third parties, such a external 
auditors,  internal  auditors  and  consultants  to  assist  them  in  carrying  out  some  of  the  duties  under 
Basel  II.  The  precondition  is  that  there  should  be  a  suitably  developed  national  accounting  and 
auditing standards and framework, which are in line with the best international practices. A minimum 
qualifying criteria for firms should be those that have a dedicated financial services or banking division 
that is properly researched and have proven ability to respond to training and upgrades required of its 
own staff to complete the tasks adequately. 
With the implementation of the new framework, internal auditors may become increasingly involved in 
various  processes,  including  validation  and  of  the  accuracy  of  the  data  inputs,  review  of  activities 
performed by credit functions and assessment of a bank's capital assessment process. 
CONCLUSION 
Implementation of Basel II has been described as a long journey rather than a destination by itself. 
Undoubtedly, it would require commitment of substantial capital and human resources on the part of 
both banks and the supervisors. RBI has decided to follow a consultative process while implementing 
Basel  II  norms  and  move  in  a  gradual,  sequential  and  co-coordinated  manner.  For  this  purpose, 
dialogue  has  already  been  initiated  with  the  stakeholders.  A  steering  committee  comprising 
representatives  of  banks and  different  supervisory  and  regulatory  departments  is  taking  stock of  all 
issues relating to its implementation. As envisaged by the Basel Committee, the accounting profession 
too, will make a positive contribution in this respect to make Indian banking system stronger. 
BIS Review 17/2005 
 3
