Ardian Fullani: Stress-testing workshop 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  “Stress-Testing” 
workshop, Tirana, 5 April 2005. 
 Dear participants and guests, 
I accepted with pleasure the invitation to open this workshop “On Stress-Testing”, having also in mind 
that the topic you are going to discuss in these three days, is an important issue in enriching the tools 
of the supervisory institution on identifying in advance areas or developments of potential fragility, and 
acting in accordance to prevent adverse situations for the licensed institutions.  
Life has shown us that risk is everywhere. Certain things are not sure of happening at all, some others 
that  will  happen  for  sure  are  not  known  when  or  where.  The  activity  of  individual  people,  of  entire 
families, of businesses, of the government, are affected considerably by what is really going to happen 
in a moment, tomorrow, the day after tomorrow and so on. Is there any way of completely avoiding any 
risk, in our life, in our activity, etc.? The answer to this question is one of the few risk-free statements: 
no, there isn’t any. It is then unavoidable to live with risk, to understand and to accept it, to manage it. 
Banking is a business activity, where risk is Inherent. This is obvious when you think of a normal bank 
balance  sheet  composition,  or  when  you  try  certain  ratios  when  assessing  their  liquidity  position. 
Banks intermediate among entities that avail their liquidities for a certain period of time and others that 
need liquidity to continue to perform their life, services and activities. These groups have different risk 
attitude,  that  is  formed  as  part  of  their  previous  experience.  They  express  their  risk  attitude  by 
choosing  a  certain  bank,  a  certain  product,  a  certain  maturity  structure,  a  certain  currency,  or  by 
keeping out of the banks at all. It is rather a consequence of a limited choice, and in many cases, of 
limited  knowledge.  As  such,  it  means  less  risk  awareness  capabilities  by  clients,  and  as  a 
consequence, less stimulus for banks themselves to carefully monitor their risks.  
Hence,  it  is  important  that  banks  (and  other  financial  institutions),  set  up  their  systems  to  identify, 
measure, monitor and manage risks. Systems here, first of all mean people and procedures that are 
an indication of how well the bank management, including its board of directors, understand the risks 
associated  with its business nature and size. Certainly, this work becomes more efficient if supported 
by information technology, at the scale that is sufficient for the size and the complexity of the bank 
business. From a practical point of view, in those financial systems where the size of certain financial 
institutions is of a systemic importance, the development of a risk management program is paramount. 
Besides the bank management, whose responsibility, I repeat, is of primary nature, the supervisory 
authority  has  a  clear  interest  and  responsibility  in  making  sure  that  individual  banks  (and  other 
financial  institutions)  understand  what  they  are  doing.  This  interest  stems  not  only  from  their  legal 
obligation, but also is an instrument in ensuring the public that the financial institutions are managed in 
a  sound  and  safe  manner.  In  the  end,  all  this  gives  a  remarkable  contribution  toward  the  goal  of 
reaching and maintaining financial stability. 
History  and practice have  shown  that having  a  good  supervision  function  is  very  important,  but  not 
enough. It is the market that could very well and in a timely way, discover behaviours that indicate 
imprudent  risk  taking  by  financial  institutions.  In  a  market  that  functions  under  normal  conditions, 
competitive factors force its players to look at each other to identify what can be done better. This is 
much  stronger  if  complemented  by  greater  transparency  and  accountability.  Under  a  deep  and 
developed market, the work of the supervisors, from the viewpoint of identifying in time imprudent risks 
that financial institutions are taking, becomes easier. On the other hand, open and developed markets, 
usually  mean  more  complex  products  with  more  complex  risk  features  that  require  more  complex 
systems to support and monitor them. This requires greater and more skilful supervision. 
While  the  market  well-functioning  and  transparency,  are  elements  that  help  supervision,  these 
elements do not substitute it. Firstly, while developed markets mean more capacities to analyse past 
and future events, the risk is that they still may miss the global picture, as individual institutions do not 
have the data and most of the times, the need, to analyse the financial stability of the system as a 
whole.  Secondly,  what 
future 
developments, is frequently what they want. One should also remember that financial institutions of a 
certain important size that expect similar events, have the power to move the market in one direction. 
institutions  analyse  and  expect 
individual 
financial 
from 
the 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 1
Based  on  specific  elements  of  any  national  or  regional  market,  this  does  not  necessarily  show  a 
reduction in the level of risk. Moreover, the systemic risk in this case, is still very high.  
It is then important to provide the supervisor with the necessary analytic tools, to use the global data of 
their supervised financial institutions, for setting up models that will provide for a global analysis. By 
what  we  do  and  who  we  are,  we  are  more  concerned  with  what  will  happen  if  something  extreme 
occurs.  What  if  the  exchange  rate  moves  adversely?  How  is  that  affecting  the  credit  portfolio  of  X 
bank, that is lending mostly in foreign currency? How big is this issue for the banking system as a 
whole? What are the developments in the interest rate that could negatively impact the balance sheet 
of one financial institution and of the entire system? What about the combination between the interest 
rate risk and the concentration risk, and its impact in one institution that holds most of the treasury bills 
in circulation?  
All these questions are important in the case of Albania. The financial market is developing, but there 
is  a  long  way  to  go.  Banking  sector  is  the  most  important  part,  with  its  assets  counting  for  around 
90 percent  of  the  financial  system.  Looking  at  the  size  of  the  banks,  the  system  continues  to  be 
asymmetric.  However,  when  you  look  at  products  and  services  that  banks  offer  to  the  public,  the 
picture  is  more  balanced.  Lending  is  still  low  compared  to  other  countries  in  the  region,  but  is 
increasing  quickly.  Around  80  percent  of  the  lending  portfolio  is  in  foreign  currency.  Investments  of 
liquidity in securities is increasing. As of the end of 2004, return on equity stood at 21.1 percent, while 
return on assets was 1.28 percent. Capital adequacy ratio stood at 21.6 percent. As of the beginning 
of 2004, state is no longer controlling any bank capital. Even though the Albanian economy is a small 
one, the potentials for expansion are real as the economy is very much opened and the region is more 
and  more  integrating  into  the  European  Union  economic  area.  As  such  we  expect  more  positive 
developments in the financial sector and the banking sector in particular. While the situation for the 
system as a whole is satisfactory, there are certain challenges out there, that need greater awareness 
among the industry and a careful monitoring from the Bank of Albania.  
Hence,  due  to  the  structure  of  the  banking  system  and  the  expected  tightening  competition 
environment, individual small banks are expected to experience difficult times ahead. We expect to 
see a lowering of their profit margins, which may hamper their attempts to position themselves better 
in the marketplace. On the other side, they will be forced to find new ways of increasing their financing 
and their incomes. From its side, Bank of Albania will pay particular attention to these banks, as in 
such difficult times, the procedures and the controls in the high earning bank activities (like lending) 
tend  to  relax.  At  the  same  time,  as  a  central  bank  we  believe  that  there  are  possibilities  for 
consolidation taking place in the banking system. We believe that through this process, higher profile 
international banks could enter the growing Albanian market or existing small and middle sized banks 
could position themselves better in the marketplace. 
Bank of Albania wants to see a higher intermediation level of the banking system and a greater impact 
in the economic development of the country. We will encourage the banking system to lend more to 
sound businesses and to those areas of the economy that appeal to them with solid and continuous 
progress. However, in every instance, we shall insist that banks maintain strong loan underwriting and 
administration processes, in order to ensure a balanced and solid growth of the activity. Due to the 
currency  composition  of  the  loan  portfolio,  it  is  important  that  banks  pay  particular  attention  to  the 
cash-flow of their borrowers, as this may not be denominated in the same currency of the loan. Any 
unexpected adverse change in the exchange rate could mean problems, if not prepared in advance to 
cope with that. On the other side, Bank of Albania wants to see higher levels of lending in domestic 
currency. This, along with other information, will improve its ability to forecast better the developments 
in  the  transmission  mechanism  and  in  performing  its  monetary  policy.  Looking  at  a  broader 
macrofinancial  picture,  Bank  of  Albania  has  contributed  to  that  goal  by  reducing  its  Repo  rate  to 
historic  low  levels  and  closing  the  lending  interest  rate  differential  between  domestic  and  foreign 
currency. 
New  developments  of  the  banking  and  financial  system,  pose  new  challenges.  It  is  important  that 
these  challenges  are  well  identified,  well  understood  and  well  acted  upon.  We  want  to  do  this  in 
cooperation  with  the  banking  system.  Opening  communication  lines  and  transparent  and  fruitful 
discussion of the new developments will help each side to understand the problems better and to act 
quickly  to  amend  the  situation,  within  the  regulatory  framework.  We  will  continue  to  improve  our 
supervisory processes, with the aim of making the supervision completely risk-oriented and proactive. 
We will invest considerable time and money in upgrading the quality of our staff. We intend to make 
our regulatory framework compliant with the best international standards as much as possible under 
our specific local conditions. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2005
Dear participants,  
I believe that this workshop is going to help us in expanding our knowledge about risk in the financial 
and the banking sector, and in promoting stress-testing as one of the techniques. Stress-testing, used 
separately  and  together  with  other  techniques,  is  a  valuable  tool  in  verifying  the  endurance  of  our 
financial institutions and financial system. In the Bank of Albania, we have a lot of interest in knowing 
your experiences. Hence I would encourage you to provide this workshop with your real examples. I 
believe you will also enjoy Tirana, a city that is changing quickly, even for those who live here. You will 
understand a little more about this country and its people, and this could prove as interesting as to 
make you wish to come back again. Last but not least, I would like to thank the International Monetary 
Fund, Mr Driessen and his colleagues, for supporting and developing this joint workshop in Tirana and 
for providing their valuable theoretical and practical expertise. 
Thank you and enjoy. 
BIS Review 24/2005 
 3
