Loi M Bakani: Save today for a better tomorrow 
Address  by  Mr  Loi  M  Bakani,  Acting  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  at  the  Pacific 
Regional Conference on Microsavings, Port Moresby, 28-29 June 2005. 
 Welcome 
Minister  for  Inter-Government  Relations  –  Hon.  Sir  Peter  Barter,  MP.,  Minister  for  Community 
Development – Dame Carol Kidu, MP., Representatives from ADB and AusAID, other development 
partner  representatives,  Senior  Government  Officials,  representatives  from  the  banking  and  finance 
sectors, overseas guests and participants to the conference. 
I am very pleased to welcome you all to this conference, and for our overseas guests and participants, 
a special welcome to Papua New Guinea (PNG). I hope that during the few days of the conference, 
you will not only learn about microfinance but also learn much about PNG itself and the opportunities 
that it presents. 
It  is  also  pleasing  to  see  that  the  invited  international  guest  speakers  and  the  distinguished 
participants  have  accepted  PNG’s  invitation  to  this  year’s  conference,  entitled  –  Pacific  Regional 
Conference on Microsavings. 
The Bank and the PNG-ADB Microfinance Project team have planned this conference as part of the 
on-going initiatives to promote the microfinance industy in PNG and the Pacific region. I am confident 
that the participants are looking forward to the two(2) days of the conference and the information and 
knowledge gained during this conference will add value in their efforts to develop their microfinance 
institutions in their respective countries. 
Message of the Conference 
The  theme  of  the  conference  is  -  “Save  Today  for  A  Better  Tomorrow”.  This  theme  befits  this 
conference  as  the  year  2005  is  the  international  Year  of  Microcredit  as  proclaimed  by  the  United 
Nations  General  Assembly  to  recognise  microcredit  as  a  means  to  alleviate  poverty  and  create 
employment. It is timely. As the conference unfolds in the next two days, many of us attending this 
conference  would  attempt  to  understand  the  theme  from  our  own  perspectives  with  respect  to 
microfinance developments. 
Perhaps we should try and understand the theme from the viewpoints of the ‘grass roots’ or the bulk in 
the informal and semi-formal sectors. There is a saying that the poor do save. The problem is that they 
need financial institutions, delivery mechanisms, systems and hands-on education and training to be 
able to understand why and how to save. In PNG however, traditional settings and arrangements of 
our  societies  and  communities  based  on  sharing  and  communal  support  is  a  challenge  to  the 
conference theme. I believe it takes a change in the mindset of our people. It requires a paradigm shift 
in our view about creating a better tomorrow through sacrificing today’s spending and enjoyment for a 
secured ‘tomorrow’. Our people need to be educated to know why they need to save and the expected 
sacrifice that will pay off in the future. 
The development of the microfinance industry in PNG through the PNG-ADB Microfinance Project is a 
long-awaited  news.  In  line  with  the  Project’s  scope  of  work,  the  establishment  of  the  microfinance 
institutions (MFIs) is a relief that, at last, there is now in place a kind of financial institution with which 
they  can  save.  The  progress  todate  of  the  Wau  Microbank  in  Morobe  and  the  PNG  Microfinance 
Limited in Port Moresby can attest to this development. 
Government Policy Initiatives 
In response to the harsh reality of lack of effective developments in the rural areas where 80% of the 
people live, the government of PNG had developed a number of policy papers aimed at mapping out 
the  path  to  addressing  the  problem.  These  papers  include  Medium  Term  Development  Strategies 
(MTDS), the National Dialog, SME and Microfinance Policies. In these policy papers, the government 
had expressed that private sector development is paramount for the future of PNG. In the SME-Policy, 
BIS Review 53/2005 
 1
the government had expressed the important role of small and medium enterprises as contributors to 
the long-term sustainable development of the private sector. Perhaps these initiatives can be modeled 
by our Pacific neighbors in their endeavor to develop their microfinance sectors given that many of our 
features are similar. 
Regulatory and Supervisory Developments 
Microfinance is a new and fast growing industry in PNG, and I believe in the other Pacific countries as 
well. For PNG, there is no legal framework currently in place to regulate and supervise the industry. 
However,  the  Bank  of  PNG  (“Bank”)  is  in  the  process  of  establishing  a  legal  framework  for  the 
microfinance  industry  and  will  soon  announce  broad  guidelines  on  the  licensing  requirements  for 
microfinance  institutions  or  microbanks.  Although  the  Bank  is  expected  to  contribute  to  the 
development of microfinance, this will eventually be phased out so that the Bank can revert to its core 
roles as supervisor & regulator of the financial system. 
Whilst  contributing  to  the  development  of  the  microfinance  sector,  the  Bank  does  not  at  all 
compromise  its  primary  roles  and  responsibilities.  All  licensed  financial  institutions,  including 
microbanks  and  licensed  microfinancial  institutions  are  expected  to  fully  comply  with  the  regulatory 
and  prudential  requirements  of  the  Bank.  Protection  of  public  deposits  and  stability  of  the  financial 
system are at the centre of the Bank’s objectives. For these reasons, we continue to enforce good 
governance  in  both  the  Board  and  management  level,  through  the  “Fit  &  Proper”  tests  for  those 
involved. The Bank will not go easy on licensed institutions that are found to be violating the provisions 
of the various Acts that empower it or the prudential standards and directives of the Bank. 
Challenge: Translating Rhetoric into Reality 
We can make speeches, write policies and attend conferences to address the needs of the informal 
and  semi-formal  sectors  but  if  these  are  not  translated  into  reality,  those  that  are  supposed  to  be 
helped will continue to remain in their backwardness. This is a challenge, not only for the government 
but,  for  all  stakeholders  to  consider.  The  PNG-ADB  Microfinance  Project  is  spear-heading  the 
microfinance development in PNG. I welcome and encourage the Pacific participants to interact with 
your PNG counterparts to learn and get as much information as possible from this conference to help 
you develop your microfinance sectors. 
Acknowledgement 
I would like to acknowledge the contributions of our development partners through the Project. One of 
the components of the Project is the Microfinance Competence Centre (MCC). I would like to thank the 
team members of MCC for organizing this conference and inviting participants from the Pacific region 
to attend. 
Closing 
In closing, I believe this conference opens up the way for all to share information and ideas to address 
the  common  problem  of  poverty  alleviation  and  rural  development  through  microfinance.  In  this 
respect, I wish you all success in your deliberations over the two(2) days of the conference. 
Thank you very much. 
