Jarle Bergo: The economic outlook and household debt 
Address by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the annual 
meeting of the Association of Norwegian Finance Houses, Gardermoen, 27 May 2005.  
The discussion of the economic outlook is based on Inflation Report 1/05 and the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s 
press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on  25  May.  Please  note  that  the  text  below  may 
differ slightly from the actual presentation.   
The references and the
Charts in pdf-format can also be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 The economic outlook 
The Norwegian economy is growing at a solid pace and growth is likely to remain high. The recession 
was mild after the previous period of expansion culminated in 2002. The period of relatively high cost 
inflation in Norway came to an end without production being impacted to the same extent as during 
the recessions in the early 1980s and around 1990. One of the reasons for this is probably that low 
inflation  in  the  1990s  and  current  monetary  policy  have  anchored  expectations  of  low  and  stable 
inflation among economic agents.  
Inflation has been low in recent years. Inflation measured by the CPI-ATE reached its lowest level in 
the first months of 2004. Inflation picked up through the autumn. The depreciation of the krone since 
the  beginning  of  2003  has  contributed  to  these  developments.  In  addition,  the  rise  in  prices  for 
domestically  produced  goods  and  services  stabilised,  and  towards  the  end  of  2004  there  was  a 
tendency towards a more rapid rise in prices for these goods and services.  
Prices  for  imported  consumer  goods  fell  more  than  expected  at  the  beginning  of  2005,  while  the 
tendency  towards  a  more  rapid  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and  services  has 
persisted. So far in 2005, inflation measured by the CPI-ATE has hovered at ¾ per cent.  
The projections in Inflation Report 1/05, published on 16 March, are based on a gradual increase in 
the  interest  rate.  This  is  in  line  with  expectations  among  financial  and  foreign  exchange  market 
participants. It is assumed that the exchange rate will shadow movements in the forward exchange 
rate.  This  implies  that  in  the  years  ahead  the  krone  will  remain  fairly  stable  at  approximately  the 
current level.  
With  a  path  for  the  interest  rate  and  the  krone  exchange  rate  in  line  with  the  baseline  scenario  in 
Inflation Report 1/05, inflation may increase gradually from less than 1 per cent today to close to 2 per 
cent  in  mid-2006.  Under  these  assumptions,  inflation  may  stabilise  at  around  2½  per  cent  at  the 
three-year horizon. Developments in line with these projections imply that the output gap will widen to 
about 1¼ per cent in 2006 and then gradually narrow.  
Developments since the March Inflation Report was published do not provide grounds for changing 
the  perception  of  the  main  features  of  developments  in  the  real  economy.  The  results  of  the  wage 
settlement so far may suggest that wage growth this year will be somewhat lower than projected by 
Norges Bank. Inflation, on the other hand, has been broadly in line with expectations, and the krone 
exchange  rate  has  developed  approximately  as  projected  since  the  March  Inflation  Report  was 
published.  The  inflation  outlook  has  not  changed  significantly  since  the  March  Inflation  Report  was 
published.  
At its monetary policy meeting on 25 May, Norges Bank’s Executive Board decided to leave the sight 
deposit rate unchanged at 1.75 per cent.  
The Executive Board stated:  
“The  monetary  policy  assessments  presented  in  the  Inflation  Report  in  March  indicated  that  the 
interest rate will rise after a period and at a gradual pace. The assessments were based on market 
participants’  expectations  that  the  interest  rate  would  be  increased  in  the  summer.  A  development 
where the interest rate rises gradually - in small and not too frequent steps - was considered to provide 
a good balance between the different objectives. The outlook for inflation and activity has not changed 
substantially  since  the  March  Inflation  Report.  As  an  alternative,  the  Executive  Board  considered 
increasing  the  interest  rate  already  at  this  meeting.  Nevertheless,  the  Executive  Board  did  not  find 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 1
grounds  –  given  the  prospect  of  continued  low  inflation  for  a  period  ahead  –  to  deviate  from 
expectations in the money and foreign exchange markets at present.”  
There are a number of uncertainties that may lead to different developments than those indicated by 
the projections in the Inflation Report.  
Increased  current  account  imbalances  in  major  countries  along  with  high  oil  prices  and  volatile  oil 
markets are contributing to the uncertainty concerning developments in the global economy.  
Household debt 
One area of uncertainty associated with the economic outlook in Norway, stressed by many observers, 
is  the  high  level  of  and  strong  growth  in  household  debt.  In  the  rest  of  this  speech,  I  will  consider 
possible causes of this strong growth. I will also say something about the possible consequences of 
debt accumulation for the economic outlook in general and for financial stability in particular.  
Causes of household debt growth 
I.  
Debt  is  growing  far  more  rapidly  in  the  household  sector  than  in  the  enterprise  sector.  Growth  in 
household debt has generally been high during the last five years. The interest rate reductions since 
December 2002 seem to have amplified debt growth somewhat. It appears that this high growth will 
continue in 2005. Growth in debt has also been appreciably higher than income growth, so that the 
debt-to-income ratio, often referred to as the debt burden, has increased markedly.  
Household debt and the housing market 
Norges Bank’s analyses show that high house prices may explain most of the growth in household 
debt. Sales of new dwellings have also made a positive contribution. The contribution from changes in 
the  interest  rate  was  high  in  2003  and  2004,  but  has  diminished  recently.  Lower  unemployment  in 
2004 and increased house sales have pushed up debt growth. Household debt also depends on the 
number of students aged 20-24 as a share of the total population. This reflects demand for student 
loans and the fact that persons with higher education normally have larger housing loans than those 
without  higher  education  (all  else  being  equal).  Our  analysis  shows  that  higher  house  prices  affect 
debt with a considerable lag. The main explanation is that the change in the loan-to-asset value ratio 
of a dwelling is closely related to the sale of the dwelling and that only a small portion of the housing 
stock is for sale at all times. Even if house prices stabilise following a sharp rise, there will be a long 
period during which houses change hands at a higher price level than the last time they were sold.  
Other factors may also contribute to a high level of household debt. Compared with other countries, 
many households in Norway own their own dwelling. Factors such as centralisation, a larger number 
of single persons, fewer persons in each household and available loan products may also have had an 
effect.  
House  prices  are  determined  by  supply  and  demand  in  the  housing  market.  The  housing  supply  is 
stable, however, in the short term because building new dwellings takes time and because housing 
construction in any case will be low in relation to existing housing stock. Therefore, in the short term, 
prices for resale homes will generally be determined by demand.  
The  demand  for  owner-occupied  dwellings  depends  primarily  on  the  interest  rate  level,  household 
income  and  household  expectations  concerning  future  income  growth.  Lower  interest  rates  mean 
lower borrowing costs connected with the dwelling and thus higher demand for housing. This pushes 
up house prices.  
Developments  in  the  labour  market  are  important  for  house  prices  because  they  affect  household 
income.  Increased  unemployment  leads  to  expectations  of  lower  wage  growth  and  increased 
uncertainty concerning future income growth. Thus, demand for owner-occupied dwellings falls. Banks 
may also be more reticent about providing loans when unemployment increases.  
If expectations about future house price inflation rise, it will be relatively more favourable to purchase a 
dwelling now rather than later. The result is increased housing demand and higher house prices today. 
Price expectations depend both on observed developments in interest rates, income and house prices 
and on household expectations of future interest rates and income growth.  
2 
 BIS Review 39/2005
Housing  demand  also  depends  on  population  movements  and  demographic  conditions  such  as 
cohabitation  patterns,  population  size  and  the  number  of  individuals  in  the  start-up  phase.  Net 
migration to central areas has been positive in recent years. This has affected regional house prices in 
different ways.  
Norges  Bank  has  recently  estimated  a  relation  for  house  prices.  The  model  contains  effects  of  the 
housing  stock,  the  unemployment  rate,  banks’  lending  rates  after  tax,  total  wage  income  in  the 
economy and an indicator of household expectations concerning their own financial situation and the 
Norwegian  economy.  In  the  work  on  the  relation,  we  did  not  find  any  evidence  to  suggest  that 
migration  or  demographic  conditions  have  strong  direct  effects  on  house  prices.  However, 
demographic changes may affect prices indirectly by affecting overall wage income in the economy.  
The estimated relation provides a good explanation of house price developments in recent years. High 
wage income has pushed up house prices. The contribution from interest rate changes has also been 
high in the last two years but has diminished somewhat recently. In the model, interest rate changes 
have a strong short-term effect.  
House prices in Norway have risen substantially since 1995. House prices have also risen rapidly in 
many other countries. The IMF has expressed concern that house prices may be too high in relation to 
fundamentals in some countries.  
In Norway, there have been signs recently of a slower rise in house prices. The seasonally adjusted, 
monthly rise has been low since November 2004, but it edged up again in April. On the other hand, 
the time it takes to sell a dwelling has declined further, whereas the number of dwellings sold remains 
high.  
Housing starts increased substantially in 2004 as a result of high house prices, low interest rates and a 
favourable  economic  outlook.  In  Oslo  in  particular,  the  level  of  residential  construction  activity  has 
been high. Increased housing supply will in isolation reduce the pressure in the housing market and 
contribute to reducing house prices.  
In  the  last  Inflation  Report,  house  price  inflation  is  projected  to  slow  towards  2008.  The  main 
explanation  for  this  is  higher  interest  rates,  but  increased  housing  construction  will  also  be  a 
contributing factor. Lower unemployment has the opposite effect.  
Growth in household debt is expected to slow as a result of lower house price inflation. Nevertheless, 
growth in household debt will be higher than growth in disposable income until 2008. As a result, the 
debt burden, i.e. debt in relation to disposable income, will rise to a level that is appreciably higher 
than the level prevailing at the end of the 1980s.  
The debt burden for Norwegian households is relatively high compared with other countries. Structural 
factors  such  as  the  percentage  of  owner-occupied  dwellings  and  differences  in  tax  systems  are 
important to explaining the differences in debt burdens.  
The transition in monetary policy from an exchange rate target to an inflation target has probably made 
it less likely that households will be exposed to a “dual shock” in the form of higher unemployment and 
higher interest rates, as was the case during the banking crisis. As a result of the change in monetary 
policy and more stable macroeconomic developments, households may also have chosen to adapt to 
a higher debt burden than before.  
Household wealth 
II.  
Household gross financial assets have increased more than debt in recent years (measured in NOK). 
This financial buffer reduces some of the concern related to debt growth.  
Debt as a percentage of gross financial assets is lower today than at the end of the 1980s. Insurance 
claims account for a substantial share of household wealth. Insurance claims are illiquid, however, and 
cannot be utilised if payment problems arise. However, debt as a percentage of liquid financial assets, 
i.e. financial assets minus insurance claims, is also lower now than it was at the end of the 1980s.  
The strong increase in wealth indicates that the debt growth in recent years has not led to a reduction 
in saving. This contrasts sharply to the situation in the 1980s. At that time, debt growth was also high, 
but it financed consumption and not investment, and overall saving fell sharply.  
BIS Review 39/2005 
 3
In addition to financial assets, households also have housing wealth. There is considerable uncertainty 
attached to the estimates for housing wealth. A cautious estimate indicates that household housing 
wealth is 11 per cent higher than financial assets and more than 40 per cent higher than debt.  
Total debt is unevenly distributed 
One worrying aspect of these developments is that debt and wealth are unequally distributed across 
different  household  groups.  Compared  with  the  1980s,  the  debt  burden  has  increased  in  low-  and 
middle-income  households  (deciles  1-6).  Households  with  higher  income  (deciles  7-9)  have  the 
highest debt burden. The debt burden for households with the highest income (decile 10) has fallen 
markedly since the banking crisis. This is partly due to changes in the tax system at the end of the 
1980s  which  led  to  a  reduction  in  tax  deductions  for  interest  expenses,  especially  for  high-income 
groups, and changes in the tax system in 1992.  
Debt is also unevenly distributed by age. In recent years, the debt burden has increased substantially 
in  the  younger  age  groups.  The  debt  burden  for  the  age  group  25-34  is  approaching  the  level 
prevailing at the time of the banking crisis. The rise in the debt burden must be seen in connection with 
the fact that they are in the start-up phase and with the rise in house prices. The high debt burden 
makes these groups vulnerable in the event of an interest rate increase.  
Consumer credit 
III. 
Banks’ and finance companies’ exposures to household loans depend in part on whether loans are 
secured. Good collateral provides a buffer against losses and is therefore advantageous for a robust 
financial system.  
Mortgage  loans  account  for  the  majority  of  household  borrowing.  The  share  of  housing  loans  has 
increased  since  1996,  whereas  the  share  of  other  repayment  loans,  which  may  be  unsecured  or 
secured  with  collateral  in  the  form  of  a  car  or  boat,  has  declined.  Other  loans  include  construction 
loans,  bank  overdrafts,  operating  credit,  leasing  and  factoring.  Their  share  is  virtually  unchanged. 
Norges Bank’s statistics do not provide the basis for estimating the total scope of unsecured loans. Of 
a  total  of  NOK  1  021  billion  in  loans  to  wage  earners,  pensioners,  social  security  recipients  and 
students at the end of 2004, NOK 208 billion represented non-mortgage loans.  
Since the third quarter of 2004, growth in mortgage loans has slowed while growth in other loans has 
increased. Growth in mortgage loans, however, remains higher.  
In the last decade, loans from finance houses to households have increased from three to four percent 
of household loans and now amount to a total of NOK 47 billion.  
Each  quarter  Kredittilsynet  (Financial  Supervisory  Authority)  conducts  a  survey  of  selected  finance 
companies  that  are  engaged  primarily  in  consumer  financing.  Consumer  loans  are  defined  here  as 
both card-based loans and other unsecured consumer  loans. The survey shows that several of the 
finance  companies  in  the  sample  have  recorded  strong  growth  in  lending.  However,  growth  has 
slowed.  The  survey  shows  that  compared  with  total  loans  to  the  household  sector,  the  number  of 
defaults  on  consumer  credit  is  high  but  relatively  stable.  Losses  are  low.  Profitability  in  these 
companies  has  improved  considerably  in  recent  years,  illustrated  here  by  net  interest  income  as  a 
percentage of average total assets. This indicates that the enterprises take into account the high risk 
when pricing consumer credit. At the same time, it is surprising that more new participants have not 
entered the market when profitability is so high.  
Some  consumer  loans  are  probably  extended  as  mortgage  loans.  This  possibility  is  closed  to 
households that do not own their own dwelling. These households will have to raise consumer loans if 
they need credit. According to Statistics Norway’s tax statistics for 2003, debt growth for individuals 
who do not own their own dwellings has been relatively high, but somewhat lower than for those who 
own their own dwellings. However, the average level of debt for individuals who do not own their own 
dwellings is considerably lower than for those who own their own dwellings.  
An increased supply of unsecured loans has improved consumption possibilities for households that 
would  not  otherwise  have  had  access  to  the  credit  market.  In  a  period  when  the  supply  of  loan 
products increases, it is important that borrowers look carefully at total costs and other loan terms.  
For lenders, the absence of collateral means that evaluating customers’ creditworthiness is even more 
important,  especially  in  the  case  of  new  customers.  It  may  be  difficult  to  acquire  information 
concerning customers’ total debt if they have unsecured loans from several lenders. Therefore, it is 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2005
important  that  both  borrower  and  lender  thoroughly  evaluate  the  borrower’s  future  debt-servicing 
capacity.  
Consequences of developments in household debt 
IV. 
History shows that periods with a sharp rise in asset prices, investment and credit may be followed by 
problems  in  the  financial  sector.  Periods  with  sharp  increases  in  asset  prices  are  often  marked  by 
great  optimism.  A  strong  belief  in  the  future  contributes  to  high  investment  which  is  often  debt-
financed. High share prices may make it easier to gain access to capital to finance investment. At the 
same time, higher asset prices provide scope for raising larger secured loans. When negative news 
appears  and  spreads,  investments  do  not  match  expectations  and  the  sentiment  is  reversed,  asset 
prices fall. Banks’ security is reduced. Borrowers experience problems in servicing their debt. Demand 
and income developments are weakened and banks’ losses increase.  
The sharp rise in house prices and household debt has increased the interest in the interplay between 
monetary  policy  and  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Financial  stability  and  price  stability  are 
mutually reinforcing. Financial stability facilitates a stable supply of credit and stable capital flows and 
underpins  the  transmission  mechanisms  for  monetary  policy.  Price  stability  strengthens  financial 
stability.  Low  and  stable  inflation  provides  households  and  enterprises  with  a  clear  indication  of 
changes in relative prices. This makes it easier for economic agents to make the right decisions and 
leads to greater price stability in financial and property markets than would otherwise be the case.  
Developments in credit and asset prices have an influence on inflation. We take this into account in 
our interest-rate setting. We are also aware of the potential risks to financial stability.  
The current low interest rates make it easy to service debt. The household interest burden, i.e. interest 
expenses after tax in relation to the sum of interest expenses and disposable income, is low despite 
strong growth in debt. The interest burden will increase, however, when the interest rate reaches a 
more normal level.  
Only 14 per cent of household loans are fixed-interest loans. This is low in relation to other countries 
and makes households vulnerable to an interest rate increase that is higher than currently expected.  
Compared with losses on loans to the enterprise sector, losses on loans to the household sector were 
low during the banking crisis at the end of the 1980s. Despite high real interest rates and a decline in 
income, households were largely able to service their debt. High interest expenses and a decline in 
income, however, forced households to reduce consumption. This led subsequently to lower turnover 
in  enterprises  and  weakened  profitability  and  debt-servicing  capacity.  In  this  way,  households 
contributed to an increase in banks’ losses on loans to the enterprise sector. The higher the household 
debt  burden,  the  stronger  the  potential  spillover  effect  from  the  household  sector  to  the  enterprise 
sector.  
The effects of weak economic developments and/or a change in interest rates on financial stability will 
depend  both  on  the  initial  situation  in  households  and  enterprises  and  on  banks’  ability  to  absorb 
losses. An analysis presented in Financial Stability 1/04 showed that a sharp increase in interest rates 
and a subsequent fall in house prices may increase banks’ losses to 2.5 per cent of gross lending. 
This is roughly half of what losses were at the beginning of the 1990s. The moderate increase in loan 
losses is due primarily to an improved financial situation in the enterprise sector.  
Banks’  capacity  to  absorb  loan  losses  depends  on  their  results  and  their  capital  adequacy.  In  the 
same  report,  we  assessed  the  capacity  of  the  seven  largest  banking  groups  to  absorb  losses  by 
measuring how large the losses would have to be over a three-year period before their capital base fell 
below the minimum requirement of 8 per cent. We based our assessment on the accounts for 2003 
and  assumed  that  banks  do  not  raise  new  equity  or  supplementary  capital,  that  the  size  and 
composition of the balance sheet does not change, and that the banks do not pay a dividend. In the 
first  example,  we  assumed  that  banks  have  the  same  results  as  in  2003  in  each  of  the  three 
subsequent years. In the second example, we assumed a result before losses of zero for these three 
years.  
With the same result before losses as in 2003, the most solid of the seven largest bank conglomerates 
will have the capacity to absorb an average loss per year over a three-year period of 3.1 per cent of 
gross lending before the capital falls below the minimum requirement of 8 per cent. If the result before 
losses is zero in the three years, this group will have the capacity to absorb an average loss of 1.4 per 
cent  of  gross  lending.  The  least  solid  of  the  seven  banks  will  have  the  capacity  to  absorb  average 
BIS Review 39/2005 
 5
losses per year over a three-year period of 1.7 per cent and 0.8 per cent of gross lending, respectively, 
given these two assumptions concerning results.  
Conclusion 
The short-term outlook for financial stability appears to be favourable. In the long term, high and rising 
household debt is a source of uncertainty. Admittedly, household financial wealth has also increased, 
but debt and wealth are unequally distributed across different household groups. Low interest rates 
and stable macroeconomic developments indicate that the outlook for households is favourable in the 
short term. In the longer term, the higher household debt burden represents a source of instability in 
demand and output.  
6 
 BIS Review 39/2005
