Klaus Liebscher: Austria after 10 years of EU membership - a review from a 
central banking perspective 
Speech  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  at  the  Bulgarian  National 
Bank, Sofia, 1 April 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen! 
I  greatly  appreciate  being  invited  to Sofia  by  Governor  Iskrov.  He  and  I  have  already  had  a  fruitful 
exchange  of  views  about Bulgaria’s  future  membership  in  the  European  Union,  the  macroeconomic 
consequences of this step and its implications for the Bulgarian National Bank. It is now a great honor 
for me to address such a distinguished audience here today. 
To begin, let me sketch the historical background leading up to this 10-year period. 
Europe has changed dramatically over the last decades. Today’s Europe is no longer characterized by 
“hot  or  cold”  conflicts,  but  by  peaceful  coexistence  and  the  mutual  respect  of  nations.  The  EU  has 
played a major role in this historic success.  
Appeasement  policies  starting  immediately  after  World  War II  in Western  Europe  resulted  in  the 
establishment  of  the  European  Coal  and  Steel  Community  in  1951  and  in  the  foundation  of  the 
European  Economic  Community  (EEC)  in  1958.  Since  then,  several  enlargements  of  the  European 
Community(EC),  then  the  European  Union  (EU)  and  the  establishment  of  the  Single  Market  and 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) have been milestones in the European integration process. The 
latest – but not last – enlargement of the EU by 10 new member states in May 2004 has brought the 
definite end to the division of Europe into “East” and “West.” Bulgaria’s and Romania’s EU accession 
treaties are scheduled to be signed on April 25 – in less than a month – and we hope to see Bulgaria 
and Romania join the EU by January 2007. 
Austria recognized the benefits of active participation in European integration early on. In 1960, the 
country was among the founding members of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). Then, in 
July 1989, Austria applied for EU membership. In 1994, Austria joined the European Economic Area 
(EEA) and finally, in 1995, it became a member of the EU. In the field of monetary integration, Austria 
belonged to the founding members of the euro area in 1999. Each of these events required substantial 
adjustments and modifications, all of which we were able to manage remarkably well. 
The  integration  steps  Austria  took  were  based  on  the  profound  conviction  among  Austrian 
policymakers that Austria should be part of an integrated Europe, a Europe founded on fundamental 
values  such  as  the  respect  for  human  rights  and  human  dignity,  freedom,  democracy,  equality, 
pluralism, tolerance and the rule of law. 
I believe that the Austrian public always felt the same. The referendum on joining the EU in 1994 was 
backed  by  a  very  solid  two-thirds  majority.  However,  there  have  been  periods  of  EU  scepticism  as 
well.  The  root  causes  for  such  scepticism  are  manifold.  Sometimes  they  are  vague  and  difficult  to 
grasp, sometimes they are specific.  
There is no ready-made solution to counteract bouts of EU scepticism. However, I consider it of the 
utmost importance that policymakers and opinion leaders do not tire of addressing the issues which 
are at the heart of such criticism and scepticism. 
The  entry  into  the  EU  and  the  participation  in  monetary  union  have  visibly  shaped  the  Austrian 
economy.  The  changeover  to  EU  law  and  the  intense  cooperation  and  communication  with  EU 
institutions,  together  with  the  process  of  gradually  getting  used  to  the  rules  of  the  new  and  stiffer 
competition  of  a  single  market,  have  triggered  extensive  reforms,  which  have  been  in  the  genuine 
interest of Austria.  
Accession  to  the  EU  generated  considerable  net  welfare  effects;  that  is,  the  cost  of  offsetting 
measures  was  more  than  compensated  by  welfare  gains.  Solid  economic  growth,  a  sound  labor 
market, stable prices, moderate unit labor costs and high price competitiveness, the consolidation of 
public  finances,  growing  attractiveness  for  foreign  investors,  the  traditional  monetary  stability,  and 
social  peace  have  significantly  increased Austria’s  international  competitiveness.  The  growing 
integration of different economic areas and the increasing mobility of the production factor capital have 
BIS Review 22/2005 
 1
shifted the focus of the economic debate on questions of competitiveness and advantages of business 
locations. Austria’s attractiveness as a business location has substantially benefited from participation 
in the single market and in monetary union. 
Let  me  cite  an  example:  Before  Austria  joined  the  EU,  competition  policy  was  not  one  of  the  most 
sophisticated  areas of  the  Austrian  judicial  and economic  system,  as deeply  vested  interests  led  to 
market segmentation and little competition in certain sectors, such as the food processing industry and 
utilities. EU membership was a deliberate decision of policymakers to facilitate structural changes that 
led  among  other  things  to  greater  efficiency,  increased  competitiveness  and  lower  price  increases 
in Austria. 
The average (CPI) inflation rate fell from approximately 2.8% in the decade before EU membership to 
some 1.7% thereafter.1 According to one economic study, EU membership has lowered inflation rates 
by some 0.3% to 0.5% and at the same time increased real GDP growth by some 0.3% to 0.8 % per 
annum in Austria, Finland and Sweden.2 
A comparison by the Oesterreichische Nationalbank of Austria, Finland and Sweden, all of which have 
been  EU  Member  States  since  1995,  and  non-member Switzerland,  concludes  that  productivity 
increases  in Austria, Finland  and Sweden  have  been  nearly  three  times  as  high  than  those 
in Switzerland since 1995.3 
Over  the  past  decades, Austria  has  thus  become  a  leading  small,  open  economy  in Europe.  This 
positive economic performance is mirrored by GDP per capita figures, where Austria ranks third in the 
EU, right behind Luxembourg and Denmark. At 4.5%, the unemployment rate is the third-lowest in the 
EU.4 Youth and long-term unemployment is also kept at comparatively low levels. The employment 
rate  of  15-  to  64-year  olds,  measured  in  terms of  full  employment,  is  one  of  the  highest  in Europe. 
Another often cited positive feature of the Austrian economy is the cooperative social climate, which 
has been fostered by the system of "social partnership." The dialogue between the social partners has 
facilitated the favorable development of unit labor costs, which, together with Germany’s, have been 
the slowest-rising unit labor costs in the EU over the last decade. Thus, Austria augmented its share of 
EU exports to 3.4% by 2003 from 2.9% in 1995. 
But Austria has benefited not only from EU membership and the Single Market, but also from the fall of 
the  Iron  Curtain  in  1989  and  from  the  transition  and  integration  process  in  Central  and  Eastern 
Europe, including – as I always do when I refer to this region – Southeastern Europe. Foreign direct 
investment (FDI) in the region and bilateral trade intensified very significantly. In the case of Austria, 
bilateral trade with Central and Eastern Europe5v has tripled since 1993 in real terms. The respective 
data  for Bulgaria  and Austria  reflect  these  developments: Austria’s  exports  to  Bulgaria  more  than 
tripled  and  imports  from  Bulgaria  even  quadrupled  in  real  terms  since  1993.  In  addition,  Austrian 
investors are among the most important foreign direct investors in Bulgaria.  
For  instance,  two  of Austria’s  big  financial  players  in  the  region,  Bank Austria  and  Raiffeisen 
International, are active in Bulgaria through their subsidiaries (“HVB Bank Biochim” and “Hebrosbank” 
respectively “Raiffeisenbank (Bulgaria)”). 
Indeed, one particular success story is the Austrian financial sector, which seized the opportunity to 
enter the financial sector in Central and Eastern Europe by means of greenfield investments and by 
participating  in  the  privatization  processes.  By  entering  these  markets  soon  after  they  opened  up, 
Austrian  banks widened  their  home  base,  diversified  their  business  portfolio and  strengthened  their 
profitability. The Financial System Stability Assessment (FSAP) finalized by the IMF last year confirms 
the  robustness  of Austria’s  banking  system,  not  least  due  to  the  successful  move  into  Central 
and Eastern Europe.  
                                                      
1  Austria’s (HICP) inflation rate has been consistently below the euro area rate. 
2   Breuss, F. (2003), “Österreich, Finnland und Schweden in der EU – Wirtschaftliche Auswirkungen,” WIFO-Monatsberichte7.  
 
3   Pointner, W. (2005), “Drei Beitritte und ein Einzelfall” forthcoming in Geldpolitik & Wirtschaft 2/2005, OeNB. 
4   At 4.5%, in January 2005 and on average in the year 2004, the unemployment in Austria is the third-lowest of the EU. 
5   CEEC-10 (i.e. without CIS).  
Inflation: AT -0.32%; SF -0.32%; SW -0.52%. Real GDP growth: AT: +0.42%; SF +0.83%; SW +0,30%. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2005
At  the  beginning  of  the  transition  period,  the  financial  sectors  in  the  transition  economies  were 
characterized by a low degree of financial intermediation, inefficiencies and instability. The strategic 
move of Austrian banks to Central and Eastern Europe not only benefited these banks, but contributed 
substantially to a stabilization of the banking systems in Central and Eastern Europe, accelerated the 
penetration  of  these  economies  with  financial  services  and  thereby  contributed  to  the  very  positive 
development of this area. 
Having mentioned some positive effects for Austria, one has to concede that big changes rarely only 
create  winners.  Even  though Austria  had  been  a  highly  developed  country  with  strong  trade  links 
in Europe, our entry in the Single Market entailed adjustment costs and significant changes for some. 
A powerful process of structural consolidation manifested itself, among other things, in a temporarily 
very high number of insolvencies. This became visible to some extent even at an aggregated level, 
foremost  in  our  current  account  balance,  which  deteriorated  temporarily  from  close  to  balance  to  a 
deficit  of  some  2%  of  GDP  from  1994  to  1996.  Notwithstanding  this  development,  on  balance,  the 
decision to join the EU was without a doubt beneficial for Austria as a whole, not only in the medium 
and long run, but even in the short run. 
To what extent can our experience be relevant to Central and Eastern Europe? 
Basically,  European  integration  was  conceived  as  a  project  aimed  at  ensuring  peace,  stability  and 
prosperity  in Europe.  This  aim  is  not  restricted  to Western  Europe  only.  The  most  recent  and 
forthcoming  enlargement  of  the  European  Union  should  be  seen  as  the  realization  of  the  EU’s 
longer-term objective of providing a framework for political stability and economic progress throughout 
Europe. 
But  I  am  afraid  that  we  have  sometimes  become  very  selective  in  our  perception  of  Central 
and Eastern Europe. We tend to take note only of certain developments and give some well-meant 
advice. And sometimes I have the impression that we easily fail to appreciate the enormous progress 
that has already been made in most of the – let me say “former” – transition countries, especially in 
those  which  are  most  advanced  in  reforms  and  transformation.  However,  the  latest  enlargement  of 
May 2004, as well as the forthcoming enlargement with Bulgaria and Romania, is the well-deserved 
confirmation of the impressive progress these countries have made. Let me congratulate you on these 
major achievements! 
Having  said  this,  there  is  a  consistent  need  for  economic  reform  in  all  societies.  While  the  reforms 
which can be characterized as transition-specific sooner or later come to an end, other reforms will 
never be complete, and the need for further adjustments will always arise. Constant reform efforts are 
the key to achieving a path of sustainable high real growth. Maintaining a faster pace of average real 
growth  than  in  the  European  Union  is  a  minimum  requirement  for  keeping  the  catching-up  process 
going in Central and Eastern Europe. We all need and benefit from this catching-up process, both in 
Europe as a whole and at the global level, as we cannot afford to let the gap between rich and poor 
countries persist or become wider. 
Notwithstanding  the  progress  made  so  far,  a  balanced  and  consistent  policy  mix  will  be  of  crucial 
importance also for Central and Eastern Europe in its catching-up and integration efforts. Let me focus 
on two aspects of this policy mix: 
First, structural reforms are the key to long-term success. Existing productive capacities have to be 
reshaped and new ones have to be built, above all in the service sector.  
In  particular,  financial  services,  which  were  practically  nonexistent  when  transition  started  some 
15 years  ago,  have  to  be  strengthened  further.  As  you  are  well  aware,  the  main  tasks  are  bank 
privatization, making possible the entry of foreign banks, the development of a sound credit culture, 
the transformation of banks into efficient financial intermediaries and the privatization of corporates. 
Reforming economic structures and institutional arrangements will, in turn, often imply additional fiscal 
expenditures.  Therefore,  it  is  all  the  more  important  to  push  ahead  with  fiscal  reform  to  ensure 
adequate  room  for  maneuver  for  these  additional  outlays.  Furthermore,  this  exemplifies  the 
importance of a well-balanced policy mix, in particular a good balance between structural and fiscal 
policies. 
Second, in the field of macroeconomic policies, I would like to underline the importance of formulating 
and implementing stability-oriented, sustainable and consistent fiscal and monetary policies. 
From a central banking perspective, Austria’s EU membership did imply major changes de jure, which 
de  facto,  in  the  case  of  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  were  rather  minor.  In  particular,  the 
BIS Review 22/2005 
 3
monetary policy strategy of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank had been price stability oriented ever 
since the country’s dramatic experience with hyperinflation after World War I. Hence, joining the EU 
and being one of the founding members of the euro area changed very little in terms of the monetary 
policy orientation. 
The  Maastricht  Treaty  of  1991  set  out  the  criteria  for  membership  in  the  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union, clearly stipulated that EMU would have to start by 1999 at the latest and specified that EMU 
would be stability oriented, particularly in terms of low inflation and sound public finances. In 1994–95 
not  everybody  believed  that  EMU  actually  would  fly  by  1999,  but  we  at  the  Oesterreichische 
Nationalbank  had  already  started  to  prepare  for  this  historic  event.  And  this  was  a  wise  and 
foresighted decision. 
One of the most important issues we had to handle when we were preparing to join the EU concerned 
the entry of our currency, the Austrian schilling, into the old ERM. At the time, our exchange rate policy 
for about two decades had been to have a very narrow peg to the Deutsche mark, because Austria 
was  a  small,  open  economy  whose  most  important  trading  partner  was Germany  and  because  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank  pursued  a  price  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy.  Over  time,  this 
exchange rate strategy gained very high credibility inside and outside Austria, not least because the 
Austrian  schilling  was  one  of  the  very  few  currencies  to  weather  the  exchange  rate  turbulences  of 
1992 and 1993 which ultimately resulted in the ejection of the pound sterling and the Italian lira from 
the ERM and the widening of the ERM bands from ±2¼% to ±15%. 
Austria  decided  to  join  the  ERM  on January  9,  1995,  as  soon  as  possible  after  entering  the  EU, 
without changing its narrow peg strategy against the Deutsche mark. The ERM countries gave us a 
warm welcome, not only because of our impressive exchange rate track record. Let me relate to you 
what made Austria’s “hard” peg exchange rate strategy so successful and indeed is essential to make 
any viable fixed-peg exchange rate regime a success.  
The underlying, interdependent factors are: 
1. 
2. 
stable institutions;  
a  compelling  economic  policy  strategy  and  policy  mix,  with  straightforward,  credible  rules 
that are understood and observed by all players;  
the firm understanding and the credibility that macroeconomic policy, in particular fiscal and 
wage policies,   will be adjusted whenever necessary; and 
sound economic fundamentals.     
4. 
In general, I would caution a simple transfer of conclusions from one country’s experience to any other 
country. However, I absolutely believe that these principles play a vital role in any fixed exchange rate 
regime, including currency boards, such as Bulgaria’s arrangement. 
In  respect  to  monetary  policy,  I  am  also  convinced  that  a  sound  stance  and  conduct  can  best  be 
achieved if the central bank is fully independent. Institutional, personal and financial independence are 
constitutive  elements  of  central  bank  independence  which  are  not  an  end  in  themselves  but  are 
instrumental in attaining functional independence.  
Functional independence is tantamount to having a clear primary objective, which has to be reflected 
in a country’s central bank legislation. Moreover, great importance should be attached to responsibility, 
accountability and transparency as a counterpart of independence. 
I am convinced that price stability should be regarded as the primary objective of monetary policy in 
transition countries, too. Actually, all EU member countries are obliged by the Treaty to pursue price 
stability as a target, even though there is no legal requirement for a national central bank outside the 
euro area to pursue price stability as its primary target. However, before adoption of the euro, changes 
in  respect  to  price  stability  as  the  primary  objective  are  required  as  part  of  the  legal  convergence, 
which will be examined in the convergence reports by the Commission and the ECB. 
Progress in bringing inflation down can be accomplished through a variety of monetary and exchange 
rate  frameworks  that  can  be  classified  into  three  groups:  1)  euro-based  currency  boards  (such  as 
Bulgaria’s arrangement); 2) pegs or managed floating with the euro as the anchor currency; and 3) 
free floating. 
Having  said  this,  an  overly  ambitious  monetary  approach  which  is  not  adequately  underpinned  by 
developments  in  the  real  economy  may  lead  to  losses  in  credibility  or  even  turn  out  to  be 
3. 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2005
counterproductive  to  stability  and  to  the  long-term  catching-up  process.  In  my  view,  it  is  clear  that 
adequately  designed  stability-oriented  policies  facilitate  structural  change.  They  support  the  mutual 
reinforcement  of  prudent  efforts  toward  stabilization  and  structural  change,  which  will  foster  the 
catching-up process. 
As  you  know,  the  monetary  integration  of Bulgaria  and  other  accession  countries  is  scheduled  to 
proceed in three stages:  
• 
• 
in stage 1, they join the EU;   
in  the  second  stage,  the  new  Member  States  participate  in  ERM II  for  at  least  two  years 
without severe tensions; and   
in  the  third  stage,  after  the  sustainable  fulfillment  of  all  the  convergence  criteria,  the  new 
Member States adopt the euro.      
 Actually, the institutional monetary integration process already starts somewhat before a country joins 
the EU: Following the signing of the Accession Treaty, the Governors of the acceding country central 
banks  attend  the  meetings  of  the  General  Council  of  the  ECB  as  observers,  and  the  acceding 
countries’ central bank experts have observer status in the committees of the ESCB whenever these 
meet in ESCB composition.  
This principle already applied to Austria in 1994 – at a time at which the EMI, the forerunner of the 
ECB, existed, and it will apply to Bulgaria from April 25, 2005. National central banks outside the euro 
area in the ESCB framework as well as in inside the euro area in the Eurosystem have vital tasks in 
the preparation and implementation of the decisions taken by the decision-making bodies of the ESCB 
and of the Eurosystem. 
Upon  joining  the  EU,  i.e.  in  the  first  stage  of  the  integration  process, Bulgaria  will  participate  in 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  with  the  status  of  a  “country  with  a  derogation.”  This  means 
that Bulgaria cannot join the euro area immediately, but that it has already committed to joining the 
euro area at a later stage. 
In the second stage of monetary integration, participation in ERM II does not require the fulfillment of 
formal criteria. However, successful participation in ERM II requires that major policy adjustments are 
undertaken before joining the mechanism. It also requires utmost vigilance in keeping the economy on 
a  sound  performance  path  after  joining  the  ERM  II.  Three  of  the  10  new  Member  States  –
 Estonia, Lithuania  and Slovenia–  have  joined  ERM II  in  the  meantime.  They  are  participating  with 
standard  fluctuation  bands  of  ±15%.  Nevertheless, Estonia  and Lithuania  have  kept  their  currency 
boards as a unilateral commitment. 
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  been  stressing  for  some  time  that  countries  that  operate  a 
euro-based currency board deemed to be sustainable might not be required to go through a double 
regime shift, i.e. floating the currency within ERM II only to repeg it to the euro at a later stage. We 
have been pointing out as well that any currency board regime will be assessed on a case-by-case 
basis and that a common accord on the central parity against the euro will have to be reached. 
The Maastricht criteria will be applied to future euro area entrants just as they were applied to euro 
area countries: Not more, but certainly not less stringently. It may take a while before new Member 
States are in a position to fully participate in EMU.  
A fair share of realism is called for to avoid disappointment. In the long run, such an equitable and 
strict procedure will be to the advantage of all Member States of the EU. 
My own institution, the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, has been an active partner for central banks in 
Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe since the very start of transition. Initially, our contribution to 
institutional development consisted in technical assistance. Gradually, this has evolved into technical 
cooperation and finally into working relationships. By now, these relationships have become integrated 
in the joint efforts of the whole European System of Central Banks. Being a member of this system, my 
bank  has  complemented  its  bilateral  relations  by  actively  promoting  a  dialogue  between  the 
Eurosystem  and  the  central  banks  of  the  accession  countries.  At  another,  multilateral  level,  the 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank, the Austrian Ministry of Finance and the IMF are the Primary members 
of the Joint Vienna Institute (JVI). Since 1992, Bulgarian participation in courses and seminars offered 
at the JVI has been high and very active.  
BIS Review 22/2005 
 5
Of course, the Oesterreichische Nationalbank would be pleased to consider any further requests for 
technical cooperation by the respective Bulgarian authorities, for instance in the form of tailor-made 
study visits and consultations. 
After touching on the implications of our experience for the monetary integration of the new Member 
States, I would like to return to my original topic, Austria after 10 years of EU membership. Here one 
event clearly stands out: the introduction of the euro in 1999. The introduction of the single currency 
was a major success for Austria, the euro area and from a global perspective. Let me mention just a 
few aspects of this success: 
The integration of money and capital markets in the euro area has lowered cross-border barriers, has 
increased the depth and breadth of financial markets and has thereby boosted their efficiency. Market 
integration  has  also  led  to  the  convergence  of  long-term  interest  rates  toward  the  rates  of  the  best 
performers. All this and in particular the single currency have improved the resilience against financial 
market crises, such as heightened exchange rate and interest rate volatility, which had beset us all too 
often before 1999. 
Turning  to  monetary  policy,  the  independence  of  the  Eurosystem  and  its  primary  objective  of 
maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  have  become  a  global  standard.  Price  stability 
unambiguously represents a precondition for sustainable economic growth and rising employment in 
the medium run. Not only has the euro helped to lower inflation rates in Member States, but the euro 
area itself has become a stable monetary anchor in the global economy.  
The aim of the Eurosystem to maintain inflation rates close to but below 2% over the medium term is 
widely accepted. With inflation averaging 2% since the start of EMU, we have by and large achieved 
this  goal,  despite  quadrupling  oil  prices  and  a  difficult  macroeconomic  environment.  On  top  of  this, 
monetary policy with historically low interest rates has taken on its share of the burden in supporting 
economic activity and employment.  
The public and the markets can trust that the Governing Council remains firmly committed to deliver 
on its mandate of maintaining price stability. 
With respect to fiscal policy, the EU Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact oblige euro area member 
states  to  achieve  budgetary  positions  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus,  in  order  to  provide  a  safety 
margin to the 3 % deficit limit. However, the fiscal track record of the euro area is mixed. In the early 
years of EMU, the Stability and Growth Pact led to an end of ever-rising debt ratios. Since then, fiscal 
discipline has regrettably deteriorated in some Member States, which cannot be explained by weak 
economic growth alone. 
The Governing Council of the ECB is seriously concerned about the recent changes to the Stability 
and Growth Pact. We must prevent changes in the corrective arm from undermining confidence in the 
fiscal  framework  of  the  European  Union  and  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  in  the  euro  area 
Member States. 
Sound fiscal policies and a monetary policy geared to price stability are fundamental for the success of 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  They  are  prerequisites  for  macroeconomic  stability,  growth  and 
cohesion  in  the  euro  area.  It  is  imperative  that  Member  States,  the  European  Commission  and  the 
Council of the European Union implement the revised framework in a rigorous and consistent manner 
conducive to prudent fiscal policies. More than ever, in the present circumstances, it is essential that 
all parties concerned fulfill their respective responsibilities.  
Fiscal policy must be part of a comprehensive and growth-oriented strategy, focusing – as a rule – on 
restraining the volume and on improving the structure of public expenditures. Excessive deficits for a 
protracted period of time – like those we are witnessing in some euro area member states – obviously 
do not promote economic growth but rather depress the confidence of investors, entrepreneurs and 
consumers.  On  the  other  hand,  the  top  performing  countries    in  the  euro  area  in  terms  of  recent 
budget balances, all have been proving that sound fiscal policies and productive economic structures 
actually contribute to positive economic developments.  
I  sincerely  hope  that  the  new  Member  States  and  accession  countries  do  not  draw  misguided 
conclusions from the latest adaptations to the Stability and Growth Pact. It is of utmost importance to 
recognize that potentially lax fiscal policies in the new and future EU Member States carry the high risk 
of  triggering  detrimental  convergence  expectations,  which  would  bring  about  significant  “divergence 
costs” in financial markets and economic performance. 
6 
 BIS Review 22/2005
This brings me to an – at least as formidable – challenge, which relates to the low potential growth in 
the euro area. In 2000, the European Council adopted the Lisbon Agenda with the bold aim of making 
the EU the most dynamic economic area by 2010. Even though there have been structural reforms 
and successes in several areas und some countries, economic growth has remained disappointing. 
Due to long time lags, it is possible that the beneficial effects of some already implemented reforms 
are  still  to  kick  in.  However,  it  is  obvious  that  the  progress  of  most  Member  States  has  been 
insufficient. 
To make the EU more dynamic, the implementation of structural reforms has to be stepped up and 
many  partially  implemented  reforms  have  to  be  fully  put  into  practice,  in  order  to  provide  the 
framework  in  which  competitive  enterprises  and  qualified  human  capital  can  prosper  and  create 
wealth.  Such  reforms  should  be  aimed  at  increasing  labor  utilization  as  well  as  boosting  labor 
productivity, for instance by increasing flexibility, improving education and technological diffusion as 
well as promoting innovation.  
Indeed,  recent  challenges  from  the  new  Member  States,  e.g.  in  terms  of  attracting  foreign  direct 
investment,  have  raised  the  urgency  for Western  Europe  to  adapt  its  structures  in  order  to  boost 
competitiveness. These spillover effects are welcome eventually, as they accelerate structural change, 
which  promotes  economic  growth.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  only  dynamic  economies  can  sustain 
modernized, but still generous social systems in Europe. 
The integration process in Europe will mutually strengthen the EU and its current and future Member 
States. Bulgaria and the other countries from Central and Eastern Europe certainly stand to gain most 
from  the  related  catching-up  and  convergence  process.  But  the  EU-15  Member  States,  especially 
those with strong trade links to this area, for example Austria, will experience positive effects as well. 
While there may be adjustment costs in some sensitive areas, not only for the EU-15 but also for the 
new EU Member States, these costs should be of a temporary nature and will be outweighed by far by 
the positive effects related to intensified foreign direct investment flows, trade creation and increased 
competition. Actually, we do not have to rely on vague projections anymore: a considerable part of the 
once expected benefits has already become a reality. Supported by intensified trade, the stabilization 
of  expectations  and  the  decrease  in  interest  rates,  Bulgaria  and  the  new  EU  Member  States  are 
experiencing an impressive catching-up process, with economic growth rates significantly above those 
of the euro area. 
In concluding, Austria joined the EU more than a decade ago. Naturally, our honeymoon did not last 
for the entire decade. However, it is fair to say that Austria’s first 10 years in the EU have been an 
impressive success, certainly for us, and I believe for the EU as well. The economic data give us an 
unambiguous verdict. 
Having said this, the EU is not only about markets, trade, profits and losses. The EU is much more 
than  that:  The  EU  is  the  most  important  and  successful  peace  project  Europe  has  ever  seen. 
Visionaries like Winston Churchill, Robert Schuman and Jean Monnet were needed to outline how to 
overcome deeply vested, ingrained divisions within Europe. 
Today,  the  EU  not  only  comprises  countries  from  the  western  part  of  Europe,  but  also  free  and 
democratic countries from Central and Eastern Europe. Bulgaria is at the threshold of joining the EU. 
Some 15 years ago, such a development appeared highly unrealistic. Again, visionaries as well as the 
will of the people were needed to translate this project into reality. 
This  success  reminds  us  not  to  lose  sight  of  our  long-term  goals  and  visions  despite  short-term 
distractions and the concerns of our daily work. No matter whether they relate to a peaceful world, a 
prosperous  and  dynamic  Europe,  or  the  establishment  of  vibrant  cultural  ties  across  the  European 
regions and peoples. 
Thank you very much for your attention! 
BIS Review 22/2005 
 7
