Panagiotis Thomopoulos: Impact of the Basel II requirements on banks and 
their business customers 
Introductory speech by Mr Panagiotis Thomopoulos, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, to the 
Alumni  Association  of  the  London  School  of  Economics,  Eugenides  Foundation,  London,  20  April 
2005. 
 It is an honour for me to address such a distinguished audience and to introduce an expert on the 
subject , Mr Edward L. Harris, who has participated in the preparation of Basel II and who, I am sure, 
will make very interesting comments on the effects of Basel II on shipping. 
The new, more risk sensitive framework for the calculation of banks’ capital requirements, introduced 
by the Basel Accord and known as “Basel II”, was initially intended for the internationally active banks. 
In Europe it will take the form of the Capital Requirements Directive and it will be implemented by all 
banks irrespective of size and focus as well as by investment firms. The approaching implementation 
of  the  new  framework  has  intensified  the  discussion  on  its  effects  on  the  stability  of  the  financial 
systems as a whole, on the health and the behaviour of individual banks and, last but not least, on the 
access of businesses to banks’ financing. 
Since the first draft, in 1999, arguments have appeared both against and in favor of the Accord. The 
former highlighted its complexity, its costly implementation as well as its technical integrity, such as the 
problem  of  procyclicality.  The  arguments  in  favor  emphasized  the  incentives  it  gives  for  better  risk 
management,  the  reduction  of  regulatory  arbitrage  opportunities  and  the  attainment  of  capital 
requirements that better reflect the risks of the banks. After a long and heated discussion, three impact 
studies and revisions of the Accord, we can say that now the balance seems to have tipped towards 
the advocates of the Accord. Its cited shortcomings have either been addressed or by far outweighed 
by the favourable effects it will bring to the banks, their customers and the economy as a whole. 
Effects on banks 
In order to better understand Basel II effects on banks, it is worth reiterating the objectives of the Basel 
Committee regarding the overall level of minimum capital requirements. According to the introduction 
of the new Accord, issued in June 2004: “The objectives are to broadly maintain the aggregate level of 
minimum  capital  requirements,  while  also  providing  incentives  to  adopt  the  more  advanced  risk 
sensitive approaches of the revised Framework” 
The new framework intends to achieve this objective through three Pillars: 
The first pillar aligns the minimum capital requirements more closely to banks’ actual underlying risks 
and allows banks, under certain preconditions, to rely on their own measures of those risks. It changes 
significantly  the  calculation  of  capital  requirements  against  credit  risk  and  introduces  capital 
requirements against operational risk. 
The second pillar, supervisory review, requires that banks enter into a dialogue with their supervisors 
on the methods and internal estimates, that they develop in order to determine how best to manage all 
their risks, including how much capital beyond the minimum requirement a firm should hold.  
The third pillar, market discipline, by enhancing transparency, strengthens the ability of marketplace 
participants to reward well-managed and capitalised banks As intended by the Committee, the overall 
capital requirements of banks are not expected to fall significantly. The capital requirements for credit 
risk  should  in  most  cases  decrease,  more  so  if  the  most  advanced  approaches  are  used,  but  this 
should be largely counterbalanced by additional capital set aside against operational risk. 
According to the Quantitative Impact Study of the Basel Committee in 2003, the average decrease of 
capital requirements for European Union institutions should be around 5.3%, ranging from an increase 
of 1.9% for banks using the standardized approach for credit risk to a decrease of 8.7% for the ones 
using the most advanced A-IRB (internal rating based) approach. For banks using the standardized 
approach  the  increase  of  capital  requirements  stems  solely  from  the  operational  risk  charges, 
amounting  to  10.3%,  which  were  not  counterbalanced  by  the  reduction  in  credit  risk  charges.  For 
banks  using  the  more  advanced  approaches  the  reduction  of  credit  risk  charges  far  outweighs  the 
BIS Review 28/2005 
 1
additional  charges  for  operational  risk.  In  total,  for  the  EU  banks  using  the  standardised  approach, 
mainly  small  banks,  even  after  allowing  for  the  10.3%  reduction,  their  capital  adequacy  ratio  will 
remain  well  above  10%  and  only  a  few,  with  a  share  in  total  banking  sector  assets  of  0.2%  may 
experience some difficulties. However, these banks may be able to raise some additional capital or 
merge with more capitalised banks, and in any way as their market share is insignificant they do not 
pose a systemic risk. 
Regarding  Greek  banks,  this  QIS  showed  an  increase  of  capital  charges  by  7.5%  stemming  by  a 
decrease of credit risk charges by 2.5% and an increase of operational risk charges of 10%. It should, 
however,  be  noted  that  the  Greek  banks  which  participated  in  the  QIS  used  the  most  simple 
(standardized)  approach.  However,  since  then  Greek  big  banks  (with  a  market  share  of  70%)  are 
gradually introducing IRB methods, so that when the new framework will be introduced, they will be 
able to reduce their credit risk charges. All the more so, that mortgage credit and consumer credit, as 
well lending to small business, which have under the new accord a preferential treatment in relation to 
capital  requirements,  are  growing  much  faster  than  the  rate  of  growth  of  total  credit.  This,  in 
combination  with  the  starting  high  level  indicates  that  the  capital  adequacy  ratio  in  Greece  should 
remain on average above 12%. 
Of  course  the  individual  banks’  capital  requirements  reductions  depend  not  only  on  the  type  of 
approach  used  but  also  on  the  composition  of  the  portfolio  and  its  quality.  Banks  with  a  larger 
proportion  of  retail  credit,  including  credits  to  Small  &  Medium  sized  Enterprises  (SMEs)  will 
experience a larger reduction of their capital requirements. Also banks with collateralized exposures or 
with customers having a better, external or internal, rating, which, of course, reflects better quality, will 
have a larger reduction. 
The  largest  reduction  will  of  course  be  for  banks  with  good  quality  portfolios  that  use  the  most 
advanced approaches for the calculation of capital requirements. It is only natural and fair that banks 
using  the  more  advanced approaches will  benefit  most.  After  all,  the  new  framework  is  intended  to 
provide incentives for the upgrading of the banks’ risk management systems. 
However, the reduction of capital charges for credit risk should not be expected by itself to motivate 
banks  to  adopt  the  more  advanced  methods.  The  high  costs  for  the  implementation  of  the  more 
advanced  systems  will  discourage  a  number  of  banks. 
In  a  study  conducted  by 
PriceWaterhouseCoopers  for  the  European  Commission,  the  implementation  cost  in  Europe  was 
estimated at about € 20-30bn, with individual banks spending € 30 - 150 m, depending on their size, 
sophistication and approach used. 
Although one cannot deny that a significant amount of these costs result from the need for regulatory 
compliance to the new framework, an equally large part are the result of improvements in credit risk 
and operational risk management systems that would have been introduced even in the absence of 
Basel II. Basel II has accelerated the process and should, with time, both increase shareholder value 
and strengthen the financial systems worldwide. 
In a globalised world, without many financial frontiers, the competition driven need for improved risk 
management  systems  are  motivating  banks  to  move  more  and  more  to  the  more  advanced 
approaches.  And  this  because  the  better  measurement  of  credit  risk  would  allow  banks  to  better 
evaluate  the  return  of  their  main  product  i.e.  credit  and  the  profitability  of  their  business  lines. 
Accordingly,  banks  are  introducing  the  advanced  approaches  for  the  calculation  of  capital 
requirements  so  as  to  be better  placed  to  identify  opportunities  in  the  credit market  and be  able  to 
exploit them through more focused marketing initiatives and better pricing. 
Traditionally,  banks  use  some  discrimination  in  their  pricing  decisions  but  mostly,  because  of  their 
inability  to  adequately  differentiate  the  credit  risk  of  their  individual  obligors  there  is  a  cross-
subsidisation of products and customers. Therefore, the system irrespective of the credit worthiness of 
the borrower was contributing to rather level pricing, especially as regards capital requirements. 
For example, consider two unsecured corporate loans, one to a rather good customer, with external 
rating  A  and  an  internally  estimated  probability  of  default  of  0.12%  and  another  worse  one  with  an 
external credit rating of BB and an internally estimated probability of default of 1,5% . According to the 
current  framework  the  required  capital  to  be  set  aside  against  both  customers  would  be  8%  of  the 
amount lent. According to the new framework: 
• 
If the standardized approach is used the capital to be set aside the first customer would be 
4% while the capital set aside for the second customer would be 8%. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2005
 If the Foundation IRB Approach is used the capital required against the first customer would 
be 2.7% for the first and 8.9% for the second. 
The new framework allows, therefore, greater differentiation of the amount of capital to be set aside 
against loans to each of these customers. 
In addition, the current framework required the same amount set against lending irrespective of the 
type of obligor (corporate, small business, retail customer). Only mortgage were allowed, under certain 
conditions lower capital requirements. The new framework makes a distinction between corporates, 
small businesses (those with exposures of less that € 1m to the banking group) and individual (retail) 
customers. For the advanced approaches a further differentiation exists for corporates with sales of 
less than € 50 mil. To summarize, the new IRB framework is a customer-tailored system, whereas the 
existing one is essentially “one size fits all” irrespective of the weight and height of the customer. 
Effects on businesses 
There is a lot of discussion regarding the effects of the new Accord on lending, especially to SMEs 
(small  and  medium  sized  enterprises),  which  in  Greece  are  the  great  majority  of  firms.  After  some 
adjustments,  to  take  into  account  these  concerns,  the  reduction  in  capital  charges  for  small  and 
medium enterprises (exposures below € 1 million) and well-provisioned past-due loans as well as the 
recognition of credit risk mitigants, such as collateral and guarantees, render the new framework much 
more favourable than the existing one. 
Generally the capital requirements for loans to corporate are likely to fall significantly (up to 80% in 
some cases) for excellent credit quality with credit risk mitigants, such as eligible collaterals. In the QIS 
it was found that corporate, non-SME lending would benefit in a pan - European level from a reduction 
of capital requirements of 2.5%. The reductions would be more for corporate SMEs i.e. corporates with 
annual sales lower than €50m, and would amount to 4%. 
Enterprises with exposure of less than € 1 m can be treated as retail customers, resulting to a further 
decrease  by  a  significant  amount  of  capital  requirements,  eventually  passing  the  benefit  onto 
companies  themselves.  Under  the  advanced  approaches,  the  capital  requirements  for  a  loan  to  a 
corporate with PD =1.5% and LGD = 45% would be as much as 8.9%, whereas if the customer was an 
SME treated as retail would be only 4.52% 
Of course the requirement for reliable data on the basis of which the banks would be able to judge the 
creditworthiness of their customers, may create an additional burden to SMEs to produce timely and 
accurate accounting and other financial information. However the availability of such information might 
also lead to more efficient management of such companies based on more informed and less intuitive 
decisions. 
What is more important is the fact that the meaningful differentiation of risk will lead to a more efficient 
allocation of capital. Banks will be able to identify companies of high creditworthiness and offer them 
credit,  at  preferential  terms,  supporting  thus  their  growth.  This  would  benefit,  not  only  healthy 
companies, including SMEs, which will find it easier and less costly to borrow from banks, but also the 
economy as a whole. 
However, starts-up may find some difficulties in raising loans and, therefore, other means of finance 
have  to  be  further  developed.  Especially  for  new  technologies,  where  Europe  is  lagging,  venture 
capital is not readily available: the sums raised in 2003 were 1/3 below of those raised in the US and 
the average technology investment almost 1/10 of the US, thus further underlining the need in Europe 
to lift the financing obstacles for the dynamic technology sectors. 
BIS Review 28/2005 
 3
