Jaime Caruana: Overview of the Spanish economy in 2004 
Address by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision,  to  the  Governing  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Spain  on  the  occasion  of  the 
presentation of the Annual Report 2004, Madrid, 10 June 2005. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The performance of the world economy in 2004 was exceptional: growth exceeded 5%, the highest 
rate for the last quarter of a century; inflation remained under control, with the exception of slight rises 
in some emerging countries; and the climate on international financial markets was relatively relaxed, 
allowing  generous  financing  conditions  in  most  countries.  No  headway  was  made,  however,  in 
correcting  the  world  economy’s  main  disequilibria,  which  tended  to  worsen.  Adding  to  these 
imbalances was the shock of higher oil prices, which look more permanent than in previous episodes. 
There  are  thus  persistent  risks  and  vulnerabilities  which,  if  not  corrected,  might  endanger  the 
continuity of growth. 
Underpinning  the  buoyancy  of  the  world  economy  was,  above  all,  the  contribution  of  US  and,  to  a 
greater extent, Chinese demand, along with that from other emerging Asian economies. There was 
also a marked rise in activity in other emerging regions, such as Latin America and the central and 
eastern European countries. Conversely, the economic performance in the euro area and Japan was 
disappointing, with rates of expansion running below initial forecasts. That would appear to confirm the 
scant flexibility of these economies and their limited responsiveness to changing conditions on world 
markets. 
Recent growth patterns have also led to widening divergence between the growth rates of the three 
main developed areas, as the high rate of expansion of the US economy increased and that of Europe 
and Japan declined or rose less than expected. This bore unfavourably on the global disequilibria, as 
manifest in the widening US current-account deficit, the counterpoint to which was the rising surplus in 
Japan,  China  and  other  Asian  economies,  as  well  as  in  the  oil-exporting  countries,  while  the  slight 
surplus in the euro area increased very moderately. 
The prolonged deterioration of the US external balance - linked to a very expansionary fiscal policy 
that  has  compounded  the  effects  of  scant  private-sector  saving  in  recent  years  -  engendered 
expectations  of  a  depreciation  of  the  dollar  on  international  foreign  exchange  markets,  which 
materialised only partially and asymmetrically. Consequently, while the dollar depreciated significantly 
against the euro until late 2004, it held very stable against the Asian currencies with which most of the 
US external imbalance has been built up. The effective depreciation of the dollar was thus only 5% in 
2004. 
The dollar’s fall in the period 2002-04 has not prompted a turnaround in the progressive widening of 
the US external deficit, either because, as is well known, depreciations tend only to correct current-
account deficits with a lag, or because of the aforementioned asymmetry in the behaviour of the dollar 
against the main currencies and the fact that it has scarcely depreciated against the currencies of the 
countries  that  are  running  the  counterpart  surpluses.  In  turn,  in  a  situation  of  large  current-account 
surpluses and strong capital inflows, the Asian countries with de jure or de facto fixed exchange rates 
against the dollar continued to build up sizable international reserves. 
The  need  of  the  Asian  central  banks  to  place  these  reserves  also  partly  explains  another  salient 
feature of economic developments in 2004: the maintenance of long-term interest rates at abnormally 
low levels. This is also largely attributable to the persistence of low inflation expectations, set against 
highly credible counter-inflationary monetary policies, and to the conditions of ample liquidity in which 
international financial markets operated. For much of the year, European bond yields were markedly 
synchronous with their US counterparts, despite the different position of the fundamentals of the two 
economies.  From  November,  however,  European  rates  declined,  moving  progressively  away  from 
US rates  so  that  the  yield  spread  between  these  areas  widened  considerably.  This  more  recent 
development  is  consistent  with  the  uncertainty  over  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  and  the 
brighter outlook for the US economy. 
But perhaps the most salient international economic development in 2004 was the persistent rise in oil 
prices. At the root of this, above all, is the force of demand from the United States and China, in a 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 1
situation marked by production and refining capacity bottlenecks, arising from limited investment in the 
past. Compared with other recent periods of oil price rises, such as the peaks in 1990 and 2000 linked 
to geopolitical tensions, the increase in prices on this occasion fed through to a much greater extent to 
long-term  futures  contracts,  suggesting  the  markets  are  expecting  oil  prices  to  hold  at  high  levels. 
Despite  this, and on  the  indicators  available,  dearer  energy scarcely  affected  inflation  expectations, 
meaning the so-called second-round effects - linked to the reaction by wages - were avoided. On past 
experience, it is these latter affects which are most damaging. 
So  far,  the  effects  of  higher  oil  prices  have  been  surprisingly  mild.  But  economic  policies  should 
remain vigilant in the face of a potential pass-through to inflation expectations, all the more so when 
there are other risks and vulnerabilities in the world economy which, in some respects, have not only 
not  diminished  but  have  tended  to  increase.  Of  note,  here,  is  the  necessary  re-establishment  of  a 
more  normal  macroeconomic  stance  (the  main  countries’  policies  have  been  adding  abnormally 
expansionary momentum in the world economy in recent years), and the potential impact on financial 
markets. 
As regards monetary policies, the countries most ahead in the business cycle have already begun to 
adjust  their  interest  rates  to  a  level  more  consistent  with  a  neutral  stance,  and  foreseeably  those 
further behind in the cycle will progressively pursue this trend as their economies gather steam. 
Turning  to  fiscal  policies,  it  is  telling  that  these  should  have  deteriorated  both  in  areas  with  more 
moderate growth rates, such as Japan and certain euro area countries, where it has been sought to 
use fiscal policy for counter-cyclical purposes, and in other particularly dynamic economies, such as 
the United States, where buoyant demand should have allowed more ambitious fiscal consolidation 
goals.  The  exceptions  to  this  pattern  of  deteriorating  budget  positions  are  in  certain  emerging 
economies, where public debt is relatively high. This is the case of the Latin-American countries, which 
have harnessed the favourable economic situation to improve their primary surpluses. The importance 
of furthering fiscal consolidation in the medium term in the more developed economies becomes even 
clearer  if  the  long-term  problems  linked  to  population  ageing  are  taken  into  account,  while  the 
emerging economies, with high debt levels, need to persevere with budgetary discipline. 
Restoring  a  more  normal  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  stance  requires  care,  to  ensure  that  the  world 
economy is not dislodged from a low-inflation path of recovery. It is particularly important to limit the 
potential  shock  to  international  financial  markets,  which  have  been  operating  in  very  favourable 
conditions  marked  by  high  liquidity,  low  risk  premiums  and  an  interest-rate  term  structure  that  has 
been propitious to long-term borrowing. 
In  this  respect,  monetary  measures  to  safeguard  price  stability  must  be  accompanied  by  an 
appropriate communication policy and consistency in the application of fiscal rules and commitments, 
if the authorities are to avoid a sharp change in conditions on financial markets, which might induce 
exaggerated reactions. In particular, although long-term interest rates should no doubt resume a level 
more  in  keeping  with  past  experience  and  with  the  current  cyclical  phase,  this  process  should  be 
orderly  and  without  excessive  propagation  towards  credit  risk  premiums  on  the  corporate-debt  and 
emerging sovereign-debt markets, or on foreign-exchange markets. 
Another  source  of  vulnerability  of  the  international  economy  lies,  as  discussed,  in  the  global 
disequilibria. Broad international consensus has it that the correction of these imbalances requires an 
increase  in  public  and  private  saving  in  the  United  States,  structural  reforms  to  invigorate  the  euro 
area economies and Japan, and greater flexibility in Asian exchange rates, especially in China. These 
policies  would  gradually  correct  the  present  current-account  mismatches  and  would  have  to  be 
accompanied by exchange-rate movements tending to bring positions closer to long-term equilibrium 
levels. 
The  correction  of  these  current-account  imbalances  would  also  ideally  re-establish  a  more  natural 
direction of capital flows between developed and emerging countries. Compared with the anomalous 
situation at present, in which these flows are from the latter countries to the former ones, owing to the 
combined impact of the absorption exerted by the US economy and the exchange-rate policies in Asia, 
a  smoother  working  of  the  world  economy  should  channel  surplus  saving  from  the  more  mature 
economies  to  those where  the  return  on  capital  is higher,  as  they  are  at  a  more  incipient phase  of 
development. 
It should be recalled that many of the achievements of the world economy in recent years, such as 
moving on to a high, inflation-free growth path and infusing the emerging areas with greater dynamism 
so as to allow them to achieve standards of living closer to those of the richer countries, are a direct or 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2005
indirect  consequence  of  growing worldwide  integration.  Globalisation  has  thus  given  most  countries 
more fluid access to foreign markets while offering them incentives to concentrate on those industries 
in  which  their  comparative  advantage  lies,  and  it  has  provided  consumers  with  a  wider  range  of 
products at more favourable prices. But it should not be forgotten that the rigidity of certain countries’ 
exchange-rate policies has ultimately triggered protectionist threats in others that see themselves as 
adversely affected. It is thus vital not to succumb to these protectionist temptations and to persevere 
with the liberalisation of international trade so that the trends which have allowed the world economy 
to achieve its recent favourable results may become entrenched. 
The euro area 
The prolonged sluggishness of the euro area economy continues, with output growth of below 2% for 
the fourth year running. In the first half of 2004 a more dynamic trajectory was discernible, in line with 
the  greater  robustness  of  the  world  economy,  presaging  the  onset  of  a  firmer  expansionary  phase. 
Activity  has  since  weakened  notably,  however,  and  the  first  half  of  the  current  year  has  seen  no 
improvement. Nonetheless, the conditions remain in place to allow the rate of expansion of GDP to 
increase  gradually  in  the  coming  quarters,  spurred  by  the  continuation  of  relatively  expansionary 
financial conditions and by the momentum of the international situation. 
Dearer oil and the appreciation of the euro have been holding back growth in the euro area for some 
time,  and  these  factors  intensified  in  2004.  However,  it  would  be  wrong  to  attribute  the  protracted 
period of low growth seen in the euro area to these factors. The euro area has in fact benefited in 
recent years from a relatively sharp expansion of its export markets, allowing it largely to offset the 
negative  effects  of  the  euro’s  appreciation.  Moreover,  the  rise  in  the  euro,  along  with  progress  in 
reducing oil dependency, has softened the adverse consequences of higher oil prices. 
At the root of the European economy’s persistent weakness are, instead, the factors that hamper the 
sustained buoyancy of domestic spending and which heighten its sensitivity to external developments. 
The lacklustre consumption and investment of recent years are telling in this connection, and denote 
the  presence  of  structural  shortcomings  which  dampen  household  confidence  and  dent  corporate 
profit  expectations.  Accordingly,  questions  such  as  the  uncertainty  over  the  viability  of  the  public 
pension  system  currently  in  place  or  the  constraints  preventing  higher  productivity  growth  not  only 
have long-term repercussions but also exert a contractionary effect on the present economic situation. 
These overall characteristics of the area do not apply to all the member economies. Growth rates vary 
considerably,  largely  due  to  the  different  degrees  of  vigour  shown  by  internal  demand.  Amid  these 
divergences,  Spain  is  one  of  the  countries  that  has  consistently  posted  substantially  higher-than-
average rates of expansion. 
The Eurosystem monetary policy has retained an accommodative stance, with the intervention rate set in 
June 2003 unchanged at 2%. Although the forceful oil shock has hampered the reduction of inflation, 
medium-term inflation expectations have held at a rate compatible with the Eurosystem’s definition of 
price stability, partly as a result of sustained wage moderation. The favourable trend of labour costs is a 
natural corollary of the prevailing sluggishness of activity and of employment creation, but it also reflects 
the credibility of the anti-inflationary goal of monetary policy. The European Central Bank has been able 
to sustain monetary conditions propitious to the strengthening of activity although, as indicated earlier, 
these have so far proven insufficient to achieve a satisfactory degree of dynamism. It thus appears that 
the euro area has yet to harness fully the benefits arising from economic integration and the introduction 
of the single currency. 
The  emergence  of  difficulties  in  furthering  European  economic  integration  has  recently  been 
discerned.  Cases  in  point  are  the  problems  affecting  the  fiscal  discipline  framework,  the  delays  in 
meeting  the  targets  of  the  Lisbon  Agenda  and  the  obstacles  still  blocking,  in  certain  industries,  the 
development of the single European market. 
At the March 2005 European Council, the authorities attempted to correct the lack of ambition behind 
the structural reforms and the scant consistency of budgetary policies with the disciplinary rules set by 
adjusting some of the policy co-ordination mechanisms. However, only clear resolve on the part of the 
authorities to fulfil their commitments would dispel the scepticism some of these proposals evoke. 
In the fiscal policy realm, the European Council approved a reform of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
Among other changes, provisions were made to pay greater attention to the particular situation of each 
country when evaluating its budgetary position and to make the application of the corrective measures 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 3
envisaged in the Treaty more flexible. As a result of these changes, the economic rationality of certain 
components of the Pact has perhaps been enhanced, though its complexity and the margin available 
for discretion in its application have also undoubtedly increased. There are some favourable aspects 
to the new rules, but they raise doubts as to the Pact’s capacity to deliver the budgetary discipline that 
proper functioning of the Monetary Union requires. Regardless of the fact that a full assessment of the 
agreement reached can only be made once the related legal texts are known, it is imperative, to dispel 
the uncertainty the reform process has aroused, that the European authorities should now apply the 
revised rules unequivocally and strictly. 
The  European  Council  also  revised  the  so-called  Lisbon  Agenda,  with  which  it  was  hoped  to 
reinvigorate  the  European  economy  in  the  first  decade  of  the  new  millennium.  Assessment  of  the 
results achieved at the half-way stage makes disappointing reading. The introduction of reforms has 
been insufficient and the European co-ordination mechanisms have proven too weak to encourage the 
adoption of the appropriate measures at the national level. The Council has sought to re-launch this 
strategy, focusing on growth and employment, and altering the co-ordination arrangements between 
the  Council,  the  Member  States  and  the  Commission,  so  as  to  ease  the  way  for  the  adoption  and 
monitoring of reforms at the national level. This new direction is appropriate, although more specific 
measures giving a more determined political impulse to the process would have been desirable. 
Such determination will be needed, in particular, to overcome the obstacles hindering completion of 
the  single  market.  Indeed,  these  were  manifest  in  the  European  Council’s  request  that  the 
Commission revise its draft directive on liberalising the provision of services in the Union. 
The challenges facing the European economy are considerable and set in an institutional context that 
has  been  disrupted  by  the  “no”  votes  in  the  recently  held  French  and  Dutch  referendums  on  the 
ratification  of  the  Constitutional  Treaty.  The  difficulties  of  entrenching  growth  that  is  sufficient  and 
consistent with the European model and with the general public’s expectations may have influenced 
the disappointing results returned by these referendums. But this is something which is closely related 
to the difficulties at the national level in pushing through the necessary reforms and explaining them 
convincingly. 
The significance and implications of these results should not be underestimated. But they need not 
check  European  integration.  Rather,  they  should  act  as  a  spur  to  further  integration  by  means  of 
European  and  national  policies  that  respond  to  the  demands  of  the  public.  In  any  event,  European 
integration has not been a linear process in the past and I am fully confident that the European Union 
will be capable of overcoming these difficulties just as it always has when obstacles have stood in its 
way. On the plus side in the current circumstances is the fact that it has a currency shared by a large 
number  of  countries  and  a  federally  organised  central  bank  which  are  a  focal  point  of  stability  and 
exemplify  Europeans’  ability  to  embark  on  and  co-ordinate  ambitious  undertakings  that  contribute 
effectively to the collective well-being. 
The Spanish economy 
Spain,  as  I  said  earlier,  has  been  one  of  the  euro  area  economies  that  has continued  to  post  high 
growth rates, compared with the relative slackness of the area as a whole. The new base-year 2000 
National Accounts estimates for Spain, released a few weeks ago, indicate that its GDP grew in 2004 
at  a  significantly  higher  rate  than  the  previous  estimate  (3.1%  against  2.7%),  albeit  with  a  more 
unbalanced composition. Moreover, the growth rate has remained on a mildly accelerating path, which 
has continued into 2005 Q1, when output stood at 3.3% compared with the same period in 2004. 
As indicated in the Annual Report, it has not yet been possible to analyse in depth the new National 
Accounts  series,  although  the  first  comparisons  with  previous  estimates  indicate  that  both  datasets 
offer a fundamentally similar diagnosis of the economy’s performance. In particular, the higher growth 
the  new  figures  -  available  so  far  from  2000  -  show  has  confirmed  the  continuity  of  the  long 
expansionary phase in train since the mid-nineties. The expansion has been the result of the notable 
momentum  of  domestic  demand  combined  with  high  employment-generating  capacity  and  the 
extension of the supply side of the economy, two mutually reinforcing phenomena over these years 
which have provided a sound base for growth. 
Spanish euro area membership lay at the root of the significant expansionary impulses experienced by 
household and corporate expenditure. The effects of the anchoring of inflation expectations and the 
adjustment  of  interest-rate  levels  have  recently  been  reinforced  by  the  looseness  of  monetary  and 
financial  conditions  in  the  euro  area.  Progress  towards  fiscal  consolidation  and  the  maintenance  of 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2005
balanced public finances have contributed decisively to shaping an environment of stability, which has 
eased the financing of private expenditure and growth. 
On the supply side, robust population and employment figures have made for favourable conditions in 
which the expansionary demand impulses have translated into higher growth in activity and not into 
greater pressure on productive capacity leading to disequilibria. That said, and as I will remark later, 
this  has  not  prevented  the  structural  shortcomings  of  the  economy  from  being  manifest  in  upward 
pressures on prices and costs and in a wider current-account deficit. 
Job creation is being fuelled by an expanding labour force, to which the increasing inflow of immigrants 
and  the  rising  labour-market  participation  of  women  are  both  contributing.  Regarding  immigration, 
population projections drawn from the 2001 census and the continuously updated municipal population 
census show an impact that could hardly have been  envisaged only a few years back. In any event, 
strong employment generation has been accompanied by very modest productivity gains, a trend which 
continued in 2004 when employment increased by 2.7%, compared with 2.5% in 2003, and apparent 
labour productivity growth was only 0.4%. 
Domestic demand quickened in 2004 by almost 1 pp, growing by 4.6%. The growth rate intensified as 
the year unfolded, rising to a rate of 5.8% at the start of 2005. This acceleration has been driven by a 
higher  increase  in  private  consumption  and  the  renewed  buoyancy  of  construction  coupled  with  a 
pick-up in investment in equipment. Households’ expenditure has been underpinned by the recovery 
in  their  disposable  income,  which  has  benefited  from  higher  employment  growth  and  from  a 
comparatively favourable contribution by general government, through the net effect of benefits and 
taxes. But above all it is the increase in household wealth in recent years - largely linked to the rise in 
real-estate asset values - and favourable financing conditions which are most underpinning household 
consumption and residential investment decisions. 
The  behaviour  of  productive  investment  has,  in  recent  years,  reflected  the  opportunities  and 
uncertainties of this expansionary phase, many of them related to the external environment. However, 
business  investment  progressively  took  a  lead  from  the  robustness  of  demand  during  2004  and  it 
started  the  current  year  on  a  clearly  more  expansionary  path.  Lax  financial  conditions,  the  healthy 
position achieved by those corporations with most investment potential and favourable expectations 
about economic developments are behind this rise. 
Set  against  the  increase  in  domestic  demand,  external  demand  has  exerted  an  increasingly 
contractionary  influence.  Although  world  trade  picked  up  in  2004,  goods  exports  grew  less  than 
external markets, while imports climbed at very high rates, increasing their penetration in the Spanish 
market.  Tourism  is  feeling  the  effects  of  competition  from  nearby  destinations  offering  packages 
similar to those of Spain at very competitive prices. The negative contribution of external demand to 
GDP growth thus continued to expand over the course of 2004, without any signs of a turnaround in 
2005.  On  the  contrary,  according  to National  Accounts  data  for Q1,  the  contractionary  effect  of  net 
external  demand  has  stepped  up  significantly,  against  a  backdrop  of  stronger  domestic  demand 
pressures  driven  by  high  consumption and  vigorous  construction  spending  combined with  a  clearer 
take-off in investment in capital goods. 
Among  the  factors  influencing  this  negative  behaviour  of  net  external  demand,  the  causes  and 
repercussions  of  which  I  shall  return  to  later,  are  the  persistence  of  inflation  differentials.  Indeed,  the 
inflation  differential  with  the  euro  area  widened  during  2004,  reflecting  a  relatively  sharper  impact  of 
dearer  oil  on  Spanish  prices.  Moreover,  although  the  growth  rate  of  labour  costs  eased,  it  remained 
relatively high. As a result, the 12-month increase in consumer prices rose from 3.2% in December to 
3.5% in April. It is expected to moderate in the coming months, however. Indeed, the initial estimate of 
the HICP for May (3.1%) suggests it already has done. 
At the onset of 2005 the Spanish economy was highly buoyant. This robustness continues to be based 
on the momentum of domestic expenditure and on high job creation. While the impact of some of the 
factors underpinning household spending may moderate in the coming quarters, most of the factors 
operating  in  the  recent  past  will  continue  to  boost  domestic  demand  and,  in  particular,  productive 
investment. Likewise, insofar as European markets recover and the effects of the euro appreciation in 
2004  ease  and  are  absorbed,  the  contractionary  influence  of  external  demand  might  be  checked. 
Under  this  scenario,  the  outlook  for  the  economy  in  the  short  run  points  to  a  prolongation  of  the 
expansionary phase, with sustained GDP growth rates similar to those observed in 2004. 
These forecasts are subject, however, to some risk. This poses significant challenges for economic 
policy, especially when it comes to promoting the sustainability of economic dynamism over a longer 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 5
term,  under  the  constraints  stemming  from  euro  area  membership.  There  are  certain  external  risks 
whose  potential  influence  on  Spain  is  significant,  but  which  economic  policy  action  can  do  little  to 
counter. This is the case with the dangers arising from the weakness of the euro area, from higher oil 
prices and from the appreciation of the euro. What economic policy can do here is in line with what 
policymakers can do to counter domestic risks, these undoubtedly being the most relevant ones for 
policy  design.  Accordingly,  I  shall  focus  on  analysing  the  nature  of  the  latter  and  their  possible 
repercussions. 
The  domestic  risk  factors  stem  largely  from  the  very  prolongation  of  a  long,  domestic  demand-led 
expansionary phase, and can be grouped in two major areas. First, the losses in competitiveness that 
have built up in the earlier described setting of inflation differentials and very low productivity gains, 
which  might  ultimately  check  the  generation  of  value  added  and  job  creation.  And  second,  the 
increase  in  household  debt  that  has  accompanied  the  expansion  of  consumption  and  residential 
investment, which might constrain households’ spending capacity, particularly if developments in the 
housing  markets  were  to  prompt  any  uncertainty  about  the  value  of  this  sector’s  wealth,  which  is 
strongly concentrated in real-estate assets. Although both areas of risk are inter-related, I shall deal 
with each separately. 
In respect of competitiveness, there are signs that the risks signalled by the Banco de España in the 
past  have  already  begun  to  materialise.  The  significant  restraint  on  growth  exerted  by  external 
demand  in  the  past  year  and  the  considerable  widening  of  the  Spanish  economy’s  external  deficit 
point in this direction. Admittedly, these results partly reflect the influence of certain external factors, 
such as dearer oil and the appreciation of the euro, which have dampened the positive impact of the 
international  recovery.  Moreover,  the  deficit  is  also  partly  influenced  by  the  cyclical  divergences 
between Spain and the euro area. But these factors do not suffice to explain either the scale of the 
deficit or the speed at which it has widened, and they should not therefore conceal the existence of a 
genuine deterioration relating to the losses in competitiveness built up in recent years, as I shall now 
seek to illustrate. 
But let me first address the significance and scope of an external deficit when the country concerned 
belongs  to  a  monetary  union,  so  as  to  qualify  interpretations  whereby  such  a  deficit  would  have 
ceased to be a cause for concern. It is true that under the new circumstances there is no danger of a 
burgeoning  external  deficit  generating  financial  or  foreign-exchange  pressures  that  then  trigger  a 
sharp  adjustment  in  the  economy,  since  fundamental  variables  such  as  the  interest  rate  and  the 
exchange  rate  are  determined  at  the  area-wide  level.  But  that  does  not  mean  that  the  economy  is 
immune  to  competitiveness  problems.  On  the  contrary,  when  a  large  external  deficit  emerges  in  a 
monetary union as a result of an economy’s difficulties in competing, a very costly dilemma may arise: 
nominal costs are either adjusted head-on, or the loss of competitiveness will check the generation of 
value added and job creation. 
A first sign of competitiveness problems is to be found in the growing difficulties Spanish products face 
in maintaining their market shares. Spanish export shares on foreign markets, which had held stable 
since the start of Monetary Union, tended to decline in 2004, even on the European market. And the 
fall-off  in  the  tourist  market  is  a  similar  development.  Although  there  are  specific  factors  that  might 
explain  some  aspects  of  this  behaviour,  the  strength  of  growing  import  penetration  in  the  domestic 
market tends to confirm the diagnosis of diminished competitiveness of Spanish products on domestic 
and foreign markets alike. 
The concurrence of the incipient slide in export shares and the ongoing increase in import penetration 
primarily  reflects  the  higher  relative  prices  of  Spanish  products  as  a  result  of  persistent  inflation 
differentials and of the more recent appreciation of the euro. Testifying to this is the negative trend of 
the traditional price competitiveness indicators, even when these are calculated with export deflators 
that  capture  how  the  sector  more  exposed  to  foreign  trade  has  narrowed  margins  to  face  growing 
competitive pressure. 
Behind the ongoing deterioration in price competitiveness lie a relative increase in unit labour costs, 
reflecting continuing higher wage increases in Spain despite the moderation compared with previous 
periods,  and  very  low  labour  productivity  gains.  The  existence  of  wage-setting  and  indexing 
mechanisms that set a higher floor for nominal wage growth than in other countries hinders the rapid 
absorption  of  external  price  shocks.  And  it  also  tends  to  hamper  full  convergence  with  the 
arrangements required in an area of macroeconomic stability. 
The problems posed by wage inertia are exacerbated by the lacklustre behaviour of productivity. As 
noted on previous occasions, this partly reflects intensive growth in employment generation, which has 
6 
 BIS Review 45/2005
in  knowledge  and 
been  most  beneficial  for  entrenching  the  expansionary  cycle  of  the  economy  and  making  more 
efficient  use  of  the  labour  supply  available.  But  weak  total  factor  productivity  growth  -  the  relative 
position  of  which  vis-à-vis  the  EU  has  continued  to  worsen  -  denotes  the  presence  of  other  more 
worrying factors which appear to be checking the incorporation of innovations and technical progress 
into productive processes. 
The lack of innovation in the productive system tends to stifle the economy’s overall efficiency and its 
long-term  growth  capacity.  The  indicators  available  for  the  stock  of  technological  capital  suggest  a 
considerable lag remains in place. Undoubtedly, specific features of the Spanish economy’s pattern of 
productive  specialisation  -  which  is  very  biased  in  manufacturing  towards  the  production  of 
intermediate- and low-technology goods, and in services towards tourism activities - may partly explain 
this phenomenon. But there are also shortcomings that are restricting the business sector’s capacity to 
incorporate  advances 
to  adapt  productive  processes,  human  resources 
management and corporate strategies to an environment of heightened competition. 
Of particular importance are the persistent mismatches between the skills and training levels of labour 
and  companies’  requirements,  and,  above  all,  the  rigidities  in  the  workings  of  factor  and  product 
markets,  which  discourage  the  adoption  of  more  innovative  strategies.  I  draw  attention  to  these 
limitations of the Spanish economy at a particular juncture in which foreign direct investment is slowing 
considerably (FDI having been one of the main channels for the diffusion of technological advances), 
and in which the weight of high-technology imports remains very limited, despite the surge in import 
penetration. 
The  prolongation  of  the  current  trends  might  mean  that  the  industries  most  exposed  to  foreign 
competition have to adjust their staffing levels in order to maintain their business margins. Hence the 
importance  of  creating  an  environment  conducive  to  technological  innovation  and  to  higher 
productivity, which I shall refer to later. 
The second area where risks have arisen from the extended expansionary phase of the economy is 
related,  as  earlier  indicated,  to  the  ongoing  buoyancy  of  household  spending  on  consumption  and 
residential  investment.  This  variable  has  been  favoured  by  the  notable  generosity  of  financing 
conditions,  and  this  has  given  rise  to  certain  pressures  on  the  financial  position  of  Spanish 
households. As is known, household debt last year held on the upward course it has been following 
since  the  mid-nineties,  clearly  exceeding  100%  of  the  sector’s  gross  disposable  income.  This  new 
peak marks a departure from the average levels of the euro area and is beginning to draw closer to 
that of countries such as the United States. 
Although the low interest rates and the long average maturities of liabilities keep the financial burden 
within moderate limits, at end-2004 the cushion of saving available after interest and capital payments 
had  fallen  to  practically  zero  for  Spanish  households  as  a  whole.  However,  the  effects  of  higher 
indebtedness  and  of  this  lower  saving  on  household  wealth  were  again  more  than  offset  by  the 
notable surge in their real-estate wealth, which was strongly linked to the rise in house prices. As a 
result, the overall financial position of Spanish households remains sound. 
The strength of the sector’s balance sheet as a whole is likewise reflected in the microeconomic 
information  drawn  from  the  Spanish  Survey  of  Household  Finances  recently  compiled  by  the 
Banco  de  España.  Although  this  survey  identifies  a  household  segment  that  is  in  a  more 
vulnerable situation than is apparent from the overall indicators, the size of this segment is small. 
While the notable changes in the household balance sheet have not led to a weakening of their wealth 
position, there has been an increase (by various mechanisms) in this sector’s exposure to a relatively 
broad  range  of  possible  shocks,  thereby  raising  the  sensitivity  of  consumption  and  of  residential 
investment  to  them.  These  shocks  notably  include  those  that  may  affect  employment,  a  variable 
which, as mentioned above, largely determines the behaviour of household spending. Obviously, the 
behaviour  of  interest  rates  is  also  very  important.  However,  the  greatest  uncertainties  lie  in  the 
possible implications of developments in the real-estate market. 
This  market  is  in  the  midst  of  an  expansionary  phase  which  still  shows  no  clear  signs  of  faltering, 
despite its extraordinary duration and intensity. 2004 ended with significant growth in supply which, 
however, was insufficient to push down a price growth rate that again topped 17% in nominal terms. 
The statistical changes underlying the official information for 2005 make it harder to interpret the most 
recent data, although they still seem to show no signs of a significant slowdown. Such high growth 
rates are difficult to explain entirely on the basis of recent changes in income or in interest rates, or as 
a response to the demographic changes under way in Spain. Consequently, the overvaluation that has 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 7
been detectable in this market for some years continued to expand in 2004, although the size of this 
gap is difficult to gauge accurately. 
Subject  to  the  natural  caution  required  in  view  of  this  lack  of  precision,  analyses  by  the  Banco  de 
España indicate that the current level of overvaluation is not incompatible with a gradual correction of 
that  overvaluation,  as  seen  in  the  past  in  both  Spain  and  abroad.  However,  a  central  bank  should 
consider not only the most likely scenarios but also the consequences of those which, though unlikely, 
might  significantly  affect  the  behaviour  of  the  economy.  Importantly  in  this  connection,  the  Spanish 
economy has sufficient depth of stability to enable it to weather the impact on household spending of 
an appreciable house price correction, in the unlikely event that it should occur. 
The  soundness  of  Spanish  credit  institutions,  underpinned  by  high  solvency  levels  and  comfortable 
bad debt coverage ratios (a matter to which I will return later in the more general framework of the 
situation of the financial system), minimises the possibility that downward adjustments in house prices, 
should  they  occur,  would  significantly  impair  banks’  ability  to  continue  to  efficiently  finance  the 
spending decisions of firms and households. Moreover, unlike in other countries, Spanish households 
have  not  started  significantly  to  borrow  against  their  increased  housing  wealth  to  directly  finance 
current consumption plans. 
In any event, the losses in competitiveness, household debt levels and house prices evidently entail a 
risk of the expansion being interrupted. The economic policies under national sovereignty thus have 
the important mission of preventing these risks from materialising and providing a solid foundation for 
growth. In particular, since monetary and financial conditions will most likely continue to be relatively 
generous for the needs of the Spanish economy in the foreseeable future, it will continue to be the 
responsibility of fiscal policy to help establish an overall macroeconomic stance that will contribute to 
mitigating  spending  pressure.  However,  the  available  instruments  are  limited  in  their  effect  on 
aggregate demand, which means that a major role must be played by microeconomic and structural 
reform policies that can influence the behaviour of supply and create a basis for more efficient markets 
and institutions and for increased productivity. 
In 2004 fiscal policy achieved the expected results, since the budget on general government account 
was almost in balance (or in modest surplus if the effect of assuming RENFE’s debt is stripped out) 
and  the  public  debt/GDP  ratio  showed  a  fresh  decrease.  Despite  this,  there  was  a  certain  drift  in 
primary current expenditure, offset yet another year by highly buoyant government revenue. From a 
more  general  standpoint,  the  momentum  of  improvements  in  the  structural  balance  must  not  be 
allowed to slacken, since this would indicate a fall-off in the fiscal drive of recent years. 
In the circumstances described, it is highly recommendable to make a fiscal effort which goes beyond 
that programmed in the fiscal plans in force, for at least two reasons. First, because a more ambitious 
fiscal policy would strengthen its role of stabilising and containing domestic demand in the short term, 
counterbalancing  monetary  and  financial  conditions.  Second,  because  firmer  improvements  in  the 
structural balance would leave public finances better placed to face the increased expenditure deriving 
from  population  ageing,  even  in  a  scenario  of  high  immigration  flows.  Fiscal  stability  and  fiscal 
discipline  are  basic  assets  of  Spanish  economic  policy  which,  however,  are  not  always  easy  to 
manage, as shown by the vagaries of the European fiscal framework. It is thus very important that the 
review of the Fiscal Stability Law and of the Autonomous (Regional) Government Financing system 
should not lead to a weakening of fiscal discipline. 
In  a  situation  in  which  it  is  necessary  to  make  headway  simultaneously  in  job  creation  and  in 
productivity gains, the role of supply-side policies geared to improving the workings of the economy 
and  expanding  its  potential  growth  is  crucial.  One  of  the  main  messages  in  the  Annual  Report 
presented today is precisely that it will become increasingly difficult for the Spanish economy to keep 
raising its levels of well-being if it does not make progress on both these fronts. Maintaining high levels 
of  job  creation  is,  and  will  continue  to  be,  a  powerful  means  of  expanding  the  economy’s  growth 
potential, but it will be impossible to sustain economic momentum in the long term if the economy does 
not improve its competitive position in the increasingly dynamic international setting. And to do this, it 
is essential to significantly improve the poor performance of productivity. 
Under this approach, labour market reform heads the list of transformations that are needed. A more 
flexible and efficient labour market is necessary to overcome the distortions that are contributing to a 
deterioration  in  competitiveness  and  to  provide  an  appropriate  framework  so  that  firms  will  find 
sufficient stimulus for job creation, the introduction of new technologies, the efficient use of factors of 
production and the enhancement of productivity. 
8 
 BIS Review 45/2005
In  this  setting,  the  persistent  ratio  of  temporary  to  permanent  employees,  which  seems  to  have 
encountered a floor at levels above 30%, with the attendant negative consequences for productivity 
and human capital accumulation, makes it advisable to review the effectiveness of the incentives in 
force to hire permanent workers in recent years. This would involve redefining the measures designed 
to reduce non-wage costs linked to this type of employment and introducing incentives to rationalise 
the use of temporary employment contracts. It is also necessary to set in train a reform of collective 
bargaining to make the wage-setting mechanisms more flexible, so that compensation is brought into 
line with the specific conditions of the productive sector and of firms and with the characteristics of 
workers.  This  reform  would  also  eliminate,  or  at  least  reduce  the  emphasis  on,  wage-indexation 
mechanisms. 
The stepping-up of investment in training, in physical capital and in technological capital in line with the 
objectives  of  the  Lisbon  Agenda  is  fundamental  for  boosting  productivity.  As  mentioned,  Spain  has 
notable weaknesses in the areas of innovation and of its incorporation and diffusion in the productive 
system. These weaknesses make it necessary to design specific policies to address this objective and 
to adapt the institutional and regulatory framework so that the smooth functioning of the markets will 
drive  the  innovation  and  development  of  new  activities  that  will  focus  the  productive  structure  on 
sectors in which demand and value added are greater. 
As a result of the launch of the new Plan to achieve a dynamic economy and to foster productivity, 
certain  measures  were  adopted  to  promote  competitiveness  (of  a  sectoral  nature),  which  will 
unquestionably  play  a  part  in  improving  productivity.  The  Banco  de  España  particularly  welcomes 
those measures  addressing  the  financial  system.  However,  what  is  most  important  is  that  this  Plan 
should clearly steer reform policy priorities in the right direction and maintain the momentum of reform. 
The commitments announced must be implemented ambitiously and complement other actions aimed 
at  fostering  improvements  in  human  and  technological  capital  and  in  the  workings  of  markets  and 
institutions. 
This is not the appropriate setting for a detailed and exhaustive review of the range of measures and 
reforms required by the Spanish economy. I have referred only to some of the most necessary ones, 
but this list would be incomplete if I did not mention steps to mitigate the potential effects of household 
indebtedness and of house price rises on the sustainability of growth. The measures aimed at raising 
the  supply  of  housing  and  its  accessibility  will  not  be  sufficiently  effective  if  they  do  not  include  a 
reorganisation  of  the  land  market,  which  remains  one  of  the  main  unresolved  issues  facing  the 
Spanish  economy.  Also,  a  more  neutral  tax  treatment  of  house  ownership  and  further  measures  to 
foster rental could improve the working of this market. There are also implications for the behaviour of 
financial intermediaries and I will look at these now as I review the main recent developments in the 
Spanish financial system. 
The financial system 
The international financial system benefited in 2004 from the favourable trends in train since 2003 and 
still  apparent  in  the  early  months  of  2005.  Very  low  long-term  interest  rates,  stable  interest  rate 
spreads both in emerging countries and in the corporate sector, the performance of the main stock 
market indices, low levels of volatility and ample liquidity all made for a relatively easy scenario that 
contrasted with the difficulties experienced at the beginning of the decade. 
Despite  this  favourable  environment,  the  financial  situation  is  complicated  by  certain  circumstances 
that cannot be ignored. First, financing activities are becoming increasingly complex in terms of both 
demand and management. Low interest rates have thus increased the appetite for risk and spurred 
the development of new financial products, such as credit derivatives, and of new intermediaries, such 
as  hedge  funds.  These  new  possibilities  mean  that  institutions  have  had  to  become  much  more 
sophisticated  risk  managers  because  of  the  singular  features  of  these  financial  products  and 
intermediaries, particularly their complexity and opacity. 
If we factor in the natural doubts as to the sustainability of this scenario (not so much as to whether it 
will continue but as to how benign it will be), it becomes evident that the satisfactory behaviour of the 
markets  and  financial  intermediaries  should  not  be  allowed  to  lead  to  complacency,  but  should  be 
used  to  strengthen  the  soundness  of  institutions  as  a  precaution  against  possible  changes  in  the 
favourable central scenarios. 
Spanish  deposit  institutions  have  not  been  unaffected  by  these  developments.  In  fact,  to  the 
favourable  factors  listed  above  should  be  added,  in  the  case  of  Spain,  a  highly  favourable 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 9
macroeconomic scenario and a growth differential with the core European countries in both output and 
employment. This, along with the good starting position of our institutions in terms of efficiency and 
competitiveness,  enabled  the  soundness  and  international  leadership  of  our  financial  system  to  be 
strengthened.  Our  institutions  have  thus  been  able  to  meet  the  demand  for  more  and  increasingly 
complex  banking  products  and  services,  and  at  the  same  time  improve  their  profitability.  Naturally, 
however, the above comments on the international scenario and the need for markets and institutions 
to maintain their operational soundness apply likewise to Spanish institutions. 
Thus  in  2004  Spanish  credit  institutions  again  achieved  very  high  levels  of  profitability,  whether 
measured  as  growth  on  the  previous  year  or  as  ROE,  which  was  more  than  14%  higher  than  the 
average  reported  by  their  international  competitors.  The  high  business  volumes,  which  more  than 
offset  the  negative  effects  of  low  interest  rates  on  net  interest  income,  and  the  tight  control  over 
operating  expenses,  which  enabled  the  efficiency  ratio  to  be  further  improved,  are  the  two  basic 
factors  behind  this  favourable  performance.  Moreover,  business  activity  has  been  stepped  up 
precisely through instruments that provide institutions with collateralised assets, specifically mortgage 
loans, which are characterised by lower default rates. Finally, this favourable earnings performance is 
also a result of the diversification of income sources, with significant growth of those associated with 
the provision of collection, payment and non-banking product services. 
Solvency  remains  at  levels  comfortably  above  the  minimum  regulatory  requirements,  although  the 
strong growth of business, and therefore of capital requirements, meant that the bank solvency ratio 
decreased slightly in 2004 with respect to 2003. In the case of Spain, this solvency was strengthened 
by a rigorous bad debt provisioning policy. 
That said, the more optimistic and favourable the central scenario, the greater the need to pay careful 
attention to potential fragilities. In applying this caveat to Spanish institutions, we shall focus on the 
three  lines  of  defence  used  by  institutions  to  protect  themselves  from  possible  difficulties:  risk 
management, which enables ex ante minimisation of difficulties, and profitability and solvency, which 
make it easier to absorb risks once they materialise. 
As regards risks, the low levels of default unquestionably reflect not only the favourable financial and 
macroeconomic  trends,  but  also  improvements  in  the  procedures  for  identifying,  measuring  and 
controlling those risks. The sharp increase in activity, however, poses certain questions to which some 
thought  should  be  given.  First,  although  the  fastest  growing  instruments  are  secured  loans,  their 
concentration  in  the  real-estate  market,  together  with  growing  household  indebtedness,  should  be 
taken into account by managers, since both factors (sectoral concentration and growing indebtedness) 
entail under alternative scenarios a greater risk, which should be analysed within the framework of an 
institution’s  medium-  and  long-term  financial  strategy,  taking  account  of  its  financial  equilibrium 
conditions. 
Second, there is a need for the management systems used to incorporate the regular performance of 
stress tests under adverse scenarios, considering variations in real estate prices, changes in interest 
rates and other possible modifications in macroeconomic data. This analysis will be of use in regularly 
reviewing each institution’s strategy and will determine the advisability of establishing internal control 
measures and how to ameliorate the residual risk incurred. Particular attention is required by those 
market  segments,  such  as  the  financing  of  real-estate  development  activities,  which  have  shown 
higher risk in the past. 
In  addition,  collateral  security  must,  as  stipulated  by  the  attendant  regulations,  be  assessed  as  a 
market value calculated in a manner that is prudent and sustainable over time, i.e. it is possible that 
the  experience  of  potential  losses  in  adverse  situations  over  the  last  twenty  years  may  not  be 
consistent  with  the  characteristics  of  the  current  situation.  This  has  to  be  taken  into  account  by 
institutions  in  calculating  the  capital  consumed  by  real-estate  loans  under  the  advanced  Basel  II 
approaches.  But  this  need  for  prudent  assessment  is  not  limited  to  credit  institutions:  appraisal 
companies play a key role in Spain’s financial system and hence it is essential for them to operate 
under the clear prudential guidelines laid down in their specific regulations. 
The sustainability of results, their recurrence, the diversity of income sources and the ongoing search 
for  efficiency  are  needed  to  strengthen  the  line  of  defence  represented  by  the  high  profitability  of 
Spain’s institutions. In this respect, we must not overlook the behaviour of the liabilities side of bank 
balance sheets. The financing of this high volume of assets has been made possible by their access to 
efficient  financial  markets  after  Spain  joined  the  euro  area.  This  enabled  them  to  supplement  their 
traditional  deposit-based  financing,  which  despite  its  strong  momentum  is  insufficient  to  finance 
lending activities. Although gearing is part and parcel of the lending business, that growing access to 
10 
 BIS Review 45/2005
international financial markets entails a higher cost of financing which puts upward pressure on the 
average cost of borrowing and negatively affects income, which is something to be taken into account 
in forward-looking strategies. 
The last line of defence is own funds and, within these, tier 1 capital. Indeed, only ordinary shares, 
reserves  and  preferential  equity  holdings  allow  both  the  absorption  of  possible  losses  and  the 
continued engagement in banking operations. This, along with its long-term presence in own funds, 
explains why supervisors and markets pay particular attention to this component of regulatory own 
funds.  Regarding  preferential  equity  holdings,  their  long-term  nature,  their  preferential  use  in 
absorbing losses and their non-participation in dividend distributions have led the Banco de España 
to allow them to rise to 30% of tier 1 capital. In addition, the characteristics of these securities and 
their frequent distribution through the network have led the Banco de España to remind institutions 
that  they  should  take  special  care  when  distributing  such  a  complex  product  to  their  retail 
customers, given the reputational risk in which they may incur. 
Looking ahead, it is advisable to strengthen this policy. For example, it would be clearly desirable that, 
when the issues are marketed among retail customers, the pricing mechanisms should be based on 
the intervention of institutional investors. Further, as a means of recognising the processes of financial 
innovation,  consideration  should  be  given  to  the  adoption  of  a  more  flexible  treatment  of  the 
characteristics of the so-called innovative instruments in tier 1, which are basically preferential equity 
holdings with a step-up in remuneration after 10 years, not currently accepted as tier 1 capital by the 
Banco de España. This option should, in any event, be accompanied by a decrease in the weight of 
preferential equity holdings from the present 30% to 15%, in order to heighten the importance of the 
basic components of tier 1 capital, namely ordinary shares and reserves. 
Moving on to regulatory developments, 2004 was a particularly eventful and, to tell the truth, difficult 
and complex year. It saw two projects with a direct impact on credit institutions: the IFRS (International 
Financial Reporting Standards) and the New Capital Accord, or Basel II. 
The  European  Union  decided  that  from  January  2005  the  consolidated  accounts  of  groups  with 
securities  quoted  on  any  regulated  market  in  the  EU  have  to  be  prepared  using  international 
accounting standards (IAS). Its aim in doing this was to assist the growing integration of the European 
single market by ensuring that investors have access to financial information with the highest possible 
level  of  homogeneity.  In  addition,  the  international  financial  system  is  strengthened,  since  the 
plurinational nature of IAS facilitates the convergence of these standards with those of the US. 
The  Banco  de  España,  in  accordance  with  its  competence  in  the  accounting  regulation  of  Spanish 
credit institutions, decided to undertake a project to extend the use of IAS from consolidated financial 
statements to the individual, regulatory and prudential ones, thereby avoiding the cost and uncertainty 
of diverse accounting criteria. This initiative gave rise to the new accounting Circular 4/2004. Through 
this Circular, the Banco de España acknowledges and shares the benefits derived from the efforts to 
achieve  greater  accounting  harmonisation,  while  pursuing,  in  its  supervisory  capacity,  a  legitimate 
interest in the quality of accounting standards and in their effective implementation. 
Also, since the process of approval and adoption of the new international standards was marked by its 
complexity and underwent certain timetable difficulties, the Banco de España’s new Circular was also 
intended to endow the process, as far as possible, with a greater degree of certainty. 
The complexity of the new accounting standards arises not only from the process referred to, but also 
basically from the modifications contained in them, since they involve notable changes in numerous 
matters that are very important in credit institution management and that impose new responsibilities 
on managers in the election of accounting policies. 
Although  it  is  too  early  to  make  a  detailed  assessment  of  the  introduction  of  the  new  accounting 
standards,  which  have  only  been  in  force  for  a  few  months,  the  initial  evaluation  by  the  Banco  de 
España is positive, and the major efforts and work by financial institutions in this connection should be 
acknowledged. 
As regards Basel II, June 2004 saw the publication of the final text of “A Revised Framework of the 
International  Convergence  of  Capital  Measurement  and  Capital  Standards”.  The  most  notable  new 
developments  are  that  it  allows  institutions  to  use  internal  risk  measurement  methodologies  if  they 
meet certain minimum requirements and are accepted by the supervisor. The possibility of using the 
most advanced methodologies will depend on the development of risk management systems, on the 
effective  integration  of  these  systems  into  management,  on  the  adaptation  of  the  technological 
environment  and  on  the  availability  of  consistent  and  integrated  historical  information  databases. 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 11
Although  the  Accord  will  not  enter  into  force  until  2007,  work  has  commenced  on  the  long  and 
complicated task of development, implementation, internal validation by institutions and review by the 
Banco  de  España  of  these  methodologies,  at  speeds  which  will  inevitably  differ  depending  on  the 
preparedness  of  the  institutions.  Furthermore,  the  European  Parliament  is  debating  a  directive  to 
legally implement Basel II after appropriately adapting it to the specific features of EU institutions and 
markets. 
It is difficult to state, in a nutshell, what the new Accord will signify. Perhaps most noteworthy are the 
three core ideas on which the three pillars rest: a recognition in regulation of sound practices in risk 
management,  along  with  an  incentive  to  encourage  them;  a  strengthening  of  the  supervisor’s 
judgement, as an added factor of safety; and the importance of market discipline, i.e. of active scrutiny 
of  the  market,  of  shareholders  and  of  creditors,  which  implies  a  continual  strengthening  of 
transparency. It is this latter aspect, relating to Pillar III, which is the least well-known, although it is 
that  with  the  greatest  potential  in  the  medium  term  for  disseminating  best  practices  in  risk 
management. 
Of course, the completion of Basel II is only the beginning of the implementation process, and not just 
in credit institutions, but also in their supervisors. In this respect, I believe that our institutions and our 
supervisory model are in a magnificent position to lead the implementation process insofar as quality 
is concerned. And this process will yield better managed institutions and more effective supervision. 
These two key regulatory issues raise other points. First, the development of IAS and Basel II make it 
necessary  to  strengthen  international  co-operation  in  supervision  and  regulation.  The  international 
expansion  of  Spanish  banking  and  its  presence  in  a  larger  number  of  jurisdictions  with  differing 
features raise the need to establish closer bilateral relations with the authorities of other countries, so 
as better to comply with the respective responsibilities. In addition, the new European legislation on 
financial conglomerates  also addresses  in  depth  the  need  for  greater co-operation.  Specifically,  the 
EU has opted for a solution based on co-operation between supervisors as the most appropriate (and 
essential)  approach.  Indeed,  this  is  the  prevailing  course  of  action  at  present,  routed  through,  for 
example,  the  ECB  Banking  Supervisory  Committee  or  the  recently  created  Committee  of  European 
Banking Supervisors, a “level 3 committee” set up in application of the Lamfalussy approach to the 
banking sector. The functions of the Committee of European Banking Supervisors include promoting 
convergence  of  the  supervisory  practices  of  the  EU  Member  States  and  increasing  and  improving 
co-operation between supervisors. 
Growing  supervisory  co-operation  will  become  unavoidable  as  further  headway  is  made  in  the 
necessary process of integration of the single financial market. In this respect, we cannot ignore that 
the pace of integration is far from homogeneous. Thus, the integration of the interbank market can be 
classed as full, particularly in the euro area, and very high in the wholesale, the securities issuance 
and the large company and bank financing markets. By contrast, the retail market remains markedly 
local in nature and it will only become integrated insofar as its cultural and idiosyncratic barriers are 
progressively lifted. 
The same is so of cross-border activity. Mergers and acquisitions of credit institutions have raised to 
forty the number of institutions with operations in various EU countries. If profitability is adequate, this 
trend  will  foreseeably  continue  and  European  institutions  will  keep  exploring  the  opportunities  for 
profitability  and  lower  costs  offered  by  operations  of  this  type.  Despite  this,  the  more  than  8,000 
deposit institutions in the EU continue to exhibit a markedly local nature. 
In short, co-operation in supervisory matters in the EU has to observe the principles of pragmatism 
and  flexibility.  Pragmatism  involves  acknowledging  the  role  that  the  competent  national  authorities 
must play in supervising a single market with very different levels of integration in the various areas of 
business and, furthermore, it advocates an increasingly important role for the authority in the home 
country  of  pan-European  institutions.  Flexibility  is  needed  to  adapt  the  levels  of  co-operation  to  the 
pace set by developments in the integration of the various segments of the single market. 
Finally,  regarding  the  changes  currently  under  way,  a  major  source  of  such  change  is  the  intense 
regulatory process to which the banking sector is lately being subjected. The adaptation to the new 
accounting standards issued by the IASB, which in Spain are set out in the new accounting Circular, 
and the preparations for implementing the new capital accord are the two landmark projects which are 
undoubtedly  calling  for  a  major  effort  by  European  institutions.  This  effort  is  absorbing  extensive 
resources  and  deserves  our  full  support.  In  this  respect,  I  consider  that,  after  a  process  of  intense 
regulatory  change,  we  should  focus  on  achieving  proper  implementation  and  allow  ourselves  to 
12 
 BIS Review 45/2005
slacken the pace of regulatory developments in these areas. This will enable the far-reaching changes 
made recently to be digested and will ensure that the new standards are properly implemented. 
From a different standpoint, allow me to share one last thought with you, which is intended to highlight 
the  importance  of  providing  appropriate  information  to  financial  statement  users.  Institutions  are 
required to help customers to understand the products that they are offered, to assess them properly 
and,  for  this  purpose,  to  identify  the  risks  associated  with  each  product  and  tailor  them  in  terms  of 
customer tolerance and affordability. 
In this respect, the Banco de España has always recognised that the smooth working of the financial 
system requires well-informed consumers capable of making responsible decisions. For this reason, in 
February this year an Internet portal was set up for bank customers. It is receiving 2,000 visits daily. Its 
purpose is not to give advice or make recommendations, but to orientate consumers in their dealings 
with  credit  institutions  and  help  to  make  information  available  to  them.  Well-informed  consumers, 
together with an attitude of transparency on the part of institutions, help to increase market discipline, 
with the consequent favourable effect on competition and efficiency in the Spanish banking system. 
I would not want to finish without conveying a message of confidence in our financial system. I am 
sure  that  Spanish  institutions  will,  as  in  the  past,  show  that  they  are  capable  of  facing  all  the 
challenges  to  which  I  have  referred.  I  therefore  trust  that  the  managers  of  institutions  will  act 
professionally  and  prudently,  designing  business  strategies  that  are  sustainable  in  the  medium  and 
long term. In this way, they will contribute not only to the stable functioning of the institutions for which 
they are responsible, but also to that of the financial system as a whole. 
The  inclusion  as  from  last  year  of  a  chapter  dealing  with  management  aspects  of  the  Banco  de 
España allows me to be brief and to point out that in 2004 the branch restructuring plans, the staff 
renewal and redimensioning plan and the early retirement plan were completed and the negotiation of 
the  2002-04  collective  bargaining  agreement  was  finalised.  All  these  reforms,  which  enable  us  to 
undertake  appropriately  our  important  mission  and  functions  in  the  euro  area,  have  been  made 
possible by the effort and dedication of all the Bank’s staff, whom I thank for their attitude and their 
work. 
Finally,  I  express  my  gratitude  to  all  the  members  of  this  Council  for  their  inestimable  support  and 
collaboration. I would like to conclude by remembering two people whose untimely loss we suffered 
last year: Ángel Pardillos, who was one of the victims of the 11 March attacks, and Eugenio Domingo, 
who shared, at this table, many sessions of this Council, both before and after his term of office at the 
European Central Bank. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 45/2005 
 13
