 Toshihiko Fukui: New trends in financial services - creation of innovative retail 
services 
Summary of a speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Forum on Retail 
Financial Services, Tokyo, 21 July 2005. 
 Introduction  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for me  to  speak at  this  forum  about  a  topic,  retail  financial  services,  which  is 
indeed of great interest to central bankers around the world.  
Retail financial services have just entered a new stage of development in Japan. This is evident, for 
example,  in  the  fact  that  an  increasing  number  of  banks  are  allocating  substantial  management 
resources to various areas of retail financial services. Behind this movement is a business strategy 
among  banks  to  strengthen  their  profitability,  now  that  the  nonperforming-loan  (NPL)  problem  has 
been nearly overcome. Enhancement of retail financial services, however, is not a trend seen only in 
Japan, but it has been a common feature in financial industries worldwide since the 1990s.  
In the sessions to follow at this forum, experts and practitioners in retail financial services will discuss 
the details of their business in Japan. In my speech today, I would first like to talk about significant 
changes in the structure of the world economy and financial markets that are behind the increased 
emphasis on retail financial services. I will then proceed to a discussion of the key factors necessary 
for  the  sound  and  robust  development  of  retail  financial  services  in  Japan,  focusing  on  financial 
services for individual customers.  
I.  
Background of the Increased Global Emphasis on Retail Financial Services  
Changes in Corporate Behavior  
A.  
Since the early 1990s, industrial countries have faced a period of fierce competition. This has been 
fueled particularly by economic globalization and the rapid progress in IT, which together have lowered 
barriers both in time and distance. Now we frequently see companies with a successful business in 
one  country  being  challenged  by  foreign  competitors  and  rapidly  losing  their  competitiveness.  The 
difficulty in projecting future economic developments, together with the geographic expansion of the 
market and the shorter life cycle of products, have provided firms with new business opportunities, but 
also resulted in increased uncertainty for corporate management.  
Given the changes in the business environment that I have just noted, firms are increasingly aware of 
the  need  to  improve  their  financial  strength  in  regard  to  executing  management  or  investment 
decisions, to overcome such uncertainties. In other words, it is evident that a growing number of firms, 
both at home and abroad, are increasingly mindful of the size of their debt obligations and undertaking 
investment decisions in a very cautious manner. Reflecting such behavior, the ratio of corporate free 
cash  flow  to  GDP  is  at  historically  high  levels  in  both  Japan  and  the  United  States.  This  does  not 
necessarily  mean  that  firms  are  adopting  a  conservative  management  stance,  but  that  they  are 
seeking a greater degree of flexibility in carrying out capital investment or participating in mergers or 
acquisitions when they find a profitable line of business.  
Changes in Household Behavior  
B.  
The environment for household financial behavior is also changing.  
Interest  rates  in  industrial  countries  are  at  historically  low  levels  against  a  background  of  modest 
inflationary  expectations.  Interest  income  from  low-risk  assets,  such  as  government  securities  and 
bank  deposits,  is  also  at  low  levels.  In  order  to  achieve  robust  and  sustainable  national  economic 
growth amid the fierce global competition that I mentioned earlier, it has become critically important for 
a  provider  of  funds  to  select  promising  firms  with  cutting-edge  business  opportunities  and  extend 
financial  support  to  their  business  activities.  A  nation's  wealth  will  grow  if  investors,  including 
households,  can  succeed  in  choosing  promising  firms  with  healthy  prospects,  and  provide  financial 
BIS Review 52/2005 
 1
support and bear part of their risks through investment in various financial products. In other words, 
the financial behavior of individuals determines the future of a nation's economic growth, which in turn 
decides their own future welfare.  
Response of Financial Institutions  
C.  
Structural changes in the global economy and financial markets have had a significant impact on the 
business model of financial institutions.  
With  the  management  stance  in  the  corporate  sector  that  I  have  described  gaining  ground  among 
firms,  it  has  become  difficult  for  financial  institutions  to  earn  high  profits  from  large  corporate 
customers through transactions such as lending and underwriting of corporate bonds. Furthermore, a 
change has occurred in the balance between the intermediary function played by financial institutions 
and that by markets, as a result of the development of capital markets and increased disclosure of 
corporate information. In other words, large firms and institutional investors are now in a much better 
position to directly satisfy their financial needs through markets.  
In light of these developments, the growing trend among financial institutions around the world is to 
strengthen lines of business pertaining to individual customers. This move makes economic sense in 
that this category of customers is usually able to obtain less financial information than other categories 
and is thus more dependent on standard financial services, such as loans, deposits, and investment 
trusts, provided by financial institutions. Thus, there is greater scope for financial institutions to play a 
large intermediary role.  
Another factor underlining this trend is banks' need to control their risks. Both Japanese and foreign 
banks,  which  have  experienced  the  NPL  problem,  are  increasing  their  share  of  small-sized  loans 
extended  to  households  in  order  to  diversify  the  risks  of  their  loan  portfolios.  In  addition,  personal 
loans such as residential mortgage loans can be easily off-balanced or securitized thanks to advances 
in financial technology.  
Furthermore,  it  should  be  noted  that  financial  institutions  can  reduce  their  own  risks  by  providing  a 
wide range of financial products and services to households with appropriate support, such as close 
investigation  of  risk  profiles  of  corporate  businesses  and  comprehensive  explanation  of  financial 
products to households. This is because such an active intermediary function of financial institutions 
can lead to steady channeling of part of household funds toward firms with high growth prospects.  
Deregulation  
D.  
Besides the structural changes in the economy, there are at least two additional factors accelerating 
financial institutions' efforts to strengthen retail financial services.  
The first is financial deregulation. Since the 1990s, authorities around the world have steadily eased or 
abolished regulations that separately governed the businesses of banking, securities, and insurance. 
The relaxation of the segregation rules that used to restrict financial services providers to offering only 
their  specialized  lines  of  business  has  opened  the  way  for  "one-stop-shopping,"  in  which  a  single 
institution  can  provide  integrated  financial  services.  This  change  is  clearly  for  the  better.  Besides 
offering greater convenience to customers, it generates an incentive for financial institutions to benefit 
from  the  effects of synergy.  Many  financial  institutions are  aiming  to realize  the  benefits  of  synergy 
through mass sales of standardized products in the area of retail financial services.  
It is interesting to note that in order to profit from synergy, financial institutions around the world are 
adopting  two  seemingly  opposing  policies--"consolidation  of  business"  and  "division  of  labor"--
simultaneously,  with  each  complementing  the  other.  In  Europe,  there  exists  a  tendency  favoring 
financial conglomerates, comprising the banking, securities, and insurance affiliates, in an attempt to 
take great synergy profits. Large establishments, however, tend to be slow to react to changes in the 
environment.  Across  national  boundaries,  therefore,  there  is  a  movement  toward  "division  of  labor" 
among  financial  institutions,  which  should  enable  them  to  rapidly  meet  the  diversified  needs  of 
customers. The policies being adopted here appear to be strengthening the lines of business where 
one enjoys a comparative advantage, while opting for outsourcing or a business alliance where there 
is no such advantage.  
Innovations in Financial and IT Technologies  
E.  
The second factor accelerating financial institutions' efforts to strengthen retail financial services is the 
remarkable  progress  in  recent  years  in  financial  and  IT  technologies,  which  together  have  had  a 
tremendous impact on the conventional thinking in the financial industry.  
Previously, small financial institutions with strong local ties excelled in loans to individual customers 
and  other  retail  financial  services,  while  large  financial  institutions  considered  such  business  less 
profitable  relative  to  its costs. Retail  transactions, compared with  corporate  transactions,  involve  far 
greater numbers of customers and correspondingly large amounts of data, and require a large number 
of  competent  employees  at  branch  offices  to  provide  various  financial  products  and  services.  The 
progress  in  IT,  however,  has  made  it  much  easier  to  process  massive  amounts  of  data  efficiently. 
Furthermore, financial institutions have now introduced an efficient method of credit screening using 
statistical  models  based  on  probability  theory  and  drawing  on  accumulated  customer  data.  This  is 
quite  unlike  the  previous  practice,  in  which  each  and  every  loan  application  had  to  be  individually 
examined.  Another  change  appears  in  the  area  of  sales.  Banks  used  to  "respond"  to  the  needs  of 
customers when the latter visited bank premises. Now, however, banks are "proactive," drawing on 
customer data compiled on the basis of age, sex, and other criteria. Such data allow them to better 
grasp  customer  needs  and  develop  potential  business.  Customer  contact  through  direct  mail  may 
result from such analysis.  
Special Features of Retail Financial Services in Japan  
II.  
As  I  have  described,  moves  to  strengthen  retail  financial  services  can  be  observed  throughout  the 
industrial countries, but the United States and Europe have taken the lead, far outpacing Japan, which 
has been burdened by the NPL problem for an extended time. Within the Japanese financial industry 
hereafter,  it  will  be  necessary  to  establish  high-quality  financial  services  for  individuals  and 
households,  taking  the  special  features  of  retail  financial  services  in  Japan  into  account.  I  will  now 
point out these special features.  
Customers' Preference for Access to Financial Services through Bank Premises  
A. 
First, individual customers in Japan show a strong preference for access to financial services through 
bank branch premises, given that the level of administrative work at Japanese banks is relatively high 
among banks worldwide. This implies that the network of bank branches in Japan is of extremely high 
value as a distribution channel for various financial products and services.  
Under  these  circumstances,  in  meeting  the  financial  needs  of  individuals,  it  would  be  extremely 
effective if the providers of various financial services utilized the network of bank branches as their 
sales channels for the financial products and services in which they specialize. For example, following 
the lifting of the ban on over-the-counter sales of investment trusts at banks in 1998, banks--not only 
major banks but also regional ones--have continued to expand sales of investment trusts, such that 
these over-the-counter sales account for approximately 40 percent of total investment trust sales at 
present.  
Naturally, this does not mean that all investment products are accepted by individual customers only 
because they are sold over bank counters. In the years just after the ban on investment trust sales 
was lifted in 1998, banks mostly sold low-risk-type investment trusts, such as money market funds, but 
sales growth during those few years was modest. Growth in stock investment trusts for the last couple 
of  years,  particularly  the  surge  in  monthly-distribution-type  investment  trusts  that  mainly  purchase 
foreign bonds, has greatly expanded the sales volume at banks' counters. Investment trusts sold by 
affiliates within the banking groups has increased, but this does not seem to be the primary reason for 
the rapid growth. Rather, it has been due to a change in the sales strategy of independent medium-
sized investment companies and foreign investment companies, which have no strong sales network 
of their own but have started to take advantage of the sales power of bank branches. Such investment 
companies  developed  products  that  would  be  suitable  for  bank  customers,  such  as  monthly-
distribution-type  products,  and  also  provided  bank  staff  with  training  on  how  to  sell  the  investment 
trusts.  
I think the key to developing innovative retail financial services hereafter in Japan will be how to meet 
the  needs  of  individual  customers  by  establishing  an  efficient  division  of  labor  within  the  financial 
services sector overall, making full use of the effectiveness of sales channels, namely, the network of 
bank branches.  
Competitors Other than Private Financial Institutions  
B.  
The second special feature in Japan, in the field of financial services for individual customers, is the 
relatively  large  presence  of  nonbanks  and  public  financial  institutions  in  comparison  with  private 
banks.  
For example, nonbanks specializing in consumer finance have a significant share of business dealing 
with the borrowing needs of individual customers. In addition, even in the area of credit cards, affiliates 
of  retailers  such  as  supermarket  chains  and  independent  commercial  companies  have  shown  their 
own  strengths  in  revolving  credit.  Banks  have  tried  to  challenge  nonbanks  by  providing  loans  with 
lower interest rates than nonbanks, taking advantage of their low fund-raising costs and solid branch 
networks. Nonbanks, however, have established a competitive advantage in loan collection expertise 
and consumer credit data, and have even fully worked out their distribution channels by introducing 
automated  contracting  machines.  Such  competition  is  behind  the  recent  marked  movement  toward 
capital and business alliances between major banks and nonbanks. There have also been efforts to 
boost administrative efficiency by sharing back-office functions among several credit card companies, 
including those of bank affiliates.  
Next, in the field of residential mortgage loans, the Housing Loan Corporation (HLC) has been playing 
an important role. This public corporation once held the largest market share for residential loans in 
Japan, but following the government's decision to implement a gradual contraction of its operations in 
2001,  the  private  sector  has  taken  aggressive  action  in  this  market,  and  a  substantial  amount  of 
residential loans has shifted to the private sector. Furthermore, the competition among private financial 
institutions has increased the variety of loan products, and loan interest rates have actually declined. 
The HLC now undertakes operations that are difficult for the private sector to initiate immediately, for 
example,  selling  35-year  loans  at  a  fixed  interest  rate  through  the  branches  of  private  financial 
institutions  and  securitizing  those  loans  by  itself.  Thus,  I  think  the  change  in  the  HLC's  role  has 
provided the private sector with a new business opportunity and led to an enhancement of the level of 
financial  services  for  individual  customers  with  public  institutions  complementing  private-sector 
services.  
Considering the steady expansion in sales of government securities for individuals through the post 
office networks, I think Japan Post (JP) can serve as a distribution channel for financial products to 
individuals. At present, the postal privatization bills are under discussion in the Diet. In regard to the 
privatization of JP, we consider it especially important to secure a level playing field for competition 
with the private sector and to insulate risks between the business lines of JP, as we have pointed out 
up to now.  
Efficiency of Retail Payment Services  
C.  
The  third  special  feature  of  retail  financial  services  in  Japan  is  that  highly  efficient  retail  payment 
services are being provided here. In the United States and Europe, personal checks are widely used 
for retail payments, such as utility bills and credit card payments. In Japan, on the other hand, direct 
debiting/crediting using bank accounts is widely used. Furthermore, transfer instructions sent via the 
Internet are also increasing.  
Given that such efficient retail payment services have long been available in Japan, people tend to 
consider that these services are public goods like water and air, and do not seem to fully recognize the 
risks and costs associated with these services. In fact, direct debiting/crediting using accounts across 
financial  institutions,  for  example,  bears  some  settlement  risks  until  final  settlement,  and  incurs 
administrative costs. Checking accounts are frequently used in the United States, but not everyone 
can write a check, nor can they do so every time they want to. In contrast, in Japan ordinary deposits 
allow  payment  transactions  on  an  unlimited  basis  while  bearing  interest.  Taking  this  feature  into 
account,  ordinary  deposits  in  Japan  are  indeed  a  value-added  financial  service.  As  implied  by  this 
case, it is important for Japanese financial institutions to earn rational profits from the day-to-day retail 
payment business.  
Concurrent with the progress in IT, there has been an increase in financial crimes not seen previously. 
At the same time, households are demanding greater information security from financial institutions in 
addition  to  efficiency  in  transactions.  For  the  financial  system  to  function  stably,  it  is  necessary  for 
each  financial  institution  to  take  appropriate  measures  to  ensure  information  security.  At  the  same 
time, I think such efforts to ensure information security can be an important key to differentiating the 
quality of "invisible" payment services and thus allowing the setting of rational charges.  
III.  
Toward Further Development of Sound Retail Financial Business  
Policy Issues  
A.  
Let us next consider the significance of further developing financial services for individuals in view of 
overall economic activity and social welfare.  
First, meeting the financial needs of households more  efficiently by providing a wide range of retail 
financial services not only supports the economic activity of households, but also, by channeling part 
of household funds stably to various firms, contributes to future growth in the Japanese economy as a 
whole.  
Second,  it  contributes  to  enhancing  the  robustness  of  the  Japanese  financial  system.  It  cannot  be 
denied that, in Japan, financial assets held by households have been concentrated heavily in deposits, 
and this has caused the concentration of various risks at banks. If households were to hold assets of 
varying types of risks, the risks borne by banks would be reduced, thus enhancing the robustness of 
the financial system.  
To achieve this result, some call for policies to induce a shift of household assets "from savings to 
investment." However, the asset portfolios of households cannot be changed significantly merely by 
imposing a one-sided risk transfer from financial institutions. It is important to encourage households 
to  voluntarily  take  on  risks  suitable  for  their  own  risk  preferences.  To  this  end,  financial  institutions 
should provide products and services that meet the financial needs of households through appropriate 
channels concurrent with full explanations of the risks.  
Finally,  I  would  like  to  discuss  policy  issues  related  to  inducing  the  creation  of  innovative  financial 
services for individual customers.  
Ensuring Sound Competition  
B.  
First, in order to encourage the creation of retail financial services that accurately meet the various 
needs  of  households,  it  is  necessary  to  ensure  sound  competition  among  financial  institutions. 
However, in the past, the government and the Bank showed extreme care in handling even a small 
sign of instability within the financial system, bearing in mind that it could generate systemic risk and 
damage the stability of the entire system.  
However,  in  the  course  of  the  last  ten  years,  we  have  seen  the  firm  establishment  of  a  safety-net 
system  necessary  for  handling  such  situations  as  the  bankruptcy  of  a  financial  institution,  and  the 
government and the Bank have accumulated practical experience in dealing with such emergencies. 
Furthermore, financial institutions have now nearly overcome the NPL problem, and from April 2005 
the blanket guarantee of deposits was fully lifted without any disruption. Considering this situation, in 
order to promote the sound development of the Japanese economy, I think it is appropriate to shift the 
main  focus  of  policies  regarding  the  financial  system  from  crisis  management  to  strengthening  the 
financial function.  
Enhancement of financial functioning is strongly needed also in retail financial services. For example, 
complicated financial products that require a high level of knowledge are increasing. In this situation, 
financial  institutions  are  expected  to  fulfill  their  function  by  providing  individuals  with  easy-to-
understand  product  information,  and  adequately  transforming  complicated  products  into  easily 
understood  ones.  To  this  end,  a  key  policy  issue  will  be  to  secure  an  environment  that  allows  free 
competition among a wide range of financial institutions, including public ones, to promote innovations 
in improved financial products and services.  
Solidifying Mutual Trust between Financial Institutions and Households  
C. 
Another  key  policy  issue  is  to  establish  a  relationship  based  on  enhanced  mutual  trust  between 
financial  institutions  and  households.  Between  financial  institutions  and  households,  there  exists  an 
extremely  large  disparity  in  financial  knowledge  and  amount  of  access  to  relevant  information.  In 
addition,  financial  institutions  store  a  massive  amount  of  personal  information.  From  a  policy 
perspective,  therefore,  it  is  extremely  important  to  minimize  harmful  influences  stemming  from  this 
information disparity and information concentration, and to encourage voluntary measures by financial 
institutions to contribute to a relationship with customers based on enhanced mutual trust. Considering 
the high possibility that various types of financial institutions, including companies other than banks, 
will become involved in a wide range of financial services, a relationship based on enhanced mutual 
trust  with  individuals  becomes  all  the  more  important.  Mutual  trust  should  be  reinforced  in  various 
stages  of  intermediary  functions,  such  as  during  the  development  of  financial  products,  sales,  and 
asset management. I would like to emphasize two points indispensable to that end.  
My first point concerns the way to protect investors. The current framework for investor protection in 
Japan is not based on the nature of the product or service, but stipulated according to segmentation of 
the  business,  for  example,  banking,  securities,  trust  banking,  and  life  insurance.  To  improve  this 
structure, introduction of a unified framework based on an investment services law is currently under 
discussion.  For  providers  of  various  financial  services,  the  setting  of  unified  obligations  to  protect 
investors  will  be  the  minimum  requirement.  However,  here  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  the  aim 
should not be a regulation which enumerates detailed obligations issue by issue. What is needed in 
the  new  legal  framework  for  investor  protection  is  to  clarify  the  basic  principles  to  be  observed  by 
financial  institutions,  for  example,  to  fulfill  fiduciary  duties  such  as  faithful  execution  of  investment 
instructions given, and segregated management of customers' assets. In addition, it is more important 
to provide a framework that encourages voluntary actions by the financial institutions themselves, to 
build a higher level of trust with customers.  
The  driving  force  spurring  financial  institutions  to  take  such  actions  is,  simply  speaking,  market 
discipline.  With  the  full  removal  of  blanket  guarantee  of  deposits,  it  is  expected  that  depositors 
themselves will  make  a  rigorous selection  of  financial  institutions,  but  amid  the  increasingly  diverse 
and  complex  range  of  financial  products,  market  discipline  will  not  work  fully  based  merely  on  the 
selections  made  by  depositors  alone.  It  is  necessary  for  all  parties  concerned  to  make  market 
discipline function effectively. These parties include the shareholders of the financial institutions, the 
creditors, the stock exchanges that list the shares of the financial institutions, the auditors, the credit 
rating agencies, and the external directors of the financial institutions. In addition, market participants, 
not the supervisory authorities, should take the lead in the formation of market rules necessary for the 
practical functioning of market discipline.  
My second point is that it is necessary to secure a high level of information security. As mentioned 
earlier, extremely efficient retail payment services are provided in Japan, but as can be inferred from 
the recent cases of fraud involving various types of cards, the level of information security in financial 
transactions in Japan has not reached the top level globally. If technological capabilities in Japan are 
fully applied to enhance security, however, I believe that the Japanese financial industry is capable of 
providing security at the world-class level, while maintaining its efficiency.  
In other words, I would like to emphasize that we should not underestimate the importance of security 
issues in providing retail services, and leave problems pertaining to security unresolved, because this 
could eventually result in excessive nationwide regulation. This is also true for the financial industry. 
Therefore, regarding the security of financial information, I think it is extremely important for financial 
institutions  to  continually  study  cutting-edge  technologies  and  provide  tools  and  infrastructure  to 
ensure security in a preemptive manner, before the public demands it of them. In this case, it may be 
sensible  for  the  costs  associated  with provision  of a  high  level of  infrastructure  to be  allocated  and 
borne appropriately between the financial institutions and end-users.  
At the same time, individuals need to have a clear idea of how to safeguard their personal information 
through their own efforts. We take various measures to prevent thieves from breaking into our home, 
but our awareness of how to protect ourselves against financial crime is relatively weak in comparison. 
Needless  to  say,  in  all  transactions,  we  should  ensure  the  safety  of  transactions  by  ourselves.  Of 
course,  on  the  part  of  financial  institutions,  it  is  necessary  to  encourage  individual  customers  to 
adequately understand the measures that are indispensable for self-protection.  
Conclusion  
I have mentioned important points indispensable to the sound development of retail financial services 
in Japan.  
To  reiterate,  if  financial  institutions  can  provide  various  financial  services  that  meet  the  needs  of 
households, and through such actions, effectively utilize the funds of households to support corporate 
activity, it can contribute not only to increasing households' wealth, but also to promoting the economic 
growth of Japan. At the same time, through the reallocation of risks, this will contribute to enhancing 
the robustness of the financial system in Japan to counter external shocks.  
Considering that the Japanese financial system is regaining its stability, we at the Bank of Japan has 
taken  a  number  of  steps  with  the  intention  of  contributing  to  developing  and  spreading  advanced 
financial  technologies  through  our  functions  of  on-site  examinations  and  off-site  monitoring  to 
encourage financial institutions' efforts to provide more advanced financial services. To this end, the 
Bank  established  the  Center  for  Advanced  Financial  Technology  in  July  2005  within  the  Financial 
Systems and Bank Examination Department. The department was created by integrating the former 
Financial  Systems  Department  and  the  former  Bank  Examination  and  Surveillance  Department.  In 
addition,  from  the  perspectives  of  enhancing  the  functions  of  financial  markets  and  settlement 
infrastructure, we are determined to make greater efforts together with market participants to enable 
market discipline to fully perform its function. In this respect, along with the organizational changes in 
July  that  I  have  mentioned,  we  established  the  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  Department  by 
making independent a part of the function performed by the Financial Markets Department. And with 
the aim of bolstering research on information security, at the start of April 2005 we established the 
Center  for  Information  Technology  Studies  at  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies. 
Through  such  measures,  we  aim  to  do  our  utmost  to  promote  the  steady  development  of  retail 
financial services in Japan.  
