Loi M Bakani: Financial system reform in Papua New Guinea 
Address by Mr Loi M Bakani, Acting Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the launch of the 
Fincorp downscaling initiative closure meeting, 23 June 2005. 
 Acknowledgement 
1. 
Chairman of Fincorp Mr Kerengua Kua, staff of Fincorp and MCC. Thank you for giving me the honour 
to address the launch of the downscaling initiative closure today. 
Firstly, on behalf of the Microfinance Steering Committee (MSC) and the Bank of PNG as an executing 
Agent  of  the  Microfinance  &  Employment  Project,  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  and  thank  those 
involved in initiating this downscaling program, namely; the staff of MCC, the staff & management of 
Finance Corporation Limited (FINCORP), and last but not the least the 500 or so micro entrepreneurs 
under  the  Liklik  Bisnis  Finance  Loan  Program.  This  is  another  milestone  in  the  development  of 
microfinance in PNG, with a product provided based on mutual trust. 
Introduction 
2. 
Let me congratulate you all for the success in running and expanding this Program for one year now. 
Like all other developing countries, PNG is constantly challenged to provide solutions as to how best it 
can  wrestle  the  problems  associated  with  poverty  and  lack  of  employment  opportunities.  PNG’s  5 
million  population  of  which  80  percent  live  in  the  rural  areas  have  been  denied  development 
opportunities because of unfair or uneven distribution of the country’s financial resources & limitation 
in infrastructure developments.  
Lack of serious attention to the declining state of infrastructure has forced many of the rural dwellers to 
migrate to the urban centres in search of employment opportunities and services of urban dwellings. 
With lack of education and entrepreneurial skills, many could not find jobs and had to resort to crime 
and other illegal activities as a means to survive.  
In addressing the lack of financial services to the rural population, the Bank had agreed to be a party 
to the development of the microfinance sector, although is outside the core functions of the Bank. We 
see  this  new  development  as  an  important  milestone  in  the  development  of  the  financial  system  in 
PNG. This industry will complement the financial services provided by the existing financial institutions, 
but with different scope and mandate. We are encouraged by the huge interest in the microfinance 
sector as evidenced by the growth of the current two (2) microfinance institutions, namely, the Wau 
Microbank and the PNG Microfinance Limited. The strong interest shown by small enterpreneurs in the 
downscaling program by Fincorp is an indication of the available demand for such financial services 
that  has  been  lacking  in  the  rural  areas  of  PNG.  It  reflects  the  need  for  financial  empowerment  to 
improve living standards and contribute to the development of our country. 
The Bank of PNG is in a process of establishing a legal framework for the microfinance industry and 
will  soon  announce  broad  guidelines  on  the  licensing  requirements  for  microfinance  institutions  or 
microbanks. It is our intention that we will exit from our involvement in the development phase of the 
sector and concentrate on our core role as supervisor & regulator of the financial system. 
The  Bank  welcomes  and  fully  supports  initiatives  such  as  this,  we  are  witnessing.  However  at  the 
same time, the Bank expects all licensed financial institutions to fully comply with the regulatory and 
prudential  requirements  of  the  Bank  under  various  legislations  by  which  it  is  empowered,  so  as  to 
ensure protection of public funds and stability of the financial system. For these reasons, we continue 
to enforce good governance in both the Board and management level, through the “Fit & Proper” tests 
for those involved. The Bank has taken actions on some licensed institutions found to be violating the 
provisions of these Acts or the prudential standards and directives of the Bank, and will not shy away 
from pursuing such actions in future. 
The development and deepening of this financial sector will provide support for the Bank’s ongoing 
fight against money schemes, which has eaten up a significant portion of the innocent savers hard-
earned incomes. The Bank of PNG has taken out various public notices and educational campaigns 
and will continue to do so to create public awareness that such schemes are not legitimate and are 
BIS Review 53/2005 
 1
illegal, because they are not licensed by the Bank to conduct banking business, mainly taking deposits 
from the public. We have few cases of these schemes before the court, and are confident that their 
operations will cease as we continue to expose their illegal activities to the public. This is much the 
Bank of PNG can do to educate the public, but the onus is on the public to ensure their savings are 
placed with licensed financial institution where their safety is guaranteed. 
Microfinance is for the “grassroots”. It is their hope of making a change in their lives and contributing 
meaningfully  to  the  development  of  PNG.  It  requires  hard  work,  dedication  and  commitment  to 
success. It also demands patience because the accumulation of surplus or profit takes time given that 
the kind of money involved in microfinance is relatively small. I am sure you all have experienced that 
in your businesses through this Liklik Bisnis Finance Program. 
To  conclude,  I  commend  FINCORP  for  being  sensitive  to  the  needs  of  small  people  who  need 
financial  empowerment,  by  taking  a  bold  decision  to  engage  in  this  downscaling  initiative.  This 
program has established itself as a model product, which may be introduced later in other areas. We 
wish you all the success in your endeavors to continue with the program into the future. 
The Project Office will continue work with microfinance institutions to test out new financial products, 
and as the Chairman of the Microfinance Steering Committee, we will ensure these are appropriately 
implemented to the benefit of our people. With this remark, I wish the entrepreneurs success in the 
business activities that you are doing under this downscaling program with Fincorp. 
Thank you very much. 
