Hermann Remsperger: Money in an uncertain world 
Speech by Dr Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at 
a dinner speech, Bundesbank and University of Bonn Workshop, Eltville, 27-28 October 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentleman, it is a pleasure for me to speak to you this evening on the role of money in an 
uncertain world. 
Of  course,  the  challenge  of  making  decisions  under  different  forms  of  uncertainties  does  not  only 
apply  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  On  the  contrary,  model  and  parameter  uncertainty,  data 
uncertainty and shock uncertainty are present in many areas of our everyday life. 
As an example, take medical science. On the one side you could argue that doctors know more about 
the working of the human body than economists know about the functioning of the economy. But on 
the other side there is also no doubt that certain health problems are not entirely understood. 
At least it is a fact that you very often get different opinions about how certain health problems ought 
to be treated. 
Uncertainty and monetary policy decision making 
Well, before I become too much involved in health care, let me get back to those uncertainties with 
which  we  are  confronted  as  central  bankers.  Here,  the  package  insert  or  the  instructions  at  our 
disposal is the stock of economic research.  
All the different types of uncertainty have been picked up by academic literature. However, while the 
literature usually focuses on only one sort of uncertainty at a time, we face all of them simultaneously. 
I will focus on two of them, one is model uncertainty and the other data uncertainty.  
Given the overall topic of this work-shop, I would like to convey the key message of my talk without 
any further delay: The analysis of monetary aggregates can play and should play an important role to 
cope with these two challenges. 
Model uncertainty and money 
As  central  bankers  we  need  models  to  structure  our  thoughts  and  to  estimate  the  impact  of  our 
decisions. However, there is no consensus about which model is the appropriate representation of the 
real world. As a consequence, most central banks – including the ECB – use a wide range of models. 
But  with  such  a  variety  of  models,  the  problem  of  setting  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance 
becomes a very difficult task. I think that Ben McCallum is perfectly right in that the preferred policy 
rule should be one that works ‘reasonably well in a variety of plausible quantitative models’.1   
By the way, this approach can also be applied to the discussion whether monetary policy decisions 
should  be  made  by  a  committee  or  not:2    The  variety  of  views  on  the  functioning  of  the  economy 
should be larger in a committee. If the committee members agree on a decision that is acceptable for 
all of the different prevailing assumptions of the transmission mechanism, this could prevent monetary 
policy decisions which are optimal only in one specific model, but lead to negative results if another 
mechanism prevails.  
In order to determine such a robust policy rule, we have to take two decisions: The first is on the set of 
models which should be taken into account. And the second is how to weigh the results these models 
                                                      
1   McCalllum, B. (1997) „Comment“ in : Bernanke, B.S. and Rotemberg, J.J. (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1997. 
The MIT Press. 
2   See p. 946 in Levin, A.T. and Williams, J.C. (2003) „Robust Monetary Policy with Competing Reference Models“, Journal of 
Monetary Economics (50), pp. 945-975. 
   1/4 
present  under  the  range  of  possible  decision  rules.  There  are  no  definite  answers  to  both  of  these 
questions.  
As concerns the weighting problem, some argue that minimizing the maximum loss across models is 
appropriate. This would prevent extremely bad results. However, others argue that this method may 
give  too  much  weight  to  implausible  scenarios.  They  propose  to  weigh  the  different  results  of  the 
models according to probabilities over which one has to decide in advance. 
The  decision  about  which  set  of  models  to  include  in  this  decision  process  and  which  models  to 
exclude also turns out to be highly important but difficult. The inclusion of an additional model, even if 
it has a low probability, may strongly influence the resulting decisions.  
Concerning the models to be regarded in the decision making process, I think that at least one from 
the  New-Keynesian  school,  which  currently  is  employed  as  a  kind  of  “work-horse”  in  monetary 
economics, should be included. These models are designed to capture short-run fluctuations in output 
and inflation and consist of an IS curve which represents the economy´s demand side and a (New-
Keynesian) Phillips curve which represents aggregate supply. 
Depending on the exact model specification, money can play an explicit role in the determination of 
output  and  inflation.3  However,  it  usually  plays  only  a  passive  role  (if  it  plays  a  role  at  all):  Money 
demand is determined by the other variables of the model but money has no effect on them.4  
Given  this  more  or  less  unimportant  role  for  money  in  New-Keynesian  models,  some  observers 
already see money leaving the stage of the academic discussion on monetary policy. However, I think 
that a few qualifications are essential.  
First  of  all,  I  would  argue  that  there  is  an  implicit  key  role  for  money  in  the  basic  New  Keynesian 
Model.5  For instance, implementing a certain path of the short-term interest rate is only possible if the 
central bank can control the corresponding supply of base money.  
Second, taking New Keynesian Models with a minor role for money on board must not mean that we 
should leave aside other models with a key role for money. On the contrary: The well-established fact 
that  there  is  a  strong  relationship  between  money  and  inflation  at  low  frequencies  urges  us  not  to 
exclude information from money.  
By the way: Even the Bank of England – which since the switch to inflation targeting has been very 
critical with respect to the usefulness of monetary indicators – now confirms this strong money/inflation 
relationship. 
Models  that capture  this  long-run  relationship between  monetary developments  and  inflation  or  that 
exploit the predictive power of monetary aggregates are – as I see it – the natural complements to 
models  of  short-run  fluctuations  in  the  toolbox  of  policy  makers.6  Those  models  are  an  essential 
device for judging the medium- to long-term risks to price stability.  
For  all  these  reasons  we  are  well  advised  to  integrate  monetary  developments  into  our  decision 
making process. 
Data uncertainty and money 
After my brief remarks on model uncertainty I now want to make some comments on the role of money 
against the background of data uncertainty.  
                                                      
3   See,  e.g.,  Kremer,  J.,  Lombardo,  G.  and  Werner,  T.  (2003)  „Money  in  a  New-Keynesian  Model  Estimated  with  German 
Data“, Deutsche Bundesbank , Discussion Paper No. 15. 
4   See Carlstrom, C.T, and Fuerst, T.S. (2004) „Thinking about Monetary Policy without Money“, International Finance (7), pp. 
325-347, for a discussion. 
5   See  McCallum,  B.T.  (2001)  „Monetary  Policy  Analysis  in  Models  without  Money“,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis 
Review, Juli/August 2001, pp. 145-160. 
6   See,  e.g.,  Nicoletti  Altimari,  S.  (2001)  „Does  Money  Lead  Inflation  in  the  Euro  Area?“,  ECB  Working  Paper  No.  63,  and 
Greiber,  C.  and  Neumann,  M.J.M.  (2004)  „Inflation  and  Core  Money  Growth  in  the  Euro  Area“,  Deutsche  Bundesbank, 
Discussion Paper No. 36. 
   2/4 
One  dimension  of  data  uncertainty  refers  to  the  problem  of  measuring  well-defined  economic 
aggregates.  This  problem  occurs  for  example  if  variables  cannot  be  measured  precisely  and  are 
therefore subject to revisions after they have been published for the first time.  
The problem of measurement errors in real-time is most severe in case of “real economy variables”, 
where revisions can be very large. The gross domestic product is an important example.  
Due to these real-time measurement problems we are left with a huge amount of uncertainty. And this 
is  not  only  true  for  the  current  state  of  the  economy,  but  also  for  our  expectations  of  future 
developments. Forecasts are conditional on real-time data, which may be revised at some later stage.  
Against  this  background  it  is  crucial  to  emphasize  that  monetary  and  financial  data  are  far  less 
affected  by  such  measurement  problems  than  data  from  the  real  economy.  Monetary  data  are 
available very quickly. And they are available with a much smaller measurement error than other key 
variables. Therefore, money may serve as an important indicator of current economic activity. 
On a microeconomic level, private agents´ real money holdings depend amongst other determinants 
on  their  individual  real  income  which  is  known  to  them.7    If  agents  are  able  to  quickly  adapt  their 
money  holdings,  changes  in  their  real  income  will  quickly  translate  into  changes  in  their  money 
holding. 
As a consequence, changes in aggregate real income quickly lead to changes in aggregate money. 
Money, therefore, adequately aggregates the individual information on real income development up to 
the macroeconomic level.  
Measurement  problems  become  even  more  severe  if  certain  model  variables  are  unobservable  as 
such. Important examples include the output gap and the natural rate of interest. With such variables 
one  is  faced  with  another  severe  problem:  The  theoretical  construct  has  to  be  translated  into  a 
statistical concept.  
And that is exactly the point where the problems of data and model uncertainty are closely connected: 
An  empirical  quantification  of  the  output  gap,  for  instance,  is  often  based  on  more  or  less  detailed 
assumptions about an underlying model structure.  
If  in  turn  a  policy  reaction  function  depends  crucially  on  such  unobservable  variables,  errors  in 
assessing the size of those variables may lead to large deviations from optimal policy. As empirical 
studies  show,  this  applies  in  particular  to  a  policy  rule  of  the  Taylor  type,  which  places  a  relatively 
large weight on the output gap.  
Orphanides and others have shown that in the seventies and eighties, estimates of the US output gap 
have  been  subject  to  large  and  persistent  measurement  errors.8  On  average,  there  has  been  a 
downward bias of this measure of economic activity which in turn led to a monetary policy of the Fed 
that - with hindsight - must be judged as too expansionary. As a consequence, the late 1970s and the 
early 1980s have been characterized by high inflation rates in the USA.  
I believe that the Bundesbank managed to prevent this kind of problems. Our research has shown that 
the  Bundesbank  did  not  assign  an  important  role  to  the  level  of  the  output  gap  which  is  especially 
prone to the real-time data problem. Instead, we focused on deviations of money growth from target, 
on  deviations  of  the  inflation  rate  from  the  price  norm  and  on  deviations  of  the  growth  rate  of  real 
output from the growth rate of potential output.9 This approach is much less subject to measurement 
errors than one that uses the level of the output gap. 
                                                      
7   See Coenen, G., Levin, A. and Wieland, V. (2005) „Data Uncertainty and the Role of Money as an Information Variable for 
Monetary Policy“, European Economic Review (49), pp. 975-1006. 
8   For the USA, see e.g. Orphanides, A. (2003), The Quest for Prosperity without Inflation, Journal of Monetary Economics, 50 
(3), S. 633 – 663. For the UK, see e.g. Nelson, E. and Nikolov, K. (2003), UK Inflation in the 1970s and 1980s: The Role of 
Output Gap Mismeasurement, Journal of Economics and Business, 55, S. 353 – 370. For Germany, see Gerberding, C., 
Seitz, F. and Worms, A. (2005), How the Bundesbank really conducted Monetary Policy: An Analysis based on Real-Time 
Data; North American Journal of Economics and Finance (forthcoming). 
9   See Gerberding, C., Seitz, F. and Worms, A. (2005), How the Bundesbank really conducted Monetary Policy: An Analysis 
based on Real-Time Data; North American Journal of Economics and Finance (forthcoming). 
   3/4 
Based on our previous research on “How the Bundesbank really conducted Monetary Policy” we have 
set up a new project on “Taylor Rules vs. Growth Rate Targeting” by Christina Gerberding, Michael 
Scharnagl,  Franz  Seitz  and  Andreas  Worms.  This  follow-up  project  intends  to  answer  the  question 
whether,  and  if  so  why,  responding  to  the  inflation  gap,  to  the  change  in  the  output  gap  and  to 
monetary  developments  instead  of  putting  a  strong  weight  on  the  level  of  the  output  gap  can  be 
welfare improving in the presence of data uncertainty. 
Our  discussion  paper  “Money  Demand  and  Macroeconomic  Uncertainty”  by  Claus  Greiber  and 
Wolfgang  Lemke  which  will  be  presented  tomorrow  provides  another  example  of  a  measurement 
problem. This paper uses a variable labelled “macroeconomic uncertainty” to capture factors different 
from the traditional determinants of money demand.  
The authors try to filter out uncertainty from observable developments in financial markets and data on 
economic  sentiment.  This  measure  turns  out  to  help  establishing  a  long-run  money  demand 
relationship that is able to account for recent monetary developments in the euro area.  
At the same time the study can be put into the perspective of model uncertainty as it explores whether 
there (still) exists a stable link between money and prices in the form of a money demand function. It is 
therefore an example for the need to improve the models used for monetary policy analysis. Or to put 
it in a nutshell: Models that capture the long-run relationship between money and inflation are always 
central to central bankers.  
Concluding remarks 
To close my remarks, let me stress that I think that if there is anything we can be certain about, then it 
is the fact that uncertainty will remain a key characteristic of monetary policy making. It is therefore 
worth-while to intensify our research efforts on the role of uncertainty for monetary policy and to refine 
monetary policy analysis along these lines. 
This  will  eventually  put  us  in  a  position  to  make  better  judgements  concerning  the  state  of  the 
economy  and  give  us  a  better  under-standing  of  “risks  and  side  effects”  that  accompany  every 
monetary policy measure. I am certain that this workshop will help us to make some progress in this 
direction. 
   4/4 
