Nils Bernstein: Recent economic and financial developments in Denmark 
Speech by Mr Nils Bernstein, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the Annual Meeting of the 
Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 30 November 2005. 
 I appreciate the friendly welcome that I have been given by the banking industry and thank you for this 
invitation to speak today. 
Let me start by stating that I intend to continue the line set by my predecessor in relation to monetary 
and foreign-exchange policy. This policy has served Denmark well.  
I have been around for so long that I remember the time when we used exchange-rate adjustments 
actively  to  solve  our  structural  problems.  As  we  know,  this  led  to  double-digit  inflation  rates  and 
interest  rates  exceeding  20  per  cent.  In  the  end,  it  became  plain  to  all  that  this  policy  was  not 
sustainable.  
Today, there is only seldom focus on the fixed-exchange-rate policy. Outside Denmark, it is in a way 
viewed  as  outdated.  Nevertheless,  this  policy  has  been  important  for  Denmark.  It  has  had  broad 
political  support  and  contributed  to  very  low  inflation;  in  practice  so  low  that  ordinary  people  hardly 
think about it any longer. In the last 15 years annual price increases have been kept at around 2 per 
cent on average, and retail prices have remained completely stable in recent years. This safeguard of 
real wages is to everyone's benefit each and every day.  
For the corporate sector it is easier to plan ahead when the exchange rate vis-à-vis the euro is stable. 
The foundation for their investments does not suddenly change due to changes in the exchange rate . 
Companies know that it is primarily up to them to meet future demands by developing products and 
human resources. 
The  lower  rate  of  inflation  is  not  an  isolated  Danish  phenomenon  –  it  is  seen  worldwide.  The 
increasing integration of Asian countries into the global economy dampens prices and wages in the 
rest  of  the  world.  This  is  also  reflected  in  long-term  yields.  Since  the  global  propensity  to  invest  is 
lower than is normally the case, and since both central banks and pension funds are currently buying 
large portfolios of long-term bonds, long-term yields are at the lowest level in the post-war era. .  
These  effects  will  diminish  at  some  point  –  we  do  not  know  when  –  but  when  that  does  happen, 
interest rates will rise. 
 Denmark's economic policy has had broad political support for a number of years. In fact, the Danish 
"model" is increasingly seen as a role model for other countries.  
Our  labour  market  is  particularly  interesting,  and  the  way  we  make  flexibility  go  hand  in  hand  with 
social security. What we see now is the result of many years' development of the Danish model. This 
is  a  never-ending  process.  Good  reforms  require  careful  preparation  and  considerable  time.  Ideas 
need to mature to ensure support for the reforms. The process is important to achieving a good result. 
The fixed-exchange-rate policy means that the level of Danish interest rates is generally determined 
abroad.  This  also  implies  that  it  does  not  always  match  Danish  needs.  In  practice,  this  has  not 
constituted  a  problem.  Fiscal  policy  has  been  designed  so  as  to  avoid  both  overheating  and  high 
unemployment.  A  forward-looking  and  reform-oriented  policy  usually  means  that  only  minor 
adjustments are required in connection with the annual Finance Act. Therefore, it is important to keep 
sights on long-term objectives all the time.  
In this context, experience from other countries can be useful. The Netherlands is currently struggling 
to get out of a recession that is self-inflicted. A favourable economic climate in the late 1990s led to 
large government surpluses. Some of the surplus was used to finance e.g. tax cuts, and the economy 
overheated. However, the consequences were not evident until a late stage. Wages soared, and so 
did  unemployment,  and  suddenly  government  finances  showed  a  large  deficit.  It  was  necessary  to 
tighten policy in the throes of a recession that only now seems to be receding. The lesson is: do not 
BIS Review 80/2005 
 1
spend  the  surplus  when  the  economy  is  good  –  particularly  if  there  is  the  slightest  risk  that 
competitiveness will suffer. 
The  Danish  economy  has  developed  favourably  in  recent  years.  This  is  naturally  very  satisfactory. 
Unemployment has declined and is now at a low level, private consumption is increasing by leaps and 
bounds, and yet we have a current-account surplus and cash is flowing into the government coffers. It 
is almost too good to be true – and there is indeed reason to exert some caution. 
Demand is still strong – and perhaps a little too strong. We do not know for certain. But the day, we do 
know that things are going too fast, we will have some unpleasant years ahead. At that point it will be 
too late to make adjustments without considerable costs. The challenge we face today is to ensure a 
balance  that  will  enable  us  to  reduce  unemployment  even  further.  We  need  to  bring  more  of  the 
weakest in society permanently into the labour market – and that will not be possible if the economy 
overheats. 
Speed  limits  should  therefore  not  only  be  observed  on  the  roads,  but  also  in  economic  policy. 
Economic  speeding  has  far  more  serious  implications  than  an  endorsement  on  a  driving  licence. 
Currently, this means that there is no scope for any relaxation on either the revenue or expenditure 
sides – on the contrary in fact. Central and local government must observe the expenditure targets, 
and the cyclical position does not warrant unfinanced tax cuts.  
The lesson to be learned from the Netherlands is clear: in an upswing the economic policy must not 
contribute to further accelerating developments. 
 Many  of  the  large  euroarea  member  states  are  struggling  with  economic  difficulties.  Large-scale 
unemployment  leads  to  uncertainty.  There  is  increasing  awareness  of  the  need  for  greater  labour 
market flexibily. Yet so far the reforms have been small. 
A key problem in Italy, France and Germany is that companies are not investing sufficiently in their 
home countries, and since households are reluctant to spend, the only option is to wait for an export-
driven upswing.  
A consumption-driven upswing in Europe would be desirable. To this end households must be willing 
and  able  to  spend  more.  However,  in  many  member  states  the  financial  sector  is  not  geared  to 
financing the households' consumption or housing requirements. The banking structure is based on 
household savings financing corporate investments, not on lending to households.  
In  Denmark,  lending  by  banks  and  mortgage-credit  institutes  to  households  matches  the  level  of 
output. At the other extremity within the EU, Italian households have only borrowed one quarter via 
these market channels, but the figure is presumably higher if loans from relatives are included. Yet 
market channels are important if family relations are not to be the central factor when young people 
buy a home or a car, or spread consumption rationally over their lifetimes.  
The  very  high  level  of  borrowing  by  Danish  households  reflects  especially  that  homeowners  can 
borrow from the capital market via the mortgage credit system. This is an advantage, but also has its 
drawbacks.  New  loan  types,  also  from  the  banks,  have  probably  contributed  to  the  very  strong 
increases in house prices. However, most of the increases must be attributed to the low interest rates, 
growth in real incomes and the freeze on property taxes. This is therefore not an inexplicable price 
bubble, yet prices may fall when interest rates go up. 
Times are good for the banks, and lending is growing. Good times are also when losses are seen as a 
thing of the past, and credit quality may deteriorate. Not in one's own bank, but among competitors.  
The  banks  face  the  major  task  of  incorporating  the new  international  accounting standards  and  the 
forthcoming  capital-adequacy  rules  –  Basel  II.  This  requires  considerable  resources.  It  is  also  an 
important task requiring each bank to assess its need for buffers against bad times. Other parts of the 
financial  sector  have  also  devoted  many  resources  to  new  legislation  and  its  implementation.  The 
European Commission has now indicated that all major legislation is in place in the financial area. Now 
we need to make the single market for financial services work. 
The  IMF  is  assessing  the  entire  financial  system  in  Denmark  as  part  of  its  Financial  Sector 
Assessment Program – FSAP. Let us take this as a good opportunity for a service check. It is good to 
take a fresh look at whether we have an optimum structure in relation to international standards. The 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2005
IMF has just concluded a two-week visit to Denmark. I would like to thank the members of the Danish 
Bankers Association and a large number of the other players in the financial system for their efforts in 
connection  with  this  visit.  FSAP  is  a  long  process  and  there  is  still  considerable  work  ahead  in  the 
coming months. The IMF's final assessment of Denmark and its recommendations are expected to be 
presented in mid-2006.  
Bodil (Nyboe Andersen) has asked me to extent her gratitude for your fine cooperation – not only over 
the past year, but over many years. I hope this fine cooperation will continue in the years to come.  
BIS Review 80/2005 
 3
