Jean-Pierre Roth: Economic recovery is continuing in Switzerland  
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 15 December 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
As we have just announced in our press release, the Swiss National Bank is raising its target range for 
the  three-month  Libor  by  0.25  percentage  points  to  0.50–1.50%.  This  change  will  take  effect 
immediately. The SNB intends to hold the rate in the middle of the target range for the time being. 
Economic recovery is continuing as expected. It has grown stronger and is more broad-based. The 
SNB  has raised  its  forecast  for  economic  growth in  2005  and now  expects  the  increase in  GDP  to 
reach  just  over  1.5%.  For  2006,  it  projects  growth  of  a  little  more  than  2%.  The  National  Bank 
anticipates average inflation for 2005 to remain at 1.2%. On the assumption that the three-month Libor 
remains unchanged at 1.0%, it forecasts annual inflation of 0.8% in 2006 and 1.2% in 2007. 
By  raising  its  target  range,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  is  adjusting  its  monetary  policy  to  economic 
developments,  which  are  proceeding  as  expected.  The  SNB  thus  ensures  that  the  inflation  outlook 
remains favourable. Despite the increase in the interest rate, the monetary policy of the SNB remains 
expansionary and supports the upswing. As economic recovery progresses, the SNB will continue to 
gradually adjust its monetary policy. If the Swiss franc were to appreciate rapidly, the National Bank 
would react appropriately. 
Today’s  increase  in  the  three-month  Libor  was  generally  expected.  Why  did  financial  markets 
anticipate this move? The answer is simple. The moderate increase in the interest rate is compatible 
with our strategy of making gradual corrections to a very expansionary monetary policy, while taking 
into account economic recovery. Let me clarify this statement. 
Economic activity 
At  our  monetary  policy  assessment  in  mid-September,  we  addressed  the  factors  indicating  an 
economic  improvement  in  the  second  quarter.  We  expected  that  this  trend  would  strengthen  in  the 
second half of the year. The movements in economic indicators over the last three months confirm this 
scenario. 
According  to  estimates  by  the  State  Secretariat  for  Economic  Affairs  (seco),  real  GDP  in  the  third 
quarter exceeded the previous quarter by an annualised figure of 4.3%. With respect to the year-back 
level,  it  was  up  by  2.3%.  Together  with  the  GDP  figures  for  the  third  quarter,  seco  also  presented 
revised figures for the first two quarters. The new figures are substantially higher than before, even 
after the considerable increase in the figure for the first quarter that was presented in September. Most 
observers were surprised by the size of the growth estimate for the third quarter. What is more, the 
retrospective revisions have considerably modified the perception of the economic situation in the first 
half of the year. Nevertheless, interpretation of the quarterly estimates is difficult in view of the sizable 
fluctuations  in  final  demand  and  the  fact  that  the  main  factor  impacting  on  GDP  momentum  are 
changes  in  inventories.  Other  indicators,  such  as  the  consumer  confidence  index,  company 
expectations, labour demand and the continued low level of inflation expectations, appear to indicate a 
more modest level of economic momentum. 
Despite the uncertainty with respect to the GDP estimates, the information currently available to us 
indicates that economic recovery has accelerated over the past few months. Fourth-quarter indicators 
point to a continuation in the economic upswing. 
Although  export  growth  is  slowing,  international  demand  remains  robust.  This  momentum  is 
increasingly shifting into the domestic sector, where it is acting as a stimulus. Gradually, the utilisation 
of industrial production capacities is improving. Meanwhile, companies expect demand to pick up over 
the next few months. 
There  were  signs  of  a  recovery  in  corporate  investment  in  the  third  quarter.  Over  the  next  few 
quarters, a high utilisation rate of technical capacity in industry and a more favourable sales outlook 
BIS Review 86/2005 
 1
are  likely  to  provide greater  support  for  investments  in  equipment  and  a  gradual  increase in  labour 
demand. As a result, the disequilibrium in the labour market is likely to diminish. 
In  the  last  quarter,  private  consumption  remained  strong.  Since  employment  can  be  expected  to 
increase over the course of 2006, consumer confidence should strengthen. By contrast, the stimulus 
provided by construction investment is likely to subside next year. In particular, we may expect that, 
after three years of robust growth, investments in residential construction will stagnate at a high level. 
Overall, we project GDP growth of just over 1.5% this year. Previously, we had expected growth to 
reach about 1%. To a large extent, this correction to our growth forecast is due to seco’s revision of 
the figures for the first two quarters. For 2006, we forecast economic growth of a little more than 2%. 
This would take GDP growth to a level above the potential growth path for the Swiss economy. The 
output gap – i.e. the gap between normal and actual utilisation of resources – will diminish. 
Monetary development 
Alongside  the  figures  for  the  real  economy,  movements  in  monetary  and  credit  aggregates  also 
indicate  that  economic  recovery  is  underway.  Since  adopting  a  resolutely  expansionary  monetary 
policy  three years ago,  mortgage  lending  has  grown  at  an  annual  rate  of  over  5%.  We continue  to 
monitor  developments  in  the  real  estate  market  closely.  Since  September,  other  loans  have  also 
recorded positive rates of growth with respect to year-back figures. In the past, a development of this 
kind usually indicated a strengthening in economic recovery. 
The economy is well supplied with liquidity as a result of the expansionary monetary policy. Although 
the growth of the broadly-defined monetary aggregate, M3, had fallen to 1% in October 2004, it has 
since climbed back to over 6%. However, excess liquidity will be gradually reduced as a result of the 
interest  rate  increase  announced  today.  In  this  way,  we  aim  to  ensure  that  price  stability  is  not 
endangered in future. 
The monetary policy decision 
The economic and monetary situation has developed in the way we anticipated. The inflation outlook 
prior  to  today’s  decision  was  largely  in  line  with  the  figures  presented  at  the  last  monetary  policy 
assessment. For 2006, however, we forecast a slightly higher level of inflation to that presented in the 
last assessment. This is due to revisions made to certain figures that point to a higher rate of utilisation 
in the economy. 
In view of this inflation outlook, what is the justification for our decision to increase the target range for 
three-month  Libor  by  25  basis  points?  While  we  anticipate  falling  rates  of  inflation  next  year,  this 
decline  is  not  relevant  in  terms  of  monetary  policy.  Recent  inflation  levels  of  over  1%  are  probably 
largely due to the rise in oil prices which began in the first half of 2004. At the time, we decided not to 
take  this  increased  inflation  into  account  in  our  monetary  policy  decisions,  due  to  the  fact  that  its 
consequences could not be neutralised through monetary policy measures. It seems logical, therefore, 
not to take account of a decline in inflation attributable to subsiding oil prices, particularly since this 
drop also results from a statistical effect. A number of inflation components are likely to persist at a low 
level,  even  in  2006.  We  are  working  on  the  assumption  that  the  prices  of  imported  products  will 
continue to fall, due especially to the continued pressure exerted by international competition. This will 
have a dampening effect on the domestic price level. All of these factors mean that some of the gains 
in productivity will be passed on to consumers in the form of price reductions. 
Since there is a considerable lag between the adoption of monetary policy measures and their impact 
on  prices,  monetary  policy  does  not  affect  price  developments  in  the  near  term.  Consequently,  the 
National Bank is guided by the medium-term inflation outlook rather than the short-term forecast. The 
inflation  forecasts  published  since  2003  show  high  rates  of  inflation  at  the  end  of  each  forecast 
horizon. This makes it clear that we cannot continue our expansionary monetary policy for an unlimited 
period of time. The three-month Libor was already lifted in June and September 2004, each time by 25 
basis  points.  Because  the  economy  weakened  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2004,  there  was  an 
improvement  in  the  inflation  outlook  at  the  monetary  policy  assessments  of  December  2004,  and 
March  and  June  2005.  Consequently,  a  decision  not  to  undertake  further  increases  in  the  rate  of 
interest was appropriate. However, the forecast of mid-September 2005 indicated that there would be 
no further improvement in the inflation outlook. Nevertheless, we decided not to increase interest rates 
at  that  time.  We  determined  not  to  take  any  action  because  of  the  fact  that  oil  prices  had  attained 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2005
record  heights  just  before  our  monetary  policy  assessment.  It  was  not  possible  at  the  time  to  fully 
assess the impact on the economy and on inflation. 
If  monetary  policy  had  remained  the  same  at  this  assessment,  the  medium-term  inflation  outlook 
would  once  again  have  been  unchanged.  In  the  meantime,  however,  the  room  for  manoeuvre 
available to monetary policy has declined. Our inevitable concerns with respect to the high price of oil 
in September have been dissipated by the favourable developments in the economy. As a result, we 
have  decided  to  increase  the  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor  by  0.25  percentage  points. 
Consequently,  this  decision  is  in  line  with  the  statements  we  made  at  the  last  monetary  policy 
assessment. 
Inflation forecast graph 
I now turn to the current inflation forecast, which is based on the assumption of a change in the three-
month Libor, to 1.0%. The graph depicts the current and the previous forecasts. The dashed red curve 
represents  the  new  forecast,  which  covers  the  period  from  the  fourth  quarter  of  2005  to  the  third 
quarter of 2008. It summarises the inflation outlook, following today’s increase in the rate of interest. 
The  dash-dotted  green  curve  shows  the  inflation  forecast  at  the  time  of  the  last  monetary  policy 
assessment and is based on a three-month Libor of 0.75%. 
The two forecasts are very similar for 2006, and show receding rates of inflation due to the fact that oil 
prices are not increasing any further. As of 2007, the new inflation forecast lies below the previous 
one. This reflects the dampening effect of today’s interest rate decision on future inflation. 
The  forecast  shows  that  there  is  no  immediate  inflation  risk.  At  0.8%  and  1.2%  in  the  coming  two 
years, the expected rates of inflation remain low. However, it is evident from the inflation dynamics 
that, even with a three-month Libor of 1.0%, monetary policy has an expansionary effect. 
With today’s decision to increase the three-month Libor by 25 basis points, we are adhering to our 
previous monetary policy course. We continue to support the economy, using the leeway available to 
us. This should guarantee price stability in the longer term. If the Swiss franc appreciates rapidly, the 
National Bank will respond appropriately, and is keeping all its options open for such an eventuality, as 
it has in the past. 
Observed inflation December 2005 
BIS Review 86/2005 
   3
Inflation forecast of September 2005 with Libor at 0.75% and of December 2005 with Libor at 
1.00% 
Inflation forecast of December 2005 (57 kb) 
 4 
 BIS Review 86/2005
