David Dodge: Summary of the latest monetary policy report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Standing  Senate 
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ontario, 26 October 2005. 
 Good afternoon, Mr Chairman and members of the Committee. We appreciate the opportunity to meet 
with  this  committee  twice  a  year,  following  the  release  of  our  Monetary  Policy  Reports.  These 
meetings help us keep Senators and all Canadians informed about the Bank's views on the economy, 
and about the objective of monetary policy and the actions we take to achieve it. 
When Paul and I appeared before this Committee last April, we said that the economy appeared to be 
operating slightly below its production capacity, and that we expected it to move back to full capacity in 
the second half of 2006. In our October Monetary Policy Report, which we published last Thursday, 
we  said  that  economic  growth  in  the  first  half  of  the  year  was  somewhat  stronger  than  we  had 
previously expected. Indeed, the global and Canadian economies have continued to grow at a solid 
pace, and our economy now appears to be operating at full production capacity.  
Past and recent movements in energy prices and in the exchange rate for the Canadian dollar, along 
with  competitive  pressures  from  China  and  other  newly  industrialized  economies,  are  giving  rise  to 
significant  ongoing  adjustments  in  the  Canadian  economy.  Given  these  adjustments  and  the  slow 
growth of productivity in recent years, the Bank has slightly reduced its estimate of potential output 
growth for 2005 and 2006. 
The  Bank  projects  that  the  economy  will  grow  in  line  with  production  potential  through  2007,  with 
growth averaging 2.8 per cent this year, 2.9 per cent in 2006, and 3.0 per cent in 2007.  
With the economy operating at capacity and with higher energy prices, pressures on consumer prices 
are  somewhat  stronger  than  they  were  at  the  time  of  the  July  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update. 
Assuming energy prices evolve in line with currently prevailing futures prices, CPI inflation is projected 
to average near 3 per cent through the middle of 2006, before returning to the 2 per cent target in the 
second half of next year. Core inflation should remain below 2 per cent in coming months, returning to 
2 per cent by mid-2006. 
The Bank raised its key policy interest rate to 3 per cent on 18 October. In line with our outlook, some 
further  reduction  of  monetary  stimulus  will  be  required  to  maintain  a  balance  between  aggregate 
supply and demand over the next four to six quarters, and to keep inflation on target. Short-term risks 
to  this  projection  appear  to  be  balanced.  But  as  we  look  further  out  to  2007  and  beyond,  we  see 
increasing  risks  that  the  unwinding  of  global  economic  imbalances  could  involve  a  period  of  weak 
world economic growth.  
The Bank will continue to assess the adjustments and underlying trends in the Canadian economy, as 
well as the balance of risks, as it conducts monetary policy to keep inflation on target over the medium 
term.  
Mr Chairman, Paul and I will now be happy to answer your questions.  
 
   1/1 
