Ardian Fullani: Preconditions for inflation targeting in Albania (closing speech) 
Farewell  speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Open  Forum 
“Preconditions for Inflation Targeting in Albania”, Tirana, 1-2 December 2005. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I want to conclude this Forum by saying first and foremost that we have had two very productive days! 
It  was  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  listen  to  your  views,  constructive  suggestions  and  fruitful  ideas 
concerning monetary policy in Albania. I thank you very much for all your contributions! 
At the end of this Forum I would like to give my personal views on the road ahead for Bank of Albania. 
But I will first put some developments in perspective.   
Since  1990  and  until  today  in  2005,  the  Albanian  economy  has  been  transformed  from  an  isolated 
centrally planned to an open market economy. Before 1990 there use to be only a state mono-bank. 
Nowadays, there is a central bank with a network of commercial banks and other financial institutions. 
In 2000, the central bank began to fully rely on indirect instruments for conducting its monetary policy.  
As you can see, Bank of Albania has a relatively short history of central banking. In my opinion, the 
central bank is moving in the right direction. But time has come to decide how to proceed in the near to 
further future. This has been the main reason for organizing this Open Forum. 
For  our  country,  an  ultimate  objective  is  the  accession  to  the  European  Union.  Accession  to  the 
European Union implies a full membership. As a consequence, it implies eventually the adoption of the 
euro after the accession date. EU accession will ultimately induce entering into ERM II, and thereafter 
adopting the full legal tender of the euro. There will be an automatic adherence to the monetary policy 
of the European Central Bank. However, these developments still belong to the future.  
Having this EU-time path in mind, we are aware of the changing world surrounding us. Albania as a 
small  and  open  economy  is  part  of  this  dynamic  world.  Today,  we  observe  a  rapid  globalization, 
liberalization,  continuous  financial  deepening  and  broadening,  with  new  financial  innovations  in  a 
always  more  interconnected  world.  Albania  is  influenced  by  these  developments  on  a  day  to  day 
basis.  Albania  therefore,  needs  a  daily  monitoring  of  new  developments  and  it  needs  to  cope  with 
these international challenges. 
Before reaching the ultimate EU-accession objective in this constantly changing world, there is still a 
long  distance  to  cross.  As  it  concerns  monetary  policy,  Bank  of  Albania  today  thinks  that  Inflation 
Targeting  is  the  way  to  take.  Better  highways  will  bring  us  more  quickly  from  Tirana  to  the  Airport. 
Likewise, the better monetary policy is able to maintain price stability, the quicker Albania can take the 
road and reach the levels of neighboring Europe with their higher welfare levels.  
We are fully aware that adopting fully fledged Inflation Targeting is a process that requires hard work 
with several preconditions in place, as these two days have underlined. Getting to Inflation Targeting is 
more of a marathon than a steeplechase. Our two days here have shown that it is not a discrete one-
time decision that resolves all problems. It should also be a smooth process. This holds in particular 
for a transitioning country like Albania. Our country faces different challenges and virtues compared 
with developed countries.  
Now, how is our Working Agenda set? 
I want to distinguish between the working areas within and outside the central bank. And the working 
area outside the central bank can be split into Albania and the international environment.  
I see the further building of the central bank as a recognized and respected institution as one of my 
primary tasks. Qualified young and ambitious people need to help us bringing our internal discussions 
and work to higher levels. Cutting-edge discussions and fundamental studies are needed to make the 
central bank choosing the best policies, on monetary policy as well as on supervision and financial 
stability (in a broad sense). The human resources capacities need to be secured. Inflation Targeting is 
to be further scrutinized in all respects. Econometric models need further development for forecasting 
inflation and analyzing transmission channels. More statistical work needs to be done, in particular on 
micro information from the real side of the economy. A specialized unit should concentrate on all areas 
that  cover  the  consumer  price  index.  A  clear  and  professional  communication  strategy  is  to  be 
BIS Review 80/2005 
 1
developed.  Information  on  monetary  policy  is  to  be  translated  into  a  language  for  the  different 
population groups in our country. Next to all these activities, we need to continue our discussions on 
the Monetary Decision Making arrangements that are deemed essential for Inflation Targeting. These 
activities within Bank of Albania are on my agenda for tomorrow. 
Outside  the  central  bank  in  Albania  we  need  to  take  all  efforts  for  a  further  development  of  the 
financial markets and other transmission channels. We cannot do this on our own. In this respect we 
should  establish  a  deeper  constructive  collaboration  with  other  national  institutions.  We  should 
elaborate  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Parliament  on  the  legal  issues  for  strengthening  the 
central bank’s independence. With the Ministry of Finance we have already projects, such as the anti-
cash, credit office, T-bills market and so on.. But a topic high on our and the agenda of the Ministry of 
Finance’s agenda should be the statistical framework. Statistics by means of Instat need to become 
timelier and need to be improved for the purposes of policies by the central bank as well as by the 
government.  As  discussed  also  these  days,  we  should  take  all  efforts  in  bridging  the  gap  between 
Bank of Albania and the other central banks in Europe. The central bank law served Albania at the 
time it was laid down. Now at the brink of the year 2006 we all agree that it needs amendments.  
Governance at the central bank needs to reach the levels of governance at the central banks in more 
developed countries. We need a full independence of monetary policy on the one hand, and of fiscal 
and other government policy on the other hand. We need more professionalism. We need monetary 
policy conducted with a view to the future. We need to improve on accountability. We need to make 
our people contestable within and outside Albania as it concerns the policies. I would like to see more 
open discussions where we discuss elaborately about our differences in opinions but at the end of the 
day also reach agreements that - as their sole purpose - benefit the Albanian economy. 
Our  cooperation  with  international  organizations  like  the  International  Monetary  Fund  will  be 
maintained and open discussions about consistency issues with the new monetary strategy will carry 
on.  Cooperation  with  the  European  Commission  should  become  intensive  in  order  to  harmonize  all 
central bank requirements in line with EU standards. In my view EU is one of the highest priorities on 
the Agenda of Albania, and the central bank will provide all cooperation in making its central bank law 
and all further rules and regulations according to EU-standards.  
Next to this, the relationships with the Bank for International Settlements and the European Central 
Bank  need  to  become  closer.  As  a  special  point  I  want  to  highlight  again  the  cooperation  with  the 
central banks in the region. We can more often share our views about monetary policy, supervision 
and financial stability. We can more often have common projects. One of the big projects I have in 
mind is the process of preparation for the accession to the European Union. 
As you see, our Agenda is quite full. Probably not only in the short term but also for the medium term. 
But let me stop here. 
I am sure we will meet again in the future. But I conclude here by saying that I hope to meet you again 
in the very near future. At these occasions I will update you about any steps and progress we have 
been making within Bank of Albania! Today I spoke a lot; tomorrow we will start implementing what we 
said today. 
Once more, thank you very much and have a safe return home.  
2 
 BIS Review 80/2005
