T T Mboweni: The South African Reserve Bank and gold; recent economic 
developments in South Africa 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  LBMA 
Precious Metals Conference, Johannesburg, 14 November 2005. 
Ladies and gentlemen, honoured guests. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Thank you very much for inviting me to participate in this your annual conference being held here in 
South Africa this time. It is indeed a privilege and an honour to speak to you today. It is also fitting that 
a conference such as this one is held in Johannesburg. This city was born in 1886 and built on the 
gold mining industry which flourished as a result of the great mineral wealth present in the rock below 
us. 
The African people refer to this place as Egoli or Gauteng which means the city of gold. The platinum 
group metals (PGMs) also play an extremely important role in the South African economy with South 
Africa  being  the  major  supplier  of  precious  metals  to  the  international  market.  Our  role  in  the  gold 
refining industry is also significant. The Rand Refinery is the world’s largest single-site gold refinery 
and  it  refines  gold  from  as  far  afield  as  East  and  West  Africa  and  Latin  America.  Since  the  Rand 
Refinery  was  established  in  1920  it  has  refined  approximately  32  per  cent  of  all  gold  produced 
globally. This is yet another good reason to hold this prestigious conference here.  
So welcome, once again, to our 119-year old city. We can guarantee great weather and, to add to the 
excitement, some volatility in asset prices! Regrettably there is no guarantee as to the precious metals 
prices, either in dollar or rand terms, but we have certainly appreciated the recent upward trend in their 
dollar prices. I will leave it to you the experts to ponder the future path of these metals. Once you have 
done  so  and  once  you  have  sampled  the  delights  that  this  country  has  to  offer  you  as  business 
people, we hope that you will return and sample its diverse offerings as a tourist. 
The precious metals industry in South Africa 
2. 
The  precious  metals  market  in  South  Africa  has  experienced  significant  changes  in  recent  times. 
Exports  of  gold  have  receded  from  51,0  per  cent  of  total  visible  exports  in  1980  to  9,4  per  cent  in 
2004. Over the same period the platinum group metals exports have risen from 5,0 per cent to 9,0 per 
cent of total visible exports. The changing fortunes of these sectors were also reflected in employment: 
the number of jobs in gold mining receded from 476 000 in 1980 to 175 000 in 2004, while in platinum 
mining it roughly doubled from 77 000 to 151 000 over the same period. 
Over the past decade, the contribution of gold mining to total gross domestic product declined from 
3,2 per cent in 1994 to 1,5 per cent last year. At the same time platinum mining’s contribution rose 
from 2,0 per cent in 1994 to 2,3 per cent in 2004. For all mining sectorscombined, the share in the total 
value added to the economy receded from 9,5 per cent in 1994 to 7,3 per cent last year. 
More  recently,  Chamber  of  Mines  data  indicate  that  South  African  gold  production  in  the  second 
quarter  of  2005  fell  by  2,4  per  cent  from  the  first  quarter  and  by  18  per  cent  year-on-year.  These 
declines reflect the industry’s adjustments to the current economic environment and the restructuring 
that has occurred over the past three years. Although the substantial increase in restructuring costs 
has  resulted  in  losses  for  the  industry,  given  that  most  of  the  restructuring  has  taken  place,  the 
Chamber  of  Mines  expects  the  associated  costs  to  decline  going  forward.  This  is  a  welcome 
development indeed. 
The exchange rate is often seen as a source of the mining sector’s difficulties. The necessity to adapt 
to  these  new  and  changing  circumstances  has  impacted  not  only  on  the  mining  sector  but  on  all 
BIS Review 76/2005 
 1
exporting sectors. Despite the mining sector’s difficult circumstances, South Africa remains the world’s 
largest producer of gold and platinum. 
The South African Reserve Bank and gold 
3. 
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  has  historically  been  an  active  participant  in  the  gold  market. 
Originally all newly-mined gold had to be offered for sale to the Bank within 30 days of production. 
Subsequently the Chamber of Mines negotiated the right to sell South African gold independently of 
the  Bank  in  beneficiated  forms  of  one  kilogram  and  less.  These  direct  sales  were  restricted  to 
one-third of the annual production. 
After lengthy consultation, a sea-change in these arrangements occurred when the Minister of Finance 
announced on 12 December 1997, in a further relaxation of Exchange Control Regulations, that South 
African gold producers may elect to sell their total output provided the Bank had given the necessary 
exemption from the relevant Exchange Control Regulations. 
This  led  to  a  gradual  but  dramatic  decline  in  the  Bank’s  transactions  in  the  bullion  market. 
Notwithstanding this, the Bank continues to be keenly interested in the health of the bullion market. 
This is by virtue of South Africa’s significant gold reserves both in the vaults and underground. 
The  SARB  also  remains  active  in  the  various  forums  where  the  issue  of  central  gold  reserves 
management is explored. The most prominent of these forums is organized from time to time during 
the annual meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, where producers and central 
banks discuss the prospects for gold. 
The  general  impression  that  we  have  gained  from  these  discussions  is  that  the  significant  central 
banks which hold gold are very conscious of the impact that their gold sales programme have on the 
gold price and as such would not want to disrupt the market or cause unnecessary price volatility. The 
Swiss central bank for example has handled their gold sales in a transparent, honest and exemplary 
manner. Their programme was pre-announced and followed to the end accordingly. 
There is some uncertainty however about what would happen in Germany when the new government 
starts  to  function.  We  can  only  hope  that  the  current  approach  adopted  by  the  Bundesbank  will 
continue.  
So the prospects for gold from a central bank perspective is good. 
A colleague of mine is participating in one of the panel discussions scheduled for tomorrow and he will 
enlighten you on the Bank’s management of gold reserves. But, allow me to make the following brief 
comments. The Bank holds around 4 million fine ounces of gold in its foreign reserves. It has held this 
net figure stable for the past number of years. Gold is, obviously, an internationally acceptable reserve 
asset.  The  Bank  is  very  comfortable  holding  these  gold  reserves  because  of  the  metal’s  war-chest 
qualities,1 because gold is no-one’s liability, and because it allows prudent diversification in the Bank’s 
total reserves. Whilst not being a signatory to the Central Bank Gold Agreement, we abide by the spirit 
of this Agreement in the management of the Bank’s gold reserves. As I have mentioned, we are very 
satisfied with the level of our gold holdings. Indeed, as part of our reviews on the composition of total 
reserves, we may even consider increasing our gold holdings. 
Recent economic developments 
4. 
The  South  African  economy  has  been  in  an  upswing  since  September  1999,  making  it  the  longest 
business cycle expansion phase on record. During this upswing growth in real gross domestic product 
has averaged approximately 3½ per cent per annum. Recent data indicate that the sustained growth 
in  real  production  is also  being reflected  in  some  very  welcome gains  in  employment,  although  the 
unemployment rate of 26½ per cent remains very high and its further reduction a strategic imperative. 
Annualised growth in real gross domestic product accelerated from 3,5 per cent in the first quarter of 
2005 to 4,8 per cent in the second quarter, with firm growth recorded in virtually all the main sectors of 
                                                      
1   Alan  Greenspan  in  his  testimony  to  Congress  on  3  November  2005  said:  “The  bottom  line  is  that  in  periods  of  extreme 
chaos, it’s turned out that gold has been the ultimate means by which transactions have been consummated. It occurred, for 
example, during World War II that you could only negotiate transactions with gold.” 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2005
the economy. All the final demand components – household consumption, government consumption, 
and fixed capital formation – have been expanding briskly. 
As could be expected, the upswing in economic activity and expenditure was accompanied by a strong 
increase in import volumes. Accordingly, the current account of the balance of payments moved into 
deficit  from  2003.  The  current-account  deficit  amounted  to  approximately  3½  per  cent  of  gross 
domestic product in the first half of 2005. Information on visible foreign trade suggests a larger trade 
deficit in the third quarter of 2005 than in the first two quarters of the year, but comprehensive data on 
services  and  income  flows  for  the  third  quarter  still  need  to  be  finalised  before  the  current-account 
balance for the third quarter of the year can be determined. Relatively favourable prices for most of 
South Africa’s export commodities have been helping to contain the trade and current-account deficits. 
At the same time sizeable inflows of financial capital have been recorded over the past three years, 
exceeding  the  current-account  deficits  and  enabling  the  Bank  to  increase  its  foreign  exchange 
reserves. 
On a trade-weighted basis, the rand appreciated by 11,7 per cent in 2004. During the first 10 months 
of this year it has depreciated by 9 per cent. The rand’s overall recovery since the lows of late 2001 
can  be  mainly  attributed  to  improved  perceptions  about  South  Africa’s  economic  fundamentals,  US 
dollar weakness, rising commodity prices, positive interest rate differentials, and, of course, a recovery 
from  heavily  oversold  levels.  The  emerging  view  of  the  rand  is  that  it  will  respond  to  changing 
fundamentals in an orderly manner. 
Rising income levels, improved confidence and lower interest rates have bolstered credit extension, 
resulting in banks’ loans and advances to the domestic private sector increasing by 21,5 per cent over 
the twelve months to September 2005. Mortgage lending has been exceptionally strong, supported by 
rising  property  prices.  Average  house  prices  rose  by  more  than  15  per  cent  over  the  past  twelve 
months.  However,  this  is  already  significantly  slower  than  the  35-percent  peak  rate  of  increase 
recorded approximately a year ago. As a counterpart to the increases in bank loans and advances, the 
monetary aggregates have also been rising briskly. Twelve-month growth in the broad money supply, 
M3, amounted to 16,7 per cent in September 2005. 
Share prices reached successive new record highs during the course of 2005, and the buoyancy in 
the  share  market  was  also  reflected  in  record  turnovers  of  shares  on  the  JSE  Limited  in  recent 
months.  Non-residents  are  taking  a  keen  interest  in  South  African  shares,  and  are  increasingly 
involved in sizeable direct investment into South Africa. The operations of the financial markets have 
continued to grow over the years. The turnover in the equity market has risen from R62 billion in 1994 
to R1 031 billion last year. Similarly, the turnover in the bond market has risen from R2 trillion in 1995 
to R9,5 trillion last year. Improvements made to the JSE such as electronic clearing and settlement 
and the dematerialisation of shares and electronic trading has facilitated these developments. South 
Africa has also made progress in providing access to finance and banking activities to small and micro 
enterprises and the underbanked communities. 
Fiscal  policy  has  been  disciplined  over  the  past  decade,  contributing  to  the  stable  macroeconomic 
environment.  Latest  estimates  provide  for  a  national  government  deficit  before  borrowing  of 
approximately 1 per cent of gross domestic product in the current fiscal year, while the government 
debt as percentage of gross domestic product has been brought down to around 36 per cent. 
The  inflation-targeting  monetary  policy  framework  adopted  in  February  2000  has  contributed  to  the 
reduction of inflation to low levels, and has allowed for nominal interest rates to fall to levels last seen 
at the beginning of the 1980s. Real interest rates have also fallen and become less variable. For the 
past 25 months, CPIX inflation (i.e. headline inflation excluding mortgage interest cost) has remained 
within the target range of 3-6 per cent, despite strong output and expenditure growth in the economy. 
Although  currently  we  still  expect  inflation  to  remain  within  the  target  range,  the  outlook  has  been 
clouded by the increased risk posed by the behaviour of international crude oil prices which have more 
or less doubled in US dollar terms over the past two years. Domestic petrol prices have consequently 
increased  and  have  recently  resulted  in  a  significant  upward  movement  in  CPIX  inflation,  from 
3,5 per cent in June, to 4,8 per cent in August, although they fell back to 4,7 per cent the following 
month.  Because  monetary  policy  reacts  with  a  lag,  there  is  little  that  can  be  done  about  these 
so-called first-round effects. However we have to be vigilant to the possible second-round effects or 
more broad-based increases in inflation which come about when prices are raised in expectation of a 
generalised  price  spiral  induced  by  the  higher  petrol  prices.  These  expectations  are  affected  to  a 
significant degree by expectations of the Bank's policy reponses to the increases. In other words, the 
credibility of monetary policy is key. 
BIS Review 76/2005 
 3
In such a situation, monetary policy is faced with a dilemma, and indeed this is the dilemma faced by 
the  MPC  at  present.  At  this  point,  there  are  few  signs  of  second-round  effects,  and  CPIX  inflation 
excluding the first-round effects of the petrol prices increases, has remained remarkably stable over 
the past year. On the one hand, if no second-round effects emanate, monetary tightening could be 
unnecessary. On the other hand, if these second-round effects are expected to materialise, because 
of the lags in monetary policy, it would be appropriate to act sooner rather than later, to avoid being 
behind the curve. The challenge is to identify or anticipate these second-round pressures in advance. 
Monetary policy therefore has the difficult task of weighing up the risk of taking potentially unnecessary 
or incorrect action by being too preemptive, against the cost of delaying too long before taking action. 
This requires fine judgement on the part of the Committee. 
The Bank will, in general, continue to accumulate foreign exchange reserves at a moderate pace and 
at opportune times. The gross reserves have already reached a level of nearly USD20 billion at the 
end  of  October  2005.  While  there  has  been  a  focus  on  steadily  accumulating  reserves,  given  their 
relatively  low  level compared  to  our  peers,  it must  be  remembered  that we do  not  target  a  specific 
level of reserves. The improved level of reserves is expected to enhance exchange rate stability and 
improve the Bank’s credibility. 
Partly due to the strengthening of our reserves position, South Africa’s credit ratings continue to be 
upgraded. In January this year, Moody’s upgraded the country’s credit rating from Baa2 to Baa1 with a 
stable  outlook.  This  upgrade  was  based  on  the  “substantial  strengthening”  in  the  country’s  foreign 
reserves  position.  Political  stability  and  robust  macroeconomic  policies  also  played  a  role.  Just 
recently, at the beginning of August, Standard & Poor’s upgraded South Africa’s credit rating to BBB+ 
to  match  the  Moody’s  rating  of  Baa1,  awarded  in  January  2005.  Towards  the  end  of  August  2005 
Fitch, similarly, revised South Africa’s BBB rating to BBB+. These ratings place South Africa at the top 
of the lower investment grade band and are an endorsement of the country’s economic fundamentals 
and  policies.  These  upgrades  have  contributed  to  the  increasingly  narrow  margins  paid  on  the 
country’s foreign borrowing. 
The  Bank  will  continue  to  encourage  foreign  direct  investment.  The  advantages  of  FDI  should  not 
primarily be seen in terms of foreign exchange flows but rather for the benefits of technology and skills 
transfer, employment creation and enhanced international linkages. 
We  must  continue  to  ensure  an  efficient  payments  and  settlement  system.  Without  this  you  cannot 
have  an  efficiently  functioning  economy.  The  National  Payment  System  (NPS)  is  a  vital  element  of 
financial stability and the Bank continues to enhance its safety and soundness by developing payment 
system oversight capacity and by maintaining a high standard in the provision of interbank settlement 
services. 
We reached an important milestone in December 2004 when the rand was included in the Continuous 
Linked Settlement (CLS) system. The rand is now positioned as one of only 15 settlement currencies 
in  the  CLS  mechanism.  CLS  is  a  world-wide  industry  initiative  to  reduce  the  risks  associated  with 
foreign  exchange  transactions  by  settling  the  two  legs  of  a  foreign  exchange  transaction 
simultaneously. As a requirement for the rand to be included in the CLS mechanism, the Bank had to 
move to a system of same day square-off and an amendment to the National Payment System Act, No 
78 of 1998 was necessary. 
Conclusion 
5.  
In conclusion, may I wish you a successful conference and an abundance of networking opportunities. 
While commodities as an asset class are in favour at present, it would appear that globally, according 
to the latest GFMS Gold Survey, the gold sector is poised for an interesting shift in international focus 
driven by the surge in demand from fabrication; possible pressure on the US dollar; lower world growth 
boosting the interest in alternative assets; and inflation concerns stemming from the high price of oil. 
Platinum  group  metals  have  been  buoyant,  in  part  aided  by  the  rally  in  the  gold  price  and  the 
continued  autocatalyst  demand.  This  is  good  news  for  South  Africa,  the  world’s  biggest  precious 
metals producer. So you have much to discuss. 
Work aside, please do take the time to experience some of the more relaxing aspects of South Africa 
once you are done with the business of precious metals. Finally, let me wish you all a very pleasant 
stay in South Africa and a safe journey home. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2005
