Ishrat Husain: Structural reforms in Pakistan’s economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Ishrat  Husain,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  public  lecture  at  the  Indian 
Business School, Hyderabad, 7 October 2005. 
 Pakistan  is  one  of  the  few  developing  countries  that  was  able  to  attain  an  impressive  record  of 
economic growth and poverty reduction in the first forty years of its existence. GDP growth rate until 
late 1980s averaged about 6 percent per annum and the incidence of poverty was lowered from 46 
percent to 18 percent. Inflation remained low and despite high population growth per capita incomes 
had almost doubled. This favorable situation was reversed in the decade of the 1990s. Growth rates 
tumbled to an average 3 to 4 per cent and poverty resurged to 33 percent of the population. Inflation 
was in double digits, large current account and fiscal deficits escalated debt – GDP ratios to over 100 
percent. The country’s foreign exchange reserves fell to less than $1 billion, exports were stagnant, 
tax collection efforts were lackluster. The country was almost on the verge of a default crisis on its 
external  payments  in  October  1999  when  President  Musharraf  took  over  the  reigns  of  the 
Government. 
He assembled an economic team of technocrats under the leadership of Shaukat Aziz to formulate 
and implement a strategy that prevented not only the payments crisis but also led to the revival of the 
economy. The team was given full support and a free hand in its work. I do not wish to dwell on the 
actual  course  of  events  but  suffice  to  say  that  the  outcome  of  the  implementation  of  this  strategy 
during  the  last  six  years  is  quite  remarkable.  GDP  growth  in  2004-05  reached  8.4  percent  after 
recording upward moving growth rates in the preceding three years; inflation during the first five years 
of the present regime was lower than 4 percent, only in 2004-05 it exceeded 9 percent; manufacturing 
sector output growth was over 15 percent, exports have doubled in US dollar terms in these five years, 
tax revenues have risen by 14 percent a year although Tax-GDP ratio is still low. Consolidated Fiscal 
deficit  is  down  to  3.3  percent  of  GDP.  Current  account  was  in  surplus  for  three  consecutive  years 
turning to a modest deficit of 1.5 percent of GDP in last fiscal year due to oil price shock. Workers’ 
remittance flows have multiplied four-fold to over $4 billion annually and Foreign Direct Investment has 
witnessed a sharp escalation to $1.5 billion, about 1.5 percent of GDP. 
Public  sector  enterprise  losses  have  been  curtailed  substantially.  Foreign  exchange  reserves  are 
twelve times their level of 1999 at over $12 billion and cover nine months of imports. Debt- GDP ratio 
has declined to 56 percent and the savings on debt servicing have allowed the Government to triple its 
public sector development program from almost $1.7 billion to $5 billion investing in infrastructure and 
human  sector  development.  Pakistan  has  successfully  entered  international  capital  markets  and 
raised over $1 billion at extremely fine pricing that was better than the investment grade sovereigns. 
Both  sovereign  bond  issues  were  subscribed  four  times  and  are  at  present  trading  at  much  tighter 
spreads than the EMBI average. The most recent survey of doing business in the world conducted by 
the World Bank and IFC has placed Pakistan as one of the ten top reformers and Pakistan ranked 60 
in the case of doing business – quite a high position among the developing countries surveyed. 
How  was  this  turnaround  achieved  in  such  a  short  period  of  time?  Our  strategy  was  to  launch  a 
multifaceted attack that combined macroeconomic stabilization, reduction in debt burden, fundamental 
structural reforms and improved governance. We felt that pursuing simply stabilization was not enough 
as it would have turned out to be a short term palliative and the risks and vulnerabilities of relapse into 
crisis situations would have remained elevated. What were the ingredients of this strategy and what 
was the sequencing and phasing of the various policy actions taken to implement this strategy? 
The first and foremost measure was to find a durable solution to the external debt problem as it was 
the major cause of stress to the economy. Bulk of the debt was owed to multilateral institutions and 
the bilateral official creditors. The former was unassailable and thus the focus was centered on the 
bilateral debt reprofiling. To make any headway on that front, the country had to come to terms with 
the IMF. 
The  problem  here  was  that  in  the  decade  of  the  1990s,  Pakistan  had  entered  into  successive 
agreements with the Fund but never implemented any one of them beyond the first or second tranche 
release. This had created a credibility gap for Pakistan among the international financial institutions. 
To resume any meaningful relations with the IMF, we had to establish a track record of performance 
before they could agree to debt restructuring. In 2000, Pakistan entered into a nine-month stand-by 
   1/3 
arrangement which involved a large number of prior policy actions, performance criteria and structural 
conditions. Only after the stand-by program was completed well before September 11, 2001 to the full 
satisfaction  of  the  IMF  authorities  that  Pakistan  was  able  to  secure  a  long-term  restructuring  of  its 
Paris Club debt. The popular notion that the Sept. 11 events helped Pakistan obtain favorable terms 
on its Paris Club debt is contrary to the facts. We had already reached an agreement well before Sept. 
11 with the Fund on a three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) of which the debt 
restructuring was an integral part. The success on the external debt front was absolutely essential for 
macroeconomic stability and we worked assiduously for almost a year prior to the approval of PRGF to 
fulfill all the conditions pre-requisite for obtaining debt reprofiling on a long term basis. The short term 
consolidation of debt was rejected as an alternate and therefore the country had to suffer the harsh 
and onerous conditions specified by the IMF under its stand-by program. 
Concurrently  with  the  debt  restructuring,  the  country  embarked  on  the  fiscal  policy  reforms  and 
consolidation by raising tax revenues, reducing expenditures, cutting down subsidies of all kinds and 
containing the losses of public enterprises. Tax reforms were undertaken to widen tax base, remove 
direct contact between tax payers and tax collectors, introduce value-added tax as the major source of 
revenue,  simplify  tax  administration  and  strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  Central  Board  of  Revenue. 
Although  these  reforms  are  still  underway,  the  adoption  of  universal  self  assessment  followed  by 
random audit of selected tax returns, automation and reorganization of the tax machinery have begun 
to help improve tax collection although tax-GDP ratio has not yet improved. 
The next major thrust of the reform program was privatization of state-owned enterprises. Fortunately, 
the privatization process was initiated in 1991 under the Nawaz Sharif Government, continued under 
the  Benazir  Government,  and  further  intensified  under  the  Musharraf  Government.  Thus,  there  is  a 
wide  political  consensus  and  support  for  privatization  because  of  an  underlying  belief  that  the 
Government  should  not  be  in  the  business  of  running  businesses  but  regulating  the  markets  and 
laying down policies. Pakistan’s record on privatization has been impressive and this has helped in 
stopping the hemorrhaging of public finances and easing the pressures on fiscal deficit. 
Financial  sector  reforms  in  Pakistan  were  also  initiated  early  in  the  1990s  when  private  domestic 
banks  were  allowed  to  set  up  their  shops  along  with  the  nationalized  commercial  banks.  Although 
these reforms were implemented with fits and start, they were accelerated in 1997 when the Nawaz 
Sharif Government brought in professional managers and boards of directors consisting of reputable 
persons  from  the  private  sector  to  manage  and  oversee  the  nationalized  commercial  banks.  The 
Central  Bank  was  granted  autonomy  and  the  control  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  over  banking 
institutions was diluted. Excess labor was shed off through voluntary golden hand shake schemes and 
unprofitable  branches  were  closed  down.  Further  reforms  were  undertaken  since  1999  when  the  
non-performing loans were tackled in a decisive manner, minimum Capital requirements were raised, 
the quality of new loans was improved, mergers and consolidations of financial institutions took place 
and the range of products and services offered by the banks was widened. But the most crucial policy 
action taken by the Government, in my view, was the privatization of Habib Bank, United Bank, and 
Allied Bank – three large nationalized commercial banks of the country. As a result of these reforms, 
the share of the private sector ownership of the banking assets has risen to 80 percent. The banks are 
highly profitable and the average lending rates declined to as low as 5 percent as automation, on-line 
banking  and  multiple  channels  of  delivery  have  improved  the  efficiency  of  services  and  a  healthy 
competitive environment has set in. Agriculture credit, SME financing, consumer loans and microcredit 
have become mainstream products of the banking industry and diversified their risks. 
The  middle  and  lower  middle  class  which  had  been  completely  shut  off  from  access  to  banking 
services are now enjoying car loans, mortgages, credit cards, consumer durables. Small farmers have 
found  themselves  using  chemical  fertilizers,  certified  seeds,  insecticides  and  weedicides,  small 
implements  and  hiring  tractor  services.  Small  and  medium  entrepreneurs  are  expanding  their 
fabrication and manufacturing capacities and upgrading technology. Landless labor and poor women 
in  the  rural  areas  are  receiving  loans  for  poultry,  small  livestock,  sewing  machines,  etc.  The  main 
beneficiaries of these reforms, in my opinion, are the customers of financial services although it must 
be  recognized  that  market  determined  deposit  rates  have  also  declined  significantly.  But  as  the 
lending rates are surging upwards, deposit rates are also going to depict an upward movement. 
Trade liberalization has been undertaken in Pakistan for the last 15 years and the maximum tariff rate 
which was as high as 250-300 percent has been brought down to 25 percent while the average tariff 
rate  is  about  9  percent.  Non-tariff  barriers  and  para  tariffs  have  been  eliminated  and  the  culture  of 
providing  selective  concessions,  exemptions  and  privileges  to  individual  firms  has  given  way  to  an 
across-the-board uniform rules and regulations. Protection to domestic industry is no longer a policy 
   2/3 
objective as in the globalized world efficiency can improve only under a competitive environment. The 
breaking  down  of  these  artificial  barriers  has  led  to  significant  productivity  gains  and  manufactured 
exports  now  account  for  90  percent  of  the  total  exports.  Imports  of  all  kinds  of  goods  –  capital, 
consumer, raw materials – are freely allowed into the country at negligible import duty rates. 
Foreign  investment  regime  in  Pakistan  is  also  highly  open  and  liberal.  There  are  no  restrictions  or 
ceilings or prior approvals required for foreign investors to set up their business in Pakistan for any 
sector  of  the  economy  –  agriculture,  real  estate,  retail  trade,  manufacturing,  services,  banking, 
insurance  and  other  financial  services.  As  long  as  they  bring  in  their  initial  foreign  investment  and 
register  it  with  the  Central  Bank,  the  foreign  investors  are  free  to  repatriate  their  profits,  dividends, 
royalties, technical fees, debt servicing, etc. through their bankers without any prior approval. Foreign 
companies  are  allowed  to  raise  funds  from  domestic  sources,  including  bank  loans,  without  any 
restrictions.  They  are  treated  equally  with  national  firms  in  all  respect  and  can  bring  in  and  out 
expatriate staff to run their businesses. 
Deregulation  of  oil  and  gas  telecommunication  and  civil  aviation  sectors  have  also  brought  about 
significant  positive  results.  Oil  and  gas  exploration  activity  has  stepped  up  in  recent  years  and 
constant  discovery  and  production  from  new  gas  fields  operated  by  private  sector  companies  have 
added new capacity to meet the growing energy needs of the country. Independent power producers – 
both  domestic  and  foreign  private  companies  –  have  played  a  critical  role  in  filling  in  electricity 
generation requirements of Pakistan. 
Telecommunication has witnessed a boom since the private sector companies were allowed licenses 
to operate cellular phones. One million new cellular phone connections are being added every month 
and the number of phones has already reached about 15 million. Long distance international and local 
loop  monopoly  of  Pakistan  Telecommunications  Corporation  has  been  broken  and  new  licenses 
including for wireless local loop have been issued. The customers are reaping rich dividends as the 
prices of phone calls – local, long distance, international – are currently only a fraction of the previous 
rates. 
Since  the  government  recently  announced  the  policy  of  allowing  the  private  operators  to  fly  on 
international  routes,  there  has  been  a  big  uptake  in  the  aviation  business.  Domestic  airfares  have 
been cut by PIA which had almost a monopoly and seat load factor has reached an all time high. PIA 
and the private airlines are all scrambling for new planes to meet the pent up demand for air travel. 
Despite  these  reforms,  Pakistan  is  facing  many  difficult  challenges.  One  third  of  the  population  still 
lives  below  the  poverty  line.  Human  Development  Indicators  remain  low  as  almost  half  of  the 
population  is  illiterate,  infant  and  maternal  mortality  rates  are  high,  access  to  quality  education  and 
health  care  particularly  by  the  poor  is  limited,  income  and  regional  inequalities  are  widespread, 
infrastructure  shortages  and  deficiencies  persist,  skill  shortages  are  taking  a  toll  in  the  economy’s 
productivity while at the same time, there is high unemployment and underemployment. Most worrying 
to me is that Pakistan’s image abroad is quite negative. Foreigners are reluctant to visit Pakistan as 
they  perceive  the  country  to  be  a  dangerous  place.  The  worldwide  preoccupation  with  the  large 
economies of China and India and the ever-increasing quest to enter these markets is also working to 
the disadvantage of countries such as Pakistan. But the lesson we have learned is that there is no 
point  in  complaining  and  whining  about  this  but  to  get  on  with  the  job,  to  work  even  harder,  to 
overcome these deficiencies and constraints and to hope for the best. 
Thank you. 
 
   3/3 
