Ardian Fullani: Financial sector assessment program (FSAP) 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference organised in 
the context of the Financial Sector Assessment Program, Tirana, 15 December 2005. 
 I have the pleasure to be here today next to the Minister of Finance, Mr. Bode and Ms. Laura Kodres, 
International Monetary Fund expert and one of FSAP mission leaders, on the occasion of introducing a 
very important document, such as the financial sector assessment program or otherwise recognized 
as FSAP.   
On behalf of the institution I represent I would like to thank the joint IMF/World Bank Mission for their 
hard and great job during their visit in Tirana. This assessment is a very significant financial passport, 
a first fundamental step to a professional and straight assessment of the financial system in Albania, 
taking into consideration each of its segments.   
A special thanks is also addressed to IMF and WB authorities, who considered our request to send to 
Tirana  their  representatives  to  enable  the  public  presentation  of  the  findings  and  recommendations 
produced by this assessment.  
I honestly hope the conclusions made by Ms. Kodres shall be bluntly and objectively assessed by you. 
I would like to stress that the recommendations made by FSAP mission provide a great assistance, 
and as such, they should be correctly comprehended and interpreted. These recommendations assist 
to a high degree each policymaker, supervisory institution, market operator, and obviously to media 
which is very much part of this process. The way you will monitor and communicate information to the 
public is very important. In this context, I would like to underline that the Bank of Albania shall be very 
open to assist.   
To this aim, we have recently made the Bank communication office functional, thereby meeting one of 
short-term FSAP recommendations.  I avail myself to this occasion to stress that our immediate plans 
are to provide a more contemporary communication approach, in particular in the context of preparing 
and launching educational and training packages, targeting different interest groups.  
From  the  moment  we  were  acknowledged  to  FSAP  recommendations,  our  institution  started  listing 
them  by  priority  and  by  institutional  right.  As  also  monitored  by  you,  we  broadly  discussed  in  the 
Forum organized in the first days of December the issue of establishing a Monetary Policy Committee.  
With  regard  to  banking  market  developments,  the  Bank  of  Albania  sticks  to  its  engagements  to 
augmenting the opportunities of commercial banks in the securities market. In more concrete terms, 
starting  from  September  the  Bank  of  Albania  charged  a  fee  for  the  operations  carried  out  in  its 
windows, and in early December the two-level securities register was placed into function. Pursuant to 
FSAP  recommendation  and  with  a  view  to  enhancing  daily  liquidity  management,  the  intra-credit 
regulatory basis was amended.   
The new bill “On Banks in the Republic of Albania” is complete and ready to be presented to banks for 
discussion. With the assistance of a specialized international consultation, we believe this shall be a 
new,  contemporary  law  and  it  shall  identify  a  number  of  issues  addressed  in  the  form  of  FSAP 
recommendations.  
Starting  from  July  2005,  the  automated  electronic  clearing  house  system  commenced  to  operate. 
Currently,  we  are  working  on  completing  the  regulatory  framework  with  a  view  to  augmenting  the 
services provided to the economy, aiming primarily at automating utilities’ periodical settlements.     
In November, the Bank of Albania Supervisory  Council amended the Regulation “On licensing non-
bank entities”, aiming at involving all non-bank financial institutions which operate in the territory of the 
Republic of Albania in the Bank of Albania licensing and supervision scheme.  
In October 2005, the Bank of Albania Supervisory Council approved the new organization structure of 
the Bank of Albania, placing a major emphasis to enhancing legal counselling, statistical service and 
public  communication.  These  tree  functions  are  deemed  as  very  significant,  in  particular  when 
considered in the context of our objectives related to monetary policy and EU integration.  
BIS Review 88/2005 
 1
Another short-term FSAP recommendation related to improving Bank of Albania transparency is now 
accomplished.  Every  interested  person  could  be  informed  on  the  rules  that  the  Bank  of  Albania 
pursues  when  it  intervenes  in  the  foreign  currency  market  or  be  acquainted  with  the  present 
agreements between the Bank of Albania and the Ministry of Finance.   
We  have  been  intensifying  our  efforts  to  reaching  to  a  rapid  and  effective  solution  as  regards  the 
Credit  Information  Bureau.  Considering  it  as  a  very  significant  recommendation,  we  have  recently 
added our contacts with the Albanian Banking Association in order to find a quick solution.  
A concrete action plan on the part of the recommendations directly related to the activity of the Bank of 
Albania and its competencies has already been completed and introduced to IMF authorities.  
What  I  deem  as  crucial  is  the  complete  assimilation  of  each  suggestion  made,  and  based  on  this 
absorption  we  have  tried  to  build  up  a  realistic  and  fully  possible  action  plan.  We  believe  that  the 
successful accomplishment of the tasks included in the action plan shall be a key factor in enhancing 
the  banking  system  financial  stability.  It  shall  influence  the  establishment  of  a  modern  payment 
infrastructure,  increase  financial  market  efficiency,  perfect  human  capacities  and  set  up  a  safe 
foundation for more sophisticated future developments.   
I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize that the Bank of Albania shall provide all its expertise 
to the inter-institutional group established to meeting many other FSAP recommendations. We hope 
the  commitment  of  other  institutions,  be  they  central  or  supervisory,  shall  be  provided  properly,  in 
order for these recommendations to be accomplished in due course.   
I  am  convinced  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  me  share  the  same  objective,  which  is  to  lead  our 
institutions  to  stepping  this  process  forward,  aiming  at  achieving  a  sustainable  and  sound  financial 
sector development in the country.  
Only by doing so, we could lay the grounds for a second assessment in a three-year time, which shall 
not  only  observe  the  accomplishment  of  these  recommendations,  but  also  determine  new  priorities 
towards financial system development.  
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2005
