Svein Gjedrem: The management of petroleum wealth 
Lecture  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Norway,  at  the  Polytechnic 
Association, Norway, 8 November 2005. 
The charts can be found on the Central Bank of Norway’s website
The lecture does not contain assessments of the economic situation or the monetary stance.  
  The oil age in Norway has spanned 30 years and it appears that it will continue for many years ahead. 
In  this  lecture,  I  will  attempt  to  take  stock  of  how  we  have  managed  petroleum  wealth  thus  far. 
Moreover, I will look at the challenges that still lie ahead.  
On some scores, our management of petroleum wealth has been very successful. We have managed 
to  define  it  as  national  wealth,  and  have  ensured  that  the  bulk  of  this  wealth  benefits  society  as  a 
whole. Both the state’s ownership interests through the State’s Direct Financial Interest in petroleum 
activities (SDFI) and the tax system have contributed to this. The companies that extract oil earn a 
reasonable  return  on  their  investments  and  have  incentives  to  invest,  but  the  economic  rent  has 
essentially accrued to the general public.  
My theme today concerns the economic challenges linked to petroleum wealth and certain aspects of 
government wealth management.  
The  most  important  economic  challenges  we  would  be  facing  were  widely  recognised  early  on.  As 
early  as  in  1974,  in  Report  no.  25  to  the  Storting  “The  role  of  petroleum  activities  in  Norwegian 
society”,  was  discussed  in  depth.  I  quote:  “A  transfer  of  production  and  employment  between  firms 
and industries may occur through higher domestic cost pressures” … and further … “How strong the 
pressures will be depends in particular on how strongly Norwegian business and industry is involved in 
petroleum activities and the scale of revenues that are used domestically”. The report underlines the 
responsibility that economic policy would have for developments.  
Fourteen  years  later,  in  1988,  former  central  bank  governor  Hermod  Skånland  summarised  the 
experience gained up to that point in time.1 He was pessimistic. We had spent a large share of the 
cash  flow  from  the  petroleum  sector  on  costly  counter-cyclical  policies  and  a  rapid  expansion  of 
welfare  schemes.  Internationally  exposed  industries  were  scaled  back,  and  it  seemed  that  the 
economy was unstable. Inflation had taken root. Skånland concluded the lecture as follows: “We will 
be  facing  greater  challenges  with  regard  to  demand  management  than  countries  with  a  broader 
industry  base.  It  still  remains  to  be  seen  whether  we  are  more  capable  of  addressing  these 
challenges.”  
Experience of other countries 
The experience of other countries that had received large, unexpected income from natural resources 
was  not  encouraging.  The  classic  example  is  Spain’s  substantial  revenues  from  the  colonisation  of 
America in the 1600s. The historian David Landes summarised the Spanish experience as follows:  
Landes  stated  that  easy  money  is  bad  for  a  country.  It  is  very  tempting  to  live  comfortably  on  this 
income and be less concerned about safeguarding other revenue sources. In that case, the country is 
poorly poised to cope with an end to easy money.  
The  economic  literature  includes  many  studies  that  look  at  the  relationship  between  income  from 
natural resources and economic growth. An article by Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warren entitled “The 
curse of natural resources”2 sets the basic tone: Countries with large income from natural resources 
                                                      
1   Hermod Skånland, ”Norge og oljen – gamle eller nye utfordringer”.(Norwegian only). Lecture, 2 November 1988. 
2   Jeffrey D. Sachs and Andrew M. Warner, The Curse of Natural Resources. European Economic Review 45 (2001), pages 
827-838. 
   1/8 
have  generally  recorded weaker  economic growth  than comparable countries.  Professor  Thorvaldur 
Gylfason illustrates this relationship for a large selection of countries in an article published last year.3  
Both  Gylfason  and other authors4  in  this  field point  to  Norway  as  an  exception  to  this general rule. 
Norway’s  management  of  its  petroleum  revenues  is  often  referred  to  as  an  example  of  successful 
organisation. 5
The construction of the Petroleum Fund 
In 1990, Norway established a transparent system for managing government petroleum revenues. All 
the revenues are transferred directly into a foreign currency fund, the Petroleum Fund. The Storting 
(Norwegian parliament) must adopt a resolution on any use of the capital in the Fund.  
Spending will be prioritised in the same way as for other government spending. There is no hidden 
use of revenues, or any use for special purposes. The Fund is strictly and effectively “out of bounds” to 
special interests.  
The system also presents other positive features. The Fund serves as a buffer between wide swings 
in petroleum revenues and domestic spending. The decisions relating to petroleum revenue spending 
over  the  central  government  budget  can  be  made  independently  of  the  size  of  the  revenues  in  the 
period. As a result, swings in petroleum revenues do not have an automatic impact on the Norwegian 
economy.  
As I mentioned earlier, however, we spent a large share of our petroleum wealth in the 1970s and 
early 1980s. In the years 1982-83 to 1986, the state acquired considerable and well hidden savings in 
the  form  of  higher  government  deposits  with  Norges  Bank,  matched  by  higher  foreign  exchange 
reserves. This capital was used during the recession and the currency crisis in the following years.  
It can therefore be said that the entire cash flow from petroleum activities was spent over the central 
government  budget  up  to  1995.  However,  the  revenues  were  used  to  finance  current  government 
investments in petroleum activities. After the construction of the Petroleum Fund started in 1996, the 
spending of petroleum revenues has been fairly independent of the cash flow in each year. This is a 
positive result.  
We also see that oil price swings have had little impact on the krone exchange rate. The correlation 
between changes in the nominal value of the krone and oil prices has been very low since 1999. This 
indicates  that  the  system  to  keep  cash  flows  from  the  petroleum  sector  outside  the  Norwegian 
economy  functions  effectively  in  that  the  system  has  won  credibility  in  financial  markets.  This  is 
another positive result.  
Since summer 2004, there has nevertheless been a somewhat stronger correlation between the krone 
and the oil price. A number of factors may have played a role here: There have been expectations that 
oil  prices  will  remain  high  for  several  years.  And  considerable  petroleum  revenues  have  been 
circulating in the Norwegian economy, partly as a result of government spending and partly due to the 
high level of petroleum sector investment.  
In  the  elaboration  of  economic  policy  in  the  national  budgets,  long-term  considerations  are  always 
discussed when making decisions about the spending of petroleum revenues. Two considerations are 
of particular importance: The aim of equitable distribution across generations and an industry structure 
that will in future provide us with solid revenue sources other than petroleum activities. The fiscal rule 
for the smooth phasing-in of petroleum revenues, which is designed to safeguard such considerations, 
                                                      
3   Thorvaldur Gylfason, Natural Resources and Economic Growth: From Dependence to Diversification. Discussion paper No. 
4804, CEPR 
4   See for example Terry Lynn Karl, The Paradox of Plenty: Oil Booms and Petro-States. University of California Press 1997. 
5   See  for  example:J.M.  Davis,  R.  Ossowski,  J.  Daniel  and  S.  Barnett,  Stabilization and  Savings  Funds  for  Non-renewable 
Resources: Experience and Policy Implications. Occasional paper 205, IMF 2001. J.M. Davis, R. Ossowski and A. Fedelino 
(eds.), Fiscal policy Implementation in Oil-Producing Countries. IMF 2003 J. Wakeman-Linn, C. Aturupane, S. Danninger, K. 
Gvenetadze, N. Hobdari and E. Le Borgne, Managing Oil Wealth: The Case of Azerbaijan. IMF 2004 World Bank report No. 
32700-TP: Country Assistance Strategy for Timor Leste. 
   2/8 
was introduced in 2001. According to the rule, only the expected real return on the Fund is to be used. 
The rule has functioned as a budget guideline.  
Effects on the Norwegian economy 
The question may be asked as to which effects we can observe of petroleum revenue spending in the 
domestic economy. The risk of “Dutch disease”6 has been a common reference in the discussion on 
petroleum  revenue  spending.  The  Dutch  disease  occurs  if  spending  is  so  high  that  the  basis  for 
internationally  exposed  industries  is  eroded  and  fluctuations  in  economic  activity  are  amplified.  As 
mentioned, in 1970s and 1980s there were clear symptoms of contamination.  
Norway’s  fixed  exchange  rate  policy  in  the  years  from  1986  to  1992  drove  high  inflation  out  of  the 
economy, however. Our inflation targeting regime will achieve the same objective. It appears that the 
economy has again become more stable. And the fiscal rule has contributed to this. This is then a third 
positive result.  
Shifts  in  industry  structure,  with  higher  growth  in  sheltered  industries,  are  a  feature  common  to  all 
developed countries. But, it may seem that this shift has occurred slightly faster in Norway than, for 
instance, among our Nordic neighbours. The changes have also been fairly considerable after 2002. It 
is reasonable to ascribe this difference to petroleum revenue spending.  
In principle, this development should have occurred. If we are to benefit from the petroleum revenues, 
they  must  be  used  to  stimulate  domestic  demand.  The  wealthier  we  are,  the  higher  demand  for 
services  is.  Many  services  cannot  be  imported,  but  must  be  provided  domestically.  This  requires  a 
higher share of employment in sheltered sectors. The question is how rapidly and to what extent this 
shift should occur.  
Changes  in  industry  structure  involve  costs  in  that  the  capital  invested  may  remain  idle  and  labour 
resources may be used less efficiently in periods. It may take time and be difficult to re-establish the 
use of these resources. Restructuring costs are probably so substantial that we should take them into 
account when we decide how fast petroleum revenues should be used in the Norwegian economy.  
An economist at Norges Bank has looked at the level of petroleum revenue spending that minimises 
restructuring costs, and in that respect represents the most efficient use of revenues. In his analysis, 
Farooq Akram7 assumes that petroleum revenues are not permanent, and that the mainland economy 
will continue to expand. This implies that the return on the Petroleum Fund will eventually decline as a 
share of national income. If we use the entire return as stipulated in the fiscal rule, earlier changes in 
industry structure will have to be reversed in the long run. Production resources will have to be shifted 
back from the sheltered to the internationally exposed sector.  
The  cost  level  in  the  Norwegian  economy,  compared  with  that  of  our  trading  partners,  rose 
substantially with the beginning of the oil age. The level has fluctuated somewhat since then, without 
exhibiting a clear tendency of being higher or lower, and has, over time, been adapted to the use of 
petroleum  revenues.  When  we  reach  a  point  in  the  future  where  the  share  of  imports  that  can  be 
financed  by  petroleum  revenues  declines,  the  cost  level  relative  to  other  countries  will  have  to  be 
reduced.  Rough  estimates  indicate  that  the  relative  cost  level  must  be  brought  back  to  the  level 
prevailing  before  the  oil  age  started  in  Norway.  The  chart  shows  the  demands  this  will  place  on 
developments in the real exchange rate.  
This depreciation can be achieved either by lower price and wage inflation in Norway than in other 
countries or by a nominal depreciation of the krone. The latter would be the least painful channel, and 
with a flexible exchange rate it is also the most likely.  
Petroleum  revenue  spending  could  also  have  an  impact  on  productivity  growth  in  the  Norwegian 
economy.  However,  there  is  no  significant  difference  here  between  Norway  and  our  neighbours.  In 
                                                      
6   The expression “Dutch disease” originates from the Netherlands, where the government rapidly spent large revenues from 
the extraction of gas in the 1960s. 
7   Q.  Farooq  Akram:  “Efficient  consumption  of  revenues  from  natural  resources  –  An  application  to  Norwegian  petroleum 
revenues.” Working Paper 2005/1. 
   3/8 
fact, Norway has scored particularly favourably in recent years by managing to sustain productivity8 
growth at a strong level. We seem to have avoided this symptom of Dutch disease. Restructuring in 
the  Norwegian  economy  in  the  1990s,  changes  in  the  tax  system,  broader  and  deeper  financial 
markets,  deregulation  in  trade  and  service  markets  and  the  use  of  the  market  mechanism  in  the 
telecommunications, postal and transport sectors appear to have contributed to a more efficient use of 
resources. This is a fourth positive result.  
Another  wealth  effect  could  be  lower  labour  force  participation  and  higher  welfare  spending.  In 
Norway, labour force participation is relatively high after lagging behind our neighbouring countries up 
to the 1990s. The labour force participation rate has declined somewhat in recent years, but is still at a 
high level. This is a fifth positive result.  
However, the average number of person-hours worked is lower than for the other Nordic countries, 
and this difference seems to have increased through the 1990s to date. The increase in the labour 
force  participation  rate  during  the  period  does  not  seem  to  be  the  explanation.  Reducing  working 
hours is one way of spending income and wealth gains.  
We  could  also  spend  wealth  gains  by  reducing  the  retirement  age.  OECD  figures  show  that  the 
difference  between  the  official  and  effective  retirement  age  is  wider  in  Norway  than  in  other 
comparable  countries.  Developments  in  expected  retirement  age  are  a  cause  for  some  concern.  A 
working 40-year-old can now expect to retire at around 63. If we include retirement due to disability, 
the average retirement age is only 60.9  
The number of persons on benefits in the working age population has shown a marked rise. Up to the 
beginning of the 1990s, there were small differences between Norway and its neighbours. Over the 
past decade, however, the increase has been clearly strongest in Norway.  
There are two sides to the conclusion as to the question of Dutch disease. On the positive side, we 
have avoided dramatic changes in industry structure, and we use our resources fairly efficiently. We 
have  managed  to  insulate  the  Norwegian  economy  from  oil  market  fluctuations  and  gradually 
managed to keep macroeconomic developments on a fairly steady course. On the negative side, there 
are signs that labour supply over a life-cycle is falling faster in Norway than in other countries.  
This may indicate that, with our current income level, we give high priority to increasing our leisure 
time.  However,  it  may  also  indicate  that  we  do  not,  as  individuals,  pay  the  true  economic  costs  of 
leisure  time  and  early  retirement.  Pension  rules,  benefits  and  taxes  contribute  to  this.  Similarly, 
enterprises are perhaps being offered the wrong incentives.  
On balance, the picture is still fairly positive: so far, petroleum wealth has not led to developments in 
the  mainland  economy  that  are  negative  in  relation  to  other  Nordic  countries.  However,  it  must  be 
stressed  that  it  is  too  early  to  draw  a  conclusion;  there  will  probably  be  a  substantial  increase  in 
petroleum revenue spending ahead.  
Long-term saving 
A visible difference from the other Nordic countries is that the Norwegian state has capital savings in 
the  Government  Petroleum  Fund.  The  Fund  has  grown  rapidly  in  recent  years,  and  we  expect 
continued strong growth in the years ahead. The National Budget for 2006 presents projections for the 
period to 2009.  
The projections are based on the assumption that the price of oil will fall from the current level to NOK 
260 per barrel. This is lower than long-term futures prices but is a high price estimate in relation to 
historical prices.  
                                                      
8   Productivity growth in service industries is compared here. There may be sources of error due to choice of method in the 
production  of  national  accounts  figures,  but  the  main  impression  can  also  be  supported  by  the  use  of  other  sources. 
Comparing  developments  in  productivity  in  manufacturing  is  of  little  relevance  since  the  structure  of  this  industry  varies 
widely among the Nordic countries. 
9   Seniorpolitikk  og  IA-avtalens  delmål  om  å  øke  pensjoneringsalderen.  (Norwegian  only)  Report  no.  04/2005.  National 
Insurance Administration. 
   4/8 
We  know  little  about  future  oil  prices.  The  chart  shows  actual  developments  since  1960  and  the 
projections  in  the  last  Long-Term  Programmes  and  in  the  National  Budget  for  2006.  We  see  that 
considerable weight has systematically been given to the prevailing oil price when making projections. 
Just as systematically, there have been surprises that have resulted in a different path for the actual 
oil price. The lesson is that today’s oil price should not be regarded as a forecast of future prices, not 
even if the level is priced into long-term futures. Substantial uncertainty must be expected.  
The  management  of  the  Petroleum  Fund  will  be  part  of  the  State  Pension  Fund.  This  essentially 
involves a name change. The capital will not be earmarked for pension payments. On the other hand, 
the intention has long been for the capital in the Petroleum Fund to be used as a means of easing the 
burden  in  connection  with  the  large  pensioner  cohorts  expected  from  about  2015.  With  the 
assumptions set out in the last national budget, only a share of the rise in pension payments ahead 
can be financed by an increase in returns on the Fund. The bulk of the increase must be financed by 
higher ordinary tax revenues.  
A number of analysts have calculated that with high oil prices the Petroleum Fund will be sufficiently 
large  to  finance  pension  payments.  Norges  Bank  has  analysed  the  uncertainty  surrounding  such 
expectations. We have looked at the probability that the capital in the Petroleum Fund will be sufficient 
by calculating developments in market value and pension payments using a model with uncertainty. 
We  have  used  Statistics  Norway’s  projections  for  pension  payments.  Standard  assumptions 
concerning uncertainty with respect to returns on the Fund’s investments have been incorporated.  
The main uncertainty is nevertheless associated with the production volume and prices for oil and gas. 
Not only are production and price developments from one year to the next uncertain in the model, but 
also  the  average  long-term  oil  price.  The  calculations  start  with  today’s  oil  prices,  but  many  of  the 
resulting price paths are far away from this level.  
The probability distribution for the oil price that we have used is derived from historical variations. The 
distribution is highly skewed. The mode is lower than today’s oil prices, but we have also incorporated 
a substantial probability that the average price in the period 2005-2030 will be very high.  
Since the oil price and oil production are so uncertain, there will also be substantial uncertainty with 
regard to the funding of the pension system. It is true that the Petroleum Fund with some degree of 
likelihood may become sufficiently large to keep tax-funding of pensions at today’s level, measured as 
a share of national income. On the other hand, it is also highly probable that this will not be the case, 
and that tax-funded pensions will claim a markedly higher share of national income than at present.  
Normal prudence implies that we attempt to guard ourselves against the most adverse outcomes. One 
can  find  a  parallel  with  the  price  assumptions  applied  by  oil  companies  in  connection  with  large 
investment projects with a long production horizon. Those prices are far lower than today’s spot and 
futures prices.  
Management of the Petroleum Fund 
The  Petroleum  Fund  is  currently  one  of  the  world’s  largest  institutional  investors,  on  a  par with  the 
largest pension fund in the US and the largest European fund. With the rate of growth that can be 
expected, the Petroleum Fund will be larger than these two funds in the next year or two.  
Norges Bank manages the Petroleum Fund on behalf of the Ministry of Finance. This is a challenging 
task  that  has  been  given  high  priority  within  the  Bank.  We  have  established  what  we  believe  is  a 
professional  management  organisation.  Performance  is  measured  against  the  benchmark  portfolio 
defined by the Ministry of Finance and the results are published in a quarterly report. So far, Norges 
Bank has achieved an excess return every year. Management costs have been low. In terms of net 
earnings, Norges Bank has added close to NOK 15bn to the Fund.  
The total return for the Fund is largely determined by the benchmark portfolio. Since 1997, the real 
return  has  averaged  4.2  per  cent.  Of  this,  0.4  percentage  point  can  be  attributed  to  active 
management, for which Norges Bank is responsible.  
The  Fund  has  become  a  large  investor  in  international  equity  markets.  Norges  Bank  recently 
established a group dedicated to actively supporting best practice corporate governance in companies 
where the Fund has ownership interests. Norges Bank already makes extensive use of its voting rights 
and has voted in about 17 000 cases this year. Because it is a major investor, the Fund can contribute 
   5/8 
effectively to the promotion of recognised principles of corporate governance. We believe that this will 
result in higher returns on the Fund’s equity investments in the longer run.  
The size of the Fund allows us to keep management costs low. We have built up an infrastructure that 
can  handle  large  transaction  volumes.  Investments  involving  much  larger  amounts  can  be  made 
without expanding the current infrastructure.  
Even though the Fund is a large institutional investor, it is not one of the world’s largest investment 
managers. Companies like UBS, Allianz, Barclays and State Street invest up to ten times as much as 
the  Petroleum  Fund,  and  these  companies  have  funds  in  a  much  larger  number  of  accounts  with 
different  investment  mandates  than  the  Petroleum  Fund.  Although  the  challenges  facing  the 
Petroleum Fund are considerable, the Fund’s structure is nevertheless much simpler than that of the 
largest investment managers.  
Government reserve funds 
Norway is not the only country to establish a reserve fund to be used in periods of fiscal stress. The 
age  structure  of  virtually  all  the  developed  countries  will  lead  to  substantial  changes  in  the  ratio  of 
pensioners to the working-age population over the next ten years or so. The working age population 
must be prepared for a larger share of national income to be spent on pensioners and others outside 
the  working  population.  Substantial  increases  in  pensions,  benefits  and  health  service  costs  will  be 
necessary. When that time comes, having reserves to draw on will be a welcome option.  
France, Ireland, Australia and New Zealand have all established government reserve funds in recent 
years in preparation for the age wave 15-20 years ahead. Sweden has restructured its four AP funds. 
Like the Petroleum Fund and the new State Pension Fund, these funds are not pension funds in the 
usual  sense.  Annual  allocations  to  the  funds  are  not  dependent  on  growth  in  government  pension 
obligations in the period. However, one of the main objectives of these funds is to cover some of the 
increased pension payments in the future. Allocations to most funds are set at around 1-2 per cent of 
national income every year until the funds’ capital is to be used from 2020 or 2025. One drawback of 
some  of  these  funds’  structures,  such  as  the  French  fund,  is  that  they  are  not  financed  through 
increased government saving, but in reality by borrowing.  
Fund-based pensions 
The Norwegian National Insurance Scheme is a pay-as-you-go system, where annual payments are 
financed by current tax revenues. The pension scheme for public employees is not fund-based either. 
An international comparison shows that pension obligations in Norway are fund-based to a very limited 
extent.  
Some other countries base their pension obligations on funds to a far greater extent. This applies for 
example to Canada, the Netherlands, the UK and the US. In these countries, fund-based occupational 
pension schemes account for a large portion of the pension system, in the public as well as the private 
sector.  
If  we  include  the  Petroleum  Fund  and  the  National  Insurance  Fund  at  current  market  values,  the 
picture changes, and funds in Norway are then higher than the OECD average. But even today, the 
level in Norway is below that of the Netherlands in 2003.  
Long-term investment strategy 
The  Petroleum  Fund  employs  a  very  careful  investment  strategy,  with  broad  diversification.  Large 
pension funds in other countries employ the same kind of strategy. Like the Petroleum Fund, these 
funds are intended to secure future payment flows. The consequences of large losses over time would 
be severe. For pure pension funds, this would mean they would not be able to honour their obligations 
to their members. For the Petroleum Fund, it would mean that the state would have to find other ways 
to finance the costs of the age wave that we know is approaching.  
Because of the prudence requirement, return requirements cannot be the same as for many private 
investors.  It  is  important  to  remember  that  for  every  successful  investor  that  achieves  high  returns, 
there  are  many  other  investors  that  have  the  same  level  of  ambition  and  risk  willingness,  but  a  far 
   6/8 
poorer track record and a history of insolvencies. The Petroleum Fund cannot run the risk of joining 
the worst group.  
Some  large  institutional  investors  have  tried  to  copy  successful  private  investors.  One  example  is 
Kuwait, which for a period chose large strategic investments instead of diversifying more evenly. To 
our knowledge, the results were not positive. Another example is the oil fund in the Canadian state of 
Alberta,  where  investments  up  to  the  end  of  the  1990s  were  partly  influenced  by  political 
considerations and a large share of the capital was invested in local businesses. This resulted in far 
lower returns than in other comparable Canadian funds.  
The best pension funds stand out as highly professional investors. Norges Bank has had close contact 
with the largest funds in the Netherlands and Canada for many years, and we have learned a great 
deal from them about our own fund management. These funds have broadly diversified portfolios. As 
an  example,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  composition  of  investment  portfolios  in  the 
largest European fund, ABP.  
ABP is the pension fund for public sector employees in the Netherlands. Forty-four per cent of the fund 
is  invested  in  fixed-income  instruments.  Investments  with  more  variable  returns  account  for  56  per 
cent of the portfolio. Fixed income investments are intended to contribute to a relatively stable return 
on the fund as a whole, while the rest of the portfolio is to achieve high expected returns. To minimise 
risk, investments are spread across many countries and companies.  
Investments with variable returns also include what are usually known as “alternative investments” i.e. 
private equity, real estate, commodities and investment in hedge funds and the like. The advantage of 
these  investments  is  that  returns  show  no  strong  correlation  with  the  return  on  fixed  income 
instruments and listed equities.  
The Petroleum Fund’s portfolio is also broadly diversified in global equity and fixed income markets. 
Equity investments are diversified across the 27 countries in the benchmark portfolio and across some 
countries that are not included in the benchmark. All of the BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India and 
China) are, for example, represented in the portfolio. So far, the Petroleum Fund has no alternative 
investments, although this option may become more likely as the Fund becomes very large. The costs 
of investing in new asset classes may then be divided on larger volumes.  
Whether  or  not  alternative  investments  are  included,  the  most  important  strategic  decision  for  the 
Petroleum Fund concerns the equity portion. The equity portion essentially decides the level of risk in 
the Fund.  
There is a trade-off between expected value and the standard deviation for the annual return on the 
Petroleum Fund, i.e. between the return that can be expected and the risk that is taken. Calculations10 
indicate  that  we  for  example  must  accept  an  increase  in  the  standard  deviation  of  one  percentage 
point if we want to increase the expected return by 0.3 percentage point. Such a rise in the level of risk 
could be achieved by increasing the equity portion by about 10 percentage points. This would imply 
slightly larger swings in the Fund’s annual return. The probability that the cumulative real return over a 
period  of  15  years  will  be  negative  would  also  increase  somewhat,  although  not  markedly.  I  have 
included  this  comment  because  these  kinds  of  assessment  are  central  to  the  choice  of  investment 
strategy for a fund such as the Petroleum Fund.  
 Long-term plan 
The Petroleum Fund is a very long-term savings plan. The notion of a fund arose in the early 1980s, 
and the Fund was adopted in 1990 before the government had received any positive net cash flow 
from petroleum activities. Up to 1995, government investments in petroleum activities were so large 
that  all  the  revenues  were  used  for  investment  and  to  cover  budget  deficits  during  the  recession 
around 1990. Now we have ten years of a rapidly expanding Fund behind us.  
Ahead  of  us,  we  still  have  at  least  50  years,  and  perhaps  more,  where  the  Petroleum  Fund  or  the 
Pension Fund will, I hope and believe, be an important part of the Norwegian economy. Every year, 
                                                      
10   The calculations are based on the market assumptions that formed the basis of our most recent review of the investment 
strategy for the Petroleum Fund. 
   7/8 
the Storting will have to decide the scale of petroleum revenue spending over the central government 
budget. There is a long time ahead before the savings plan has been carried through.  
 
   8/8 
