Timothy F Geithner: Challenges in risk management 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the Institute of International Bankers Luncheon, New York,18 October 2005. 
 Thanks for giving me a chance to address this meeting of the Institute of International Bankers. Your 
presence  in  our  markets  adds  greatly  to  the  competitiveness  and  dynamism  of  the  U.S.  financial 
system. The major international institutions contribute not just depth and liquidity to our markets, but 
also bring new ideas and global perspectives on developments here and abroad. And the Institute has 
played  an  important  role  in  fostering  dialogue  among  international  bankers  and  policymakers  on 
issues of mutual interest.  
You are meeting at a time when the financial markets reflect a substantial degree of confidence about 
the  future—confidence  in  the  stability  of  future  macroeconomic  outcomes  and  confidence  in  the 
strength of many of the world’s major financial institutions. Against this backdrop, I thought it might be 
useful  to  talk  about  our  hierarchy  of  concerns  and  priorities  in  the  supervisory  process,  particularly 
those that relate to the financial strength of the major intermediaries and the functioning of the markets 
in which they operate. 
I  should  note  that  we,  of  course,  have  a  broader  set  of  related  supervisory  responsibilities  and  a 
broader  agenda  of  specific  concerns.  Just  to  list  a  few  of  these,  we  are  deploying  significant 
supervisory  resources  to  evaluate  efforts  to  strengthen  internal  controls  and  compliance  functions, 
including  those  specifically  directed  at  vulnerability  to  money  laundering  and  fraud;  we  are 
encouraging  efforts  to  reduce  operational  risk  and  improve  resilience;  and  we  are  assessing 
residential and commercial real estate lending practices.  
These are important, and familiar, priorities to the banks operating in our markets. Today, however, I’d 
like  to  concentrate  on  some  of  the  risk  management  challenges  that  are  at  the  heart  of  prudential 
supervision—in  particular,  the  financial  health  of  the  core  intermediaries  and  the  major  wholesale 
markets for finance and risk mitigation. 
While these topics are always at the center of our agenda, they are worthy of special attention today 
for two reasons.  
The  first  relates  to  the  overall  economic  and  financial  context  in  which  financial  institutions  operate 
today. We have been through a period of relatively favorable overall macroeconomic conditions in the 
United States, low realized credit losses, lower volatility in output growth and relatively low and stable, 
long-term inflation expectations. This has been accompanied by a reduction in many different types of 
risk premia and in expectations of future volatility. This change in market perception of future risk has 
occurred in the context, however, of a substantial increase in leverage in the balance sheets of the 
United  States,  the  federal  government  and  the  U.S.  household  sector.  These  developments  are  a 
potential source of greater macroeconomic uncertainty.  
The  second  reason  for  greater  attention  to  prudential  concerns  is  that  we  are  in  the  midst  of 
substantial changes in the structure of the U.S. financial system. The largest financial institutions in 
our  markets  are  substantially  larger  than  even  a  decade  ago  in  the  scope  and  complexity  of  their 
operations and in terms of their importance in the markets in which they operate. Hedge funds and 
other financial institutions that operate outside the scope of regulation or consolidated supervision now 
play  a  more  important  role  in  our  financial  markets.  And  we  have  seen  a  new  way  of  financial 
innovation in credit risk transfer techniques and many new derivative instruments that have allowed 
risk to be measured and managed more effectively and distributed more broadly.  
These developments have contributed to what seems to be a significant improvement in the overall 
stability and resilience of the US financial system, by reducing the vulnerability of individual institutions 
to a broader range of potential shocks. They may also, however, add to uncertainty about how well the 
system might function in the context of a major systemic shock. And in this sense, they create some 
exacting challenges for risk management. 
Let  me  focus  on  three  areas  where  this  is  the  case:  counterparty  risk  management  with  respect  to 
hedge  funds  and  other  unregulated  entities;  risk  management  and  market  infrastructure  issues  in 
credit derivatives and other instruments; and stress testing and scenario analysis.  
   1/3 
First,  the  greater  role  of  hedge  funds  and  other  unregulated  entities  in  our  financial  system  today 
requires more attention by the major banks and investment banks to counterparty risk management. 
The greater diversity of participants in risk intermediation is probably on balance a positive thing for 
our financial system.  
Hedge funds, private equity funds and other kinds of investment vehicles help to disperse risk and add 
liquidity. Their greater prominence in our markets, however, means that banks and investment banks 
face  a  heightened challenge  in  managing  the  risks  involved  in  their  exposure  to  these  firms  and  in 
understanding the firms’ ability to weather conditions of stress and their impact on market conditions in 
those  circumstances.  The  degree  of  the  systemic  risk  presented  by  the  growth  in  the  leveraged, 
unregulated  financial  institutions  depends  in  part  on  how  well  the  major  dealers  manage  these 
challenges. Market  practice  in  these areas  has  improved significantly  since  1998,  but  progress has 
been uneven across the dealer community, and competitive pressures have caused some erosion in 
counterparty discipline relative to the risks in exposures.  
We believe it is important that internal information systems are capable of capturing the full range of 
exposures  to  individual  counterparties  across  the  firm;  that  potential  future  credit  exposure  is 
measured  realistically,  including  through  stress  tests  at  the  counterparty  level  and  across  the  firm’s 
portfolio,  and  managed  to  prudent  limits  relative  to  capital;  that  credit  limits  and  terms  reflect  the 
quality of information provided by the counterparty about its risk profile and risk management systems 
and are not eroded by competitive pressures; and that the risk management process tries to capture 
the risk to the firm that could result from the rapid unwinding of positions by leveraged counterparties.  
A  second  challenge  relates  to  the  growth  in  volume  and  complexity  of  new  instruments  for  risk 
transfer,  which  has  advanced,  as  it  typically  does,  ahead  of  improvements  in  the  trade  processing 
infrastructure and risk management and control practices. Although these innovations seem likely to 
reduce  overall  risk  in  the  financial  system,  shortfalls  in  the  infrastructure  leave  the  market  more 
vulnerable than it needs to be to adverse dynamics in conditions of stress.  
These gaps are evident in the degree of manual processing required for trade capture and settlement; 
the  substantial  backlog  of  undocumented  or  unconfirmed  trades;  the  prevalence  of  assignments  of 
trades  without  the  consent  of  counterparties;  and  in  the  slow  adoption  of  market  services  for 
automated  processing.  Shortfalls  are  also  evident  in  the  limits  of  models  and  other  techniques  for 
measuring potential exposures in conditions of stress.  
Some  of  these  shortfalls  are  the  result  of  limited  investments  in  resources  and  technology  and  the 
limited  ability  of  individual  firms  to  improve  market practice  without  a  commensurate  effort  by  other 
dealers. Some are a reflection of the complexity of the products and the limited experience firms have 
had  with  how  these  exposures  trade  in  more  adverse  market  conditions.  Both  require  a  greater 
investment of resources and attention by senior managers.  
We  are  encouraged  by  the  initial  commitments  outlined  by  the  major  dealers  earlier  this  month  to 
resolve a number of these problems. In cooperation with the other principal supervisors, we will be 
monitoring progress closely.  
The third area I’d like to discuss concerns the need to improve stress testing and scenario analyses, 
which are among the most difficult and consequential parts of the risk management process.  
What  is  important,  as  always,  is  to  bring  a  forward-looking  view  to  evaluating  a  firm’s  potential 
exposure across a broad range of economic and market conditions and to capture the risk in the tail of 
the distribution of possible outcomes. 
Among the challenges we see today, even at the most sophisticated institutions, are the following: 
• 
bringing more integration to the assessment of market and credit risk and the interactions 
between them,  
capturing, measuring and aggregating credit exposures stemming from activities across all of 
a firm’s business lines,  
assessing the value of positions in portfolios of more complex and less liquid products,  
capturing the potential implications on market liquidity and price movements of the unwinding 
of common positions across market participants, and  
     2/3 
 assessing  the  implications  of  the  exit  of  a  major  counterparty,  particularly  in  the  more 
concentrated  segments  of  the  market,  and  the  limitations  imposed  by  the  size  of  the 
institution itself in responding to adverse market conditions.  
Together, the three areas I’ve discussed—challenges in counterparty risk management with respect to 
hedge  funds,  developments  in  the  credit  derivatives  market  and  infrastructure  and  ongoing  work  to 
improve stress testing and scenario analysis–represent areas where uncertainty is necessarily high. 
And  assessing  the  probability  of  various  outcomes  and  the  potential  losses  associated  with  those 
outcomes is very complicated and hard to do well. Doing so requires care, judgment and a portfolio of 
different approaches. This is particularly important to do well in a context when we have had such a 
sustained period of relatively low credit losses and low volatility.  
Across all these areas, these judgments have to be translated into appropriate limits, an appropriate 
capital  cushion  above  the  regulatory  minimum  and  a  robust  liquidity  management  strategy.  These 
thresholds need to be calibrated to withstand more adverse conditions than we’ve seen in the recent 
past.  
The  major  institutions  seem  in  general  to  be  managed  so  that  they  are  in  a  stronger  position  to 
withstand  the  shocks  of  the  nature  and  magnitude  of  the  last  few  decades  of  experience.  The 
apparent  increase  in  the  strength  and  resilience  of  the  U.S.  financial  system  has  contributed 
significantly to the improvement in the overall performance of the U.S. economy of the past 20 years.  
As the challenges of risk management become more demanding, it is important that supervisors and 
those charged with managing the major financial institutions make the investments necessary to stay 
abreast  of  the  changing  frontier  of  risk  management  challenges  and  a  potentially  more  uncertain 
future. 
Thank you. 
 
   3/3 
