Alan Bollard: Housing debt, inflation and the exchange rate 
Speech notes by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, at an address to the 
Employers and Manufacturers Association (Northern) AGM, Wellington, 2 November 2005. 
The  graphs  for  this  speech  can  be  found  on  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand’s  website 
www.rbnz.govt.nz 
 New  Zealand  has  enjoyed  very  strong  growth  over  the  last  decade.  GDP  growth  has  averaged  
3.6  per  cent  over  the  last  five  years.  But  now  it  is  starting  to  slow,  causing  some  concern  to 
businesses. 
We have enjoyed strong growth 
New  Zealand  is  an  open  economy  and  over  the  cycle  we  rely  on  important  contributions  from  the 
export sector. But at the moment we observe that despite reasonable terms of trade the impact of net 
exports is weak, while the domestic sector has continued to grow extremely strongly, driving imports 
strength. 
Driven by very strong domestic spending 
The inevitable upshot has been that the creditable positive trade balance we have enjoyed over the 
last decade and a half has now reversed. Based on last week's trade data, the trade balance has now 
fallen to a deficit of 2 per cent of GDP. This trade deficit has been a principal (but not the only) reason 
for the severe fall off in the current account balance (the balance of flows carried in the country and 
abroad.) Our current account deficit has now reached 8 per cent, the worst figure since 1986 and very 
marked by OECD standards. 
Contributing to negative external balances 
Another way of looking at this is to say that we are consuming and investing much more than we are 
saving. The Government has had a strong saving record over the last decade, and more recently the 
business sector has been saving too. But the household sector, which represents a large part of the 
economy, has been running down its savings in spectacular fashion. While we may contest the validity 
of some of the data, there is little doubt we are now dissaving at about 12 per cent, very low by OECD 
standards. 
And very weak household savings 
An  important  part  of  what  is  going  on  relates  to  housing.  Over  the  last  five  years  as  capital  has 
appeared  cheaper  and  mortgages  have  become  more  accessible,  the  household  sector  has 
participated in a large housing boom, including: first time home buyers; others trading up; additions 
and alterations; second homes; investor houses; investor apartments; and rural property. 
The  outcome  has  been  unsustainably  high  house  price  rises,  exacerbated  by  a  very  tight  labour 
market and growing non-residential construction. Several other OECD countries are going through a 
similar  housing  boom,  but  none  of  them  have  such  a  tight  domestic  economy  and  a  poor  savings 
record. 
New Zealand households are also unusual in the dependence they have on property assets in their 
balance  sheets.  In  fact  many  households  hold  essentially  no  other  assets.  The  typical  holding  of 
financial assets and equities is very low by OECD standards. The danger of this is it means our love 
affair with housing leaves us very exposed to a property slump. 
The  housing  boom  has  driven  a  lot  of  extra  expenditure  that  typically  accompanies  new  houses: 
fixtures and fittings, appliances, even cars. In addition, seeing their house value rise over the last five 
   1/3 
years, many people have felt richer and have spent more on unrelated items - entertainment, travel, 
etc. The very tight domestic economy largely reflects this. 
Strong house price inflation 
Such  spending  has  been  made  easier  by  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  lending  freely  on 
homes, encouraging people to put other debt on to their mortgage, and increasing mortgage levels to 
allow home-owners to consume part of the equity in their homes. This may be part of a longer term 
change in behaviour by baby boomers to consume more of their wealth during their lifetime. However, 
this is a difficult time for such adjustment in the business cycle. 
The housing boom has meant good profits for many New Zealand companies supplying materials and 
building services. But it implies home-owners would rather invest in their country's homes rather than 
its businesses. 
What has the Reserve Bank been doing about these growing imbalances and inflation pressures? We 
identified the issue several years ago and have increased the OCR eight times, the latest last week. 
Our intention has been to ensure mortgage rates rise so as to curb excess demand. In addition, we 
have  spoken  out  frequently  about  the  need  for  home-owners  to  show  care  in  increasing  their 
borrowings and to increase and diversify their savings. 
These past interest rate hikes have slowed housing price growth. But it is still growing at around 14 
per cent, driving unsustainable levels of consumer spending. The impact of higher rates on spending 
levels has been slower than in other periods because the effective mortgage rate has increased more 
gradually  than  the  OCR.  Global  interest  rates  have  been  unusually  low,  reflecting  loose  monetary 
policies in a large part of the OECD, and supply of savings out of East Asia. Low global interest rates 
have kept longer-term rates in New Zealand lower than usual and necessitated more tightening in the 
OCR. 
Mortgage rates on upward trend 
In addition, late last year the banks in New Zealand started cutting margins as part of a mortgage war. 
The Australian-owned banks have enjoyed strong profits in New Zealand for some years. They are 
now seeking to keep up the returns by capturing more business through active marketing of fixed rate 
loans. This has kept the housing market much more buoyant, unlike in their home country Australia 
where floating rates predominate and the housing boom is over. 
So far our focus has been on the overall effects on the New Zealand economy. But we also need to 
emphasise the position of certain households that are potentially at risk. About a third of households 
have  mortgages,  and  one  tenth  of  those  are  quite  deeply  in  debt,  already  spending  over  half  their 
disposable income on servicing their mortgage. These people are vulnerable to interest rates rising, 
property prices falling, or their employment positions becoming more fragile. Later in November we will 
be releasing our Financial Stability Report, which will comment on the housing sector in more detail. 
This presents us all with a challenge. 
Strong housing activity and other consumption in this tight economy is starting to drive inflation higher. 
In  addition,  pre-election  fiscal  promises  and  coalition  undertakings  could  fuel  the  strong  domestic 
economy  further  if  they  happen  in  the  near  future.  And,  the  big  oil  price  rise  is  already  increasing 
headline CPI, while second-round effects could drive inflation further. 
Oil price shocks 
We are addressing these inflation pressures through higher interest rates. But at the same time this 
strong domestic demand is driving the current account deficit, which itself is partly exacerbated by the 
opportunities  the  relatively  higher  New  Zealand  interest  rates  offer  overseas  investors  in  the  New 
Zealand dollar. 
How do we intend to manage these issues?  
Our  primary  concern  is  inflation.  We  are  already  seeing  signs  of  domestic  spending  slowing.  Last 
week  we  increased  the  OCR  again  and  stated  that  we  need  to  see  more  housing  and  consumer 
   2/3 
spending moderation before we will be comfortable that inflation pressures are contained. We will be 
helped in this by the pressures to increase mortgage rates already in the pipeline, by the tightening 
international bond rates, and by the increasing sensitivity of indebted households to monetary policy. 
We will be watching closely for signs of further slowing over coming months. 
But we cannot reduce inflation and reduce external imbalances alone. There are other key players in 
this process, all with responsibilities. 
Banks need to focus on their long-term interests, not just their one-year profit growth or market share 
target. In New Zealand, the banking sector is also responsible for the bulk of credit allocation. This 
task  is  an  important  determinant  of  New  Zealand's  long-term  economic  growth  and  hence  banks' 
future  profits,  and  must  be  considered  carefully.  The  larger  banks'  shareholder  interests,  which  are 
intrinsically  linked  to  the  health  of  the  New  Zealand  economy,  will  not  be  achieved  if  they  promote 
loans to people who cannot afford them. 
Some  of  the  comments  that  have  come  out  of  the  property  industry  suggesting  that  activity  can 
continue sustainably at this level have been self-serving and unhelpful to those that will be caught up 
and  damaged  by  a  property  market  correction.  We  look  to  the  industry  and  the  financial  advisory 
profession to offer professional and realistic advice. 
The  more  government  can  work  to  reduce  fiscal  pressures  on  the  economy,  the  easier  our  job 
becomes. 
History shows us that the exchange rate cycle is linked to the broad economic growth cycle. As tighter 
monetary policy eventually dampens domestic demand - the main source of strong growth in the New 
Zealand economy - the exchange rate will in time fall. A lower exchange rate is necessary to improve 
the current account balance by dampening consumption of imports and encouraging exports. 
The high exchange rate dampens export earnings 
As far as possible the Reserve Bank will not stand in the way of such exchange rate adjustment. Over 
the short-term, a fall in the exchange rate would push inflation temporarily higher through higher prices 
for imported goods. But monetary policy would be focusing on the medium-term inflation outlook. 
Future track of interest rates 
More generally, the correction of imbalances will be driven by the slowing in domestic demand, which 
will  bring  down  inflation  to  the  target  zone  by  2007.  This,  however,  comes  at  the  cost  of  slowing 
growth. But it is important to recognise that such an adjustment needs to happen - and the sooner it 
happens, the less costly it will be. 
Inflation peaks at 4% then reduces 
Finally, households need to remember that saving only through property is unwise, that house prices 
do not rise forever, and that they cannot rely on others to do their saving for them. If they do, then they 
can hardly complain when foreigners own a growing part of our capital stock and when they buy New 
Zealand dollars. We need to take responsibility for our own savings. 
The  high  interest  rates  needed  to  encourage  New  Zealanders  to  save  have  had  one  difficult  side-
effect,  and  that  is  offering  inducements  to  foreigners  to  buy  New  Zealand  dollars  to  fund  our 
consumption. This has been one reason why the New Zealand dollar has remained so high (although 
of  course  our  high  commodity  prices  are  another  reason).  This  is  starting  to  cause  considerable 
discomfort for some exporters.  
We now see the exchange rate as exceptionally high, and in some respects this is unjustifiable; in time 
it  will  fall.  The  decline  in  the  New  Zealand  dollar  exchange rate will  either be  gradual,  as domestic 
spending pressures ease off, or it will be more abrupt as global investors reassess New Zealand as an 
investment destination. Either way, those investors who think that the New Zealand dollar only goes 
up will be set up for disappointment. 
The  medium-term  economic  prospects  for  this  country  look  good,  but  we  have  some  short-term 
adjustment to go through first. 
   3/3 
