Susan Schmidt Bies: Basel II implementation and revisions to Basel I 
Testimony of Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington DC 
10 November 2005.  
 Chairman  Shelby,  Senator  Sarbanes,  and  members  of  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and 
Urban  Affairs,  I  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  join  my  colleagues  from  the  other  federal  banking 
agencies to discuss the current status of Basel II in this country, as well as the status of proposed 
amendments to our existing Basel I-based capital rules.  
Introduction 
The Federal Reserve considers the maintenance of strong and stable financial markets as an integral 
part  of  our  responsibility  and  critically  related  to  safety  and  soundness  of  the  participants  in  those 
markets. Financial stability contributes to sustained economic growth by providing an environment in 
which  financial  institutions,  businesses,  and  households  can  conduct  their  business  with  more 
certainty about future outcomes. Part of maintaining a strong financial system is ensuring that banking 
organizations operate in a safe and sound manner with adequate capital cushions that appropriately 
support the risks they take.  
As  many  of  you  are  aware,  there  have  been  two  major  developments  within  the  past  six  weeks 
regarding U.S. regulatory capital requirements that apply to banking institutions. First, on September 
30,  the  U.S.  banking  agencies  announced  their  revised  plan  for  the  implementation  of  the  Basel  II 
framework in the United States. Second, the agencies published for comment an advance notice of 
proposed  rulemaking  (ANPR)  pertaining  to  amendments  to  the  existing  Basel  I-based  capital  rules 
(the  amended  Basel  I).  Taken  together,  these  proposals  on  Basel  II  and  the  amended  Basel  I 
represent  substantial  revisions  to  the  regulatory  risk-based  capital  rules  applied  to  U.S.  banking 
institutions, from the very largest to the smallest. From the Federal Reserve's perspective, these two 
initiatives, when implemented successfully, should produce a much-improved regulatory capital regime 
in the United States that enhances safety and soundness. The Federal Reserve considers the ongoing 
discussion between the Congress and the U.S. banking agencies--and, of course, with the banking 
industry and members of the public--to be critical to the success of both sets of proposals.  
Reasons for pursuing Basel II 
We  have  all  witnessed  the  substantial  changes  in  the  U.S.  banking  industry  over  the  past  decade, 
including  growth  in  size  and  geographic  scope,  expansion  of  activities,  development  of  new 
instruments and services, and greater use of technology. As a result, we have seen the rise of very 
large  entities  with  large  geographic  reach  operating  in  many  lines  of  business  and  engaging  in 
complex and sophisticated transactions. The largest institutions have moved away from the traditional 
banking strategy of holding assets on the balance sheet to strategies that emphasize redistribution of 
assets  and  actively  managing  risks.  These  dramatic  changes  to  the  risk  profiles  of  many  banking 
organizations  have  only  accelerated  with  the  continued  evolution  of  many,  often  complex,  financial 
tools, such as securtitizations and credit derivatives.  
Additionally,  risk-management  techniques  employed  by  many  banking  organizations  continue  to 
change, improve, and adapt to the ever-changing financial landscape. For instance, operational risk 
was  not  part  of  our  risk-management  thinking  ten  years  ago,  but  tools  to  identify,  measure,  and 
manage  it  are  now  becoming  prevalent.  Also,  the  lines  between  the  banking  book  and  the  trading 
book  have  blurred  significantly  and  organizations  continue  to  move  resources  and  products  to 
optimize earnings and manage risks. And finally, global competition has intensified significantly, as the 
ability  of  customers  to  choose  from  a  variety  of  local  and  international  banking  firms,  as  well  as 
nonbank competitors, has increased.  
While the current Basel I-based rules have served us well for nearly two decades, they are simply not 
appropriate for identifying and measuring the risks of our largest, most complex banking organizations. 
Basel  I,  even  when  periodically  amended,  must  be  straightforward  enough  for  even  the  smallest 
   1/6 
banking organizations to implement with relative ease. Thus, the categories of risk used to determine 
capital are very broad and are intended to capture the "average" risk levels across the banking system 
for that generic exposure.  
Large financial institutions, however, tend to manage risk in more proactive ways, and are able to take 
advantage  of  new  innovations  in  financial  instruments  to  hedge,  sell,  or  take  on  risk  exposures  to 
support their business strategies and profitability targets. As a result, they are able to remove balance 
sheet  exposures  for  risks  where  they  feel  regulatory  capital  is  set  too  high,  and  thereby  reduce 
minimum  regulatory  capital.  Smaller  organizations  generally  do  not  have  the  risk-management 
systems or scale of transactions to make these practices economically viable.  
While  the  balance  sheet  focus  of  Basel  I  is  appropriate  for  most  banking  organizations,  the  largest 
organizations  have  significant  exposures  off  the  books,  and  these  risk  exposures  need  to  be 
considered explicitly in determining minimum regulatory capital for these sophisticated organizations. 
Large  organizations  are  increasingly  gravitating  toward  fee-based  revenue  streams.  This  is  due  to 
securitizations of loan portfolios that retain the responsibility of servicing the loans, buying and selling 
financial  instruments  for  customers,  and  growth  in  business  lines  where  fees  are  generated  by 
transactions and account processing. These activities have little exposure shown on the balance sheet 
at a moment in time, but failure to operate complex systems and negotiate complex financial deals in a 
sound manner can lead to large loss exposures given the volume of activity that runs through the line 
of  business.  They  also  use  sophisticated  models  to  manage  credit,  market,  and  interest  rate  risks. 
Poor data integrity, model reliability or lack of sufficient controls, can create losses when management 
action relies on the faulty results of decision models. 
Finally, the complexity of these organizations makes it more difficult for executive management to view 
risk  in  a  comprehensive  way,  both  in  terms  of  aggregating  similar  and  correlated  risks,  but  also  in 
identifying potential conflicts of interest between the growth of a line of business and the reputation, 
legal,  and  compliance  risks  of  the  firm  as  a  whole.  In  recent  years,  large  financial  institutions  have 
reported losses from breaks in these operating controls that in some cases have exceeded those in 
credit or market risk.  
The Basel II framework should improve supervisors' ability to understand and monitor the risk taking 
and capital adequacy of large complex institutions, thereby allowing regulators to address emerging 
problems  more  proactively.  It  should  also  enhance  the  ability  of  market  participants,  through  public 
disclosures, to evaluate the risk positions at those institutions by providing much better risk measures. 
The  advanced  approaches  under  Basel  II,  which  include  the  advanced  internal  ratings-based 
approach  (or  A-IRB)  for  credit  risk  and  the  advanced  measurement  approaches  (or  AMA)  for 
operational risk, offer particularly good improvements in terms of risk sensitivity, since they incorporate 
advanced risk-management processes already used today by best-practice institutions.  
Indeed, the expected improvements in risk measurement and risk management form the core of our 
reasons  for  proposing  Basel  II  in  the  United  States.  Its  advanced  approaches  create  a  rational  link 
between  regulatory  capital  and  risk  management.  Under  these  approaches,  institutions  would  be 
required  to  adopt  a  set  of  quantitative  risk-measurement  and  sophisticated  risk-management 
procedures  and  processes.  For  instance,  Basel  II  establishes  standards  for  data  collection  and  the 
systematic use of the information collected. These standards are consistent with broader supervisory 
expectations that high-quality risk management at large complex organizations depends upon credible 
data. Enhancements to technological infrastructure--combined with detailed data--will, over time, allow 
firms to better track exposures and manage risk. The emphasis in Basel II on improved data standards 
should not be interpreted solely as a requirement to determine regulatory capital standards, but rather 
as a foundation for more advanced risk-management practices that would strengthen the value of the 
banking  franchise.  But  while  the  new  framework  would,  in  our  view,  provide  useful  incentives  for 
institutions to accelerate the improvement of risk management, we believe that in most areas of risk 
management institutions would continue to have the choice among which methods they employ.  
Thus,  from  a  safety  and  soundness  regulatory  perspective,  for  these  large,  complex  financial 
organizations,  regulators  and  market  participants  need  the  information  provided  by  the  advanced 
framework of Basel II.  
Recent developments with Basel II 
The Federal Reserve considers the agencies' September 30 announcement relating to Basel II a good 
outcome  and  an  example  of  successful  interagency  cooperation.  As  you  may  recall,  in  April  of  this 
   2/6 
year the agencies announced jointly their reaction to initial results of a fourth quantitative impact study 
pertaining  to  Basel  II,  known  as  QIS4.  As  the  April  statement  indicated,  we  were  concerned  about 
results  from  QIS4  that  showed  a  wider  dispersion  and  a  larger  overall  drop  in  minimum  regulatory 
capital requirements for the QIS4 population of institutions than the agencies had initially expected. 
The initial QIS4 results prompted the agencies to delay issuance of a notice of proposed rulemaking 
(NPR) for Basel II in order to conduct further analysis of those results and their potential impact. The 
agencies' reaction to the initial QIS4 results, deciding to take additional time to understand more fully 
the information provided by the QIS4 institutions, is an indicator of how seriously we are taking Basel II 
implementation.  
During  the  summer,  the  U.S.  agencies  conducted  additional  analysis  of  the  information  reported  in 
QIS4.  That  analysis  is  for  the  most  part  complete.  Based  on  the  new  knowledge  gained  from  the 
additional  QIS4  analysis,  the  U.S.  agencies  collectively  decided  to  move  ahead  with  an  NPR  but 
adjust  the  plan  for  U.S.  implementation  of  Basel  II.  Adjustments  to  the  plan  include  extending  the 
timeline for implementation and augmenting the transitional floors, which should provide bankers and 
regulators with more experience with Basel II before it is fully implemented in the United States. In 
addition, the agencies stated specifically in our joint press release that after completing a final rule for 
Basel  II,  we  intend  to  revisit  that  rule  prior  to  the  termination  of  the  transitional  floors.  That  is,  we 
expect to perform additional in-depth analyses of the Basel II minimum capital calculations produced 
by  institutions  during  the  parallel  run  and  transitional  floor  periods  before  we  move  to  full 
implementation  without  floors.  This  is  consistent  with  the  overall  process  we  have  laid  out  for 
implementing  Basel  II.  We  want  to  ensure  that  the  minimum  regulatory  capital  levels  for  each 
institution and in the aggregate for the group of Basel II banks provide an adequate capital cushion 
consistent with safety and soundness.  
Probably the most important thing we learned from the QIS4 analysis is that progress is being made 
toward developing a risk-sensitive capital system. In terms of the specifics of the analysis, we learned 
that the drop in QIS4 capital was largely due to the favorable point in the business cycle when the data 
were collected. While the previous QIS3 exercise was conducted with data from 2002, a higher credit 
loss year, QIS4 reflected asset portfolio, risk-management information and models during one of the 
best periods of credit quality in recent years. We learned that the dispersion was largely due to varying 
risk parameters used by the institutions, which was permissible in the QIS4 exercise, but also due to 
portfolio  differences.  That  is,  banks  have  different  approaches  to  risk-management  processes,  and 
their models and databases reflect those differences.  
We also learned that some of the data submitted by individual institutions was not complete; in some 
cases banks did not have estimates of loss in stress periods--or used estimates that we thought were 
not very sophisticated--which caused minimum regulatory capital to be underestimated. Based on the 
results of QIS4, the Federal Reserve recognizes that all institutions have additional work to do. In our 
view,  the  findings  did  not  point  to  insurmountable  problems,  but  instead  identified  areas  for  future 
supervisory  focus.  In  that  way,  the  analysis  was  critical  in  providing  comfort  to  enable  us  to  move 
forward. 
It is also helpful to remember that the QIS4 exercise was conducted on a best-efforts basis. It was just 
one step in a progression of events leading to adoption of the Basel II framework. We certainly expect 
that  as  we  move  closer  to  implementation,  supervisory  oversight  of  the  Basel  II  implementation 
methodologies by our examination teams would increase. Indeed, during the qualification process we 
expect to have several additional opportunities to evaluate institutions' risk-management processes, 
models, and estimates--and provide feedback to the institutions on their progress. So while the QIS4 
results clearly provided a much better sense than before of the progress in implementing Basel II and 
offered additional insights about the link between risks and capital, QIS4 should not be considered a 
complete  forecast  of  Basel  II's  ultimate  effects.  It  was  a  point-in-time  look  at  how  the  U.S. 
implementation was progressing.  
Institutions participating in QIS4 put a lot of time and effort into assisting with the QIS4 analysis. For 
that  reason,  we  owe  it  to  the  institutions  to  provide  feedback  prior  to  engaging  in  a  detailed  public 
discussion of the findings. Those feedback sessions, a full interagency effort involving an interagency 
agreed-upon  presentation  of  the  results,  are  now  underway  and  we  expect  them  to  be  largely 
completed by the end of this month. The agencies plan to release a public document describing our 
findings shortly after these sessions are completed, we hope by the end of the year. 
   3/6 
Proposed next steps in the Basel II process 
I  would  now  like  to  describe  some  possible  next  steps  in  the  Basel  II  process.  To  be  clear,  these 
thoughts represent our best estimates at this time and could change, given the extensive opportunity 
for public comment and additional interagency discussions to come. But I thought it would at least be 
helpful to offer the Federal Reserve's perspective.  
First, we support the idea of finishing an NPR on Basel II and related supervisory guidance as soon as 
possible,  which  right  now  looks  to  be  in  the  first  quarter  of  2006.  We  believe  that  the  best  way  to 
further augment our understanding of the impact of Basel II is to issue the NPR and hear reaction from 
the  Congress,  the  industry,  and  the  public.  In  addition,  we  are  interested  in  issuing  the  NPR  and 
related  supervisory  guidance  as  soon  as  possible  so  that  bankers  can  have  a  better  idea  of 
supervisory expectations relating to Basel II. The NPR will help bankers identify the areas where they 
need  to  strengthen  their  risk-measurement  processes  as  they  continue  to  prepare  for  adoption  of 
Basel II.  
After the end of the NPR comment period, the agencies plan to review the comments and decide more 
specifically on how to move forward. The agencies would then develop a strategy for issuing a final 
rule on Basel II, of course taking into account comments received. Once the final rule is issued, those 
institutions moving to Basel II would complete preparations to move to a parallel run, a period in which 
minimum  regulatory capital  measures under  both  Basel  II and  Basel  I  will  be calculated.  Under  the 
current timeline, the parallel run would start in January 2008.  
The parallel run period, which is intended to last for four continuous quarters, should provide us with 
additional key information about the expected results for Basel II on a bank-by-bank basis, as well as 
the level of bank preparedness to operate under Basel II. Once an institution conducts a successful 
parallel run, the relevant primary federal supervisor would then confirm the bank's readiness and give 
permission for the institution to move to the first initial phase of adoption, into the initial floor period. It 
is only after an institution has operated to the primary supervisor's satisfaction in the parallel run and 
each  of  the  three  years  of  floors  that  it  would  be  allowed  to  have  its  minimum  regulatory  capital 
requirements determined by Basel II with no floors.  
During U.S. implementation of Basel II, if at any stage in the process we see something that concerns 
the banking agencies, we will reassess and propose amendments to relevant parts of the framework. 
The agencies have already decided to embed in the planned timeline the possibility for a later revision 
to  the  initial  Basel  II  rule  (before  the  floors  are  removed),  since  it  is  expected  that  new  information 
provided in the parallel run and floor years might point to a need for adjustments to that initial rule. 
This is entirely consistent with the path we have taken in the past regarding Basel I, to which there 
have  been  more  than  twenty-five  revisions  since  1989.  The  Federal  Reserve  considers  all  of  the 
planned safeguards and checks and balances to be sufficient for Basel II to be implemented in the 
United States effectively, and with no negative impact on safety and soundness or the functioning of 
banking markets.  
Proposed Amendments to Basel I 
As  I  noted,  the  Basel  II  proposal  is  not  the  only  minimum  regulatory  capital  proposal  being 
contemplated by the U.S. banking agencies. We have issued an ANPR for amendments to Basel I that 
is another important initiative in our efforts to update regulatory capital rules. The regulatory capital 
rules  to  be  amended  by  the  ANPR  would  apply  to  thousands  of  banking  institutions  in  the  United 
States, while the Basel II proposal would likely only apply to ten to twenty at inception. The agencies 
are focusing considerable attention on the potential interplay between the proposed Basel II rules and 
the proposed Basel I amendments in order to ensure that the goals for each are achieved.  
The Federal Reserve's statement pertaining to the release of the ANPR highlighted that the revisions 
are  intended  to  align  risk-based  capital  requirements  more  closely  with  the  risk  inherent  in  various 
exposures. The ANPR relates, in part, to some long-standing issues in our current capital rules that 
have been identified (such as requiring capital for short-term commitments). We also noted that the 
amended  Basel  I  is  intended  to  mitigate  certain  competitive  inequalities  that  may  arise  from  the 
implementation  of  Basel  II  rules  (such  as  lowering  the  risk  weight  for  some  residential  mortgage 
exposures).  In  considering  these  possible  revisions,  the  U.S.  agencies  are  seeking  to  enhance  the 
evaluation of bank portfolios and their inherent risks without undue complexity or regulatory burden. In 
issuing  the  ANPR,  an  advance  notice,  the  agencies  are  emphasizing  that  views  are  still  being 
developed and additional comment from the banking industry and other interested parties would be 
   4/6 
both beneficial and welcome before we move forward. We are intentionally leaving a number of areas 
open in order to solicit a broad range of comments before we narrow down the range of possibilities.  
The U.S. banking agencies have identified over the past several years a number of issues that need to 
be addressed within our current Basel I rules. The development of Basel II-based rules also creates 
the  need  for  the  U.S.  agencies  to  amend  the  current  rules  in  order  to  address  issues  relating  to 
competitive  impact.  While  we  view  that  impact  as  limited,  we  want  to  ensure  that  institutions  not 
moving  to  Basel  II  have  equal  opportunities  to  pursue  business  initiatives  and  are  not  placed  at  a 
competitive disadvantage or otherwise adversely affected. That is why we are being very careful to 
analyze the potential results of these two efforts in tandem, and asking for the Congress, the industry, 
and others to provide comments on the potential effects of both initiatives. 
We believe that the revisions to Basel I-based rules should benefit most institutions by better reflecting 
current  risk  exposures  in  regulatory  capital  requirements  at  little  additional  burden.  Naturally, 
regulatory capital requirements are usually not the binding constraint for banking organizations. Nearly 
all institutions hold capital in excess of the minimum required regulatory ratios, in many cases several 
percentage points above, to satisfy rating agencies, debtholders and shareholders, and counterparties 
in the market. By the same token, pricing in the banking industry is not driven by regulatory capital, but 
rather,  as  most  would  intuitively  assume,  by  supply  and  demand  and  business  decisions  made  by 
bankers. But we think regulatory capital can act as a useful gauge of risk-taking, even though it would 
not be the deciding factor in business decisions. 
With  respect  to  the  proposals  for  amended  Basel  I,  as  well  as  Basel  II,  the  Federal  Reserve  fully 
supports retention of the existing prompt corrective action (PCA) regime, which the Congress put in 
place  more  than  a  decade  ago,  as  well  as  existing  leverage  requirements.  In  addition  to  the 
safeguards planned for initiatives being discussed today, we at the Federal Reserve take comfort that 
the  PCA  and  leverage  requirements  will  continue  to  provide  a  level  of  protection  for  depositors, 
consumers, and the financial system as a whole. These regulations help to ensure a minimum level of 
capital  at  individual  institutions  and  in  the  aggregate  that  we  consider  to  be  absolutely  vital  to  the 
health of our banking system and the economy more broadly.  
Importance of the Rulemaking Process 
At the Federal Reserve--indeed, I think I can say among all the U.S. banking agencies--we understand 
and respect the rulemaking process and the legal requirements for implementing regulatory revisions. 
This,  of  course,  includes  comment  periods  for  each  of  our  regulatory  capital  proposals  and 
transparency in our overall process. We encourage a healthy debate about the agencies' proposed 
initiatives--including the recently revised timeline for Basel II. We look forward to continuing to engage 
the industry, the Congress, fellow supervisors, and others in a discussion about what effects the Basel 
II framework and the Basel I revisions might have on our banking system. The proposals are intended 
to provide the right incentives for bankers, but if the proposals do not achieve this goal, we want to 
know why. In the past, when we have been provided with well-documented and convincing reasons for 
making  a  change  to  the  Basel  II  framework  or  the  U.S.  implementation  process,  we  have  heeded 
those arguments. We expect to have the same posture regarding comments on the proposed Basel I 
amendments. We continue to recognize that vigorous discussion and debate produce a much better 
product.  And  we  expect  to  remain  vigilant  about  the  potentially  unintended  and  undesired 
consequences, particularly those that might affect a certain class of banks. 
Additionally, I would like to emphasize that from my perspective the U.S. agencies continue to work 
well with one another on these regulatory capital proposals in a general environment of cooperation 
and  good  will.  While  the  U.S.  agencies  naturally  disagree  on  certain  policy  matters  and 
implementation issues from time to time, we at the Federal Reserve are pleased with the outcomes to 
date and recognize that all four agencies are making considerable contributions to the overall effort.  
Dialogue with the industry 
The extension of the U.S. timeline for Basel II, along with the ongoing proposals for amended Basel I, 
obviously present some challenges for U.S. institutions. We will continue our efforts to ensure that we 
hear about these challenges and do our best to assist institutions in meeting them. First of all, bankers 
must  keep  track  of  the  latest  proposals  and  understand  what  they  could  mean  for  their  own 
institutions.  For  those  institutions  looking  to  prepare  for  adoption  of  Basel  II,  making  the  manifold 
   5/6 
upgrades  in  risk-measurement  and  -management  systems--not  the  least  of  which  is  developing 
credible  databases--is  even  more  difficult,  especially  since  complete  and 
final  supervisory 
expectations have yet to be released. But we certainly hope that institutions do not lose momentum 
based on the revised timeline for Basel II; indeed, that timeline reflects our assessment of the work 
that still lies ahead.  
While institutions might be challenged to move forward in certain areas until the Basel II NPR and its 
associated supervisory guidance is issued, we still believe that they can make strides in other areas. 
For one, the agencies all along have emphasized the importance of institution-specific implementation 
plans, which include gap analyses, clearly defined milestones, and remediation plans. In other words, 
we think that institutions could now continue development of the corporate governance surrounding 
each  institution's  efforts  in  Basel  II  implementation  and  focus  on  their  individual  implementation 
processes.  In  addition,  supervisors  have  begun  to  discuss  individual  QIS4  results  with  each 
participant;  these  discussions  include  specific  feedback  about  the  institution's  results  and  some 
general peer comparisons.  
Additionally,  we  do  recognize  that  the  recent  update  to  U.S.  implementation  plans  could  generate 
some challenges for U.S. institutions as they try to implement Basel II worldwide, as well as for foreign 
banks operating in the United States. Overall, we think these challenges are manageable and we can 
facilitate  solutions  to  them  during  the  implementation  process.  While  not  downplaying  potential 
challenges, the U.S. agencies, in deciding to adjust implementation plans, thought it was important to 
ensure  that  implementation  in  the  United  States  be  conducted  in  a  prudential  manner  and  without 
generating  competitive 
the  September  30 
announcement,  we  continue  to  work  with  institutions  and  foreign  supervisors  to  minimize  the 
difficulties  in  cross-border  implementation.  Our  support  includes  extensive  discussion  with  other 
countries in the Basel Accord Implementation Group, as well as more informal, bilateral discussions 
with institutions and foreign supervisors. Our view is that these cross-border issues do not necessarily 
represent fundamentally new problems; while requiring some work, these challenges are manageable. 
It  is  also  useful  to  point  out  that  all  Basel  member  countries  have  their  own  rollout  timelines  and 
national discretion issues, not just the United States--which is entirely appropriate. In order to assist 
institutions in resolving their cross-border challenges, we are eager to hear specifics from institutions 
so that we can develop targeted solutions.  
in  our  banking  markets.  As  before 
inequalities 
Conclusion 
Mr.  Chairman,  in  my  remarks  today  I  have  described  the  Federal  Reserve's  views  on  suggested 
changes  to  the  current  regulatory  risk-based  capital  regime,  namely  the  proposals  for  Basel  II  and 
amended Basel I. I have outlined the need for change, the work completed to date, and some of the 
lessons learned. In our view, recent exercises such as QIS4 have served as useful indicators of the 
progress being made and the direction needed for these initiatives on regulatory capital requirements. 
QIS4  was  part  of  an  extended  series  of  activities  to  ensure  that  the  suggested  regulatory  capital 
revisions  are  implemented  in  an  appropriate  and  prudent  manner.  From  the  Federal  Reserve's 
perspective,  we  should  continue  to  move  forward  with  the  activities  I  described,  while  seeking 
comment and listening to feedback at every stage.  
Our support for Basel II stems from the belief that it would provide a much better measure of minimum 
regulatory capital at the largest, most complex institutions, aligning capital with risks to which these 
institutions are exposed. We also believe that Basel II would bring about substantial improvements in 
risk  management  to  those  institutions.  At  the  same  time,  amending  Basel  I  for  the  vast  majority  of 
banking  institutions  in  the United  States  could  improve  the reflection  of  risks  in  Basel  I-based rules 
without  much  additional  burden.  Taken  together,  these  initiatives  should  ensure  adequate minimum 
capital  cushions,  allow  fair  competition,  maintain  safety  and  soundness,  and  enhance  financial 
stability.  
I am pleased to answer your questions.  
   6/6 
