Ishrat Husain: What works best for emerging market economies? 
Keynote address by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the SBP Conference 
on Monetary-cum-Exchange Rate Regime, Karachi, 14 November 2005. 
 Conduct of monetary policy in emerging market economies is certainly no less challenging than it is in 
advance economies; it may be argued that it is, in fact, more challenging because of different nature of 
economic,  socio-political  and  institutional  structure  of  emerging  market  economies.  However,  the 
experience of advance economies in formulating and implementing monetary policy combined with the 
broad  principles  of  economics  and  their  own  experiences  provides  a  natural  starting  point  for  the 
central banks of emerging economies to actively search for improving their monetary regimes. 
Last decade of twentieth century witnessed significant transformations in the institutional workings of 
central  banks  around  the  world  starting  with  the  landmark  independence  of  Reserve  Bank  of  New 
Zealand in 1989. Greater realization for the need to have independent central banks on the part of 
governments, and the need to enhance institutional competence on the part of central banks produced 
a wave of central banking reforms both in advance and emerging market economies. Pakistan had 
also  immensely  benefited  from  this  evolution  starting  with  the  administrative  and  operational 
independence legislated first in 1994 and again in 1997 that completed its de jure independence. 
Before SBP’s independence, monetary and exchange rate regime had evolved from fixed peg up to 
early 1980s and managed float till 2000. From the onslaught of financial sector reforms in Pakistan, 
especially with reference to adoption of market-based or indirect instruments of monetary policy, SBP 
started to follow monetary aggregates targeting from early 1990s. With greater liberalization of interest 
rates and gradual strengthening of transmission mechanism of monetary policy, more attention was 
paid  to  management  of  shortterm  interest  rates,  but  within  the  framework  of  monetary  aggregate 
targeting with inflation as the ultimate target, broad money as the intermediate target and base money 
as  the  operational  target.  Moreover,  the  focus  of  monetary  regimes  during  1993  to  2004  was  on 
quantity  variables  like  ceilings  on  SBP  NDA  and  floors  on  SBP  NFA,  which  is  the  hallmark  of  IMF 
monetary programs. Focus has since then shifted to base money rather than its subcomponents after 
the successful conclusion of Poverty Reduction Growth Facility (PRGF). 
Over the years, especially during the last couple of years, practice of monetary policy implementation 
was  broadened  to  include  important  indicator  variables  like  the  yield  curve  in  addition  to  several 
aggregates  other  than  broad  money.  Furthermore,  several  steps  were  taken  to  make  the  monetary 
policy more transparent. Indicative monetary planning, rather than strict credit rationing that used to be 
practiced  prior  to  1992,  is  done  under  the  aegis  of  National  Credit  Consultative  Council,  which  still 
makes the Credit Plan. Intermediate monetary targets are set there consistent with ultimate goals of 
inflation and real GDP growth. Interest rates were increasingly given more importance because of their 
superiority in signaling of monetary policy stance, yet within the framework of monetary and reserve 
money program. Transparency was increased by issuing six-monthly statements on monetary policy. 
Candid analytical reviews in SBP Annual and Quarterly Reports, not only on the real economy, but 
SBP’s own monetary policy also added to increased transparency. Recent release of Monthly Inflation 
Monitor is also a step in this direction. 
At  this  juncture,  when  SBP  has  established  itself  as  an  independent  central  bank,  with  a  sound 
banking  sector,  it  needs  to  carefully  review  the  international  best  practices  of  conducting  monetary 
policy. In fact, many good practices are already in place; my predecessor Dr. Yaqub institutionalized 
internal monetary policy operational consultative process by constituting a committee that drew senior 
members  from  the  relevant  Departments  under  the  Chairmanship  of  Deputy  Governor  that  met 
regularly.  I  enlarged  the  scope  of  the  committee  to  coordinate  both  money  market  and  foreign 
exchange  operations  in  2001.  Monetary  and  Exchange  Rate  Policy  Committee  meets  bi-monthly, 
reviews the current economic situation together with emerging monetary and exchange rate trends, 
and  forms  a  recommendation  by  majority  and  I  then  act  by  again  taking  views  and  evolving  a 
consensus. The system is well structured, takes a lot of information systematically into account and 
can  be  termed  as  an  eclectic  approach  to  monetary  policy  implementation,  which  Mishkin  has 
sarcastically described as ‘just do it strategy’. 
BIS Review 78/2005 
 1
Nonetheless, system needs continued strengthening, especially when the fad of inflation targeting has 
spread  quickly  not  only  in  advance  countries,  beginning  with  New  Zealand  in  1990  and  several 
developed countries during early to mid 1990s, but to several emerging market economies as well, 
which  are  not  very  different  from  Pakistan  in  many  of  economic  and  social  characteristics.  Inflation 
targeting  seems  to  offer  a  lot  of  advantages,  especially  in  terms  of  increasing  transparency  and 
credibility of a central bank. 
However,  the  evidence of  superiority  of  inflation  targeting  over  other alternatives  is,  at  best,  partial. 
Cumulative experience of countries with inflation targeting is comparatively smaller than the historic 
experience of other regimes to conclude anything unambiguously. More importantly, monetary policy 
can not be formulated and implemented in isolation of government policies no matter how independent 
a central bank is whether of an advance or a developing country. This aspect is of utmost importance 
for  developing  countries  that  still  have  a  relatively  weak  taxation  regime, with  lingering  suspicion  of 
fiscal  dominance  hovering  most  of  the  time.  In  Pakistan,  the  Government  does  not  have  a  broad 
revenue base and the domestic financial markets do not have enough depth to absorb placements of 
public debt. So, although the precondition of Central Bank independence is met for pursuing inflation 
targeting the other conditions is missing. For example, selection of an appropriate price index itself to 
define the target is problematic in the choice of exchange rate regimes. As the role of market forces is 
expanding due to liberalization, deregulation and privatization of the financial sector there are changes 
taking place in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy also. The redefinition of the regulatory 
role of the SBP, the revision of the prudential norms, the revamping of the bank supervisory tools, the 
shift towards automation and electronic banking and financial innovations in products and services are 
contributing to the emergence of a different financial system. 
I now turn to the Exchange Rate Regime in Pakistan. 
Pakistan has adopted the floating inter-bank exchange rate as the preferred option since 2001. SBP 
has attempted to maintain real effective exchange rate at a level that keeps the competitiveness of 
Pakistani  exports  intact.  But,  like  other  Central  Banks,  it  does  intervene  from  time  to  time  to  keep 
stability in the market and smooth excessive fluctuations. The managed float has served us quite well 
as it has conferred a degree of certainty and predictability to the economic agents to make informed 
judgments about the relative movement of the exchange rate. The accumulation of reserves during the 
last four years has underscored the credibility of the exchange rate policy and minimized excessive 
speculative  activity.  At  the  same  time  and  until  mid  2004  –  the  exchange  rate  stability  also  helped 
contain  inflationary  expectations  as  unlike  in  the  decade  of  the  1990s  when  the  rupee  was 
depreciating  at  an  average  of  120  per  cent  per  year  vis-à-vis  the  dollar,  the  rupee  became 
strengthened. 
The current framework of monetary-cum-exchange rate policies and the underlying economic analysis 
in Pakistan can, thus, be broadly characterized as judgment and discretion based rather than model or 
rule  based.  The  main  justification  for  the  current  practice  is  that  the  economy  is  undergoing 
fundamental structural transformation and thus the behavioral relationships among the variables and 
the  time  lags  influencing  the  behaviour  are  in  a  state  of  flux  and  transition.  An  added  complicating 
factor  is  that  measuring  and  predicting  expectations  about  the  possible  effects  of  policy  changes 
makes  it  difficult  to  model  the  monetary  and  financial  behaviour  in  a  robust  way.  Furthermore,  the 
Central Bank’s own credibility is an endogenous variable that affects the outcomes and expectations. 
A  model  or  rule  based  framework  may,  therefore,  be  inadequate  at  present  to  guide  the  SBP  in 
meeting unanticipated exogenous shocks and managing unforeseen crisis or crisis like situations as 
our  understanding  of  the  empirical  links  between  instruments  and  targets  of  monetary  policy  is 
incomplete and rudimentary. 
We must all remember that the recent episodes of financial crisis in the 1990s occurred in countries 
where inflation was low, fiscal deficits were small or even absent and the public debt burden was at 
tolerable levels. Models based on the past data missed these episodes as they would have emanated 
danger  signals  only  if  the  countries  had  high  current  account  deficit,  unsustainable  external  debt 
burden and serious fiscal imbalances or a combination of these. 
In hindsight, a better way to detect the signs of danger would have been to complement the sound 
monetary  and  fiscal  policies  with  flexible  exchange  rate,  better  regulations  and  supervision  of  the 
financial sector, greater disclosure, transparency and communication. This could have been possible if 
the policy makers did not concentrate on mechanistic tools but took a more holistic and broad-based 
view  of  the  economic  variables,  their  movements  and  assessed  their  relative  impact  on  the 
macroeconomic outcomes. 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2005
In this perspective, I hope that the present conference will provide a stimulating intellectual impetus to 
SBP research and policy staff to chart out alternative courses of monetary strategies for the future. It 
has already been envisaged in the 5-year Strategic Plan of SBP that the current internal Monetary and 
Exchange Rate Policy Committee will be transformed into a conventional Monetary Policy Committee 
with  decision  making  powers  about  altering  the  monetary  policy  stance  in  a  transparent  manner  in 
future.  I  am  also  sure  that  the  papers  presented  today  and  tomorrow  will  also  give  ample  food  for 
thought to journalists and academicians alike who will be listening carefully to form their own views 
and  expectations  about  future  strategy  of  SBP  that  is  best  for  enhancing  the  economic  welfare  of 
Pakistan. 
BIS Review 78/2005 
 3
