Ian J Macfarlane: Some observations on recent economic developments 
Talk  by  Mr  Ian  J  Macfarlane,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  Australian  Business 
Economists, Annual Forecasting Conference Dinner, Sydney, 13 December 2005. 
 I  see  from  my  records  that  this  is  the  sixth  time  that  I  have  addressed  the  Australian  Business 
Economists,  but  the  last  time  was  four  years  ago.  At  that  time  most  of  the  G7  countries  were  in 
recession and interest rates were still heading down. The world looks a lot better now as it adjusts to 
stronger growth and a new set of challenges.  
I  confess  that  I  had  difficulty  in  deciding  on  a  topic  for  tonight's  talk.  There  were,  in  my  view,  no 
burning issues that I wanted to address, or messages that I wanted to leave my listeners with. In the 
event, I have decided to talk about three topics: how the world has coped with a tripling of oil prices, 
how the world is emerging from a period of exceptionally low interest rates, and, quite separately, is 
there an Australian model of macro-economic policy?  
Oil prices  
I will start with oil prices. At the beginning of 2002, when oil prices averaged about $US20 per barrel, 
most observers would have been very apprehensive if they had known that over the following three 
years prices would more than treble to a recent peak of $US70 per barrel. I think it would have been 
assumed  that  this  event  would  lead  to  a  significant  rise  in  inflation  and  a  major  slowing,  if  not 
contraction, in the world economy. Memories of OPEC I in 1973 and OPEC II in 1979 when oil prices 
rose by a factor of three or four were still being seen as a guide to possible outcomes.  
Certainly, over the past couple of years, the media has been full of stories about rises in oil prices and 
the dislocations and hardships they have caused. But looking back from our current vantage point, the 
thing that stands out is how comfortably the world economy has handled developments. Virtually all of 
the  rise  in  oil  prices  has  by  now  been  reflected  in  statistics  on  inflation  and  GDP  growth,  and  the 
results have been surprisingly small.  
Global GDP growth was 4 per cent per annum or higher in 2003 and 2004 and is expected to remain 
so in 2005 and 2006. Of course, a lot of this growth has come from outside the OECD area, with the 
figures for OECD area growth being more than 1 per cent lower than for global growth. On inflation, 
the pick-up has been quite modest, with most OECD countries still recording headline inflation below 3 
per  cent  per  annum  in  the  12  months  to  September  2005.  Interestingly,  the  United  States  where 
headline inflation was 4.7 per cent, stands out on the upside and lifts the OECD average inflation rate 
to 3.3 per cent. In Australia, as you are aware, headline CPI rose by 3.0 per cent in the year to the 
September quarter, up from a recent low point of 2.0 per cent eighteen months earlier.  
There have been a number of reasons for these favourable outcomes around the world, including the 
developed world's lower oil dependency compared with earlier years, but I will concentrate on a few 
that I think are important. The main reason that economic growth was so little affected was that the 
rise in oil prices was caused by strong world growth, particularly from developing countries such as 
China and India. For the world as a whole, the rise in oil prices was not a negative supply shock, as it 
was in the seventies, but was the result of a positive demand shock. Of course, global growth could 
well have been stronger in the absence of the oil price rise, but even with its constraining effect, there 
was still plenty of growth to go around and current forecasts are still looking good.  
On why the rise in inflation was so modest, the story is very interesting. We should start by reviewing a 
bit of history; this shows that even before OPEC I and II came along, OECD area inflation was rising 
year by year. Immediately before OPEC I, it had already risen to nearly 9 per cent, with Australia being 
one of the highest at 10.1 per cent. Inflationary expectations were also on the rise. In the business 
community the assumption was that any increase in costs could be easily passed on into prices, and 
the unions assumed that all wages would be indexed to rising inflation.  
The situation is very different now. After more than a decade of low and stable inflation, inflationary 
expectations are better anchored. Discipline in goods markets from domestic and foreign competitors 
means the old 'cost plus' mentality no longer prevails. While pass-through at the first round still occurs, 
as the rise in retail petrol prices demonstrates, subsequent price pressures are often absorbed. With 
BIS Review 85/2005 
 1
only limited and manageable increases in overall inflation throughout the world, monetary tightenings 
specifically directed at oil-price-instigated inflation have not been needed.  
That is all I wish to say about oil prices, other than to add the caveat that I am only talking about the 
increases to date. Obviously, if we enter a new round of similar increases, the situation would have to 
be reassessed.  
World interest rates  
It is well known that the world has recently gone through a phase of exceptionally low interest rates, 
but I am not sure that people appreciate how low they were by historical standards. In fact it is not 
much of an exaggeration to say that interest rates in mid 2003 were at their lowest level for a century. 
This was the time when official overnight rates – the ones set by central banks – were 1 per cent in the 
United States, 2 per cent in the euro area, and zero in Japan. The only qualifications I have to make to 
my  earlier  generalisation  is  to  concede  that  rates  may  have  been  slightly  lower  during  the  second 
world war in some countries such as the United States and United Kingdom when quantity rationing 
was the norm, but they have not been lower in peace time. 
We can construct an indicator of world interest rates for a century or more using a weighted average of 
the rates for the United States, United Kingdom, Germany and Japan. Graph 1 shows the results for 
official overnight interest rates or their nearest equivalent since 1860. Although the graph is dominated 
by the high interest rates during the great inflation of the 1970s, the readings for 2002 and 2003 are 
lower than any other time in this long span of years.1 Part of the explanation is that inflation was low, 
but it was only low compared to the post-war standard – it was not low compared to most of the period 
covered by the graph. In fact if we construct simple measures of real interest rates (based on realised 
inflation rates), they were also low by the standards of earlier low inflation periods.2 In Table 1, real 
interest rates in the first five years of this decade are lower than in any previous decade apart from 
those containing the two world wars and the 1970s.  
Graph 1  
                                                       
1   The observation for 1923, the year of the Weimar inflation in Germany, had to be deleted because it did not fit on the scale. 
2   The problem with most measures of real interest rates is that they become negative during periods of unanticipated rises in 
inflation such as the 1970s. For this reason, meaningful comparisons of real interest rates (using realised inflation rates) 
should only be made for periods of low and stable inflation such as the present. 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2005
 We could ask the question of why such low interest rates were put in place in this decade when it had 
not been seen to be necessary to do so on earlier occasions. This is a very big question and I do not 
propose to answer it tonight.3 Nor do I wish to maintain that a different global monetary policy should 
have  been  put  in  place.  Defenders  of  the  monetary  policy  that  was  pursued  would  argue  that  it 
resulted in continuing low inflation and reasonable economic growth for the world economy, apart from 
the mildest post-war recession in 2001. They would say that in light of this outcome, it would be hard 
to argue for a higher level of interest rates during the period.  
Usually when interest rates are kept very low for an extended period the main risk is that there will be 
a pronounced pick-up in inflation. As we know, there has been little of that on a global scale, or indeed 
in individual countries, even though commodity prices have risen sharply. Where the risks have mainly 
arisen has been in the financial sphere, where there has been a 'search for yield' and a driving up of 
many asset prices. So far this decade, the most obvious sign of the latter phenomenon has been the 
surge in house prices, particularly in those anglo countries with very competitive financial sectors such 
as the United States, United Kingdom and Australia.  
What I have been describing so far is a global development, and although we in Australia have shared 
it in some aspects, in others we have differed. The main aspect in which we differed was that we did 
not reduce interest rates to anywhere near the extent they were reduced in the three biggest monetary 
areas – the United States, Japan and the euro area. The low point in our short-term interest rates of 
4¼ per cent this decade was not very different to the low point in the 1990s of 4¾ per cent. We were 
also the only country of any significance to resist the general trend to lower interest rates during 2003. 
Nevertheless, we still have shown many of the same symptoms in our asset markets that others have 
shown.  
What  we  are  seeing  now  around  the  world  is  a  gradual  return  to  normality  in  interest  rates.  We  in 
Australia can make some claim to being the first in this process because we began in mid 2002. Over 
the  past  two  years  the  predominant  tendency  among  countries  has  been  to  raise  interest  rates. 
Virtually  every  developed  country  except  Japan  has  now  participated,  with  the  move  by  the  ECB 
earlier this month being an important step.  
The point I want to make that links the first two parts of this talk together is that the major reason for 
the  rises  in  interest  rates is,  I  think,  the  need  for  a  return  to  normality,  not  a  specific  fear about  oil 
prices.  Of  course  the  two  are  related  in  that  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  has  accommodated  the 
growth in demand that lay behind the rise in oil prices. But the most important factor behind the recent 
                                                      
3   For a partial answer see I.J. Macfarlane, “What are the Global Imbalances?”, Reserve Bank Bulletin, October 2005. 
BIS Review 85/2005 
 3
moves is the realisation that the world could not have safely continued with the sort of interest rates 
that prevailed in 2002 and 2003.  
a floating exchange rate with a currency viewed as a commodity currency;  
a monetary policy regime based on central bank independence and an inflation target;  
a disciplined fiscal policy which aims at balance or surplus in the medium term.  
Is there an Australian model?  
I was recently visited by the Chilean Minister of Finance who, like many in the same position in Latin 
America,  is  a  very  good  professional  economist.  Our  discussions  were  very  interesting,  and  at  one 
stage he answered one of my questions by saying that Chile 'was following the Australian model'. He 
meant this in a very specific way, and it is worth examining exactly what he meant by the term.  
First, he was talking about a macro-economic policy model that had the following structural features: 
• 
• 
• 
These  were  important,  but  the  most  important  characteristic  he  wished  to  focus  on  was  the 
internationalisation of the currency, i.e. the ability for Australian entities to borrow abroad in Australian 
dollars, or to borrow abroad in foreign currency and hedge back into Australian dollars. This allows 
Australian corporations and banks to participate fully in international financial markets without incurring 
foreign currency risk (or to only incur it where they have a 'natural hedge' such as foreign currency 
export earnings or to finance a foreign acquisition).  
We, of course, have been very aware of the importance of this characteristic and regard it as a virtual 
necessity if a country is to be able to run a floating exchange rate regime successfully. But many, if not 
most, countries do not reach this stage. It was foreign currency exposure which led to the collapse of 
many Asian banks and corporations when their currencies fell during the Asian crisis. In Latin America, 
traditionally all foreign borrowing was in US dollars, which made their countries extremely vulnerable 
to falls in their exchange rates. It also gave rise to what is known as 'fear of floating' which means the 
tendency for their central banks to quickly resort to raising interest rates whenever the exchange rate 
is in danger of falling.  
What the Chilean Finance Minister called the Australian model, of course, is not unique to Australia,4 
but it is associated with Australia in Latin American and Asian economic circles because of Australia's 
success in withstanding the Asian crisis. While some countries such as Chile see it as a sort of role 
model,  many  Asian  countries  have  chosen  a  different  path  by  running  current  account  surpluses, 
building up large holdings of international reserves and resisting changes in their exchange rates. As 
you know, we think this is a major reason for the growing global payments imbalances, and would be 
happier if they followed a model closer to our own. But that is another story.  
The  interesting  issue  for  other  economies,  particularly  emerging  market  economies,  is  how  do  you 
reach the situation where you can borrow abroad in your own currency, or, to put it differently, where 
investors in other countries will willingly hold assets denominated in your own currency. When we look 
back and see how Australia reached this position, it is a very interesting (and reasonably recent) story.  
The  major step  occurred when  the  Government  decided  that  it would  borrow  honestly  from  its own 
citizens.  That  is,  it  would  stop  using  captive  arrangements  that  force  financial  institutions  to  take 
government paper, and stop setting the interest rate on its own paper. In our case this occurred when 
we introduced the tender system for selling Treasury notes in 1979 and bonds in 1982, and soon after 
made clear that the Government would no longer borrow from the Reserve Bank, but instead borrow 
from the public to finance the budget deficit dollar for dollar. At first we had to accept very high interest 
rates, but in time demand for government paper expanded, and most importantly overseas investors 
began to find Australian government bonds denominated in Australian dollars an attractive investment. 
It was not necessary to ask them to invest, nor to do 'road shows' on Wall Street to entice them. At the 
                                                      
4   Canada and New Zealand also have the characteristics listed when describing the Australian model. For a discussion of the 
difference between Australia and some other commodity exporters, see: Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann (1999), 
“Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility,” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, New Challenges for Monetary Policy, 
pp329–368; and Ricardo J. Caballero, Kevin Cowan and Jonathan Kearns (2005), “Fear of Sudden Stops: Lessons from 
Australia and Chile,” Journal of Policy Reform, Vol.8 (4), pp313–354. 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2005
same time, old habits died hard so that as recently as March 1987 the Australian Government made 
its last overseas borrowing in the US market in US dollars.  
In time, overseas investors became comfortable with holding Australian government paper, semi and 
local paper, and eventually corporate bonds and asset-backed securities. Turnover in the Australian 
dollar is sixth amongst the world currencies and there is ample liquidity in both currency and asset 
markets. The relevant derivative contracts have grown, and so provided hedging opportunities. As we 
point out in a forthcoming Bulletin article, Australia as a whole has for some time had a long foreign 
currency position. That is, we have more foreign-currency-denominated assets than foreign-currency-
denominated liabilities, a far cry from our position in the early post-float period.  
I  want  to  conclude  now  by  briefly  revisiting  the  subject  of  why  economies,  including  our  own,  have 
exhibited  more  stability  than  in  earlier  periods.  Is  it  because  policymakers  have  become  better 
forecasters  and  more  adept  at  timely  adjustment  to  the  levers  of  economic  policy?  It  would  be 
tempting to answer yes to this, but I suspect it is only a small part of the answer. A more plausible 
explanation is that our economy has become more resilient. That is, we have systematically modified 
our institutional framework so that it is more flexible and more able to adjust to economic shocks than 
formerly. What I have described above is a good example of this process at work.  
BIS Review 85/2005 
 5
