Rasheed M Al-Maraj: Basel II and risk management 
Address by His Excellency Rasheed M Al-Maraj, Governor of the Bahrain Monetary Agency, to the 
Institute  of  International  Finance:  Basel  II  &  Risk  Management  -  Meeting  International  Standards, 
Manama, 30 November 2005. 
 Mr. Chairman, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  with  you  here  today,  and  to  have  this  opportunity  to  contribute  to  this  topical 
symposium. My own personal thanks go to the organisers, the Institute for International Finance, and 
to the sponsors, Gulf International Bank and Arab Banking Corporation, for making this event possible. 
I  should  also  like  to  welcome  those  of  you  who  have  taken  time  out  from  busy  year-end  diaries  to 
attend today’s event – especially those who have travelled from overseas. 
Basel II, as you need no reminding, constitutes the most significant change to banking regulation in 
nearly twenty years. Its impact so far, however, has probably been less felt in the Gulf region than in 
the G10 countries, where extensive implementation efforts have been taking place for some time. The 
situation  in  the  Gulf,  however,  is  now  rapidly  changing,  as  the  strong  turnout  today  I  think 
demonstrates. 
I should like, therefore, to use today’s opportunity to set out in high-level terms the BMA’s approach to 
Basel II implementation and how it relates to the BMA’s other regulatory initiatives. I will also touch on 
what I see as some of the key challenges posed by Basel II, not only for GCC regulators, but also for 
the  regional  banking  industry.  In  doing  so,  I  will  avoid  touching  on  some  of  the  more  detailed 
implementation issues, which will be covered later this morning. 
The BMA has endorsed the implementation of Basel II and is now working closely with the industry to 
apply it to the whole of Bahrain’s banking sector. We are aiming to implement Pillars 2 and 3 first, 
during 2007; Pillar 1 will be implemented at a later stage, from 2008 onwards. We currently expect that 
most locally incorporated banks will use the standardised approach for credit risk - only a handful have 
expressed an interest in using the IRB approach. For our part, we have said that we will only offer the 
foundation IRB approach, to start with at least. 
The above approach reflects our view that Basel II represents a significant improvement over Basel I, 
in terms of its better alignment of regulatory capital with risk, its emphasis on risk management and 
supervisory review, and its requirements on disclosure. It also reflects the fact that Bahrain hosts a 
large and dynamic banking industry, comprising international as well as local and regional players, and 
that their expectations are that Bahrain should move towards Basel II. 
Finally,  the  above  approach  also  reflects  our  view  that  a  realistic  and  measured  implementation  of 
Basel II is essential, if it is to succeed without creating additional risks to the banking system. Basel II 
is clearly a much more complex and sophisticated framework than the original Capital Accord, and its 
successful implementation will require not only a strong supervisory infrastructure to be in place, but – 
for  many  banks  -  more  sophisticated  risk  management  and  comprehensive  data  capture  to  be 
developed.  For  this  reason,  we  remain  sceptical  at  this  stage  that  the  necessary  preconditions  for 
implementing the advanced IRB and operational risk measurement approaches will exist by 2008. 
Many of the BMA’s recent enhancements in supervision will help prepare the groundwork for effective 
implementation  of  Basel  II.  For  instance,  our  development  of  a  risk-profiling  methodology  for  bank 
licensees, to help better focus our supervisory efforts and provide for a more systematic assessment 
of key risks in an institution, is essential in my view to the successful implementation of Pillar 2. As part 
of our Basel II preparations, we will be developing this system further to incorporate assessments of 
banks’ capital assessment processes and to ensure more effective implementation across both on-site 
and off-site supervisory directorates. 
Our on-going efforts at strengthening corporate governance in banks, and our support for the recent 
development of a credit reference bureau in Bahrain, will similarly help underpin the implementation of 
Basel II. 
BIS Review 78/2005 
 1
Nevertheless,  the  fact  remains  that  Basel  II  represents  for  the  Gulf  region  as  a  whole  a  major 
implementation challenge. Even where risk-based supervision has already been introduced, moving to 
a system of individual capital requirements, set by regulators through the Pillar 2 review process, will 
require  significant  improvements  in  internal  processes,  staff  training  and  resources,  if  the  whole 
system  is  to  work  effectively  and  in  a  manner  that  carries  credibility  with  the  industry,  the  rating 
agencies and other supervisors.  
Supervision,  in  short,  will  have  to  become  even  more  pro-active  and  risk-focused,  and  will  become 
more resource-intensive. 
Equally, significant challenges exist for banks. Boards will be required to demonstrate that they have in 
place  effective  processes  for  capital  adequacy  assessment  and  management.  Many  GCC  banks, 
particularly the smaller entities, have much work to do in this area to ensure that such frameworks are 
properly embedded in their organisation. Further efforts need to be made to link capital planning to risk 
management in a comprehensive manner. And many boards need to engage in such issues in much 
more detail; some will need to revisit their mix of skills and experience. 
Furthermore, banks will also be required to implement a comprehensive range of disclosures under 
Pillar 3. Although banks in Bahrain are already subject to fairly extensive disclosure requirements, the 
Basel II requirements are even more detailed. For many banks, this will pose challenges in terms of 
reporting systems; for some, it may also require a shift in corporate culture.  
In short, Basel II represents more than simply a technical compliance exercise. It will require major 
changes  in  the  way  that  we  operate  as  supervisors,  and  in  the  way  that  banks  and  their  boards 
manage their business. Without such changes, the benefits of Basel II will not be realised. 
I should like to turn now to some of the wider implications of Basel II for the Gulf region. Many of the 
concerns voiced over its competitive and macro-economic impact are based on the assumption that 
there  is  a  direct  relationship  between  regulatory  capital  requirements  and  the  pricing  and  supply  of 
bank lending – in other words, that regulatory capital requirements determine banks’ behaviour. 
In fact, the evidence suggests that although there is some impact, that regulatory capital is not usually 
the  key  determinant.  Actual  capital  held  by  banks,  for  instance,  is  often  significantly  in  excess  of 
regulatory minima: in Bahrain, commercial banks on average maintain a capital adequacy ratio of over 
25%, significantly in excess of the BMA-imposed minimum of 12%. 
Some banks also assume that the more sophisticated credit risk approaches offered under Basel II 
inevitably lead to lower regulatory capital requirements. In reality, of course, the impact of the different 
possible  approaches  is  dependent  on  the  quality  of  the  loan  portfolio  concerned.  The  more 
sophisticated  approaches,  because  they  measure  more  accurately  the  underlying  economic  risks 
involved,  in  fact  impose  higher  capital  requirements  for  poorer  quality  loans  than  the  standardised 
approach.  Even  where  they  offer  regulatory  capital  savings,  banks  often  overlook  the  systems  and 
data costs involved in implementing the more sophisticated approaches.  
And finally, some comments are based on the assumption that the current Basel I regime, the status 
quo, is the valid yardstick by which to measure these changes. Thus, the move away from the simple 
risk weighting of bank exposures at 20% may indeed lead to higher cost of funds for some banks – but 
to the extent that the existing approach does not adequately discriminate between the different risk 
profiles of borrowers, the change in regulatory treatment is clearly an improvement. 
Bearing  these  points  in  mind,  I  believe  that  many  of  the  concerns  expressed  over  the  competitive 
impact of Basel II are somewhat over-done. At the very least, the issues involved – and the impact of 
any changes to regulatory capital requirements - are not always as straightforward as they may first 
appear. 
In  short,  therefore,  the  main  impact  of  Basel  II  is  more  likely  to  be  to  move  regulatory  capital 
requirements closer to banks’ actual risk assessments when lending to emerging markets, rather than 
lead to material changes in pricing or availability of funds. 
Similarly,  Basel  II  will  not  necessarily  favour  foreign  banks  over  domestic  ones.  Banks  operating 
mainly  in  lower-rated  markets  will,  it  is  true,  on  average  be  required  to  hold  under  Basel  II  more 
regulatory capital relative to banks operating in higher rated markets, including a higher capital buffer 
to match the higher volatility inherent in their business. But the regional experience here is that local 
banks  already  are  relatively  well  capitalised  –  again  indicating  that  actual  risk  assessments,  rather 
than regulatory capital, are the key driver. 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2005
These comments, of course, only touch on the surface of what is a complex subject. But the message 
that  I  wish  to  leave  today  is  simple.  It  is  that  Basel  II  has  the  potential  to  bring  about  significant 
improvements  in  both  the  quality  of  supervision  and banks’  risk  management.  For  that  reason,  it  is 
important  to  the  financial  services  industry  in  this  region  that  we  implement  it  wholeheartedly,  in  a 
manner that brings about these improvements. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your patience. 
BIS Review 78/2005 
 3
