Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Enhancing financial literacy for sustained economic 
prosperity 
Dinner address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Citigroup-
INSEAD Financial Education Summit 2005: A Forum Promoting Financial Education in Asia Pacific, 
Kuala Lumpur, 12 December 2005. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  here  tonight  at  this  second  Citigroup-INSEAD  Financial  Education 
Summit. Malaysia is particularly pleased to host this year's Summit here in Kuala Lumpur given that 
enhancing the levels of financial literacy is being accorded a high priority on our agenda. 
Effective participation in the economy essentially needs to be an informed participation. This is more 
so  now  than  ever  before.  We  are  now  living  in  an  environment  of  rapid  change.  The  advances  in 
technology,  product  innovation,  the  removal  of  regulatory  restrictions,  deregulation  and  greater 
competition have dramatically transformed the financial system and the economy. The environment is 
marked by increased access to financial services, broader range of products and services, a far more 
competitive financial services industry and more complex financial transactions. It is the demands of 
this  new  environment  that  has  created  a  greater  need  for  financial  literacy  to  not  only  ensure  the 
efficient functioning of the financial system but also enhance the potential for the economy to prosper 
and thrive.  
This evening, I would like to focus on financial literacy from the perspective of the Central Bank, given 
that  the  function  of  the  Central  Bank  has  widespread  implications  on  financial  markets,  businesses 
and  the  public  as  large.  The  main  responsibilities  of  the  Central  Bank  includes  the  formulation  and 
implementation of monetary policy, ensuring the soundness and stability of the banking system, and 
finally ensuring the integrity and reliability of the payments systems. In all these areas, the actions of 
the  Central  Bank  have  direct  implications  on  the  business  community  and  the  public  at  large.  The 
ultimate aim of the policies are to make the economy strong, and to ensure the health of the financial 
system that is vital to supporting the economic growth and development process. Knowledge of what 
the Central Bank does and the reasons for its actions are essential for the efficient functioning of the 
financial  markets  and  the  effectiveness  of  the  policy  initiatives.  In  all  these  areas,  the  behavior  of 
businesses  and  consumers  at  large  are  important  in  determining  the  final  outcome.  Having  the 
knowledge and understanding of the issues would better equip consumers to manage their financial 
matters and to make well informed decisions regarding their own finances. In addition, it would also 
contribute to the soundness of the banking system and the efficiency of the payments system. 
In this current environment, the issue of financial literacy from these perspectives has become more 
urgent,  particularly  in  the  emerging  market  economies  of  Asia,  where  household  consumption  is 
becoming  an  important  driver  of  growth.  The  expanding  cumulative  domestic  market  in  Asia  is 
becoming massive, a factor that has been important in facilitating intra-Asian trade and thus driving the 
economic integration of the Asian region. This trend has the potential to contribute to the rebalancing 
of  global  growth  and  thus  to  address  the  structural  imbalances  currently  prevailing  in  the  global 
economy.  Households  therefore  need  to  be  financially  strong  if  this  trend  is  to  be  sustainable. 
Financial  literacy  will  allow  households  to  have  the  increased  confidence  to  make  sound  decisions 
regarding their consumption expenditure. 
Of  importance  to  Central  Banks  is  that  consumer  credit  remains  within  prudential  limits  and  do  not 
impose undue risk to the consumers that can often result in financial stress. Consumers not only need 
to  be  able  to  assess  their  capacity  for  expenditure,  savings  and  debts  but  also  have  to  be  able  to 
select from the array of financial products and delivery systems that will best meet their requirements. 
Households  need  also  to  be  aware  of  and  understand  the  financial  risks  associated  with  their 
transactions. Greater financial literacy can contribute to mitigating these financial risks. 
The growth in household debt is an increasingly evident phenomenon in Asia. Over the period of 2000 
to  2004,  the  volume  of  consumer  loans  across  seven  major  Asia  Pacific  economies  grew  at  an 
average  annual  rate  of  9  percent,  relative  to  total  loan  growth  of  5.2  percent  and  corporate  credit 
growth of 2.6 percent. The risk emerges when debt reaches a level where it cannot be sustained, and 
ultimately  leads  to  increased  financial  stress.  It  is  therefore  important  that  borrowers  are  financially 
savvy to manage financial risks in a proactive and constructive manner. 
BIS Review 85/2005 
 1
The environment we are operating in is becoming increasingly challenging. Individuals may not know 
where  to  seek  information  or  do  comparative  shopping.  The  aggressive  marketing  by  financial 
institutions may lure naïve borrowers into financial transactions that cannot be sustained in the 
longer  term.  A  number  of regional  economies  have seen  aggressive  marketing  of  credit cards,  that 
have  led  to  situations  where  financial  institutions  were  eventually  compelled  to  write-off  many  bad 
loans. The observation from surveys is that many consumers do not fully understand relatively simple 
financial calculations, and hence do not realise the risks involved. 
For  some  countries,  the  cost  of  borrowing  may  increase  substantially  depending  on  the  prevailing 
conditions. This may result in difficulties in servicing the debt. Also this would depend on the extent of 
the household gearing. For Asia Pacific economies, this ratio of debt servicing to total income ranges 
from  a  low  of  two  percent  for  economies  that  do  not  have  sophisticated  financial  systems,  to  74 
percent at the high-end, where consumerism is well entrenched. While there is no magic number to 
determine prudent gearing, this ratio can be used to assess whether the financial risk is increasing. 
Over time, it could provide an indication of the level of debt that is manageable. Basic financial literacy 
would be necessary for such self-assessment. 
A further risk, which is linked closely to the high cost of borrowing, is the reliance for financing from the 
informal financial sector. Very often such type of predatory lending results in perpetual debt since the 
interest  rate  is  prohibitively  high,  and  the  borrower  does  not  have  recourse  to  legal  aid  or  proper 
financial  advice  given  that  the  transaction  takes  place  in  the  informal  financial  sector.  Increased 
financial literacy would avoid recourse to such financing and would facilitate greater reliance on the 
formal financial service providers. 
An important objective of enhanced financial literacy is to achieve greater personal accountability for 
post-retirement financial, medical and social needs. Unlike in the developed economies, the financial 
burden of those who have retired with respect to health and retirement costs are usually borne by the 
individual. This requires understanding of the various insurance products and other health care plans. 
The most sustainable approach to mitigating this type of risk is to have informed participation in health 
and  retirement  funding  schemes.  Greater  understanding  and  knowledge  of  these  financial  risks 
through improved financial literacy is the first step towards actively managing these risks.  
Enhanced financial literacy can also contribute towards a more stable and sound banking system. A 
more  discerning  household  sector  can  drive  greater  innovation,  greater  efficiency  in  terms  of  lower 
fees and charges and better quality of services. This combined with the monitoring by Central Banks 
to ensure that financial services are provided fairly and to ensure appropriate risk management and 
governance  practices  adopted  by  the  industry  increases  the  potential  for  enhanced  stability  and 
performance of the industry. This in turn enhances the potential for the industry to provide financing to 
households and enterprises thus contributing to the economic growth process.  
Another  instance  where  efficiency  and  potential  of  the  industry  can  be  enhanced  is  migration  from 
paper-based payments to electronic payments. This would provide significant benefits to all parties as 
it  provides  a  more  efficient  and  reliable  payment  instrument  and  it  attracts  lower  costs,  increased 
convenience and a higher level of security. 
In promoting financial literacy, several issues need to be addressed. One of the most critical issues is 
the apathy towards information. Irrational behavior, the inability to comprehend complex information, 
the perception that information is unreliable, or more often than not the reluctance to invest the time to 
study the information, are all reasons that increase such apathy.  
In  addressing  financial  literacy,  the  information  provided  to  consumers  needs  to  be  simple,  brief, 
contextualised to the needs of the consumer and delivered at the right time. An example is providing 
special,  inclusive  programmes  for  financially  excluded  groups  that  are  at  different  levels  of 
development and that face different challenges in managing their financial affairs.  
The  emerging  best  practices  in  enhancing  financial  literacy  clearly  suggest  that  an  integrated  and 
coordinated delivery of financial literacy initiatives is needed to address the issues highlighted above. 
This requires a comprehensive approach involving central banks, government ministries, NGOs and 
corporations to work collaboratively to promote financial literacy. Attention needs to be given to greater 
strategic  focus  on  the  outcomes  to  be  achieved  by  the  financial  literacy  programs.  It  will  require 
concerted,  deliberate  and  sustained  efforts  by  all  parties  concerned.  Finally,  the  progress  made  in 
advancing financial literacy needs to be tracked. This will allow for insights to assess the capacity of 
the financial system to handle greater levels of innovation and free market practices. 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2005
In Malaysia, a comprehensive approach has been adopted to enhance financial literacy in the country. 
The  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan,  which  was  launched  in  2001,  includes  a  10-year  consumer 
education program. This agenda includes infrastructure and institutional capacity development in the 
areas  of  financial  education,  advisory  services,  distress  management  and  rehabilitation.  For  this 
purpose, the Central Bank in partnership with the financial industry and other government agencies, 
has introduced the Financial Mediation Bureau, Deposit Insurance Scheme, Basic Banking Services 
Framework,  Credit  Counselling  and  Debt  Management  Agency,  as  well  as  created  a  new  class  of 
licensed  Financial  Advisers.  These  initiatives  are  also  being  reinforced  by  a  higher  level  of 
transparency and disclosure. 
A  series  of  consumer  education  programs  has  been  introduced,  such  as  Bankinginfo  and 
Insuranceinfo,  both  of  which  are  delivered  through  various  channels.  These  include  road  shows, 
pamphlets at the branches of financial service providers and dedicated Internet sites hosted by the 
central bank. Savings and education programs are also being promoted in schools.  
More  recently  a  one-stop  centre  was  established  within  the  Central  Bank  for  the  public  to  obtain 
information  about  financial  services  in  Malaysia  and  to  provide  face-to-face  customer  service  on 
general enquiries and complaints. This Centre was established to act as a centralised point of contact 
to  facilitate  a  rapid  and  effective  response  for  members  of  the  public  and  small  and  medium 
enterprises  (SMEs)  in  matters  related  to  their  requirements.  Also  a  Credit  Counselling  and  Debt 
Management Agency will be launched early next year. The Credit Counselling and Debt Management 
Agency is being established to undertake credit counselling and loan restructuring for individuals. This 
institutional  arrangement  will  help  consumers  who  encounter  difficulties  in  meeting  their  financial 
commitments.  Apart  from  being  a  source  of  information  and  advice  on  financial  management,  the 
arrangement would represent a more cost effective and prompt means of debt settlement through out-
of-court procedures. 
All these measures to enhance financial literacy involve all the parties concerned - the consumers, the 
financial service providers, the regulators and relevant Government ministries, the corporate and the 
NGOs. This collective approach reflects the importance of shared responsibility in helping consumers 
manage their financial risks more effectively. In this regard, the financial institutions who are the first 
line of contact with consumers, and who bear a major part of the financial risk in the event consumers 
suffer financial stress, need to play a greater role in helping create more informed participation in the 
financial  system.  The  dividends  in  terms  of  lower  non-performing  loans  and  increased  profitability 
makes this a win-win proposition. Financial institutions with their extensive branch networks, qualified 
financial management officers and extensive experience in assessing the risks facing consumers are 
best positioned to increase the level of institutional capacity that can enhance financial literacy. 
We  need  to  recognise  our  shared  responsibility  to  equip  the  communities  in  our  countries  with  the 
necessary  skills  and  confidence  in  managing  their  personal  financial  matters.  Collective  efforts  to 
develop institutional capacity to share information and knowledge about financial literacy across the 
region can also bring about mutually reinforcing results. Financial literacy needs to be elevated to a 
more  important  level  on  the  national  and  international  agenda  for  a  greater  shared  economic 
prosperity.  
On that note, thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 85/2005 
 3
