Jarle Bergo: Household saving and the economic outlook 
Speech by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of the Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
Oslo, 3 October 2005. 
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on  21  September, 
Inflation Report 2/05 and on previous speeches. 
The references and the charts in pdf-format 
 can also be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 Introduction 
First of all, let me take the opportunity to thank you for your invitation to speak to you this 
morning.  
Most of you in the audience today are in daily contact with the public to give them advice 
about  saving  and  investment  decisions.  Some  of  these  decisions  can  have  considerable 
impact on a household’s financial situation. In addition, overall developments in the economy 
are  a  result  of  all  these  individual  decisions.  In  any  case,  it  is  important  that  all  of  these 
decisions are based on the best possible information.  
Savings motive and forms of saving 
One decision we take as individuals is how much of our current income we are not going to 
spend on consumption immediately. In other words – how much we are going to save. We 
can save directly in the form of fixed assets such as residential property or by investing in 
financial assets. Households that save in banks or invest in other forms of financial assets 
make funds available to others. Banks convert some households’ savings into loans for other 
households  wishing  to  finance  house  purchases,  for  instance.  If  we  look  at  the  household 
sector as a whole, savings accounted for about five per cent of household disposable income 
in 2004,1 which has been the level of saving for the past few years. These are funds that are 
channelled to the business sector in Norway or abroad to finance investment there.  
There may be various reasons behind a decision to save. In many cases, the objective is to 
spread  consumption  evenly  through  the  course  of  a  lifetime.  Another  reason  may  be  the 
desire to leave behind an inheritance.  
For most people, the level of income will fluctuate through life. Most of our income is earned 
while we are economically active. Once our working career is over, we will have little to live 
on if we have not set aside capital as we earn or have secured our retirement by some other 
means. A hundred years ago, a common  way  of “saving” for old age was to have a large 
number of children. A large family increased the probability of some of the children growing 
up  and  being  able  to  support  their  parents  when  they  were  old.  By  looking  after  family 
property, and perhaps expanding it, subsequent generations could also be provided for.  
Demography is also important today, but the importance of a reasonable ratio of workers to 
pensioners has become somewhat less obvious because of the way we now try to ensure 
financial security in old age. It is probably no coincidence that the Norwegian expression for 
the end of our working career is “to withdraw with a pension”. The equivalent expression in 
                                                 
1   This figure has been adjusted for estimated extraordinary share dividends as from 2000. 
   1/7 
English,  “to  retire”,  means  simply  to  withdraw.  There  are  no  associations  with  financial 
benefits.  
In Norway, everyone is entitled to a state pension at the age of 67. How much each of us will 
receive depends both on the size of our income through our working career and on the path 
of growth in the economy. With its current structure, the National Insurance Scheme will be 
facing a considerable challenge in the future when an increasing proportion of the population 
is over 67 years old. Many employees receive an extra pension payment in the form of an 
occupational pension. In Norway, this will soon apply to virtually all employees.  
Over the past few years, private pension insurance has become more common in Norway. In 
2004, individual pension agreements had increased by 13 per cent since 1997. Membership 
in collective pension schemes increased by 22 per cent in the same period. It is likely that the 
debate around the state pension system has in some cases generated concern about how 
much the National Insurance Scheme will provide. The same debate may have led others to 
discover the exact size of the payments they can expect to receive as pensioners. As income 
levels rise, many will want to set aside more of their income for consumption later in life. In 
addition,  today’s  working  population  expects  to  live  longer  than  previous  generations,  but 
also to be more active and in better shape than they were. Many people will therefore want to 
have more capital at their disposal as pensioners than public pension schemes can provide.  
Another reason to save is to have something put by to meet emergencies. In Norway, the 
tradition  used  to  be  to  hide  away  some  extra  “daler”  in  savings  in  the  bottom  of  a  trunk. 
These  emergencies  are  also  to  a  greater  extent  now  covered  by  public  schemes  such  as 
unemployment  benefit  and  disability  pensions.  At  the  same  time,  private  schemes  are 
becoming more common.  
Let  us  now  look  at  how  households  save.  Households  save  either  in  the  form  of  fixed 
investment, mainly their own homes, or in the form of financial investments. This chart shows 
how households distribute their total wealth. The value of housing wealth is very uncertain. 
By our estimates, households’ total housing wealth was around NOK 2000 billion at the end 
of 2004. Housing wealth accounted for a little more than half of total gross household wealth 
at this time. The picture was about the same in the mid-1990s.  
If we look more closely at household financial wealth, we find that it is spread over various 
assets, with insurance claims the most important at the end of 2004. By paying premiums 
into various insurance schemes, mainly life and pension insurance, households earn the right 
to future disbursements from the insurance companies. These premiums accounted for more 
than  a  third  of  household  financial wealth  at  the  end  of  2004.  The  investment  instruments 
perhaps most commonly referred to, securities and bank deposits, accounted for less than a 
quarter of total wealth.  
Household gross financial wealth must be seen in the context of the debt accumulated by 
households  as  a  group.  Even  when  this  is  taken  into  account,  the  household  sector  as  a 
whole has positive net financial wealth.  
As a share of disposable income, household net financial wealth increased from the end of 
the  1980s  to  the  mid-1990s.  In  relation  to  disposable  income,  debt  was  reduced,  while 
household wealth increased. From the end of the 1990s, household debt and wealth have 
risen in tandem. Net wealth has remained fairly stable at around 50 per cent of disposable 
income. The rise in household debt must be seen in the context of the strong rise in house 
prices.  
From oil to financial wealth 
Household saving is part of the country’s total saving. As a nation, we can save by investing 
in  fixed  assets  in  Norway  or  by  making  financial  investments  abroad.  Domestic  fixed 
   2/7 
investment provides a return in the form of higher production capacity in the future. Building 
up financial assets abroad allows us to pay for more imports in the years ahead.  
In the past few years, there has been a sharp increase in Norway’s saving, as conventionally 
measured in the national accounts. As a share of GDP, Norway’s saving after the turn of this 
century has been almost double the average for the 1980s and 1990s.  
The  explanation  for  these  figures  lies  in  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund.  Norway’s 
petroleum resources are in principle part of our national wealth, but are not recorded as such 
in the national accounts. When oil is extracted and sold, natural assets are transformed into 
financial  wealth.  As  long  as  this  financial  wealth  continues  to  grow,  it  will  appear  as 
government saving in the accounts, while it is in reality a conversion of wealth. In this sense, 
we are not saving so much more than we used to. Nevertheless - when households see that 
the  state,  which  has  undertaken  substantial  pension  obligations,  puts  money  aside,  some 
may  perceive  this  as  a  guarantee  for  their  own  pensions.  This  may  influence  their  own 
private saving decisions.  
The value of the Petroleum Fund, measured as a percentage of GDP, will rise in the years 
ahead.  On  the  other  hand,  Norway,  like  many  other  countries,  is  facing  substantial  fiscal 
challenges. The expected dependency ratio, i.e. the ratio of persons over the age of 67 to 
persons  aged  20  to  66,  will  rise  sharply  in  the  years  ahead.  The  National  Insurance 
Scheme’s  spending  on  old  age  and  disability  pensions,  based  on  current  social  security 
rules,  is  increasing.  The  return  on  the  Petroleum  Fund  can  only  cover  a  small  portion  of 
higher pension expenditure. The chart shows how pension expenditure and the real return on 
the Petroleum Fund will develop in the years to 2060. The calculations were carried out by 
the Ministry of Finance and based on a long-term oil price of 180 2004-kroner (around USD 
27).  Even  with  a  long-term  oil  price  of  230  2004-kroner  (around  USD  35),  a  funding 
requirement equivalent to 6 per cent of GDP will still not be covered in 2060. Oil futures six to 
seven years ahead are now higher than this. If oil prices remain as high in the future, the 
funding requirement will be somewhat lower. To base decisions on this, however, would be a 
very risky strategy.  
The economic outlook 
The size of the return on our savings, at the national or the personal level, will depend on 
how  well  we  have  invested,  but  also  on  economic  developments.  For  our  pensions,  it  is 
important that wealth creation is substantial in the years ahead.  
It is natural for me to focus on how monetary policy can contribute to high wealth creation.  
Monetary  policy  in  Norway  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable  inflation.  This  is  the  most 
important  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  sound  economic  developments  in  the 
long  term.  Low  and  stable  inflation  provides  the  economy  with  a  nominal  anchor.  This 
contributes  to  predictability  for  those  taking  decisions  about  saving  and  investment  today, 
although the result depends on how the economy develops in the future. In addition, we will 
seek to prevent unduly wide fluctuations in output and employment in the short and medium 
term.  
In  the  long term,  output  in  an  economy  is  determined  by  the  supply  of  labour, capital  and 
technology.  
Monetary policy influences the economy with long and variable lags. This means we must 
look  ahead  when  setting  interest  rates.  I  would  therefore  like  to  comment  briefly  on  our 
assessment  for  the  next  three  years,  based  on  the  analyses  in  the  most  recent  Inflation 
Report, published in June (Inflation Report 2/05).  
The  Norwegian  economy  is  in  an  upturn  and  is  now  expanding  at  a  brisk  pace.  Inflation 
remains low, but has edged up since last year. The risk of a fall in the level of prices and 
   3/7 
markedly lower inflation expectations has diminished. At the same time, there appears to be 
little risk that inflation will rapidly move up to a level that is too high.  
The  interest  rate  reductions  through  2003  and  into  2004  have  resulted  in  low  real  interest 
rates. For a period, the real interest rate has been considerably lower than normal. The low 
level of interest rates is supporting the high activity level in the Norwegian economy.  
The economic upturn is broad-based. At the beginning of the recovery, activity was primarily 
fuelled  by  private  consumption,  traditional  exports  and  petroleum  investment.  In  addition, 
growth in mainland fixed investment has gradually gained considerable momentum.  
Monetary  policy  easing  and  low  inflation  have  resulted  in  strong  growth  in  household  real 
disposable income. Private consumption and housing investment have risen sharply. House 
prices have continued to rise. Debt growth remains high.  
The economic upturn has continued this year. High petroleum investment, the international 
upturn  and  higher  commodity  prices  have  boosted  production  and  earnings  in  the 
manufacturing  sector.  Statistics  Norway’s  business  tendency  survey  points  to  continued 
favourable prospects for Norwegian manufacturing. In service industries and the construction 
sector, continued low interest rates and strong growth in household demand are expected to 
result in a further increase in activity in the near term. Capacity utilisation in the Norwegian 
economy  now  appears  to  be  close  to  a  normal  level.  In  manufacturing,  capacity  utilisation 
has been close to its historical average. According to Norges Bank’s regional network, about 
40 per cent of enterprises will have some or considerable difficulty in increasing production.  
The situation in the labour market does not indicate that substantial pressures are building up 
in the Norwegian economy as a whole, even though growth has been high for a fairly long 
period. So far, the rise in the number of employed has been fairly modest in relation to output 
growth.  This  may  be  due  to  lagged  effects  of  the  sharp  fall  in  sickness  absence  through 
2004.  In  many  companies,  the  large  increase  in  available  person-hours  was  probably  not 
fully utilised immediately. A considerable share of production growth so far this year may be 
the  result  of  improved  utilisation  of  existing  company  workforces.  In  addition,  the  use  of 
foreign labour seems to have increased recently.  
Inflation decelerated markedly from summer 2003 and continued to fall in the beginning of 
2004.  Consumer  price  inflation  has  subsequently  picked  up,  albeit  at  a  gentle  pace.  In 
August,  the  year-on-year  rise  in  consumer  prices  adjusted  for  tax  changes  and  excluding 
energy products was 1.3 per cent.  
Prices for imported consumer goods have continued to fall. The decline in prices may reflect 
high productivity growth in the production of some goods and large investments to increase 
production capacity, particularly in China.  
Prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and  services  rose  by  2.1  per  cent  in  the  twelve 
months to August this year.  
On the basis of the pay increases agreed upon in this year’s wage settlement, combined with 
the estimates for wage drift and wage carry-over, annual wage growth is projected at around 
3½  per  cent  this  year.  Low  wage  growth  will  contribute  to  curbing  the  rise  in  prices  for 
domestically produced goods and services.  
Economic growth among trading partners is expected to be somewhat lower this year than in 
2004. In the years ahead, growth is expected to be relatively stable. Uncertainties that may 
contribute  to  weaker  developments  include  high  oil  prices  and  the  possibility  of  weaker 
housing markets in a number of countries.  
Very high growth in demand for oil is one of the factors behind record high oil prices. In the 
first half of this year, the price of Brent Blend fluctuated for the most part between USD 45 
and USD 55 per barrel. Oil prices rose further this summer, exceeding USD 60 per barrel in 
August and September. Oil futures have also increased.  
   4/7 
Little  excess  production  capacity  in  OPEC  countries,  combined  with  the  prospect  of  lower 
production  in  non-OPEC  countries,  has  probably  influenced  oil  prices.  At  the  same  time, 
there are prospects of continued strong demand growth in important oil-importing countries, 
such as China and some other emerging economies.  
Rising  or  persistently  high  oil  prices  may  gradually  dampen  growth  among  our  most 
important trading partners. The slowdown may occur gradually and may not be particularly 
marked, but there are now growing concerns that high oil prices may have a stronger impact 
on inflation and inflation expectations. Monetary policy easing in response to this may then 
trigger a more pronounced downturn.  
High oil prices have a different impact in Norway than in oil-importing countries. A rise in oil 
prices improves our terms of trade. Other countries perceive this as an externally imposed 
tax.  
As  a  result  of  persistently  high  oil  prices  and  expectations  that  oil  prices  will  remain  high, 
investment  in  the  petroleum  sector  may  reach  record  levels  this  year.  The  investment 
intentions survey for the petroleum sector points to very high growth.  
The analyses in Inflation Report 2/05 are based on a baseline scenario where the key rate 
shadows forward interest rates up to 2007, and then rises somewhat more rapidly. The krone 
exchange  rate  is  assumed  to  shadow  the  forward  exchange  rate,  which  remains  broadly 
unchanged over the next three years.  
Private  consumption  accounts  for  just  under  60  per  cent  of  total  demand  in  mainland 
Norway, and is an important channel through which monetary policy operates.  
Low real interest rates, solid growth in real disposable income and a continued sharp rise in 
house  prices  will  result  in  high  growth  in  private  consumption  again  this  year.  Higher 
employment  and  somewhat  higher  wage  growth  will  continue  to  contribute  to  growth  in 
household  demand  in  the  period  ahead.  Household  debt,  however,  has  risen  sharply.  A 
gradual normalisation of interest rates will reduce growth in household disposable income. 
This  suggests  lower  growth  in  consumption.  We  assume  that  households  will  choose  to 
spread  consumption  over  time,  so  that  the  saving  ratio  will  continue  to  fall  even  if  interest 
rates rise.  
Housing investment rose sharply last year. It appears that growth in residential construction 
will remain high this year, although the rate of growth is expected to slow somewhat through 
the year. Low interest rates may have contributed to moving forward some housing projects. 
A  gradual  normalisation  of  interest  rates  implies  more  moderate  growth  in  housing 
investment. Developments in underlying demand for housing may also imply that residential 
construction will stabilise and gradually decline somewhat.  
Household debt has increased at a faster pace than income over the past ten years. Norges 
Bank’s calculations indicate that debt growth may largely be due to the sharp rise in house 
prices in recent years. Higher house prices have a fairly prolonged effect on household debt 
growth. As a result, credit growth will remain high for a fairly long period even though the rise 
in house prices is expected to slow. Given the assumptions underlying our projections, it is 
likely  that  debt  will  continue  to  grow  at  a  faster  pace  than  disposable  income  through  the 
entire projection period.  
High credit growth has led to a rise in the household debt burden, measured as loan debt as 
a percentage of liquid disposable income. The  debt burden, measured  in this way, is now 
record  high.  Due  to  unusually  low  interest  rates,  the  interest  burden  is,  nevertheless, 
relatively  low.  A  normalisation  of  interest  rates  will  increase  households’  net  interest 
expenses, but according to the projections the interest burden will not be higher than it was 
at the end of the 1990s. If there are expectations of persistently low interest rates, there is a 
risk that debt may increase more than assumed. Net interest expenses and the debt burden 
will  then  also  be  higher  than  assumed.  In  addition,  households  will  be  vulnerable  if 
unexpected disturbances result in higher-than-expected interest rates.  
   5/7 
Capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy is expected to increase this year and next and 
exceed its normal level. There are prospects that inflation will gradually pick up and be close 
to 2½ per cent at the three-year horizon. Since the publication of the June Inflation Report, 
prices for domestically produced consumer goods have risen slightly less than expected. At 
the  same  time,  oil  prices  have  been  somewhat  higher  than  assumed.  Energy  prices  are 
pushing up consumer price inflation.  
New information since the publication of the June Inflation Report does not provide grounds 
for changing the assessment of developments in the real economy. Growth among trading 
partners seems on the whole to be approximately as expected in the June Inflation Report, 
but  the  risk  of  more  sluggish  developments  has  increased,  according  to  the  IMF  and  the 
OECD.  High  oil  prices  may  result  in  somewhat  higher  global  inflation  than  previously 
projected.  
The objectives of bringing inflation back to the target of 2.5 per cent and anchoring inflation 
expectations imply a continued low interest rate.  
On the other hand, there are expectations that high output growth will persist. The objective 
of stabilising developments in output may, in isolation, imply a higher interest rate. Inflation is 
gradually  picking  up.  High  capacity  utilisation  may  generate  a  continued  sharp  rise  in 
property prices and household borrowing. This could be a source of instability in demand and 
output in the somewhat longer run.  
The Executive Board’s assessment in the June 2005 Inflation Report was that the interest 
rate may gradually – in small, not too frequent steps – be brought up towards a more normal 
level  if  economic  developments  are  approximately  as  projected  in  the  Report.  This  was 
considered to provide a reasonable balance between the objective of stabilising inflation at 
target and the objective of stabilising growth in output and employment.  
It was the Executive Board’s assessment that the sight deposit rate should lie in the interval 
1¾ 
-  
2¾ per cent in the period to the publication of the next Inflation Report on 2 November.  
Following  the  monetary  policy  meeting  on  21  September,  the  Executive  Board  stated  that 
developments  in  output,  demand  and  underlying  inflation  had  been  consistent  with  the 
projections in the June Inflation Report. The Executive Board also stated that its monetary 
policy strategy and assessments indicate that the interest rate should be gradually increased 
ahead. One option was to increase the interest rate at this meeting, but the Executive Board 
found it appropriate to leave the interest rate unchanged.  
Conclusion 
In my speech today, I have focused on how much and in what way households save and on 
the  prospects  for  wealth  creation.  I  have  also  pointed  to  the  challenge  facing  our  current 
pension system as an ever increasing share of the population gradually reaches retirement 
age. Increased saving today may be a way to address this challenge, but this is not enough 
in  itself.  In  the  long  term,  the  most  important  factor  will  be  how  we  manage  our  national 
wealth.  
Even  though  Norway’s  petroleum  wealth  is  substantial,  it  is  our  human  resources  that 
account  for  most  of  our  national  wealth.  Even  a  small  increase  in  the  “return”  on  human 
capital might generate considerable gains. The return on this capital partly depends on our 
pension schemes and the application of social security rules. These should be designed in 
such a way that they provide incentives and opportunities to work. Labour market legislation 
must also promote production and employment.  
In  May,  the  Storting  (Norwegian  parliament)  deliberated  the  Pension  Commission’s 
proposals for reforming the national insurance system. There was agreement on some of the 
main points, but the specific content has yet to be determined. If we succeed in reducing the 
   6/7 
growth in pension expenditure by modernising the national insurance system and introducing 
other reforms, this will be an important step towards addressing the fiscal challenges facing 
us.  
 
   7/7 
