Niklaus Blattner: Switzerland’s real estate market 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Niklaus  Blattner,  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 15 December 2005. 
 Competition in the Swiss real estate market has undoubtedly become stiffer in recent times. This is 
basically a good thing. Moreover, different market players and other observers have been pointing out 
for some time now that banks have not only become more competitive, but also less cautious. 
Mortgage  lending  is  part  of  the  banks’  core  business.  The  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  therefore 
decided  to  analyse  the  current  situation  and  development  in  the  Swiss  real  estate  market  in  more 
detail. The SNB is mandated to contribute to the stability of the financial system. The question asked 
was  the  following:  Are  there  any  signs  that  the  fiercer  competition  in  the  real  estate  market  is 
associated with excessive risks which may ultimately threaten the stability of the banking system? 
The National Bank’s analysis is based on both statistical data regarding banking activity and on the 
results  of  a  survey  conducted  among  a  number  of  banks  specifically  for  this  purpose.  The  random 
sampling covers banks with a total market share of over 70%. 
The main result of our survey shows that stronger competition in the real estate market has so far not 
had a destabilising effect on the banking sector in Switzerland. 
Modest rise in Swiss real estate prices overall 
Among other things, our assessment is based on the development of real estate prices. In Switzerland 
as a whole, real estate prices have only experienced a moderate rise in the past few years. Moreover, 
the general price level is still considerably lower than the record highs reached over ten years ago. By 
contrast,  owner-occupied  apartments  are  an  interesting  deviation  from  this  trend.  They  have  risen 
sharply of late, almost equalling their 1990 high. 
Econometric  estimates  of  equilibrium  prices  which  have  been  additionally  carried  out  also  fail  to 
indicate any overheating in the Swiss real estate market as a whole. We arrive at the same conclusion 
even under the assumption of a significantly higher interest rate level than today’s, which would result 
in  a  marked  correction  of  the  capitalised  value  of  real  estate.  Our  assessment  is  based  on  an 
observation  for  Switzerland  as  a  whole.  It  does  not  exclude  the  possibility  that  there  have  been 
excesses in individual regions or in certain parts of the real estate market. 
BIS Review 86/2005 
  1
Graph 1: Development of mortgage claims and real estate prices 
Source: SNB, Wüest & Partner 
No sign of banks taking greater risks 
Since the end of 2002, mortgage claims have recorded annual growth rates of up to 6%. This is quite 
substantial  compared  with  the  rather  moderate  trend  in  real  estate  prices.  It  appears  that  the 
expansion of mortgage claims has not been driven so much by real estate prices, but by the number of 
loan requests. Consequently, the growing demand for loans is more likely attributable to factors other 
than the expectation of a speculative boom in real estate prices. 
The  crucial  question  is  the  following:  Is  the  higher  demand  for  loans  due  to  excessively  harsh 
competition among banks that has led to cheaper credit not reflecting the actual risks incurred? 
How  has  the  relatively  strong  growth  in  mortgage  loans  impacted  on  bank  risks?  To  answer  this 
question, we took a closer look at the banks’ risk behaviour. Several indicators led us to believe that 
banks have hardly engaged in excessive risk taking. 
While  it  is  true  that  interest  rate  margins,  i.e.  the  spreads  between  mortgage  rates  and  the  banks’ 
financing costs, had fallen slightly by mid-2005, other bank expenses declined at the same time. In the 
final  analysis,  therefore,  the  profit  margin  was  virtually  constant  or  even  slightly  higher.  The  profit 
margin  corresponds  to  the  difference  between  the  interest  rate  margin  and  the  total  operating 
expenses  expressed  in  percent  of  the  loan  volume  and  –  to  reflect  expected  risks  –  of  total  value 
adjustments  and  provisions.  The  banks’  profit  margin  thus  also  serves  to  cover  unexpected  risks. 
Given  that  the  profit  margin  has  remained  constant  or  moved  slightly  higher,  the  banks’  risk-taking 
capacity has not diminished in spite of pressure on interest rate margins. This presupposes, however, 
that the banks have made realistic value adjustments and provisions. We currently assume that this is 
the case. 
Moreover,  average  lending  limits  for  mortgage  loans  have  changed  only  insignificantly  and  may  be 
regarded as cautious. For instance, the proportion of low-risk first mortgages – i.e. those mortgages 
with the lowest lending limit – is over 90%. The criteria used in extending loans can also be rated as 
conservative. As a rule, assessments of a debtor’s future solvency are based on considerably higher 
interest rates than the current ones. Mortgage debtors should therefore be able to meet their liabilities 
even if there is a marked increase in the interest rate level. 
Our  analysis  focuses  on  system-relevant  banks  and  on  different  groups  of  banks.  We  rely  on 
aggregated  data  and  on  a  random  sampling  of  banks  or groups  of  banks.  Problems  with  individual 
institutions cannot be excluded but should not threaten system stability. 
Increase in interest rate risks 
These assessments, which have so far been positive, are becoming slightly clouded because of higher 
interest rate risks. Smaller banks in particular have seen a relatively strong increase in direct interest 
rate risks. A sharp rise in the interest rate level could affect the valuation of assets and liabilities of 
such  banks  to  such  an  extent  that  their  capital  resources  would  in  some  cases  be  reduced 
considerably. While such losses could still be absorbed, we would, however, consider a further rise in 
interest rate risks as critical. 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2005
Graph 2: Interest rate risks by bank groups 
(reduction in net present value as a percentage of equity following an interest rate shock of +100 basis points) 
Source: SNB 
 Conclusion: Increased efficiency without higher risks 
The  slight  narrowing  of  interest  rate  margins  supports  the  assumption  of  increasingly  fierce 
competition  in  the  mortgage  market.  From  the  viewpoint  both  of  consumers  and  of  economic 
efficiency, this would be a welcome development. However, in the banking business there is always a 
danger  that  fiercer  competition  might  encourage  excessive  risk  taking  by  the  banks.  A  bank  can 
outperform  its  competitors  by  offering more  favourable  conditions  while  at  the  same  time  accepting 
poorer risk cover. However, as already mentioned, our aggregated analysis suggests that caution has 
not waned. Banks’ gross margins are declining slightly because their cost savings and improvements 
in efficiency are being passed on to customers. The capacity to absorb risks is not compromised by 
granting customers better conditions. Currently, the positive aspects of healthy competition are taking 
hold without apparently having any negative side effects. 
The SNB will nevertheless keep a close watch on trends in the real estate market. In particular, we will 
monitor interest rate risks, which have already reached a high level. 
With an appropriate normalisation of money market rates, the SNB contributes to limiting the danger of 
an abrupt rise in interest rates. In the current environment of historically low rates, however, there is no 
guarantee that the future trend in interest rates will be moderate. Sharp fluctuations in market rates are 
a possibility. This is a fact banks must bear in mind when managing interest rate risks. 
BIS Review 86/2005 
 3
