Jean-Paul Redouin: What happened to liquidity? A central banker’s 
perspective 
Opening address by Mr Jean-Paul Redouin, Deputy Governor of the Banque of France, at 
the Association des Marchés de Taux en Euros, Paris, 10 April 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure and honour for me to be here with you. There are many reasons for me 
to join you tonight: the subject, for sure; but also the opportunity to meet the main players of 
the fixed income community. 
I would like first to thank the AMTE for the invitation to discuss how a central banker views 
the recent financial turmoil and addresses the liquidity question. Allow me to speak wearing 
my  two  different  hats  –  that  of  a  central  banker  and  that  of  a  supervisor  –  since  present 
circumstances have shown that these responsibilities can be very complementary and, dare I 
say, efficient. 
I will discuss three points: What are the issues at stake? What happened to liquidity? And 
what is the role of central banks in this context? In addressing these questions, my answers 
will remain cautious and focused on some specific aspects. There are two reasons for this: 
first, the events are not yet over. Second, the Banque de France has published one month 
ago a full special issue of its Financial Stability Review focused on liquidity and showing that 
despite an in-depth analysis of 200 pages, answers are not so easy to find. 
What are the issues at stake? 
A.  
When referring to liquidity, three components are at stake: 
• 
Asset liquidity: the facility with which assets can be turned into cash quickly without 
incurring any loss of value; 
Market  liquidity:  the  ability  to  buy  or  sell  on  a  market  a  large  volume  of  assets 
without influencing their price or their volatility; 
Monetary liquidity: the quantity of liquid assets needed for an economy to develop 
properly and to avoid two opposite dangers, an asset bubble or a credit crunch. 
  Liquidity viewed from a central bank 
Three key areas form the nexus of how central banks implement their monetary policy: 
o 
o 
o 
the  proper  quantity  of  money  consistent  with  maximum 
Assessing 
sustainable growth; 
Influencing market rates, by steering short-term interest rates; 
Monitoring the proper running of financial counterparties. 
In fact, a liquid and well-functioning money market is crucial for central banks to implement 
their monetary policy efficiently and achieve their main goal: ensuring price stability. In this 
respect,  allow  me  to  dispel  one  ambiguity  that  I  see  in  many  comments:  the  liquidity 
injections have not been aimed at bailing out specific institutions. They have been designed 
to help the money market as a whole, in a period of stress, to function properly and to ensure 
an adequate allocation of funding resources. 
BIS Review 62/2008 
 1
Some more remarks about liquidity 
One  year  ago,  studies focused  on the  issue  of  excess liquidity.  The  main  questions  were: 
why  is  liquidity  so  abundant?  What  disequilibrium  could  this  cause  on  financial  markets, 
particularly  in  pushing  spreads  far  below  their  long-term  average  level?  These  questions 
remain at the heart of our concerns today, but the focus is now on market and asset liquidity. 
The main discovery is that liquidity is not given. It can suddenly disappear, and for several 
months.  The  US  ABCP  market  is  a  striking  example  of  the  sudden  disruption  of  market 
mechanisms that were deemed to be robust. Another discovery is that these sudden liquidity 
dry-ups can affect even the core of the financial system, such as the interbank market. 
How can we explain such a dramatic change? What are the underlying factors behind this 
liquidity dry-up? 
B.  
What happened to liquidity? 
What happened to assets? 
One of the  main triggers of the crisis was the sharp and sudden decrease in the value of 
collateral. By contagion an aggravating factor has appeared: bad assets have driven huge 
categories of assets out of circulation, even the good ones. That is why, over the last few 
months,  we  have  observed  illiquidity  spreading  from  one  market  to  another  and  from  one 
country to another. 
Three basic comments to illustrate that: 
First, the proliferation of off-balance sheet structures involved in maturity transformation was 
another factor impinging on assets. Those structures with no capital buffer found themselves 
unable to hold long-term illiquid assets when investors decided not to roll over their short-
term paper. 
Second observation: the liquidity provision channels of securitised and structured assets are, 
by their very nature, fragile: they rely on innovative instruments that lack deep, “battle-tested” 
secondary markets. Their opacity and complex nature have been strong impediments to the 
maturing of an efficient secondary market and to the existence of observable market prices. 
Thirdly, in having recourse to high leverage financial instruments originators have increased 
the probability of market illiquidity and, at the same time, have given investors a misleading 
sense of liquidity. 
What happened to the money market? 
The  money  market  today  faces  a  real  dislocation.  This  can  be  viewed  from  different 
standpoints.  First,  a  dislocation  in  maturities:  over  the  shortest  horizons  (less  than  one 
week), liquidity is abundant. It’s also possible to find liquidity for horizons exceeding one or 
two years. But a severe liquidity dry-up is occurring between these two maturities (1 month, 3 
months,  6  months),  with  the  only  entity  providing  liquidity  at  those  medium-term  horizons 
being  the  central  bank  [ECB  has  recently  introduced  a  new  6-month  operation].  It  is  quite 
striking to note that some financial institutions, such as mutual funds, are ready to lend for 
one or two years, but more reluctant, to lend for shorter terms. To be honest, we still lack 
convincing explanations of this phenomenon. 
Dislocation also appears between players: some lend only over the very short term, others 
concentrate on longer period. 
In addition, industrial companies are currently finding funds more easily and, for long-term 
financing, at sometime lower cost than their banks – a rather paradoxical situation. 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2008
Lastly, the dislocation has also been a  geographical  one: the circulation of liquidity across 
borders between euro area banks came to a halt. For instance, German banks used to lend 
substantially to French banks, while now they hoard liquidity and French banks have to resort 
more to the central bank to finance their short liquidity positions. In a certain sense, borders 
have been reintroduced into the euro area money market! 
The result is a disrupted yield curve. 
The role of banks as liquidity providers and managers 
In  a  traditional  financial  intermediation  framework,  banks  provide  liquidity  to  the  whole 
economy  through  balance  sheet  intermediation  by  creating  a  duration  mismatch  between 
their  assets  and  liabilities.  This  transformation  exists  because  banks  are  supposed  to  be 
better at pooling, selecting and monitoring loans and borrowers than their depositors, and are 
therefore  able  to  reduce  the  information  asymmetry  on  credit  markets.  In  so  doing,  banks 
intermediations ease the credit constraints affecting non-financial agents. 
Over the past few decades, the financial system has developed a more efficient approach of 
liquidity management. Thanks to financial innovation, banks have moved from an “originate 
to hold” model to an “originate to distribute” model, and rely more on financial markets for 
their funding. This has allowed the easing of credit constraints in the economy, as growth in 
lending  could  be  partially  disconnected  from  growth  in  bank  deposits.  But  financial 
institutions were probably overconfident in their asset-liability management techniques, which 
became  increasingly  sophisticated.  In  times  of  stress,  it  appears  more  difficult  than 
anticipated  for  financial  institutions  to  adjust  their  ALM  quickly.  Hence,  there  is  probably  a 
limit to the optimisation of asset-liability management, and this is a lesson for the future. 
C.  
The liquidity toolkit of the central banks? 
Some prerequisites 
The recent movement of re-intermediation is showing that banks are and will likely remain a 
major liquidity provider for the whole economy. 
They are able to do so because of their direct access to central bank money. This access is 
only available to banks, because they comply with specific requirements, unlike mutual funds 
and  non-regulated  entities  such  as  hedge  funds.  Banks  satisfy  minimum  requirements  on 
capital,  liquidity  and  information  disclosure  about  their  exposures  and  positions.  These 
binding  constraints  are  counterweights  to  their  maturity  transformation  capacity  and  their 
ALM  optimization  policy.  Recent  Fed  actions  have  shown  that  extended  access  to  central 
bank  money  is  possible  only  in  exchange  for  more  extensive  supervision  to  ensure  the 
integrity of the financial system. 
Central bank action can be assessed at two levels. 
First: short-term actions 
While not intended to address the underlying causes of the crisis, which lay well beyond their 
scope, central banks’ liquidity-providing operations have been effective in relieving pressures 
in interbank funding markets. To achieve this, central banks’ operating frameworks have had 
to  adapt  and  undergo  substantial  changes,  with  a  trend  of  converging  towards  the  most 
flexible frameworks, such as that of the Eurosystem. The trend is towards more flexibility in 
terms of the potential frequency and maturity of operations, and the broadening of the range 
of counterparties and collateral in order to accommodate the change in the composition of 
the  financial  sector’s  balance  sheet.  Overall,  the  structural  flexibility  of  its  framework  has 
allowed the Eurosystem to weather the current turmoil by showing considerable resilience. 
BIS Review 62/2008 
 3
Only  minor  changes  have  been  necessary,  notably  to  address  the  dry-up  of  the  interbank 
money  market  at  intermediate  maturities,  i.e.  an  increase  in  the  amount  of  the  3-month 
operation and the introduction of a new 6-month operation. 
For  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  changes  have  been  much  more  substantial,  as  for  instance 
they had to broaden access to central bank money to non-banks for the first time since the 
Great  Depression.  In  so  doing,  they  went  a  step  further,  taking  fully  into  account  the 
challenge of providing liquidity in a disintermediated world. 
Second: ways ahead. To restore confidence requires some initiative. Let me address 
some priorities. 
Re-visit the ratios 
The  present  crisis  has  demonstrated  that  a  liquidity  squeeze  can  very  rapidly  turn  into  a 
solvency  problem.  Therefore,  beside  a  solid  capital  base  an  efficient  bank  liquidity 
management is the first line of defence against market turmoil. This crisis has speed up the 
need to revise liquidity and capital requirements for banks, in order to base them on a more 
comprehensive vision of what influences liquidity, in line with the Basel 2 approach. 
Before  the  crisis,  the  world  was  seen  as  “awash”  with  liquidity.  Priority  was  given  to  the 
solvency  framework  and  its  implementation.  Liquidity  regulation  was  regarded  as  less 
important. There is a need now to give them equal priority and to take more into account the 
features of the “securitised” world. 
Beyond quantitative regulations, banks also need to enhance their internal risk management 
systems and to conduct more comprehensive stress tests. If we do not want these events to 
happen again, banks need to implement a new generation of stress tests, taking into account 
systemic concerns. This means drawing-up and running tests, including contingent claims, 
off-balance sheet exposures and above all the interdependencies between institutions and 
the drying up of some markets. 
Valuation issues 
The crisis has also shed light on structural failures regarding the valuation of assets and the 
need for greater transparency in the valuation process. I am convinced that the use of market 
prices when there is no market is not a good solution and leads to a lot of discrepancies in 
banks’  practices,  which  is  confusing  for  market  participants.  We  should  request  standard 
setters  to  revisit  valuation  rules  for  illiquid  products,  as  current  rules  produce  too  much 
volatility and do not allow sufficient flexibility between the trading and the holding of these 
assets. 
Re-create a market with simpler products: “back to basics” 
One way out of this freeze, could be to start by re-creating a market with simpler products. 
The resilience of the equity markets or other markets such as the ABCP market in France 
are  good  example:  products  are  more  standardised,  liquidity  is  ensured  by  institutional 
mechanisms  (order  books,  market-making  arrangements)  and  transparency  is  warranted. 
After all, banks tend to become “market makers of last resort” for the securitised products 
they had sold. By taking them back on their balance sheets, banks behave somewhat as a 
market  maker.  Of  course,  this  will  be  facilitated  if  products  are  simpler  and  more 
standardised. Such a “back to basics” trend can be a first step of a virtuous circle. 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2008
Conclusion 
The financial market liquidity squeeze that started last year is a very serious challenge for 
central banks and the financial community. I am convinced … that there are ways out but to 
help replenish liquidity, it will require: 
• 
• 
• 
Time 
Close co-operation between banks, non-banks and regulators; 
Basic  but  hard  choices.  Yes,  liquidity  has  a  price.  Yes,  complexity  carries  a  cost. 
Yes, there should be limits to over-reliance on optimisation tools and sophisticated 
ALM techniques. 
Central  banks  will  always  be  there…  But  we  should  avoid  put  them  in  the  middle  of  the 
market, as it could squeeze it. Let central banks do their job, which is: 
• 
• 
• 
to set and supervise rules in a level playing field manner; 
to drive short-term interest rates; 
to behave as liquidity providers and not permanent lenders of last resort. 
BIS Review 62/2008 
 5
