Glenn Stevens: Reviewing the Australian economy’s performance 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Sydney, 4 April 2008. 
 Mr  Chairman,  my  colleagues  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  able  to  appear  before  this  newly  re 
formed Standing Committee. I look forward to productive sessions with you over the life of 
this Parliament. 
I shall begin by reviewing the economy’s performance over the past year or so. I will then 
offer some comments about the current conjuncture, and some of the issues that we face in 
the period ahead. All this provides some context for our discussion about monetary policy. 
The Australian economy recorded another very strong year in 2007. Real GDP expanded by 
about 4 per cent. Growth in domestic final demand was even stronger, at over 5½ per cent. 
The rate of unemployment declined further, in the most recent readings reaching its lowest 
level since the mid 1970s. Indicators of capacity utilisation reached their highest levels for 
two decades, and firms continued to report considerable difficulty in expanding operations, 
due to shortages of suitable staff. 
These outcomes for demand and output growth exceeded those in either of the preceding 
two  years,  and  were  stronger  than  was  expected  a  year  ago,  particularly  in  the  case  of 
domestic demand. In explaining these trends, a noteworthy factor is that the global economy 
continued  to  offer  a  very  supportive  environment  for  Australia,  notwithstanding  the  evident 
deterioration  in  the  United  States  and  the  serious  disturbances  in  international  capital 
markets  in  the  latter  part  of  the  year.  The  cumulative  impact  of  the  very  large  rise  in 
Australia’s terms of trade over a number of years continued to flow through the economy. 
Very high levels of confidence in the business community saw robust growth, from already 
high levels, in capital spending. This was most pronounced in the resources sector, which is 
not surprising given the level of demand and the record prices being paid for its output, but 
the strength was not confined to that sector. To this was added the response of governments 
and  associated  enterprises  to  the  need  for  upgrades  to  public  infrastructure  and  other 
demands, which saw public final spending rise at about twice its trend pace over the course 
of 2007. Finally, consumer demand also rose at a pace well above average, fed by a rate of 
growth of real household disposable income as high as anything seen in the past 20 years. 
The only major expenditure aggregate that was on the soft side was dwelling investment. 
While there continue to be differences in the degree of overall strength of the economy by 
region, those differences, if anything, narrowed during 2007. Unemployment rates in the big 
south eastern states, for example, were at generational lows on the most recent reading. 
The pace of demand growth in 2007 well and truly exceeded any plausible estimate of the 
rate of growth of the economy’s supply potential. Under these demand conditions, inflation 
increased. Having apparently moderated a little late in 2006 and early 2007, it began to show 
higher readings around the middle of 2007 and by the end of the year had reached about 3½ 
per cent in underlying terms. Measured by the CPI, the year ended inflation rate was 3 per 
cent, but as is well understood, the next figure is likely to be around 4 per cent. 
Faced with this combination – very strong demand growth in what was already a pretty fully 
employed  economy,  and  inflation  moving  higher  –  the  Reserve  Bank  Board,  when 
discharging its  monetary  policy  duties,  could  draw  no  other  conclusion  than  that  growth  in 
demand needed to slow. The Board had tightened monetary policy on three occasions during 
2006. It then stayed its hand for a period in the first half of 2007, as inflation results available 
at that time suggested some moderation. But as the trends of 2007 and the likely risk they 
posed  to  longer  run  performance  emerged,  the  Board  tightened  policy  further  during  the 
BIS Review 39/2008 
 1
second half of the year and in the early months of this year. The cash rate was raised on a 
total  of  four  occasions,  with  the  aim  of  achieving  a  moderation  in  demand,  which  is  an 
obvious necessary condition for reducing inflation over time. 
In reaching these decisions, the Board naturally took careful account of the unfolding events 
in global financial markets. I will not recount the details of those events again now – I and 
many  others  have  talked  at  length  about  them  before.  I  am  sure  we  will  return  to  them  in 
question time. As a daily participant in financial markets, the Reserve Bank was in a position 
to observe developments very closely. Our senior officers have been in frequent contact with 
all the significant financial institutions operating in Australian markets, with our colleagues at 
APRA  and  other  regulatory  agencies,  and  with  our  counterparts  abroad.  The  RBA  Board 
spent  considerable  time  at  its  meetings  examining  market  developments  and  considering 
their  possible  implications.  The  RBA  responded  to  the  unusual  demand  for  liquidity  on  a 
number of occasions, and made early changes to its practices for open market operations to 
accommodate  dealing  in  a  wider  range  of  assets  and  over  longer  terms.  These  market 
pressures were, and remain, overwhelmingly a flow on of international forces. They were not 
mainly a result of local factors. But it is appropriate, in our judgment, to foster confidence to 
the extent we can during periods of global stress such as we have been experiencing. 
Despite  those  actions,  a  financial  system  such  as  ours  cannot  be  entirely  insulated  from 
these  global  events  and,  inevitably,  the  Australian  financial  system  has  been  affected  to 
some extent. The rise in the wholesale cost of term funding has meant that many non bank 
and some bank lenders have had to slow the growth of their businesses. The closure, more 
or less, of securitisation markets for the time being also has made life much more difficult for 
those  lenders  which  relied  heavily  on  that  avenue  of  funding.  Capital  market  raisings  are 
much more difficult for some corporates as well, and many of these entities are turning to 
their bankers. 
By  and  large,  the  major  banking  institutions  have  been  able  to  provide  support  for  sound 
borrowers, and have stepped into the gap left by the withdrawal of funding from the capital 
markets.  They  have  been  able  to  do  this  because  of  their  own  balance  sheet  strength, 
something which is clear from the analysis in the Bank’s recently released Financial Stability 
Review.  While  some  of  their  customers  have  been  excluded  from  capital  markets  of  late, 
banks  have  themselves  been  able  to  access  segments  of  the  capital  markets  in  sufficient 
quantity to keep their balance sheets expanding. This has come at a time when wholesale 
funding costs have been rising by more than the official cash rate, and that has been passed 
on  to  end  borrowers,  while  conditions  on  lending  for  some  borrowers  have  tightened  in 
response to higher perceived risk. But this outcome is preferable to the alternative of lending 
drying up. 
At  present,  the  international  environment  remains  very  difficult.  The  US  economy  is 
experiencing  very  subdued  conditions,  as  the  weakness  that  had  for  some  time  been 
confined  to  the  housing  sector  has  spread  to  other  areas  over  recent  months.  Losses 
incurred  by  major  international  financial  institutions  associated  with  previous  risky  lending 
have  continued  to  come  to  light,  even  during  this  week.  Valuing  certain  classes  of  assets 
remains very difficult and some quite sound assets appear to be priced currently at less than 
their likely underlying value. A process of deleveraging is continuing among hedge funds and 
other complex financial vehicles, as the retreat from risk by their lenders forces a winding in 
of  positions.  While  all  this  has  been  occurring,  participants  in  financial  markets  have 
understandably remained very nervous, and day to day volatility in a range of markets has 
been much higher than participants had become accustomed to over recent years. 
In  the  meantime,  real  savings  are  still  flowing  into  the  accounts  of  institutional  investors  – 
pension/superannuation funds, insurance companies and so on. Given the present level of 
uncertainty, those responsible for investing these funds are remaining very cautious, fearing 
further write offs by the large international banks and declines in asset values. Hence, they 
are  sticking  to  very  large  positions  in  very  short  term  liquid  investments.  There  is  little 
2 
 BIS Review 39/20086
appetite just now to commit funds to more risky or longer term uses. The normal functioning 
of capital markets can really resume only when these sorts of investors regain the confidence 
to make those commitments. 
As a result, the outlook for the United States, where credit concerns are most acute, where 
capital markets are most important for the flow of credit, and where house prices are falling, 
is  for  weakness  in  the  near  term,  and  most  forecasters  have  been  revising  down  their 
numbers  for  2008.  Considerable  stimulus  has  been  applied  by  the  US  authorities  to  this 
situation, with policy interest rates declining sharply and a fiscal stimulus package imminent. 
The  US  Federal  Reserve  has  also  taken  some  forceful  actions  to  stabilise  the  financial 
system. 
Growth  in  the  euro  area  appears  to  be  moderating  as  well,  though  at  this  point  not  by  as 
much  as  in  the  US,  and  the  euro  area  authorities  continue  to  express  concerns  about 
inflation.  Japan’s  economy  is  also  weakening,  partly  as  a  result  of  international  forces  but 
also partly due to purely domestic events. 
Economic conditions in the rest of Asia, on the other hand, have continued to be quite solid. 
Growth in industrial production and exports has been strong in the first couple of months of 
2008. Weaker US conditions are affecting Asian exports to that country, but to date exports 
to  other  countries  have  compensated  for  this.  The  Chinese  economy,  with  its  demand  for 
natural  resources,  has  continued  to  expand  strongly.  The  impact  of  the  global  turmoil  via 
financial linkages has affected share markets in the region, but there does not appear, so far, 
to have been any noticeable effect on the capacity or willingness of Asian banks to extend 
credit.  In  fact,  domestic  financial  conditions  in  Asia  remain  quite  expansionary,  which  is 
contributing  to  considerable  strength  in  domestic  demand.  Inflation  remains  a  concern  in 
many of these countries and, if anything, that concern could be said to be growing.  
The net effect of all these forces is such that Australia’s trading partners as a group is likely 
to record below average growth in 2008, reflecting weak outcomes in the developed world, 
and  slower  but  still  pretty  good  growth  in  Asia.  But  at  the  same  time,  expected  higher 
contract  prices  for  coal  and  iron  ore,  which  are  about  to  take  effect,  will,  all  other  things 
equal, lift Australia’s terms of trade by perhaps a further 15 per cent, adding some 2 to 3 per 
cent to national income over the next year or so. This expansionary impetus comes after the 
earlier rise of some 40 per cent over the previous five years. So the world economy presents 
some considerable cross currents for Australia. The biggest terms of trade boom for 50 years 
is coinciding with one of the most serious malfunctions in developed country capital markets 
for a long time. 
Looking to domestic conditions, most indicators of actual economic performance for the early 
part  of  2008  have  remained  quite  strong.  Employment  has  been  very  robust,  and  survey 
based  measures  of  actual  business  conditions  have  remained  strong,  even  if  off  their  late 
2007 highs. 
We do think, however, that demand growth in Australia is now in the process of moderating. 
The  demand  for  credit  by  households  has  also  been  weakening  over  recent  months. 
Measures of confidence have declined. While those measures can provide false signals, our 
assessment is that a change in trend is occurring, and we are hearing that from businesses 
we talk to. A tightening in financial conditions, lower share prices and heightened concerns 
over the global financial problems will all have played a part in this change. 
The likely extent and persistence of this slowing in demand is quite uncertain, as these things 
usually are. There remain powerful conflicting forces at work, so we can expect that difficult 
issues for judgment will remain with us for some time. 
These  are  issues  with which  the  RBA  Board  has  to  grapple.  At  its  meeting  this  week,  the 
Board reached the view that, for the time being, policy settings should remain unchanged. 
The  current  rate  of  inflation  is  clearly  uncomfortably  high,  and  were  expectations  of  high 
ongoing inflation to take root, it would be even more difficult to reduce inflation again. Hence, 
BIS Review 39/2008 
 3
policymakers are obliged to have in place a policy setting that represents a credible response 
to  evident  inflation  pressures.  But  the  significant  tightening  in  financial  conditions  that  has 
occurred since mid 2007 is a strong response. Short term interest rates are towards the top 
end  of  the  range  experienced  during  the  low  inflation  period.  The  Board  is  also  conscious 
that some non price tightening of credit conditions is probably occurring at the margin. These 
factors  should  be  working  to  slow  demand.  There  is  at  least  some  evidence  that  a 
moderation  in  demand  is  occurring.  That,  if  it  continues,  should  in  due  course  act  to  slow 
prices. 
We will be receiving a round of prices data in a few weeks’ time, which will afford another 
chance to review both recent performance and the outlook. As I noted earlier, the headline 
CPI rate is likely to be high. We will naturally examine the outcome for new insights about the 
extent  of  inflation  currently  occurring.  But  as  well  as  that,  it  will  be  important  to  make 
continuing assessments of the extent both of the likely moderation in demand and its effect 
on  inflation  over  time.  This  will  by  no  means  be  an  easy  balance  to  strike.  But  if,  by 
restraining demand for a while, we can secure a gradual reduction in inflation over the period 
ahead, then an important foundation of Australia’s good macroeconomic performance over 
the past decade and a half will remain in place. That, in turn, will offer the prospect of good 
sustainable growth into the next decade. That is the goal of monetary policy. 
My colleagues and I are here to respond to your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 39/20086
