Ingimundur Friðriksson: The Icelandic economy and financial system in 
April 2008 
Presentation  by  Mr  Ingimundur  Friðriksson,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  a 
meeting  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Norwegian  Financial  Supervisor,  Kredittilsynet, 
Reykjavík, 24 April 2008.  
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  have  been  invited  to  speak  to  the  Board  of  Directors  and 
management  of  the  Norwegian  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  at  its  meeting  in  Reykjavík 
this week. There are good reasons for the Norwegian Supervisor to come into direct contact 
with  both  colleagues  in  the  Icelandic  Supervisory  Authority  and  with  leaders  of  financial 
institutions  in  general.  Much  has  been  written  and  said  about  the  Icelandic  economy  and 
financial system of late, some of it accurate, some of it not so accurate. For the outsider, it 
may be difficult to separate the accurate from the inaccurate. 
As requested, I will in my presentation give an overview of recent economic developments 
and prospects and then touch briefly on the Icelandic financial system. 
Economic developments and prospects 
As  you  know,  Iceland  is  one  of  the  highest  income  countries  of  the  world  and  one  with  a 
highly developed infrastructure and institutional framework. You may also know that Iceland 
is prone to greater economic fluctuations than most or all highly developed economies. In the 
1990’s, the Icelandic economy was deregulated and liberalised and that process was largely 
completed with the full privatisation of the Icelandic commercial banks shortly after the turn of 
the century. The liberalisation of the economy did not reduce its characteristic fluctuations. 
We are now coming to the end of a period of very rapid expansion. It started back in 2003 
when  construction  commenced  of  a  large  aluminium  smelter  in  the  eastern  part  of  the 
country and an associated power plant. The overall size of this investment was equivalent to 
over 30% of GDP in 2003, the year that construction started. It therefore gave a very large 
boost to the Icelandic economy. 
In  the  latter  half  of  2004,  the  Icelandic  banks  began  to  compete  head  on  with  the  State 
Housing  Finance  Fund  (HFF)  which  had  traditionally  been  the  main  provider  of  mortgage 
loans to households. The banks’ entry into the market was no doubt the result of the HFF’s 
ambition to increase its market share in the provision of mortgage finance. The banks had 
normally  provided  only  a  limited  share  of  mortgage  finance.  They  were  in  that  respect 
different  from  banks  in  many  neighbouring  countries  which  have  traditionally  provided 
mortgage loans and thus have a stable portfolio of such loans on their balance sheet. The 
entry of the banks into the market led to significant changes. Households could now borrow 
against  collateral  in  their  existing  real  estate,  that  is,  they  could  take  equity  out  of  their 
investment.  This  they  did  with  vigour.  The  overall  result  was  that  credit  grew  briskly,  real 
estate prices rose rapidly and private consumption expanded sharply, leading to inflationary 
pressures and a widening current account deficit. 
The third important factor that contributed to the overheating of the Icelandic economy was 
the reduction in both direct and indirect taxes which, in addition to relatively large increases 
in general pay, led to a rapid increase in real disposable incomes. 
All  of  this  happened  during  a  period  of  an  international  liquidity  glut  and  historically  low 
interest rates which further facilitated domestic demand growth. 
The  expansion  of  private  consumption  and  the  investment  in  the  aluminium  production 
capacity  and  the  related  power  sector  led  to  a  widening  of  the  current  account  deficit.  It 
BIS Review 52/2008 
 1
reached the equivalent of more than a quarter of GDP in 2006, a phenomenally large deficit 
both  in  Icelandic  economic  history  and  by  international  comparison.  The  part  of  the  deficit 
that  resulted  from  the  investment  in  aluminium  and  power  evaporates  as  construction  is 
completed and exports of aluminium picked up as of late last year. However, the larger share 
of  the  deficit,  which  resulted  from  other  domestic  demand,  will  only  subside  as  restrictive 
economic policies have their intended effects. The current account deficit fell towards 15% of 
GDP in 2007, it will remain more or less unchanged this year but fall further in 2009, aided by 
the depreciation of the króna which I will touch on later. 
Needless to say, inflationary pressures emerged early in the expansion phase. The Central 
Bank began to tighten policy in the spring of 2004. Inflationary pressures mounted and, to 
make a long story short, the Central Bank raised its policy rate in successive steps up to the 
present level of 15.5%. 
Since 2001, the framework for monetary policy is an inflation targeting one, the target being a 
2½%  12-month  rise  in  the  CPI.  The  regime  was  introduced  under  trying  conditions  and 
inflation rose rapidly immediately after its adoption but fell subsequently and was close to or 
below the target for about a year and a half before picking up in 2004. It has remained above 
target  since  2004  and  the  most  recent  measure  of  the  12-month  increase  in  the  CPI  was 
8.7%. 
The reasons for inflation significantly exceeding the target are manifold. I have mentioned the 
shocks to the economy, the construction of aluminium and power plants, the radical change 
in the mortgage finance market, the reductions in direct and indirect taxes and ample and 
cheap foreign credit. Moreover, there was during this period a systematic failure to correctly 
assess  in  real  time  the  underlying  strength  of  the  economy.  This  means,  that  when  the 
Central  Bank  tightened  policy  in  the  early  phase  of  the  expansion,  official  statistics  and 
indicators  available  at  the  time  significantly  underestimated  the  underlying  strength  of 
domestic demand. Thus, in retrospect, the Central Bank responded too slowly and modestly 
to the inflationary pressures that were building up. A second factor was that the transmission 
of  monetary  policy  measures  was  insufficiently  effective.  The  presence  of  the  Housing 
Finance  Fund  in  the  mortgage  market  and  its  state  guarantee  distorted  the  market  and 
hindered policy rate increases from being reflected in mortgage rates. Moreover, the Central 
Bank  was  not  able  to  sufficiently  affect  expectations  in  the  market  with  its  decisions  and 
pronouncements.  This  significantly  changed  in  early  2007  when  the  Bank  began,  like  the 
Central Banks of Norway and Sweden for example, to publish a future policy rate path. That 
change  greatly  improved  the  communication  and  transparency  of  monetary  policy  and 
significantly strengthened the transmission mechanism as policy rate decisions were much 
more effectively reflected through the maturity spectrum. 
The  Treasury  has  delivered  surpluses  over  a  number  of  years.  They  and  the  privatization 
proceeds from earlier years were used to retire debt, leaving the Treasury currently without 
debt in net terms. In fact, the Treasury earned net interest income in 2007. Its deposits in the 
Central Bank are currently equivalent to roughly 12% of GDP. Nevertheless, it is evident from 
developments  over  the  last  few  years  that  fiscal  policy  was  not  sufficiently  tight  to  aid 
monetary policy in containing inflation. 
Domestic  demand  has  been  slow  in  responding  to  tightened  monetary  policy.  The  higher 
policy rate meant that the Icelandic króna became an attractive investment vehicle for foreign 
investors.  International  issuance  of  Icelandic  krónur  bonds  commenced  in  2005  with 
relatively lively issue activity – albeit fluctuating – into the early part of this year. It followed a 
pattern very similar to that experienced by New Zealand. Foreign investors have also entered 
the  Icelandic  market  directly,  both  in  domestic  securities  and  bank  deposits.  This 
development kept the exchange rate of the króna relatively high and obviously above its long 
term equilibrium level. The Central Bank repeatedly stated that the króna would depreciate at 
some stage. The Bank’s hope was that the economy would have cooled considerably down 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2008
before that happened in order to limit to the extent possible the pass-through of the effects of 
the depreciation into domestic prices. 
One aspect of developments during the period of expansion was the abundance of liquidity in 
the international markets at very favourable rates which I mentioned earlier. It fuelled among 
other  things  the  rapid  expansion  of  Icelandic  banks  and  business  in  general  to  other 
countries.  This  expansion  was  financed  partly  by  own  funds  but  more  importantly  by 
relatively cheap credit. Questions have been raised from time to time in other countries about 
where  the  money  for  Icelandic  investment  abroad  came  from.  They  need  not  to  be  raised 
because the answers are provided in the statistics. The gross debt of the Icelandic economy 
rose rapidly and according to the official statistics, compiled on the basis of internationally 
accepted  standards,  the  net  international  investment  position  of  Iceland  was  negative  by 
125% of GDP at the end of 2007. In assessing these numbers, one must keep in mind the 
extremely rapid increase in gross capital flows resulting from the internationalisation of the 
Icelandic  economy,  its  business  and  financial  system.  This  complicates  the  compilation  of 
balance of payments statistics, in particular on factor income and factor expenditures, and on 
the stock of foreign assets. Official data shows foreign assets at market value where market 
prices are readily available. Otherwise, assets are recorded at their book value. 
In  an  article  in  the  Central  Bank’s  most  recent  Monetary  Bulletin1,  an  attempt  is  made  to 
estimate  the  market  value  of  inward  and  outward  foreign  direct  investment  using  methods 
developed in other countries. This is done by estimating the likely market value of assets that 
do not have a readily available market price. The result of the calculation is that rather than 
being negative by 120% of GDP, the international investment position was negative by less 
than 30% of GDP at the end of quarter III of 2007. The large difference stems not the least 
from  the  fact  that  assets  of  Icelanders  abroad are  much  larger  than  those  of  foreigners  in 
Iceland.  The  lower  figure  is  not  necessarily  correct.  However,  it  shows  that  there  is  an 
overriding likelihood that the large negative net international investment position of Iceland is 
exaggerated in the official statistics which are compiled in accordance with IMF standards.  
The Icelandic economy is at crossroads. It is quite evident that the expansion of recent years 
is  coming  to  an  end.  The  forecast  issued  by  the  Central  Bank  on  April  10  envisages  a 
contraction of GDP in 2009 and 2010. The Ministry of Finance forecasts a milder and more 
short-lived contraction. It is mainly driven by a sharp reduction in private consumption, but 
cyclical swings in private consumption are a recurrent feature of Iceland’s economic history. 
Even if GDP contracts on the scale forecast by the Central Bank in 2009 and 2010, average 
GDP growth in the period 2005 to 2010 will still be well above 2%. Given the characteristic 
fluctuations in the Icelandic economy, one must take a longer view of developments than just 
one  year  to  get  a  picture  of  long-term  trends.  It  is  also important  to  keep  in  mind  that  the 
contraction of the economy is unavoidable if sustainable balance is to be restored following 
the extended period of overheating. Once that has been achieved, the economy will be very 
well set for a recovery of growth to a long-term sustainable trend. Iceland is in the enviable 
position  of being  endowed  with  rich  renewable  energy  resources  in  the  form  of  hydro  and 
geothermal power in addition to renewable resources of the sea. With rising energy prices 
and concerns for the environment, Iceland’s energy reserves become all the more valuable. 
In  addition,  Iceland  has  highly  developed  service  sectors,  including  financial  services  and 
tourism,  that  will  contribute  to  the  recovery  of  activity  following  the  adjustment  of  the 
economy. 
I  should  add  here  that  in  addition  to  favourable  demographics,  Iceland  has  a  largely  fully 
funded pension system with total assets equivalent to over 130% of GDP. Thus, there is no 
fiscal overhang related to a slowly aging population. 
                                                 
1   Daníel Svavarsson: International investment position: market valuation  and the effects of external changes. 
Central Bank of Iceland: Monetary Bulletin 2008/1. 
BIS Review 52/2008 
 3
Focusing  again  on  developments  this  year,  the  attention  of  the  outside  observer  is  easily 
arrested  by  the  depreciation  of  the  króna.  I  mentioned  earlier  that  it  was  overvalued  for  a 
rather  extended  period  to  the  extent  that  the  Central  Bank  warned  that  it  would  at  some 
stage  have  to  depreciate.  The  depreciation  came  earlier  and  faster  than  we  would  have 
hoped,  partly  and  perhaps  most  importantly  because  of  the  radical  changes  in  global 
financial  markets  after  the  middle  of  last  year  and  the  associated  reassessment  of  risk. 
These changes meant that the access of Icelandic banks to foreign financing was seriously 
curtailed. Additionally, questions were raised about the viability of the Icelandic economy in 
light of the large imbalances and all of this led to an erosion of confidence. Subsequently, the 
exchange rate depreciated significantly. By the end of March it had fallen to a historically low 
level in real terms, a level that was clearly below its long-term equilibrium value. The Central 
Bank responded to the developments in March by raising its policy rate by 125 basis points 
on Tuesday morning after Easter, followed by a further 50 basis points increase on April 10, 
bringing the policy rate to the 15.5% which I have already mentioned. 
The  policy  rate  action  after  Easter  halted  the  slide  of  the  króna  and  it  has  remained  in  a 
range above the low level it touched in late March. The sudden depreciation in the early part 
of the year greatly worsened inflation prospects. The rate of inflation is set to rise to above 
10% in the near term before subsiding again. Given the policy rate path that the Central Bank 
published on April 10, the inflation target of 2½% will be achieved in the second half of 2010. 
The policy rate path also shows that given present prospects the Bank can begin to reduce 
its policy rate before the end of this year. All of this is covered in detail in the latest issue of 
the Central Bank’s Monetary Bulletin2. 
Just as in other equity markets, stocks on the Iceland stock exchange have fallen in price 
from their peak in mid 2007. The decline in the Icelandic index is more pronounced than in 
many other countries largely because the relatively heavy weight of financial companies in 
the  Icelandic  index.  Financial  companies  have  declined  more  in  price  on  the  world  stock 
markets  than  other  companies  on  average.  The  stocks  of  Icelandic  banks  have  not  fallen 
more  over  the  past  year  than  those  of  many  banks  in  neighbouring  countries  and  big 
international banks, in some cases by less or even much less. 
To conclude on the economy, in its monetary policy statement issued on the occasion of the 
latest  policy  rate  decision  on  April  10,  the  Board  of  Governors  once  again  stated  that  the 
Bank’s most critical task was to reach the inflation target as soon as possible. The demand 
shocks  of  the  past  few  years  and  unusual  conditions  in  the  global  financial  markets  had 
delayed  that  process.  There  was  no  reason  to  surrender  any  ground  in  the  battle  against 
inflation. Thus the Central Bank continues to be fully committed to the inflation target. 
Financial sector 
You are familiar with the expansion of Icelandic banks to other countries, including Norway. 
This  development  followed  the  banks’  full  privatization  a  few  years  ago.  The  three  major 
banks  all  expanded  their  activities  to  other  countries  but  followed  different  strategies.  The 
record  shows  that  their  investment  in  financial  services  companies  abroad  was  generally 
very  sound.  They  have  good  and  solid  operations  in  other  countries.  Because  of  this 
development,  the  banks  have  become  less  Icelandic  and  more  Northern-European,  as 
demonstrated  among  other  things  by  the  fact  that  in  2007  the  three  biggest  commercial 
banks derived more than half of their overall income from activities outside Iceland and the 
biggest bank derived about two thirds of its income from operations outside Iceland. They are 
therefore much less sensitive to cyclical developments in Iceland than before, or in any one 
country for that matter. The risks are much better spread than before. 
                                                 
2   Central Bank of Iceland: Monetary Bulletin 2008/1. 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2008
In their expansion, the banks exploited the particularly favourable opportunities offered in the 
global financial markets in the form of abundant liquidity at historically very low prices. Thus, 
they  relied  on  capital  markets  funding  for  their  operations,  raising  the  share  of  borrowed 
funds on the liability side of the balance sheet. 
The  rapid  expansion  of  the  banks  did  not  go  unnoticed.  It  drew  the  attention  of  many 
observers at the end of 2005 and the early part of 2006, resulting in considerable headwind 
for the banks in that period. Questions were raised about their business model, their reliance 
on wholesale funding in international markets and low level of deposits, lack of transparency 
and cross ownership among other things. The banks responded effectively to the criticism 
levelled  at  them.  They  increased  transparency,  reduced  cross  ownership,  and  placed 
emphasis  on  raising  the  share  of  deposit  on  their  funding  side.  They  also  significantly 
strengthened their capital base and last but not least greatly improved their liquidity position. 
As  a  result  they  were  much  better  prepared  for  the  sudden  change  in  global  financial 
conditions after the middle of last year. Most importantly, they had a strong liquidity cushion. 
The  Icelandic  banks  have  been  the  focus  of  considerable  international  attention  in  recent 
months. Questions have been raised about their viability and those have been reflected in 
their  extraordinarily  high  CDS  spreads  since  late  last  year.  These  spreads  began  to  rise 
following the turnaround in the international markets and they had a tendency to rise more on 
the Icelandic banks than on other banks with every event or news that prompted a general 
rise in risk aversion and in CDS spreads. The spreads peaked around the end of March and 
have come down quite considerably this month. 
The CDS market is an opaque and unregulated one but, nevertheless, CDS spreads are a 
reference for the terms that would be available to the banks if they were to go to the market. 
In  our  view,  the  CDS  levels  on  the  Icelandic  banks  have  been  out  of  proportion  to  their 
underlying financial strength, their credit rating and spreads on comparable banks in other 
countries.  It  also  seems  that  the  CDS  market  is  thin,  turnover  in  CDS  transactions  on 
Icelandic banks appears to be limited. One reason behind relatively high CDS spreads on 
Icelandic  banks  maybe  the  fact  that  a  sizeable  amount  of  Icelandic  bank  bonds  issued  in 
recent years ended up in CDO´s which have been in a process of being unwound over the 
last few months. However, this alone does not explain the very high spreads. 
It  is  also  quite  remarkable  that  the  CDS  spread  on  the  Republic  of  Iceland  rose  very 
substantially,  even  to  400  to  500  points  when  it  was  at  its  highest  earlier  this  year.  This 
happened  despite  the  fact  that  on  a  net  basis,  the  Icelandic  Government  has  no  external 
debt. It could thus acquire very significant external debt before reaching debt levels of many 
other  developed  countries  with  strong  credit  ratings.  These  CDS  spreads  have  also  come 
down significantly from their peak. 
Despite the very high CDS spreads on the Icelandic banks, they have funds at levels that are 
below their CDS spreads. Nevertheless, the access of the banks to external financing has 
been  limited.  Their  liquidity  cushion  means  that  they  can  stay  out  of  the  market  for  quite 
some  time.  The  prevailing  circumstances  in  international  capital  markets  and  the  limited 
prospects of improvement in the foreseeable future have, however, led the banks to embark 
upon  a  process  of  reducing  costs  and  streamlining  their  operations,  including  liquidating 
assets, and on attracting deposits. This is a process that evidently will have to continue. It 
does not detract from the fact that the banks had solid capital and liquidity positions at the 
end of last year as reflected in their 2007 accounts. They had a solid performance in 2007. 
They all returned a profit in the last quarter of the year despite the significantly more hostile 
operating environment. It was also notable that the profitability of their core operations was 
strong  in  that  quarter.  Taken  together,  the  banks  had  insignificant  exposure  in  sub-prime 
related  instruments  and  where  they  existed,  they  have  been  significantly  reduced.  Thus, 
there have been small write-downs of sub-prime related debt as there has been little to write 
down. 
BIS Review 52/2008 
 5
Within  the  next  couple  of  weeks,  the  banks  will  report  their  results  for  the  first  quarter  of 
2008.  I  have  no  information  on  what  they  will  show.  I  can  only  say  that  the  strong 
performance  of  their  core  business  in  the  last  quarter  of  2007  allows  one  to  anticipate  a 
relatively  good  performance  also  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  In  addition,  given  the 
composition  of  their  balance  sheet,  they  will  all  have  profited  from  the  depreciation  of  the 
Icelandic  króna  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  year  as  well  as  from  the  increase  in  the  rate  of 
inflation as they hold more price indexed assets on their balance sheet than indexed debt. 
You  are  of  course  familiar  with  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  in  Iceland.  It  is 
based  on  best  international  practice  and  has  received  high  marks  from  foreign  observers. 
The Supervisory Authority and the Central Bank cooperate closely on their respective roles in 
the  area  of  financial  stability.  Developments  over  the  last  few  months  have  increased  the 
intensity  of  the  cooperation  and  monitoring  of  developments  in  the  institutions’  respective 
fields of responsibility and experience. This is as it should be and in line what has been done 
elsewhere. 
Like many other central banks, the Central Bank of Iceland has somewhat relaxed its rules 
on eligible collaterals under its regular liquidity facilities. These are broadly based on ECB 
rules,  but  ours  are  probably  still  somewhat  more  restrictive  than  the  ECB’s.  The  Icelandic 
interbank  market  has  operated  smoothly  with  rates  consistently  staying  comfortably  within 
the interest rate corridor of the Central Bank. The Bank has also modified other rules towards 
ECB standards, including the rules on reserve requirements. 
The evolution of our financial system over the coming months and years will of course be 
very much affected by developments in the global financial system. Once conditions improve 
generally  at  the  world  level  and  the  access  of  banks  to  financing  improves,  the  most 
creditworthy banks will be at the head of the queue but others further back. Thus, it will take 
longer for Icelandic and other banks closer to the fringes of the international financial system 
to gain normal access to international financing. This is the scenario which the managements 
of banks will have to adjust their thinking, strategies and operations to. If they do that, I am 
sure that they will fare well. If they don’t, their business will be more difficult. 
The  business  of  banking  is  much  dependent  on  confidence.  It  is  therefore  of  the  utmost 
importance for the Icelandic banks and others to do everything that they can to strengthen 
confidence  in  their  operations  and  not  to  postpone  any  measures  to  that  effect  in  the 
misguided hope that the operating environment will recover soon. 
In conclusion, I would like to mention that on May 8 the Central Bank of Iceland will publish 
its 2008 report on financial stability. It will be available on the Bank’s website on that day. Our 
stability reports have been judged to be of high quality, transparent and frank. We intend to 
live up to that reputation once again. 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2008
