Ferenc Karvalits: Challenges of monetary policy – a global perspective 
and the Hungarian situation  
Speech by Mr Ferenc Karvalits, Deputy Governor of Magyar Nemzeti Bank (the central bank 
of  Hungary),  at  the  46th  Economic  Conference,  organised  by  the  Hungarian  Economic 
Association, Budapest, 28 June 2008. 
 This invitation is an honour, which I am more than happy to fulfil as in recent months public 
attention has been increasingly focused on various decisions taken by the Magyar Nemzeti 
Bank,  while,  at  the  same  time,  monetary  policy  has  attracted  media  investigation  and  has 
become a hotly debated issue among financial experts.  
According to Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, monetary policy is considered 
efficient when it is boring. Today, monetary policy can by no means be called boring. On the 
contrary,  it  is  quite  interesting,  fascinating  and,  above  all,  difficult.  The  happy  days,  as  it 
were, are over. While the past decade was a period of prosperity and price stability, thanks to 
globalisation  and  financial  integration,  growth  and  inflation  currently  seem  to  pose  serious 
risks,  while  the  menace  of  stagflation  seems  to  threaten  numerous  large  economies. 
Furthermore, the credit market crisis has put the global financial system at risk.  
Besides  international  events,  domestic  problems  have  also  focused  the  spotlight  of  public 
opinion  on  the  central  bank’s  activity.  Although  the  perceived  controversy  regarding 
monetary  policy  has  numerous  aspects  to  it,  the  time  available  here  does  not  make  it 
possible to even touch upon these issues, let alone answer all the related questions. I have, 
therefore,  selected  three  interrelated  and  frequently  asked  questions  which  I  will  try  to 
elaborate on: 
• 
To  what  extent  does  the  evolution  of  the  global  financial  environment  influence 
Hungarian monetary policy? 
Is  it  possible  or  worthwhile  to  fight  the  impact  of  growing  commodity  prices  with 
monetary instruments?  
How  does  the  exchange  rate  influence  the  economy  within  the  framework  of 
domestic monetary policy? 
  Before  addressing  these  questions,  please  allow  me  to  briefly  explain  the  principles  of 
monetary policy. 
On the principles of monetary policy  
The  fundamental  principles  of  monetary  policy  were  formed  and  bolstered  in  the  debates 
between  theoretical  economists  and  practising  central  bankers,  which  had  lasted  for  a 
decade and which are now the subject of a broad consensus worldwide. As my colleague 
Judit Neményi mentioned in her article published a few days ago, it would be well worth the 
effort to encourage the Hungarian public to acknowledge these principles. 
Central  banks,  concurrently  with  the  development  of  the  entire  system  of  financial 
institutions, have undergone significant changes over the past twenty years. While financial 
systems have become increasingly open and competitive, central banks have at the same 
time strengthened their belief that their primary task is to maintain price stability. 
The  claim  that  a  central  bank  is  only  capable  of  influencing  nominal  variables  –  in  other 
words inflation – is true even in the medium term. It is unable to influence the output of the 
economy or the level of employment in the long run. Furthermore, no correlation has been 
established  between  the  level  of  unemployment  and  inflation  when  considering  a  larger 
BIS Review 98/2008 
 1
timeframe.  On  the  contrary,  international  experience  has  underpinned  that  low  and  stable 
inflation  can,  through  efficient  allocation  of  resources,  contribute  to  economic  growth  and 
higher levels of employment. Price stability, therefore, has important welfare-related benefits. 
Although it is possible that the economy is temporarily stimulated via the instrument of so-
called surprise inflation, this will soon lead to higher inflation. If economic agents do in fact 
expect higher inflation, it will lose all of its stimulating effects on the economy. Only further 
surprise inflation could be effective. In reality, such a strategy would not be effective even in 
the  short  term  as  economic  agents  not  only  learn  from  the  past,  but  also  formulate 
expectations  regarding  anticipated  future  policy.  They  optimise  their  decisions  accordingly, 
using  all  the  information  available  to  them.  The  primary  message  of  such  thinking  is  that 
expectations regarding monetary policy have a vital role in the business decisions and the 
activity of economic agents. 
Without  strict  mechanisms  ensuring  their  commitment,  monetary  policy  makers  will  always 
have  to  face  the  fact  that  market  participants  who  expect  discretionary  measures,  i.e. 
stimulation,  will  continue  to  revise  up  their  inflation  expectations.  Therefore,  central  banks 
can  only  be  successful  in  reaching  their  inflation  goals  if  they  show  unquestionable 
commitment towards curbing inflation and understand that stimulating employment or output 
beyond the level which is consistent with price stability is an objective they should not strive 
to  achieve.  Influencing  expectations  has,  therefore,  become  a  primary  aspect  of  monetary 
theory and of the practice of monetary policy; it has also provided evidence that a consistent 
attitude to decision-making dictated by rules leads to a more efficient monetary policy. 
In order for price stability to become a viable objective, more and more monetary authorities 
have been granted independence from the government. The level of independence does, of 
course, vary from one country to the next, but the guiding principle is identical: the bank’s 
governor or the main decision-making body will set an interest rate policy and the policy rate 
without any political constraint and free of any political influence. This freedom of decision 
should also be supported through institutional and financial independence. In Hungary, this 
framework is ensured by the Central Bank Act. Thus the MNB is an independent institution. 
It is also over the past twenty years that the majority of central banks have started to operate 
within  the  framework  of  inflation  targeting.  Within  this,  monetary  policy  regards  the  explicit 
inflationary target as the nominal anchor which it commits itself to reaching, thereby striving 
to  influence  the  expectations  of  economic  agents.  Decisions  about  monetary  policy  will 
reflect  the  deviation  of  projected  inflation  from  the  announced  target.  In  Hungary,  an 
agreement  was  reached  in  2005  between  the  MNB  and  the  Government,  setting  the 
medium-term inflation target at 3 per cent in terms of the headline consumer price index. 
The  majority  of  central  banks  pursue,  explicitly  or  implicitly,  an  objective  function  which 
simultaneously  takes  into  account  the  deviation  of  inflation  from  price  stability  and  the 
evolution of the real economy, with more emphasis on the former. It is important to note that 
the evolution of the economy in this case represents deviation of current output from its long-
term, potential level. The central bank, as I mentioned earlier, is in no position to influence 
the  latter.  This  approach  is  entirely  compatible  with  the  forecast-based  inflation  target 
system. Besides the evolution of inflation, central banks pursuing an inflation target also take 
into  consideration  real  economic  processes  through  various  channels.  Inflation  forecasts, 
serving as the basis of monetary policy decisions, reflect the effect of economic activity on 
inflation. In the case of an economic slowdown, for example, the output gap will widen and 
projected  inflation  will  be  lower  accordingly.  Another  channel  is  the  specific  time  horizon 
assigned to a particular monetary policy: by making decisions which usually focus 1-2 years 
ahead, central banks setting inflation goals take into account the fact that counterbalancing 
temporary  inflationary  shocks  in  the  very  short  run  would  result  in  unnecessarily  high  real 
economic sacrifices. 
Following  this  brief  theoretical  introduction,  let  us  move  on  to  the  current  day-to-day 
challenges facing central banks. 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2008
Current challenges of monetary policy  
Currently,  the  world’s  central  banks  have  to  face  two  serious  challenges.  One  is  the  sub-
prime crisis, which broke out in the US and subsequently spiralled into financial turbulence 
on a global scale. The other is the significant increase in the prices of food, oil and other raw 
materials, which has led to a worrying inflationary pressure worldwide. 
Global financial turbulence 
Without going into details regarding the reasons behind the turbulence, I would like to sum 
up the ways in which the financial crisis complicates the conduct of monetary policy. 
Due to the US sub-prime mortgage crisis, global appetite for risk seems to have fallen. Grave 
liquidity  problems,  based  in  many  cases  on  a  mutual  lack  of  trust,  have  emerged  in  the 
financial systems of the (mainly developed) countries affected by this. In larger, more closed 
economies, downward risks to growth are increasing, feeding on the volatility of the financial 
system, the tightening of credit standards and, in certain regions, on the correction affecting 
asset price bubbles. In smaller, more open economies that have not directly been exposed to 
the effects of the financial turbulence, problems might stem from the fall in global appetite for 
risk and the slowdown in larger regions of the world economy. 
A  significant  difference  compared  to  previous  periods  is  that  a  change  in  investors’  risk 
appetite  does  not  affect  emerging  markets  in  the  same  manner.  In  so-called  safe  haven 
countries,  characterised  by  rapid  growth,  low  inflation  and  low  external  debt,  a  smaller 
increase in risk premia and a tendency of appreciating nominal exchange rates seem to be 
continuing. Emerging economies with high external debt and/or signs of overheating fuelled 
by credit growth and deemed more vulnerable by financial markets are characterised by a 
larger jump in risk premia and capital outflows. 
Although Hungary’s vulnerability indicators have improved following measures of budgetary 
adjustment,  the  change  in  external  conditions  has  led  markets  to  increase  the  yields 
expected from Hungarian assets, rather than lowering risk premia in response to the results 
of the fiscal consolidation. There are two reasons why this should not come as a surprise. On 
the one hand, the budget deficit has significantly shrunk, thereby improving external balance. 
The growing indebtedness of households has, however, resulted in adverse effects. On the 
other hand, the composition of external financing has also deteriorated, increasingly involving 
a  shift  towards  debt-generating  inflows.  Although  other  specific  effects  have  also  played  a 
part in how that composition has changed, the drop in FDI inflow may be taken as a warning 
sign, since Hungary has a high net liability position and its image has been further tarnished 
by worsening expectations regarding its prospects for growth.  
A  precondition  for  the  improvement  in  debt  and  indebtedness  indicators,  as  well  as  for  a 
decline in the risk premium, is a strict and at the same time growth-friendly fiscal policy. The 
central  bank’s  responsibility  is  to  contribute  to  the  creation  of  a  more  stable  economic 
environment  through  price  stability  and  by  the  reduction  in  uncertainties  that  stem  from 
inflation.  
Global price increases 
One of the determining tendencies of the world economy currently is the growing prices of 
food, oil and other raw materials. What we know for sure is that the prices of these products 
are  increasing  relative  to  that  of  other  products  and  services  that  enter  into  international 
trade.  These  commodities  are  characterised  by  the  fact  that  they  appear  directly  in  the 
consumer basket, and also serve as input in the production process, especially in the case of 
oil.  There  are  several,  not  mutually  exclusive  explanations  that  can  account  for  the  global 
increase in the prices of these goods. 
BIS Review 98/2008 
 3
These include a temporary spike in prices, long-term structural factors or a global inflationary 
pressure.  One-off  factors  such  as  bad  weather,  temporary  capacity  limits  and  speculation 
have contributed to the former. The sustained change in relative prices may be caused by 
long-lasting structural factors leading to a shift in demand and/or supply relations. In the case 
of food prices, these include growing demand in emerging countries and subsidy schemes 
supporting the production of biofuels. The observed changes in these prices may also reflect 
a global inflationary pressure. In this case, what we are seeing is not a change in relative 
prices  but  the  dynamics  of  food,  oil  and  raw  material  prices  reacting  to  a  positive  global 
output gap, which could be an early symptom of a mounting global inflationary pressure. This 
is  because  the  price  of  unprocessed  food  and  crude  oil  is  typically  set  on  auction-like 
markets, where prices adjust rapidly and in a more flexible way, whereas the prices of other 
globally traded goods are more rigid, thus they react more sluggishly.  
Today it seems increasingly likely that oil and raw materials will remain more expensive than 
they were a couple of years, or even months ago. What remains to be seen is whether we 
are  only  facing  a  relative  price  change  or  whether  this  tendency  is  a harbinger  of  broader 
global inflationary pressure affecting the widest range of goods and services. 
What can be achieved through monetary policy in a small, open economy in order to 
meet these challenges? 
As I mentioned previously, the task of monetary policy-makers is to set an interest rate path 
which ensures that the inflation target is achieved with the least possible economic sacrifices. 
Global financial turbulence has so far caused only limited increase in risk premia in Hungary. 
The banking system’s exposure is not high. Of course, this does not mean that policy makers 
here  can  be  complacent,  as  the  current  global  financial  turbulence  is  far  from  being  over. 
Furthermore,  it  is  still  unclear  to  what  extent  financial  turbulence  has  set  back  the  growth 
outlook of our major foreign trading partners. Hungarian monetary policy cannot turn a blind 
eye  to  factors  such  as  an  increase  in  risk  premia  and  a  deterioration  of  global  growth 
prospects.  
The most urgent problem central banks of small, open economies are facing seems to be 
imported  price  pressure.  Although  these  central  banks  have  influence  neither  on  global 
monetary conditions nor on the global output gap, with a floating exchange rate regime the 
importing of global oil and commodity price increases is not inevitable. Imported inflationary 
pressure  can  be  counterbalanced  by  nominal  exchange  rate  appreciation;  this,  however, 
does not constitute a free lunch, as it can temporarily contract activity in the tradable sector.  
An  appropriate  monetary  policy  response  depends  on  what  processes  are  responsible  for 
global price increases. If the rise in food and oil prices is only a temporary phenomenon, the 
short-term inflationary effect of the shock can be accommodated. The possible second-round 
effects  and  inflation  expectations,  however,  should  be  closely  monitored.  The  less 
accumulated credibility monetary policy has, the more likely second round-effects will occur. 
For a central bank with relatively low credibility, pre-emptive measures may be necessary to 
stave off second-round effects, even if it does not wish to offset the direct inflationary effects 
of the external shock. 
If the change observed in relative prices is the result of lasting, structural causes, monetary 
policy will not be able to do anything about it in the long run. If the relative price changes 
remain permanent their effect will, on the one hand, appear directly in the consumer price 
index and may, on the other, lead to cost-push inflationary pressure on the relevant monetary 
policy  horizon,  due  to  the  fact  that  the  goods  affected  also  serve  as  production  input. 
Furthermore, the risk of second-round effects will appear. Compared to the transitory case, 
another difference is that a lasting change in relative prices can also lower potential GDP. 
Because of this the central bank should, with the instruments at its disposal, strive to ensure 
that the change in relative prices takes place within the lowest possible inflation environment, 
4 
 BIS Review 98/2008
and that a lasting inflationary pressure or a price-wage spiral will not occur. Although creating 
a low inflation environment may entail some sacrifices in the short term, the advantages of 
maintaining price stability will counterbalance them in the long run. 
The rise in prices observed may also signal a global inflationary pressure if the majority of 
the world’s economies grow (or have grown in the recent past) at a faster rate than what is 
consistent with price stability – i.e. become overheated – over a prolonged period, as a result 
of  loose  monetary  conditions  at  the  global  level.  Global  inflation  can  be  considered  a 
monetary phenomenon; therefore, in this case there is no need for any adjustment in relative 
prices. If the global inflationary pressure affects a broad spectrum of globally traded goods 
(i.e. both on the input and output side of the export sector), then the tightening of domestic 
monetary conditions via the exchange rate channel will not inflict serious costs on the export 
sector. In the longer run, the global inflationary pressure may disappear if the major central 
banks on the global scene start tightening their stance. The question which would then arise 
is to what extent will a small, open economy assume the cost of higher inflation, and when 
will it face the economic sacrifices of disinflation. If it swims with the tide, it may later face 
larger losses of output, as it would simultaneously have to deal with disinflation and lower 
external demand. If, however, it goes against the grain of global inflation, loss of output will 
appear sooner, but the cost of enduring inflation and costlier future disinflation will not have 
to be paid. In essence, monetary policy decides about which time and output-inflation path to 
choose for handling the problem. 
What Hungary needs to be particularly careful about  
In Hungary, special attention must be given to managing the inflationary effects of a global 
price  shock.  On  the  one  hand,  the  accumulated  credibility  of  monetary  policy  is  not  yet 
complete  and  the  stability  of  inflation  expectations  is  still  questionable.  Under  these 
circumstances, even partial accommodation of inflationary shocks might be too risky. On the 
other hand – as I mentioned previously – due to its high external debt, Hungary is vulnerable 
to the changes in global risk appetite, so if the fight against global inflation becomes more 
pronounced in the future, the risk premium of Hungarian assets may also increase. 
How can we influence the economy with the help of the exchange rate? 
The  Magyar  Nemzeti  Bank  is  capable  of  exercising  its  impact  on  the  economy  chiefly  by 
influencing exchange rates and inflationary expectations. Changes in the stance of monetary 
policy and the evolution of the exchange rate are linked by the uncovered interest rate parity 
principle. It is important to note that, even with the increase in the stock of foreign currency 
loans,  the  tightening  of  monetary  conditions  has  a  downward  effect  on  inflation.  The 
exchange rate channel operates efficiently through the price of imported inputs used in the 
production process and imported consumer goods. 
Hungarian monetary policy is capable of achieving a short-term lowering of inflation at a pace 
faster than the international average. However, its capability to stabilise short-term output is 
far  more  limited.  Interest  rate  increases  and  the  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  are 
measures  that  might  entail  economic  sacrifices  for  exporters  operating  with  low  import 
penetration ratios, as they need to adapt to these changes. The more flexible they are in the 
adjustment process (wages, improving efficiency), the smaller the sacrifices. Due to the high 
ratio of imported inputs in Hungarian export, the total growth sacrifice is significantly smaller 
than what would be implied by the decrease in export revenues in itself  
In the medium and long term, the competitiveness of export companies is influenced by the 
real exchange rate. Although monetary policy cannot influence the real exchange rate in a 
long-term  perspective,  it  is  still  capable  of  influencing  the  extent  to  which  equilibrium  real 
appreciation  –  stemming  from  real  convergence  –  should  appear  in  consumer  price  (or 
wage) inflation and in nominal appreciation. It is in the interest of the national economy to 
BIS Review 98/2008 
 5
ensure  that  equilibrium  real  appreciation  takes  place  within  the  context  of  steadily  low 
inflation and moderate nominal appreciation. In order to curb inflation and stabilise inflation 
expectations, a stronger than moderate appreciation may be needed temporarily.  
By influencing the evolution of the exchange rate, the Magyar Nemzeti Bank does have the 
capability of holding back the inflationary repercussions in Hungary of  global inflation. The 
MNB does not have the capability or the intent to offset the change in the relative price of raw 
materials and food. What it can and does intend to influence is the inflation environment in 
which this process occurs. 
6 
 BIS Review 98/2008
