Michael C Bonello: Malta’s journey to the euro and beyond 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the European 
Economics and Financial Centre, London, 1 February 2008. 
 A month has passed since the euro became Malta’s new currency. Euro area membership is 
a  major  milestone  for  any  country  for  there  are  clearly  long-term  benefits  associated  with 
participation  in  the  world’s  second  most  important  currency  area.  There  is  indeed  much 
evidence  that  the  macroeconomic  framework  which  supports  the  euro  has  delivered  price 
stability, job creation and economic growth.  
For a small, open economy like Malta’s with a heightened vulnerability to external and sector 
specific  shocks,  the  benefits  of  the  single  currency  can  be  expected  to  be  even  more 
valuable.  From  a  central  banker’s  perspective,  moreover,  euro  area  membership  means 
replacing the manifold risks inherent in managing a small, vulnerable currency such as the 
Maltese lira by the greater security afforded of major reserve unit. 
Where have we come from? 
Although the Maltese economy had responded fairly well to the closure of the British military 
base  in1979,  it  still suffered  from  considerable  structural weaknesses  when  the  authorities 
applied for EU membership in 1990. These were reflected in the dominant role of the public 
sector – which at the time provided 40% of all jobs – and in the extensive use of protective 
trade barriers that only served to entrench inefficient and uncompetitive practices. The extent 
of these deficiencies was such that in its first opinion on Malta, the European Commission 
called for ‘a root-and-branch overhaul of the entire regulatory and operational framework of 
the Maltese economy’1. 
Although  the  situation  had  improved  somewhat  by  the  time  Malta’s  EU  application  was 
reactivated  in1998,  the  economy  was  still  not  fully  equipped  to  withstand  the  competitive 
pressures  unleashed  by  globalization.  While  reforms  were  underway,  they  were  not 
sufficiently ambitious. For example, while the re-introduction of VAT in 1999 was meant to 
broaden the tax base and reduce the extent of unrecorded activity, the list of exempt or zero-
rated  items  was  far  longer  than  that  of  the  other  Member  States.  The  role  of  different 
authorities having competence in the field of competition remained ambiguously defined, and 
in many sectors an insufficient distinction was made between the regulator and the service 
provider.  The  public  sector  was  not  only  overmanned,  but  outdated  practices  and  manual 
procedures were still pervasive. 
These weaknesses became fully exposed around the turn of the century when the removal of 
trade  restrictions  and  other  protective  measures  gained  momentum  in  anticipation  of  EU 
membership.  This  process,  moreover,  coincided  with  two  external  shocks  that  adversely 
affected two vitally important industries, electronic components and tourism. The former was 
hit by the sharp decline in demand as result of the global downturn in the high-tech sector, 
the  latter  by  the  increased  travel  aversion  in  response  to  the  9/11  terrorist  attacks.  The 
impact  was  of  such  magnitude  that  export  receipts  in  these  two  industries,  which together 
                                                 
1   European  Commission.  1993.  The  Challenge  of  Enlargement  –  Opinion  on  Malta’s  Application  for 
membership, document drawn up on the basis of COM (93) 312 final. Bulletin of the European Communities, 
Supplement 4/93, p. 13. 
BIS Review 14/2008 
 1
had  accounted  for  60%  of  total  exports,  dropped  by  more  than  26%  between  2000  and 
2002.2
The triggers 
This  cyclical  setback  was  compounded  by  the  economic  restructuring  induced  by 
globalization and was soon reflected in a rising unemployment rate and large and growing 
fiscal and current account deficits. On the eve of EU membership, therefore, the authorities 
were faced with a choice between two strategies. They could either use the fact that Malta 
had  a  large  fiscal  imbalance  to  maintain  the  status  quo  or,  at  most,  adopt  a  gradualist 
approach to fiscal consolidation, with the aim of minimising social disruption. This would have 
implied a delay in implementing much needed measures, with a consequent risk of slippage 
in  the  Government’s  commitment  to  reform  that  would  have  further  undermined  growth 
prospects. Worse still, this option carried the possibility of more painful adjustment at a later 
stage. 
The alternative option was to highlight the urgent need for adjustments in the real economy 
given  the  vulnerability  of  the  exchange  rate  peg  in  the  context  of  capital  account 
liberalization,  while  taking  advantage  of  the  fact  that  Malta  was  already  closely  integrated 
with the EU through trade and finance, and thus well suited to join the euro area at an early 
date. 
The policy response 
The authorities chose the second approach and launched an ambitious programme of fiscal 
consolidation and a comprehensive package of structural reforms. In the public sector, loss-
making firms were liquidated, while others were privatised. Public finances were placed on a 
sounder footing through different measures, ranging from an increase in the VAT rate and 
the setting up of specialised units to investigate benefit fraud and tax evasion, to a revision of 
salary  structures  and  a  policy  of  natural  attrition  in  the  public  service.  The  first  stage  of  a 
pension reform has been implemented and cost-based pricing of public services introduced 
on a wider scale. 
Meanwhile, initiatives have been taken in the context of the Lisbon Agenda, including public-
private  partnerships,  a  port 
liberalisation  programme  covering 
telecommunications and utilities. Vocational education institutions have been set up, school 
curricula substantially revised, a postgraduate bursary scheme introduced and mechanisms 
fostering synergy between educational institutions and the private sector put in place in order 
to meet the changing skill requirements of industry. 
To  encourage  greater  labour  market  participation,  the  disbursement  of  unemployment 
benefits was made conditional on the taking up of appropriate training, and fiscal incentives 
were introduced aimed at encouraging the return of women workers to the labour market and 
the employment of those over 40 years old. 
In  parallel,  steps  were  taken  to  simplify  administrative  and  business  procedures  and 
extensive  investments  were  made  in  state-of-the  art  technologies  and  in  broadening  the 
outreach of the information society. This investment appears to have paid off, as Malta now 
ranks second in the EU in terms of the provision of online government services,3 and two 
reform  and  a 
                                                 
2  The deterioration was most significant in the electronics sector, which saw a 31% drop in 2001 and a further 
9.5% drop in 2002. Tourist receipts fell by around 2% in 2001 but recovered by 4% in 2002, such that over the 
period at a whole it had grown by only 2%. This marginal increase notwithstanding, its share in total services 
exports had fallen from 54% to 49%. 
3   Eurostat ICT indicators. 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2008
different  sources  suggest  that  it  ranks  among  the  25  most  technologically  advanced 
countries in the world.4
Economic performance post-reform 
Although  the  reform  process  is  still  underway,  Malta’s  economy  was  judged  by  the  EU 
Council in July 2007 to be sufficiently well equipped to operate within the policy parameters 
of  monetary  union.  In  the  Commission’s  words,  Malta  had  achieved  ‘a  high  degree  of 
sustainable convergence’.5
After four years of low or negative growth, the economy expanded by more than 3% in each 
year since 2005. At 6.5% the unemployment rate is at its lowest level in eight years, and the 
annual rate of change in productivity has returned to more acceptable levels after years of 
negative or marginal growth. 
Reflecting  this  general  improvement,  macroeconomic  imbalances  have  also  declined.  The 
fiscal deficit contracted from almost 8% of GDP in 1999 to an estimated 1.6% in 2007 and 
the public debt/GDP ratio has gone down to 63% from a peak of 73% in 2004. The other 
Maastricht  criteria,  of  course,  were  all  met  in  good  time  and  in  a  sustainable  manner. 
Meanwhile, the current account deficit dropped from the 6 - 8% range in the first years after 
EU  accession  to  around  3%  in  2007,  and  is  expected  to  drop  further  as  the  fiscal 
consolidation programme continues to unfold. 
At  the  same  time,  the  private  sector  appears  to  have  adjusted  well  to  the  changing 
composition of domestic and external demand. Not only has there been a shift away from 
public sector employment to private services - the share of the public sector in employment 
shed five percentage points to 30%since 2000 - but there has also been a move away from 
low value manufacturing activities to skills based services. Indeed, between 2000 and 2006 
the  share  of  the  manufacturing  sector  in  gross  value  added  dropped  by  5.5  percentage 
points,  while  the  share  of  services  other  than  public  administration  gained  more  than  6.5 
points to 70%. 
The  composition  of  the  services  and  manufacturing  sectors  has  also  changed.  In 
manufacturing, for example, the share of the two largest sectors dropped from 52% in 2000 
to 41% in 2006, suggesting that diversification is underway. Industry has also become leaner 
and 
intensive  activities  such  as  generic 
pharmaceuticals  and  biomedicine.  In  the  services  sector,  aircraft  maintenance  and  repair, 
aviation  engineering,  software  development,  call  centres  and  back  office  and  financial 
services are gaining ground as are well-established activities such as tourism. 
This change in Malta’s productive structure reflects a conscious policy of moving away from 
labour intensive, low-value activities to others that use higher skills and have a potential to 
increasingly  oriented 
towards  capital 
                                                 
4   According to the 2007 e-rankings of the Economist Intelligence Unit, Malta is the 24th most technologically 
advanced country in the world. The Economist Intelligence Unit defines ‘e-Readiness’ as the ‘state of play’ of a 
country’s  information  and  communications  technology  (ICT)  infrastructure  and  the  ability  of  its  consumers, 
businesses  and  governments  to  use  ICT  to  their  benefit.  Rankings  are  based  on  a  weighted  collection  of 
nearly  100  quantitative  and  qualitative  criteria,  organised  into  six  distinct  categories  measuring  the  various 
components  of  a  country’s  social,  political,  economic  and  technological  development.  The  Intelligent 
Community  Forum  (ICF)  recognises  Malta  as  one  of  the  Smart21  Communities  of  2008.  The  rankings  are 
based on nominations submitted by large and small communities from around the world that take into account 
indicators developed by the forum. The award goes to communities or regions with a documented strategy for 
creating a local prosperity and inclusion using broadband and information technology to attract leading-edge 
businesses,  stimulate  job  creation,  build  skills,  generate  economic  growth,  and  improve  the  delivery  of 
government services. 
5   European Commission. 2007. Report from the Commission - Convergence Report 2007 on Malta, COM(2007) 
258 final, p.7. 
BIS Review 14/2008 
 3
generate more value. The ongoing improvement in the quality of the infrastructure and other 
facilities  available  to  investors  has  induced  many  foreign  investors  to  locate,  or  expand 
existing  operations,  in  Malta  and  thus  take  advantage  of  market  access  and  cost-saving 
opportunities created by Malta’s status, first as an EU Member State and eventually also as a 
euro area member. This is reflected in the FDI figures when expressed in terms of additions 
to the capital stock in any one year. Since 2003, for example, the ratio of FDI inflows to gross 
capital formation was on average 83%, compared to 14% in the EU25. 
In manufacturing alone, since the first year of EU membership a total of 127 new projects or 
expansions with foreign participation have been approved, with an estimated potential value 
equivalent to 1% of nominal GDP.6
The role of the Central Bank of Malta 
The Central Bank of Malta has been present at every stage of Malta’s journey to the euro. In 
the  early  years  it  provided  the  intellectual  underpinnings  for  the  project  as  well  as  policy 
advice. For example, it was at the fore in highlighting the long-term benefits for Malta’s small, 
open  economy  of  EU  membership  and  of  an  early  adoption  of  the  single  currency.  It  also 
cautioned, however, that these benefits would only materialise if the existing macroeconomic 
imbalances  were  addressed  through  the  implementation  of  appropriate  reforms.  The  Bank 
also emphasized that these reforms were not only necessary to ensure eligibility for adopting 
the  euro,  but  also  in  view  of  the  strong  competitive  pressures  that  were  emerging  in  the 
global economy. 
On the operational level, the Bank’s monetary policy remained oriented towards delivering a 
low  and  stable  level  of  inflation.  The  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  has  indeed  been  a 
cornerstone  in  the  country’s  euro  adoption  strategy.  The  policy  discipline  it  promoted  had 
served  the  country  well  for  over  three6  decades  as  it  had  come  to  be  recognised  that 
imbalances and structural deficiencies must be addressed through targeted reforms and not 
through exchange rate adjustment. 
When, therefore, the time came for the Maltese lira to enter ERM II in May 2005, the Bank’s 
advice was that the exchange rate should remain fixed throughout the ERM II period. This 
would  ensure  continuity  and  so  assure  operators  that  stability  would  continue  to  prevail 
notwithstanding  the  lira’s  participation  in  a  mechanism  that  permitted  relatively  wide  daily 
fluctuations. This decision was also dictated by the need to counter harmful speculation at 
the time about the appropriate level of the exchange rate. 
Lessons learned 
One  lesson  that  could  indeed  be  drawn  from  Malta’s  experience  is  that  the  discipline 
imposed by the currency peg was probably the factor that contributed most to the relatively 
smooth  transition  to  euro  area  membership,  not  only  in  terms  of  the  achievement  of  the 
exchange rate criterion, but more so because it helped to focus attention on macroeconomic 
and structural policies. 
There  was,  however,  one  factor  that  remained  constant  as  the  journey  to  the  euro 
progressed.  That  was  the  small  size  of  the economy  and,  thus, its  vulnerability  to  shocks. 
This  was  compounded  by  the  risk  of  a  speculative  attack  of  the  currency,  given  the 
combination of still weak economic fundamentals and the dismantling of the capital controls 
regime which had protected the lira for decades. These realities made the transition from a 
basket  peg  to  a  full  euro  peg  even  more  challenging.  The  potential  exposure  to  capital 
outflows was also a source of preoccupation because the Bank was aware that the typical 
                                                 
6  Malta Enterprise. 
4 
 BIS Review 14/2008
interest-sensitive  Maltese  investor  was  likely  to  be  attracted  by  the  availability  of  a  wide 
choice of financial products overseas offering attractive yields. 
Long before EU accession the Bank had anticipated this challenge by adopting a sequenced 
programme of capital account liberalisation to test investor reactions. In fact, capital controls 
were only fully lifted on the eve of EU membership in 2004. During the experimental phase, 
the liberalisation of direct investment and other long-term flows preceded that of flows with a 
shorter  maturity.  At  this  time  in  particular  the  Bank  ensured  that  its  policy  interest  rate 
contained a sufficient premium over euro rates so as to make Maltese lira assets relatively 
more attractive. As a result, and despite the persistence of a relatively high current account 
deficit, the Maltese lira did not experience undue selling pressures. 
This was reassuring, but it was not enough. When it was time to decide on the strategy to 
pursue in ERM II, therefore, the Bank only put forward its proposal to eschew the use of the 
15% fluctuation bands after it had carried out the necessary studies to assess the level of the 
equilibrium exchange rate. These studies, based on different methodologies, showed that the 
Maltese lira exchange rate was not significantly out of line with its estimated equilibrium level, 
and  so  promised  to  be  broadly  sustainable.  The  ECB  and  the  EU  Commission  reached  a 
similar  conclusion.  Hence  the  decision  to  enter  ERM  II  at  the  market  rate  prevailing  the 
previous day and the commitment not to allow the lira to move from its central parity rate in 
ERM II. 
Such  a  commitment,  of  course,  could  only  be  made  against  the  background  of  a  strong 
external  reserves  position.  There  was,  moreover,  no  departure  from  the  Bank’s  prudent 
approach  to  reserve  management  and  the  reserves  remained  well  above  the  minimum 
statutory level. This was the case even during periods of rising international oil prices, which 
inflated the import bill, and in 2007 when the public started to convert Maltese lira holdings 
into euro and to hold on to euro earnings in anticipation of the change to the euro. 
Another favourable element during the ERM II phase was the comfortable surplus position on 
the  capital  and  financial  account,  which  more  than  offset  the  current  account  deficit.  A 
combination  of  substantial  inflows  of  FDI  and  inward  portfolio  investment  flows  provided 
strong support to the Maltese lira. 
The Central Bank of Malta’s credibility - based on its track record in delivering exchange rate 
and price stability - as well as the small size of Malta’s financial market probably also helped 
to ward off any unwanted attention. The absence of volatile short-term capital flows into and 
out of the country during this period supports this impression. 
Finally,  Malta’s  experience  points  to  the  importance  of  a  shared  vision  between  the 
government and the central bank on policy objectives, as well as of a holistic approach to 
achieving them. In this regard, the continued acceptance by economic operators of the need 
to  support  the  fixed  exchange  regime  facilitated  the  authorities’  task  in  imposing  the  fiscal 
and monetary discipline necessary to meet the nominal convergence criteria. 
The way forward 
Becoming a member of the euro area does not represent the end of a process, but rather the 
beginning of a new era in which the burden of adjustment will have to be carried entirely by 
the real economy and in which the harmful effects of inefficient institutions and practices on 
costs  and  final  prices  will  become  more  visible.  The  policy  challenge,  therefore,  is  to 
maximize the benefits of participation in monetary union and so bridge the remaining income 
gap with the euro area. Malta’s per capita income level is still around 70% of the euro area 
average. 
Among  other  things,  this  means  that  further  fiscal  consolidation  is  necessary  in  order  to 
achieve a balanced budget by the set date of 2010. There must also be more emphasis on 
expenditure-based  adjustment,  particularly  in  view  of  rising  pressures  caused  by  ageing-
BIS Review 14/2008 
 5
related factors such as pension and health care costs. It will be equally important, in both the 
private and public sectors, for wage growth to be compatible with productivity growth, labour 
market conditions and cost developments in competitor countries. The further strengthening 
of competition in both product and resource markets and the creation of more incentives to 
work are also necessary in order to raise the participation rate. 
These  ambitious  objectives  clearly  allow  no  room  for  complacency.  In  this  regard,  it  is  a 
positive sign that the Budget for 2008 promises policy continuity. It contains a commitment, 
for example, to reduce the burden of public sector expenditure on the productive areas of the 
economy,  and  targets  a  6  percent  reduction  this  year.  It  also  provides  new  incentives  for 
investment in R&D by the private sector and more generous allocations for the development 
of industrial areas. 
As  far  as  the  labour  market  is  concerned,  new  training  and  placement  programmes  are 
envisaged  for  persons  who  lack  skills  and  for  the  long-term  unemployed,  especially  those 
interested in setting up their own business. There are also plans to establish a register for 
those seeking part-time employment, along with incentives that should encourage a greater 
take up of temporary employment as well as labour market participation after pension age.  
In  the  education  sector,  a  wide  range  of  measures  are  envisaged  aimed  at  improving  the 
quality of education. There are also plans to offer land to international educational institutions 
interested in developing campuses in Malta. This year will also see a record amount of funds 
allocated for higher education, including for the creation of an ICT faculty, the modernisation 
of science and engineering laboratories and additional investment in e-learning facilities. 
In  this  same  area,  a  new  ICT  strategy  has  been  launched  which  aims  to  establish  Malta 
among the top ten Smart Islands by 2010. The strategy aims at improving further  the ICT 
infrastructure,  the  diffusion  of  next  generation  applications  and  at  creating  the  right 
environment  for  large  projects  that  are  in  the  pipeline,  including  the  Smart  City  by  Tecom 
Investments of Dubai. The strategy also provides for further enhancements to e-government 
services,  and  sets  new  targets  aimed  at  raising  the  broadband  connectivity  ratio  and 
computer literacy rate among households. 
Malta’s investment promotion efforts meanwhile have been refocused to exploit the island’s 
strategic location as a bridge between two continents, as well as its potential to serve as a 
hub  for  international  business  in  areas  such  as  health  care,  software  development  and 
education. 
Conclusion 
The next phase in Malta’s economic history, therefore, promises to be a challenging one, but 
it should also be an exciting time. For a country with a population of 400,000 and a GDP of 
under  five  billion  euro,  having  a  major  reserve  unit  as  its  domestic  currency  is  indeed  a 
significant advantage. We thus have good reason to feel encouraged and, as a people that 
has  suffered  repeatedly  as  a  consequence  of  divisions  on  the  European  mainland,  also 
reassured  that  we  are  about  to  reinforce  our  integration  in  Europe  with  full  economic  and 
monetary  union.  For,  while  the  EU  has  for  fifty  years  brought  peace  and  stability  to  the 
peoples  of  Europe,  the  Single  Market  and  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  have  created  a 
congenial environment in which economies can grow and people prosper. 
6 
 BIS Review 14/2008
