Frederic S Mishkin: Outlook and risks for the US economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Frederic  S  Mishkin,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  National  Association  for  Business  Economics  Washington  Policy 
Conference, Washington DC, 4 March 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  be  here  today.  I  am  very  pleased  to  be  a  part  of  this 
conference.  The  National  Association  for  Business  Economics  policy  conferences  always 
focus on the critical issues facing the economy, and this conference follows in that tradition. 
In  my  remarks  today  I  will  review  the  current  economic  situation  and  the  outlook  for  real 
activity and inflation. I will offer some specific observations about the recent deterioration in 
economic  activity,  highlight  several  risks  facing  the  economy,  and  review  recent  inflation 
dynamics. I should note that the views I will express here are my own and not necessarily 
those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1
The U.S. economy is facing substantial challenges. The housing sector continues to weaken, 
production and spending in other parts of the economy have decelerated, the labor market 
has softened noticeably, and the turmoil in financial markets has led to a reduced availability 
and a higher cost of credit to many households and businesses. Indeed, real gross domestic 
product  (GDP)  rose  at  an  annual  rate  of  only  0.6  percent  in  the  fourth  quarter,  and  the 
available data suggest that the economy has relatively little momentum going into the first 
quarter. Moreover, upward pressures on inflation have emerged, emanating in part from the 
rapid increases in prices of crude oil and some other commodities. 
The strains in financial markets that emerged last summer were triggered by problems in the 
markets for subprime mortgages and related securities. As the financial landscape became 
more uncertain, a broader tightening of credit conditions took hold, with investors becoming 
less willing to bear risk, more concerned about the valuations of a wide range of complex 
financial  instruments,  and  more  concerned  about  counterparty  credit  risk.  Reflecting  these 
concerns,  the  functioning  of  the  short-term  credit  markets  deteriorated  dramatically, 
corporate bond spreads rose, and the market value of leveraged loans and other securities 
fell. In addition, banks were forced to bring onto their balance sheets a significant volume of 
loans and other securities, and in the second half of 2007, banks took large write-downs on 
mortgage-related  and  other  assets.  In  recent  months,  short-term  credit  markets  have 
functioned better than in the summer but have remained strained, risk spreads on corporate 
bonds  have  risen  markedly  further  on  concerns  about  the  near-term  outlook  for  corporate 
credit  quality,  and  equity  prices  have  weakened  considerably.  Moreover,  substantial 
uncertainty remains about the magnitude and distribution of credit losses going forward and 
the extent to which those losses will lead to tighter credit conditions.  
To help place these developments into perspective, I would note that the turmoil in financial 
markets  emerged  at  a  time  when  the  economy  was  otherwise  in  pretty  good  shape.  Real 
GDP growth held up reasonably well through the summer – despite the ongoing declines in 
home  building  –  and  balance  sheets  of  nonfinancial  corporations  remained  strong.  In 
addition, the financial system entered last summer with some strengths. Most large financial 
institutions had strong balance sheets and solid earnings, as delinquencies and charge-off 
rates  on  most  types  of  loans  were  at  low  levels.  At  the  same  time,  the  financial  market 
infrastructure  for  clearing  and  settlement  was  robust  and,  subsequently,  performed  well. 
                                                 
1  
I wish to thank Charles Fleischman and Dan Sichel for their helpful comments and assistance on this speech. 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 1
Moreover, as I have discussed in earlier speeches, I believe that monetary policy has helped 
to  effectively  anchor  long-run  inflation  expectations,  which  in  turn  helped  to  restrain  core 
consumer price inflation in spite of energy and other supply shocks.  
In  an  environment  of  well-anchored  inflation  expectations,  the  FOMC  had  the  scope  to 
respond aggressively to the strains in financial markets that emerged late last summer and to 
the worsening economic outlook. Indeed, since September, the FOMC has cut the federal 
funds  rate  five  times,  for  a  total  of  225  basis  points.  In  addition,  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
taken a number of other steps to ease strains in short-term funding markets. These policy 
actions,  along  with  the recently  enacted  fiscal stimulus  package,  should  support  economic 
activity and should improve the odds of avoiding more adverse outcomes.  
The  most  recent  economic  projections  made  by  Federal  Reserve  Board  members  and 
Reserve Bank presidents – released a couple of weeks ago but submitted around the time of 
the  late  January  FOMC  meeting  –  show  sluggish  economic  growth  this  year  but  not  a 
downturn in activity. The data on consumer and business spending released since the last 
FOMC meeting have been largely consistent with this outlook. Nonetheless, as I will discuss 
shortly, I see significant downside risks to this outlook. These risks have been brought into 
particularly  sharp  relief  by  recent  readings  from  a  number  of  household  and  business 
surveys that have had a distinctly downbeat cast.  
The outlook for real activity 
Turning  to  some  specifics,  the  ongoing  correction  in  the  housing  market  has  been  a 
substantial drag on real GDP growth over the past two years, with declines in real residential 
investment subtracting about 1 percentage point from the growth of real GDP last year. This 
weakness intensified in the second half of 2007 with the dramatic decrease in the availability 
of mortgage credit for nonprime borrowers and with a widening of spreads on jumbo loans. In 
addition, the Federal Reserve's latest Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending 
Practices indicates that a large fraction of reporting banks have tightened lending standards 
on all types of residential mortgages. By January 2008, sales of existing single-family homes 
had fallen to more than 30 percent below their peak in September 2005, while sales of new 
homes in January were more than 50 percent below their peak in July 2005. 
The  cutbacks  in  new  home  construction  that  have  come  in  response  to  the  weakening  of 
demand have been substantial, but they have yet to reduce the overhang of inventories of 
unsold new homes. As of January, the months' supply of new homes for sale – that is, the 
ratio of unsold inventory to sales – was more than twice its average level from 1997 through 
the summer of 2005. Given that sizable backlog and the subdued level of demand, cutbacks 
in housing construction seem likely to continue being a drag on economic activity for some 
time to come. 
House prices decelerated appreciably as sales began to fall, and prices are now declining in 
many areas of the country. Given the continued weakness in housing demand, house prices 
appear likely to remain under pressure. Moreover, as I will describe in a few minutes, falling 
house prices may not only reflect declining demand for homes but also can contribute to a 
further weakening in demand. 
In the consumer sector, real outlays held up reasonably well for most of 2007. But spending 
growth slowed noticeably toward the end of the year, and the most recent readings on real 
consumer  purchases  point  to  a  soft  first  quarter.  More  broadly,  consumers  are  being 
squeezed  from  several  directions.  Very  soft  house  prices  and  a  weak  stock  market  have 
reduced  household  wealth.  Slowing  labor  demand  and  the  steep  increases  in  the  price  of 
imported oil have damped real income gains. And banks report that they have tightened the 
terms and standards for consumer loans. In this environment, consumer sentiment has been 
weak; it began eroding last summer and plummeted in February. Together, these factors are 
likely  to  restrain  spending  growth  in  the  period  ahead.  This  restraint  should  be  offset 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2008
somewhat beginning in the late spring, when many households will start to receive the tax 
rebates that are the centerpiece of the recent fiscal stimulus package. 
Business investment in equipment and software also decelerated toward the end of last year, 
and a number of factors appear likely to weigh on spending in the near term. Indicators of 
business  sentiment  from  a  variety  of  national  and  regional  surveys  have  deteriorated,  on 
balance, in recent months. Moreover, spreads on corporate bonds across a wide range of 
credit qualities have been moving up, especially for riskier firms, and an increasing number 
of banks report that they are tightening lending standards for business loans. All told, real 
spending  on  equipment  and  software  seems  likely  to  be  subdued  in  the  near  term.  It  is 
anticipated that investment spending should receive some help in the second half of this year 
from  the  accelerated  depreciation  provisions  in  the  fiscal  stimulus  bill;  however,  based  on 
experience with a similar tax provision in 2002 and 2003, the magnitude and timing of these 
effects is very uncertain.  
Investment  in  nonresidential  structures  continued  to  grow  robustly  through  the  end  of  last 
year, with most major components contributing to the strong gains. However, prospects for 
the  coming  year  are  less  buoyant  given  the  tightening  credit  conditions  as  well  as  the 
slowdown in economic activity more broadly.  
Turning  now  to  international  trade,  export  growth  has  been  a  bright  spot  for  the  U.S. 
economy, boosted by past declines in the exchange value of the dollar and solid economic 
growth  abroad.  Indeed,  rising  demand  for  U.S.  exports  has  offset  some  of  the  negative 
effects on producers here in the United States from the deterioration in domestic spending. 
Although foreign economies also have been affected by financial turmoil, and growth among 
our trading partners is showing some signs of slowing, expanding exports should continue to 
help support economic activity in the United States.  
In the labor market, private payrolls decelerated over the course of 2007 and were reported 
to  have  been  unchanged  in  January.  The  unemployment  rate,  after  remaining  near  4-1/2 
percent in the first half of last year, has moved up about 1/2 percentage point to  nearly 5 
percent,  its  highest  level  since  late  2005.  And  the  labor  market  appears  to  have  softened 
further  in  February.  Initial  claims  for  unemployment  insurance,  which  can  be  a  timely 
indicator  of  labor  market  activity,  moved  up  appreciably  in  February.  Moreover,  recent 
surveys of hiring plans have become less favorable, and households' assessments of current 
job availability and of expected labor market conditions have deteriorated. With the pace of 
economic activity expected to be sluggish in the near term, I anticipate some further rise in 
joblessness this year. 
Risks to the outlook for real activity 
For the reasons cited, I continue to expect a period of economic weakness in the near term 
that should be offset to a degree in future quarters by the monetary easing already in place 
and the fiscal stimulus package. Nonetheless, the economy faces significant downside risks 
that could contribute to a worse outcome. Key among those risks is a worse-than-expected 
outcome  in  the  housing  market  as  a  result  of  more  adverse  housing-price  dynamics.2  In 
particular, declines in housing prices, rather than stimulating demand, could further depress 
home purchases, at least for a time.  
An often-expressed idea is that buyers are reluctant to buy into a falling market. This notion 
can be made more precise by organizing ideas around the standard neoclassical model of 
capital  investment.  In  this  framework,  the  so-called  user  cost  of  capital  is  an  important 
determinant of the demand for any investment good – including housing. When the user cost 
                                                 
2   This  material  draws  heavily  from  the  paper  I  delivered  at  last  summer’s  Jackson  Hole  conference  (see 
Mishkin, 2007b). 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 3
of housing rises, the demand for housing will decline, everything else being equal. The user 
cost will increase when, among other things, the purchase price of housing rises relative to 
the prices of other goods and services or mortgage interest rates move up.  
In  addition  to  these  factors,  Case  and  Shiller  (2003)  have  emphasized  that  changes  in 
expected  house  prices  can  play  an  important  role  in  the  demand  for  housing  through  the 
user-cost  channel.  When  relative  house  prices  are  expected  to  increase,  the  user  cost  is 
reduced,  stimulating  the  demand  for  housing.  This  factor  presumably  contributed  to  the 
robust demand for housing during the period when house prices were rising rapidly and were 
expected  to  continue  doing  so.  Conversely,  when  relative  house  prices  are  expected  to 
decline, the user cost is higher. Indeed, a drop of 1 percentage point in the expected rate of 
change in real house prices, all else being equal, is equivalent in the user-cost framework to 
an  increase  of  100  basis  points  in  the  after-tax  mortgage  interest  rate.  Consequently,  if 
house prices fall more than expected, and that condition leads to more adverse expectations 
for future changes in house prices, then housing demand could fall as a result. 
A second risk to the economy is that larger-than-expected declines in house prices would be 
expected  to  lead  to  a  larger-than-expected  drag  on  consumer  spending  through  the  usual 
wealth-effect  channel,  as  a  lower  path  of  household  net  worth  restrains  consumption. 
Moreover, during periods of financial distress, the effects of falling house prices on consumer 
spending  could  be  greater  than  that  suggested  by  conventional  estimates  of  the  wealth 
effect. Because prospective borrowers typically have more information about their ability to 
repay the loan than do lenders, homeownership can play a role in reducing the problems of 
asymmetric information in consumer credit markets by providing collateral that reduces those 
information  problems.  Good  collateral  increases  the  borrower's  incentive  to  repay  the  loan 
and significantly reduces potential losses to the lender upon borrower default. Consequently, 
a  decline  in  house  prices  will  reduce  the  value  of  the  collateral  backing  mortgage  loans, 
thereby  increasing  the  problems  of  asymmetric  information  and  potentially  decreasing  the 
access of households to credit.  
The  same  idea  is  expressed  another  way  in  a  paper  by  Ben  Bernanke  and  Mark  Gertler 
(1995), who suggested that a decline in house prices can increase the wedge between the 
default-free interest rate and the effective interest rate facing the homeowner. That is, in the 
eyes of the lenders, declining house prices diminish the quality of the borrowers' collateral, 
which effectively reduces the availability of credit to households that can be used to finance 
consumer  purchases.  This  effect  is  another  reason  to  be  concerned  about  the  possible 
consequences  of  greater-than-expected  house  price  declines.  And,  to  my  view,  the  credit-
constraint  channel  provides  a  more  credible  link  between  house  prices  and  consumer 
spending  than  does  mortgage-equity  withdrawal,  a  story  about  which  I  have  previously 
expressed serious doubts (Mishkin, 2007b). 
Another  significant  risk  to  the  outlook  is  that  lending  standards  could  tighten  more  than 
expected not only for mortgages but for other types of credit as well. As I have noted, the 
January 2008 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey highlighted the fact that many banks are 
tightening  lending  standards  and  terms  in  a  number  of  credit  markets.  At  the  same  time, 
capital at some banks has come under pressure, as institutions have been forced to bring 
some loans and other securities back onto their own balance sheets. Because this process is 
still  unfolding,  it  poses  a  risk  that  credit  standards  for  households  and  businesses  could 
tighten more than expected and significantly crimp spending.  
Finally, I would note the possibility of a feedback loop between financial market disruptions 
and deterioration in the real economy that I have emphasized in previous speeches (Mishkin, 
2008a,  2008b).  Because  economic  downturns  typically  result  in  even  greater  uncertainty 
about asset values, such episodes may trigger an adverse feedback loop whereby financial 
disruptions  cause  investment  and  consumer  spending  to  decline,  which,  in  turn,  causes 
economic activity to contract. Such a contraction then increases uncertainty about the value 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2008
of assets, and, as a result, the financial disruption worsens. This development then causes 
economic activity to contract further in a perverse cycle. 
Inflation and inflation dynamics 
Let  me  turn  now  to  inflation  and  inflation  dynamics.  Over  the  twelve  months  ended  in 
January, the price index for total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose 3.7 percent, 
up from 2.1 percent during the comparable period twelve months earlier. Recently, headline 
inflation has been pushed higher by sizable increases in food and energy prices; crude oil 
prices have surged, and food prices have risen significantly, reflecting strong global demand 
in general as well as hefty demand in particular for corn for use in ethanol production. 
Even  excluding  food  and  energy,  recent  readings  on  inflation  also  have  been  elevated, 
although  over  the  past  year  core  PCE  prices  decelerated  a  touch  from  2.4  percent  to  2.2 
percent. The recent observations on core inflation suggest that higher energy costs and the 
lower  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  may  have  been  sources  of  upward  pressure  on  core 
inflation. However, the recent bump up in inflation also likely reflected a reversal of unusually 
low readings earlier last year for apparel, prescription drugs, and so-called nonmarket items 
in the index, and the contribution of these items to core inflation is likely to wane.  
In my view, long-run inflation dynamics are influenced importantly both by prospects for the 
future  balance  of  aggregate  supply  and  demand,  as  well  as  by  longer-run  inflation 
expectations  (Mishkin,  2007a).  By  a  range  of  measures,  longer-run  inflation  expectations 
appear  to  have  remained  reasonably  well  contained  even  as  recent  readings  on  headline 
inflation have been elevated. The median expectation of inflation five to ten years ahead in 
the Reuters/University of Michigan survey stands in the middle of the range that has been 
evident over the past couple of years, although the expectation for year-ahead inflation from 
this  same  survey  has  moved  up  recently,  presumably  in  response  to  the  higher  rates  of 
actual  inflation.  In  addition,  although  the  measure  of  long-run  expectations  for  consumer 
price index (CPI) inflation from the Survey of Professional Forecasters ticked up in February, 
this measure remained at essentially the same value that has prevailed since 1998. 
As for inflation compensation derived from spreads between yields on nominal and inflation-
indexed Treasury securities (known as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, or TIPS), the 
implied  rate  of  inflation  compensation  from  five  years  ahead  to  ten  years  ahead  (the  so-
called  five-to-ten-year-forward  rate)  has  risen  somewhat  since  the  beginning  of  the  year. 
Does this rise in forward inflation compensation indicate that long-run inflation expectations 
have  risen  by  a  similar  amount?  My  best  guess  is  that  much  of  the  rise  in  inflation 
compensation reflects other factors. 
To begin, recall that inflation compensation measured by using TIPS yields is not the same 
thing as inflation expectations. Rather, movements in inflation compensation reflect not only 
changes in inflation expectations, but also changes in an inflation risk premium and in the 
relative  liquidity  of  TIPS  and  similar  maturity  nominal  Treasuries.3  To  see  that  these 
components are distinct, recall that during the period of heightened concerns about deflation 
in  2003  and  2004,  forward  inflation  compensation  rose  substantially  to  an  unusually  high 
level amid concerns about an unwelcome fall in inflation; that earlier episode, in particular, 
underscores  the  fact  that  we  must  be  careful  in  using  the  forward  rates  of  inflation 
compensation as a gauge of long-run inflation expectations. To see this distinction another 
way,  consider  a  scenario  in  which  inflation  uncertainty  increased  but  inflation  expectations 
                                                 
3   For  additional  background,  see  Gürkaynak,  Sack,  and  Wright  (2008).  They  discuss  the  decomposition  of 
inflation  compensation  into  these  distinct  components  and  argue  that  far-forward  rates  of  inflation 
compensation are too volatile to be pure measures of long-run inflation expectations. 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 5
did not. In that case, the midpoint of inflation expectations would remain the same, but the 
range around the midpoint would increase.  
Turning  specifically  to  the  recent  experience,  consider  the  sequence  of  one-year-forward 
rates of inflation compensation – that is, decompose ten-year inflation compensation into a 
sequence of one-year-forward rates. The one-year-forward rate ending about five years from 
now has moved up, but the forward rate ending in ten years has climbed more than twice as 
much. This pattern suggests an important role for factors other than rising long-run inflation 
expectations  in  explaining  recent  movements  in  inflation  compensation  as  one  might 
suppose that any tendency toward higher inflation would be expected to show through within 
five years. And survey measures of long-run inflation expectations – including that from the 
Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters  –  have  moved  relatively  little.  But  respondents  to  the 
latest Survey of Professional Forecasters indicated that they were more uncertain about the 
future trajectory of inflation. Altogether, the evidence points toward the inflation risk premium 
as  the  likely  cause  of  much  of  the  rise  in  five-to-ten-year-ahead  inflation  compensation. 
Although a distinctly different concept from inflation expectations, policymakers need to be 
concerned  about  any  widening  of  inflation  uncertainty.  Indeed,  an  increase  in  inflation 
uncertainty  would  likely  complicate  decision  making  by  consumers  and  businesses 
concerning plans for spending, savings, and investment. 
What does this mean for the inflation outlook? I expect inflation pressures to wane over the 
next few years, as product and labor markets soften and the rise in food and energy prices 
abates.  In  addition,  I  continue  to  believe  that  long-run  inflation  expectations  remain 
consistent  with  increases  in  PCE  prices  in  the  neighborhood  of  2  percent  per  year.4 
Accordingly, I anticipate that over time core PCE inflation will move back to around 2 percent. 
The  risks  around  this  outlook  appear  to  me  to  be  balanced,  although  the  uncertainty 
surrounding the outlook may have widened recently, consistent with the apparent rise in the 
inflation  risk  premium.  The  risks  associated  with  higher  oil  and  commodity  prices  are  a 
concern as is the possibility that past cost shocks may have a more pronounced effect on 
core  inflation  than  has  been  apparent  to  date.  Working  in  the  opposite  direction,  with  the 
risks  to  the  real  economy  and  resource  utilization  skewed  to  the  downside,  there  are 
accompanying  risks  that  inflation  may  be  subject  to  some  additional  downward  pressure. 
Regardless  of  how  these  risks  play  out,  a  commitment  to  a  strong  nominal  anchor  will  be 
crucial to the success of monetary policy. Any tendency for longer-run inflation expectations 
to become unanchored would pose a significant problem for monetary policy makers, and the 
FOMC will be closely monitoring inflation and inflation expectations in coming months.  
To  summarize,  with  the  economic  outlook  having  deteriorated  significantly  and  financial 
markets under considerable stress, the FOMC  will face significant challenges. As noted in 
the statement following the January meeting, the FOMC "will continue to assess the effects 
of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act in a timely manner 
as  needed"  to  address  risks  facing  the  economy  (FOMC,  2008).  The  FOMC's  critical 
challenge will be to calibrate monetary policy in a way that best achieves its dual objectives 
of maximum employment and price stability. 
Thank you for your time and attention. It has been a pleasure to be with you today.  
                                                 
4   As I described in an earlier speech (Mishkin, 2007a), this figure is sensitive to a variety of assumptions, so one 
should not overstate its precision. Note that expectations for CPI inflation must be adjusted to convert them 
from a CPI basis to a PCE basis. 
6 
 BIS Review 26/2008
References 
Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark  Gertler (1995). "Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of 
Monetary  Policy  Transmission",  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives,  vol.  9  (Autumn), 
pp. 27-48. 
Case,  Karl  E.,  and  Robert  J.  Shiller  (2003).  "Is  There  a  Bubble  in  the  Housing  Market?" 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2003 (no. 2), pp. 299-362. 
Federal Open Market Committee (2008). "FOMC Statement and Board Approval of Discount 
Rate Requests of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, 
Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, and San Francisco", press release, January 30. 
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright (2008). "The TIPS Yield Curve and 
Inflation  Compensation",  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2008-05.  Washington: 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2007a).  "Inflation  Dynamics",  speech  delivered  at  the  Annual  Macro 
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 23. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2007b).  "Housing  and  the  Monetary  Transmission  Mechanism", 
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-40. Washington: Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, August. 
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2008a). "Monetary Policy Flexibility, Risk Management, and Financial 
Disruptions", speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, January 
11. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2008b).  "The  Federal  Reserve's  Tools  for  Responding  to  Financial 
Disruptions", speech delivered at the Tuck Global Capital Markets Conference, Tuck School 
of Business, Dartmouth College, Hanover, N.H., February 15. 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 7
