Stefan Ingves: Can the authorities manage crises in the financial 
system? 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Swedish Economics 
Association, Stockholm, 13 March 2008. 
 I’m sure that no one here has failed to notice the fact that there has periodically been turmoil 
in  the  financial  markets  since  last  summer.  It  is  scarcely  remarkable  or  unusual  that  the 
financial markets experience upswings and downswings. And there are almost always some 
countries in the world experiencing problems in their financial sector. We have become used 
to this being a fact of life.  
But this time there appears to be much greater nervousness than we have seen in a long 
time. Central banks have also followed developments with great interest. For instance, the 
ECB, the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England have taken a number of well-publicised 
measures. So why all the commotion this time?  
Well, this is one of the subjects of my speech today. Financial stability is the Riksbank's other 
task in addition to monetary policy. Apart from being a red-hot topic of discussion, it is also 
an  area  to  which  I  have  devoted  many  years  of  work.  Today  I  want  to  talk  about  the 
regulations for managing financial institutions in distress and the challenges we face. But let 
me first reason a little about financial crises on the basis of the current turbulence and the 
crisis Sweden experienced at the beginning of the 1990s. 
The problems began in the subprime market 
As you all know, the recent credit concern began with problems on the US mortgage market. 
This applies in particular to the area offering so-called subprime loans. These are loans to 
mortgage  customers  with  lower  credit  ratings  –  often  households  without  a  documented 
credit  history  and  with  a  lower  income  than  the  average  household.  These  loans  doubled 
between 1996 and 2006, although they still comprise a relatively small part of the US credit 
market. The problems began to affect many borrowers back in 2005 in connection with the 
rise in interest rates.  
When loans were renewed at new, higher interest rates the loan costs for these borrowers 
rose  substantially.  And  when  property  prices  fell  in  many  areas,  there  was  no  scope  to 
mortgage the house so householders could borrow their way out of their problems. This was 
otherwise a common – albeit dubious – strategy during the years of rising property prices. 
Many borrowers could no longer make the interest and mortgage payments on their loans. 
This  led  in  turn  to  substantial  credit  losses  for  many  mortgage  institutions.  But  the  loan 
losses did not merely affect the banks and mortgage institutions that had originally issued the 
loans. As you all know, the problems came to have a much wider spread. 
And the problems spread as the risks were sold on 
The  reason  why  the  problems  spread  is  the  extensive  securitisation  of  mortgages.  This 
special  form  of  financial  engineering  has  made  it  possible  for  lenders  to  sell  credit  risk 
together with the right to the payment flows from the loans to prospective investors around 
the world. What this means, basically, is that a number of loans are combined and put into a 
an investment vehicle created especially for this purpose, which is in turn financed by issuing 
securities,  what  are  known  as  mortgage-backed  securities.  In  principle,  this  is  a  way  of 
making illiquid assets liquid.  
BIS Review 30/2008 
 1
This has become increasingly common among banks and other credit institutions around the 
world. One can say that they have thus increasingly moved away from the traditional role as 
monitor  of  credit  risk.  Instead  they  have  to  a  greater  degree  originated  loans,  where  the 
inherent credit risks have immediately been distributed to investors in the financial markets 
willing  to  take  risks.  Their  business  strategy  has  changed  from  focusing  on  long-term 
customer  relations  to  repackaging  and  selling.  Having  said  this,  securitisation  is  not 
necessarily a bad thing in itself.  
What has been new and something of a problem this time has been the way in which the 
securitised loans have been repackaged and sold through several stages. They have created 
so-called  structured  credit  risk  products,  which  have  often  included  a  large  portion  of 
subprime  loans.  The  variety  of  these  has  been  impressive.  Often  one  product  has  been 
included  as  a  component  in  another  product,  which  in  turn  has  been  repackaged  and 
included as a component in a new product. One can equate this to Russian dolls: a large one 
that contains a smaller one, which in turn contains an even smaller one, and so on. This has 
been a means of creating assets that suit investors with differing risk appetites, particularly 
assets with a high return and high risk level. 
A complicated structure emerged 
But there has been substantial variation among the special vehicles used by banks and other 
credit  institutions  for  their  securitisation.  I  do  not  intend  to  describe  in  detail  all  of  these 
conduits and SIVs and suchlike. But what they have in common is that they invest in high-
yield assets and long durations, often structured credit-risk products with a subprime content. 
They have been financed, at least partially, by issuing certificates in the fixed income market 
for  short  durations,  what  are  known  as  asset-backed  commercial  papers.  The  special 
vehicles  have  thus  to  a  greater  or  lesser  degree  been  dependent  on  the  liquidity  in  the 
market for these securities for their financing. 
Even if these special vehicles are in principle independent from the banks, it is common that 
the  banks  supply  some  form  of  liquidity  guarantee.  In  other  words,  if  a  special  vehicle  for 
some  reason  is  unable  to  issue  new  certificates  when  the  old  ones  fall  due,  the  bank 
guarantees  the  ability  to  pay,  wholly  or  partly.  Such  guarantees  need  not  only  consist  of 
formal obligations. They may also be of a purely informal nature. This is because the bank 
may be disinclined to abandon its special vehicle if only to protect its name and reputation. 
Whatever the case, it means that the financing problems that affect the special vehicles can 
easily lead back into the bank. What one has regarded as true sale may in reality not always 
have been so. 
Credit ratings attracted investors but were used wrongly 
As you realise, the result has been an extremely complicated structure. Many asset classes 
have arisen, each with their own unique conditions and idiosyncrasies in pricing. This has in 
turn made it difficult to assess the different products.  
Then they can instead obtain help from the credit rating agencies. With the aid of the credit 
rating the agencies have issued, investors have been persuaded to invest in the products. 
Credit ratings are excellent aids that measure the probability of a failure or an expected loss. 
But they do not take into account how the risks covary and are otherwise distributed.  
Unfortunately, many investors appear to have disregarded these limitations. In addition, all of 
the  repackaging,  special  middlemen  and  more  or  less  visible  guarantees  have  made  it 
difficult to gain insight into where the risks are. In particular the geographical spread appears 
to have been greater than in earlier episodes of financial turbulence.  
2 
 BIS Review 30/2008
Uncertainty increased and liquidity disappeared  
When the problems in the subprime market began to show here and there, this caused great 
uncertainty. It was quite simply impossible to know who was actually left with the direct or 
indirect exposures to the subprime loans. This led to liquidity waning in parts of the interbank 
market.  It  therefore  became  more  difficult  and  more  expensive  for  the  banks  to  refinance 
themselves. When many banks experienced problems, a number of central banks chose to 
take measures to increase liquidity in the interbank market.  
The unease in the credit markets has continued during the winter and spring. Many large and 
established  banks  have  been  gradually  forced  to  write  down  the  value  of  their  subprime-
related  assets.  This  has  led  to  some  major  financial  groups  requiring  new  capital.  At  the 
same time, there has been increased uncertainty over international economic activity. This 
has in turn contributed to major fluctuations on the world’s stock markets.  
Over the past week the unease has increased again. This has contributed to rising interest 
rates  on  the  interbank  market  in,  for  instance,  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom. 
With  the  free  capital  movement  this  of  course  also  affects  Swedish  interbank  rates.  But 
higher  interest  rates  in  the  interbank  market  do  not  by  definition  mean  that  the  banks  will 
experience  liquidity  problems.  The  Swedish  banks  have  had  good  liquidity  throughout  the 
entire period of turmoil. They have not been exposed to subprime-related securities to any 
great extent. Their solidity was and remains good and their loan losses are at present very 
small. Nevertheless, the Swedish banks have not been able to entirely escape the effects of 
these events. 
There are similarities between today’s financial turmoil and the Swedish bank crisis 
The current financial turmoil and the Swedish bank crisis actually have a number of common 
denominators.  Harvard  professor  Kenneth  Rogoff  together  with  Carmen  Reinhart  of 
Maryland University has pointed to a number of similarities between the US mortgage turmoil 
and a number of earlier financial crises, including the Swedish bank crisis at the beginning of 
the  1990s.  Some  common  denominators  for  the  period  prior  to  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis 
include a rapid increase in property and share prices, the fact that the current account deficit 
was  large  and  growing  and  that  economic  growth  had  declined  from  an  earlier  high  level. 
One important difference is that the exchange rate regime has not played a prominent role in 
the US case.  
Too low risk premiums and abstruse risks 
But it is also possible to find more specific parallels to the Swedish bank crisis. In both cases 
lending  has  increased  rapidly  at  the  same  time  as  the  banks  have  underestimated  and 
therefore not taken sufficient payment for the credit risks. In Sweden this was linked to the 
banks – after decades of credit regulation – lacking a developed strategy for managing and 
pricing credit risk. When deregulation came in the mid-1980s they were quite simply unused 
to loan losses. But such tendencies could also be seen prior to the recent market turmoil. For 
a  long  time,  risk  premiums  for  credit  risk-related  securities  were  remarkably  low.  The 
uncertainty has led to an increase. 
But, there are also other parallels. This includes in particular the arrangements that made the 
banks’ real risk-taking more abstruse. The banks’ formal and informal promises of loans to 
special investment vehicles meant that the problems quickly bounced back into the banks' 
balance sheets.  
In the Swedish bank crisis one can say that the finance companies in some respects played 
a  corresponding  role  to  the  special  vehicle.  It  was  the  finance  companies  that  primarily 
financed  the  expansion  in  the  construction  and  property  markets.  The  finance  companies 
largely financed themselves in the short term by issuing so-called commercial papers in the 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 3
fixed income market. When the property market folded, it was a finance company, Nyckeln, 
which  in  September  1990  was  the  first  to  throw  in  the  towel  when  it  could  not  renew  its 
financing. Other finance companies then followed suit.  
Many of the finance companies were owned by the banks. And the banks were tied by both 
formal and informal commitments. The losses therefore soon returned to the bank system. In 
1991  it  became  apparent  that  the  banks  had  substantial  problem  loans  through  their 
exposures to the property branch both directly and indirectly through the finance companies 
they supported. The bank crisis had become a reality. Perhaps you begin to see a pattern 
now? 
The structures were a side-effect of the desire to avoid regulation 
It is also interesting that the abstruse structures, which led to the current financial turmoil and 
the bank crisis in the 1990s, were in both cases partly due to so-called regulatory arbitrage. 
The most recent wave of securitisation of the banks’ credit portfolios was partly propelled by 
deficiencies  in  the  capital  adequacy  rules.  Through  securitisation  the  banks  could  easily 
avoid a lot of expensive capital adequacy. Since 2004 a new capital adequacy regime, Basel 
II, has applied. This is more finely meshed and does not allow the same possibilities to avoid 
capital  adequacy  through  securitisation.  However,  it  has  not  yet  been  implemented  in  all 
countries, such as the United States, for instance. 
The Swedish finance companies were in their day the result of regulatory arbitrage. Prior to 
the  abolition  of  credit  regulation  in  Sweden,  the  finance  companies  were  often  used  as  a 
means for the banks to get round the credit restrictions. This “grey” credit market was once 
substantial and an important source of additional income for the banks. Around 25 years ago 
I myself wrote quite a lot about this.  
Credit insurances existed then as now 
One  can  also  observe  another  similarity,  namely  the  occurrence  of  so-called  credit 
insurances. A company that sold credit insurances to the Swedish banks in the 1980s and 
1990s was Svenska Kredit. Many banks bought insurances against losses from their loans to 
property companies from this company. When the property market crashed, Svenska Kredit 
was unable to meet all of its obligations and consequently went bankrupt. This in turn fuelled 
the problems for the banks.  
There  are  parallels  between  the  Swedish  credit  insurance  companies  of  that  time  and  the 
current so-called monolines. These are large insurance companies which are specialised in 
insuring  various  types  of  bond  loan.  Those  who  have  bought  the  companies’  insurances 
have  traditionally  been  municipalities,  federal  states  and  other  bond  issuers  with  poorer 
credit  ratings.  The  insurance  has  meant  that  the  bond  loans  have  received  better  credit 
ratings  and  it  has  been  possible  to  sell  them  at  better  rates.  In  July  2007  the  outstanding 
volume of bonds insured by monolines amounted to a value of USD 3,300 billion. 
In recent years these monolines have increasingly been used to insure securities issues with 
a subprime content. This has meant that they have also begun to experience problems. This 
risks  in  turn  having  repercussions  for  the  securities  they  have  insured  and  ultimately  for 
those who have invested in them.  
Of  course,  there  are  also  some  essential  differences  between  the  most  recent  financial 
turbulence and the Swedish bank crisis. This applies to both the nature and the scope of the 
crisis. But, as you will note, there are many and striking similarities in the way people have 
acted. Or as Voltaire is supposed to have said "While history may never repeat itself – man 
always does!” 
4 
 BIS Review 30/2008
Financial crises arise as a result of imbalances in the balance sheet 
So why do financial crises arise? The root of most financial crises can quite simply be found 
in the imbalance between assets and financing. The simplest way to illustrate this is to look 
at  a  stylised  bank’s  balance  sheet.  On  the  asset  side  there  is  lending  to  companies  and 
households. These are assets that cannot be realised quickly without a substantial discount. 
In other words, they are illiquid. The bank’s financing on the other hand largely consists of 
deposits  from  the  general  public  and  short-term  borrowing  on  the  interbank  and  securities 
markets. Their financing is thus very liquid.  
In normal circumstances this is not a problem, as we do not expect all depositors and other 
lenders to withdraw their money or their financing at the same time. But at the same time this 
liquidity transformation makes the bank sensitive to its financiers' confidence in its ability to 
meet its obligations. Suspicions that the bank has financial problems could very quickly lead 
to a bank run.  
There  have  been  many  bank  runs  in  the  past.  Stockholms  Banco,  which  was  founded  by 
Johan  Palmstruch  in  1656,  was  hit  by  a  bank  run  in  the  1660s  when  the  depositors  lost 
confidence in the notes issued by the bank. The bank was taken over by the estates of the 
realm,  and  is  the  precursor  to  the  Riksbank  which  was  founded  in  1668.  There  were 
countless bank runs in the United States at the end of the 1920s and the beginning of the 
1930s. Argentina and Indonesia were hit at the end of the 1990s and the beginning of the 
2000s.  And  as  recently  as  September  2007  the  British  building  society  Northern  Rock 
suffered a bank run. I shall return to this shortly. 
It is clear that even the most recent financial turmoil is a question of an imbalance between 
assets  and  liabilities,  although  the  assets  and  liabilities  have  come  to  look  rather  different 
than in the fictitious example. Essentially this is a question of the same thing, namely lending 
at long durations that is funded in short durations. The awareness of this inherent instability 
and  the  difficulty  in  seeing  where  the  risks  lie  meant  that  there  was  sometimes  too  little 
liquidity  in  parts  of  the  money  market.  What  is  new  is  that  banks  around  the  world  have 
become much more dependent on the securities markets for managing risks and financing 
themselves. In 2007 we had concrete evidence of how sensitive the banks have become to 
liquidity  shocks  in  these  markets.  Problems  in  the  securities  markets  have  almost  never 
before returned to the bank systems with such force.  
The importance of financial stability 
When Northern Rock suffered problems, the British authorities took a number of exceptional 
measures.  For  instance,  the  Bank  of  England  granted  the  building  society  emergency 
liquidity assistance. And HM Treasury abandoned the limits of its existing deposit guarantee, 
extending them to cover all deposits in Northern Rock without limitation.  
The question that many people are probably asking is why so much effort was made for one 
individual financial institution. Public measures  of this type could hardly be appropriate if it 
had been a question of an ordinary engineering company or retail chain that was in financial 
straits. It is due to two factors. Firstly, it concerns the special role played by the banks and 
the  bank  system  as  a  whole  in  the  economy.  Secondly,  it  concerns  the  special  contagion 
risks  in  the  financial  system.  In  a  central  bank  context,  these  are  usually  called  systemic 
risks.  
Banks and other intermediaries in the credit market who receive deposits from the general 
public play a central role in the financial system. They contribute, for instance, to facilitating 
the mediation of capital by acting as intermediaries between depositors and borrowers.  
They  also  create  the  conditions  for  more  efficient  mediation  of  payments  in  the  economy. 
The banks’ deposit accounts are of central importance for the use of payment cards, credit 
cards and credit transfers. Many banks also participate in the system for the settlement of 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 5
large-value payments supplied by the central bank. The banks and their account systems are 
therefore a vital part of the payment system. So if anyone asks why the banks are special, I 
could reply in the same way as John Dillinger, designated by the FBI in the 1930s as public 
enemy number one, when asked why he robbed banks: “Because that’s where the money 
is.” 
At the same time, problems that arise in one bank can easily spread to other banks. This 
spread  can  occur  in  different  ways.  Firstly,  there  can  be  a  direct  spread,  through  the 
exposures  the  banks  have  to  one another  in the  payment  systems  and  in connection  with 
foreign exchange and securities trading. Severe chain effects can arise if the customers of a 
bank  suffering  problems  have  their  means  of  payment  tied  up  in  the  bank.  This  makes  it 
difficult  to  make  payments  to  other  households  and  companies.  It  can  lead  to  liquidity 
problems that can in turn give rise to loan losses and payment problems for these customers’ 
banks.  
Secondly,  the  banks  are  often  exposed  to  the  same  sorts  of  risk.  This  increases  the 
probability that, for instance, a macroeconomic shock may affect more than one bank. The 
spread  of  problems  between  banks  can  thus  also  arise  as  an  indirect  effect,  through 
expectations that other banks may suffer similar problems to the one first affects, or via more 
well-founded suspicions of the banks' exposures to one another. 
The  contagion  risks  mean  that  problems  in  one  bank  can  easily  lead  to  problems  for  the 
entire bank system. The costs to society of a crisis affecting the entire bank system can be 
substantial. It is, of course, difficult to calculate these costs. Some surveys have indicated 
that an average production loss resulting from a bank crisis could be around 15-20 per cent 
of  GDP.  According  to  some  calculations,  the  collapse  of  the  Swedish  bank  market  cost 
around 5 per cent of GDP in terms of a loss in output.  
Seen from society’s point of view, the individual agents’ incentives are not sufficient to take 
protective  measures  against  crises  that  affect  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  The 
shareholders can never lose more capital than they have put in and individual depositors find 
it  difficult  to  monitor  a  bank  with  widespread  operations.  There  are,  to  use  economic 
terminology,  considerable  negative  externalities.  In  addition  to  the  consumer  protection 
aspects,  this  is  a  decisive  motive  for  having  a  financial  safety  net  in  the  form  of  special 
regulation, supervision and a deposit guarantee. It is also the reason why central banks have 
the possibility to provide liquidity support in the form of emergency liquidity assistance. Such 
emergency liquidity assistance shall in principle only be granted if the institution in question 
has temporary liquidity problems, but is essentially robust and if there are systemic contagion 
risks.  
It was exactly this risk of domino effects in the rest of the financial system that meant that 
Northern  Rock,  which  can  hardly  be  said  to  be  of  critical  significance  to  the  bank  system, 
became the object of a number of measures taken by the British authorities. It was probably 
similar  considerations  that  motivated  the  measures  taken  in  Germany  to  save  IKB  and 
Sachsen Landesbank.  
Now one has seen that it was not so easy for the British authorities to manage the problems 
in  Northern  Rock.  The  existing  regulations  and  arrangements  did  not  prove  particularly 
effective. Despite the measures taken, they did not manage to avoid a bank run. This has led 
to the authorities in Great Britain drawing up, in an impressively short time, proposals for a 
number of improvements in the regulatory framework for managing institutions in distress. In 
February  the  British  finance  minister  announced  that  they  had  decided  to  nationalise 
Northern  Rock,  as  there  was  otherwise  a  risk  that  the  cost  to  the  taxpayers  would  be  too 
high.  
6 
 BIS Review 30/2008
The regulations for managing institutions in distress are inadequate  
As partially responsible for the stability of the financial system, I ask myself, how are things in 
Sweden?  Do  we  have  the  regulatory  framework  required  to  manage  possible  future 
problems?  Unfortunately,  the  answer  to  that  question  must  probably  be  no,  at  least  at 
present. 
During  the  Swedish  bank  crisis  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  a  number  of  extraordinary 
measures  were  taken.  These  included  issuing  the  bank  deposit  guarantee.  This  was  a 
general declaration that the banks’ creditors would be protected. In addition, a special crisis 
management authority was established, the Swedish Bank Support Authority. In connection 
with  this,  a  number  of  provisions  of  a  compulsory  nature  were  introduced  to  prevent  the 
possibility  of  the  state  being  placed  in  a  blackmail  situation.  For  instance,  an  act  was 
introduced  that  meant  in  principle  that  the  Swedish  Bank  Support  Authority  could  make 
decisions in the bank through a state compulsory purchase of the shares if the bank’s capital 
adequacy fell below two per cent.  
But these temporary provisions, like the general bank guarantee, ceased to apply in 1996. 
The Bank Support Authority was transformed into the Deposit Guarantee Board, which was 
given the task of managing the deposit guarantee and investor protection.  
Since then it is in principle only the general regulations for competition and liquidation and 
the  system  for  the  deposit  guarantee  that  are  available  for  managing  institutions  with 
problems.  Unfortunately  it  is  not  particularly  appropriate  –  if  even  possible  –  to  apply  the 
general  competition  regulations  to  banks.  The  regulations  on  competition  and  liquidity  are 
primarily  to  protect  the  interests  of  the  creditors.  They  are  not  particularly  well-adapted  to 
take  into  account  society’s  interest  in  maintaining  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  The 
primary task of a receiver in a bankruptcy is to safeguard the interests of the creditors. He or 
she  has  neither  the  authority  nor  can  be  expected  to  have  the  skills  required  to  take  the 
measures needed to safeguard the stability of the financial system.  
Problems which threaten stability require immediate action. Bankruptcies usually take years 
to resolve. Some elements of the general bankruptcy procedure, such as freezing balance 
sheets,  may  in  some  cases  be  directly  harmful  if  applied  to  a  systemically-important 
institution.  For  example,  the  banks’  central  role  in  the  payment  system  means  that  one 
cannot  merely  stop  payments  in  one  or  more  of  the  major  banks,  as  this  could  have 
devastating  consequences  for  the  financial  system.  During  the  bank  crisis  no  banks  were 
declared bankrupt. 
The lack of specially-adapted regulations for winding up problem institutions with the capacity 
to take into account society’s need for financial stability was emphasised by the Banking Law 
Committee.  This  was  a commission  of  enquiry  appointed  in  1995  in  the  wake  of  the  bank 
crisis  to  look  into  the  needs  for  modernised  legislation  for  banks.  The  Committee  also 
presented  a  proposal  for  a  new  system  to  manage  banks  in  distress,  called  public 
administration.  This  proposal  has  now  been  under  investigation,  as  it  is  called,  by  the 
Government Offices since the year 2000.  
Custodia was a reminder of the shortcomings 
Since  then  we  have  received  new  indications  of  the  shortcomings  in  the  regulations.  The 
course  of  events  at  credit  institution  Custodia  in  2006  indicated  worrying  difficulties  in 
managing even a relatively small and insignificant problem institution. We are therefore in no 
way  better  equipped  than  the  United  Kingdom  to  manage  problem  institutions  and  this 
applies with regard to both small and large institutions.  
Fortunately, Custodia was a small company and the problems occurred in a situation where 
there  was  relative  calm  on  the  financial  markets.  The  stability  of  the  financial  system  was 
thus definitely never threatened. But it is regrettable that we still have not managed to create 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 7
an adequate regulatory framework in this field, more than fifteen years after our own bank 
crisis.  
In countries where they have slightly more experience of bank failures, such as the United 
States and Canada, they have learn that special institutions and arrangements are required 
to manage institutions that are experiencing financial problems. 
One of the most important lessons is that the authorities must be able to intervene as quickly 
as possible when a bank faces problems. There are several reasons for this. The first is to 
put  pressure  on  the  management  and  owners  of  the  bank  to  rectify  the  situation  and 
hopefully  to  prevent  the  situation  deteriorating  further.  The  so-called  Savings  and  Loans 
crisis in the United States in the 1980s become more costly when the  authorities failed to 
take action in time. This meant that in the United States at the beginning of the 1990s they 
introduced a system with so-called prompt corrective action. This means that the authorities 
quite simply are obliged by law to intervene at certain specified thresholds. In my opinion it is 
desirable that Finansinspektionen (the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority) should also 
have a large toolbox of measures that can be taken at an early stage. It should be possible to 
intensify these measures gradually as problems worsen. Of course, it is not desirable that the 
only possibility is to withdraw the license of an institution whose capital adequacy falls below 
the  eight  per  cent  level.  In  Sweden,  there  is  every  reason  to  look  more  closely  into  the 
obligations and powers of authority of Finansinspektionen. 
Another  motive  for  the  authorities  to  act  quickly  is  to  be  able  to  quickly  pay  the  deposit 
guarantee. To be able to make the necessary preparations for this, the authorities therefore 
need  to  have  access  to  and  control  over  relevant  data  files  at  an  early  stage  when  an 
institution  gets  into  difficulties.  This  has  been  a  problem  in  earlier  cases  of  compensation 
from the Swedish deposit guarantee.  
If  the  financial  system  is  threatened,  the  authorities  must  also  be  able  to  temporarily  take 
control  over  the  bank  to  maintain  vital  functions.  The  banks’  central  role  in  the  payment 
system means that payment defaults by one bank can have substantial domino effects. The 
consequences for the rest of the financial system may then be difficult to survey.  
With regard to institutions lacking a long-term survival capacity, it is of course important that 
they  are  wound  up  as  quickly  and  smoothly  as  possible.  There  must  be  several  different 
alternative methods for winding up banks to make it possible to choose the model that is best 
suited  and  entails  the  least  cost  to  society.  Of  course,  it  would  be  best  if  one  could  get 
another  bank  to  take  over  this  institution’s  activities.  But  the  possibility  to  carve  up  the 
business and sell it in parts could in some cases prove more profitable. In certain cases a 
reconstruction of the bank may be the most appropriate solution. 
If it were to take too long to find a buyer, it might be necessary for the state to take over the 
bank  temporarily.  This  was  what  was  ultimately  necessary  in  the  case  of  Northern  Rock. 
There is a risk in similar situations that the state could be exposed to blackmail. To minimise 
the costs to taxpayers,  it is therefore necessary in my opinion that the state has sufficient 
strength to negotiate with existing and presumptive shareholders. For instance, there must 
be legal possibilities for the state to redeem the shares at a price corresponding to the value 
of  the  bank  if  there  are  no  state  aid  measures.  It  is  also  particularly  important  to  avoid 
situations where a bank ends up in a no man’s land regarding ownership. 
An essential condition for a well-functioning system is that one can attain a balance between 
all  of  the  interested  parties  who  come  forward  when  a  bank  is  in  distress.  The  various 
interests  include  society’s  interest  in  financial  stability  and  the  depositors’  interest  in  good 
consumer  protection.  But  there  are  also  the  creditors’  interest  in  good  protection  and  fair 
treatment,  the  taxpayers’  and  the  fee-paying  institutions’  interest  in  the  cost  of  the  deposit 
guarantee system being as low as possible. In addition to this are the owners’ interest in their 
legal rights and not least society’s interest in the administration of justice functioning in the 
field of economic crime.  
8 
 BIS Review 30/2008
All of these interests, and probably more, are entirely legitimate and must of course be taken 
care of in the legislation. But they must be classified according to their relative significance to 
society.  Otherwise  it  will  not  be  possible  to  distribute  the  roles  between  the  different 
authorities  in  the  best  way  when  managing  problem  institutions.  There  is  also  a  risk  of 
wasting valuable time on managing conflicts between different interested parties instead of 
managing the institution’s problems. In other words, it is necessary to have a bird’s eye view 
when drawing up regulations. 
in  distress.  The  design  of 
The regulations must be formulated to give the state the right tools  
I  know  that  the  Ministry  of  Finance  is  currently  working  hard  on  a  proposal  for  public 
administration  of  banks 
the  deposit  guarantee  and 
Finansinspektionen’s powers of authority are also being reviewed. We eagerly await these 
proposals. Even if the work is carried out on parallel tracks, it is important that the final result 
is coherent. Otherwise it could be difficult to manage a future crisis in the financial system. 
It is also important that the proposals are not toothless. Running a bank is not a right, rather 
it entails considerable responsibility towards both society as a whole and the customers who 
have  entrusted  their  savings  to  the  bank.  Bank  owners  are  already  protected  through  the 
financial safety net and isolated against risks in a completely different way to those who own 
ordinary companies. It would therefore be unfortunate if the result was merely a proposal that 
entailed the state taking over the management of a problem institution, fixing it up and then 
handing it back to the owners in a new, improved version.  
My hope is that the government will dare to take the overall approach required when working 
on  these  issues.  I  hope  in  particular  that  they  will  take  note  of  the  events  in  the  United 
Kingdom and the initiatives that have come about as a result of the problems with Northern 
Rock. It is important that the state has the necessary tools. If the current EU legislation in 
various ways puts a spoke in the wheel, then the joint regulations also need to be reviewed.  
The internationalisation of the financial sector requires greater cross-border 
cooperation  
The  authorities’  crisis  preparedness  and  legal  and  institutional  arrangements  for  crisis 
management  will  thus  be  less  of  a  purely  national  affair.  The  financial  sector  will  be 
increasingly  internationalised,  if  not  globalised.  The  banks’  activities  are  becoming  more 
cross-border in nature.  
The four largest Swedish banks currently have more than half of their total assets abroad, 
mainly in the other Nordic countries, but also in Germany, Poland and the Baltic states. An 
almost equally large share of their total operating profits originates abroad. For the Nordea 
group this share is no less than three quarters.  
In recent years there have also been some much-publicised cross-border acquisitions among 
several  large  European  banks.  There  are  currently  around  50  banks  in  Europe  with 
substantial  operations  in  several  EU  countries.  There  are  a  number  of  interacting  reasons 
behind this. The capital adequacy rules have been harmonised, the opportunities to expand 
in small and mature domestic markets are slight and the economies of scale have increased 
as a result of, for instance, IT costs accounting for a larger share of the banks’ total costs.  
When the banks operate across national borders competition increases. This benefits both 
companies  and  households,  as  financing  costs  fall  and  the  supply  of  financial  services 
increases. These are efficiency gains which are ultimately beneficial for economic growth. 
But at the same time the risk of a bank crisis spreading across national borders increases. 
This also increases the risk of serious problems arising in several countries at the same time. 
This  makes  high  demands  of  crisis  management.  The  exchange  of  information  and  the 
decision  making  must  be  coordinated  between  different  authorities.  I  know  from  my  own 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 9
experience that this can be difficult to achieve in just one country. The differences between 
the different authorities’ aims, perspectives and methods of working can be substantial. In a 
cross-border  crisis  it  would  also  be  necessary  to  coordinate  the  authorities  in  several 
different countries. It is not difficult to imagine that this could be very complicated. Apart from 
involving  more  authorities,  a  number  of  legal  and  practical  complications  arise.  This  can 
sorely test the coordination of the exchange of information and the decision making. 
The Swedish bank’s substantial activities abroad have therefore meant that the Riksbank has 
entered into a number of agreements on cooperation in the event of financial crises with the 
central  banks  in  the  other  Nordic  countries  and  in  the  Baltic  states.  There  is  now  also  an 
overall  agreement  on  crisis  management  at  EU  level  –  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding, 
MoU. This covers central banks, supervisory authorities and finance ministries in all of the 
member states. Agreements of this nature are valuable because they create orderly forms for 
cooperation.  They  create  necessary  contact  networks  and  not  least  a  common  parlance, 
which  can  be  of  great  importance  when  managing  a  crisis.  But  these  MoUs  also  have 
shortcomings.  They  are  often  worded  in  a  vague  and  general  manner  and  are  not  usually 
legally binding; more a declaration of intent.  
But the most serious deficiency is that they do not take into account the conflicts between 
national interests which may arise in a crisis situation. These should be added to all of the 
other  conflicts  which  may  arise  between  different  interested  parties  and  authorities  with 
different objectives. Conflicts between national interests can be particularly prominent if the 
socioeconomic  costs  of  a  crisis  in  a  cross-border  institution  are  unevenly  or  unreasonably 
distributed between different countries. This could in some situations affect the willingness to 
contribute constructively to an overall solution of the crisis. There is an evident risk that the 
crisis  management  can  be  prolonged  by  political  negotiating  games.  When  the  stakes  are 
high, there is a risk that many countries will choose to play their cards close to their chest as 
long  as  possible.  In  the  worst  case  scenario,  this  could  lead  to  crisis  measures  not  being 
taken in time, which could have devastating results for all those involved.  
In  September  2007  a  Nordic-Baltic  crisis  exercise  was  organised  around  a  financial  crisis 
scenario. Taking part in this exercise were the central banks, financial supervisory authorities 
and finance ministries of all of the five Nordic countries and the central banks of the Baltic 
states. Without going into any details, I can reveal that the exercise brought to light many 
deficiencies in coordination – both between authorities within individual countries and across 
national  boundaries.  In  particular,  it  showed  that  measures  taken  unilaterally  by  the 
authorities in one country can easily have disastrous consequences for financial stability in 
other  countries.  It  also  further  emphasises  the  importance  of  continuing  to  develop  the 
cooperation and ensuring that national regulations do not form an obstacle to cross-border 
crisis management.  
In a crisis it is essential that the authorities in different countries understand one another’s 
assessments of the situation and preferable that they can reach a common view. This makes 
demands for common criteria and joint terminology.  
It must also be possible to coordinate various measures across borders, such as emergency 
liquidity  assistance  and  payments  of  deposit  guarantee  funds.  And  it  must  be  possible  to 
distribute  the  socioeconomic  burdens  in  the  wake  of  a  cross-border  crisis  in  a  reasonable 
and  preferably  fairly  predictable  manner.  Otherwise  there  is  a  risk  that  conflicts  between 
national interests will make the management of a crisis more difficult and prolonged.  
Another  aspect  which  has  come  to  the  fore  in  the  recent  financial  turmoil  is  the  banks’ 
increased dependence on liquidity in the securities markets for their risk management and 
financing. Central banks around the world need to examine whether they have the necessary 
tools to manage coming liquidity crises. The question of when and how liquidity support can 
be  given  and  how  such  a  decision should  be  communicated  without  having  a  stigmatising 
effect that counteracts its purpose may require new ways of thinking. 
10 
 BIS Review 30/2008
Better regulations and increased cross-border cooperation are necessary 
Let me in conclusion observe that the financial turmoil currently prevailing bears a number of 
clear parallels to many other financial crises – not least the Swedish bank crisis of the 1990s. 
The  bank  crisis  was  in  many  ways  the  wake-up  call  that  made  the  Riksbank  and  other 
authorities  realise  the  serious  consequences  that  a  lack  of  stability  in  the  financial  system 
can  have.  It  led  to  the  Riksbank  developing  an  analysis  capacity  in  the  field  of  financial 
stability. Ten years ago the Riksbank published the first of its now regular Financial Stability 
Reports. I can warmly recommend that you read them. 
The  insights  from  the  bank  crisis  have  also  led  to  the  Riksbank  strengthening  its  crisis 
organisation  and  developing  forms  for  cooperation  between  authorities  with  regard  to 
managing  financial  crises.  But  one  important  element  is  missing,  namely  an  effective  and 
coherent  regulatory  framework  for  managing  institutions  in  distress.  In  my  opinion,  one 
should have at least some fundamental requirements for such a system.  
Firstly, it should ensure the quickest, most resolute action possible from Finansinspektionen 
when a financial institution suffers problems.  
Secondly, it should be designed so that it is possible to quickly and easily pay the deposit 
guarantee.  
Thirdly, it should give the state sufficient negotiating power towards existing and presumptive 
shareholders  to  prevent  taxpayers  having  to  bear  the  cost  when  a  financial  institution  has 
been mismanaged. 
Without well-functioning arrangements and appropriate legislation already in place it may be 
very difficult to manage future problems in the Swedish financial system.  
And it is not sufficient to merely patch up the gaps in the domestic regulatory framework. The 
real challenges lie in managing cross-border crises. This is becoming increasingly important, 
particularly in the light of the banks’ increasing international operations. It entails challenges 
that we must tackle jointly on an international level. The regulations must be developed at 
European level, at least. 
All  of  these  are  difficult  issues.  One  does  not  need  to  look  far  beyond  narrow  authority 
objectives and short-sighted national interests to realise that new regulatory frameworks and 
arrangements  for  cooperation  are  required  if  we  are  to  be  able  to  manage  future  financial 
crises. But this appears to be an insight that not everyone reaches at the same time. The 
picture appears to be most clear to the countries that have come furthest in the question of 
the integration of the financial sector across national boundaries and which themselves have 
experience of financial crises. It appears to take other countries longer to realise what new 
demands arise from the changes in the financial landscape. To achieve this it is necessary to 
surmount  ingrained  opinions  and  other  internal  resistance.  I  hope  that  it  will  not  require  a 
financial crisis of catastrophic proportions before the political maturity and willingness to go 
further can be achieved on all fronts, both nationally and within the EU. 
As John F Kennedy said, “the time to repair the roof is when the sun is shining.” When it 
starts to drizzle it is high time to speed up. 
With these words I conclude my talk here at the Swedish Economics Association. It has as 
always been a great pleasure to be able to share my thoughts with this prominent assembly 
of economists. I will happily answer any questions you may have now. 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 11
