Paul Tucker: Money and credit, twelve months on 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Tucker,  Executive  Director  and  Member  of  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee of the Bank of England, at the Money, Macro and Finance Research Group 40th 
Annual Conference, Birkbeck College, London, 12 September 2008. 
 As many people have said, this is a challenging time for policymakers. But the real challenge 
is for households and firms in the real world who are having to navigate the fallout from the 
extraordinary  combination  of  financial  and  commodity  shocks  rippling  through  the  world 
economy. Our job as policymakers is to make that process as smooth as it can be over the 
medium term. And having our eye on the medium term means we must ensure that the gains 
of the past ten-to-fifteen years in stabilising inflation are not frittered away. 
In confronting that task, policymakers are having both to make big picture judgments about 
the balance of forces buffeting the UK economy; and to apply areas of economic theory that 
stretch  the  frontiers  of  existing  research.  So,  in  joining  your  research  conference  this 
morning,  I  want  to  sketch,  broadly,  what  the  current  conjuncture  suggests,  from  the 
policymaker’s  perspective,  should  feature  in  the  future  research  agenda  of  monetary 
economists.  
The current conjuncture, and policy 
By  way  of  establishing  the  context,  I  will  begin  with  the  Bank  of  England’s  most  recent 
economic  forecast.  In  August,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  published  our  latest 
projections for output growth and inflation. On the then profile of market interest rates, the 
Committee  as  a  whole1  judged  that,  most  likely,  output  growth  would  slow  quite  sharply 
during the current year and would be anaemic for a period thereafter. Crucially, the balance 
of  risks  to  that  most  likely  (or  modal)  outlook  was  judged  to  be  on  the  downside.  In  other 
words, the mean forecast for output was somewhat weaker still. For inflation, meanwhile, the 
most likely outlook was that, after an uncomfortably high and protracted spike, it would fall 
back to a little below the 2% target by the end of two years, and would continue to drift down 
thereafter. In other words, the crucial judgment was that the accumulation and persistence of 
slack in the economy would most likely be enough to avoid inflation getting out of control.  
That was the part of the August projections that captured the attention of the markets and 
commentators.  
But, collectively, we also concluded that the balance of risks to the inflation outlook was to 
the  upside, so  that  the  mean  for  inflation  was  actually  above  the  2%  target  at  around  two 
years or so. That’s not without significance given that most analytical models suggest that 
policymakers  should  set  policy  in  the  light  of  the  mean,  not  the  mode  –  although  a  better 
description of the MPC’s approach would be to say that we take account of the nature of the 
entire distribution of risks.2  
                                                 
1    See Tucker, PMWT, 2008 “Making monetary policy by Committee” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2008 
Q3 (forthcoming) for some thoughts on the  relatively collective nature of the MPC’s forecasts given its one 
person, one vote decisions on Bank Rate. 
I have to say that the textbook stress on the mean (or expected value) might be somewhat overdone in some 
circumstances, in particular  where the mean is materially influenced by certain types of low probability/high 
impact risks. I hope the following will illustrate that. Imagine, not in the current context, that there is a risk of a 
dollar collapse against the euro, the currency of the UK’s largest trading partner, but without a similar risk of 
sterling  collapsing.  Say  the  probability  is  judged  to  be  low,  but  the  impact  large;  so  that,  in  the 
probability-weighted way, it is enough to shift the mean outlook for future inflation. If (if) the risk crystallised, 
2  
BIS Review 112/2008 
 1
Now, putting this together, the following inference can be drawn; and I hope that I shall be 
excused  if  I  plod  through  this  in  slow  motion.  Focusing  on  a  roughly  two-year  horizon,  if 
inflation was most likely to be below target in the context of the August modal forecast for 
output,  then  it  would  be  even  further  below  target  if  the  MPC’s  view  in  August  of  the 
downside risks to growth were to materialise (ie consistent with the mean path for output but 
no further adverse shock to costs). But, in fact, the mean path for inflation was above target 
at  around  two  years.  That  underlines  the  hefty  upside  risk  to  inflation  that  featured  in  the 
Committee’s August projections.  
Indeed,  we  cannot  be  remotely  complacent  about  the  risks  in  either  direction.  This  is  a 
delicate balance, and one that is developing from month to month. It is a convenient but in 
some  ways  misleading  shorthand  to  characterise  the  Committee  as  currently  balancing  a 
growth  risk  against  an  inflation  risk.  Given  our  mandate  –  and,  indeed,  given  how  the 
economy  works  –  that  is  better  thought  of  as our  having  to  balance  the  downside  risks  to 
inflation over the medium-term against the upside risks to inflation over the medium-term. So, 
perhaps contrary to some recent commentary, the MPC remains as focused on medium-term 
inflation  as  ever.  No  shift  in  the  underlying  reaction  function.  No  shift  in  the  aversion  to 
inflation (or to deflation). But, of course, the current environment is highly unusual and our 
reaction  function  cannot  be  written  down  as  a  fully  specified  state-contingent  rule;  and  so 
everyone is discovering that we truly are committed to low inflation in the medium term.  
The mandate is expressed in terms of stable low inflation because that is what central banks 
can  deliver  over  the  medium  term,  and  because  nominal  stability  is  a  precondition  for 
sustainable growth. 
There is not a comfortable medium-term trade off between growth and inflation. Inflation is 
just the opposite of a free lunch. If in the interests of sustaining growth in the short run, we 
were to risk letting inflation become established at higher levels, things could easily get out of 
control  as  higher  medium-term  inflation  expectations  would  become  embedded.  We  would 
then  find  it  much  harder  to  bring  inflation  back  to  target,  and  could  well  end  up  having  to 
generate a serious recession to put the genie back in the bottle. The experience of the thirty 
years  before  the  current  regime  demonstrated  the  economic  and  social  costs  –  to 
households, livelihoods and businesses – of what that entails. The MPC’s inflation targeting 
mandate is the expression of those lessons that – tragically for millions of people, given the 
chances of getting stuck in unemployment – UK policymakers had to learn. We’re not about 
to give up on the mandate. Success in anchoring inflation expectations in line with the target 
will give us more scope over time to cushion the economy from the adverse shocks to growth 
– which of course we would want to do when we can, consistent with medium-term stability.  
What does, of course, shift as the months pass is our assessment, as nine individuals, of the 
balance of risks to inflation, given changes in the economic environment. And quite a lot has 
happened since our August forecast.  
In  the  six  weeks  or  so  since  the  Committee’s  August  report  was  finalised,  the  signs  of 
weakening in the UK’s major trading partner, the euro area, have intensified. Growth appears 
to be slowing in parts of Asia too. And in the US, the housing market has not yet obviously 
stabilised,  which  is  probably  a  precondition  for  broader  recovery  there.  Domestically,  the 
output data have been on the soft side, moving into line with the battery of surveys and the 
Bank’s  regional  Agents.  The 
to  have  softened,  with 
unemployment  rising  and  fewer  vacancies  advertised.  It  is  perhaps  not  surprising  that, 
compared with recent slowdowns, there should be less hoarding of labour if firms expect the 
adverse  environment  to  persist  for  a  while;  and  with  tighter  credit  conditions,  stretching 
labour  market  also  appears 
                                                                                                                                                      
the export-oriented euro area would be adversely affected, and the UK with it. But, seriously, should the UK 
cut the policy rate to head off the risk of a dent to output from a dollar collapse that hadn’t yet occurred? I don’t 
think so. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2008
to 
for 
the 
firms 
finance 
it  harder 
retention  of  a 
working  capital,  making 
less-than-fully-occupied  labour  force.  In  the  manufacturing  sector,  input  and  output  price 
inflation have edged down very slightly. In the service sector, the data are less timely, though 
surveys have started to indicate some slowing in the pace of inflation. Commodity prices – 
not only energy, but food too – have continued to fall, perhaps reflecting the effects on global 
demand of the earlier price rises and the reduction of subsidies by a raft of emerging-market 
countries.  Equities  have  fallen  around  3%.  But  sterling’s  exchange  rate  has  fallen  –  by 
around 4% since the MPC’s August meeting; and by about 15% since the beginning of 2007, 
so that, in sterling terms, the fall in oil prices has been less pronounced over the past month 
or so.  
On balance, those developments mostly comprise downside news, since the August Inflation 
Report,  to  the  outlook  for  demand  and  for  inflation.  But  the  recent  depreciation  of  the 
exchange rate has to be offset against that. And headline inflation has reached 4.4%. It will 
probably  rise  further.  The  Committee  can  and  will  ensure  that  this  is  a  temporary  state  of 
affairs. But, for the moment, inflation expectations do continue to flash an amber light. 
Meanwhile,  credit  has  remained  tight,  and  underlying  money  growth  has  decelerated, 
implying  that  monetary  conditions  may  be  leaning  against  those  incipient  inflationary 
pressures. 
At the end of the last year – some months’ after the onset of the market turmoil – I set out 
some of the thinking that guided my interpretation of the monetary data and how it related to 
my policy decisions.3 I stressed that “we must try to avoid  a vicious circle in which tighter 
liquidity  conditions,  lower  asset  values,  impaired  capital  resources,  reduced  credit  supply, 
and slower aggregate demand feed back on each other”. A vicious circle between the world 
financial system and global economy has so far probably been kept at bay; global growth has 
slowed not collapsed. But there is no denying an adverse feedback loop between tightening 
credit conditions, the macro slowdown, and the perception that that will in time impair banks’ 
asset portfolios. So it seems timely to revisit some of the issues of “money and credit”. 
The Taylor-rule framework for thinking about policy  
It  is  well  over  a  decade  since  John  Taylor  set  out  what  has  become  part  of  the  current 
orthodoxy of monetary economics. His rule looks something like this: 
it = Πt +r*
t+ a(Πt – Π*
t ) +b(yt-y*
t ) 
This is, at its roots, a Wicksellian view of the world.4 By fixing the short-run nominal rate, the 
central bank can, given stickiness in prices over the short run, shift the short real interest rate 
– both in absolute terms and, more particularly, relative to the short-run real rate that would 
equilibriate demand and supply.5 So that gap between the short real rate and its “equilibrium” 
can be thought of as representing the stance of monetary policy, which should be chosen by 
the central bank in the light of the extent to which inflation deviates from target, and to which 
aggregate demand deviates from the supply capacity of the economy. Implicit in this rule is 
                                                 
3   See Tucker, PMWT (2008) “ Money and credit: banking and the macroeconomy”, Bank of England Quarterly 
Bulletin, 2008 Q1 pp 96-106. 
4   See Wicksell, K, 1898, “Interest rates and Prices”. 
5   Typically, policymakers think about that in terms of the “output gap”, reflecting firms’ capacity utilisation and 
slack/pressure  in  the  labour  market.  By  contrast,  in  the  academic  literature  –  notably  Michael  Woodford’s 
Interest and Prices – the benchmark is to set monetary policy in order to offset the frictions in the economy, so 
as  to  obtain  the  conditions  that  would  prevail  if  prices,  wages  etc  were  fully  flexible.  Policymakers  and 
academics need to resolve how big the gap is between those two approaches. 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 3
that the textbook policymaker knows how the degree of slack in the real economy acts on 
future inflation (or the slope of the Phillips curve).  
The  two  forces  sweeping  through  the  world  economy  test  the  way  policymakers  typically 
apply various elements of this set up in more routine circumstances. 
For example, how do the commodity price rises and, separately, the credit crunch affect the 
“equilibrium”  short-term  real  rate?  Is  the  actual  short  real  rate  still  an  adequate  proxy 
measure of monetary conditions? Is the “normal” relationship between economic slack and 
future inflation intact?  
The cost shocks, and monetary conditions  
Although they have fallen by nearly $50 since the peak reached in July, oil prices are still up 
more than 200% since the middle of 2003; and, indeed, around 3% since the beginning of 
this year. As oil is a key input to production, this acts like a negative supply shock for the 
Western economies: it costs firms more to produce the same level of output than before the 
run  up  in  oil  prices.  And,  like  a  tax,  it  acts  to  redistribute  spending  power  from  energy 
consumers  to  energy  producers.  In  those  circumstances,  real-take  home  pay  has  to  grow 
more  slowly  for  a  while  in  order  to  avoid  the  capital  stock  shrinking  as  firms  sought  to 
maintain the internationally-determined required rate of return. The role of monetary policy is 
to  facilitate  that  process,  recognising  the  potential  redundancy  of  some  capital  resources 
given  higher  energy  prices,  and  the  upward  pressure  on  real  interest rates  as  households 
seek to borrow to tide them over the tough times. 
In other words, in the now standard set up, taking the cost shock on its own, the equilibrating 
short-term  real  rate  (r  star)  has  risen  and  the  economy’s  potential  supply  (y  star)  has 
probably  fallen.  So,  ignoring  other  developments,  policy  would  have  to  be  tighter  than 
otherwise, even if the direct effects of the cost rise on the price level were accommodated. 
But, of course, other things have been going on, and it is the net effect for our policy rate that 
matters. And that involves making a judgment about the tightness of credit conditions. 
The credit shock and monetary conditions 
In  conducting  policy,  commentators  usually  take  the  short-run  nominal  interest  rate,  Bank 
Rate, as a summary measure of monetary conditions. If Bank Rate is increased, monetary 
conditions are being tightened; and conditions are being loosened if Bank Rate is cut. There 
are a few important simplifying assumptions being made here – assumptions whose validity 
in current circumstances is doubtful.  
In  the  first  place,  that  view  of  the  world  implicitly  assumes  that  the  equilibrium  real  rate  is 
stable over time, whereas in fact it will move about.6 Sometimes the central bank will need to 
change its policy rate simply in order to maintain unchanged monetary conditions (as proxied 
in the literature by r minus r star). In the same vein, if near-term inflation expectations rise or 
fall,  our  nominal  policy  rate  may  need  to  change  just  to  leave  the  actual  short  real  rate 
unchanged. In other words, we can fix only one thing – the short nominal rate – but what any 
particular level of Bank Rate means for monetary conditions will depend on short-run inflation 
expectations and on the equilibrium real rate needed to balance the economy. Both will likely 
have changed materially in the face of the cost and credit shocks. 
What our Bank Rate will mean for monetary conditions will depend on how it relates to the 
panoply of other interest rates on financial contracts. In fully efficient markets, the risk-free 
                                                 
6   See Neiss, K and Nelson, E (2001) “The real interest rate as an inflation indicator”, Bank of England Working 
Paper No 130. 
4 
 BIS Review 112/2008
rate is a fully satisfactory summary statistic; other rates fall into line through arbitrage, with 
differences reflecting risk premia. More practically, it can typically be assumed that the rates 
charged on private sector loans are maintained at fairly stable spreads relative to the risk-
free yield curve (ie given the expected path of the policy rate). And, related to that, it can also 
typically be assumed that the degree of credit rationing in the economy is broadly constant 
over time. Obviously, neither of those things is true at present.  
The most unusual, and stretched, circumstances lie within the global financial system itself. 
The premium on unsecured interbank lending has risen (Chart 1); and growth of such lending 
has  slowed.  This  reflects  a  desire  to  hoard  liquidity  in  a  hazardous  environment;  and 
heightened aversion to taking on unsecured credit exposures for term maturities. Banks are, 
in consequence, deleveraging7 their balance sheets. Broadly, they can do so in two ways – 
raise extra capital, or shrink (the pace of growth in) their balance sheets. Both have been 
underway. The balance sheet shrinkage is reducing the supply of credit to households and 
firms. But there is differentiation across the banking industry, according to size and strength. 
In that environment, spreads on corporate bonds are higher. Many corporate and household 
lending  rates  have  been  affected  by  the  rise  in  Libor  relative  to  risk-free  rates.  And  retail 
rates – for both loans, and some deposits – have risen relative to the relevant risk-free rate. 
Effective rates on some types of lending are not much changed since last summer, but we 
have cut Bank Rate by 75bp and the risk-free curve has shifted down (Chart 2). 
All this is true in the US too, probably more so. That has led John Taylor himself to suggest8 
that, to maintain an unchanged policy stance, the policy rate should be reduced by the extent 
of  the  widening  in  spreads.  In  fact,  as  I  am  sure  Taylor  recognises,  it is  nowhere  near  so 
straightforward  –  if  for  no  other  reason  than  that,  for  the  real  economy,  the  most  severe 
feature of the credit shock is the rising incidence of quantity rationing.9
There appears to be some discrimination between lower-risk and higher-risk borrowers in the 
household sector. Rates on fixed-rate mortgages have recently been cut for lower loan-to-
value borrowers. We have added a question to our current Credit Condition Survey, due out 
later  this  month,  to  gauge  conditions  in  that  part  of  the  market.  Plainly,  conditions  have 
tightened a lot for riskier borrowers – households and firms. That means we need to look at 
quantity data as well as at the price of credit. For companies, money growth has fallen very 
sharply.  Lending  held  up  for  a  while,  but  possibly  in  part  because  firms  were  drawing  on 
committed  lines  of  credit  while  they  were  still  available  on  pre-turmoil  terms.  The  Credit 
Conditions Survey has signalled a clear tightening (Chart 3). 
To translate this back into a Taylor-rule world, we would need to know the so-called “shadow 
prices”.  Of  course  we  don’t  know  those  unobservable  prices.  But  we  can,  perhaps,  get  a 
broadbrush handle on the materiality of the tightening by using estimated equations for credit 
(and money) demand, holding all other influences constant.10 There is just huge uncertainty 
                                                 
7   See  Tucker,  PMWT  (2008),  “The  credit  crisis:  lessons  from  a  protracted  peacetime”,  remarks  given  at  the 
Chatham  House  conference  on  “The  New  Financial  Frontiers”.  These  remarks  are  also  forthcoming  in  the 
2008 Q3 edition of the Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin. 
8   See Taylor, JB., (2008) “Monetary Policy and the State of the Economy”, testimony before the Committee on 
Financial Services, US House of Representatives, February and Mculley, P and Touli, R (2008) “Chasing the 
Neutral Rate Down: Financial Conditions, Monetary Policy, and the Taylor Rule”, Global Central Bank Focus, 
PIMCO. 
9   Another reason reflected in the Curdia and Woodford (2008) paper is the fact that borrowers and savers have 
different propensities to consume. Consequently a change in spreads will affect the “average rate” faced by 
borrowers and savers in a different way from a change in the policy rate. 
10   Based, for example, on Brigden, A and Mizen, P (1999) “ Money, credit and investment in the UK corporate 
sector”, Bank of England Working Paper number 100. 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 5
about  such  estimates  but,  for  what  it’s  worth,  they  indicate  a  material  tightening  from  this 
source.  
Alternatively, that can be thought of as being equivalent to a fall in the real risk-free rate of 
interest  that  would  equilibriate  supply  and  demand.11  Taken  on  its  own,  this  rather  leans 
against the proposition, advanced by a number of commentators, that monetary conditions 
are loose on the grounds that deducting CPI inflation of between 4 and 5% from a Bank Rate 
of 5% leaves a “real rate” close to zero. First, as I have been arguing, it is vital to take into 
account the possibility that the real rate warranted in the current conjuncture has fallen. 
Second, headline CPI might not be the best deflator for calculating the relevant real rate of 
interest. CPI may not necessarily be the price – the “own real rate” – relevant for individual 
households’ and businesses’ spending decisions.12 For example, firms’ investment might be 
more dependent on the price of capital goods. Despite the pickup in oil prices, the pace of 
inflation  for  capital  goods  has  been  much  lower  than  for  CPI.  So  that  might  suggest  a 
correspondingly higher real rate for businesses than one based on CPI (Chart 4). A similar 
question could be posed about the real rate facing households, given that the CPI currently 
excludes the costs of owner occupation.  
So one can safely conclude that it is not all straightforward at present to calibrate monetary 
conditions.  
For  researchers,  that  underlines  the  importance  of  renewing  work  directed  at  gauging 
monetary conditions. A recent paper by Michael Woodford13 concluded that information from 
money and credit quantities could not add anything to spreads; and, what is more, that they 
were not as useful as spreads because the quantity effects of a tightening become apparent 
only with lags. The set up in Woodford’s paper does not, however, involve quantity rationing. 
When such rationing occurs, data on the quantity of lending and money may be more useful, 
even with a lag, than the shadow prices that cannot be observed! Of course, I absolutely do 
not  want  a  reversion  to  oversimplified  Monetary  Conditions  Indices,  which  set  a  trap  for 
policymakers by ignoring the nature of the shocks that shift credit supply and other financial 
variables. But we do need to have a better quantitive understanding of how the equilibrium 
real rate (r star) shifts with shocks to the financial parts of the economy.  
For  UK  policymakers,  overall,  the  sharp  slowing  in  corporate  and  household  credit  and 
money  growth  signals  that  monetary  conditions  are  quite  tight.  Tighter  bank  lending 
conditions will make it harder for households to maintain their spending during this testing 
period  –  when  the  rise  in  energy  and  food  prices  has  squeezed  disposable  incomes;  and 
when the savings rate was already low. Similarly, with less easy access to credit, it will be 
harder for firms to bridge to the expected recovery without cutting costs. On the whole, the 
corporate sector probably entered this episode with stronger balance sheets, leveraged buy-
outs  aside,  than  the  household  sector.  But,  as  the  months  have  passed,  firms  have  been 
registering a greater sensitivity to tighter financial conditions.  
The  lags  between  the  incidence  of  the  financial  shock  last  summer  and  its  impact  on 
spending in the economy have been fairly drawn out. It is striking that through the autumn 
and perhaps even into the spring, a number of commentators thought this was essentially a 
problem for Wall Street not Main Street. We need more research to help understand those 
lags, and whether the credit shock has been more potent for its coinciding with the climb in 
commodity prices. 
                                                 
11   David Miles has recently made a broadly similar point in “The cost of bank debt: rethinking the neutral rate”. 
12   I owe this point to Mervyn King. 
13   See Curdia V, and Woodford and M (2008), “Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy”, a paper discussed 
at the BIS Annual Conference in June 2008. 
6 
 BIS Review 112/2008
That assessment has informed my view that slack will accumulate, leaning against – but not 
eliminating  –  the  current  upside  risks  to  inflation.  Indeed,  the  best  gauge  of  our  view  of 
monetary  and  credit  conditions  is  to  be  found  in  our  periodic  forecasts  for  growth  and 
inflation.  
Nominal trends  
A  hazard,  given  the  current  paradigm  in  monetary  economics,  is  that  its  all  too  easy  for 
policymakers to fall into the habit of never mentioning anything nominal – apart from inflation 
expectations. 
One of the key challenges for monetary researchers is, accordingly, to discover more about 
what determines inflation expectations. Meanwhile, whatever is incorporated into forecasting 
models, policymakers cannot sensibly just take it for granted that expectations are anchored, 
so that inflation will painlessly come back into line with the target whenever it is driven away 
by  temporary  cost  shocks.  What  that  means  right  now  is  that  arresting  the  upside  risk  to 
inflation cannot rely entirely on real-economy interactions.  
So what diagnostics have we got on nominal trends, right now? 
On  the  whole,  they  are  not  signalling  an  imminent  resurgence  in  inflationary  psychology. 
Nominal demand growth has slowed quite sharply (Chart 5). Adjusting for various misleading 
technicals,14 broad money has decelerated sharply (Chart 6). The rate of growth of so-called 
Divisia money, a measure of transactions balances, has similarly fallen sharply. And in the 
labour market, nominal earnings growth has recently been below 3.5%, although the annual 
wage  round  lies  ahead.  Sterling’s  exchange  rate  has  fallen,  however.  That  might  be 
consistent with the foreign exchange markets expecting a nominal shock in the future. But 
there  are  other  possible  explanations,  notably  that  a  risk  premium  may  have  become 
incorporated to compensate for uncertainty in the outlook.  
Had  there  been  a  shift  in  the  market’s  inflation  expectations,  the  obvious  place  for  that  to 
show up would be in the yields on nominal government bonds. For medium-term maturities, 
so-called  “breakeven  inflation  rates”  –  derived  from  the  difference  between  the  yields  on 
conventional and inflation-indexed gilts – have stabilised over the past few months. Given the 
frictions that many believe distort indexed-linked yields,15 I also like to look directly at nominal 
forward rates. The underlying thought is that, relative to fluctuations in bond yields brought 
about by past shifts in inflation regimes, longer-term risk-free real rates may not move around 
a great deal, so that any systematic inflationary impulse would be quite likely to show up in 
nominal  yields.  Consistent  with  that,  following  the  UK’s  disinflation  in  the  early-1990s, 
medium-term nominal forward rates fell by around 400bp. Since the new monetary regime 
became  established  in  the  late  1990s,  they  have  been  more  or  less  stable,  and  currently 
remain within the range prevailing over the past decade or so.  
Surveys  of  household  inflation  expectations  tell  a  broadly  consistent  story.  For  near-term 
horizons,  they  have  picked  up  sharply.  What  limited  information  we  have  on  the  public’s 
                                                 
14   Broad money (M4) can be adjusted using Bank estimates of banks' intragroup business with other financial 
corporations,  as  well  as  banks'  repo  activity  with  LCH.Clearnet's  RepoClear  service.  Such  estimates  are 
based on anecdotal information provided by a small sample of banks. Work is under way within the Bank to 
improve  the  basis  of  these  estimates,  see  Burgess,  S  and  Janssen,  N  (2007),  “Proposals  to  modify  the 
measurement  of  broad  money  in  the  United  Kingdom:  a  user  consultation”,  Bank  of  England  Quarterly 
Bulletin, vol. 47, no. 3, pages 402-14. 
15   Of course, if true risk-free rates fall then, other things being equal, nominal forward rates would fall too, and so 
would not, on their own, be a good indicator of inflation expectations. Given the bulge in Asian savings, there 
are reasons to think that long real rates might have fallen. But this is much less pronounced in US$ TIP yields 
than in UK indexed-gilt yields, and so I incline to the view that the gilt-market “breakeven” rates are somewhat 
distorted. 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 7
medium-term expectations suggests that the expectations might have been more contained, 
and might more recently have started to edge down a bit. But it is hard to know how much 
weight to place on that.  
But if the upside risks to medium-term inflation are not yet firmly embedded in expectations 
and so are not evident across the nominal indicators, we certainly cannot conclude that the 
risk has passed.  
Headline inflation outturns remain elevated, and could top 5% – well above the 2% target – 
for a number of months. Not only have goods prices accelerated, reflecting the direct impact 
of food and energy prices, but services inflation has risen too (Chart 7). As a diagnostic of 
the underlying upside risks, ignoring the direct effect of past increases in food and energy 
prices,  inflation  has  reached  around  2%.  Sterling’s  recent  depreciation  will  give  a  further 
impulse  to  import  prices;  and  so,  other  things  being  equal,  may  stretch  out  the  period  of 
uncomfortably high inflation, endangering inflation expectations.  
Moreover,  there  remains  a  risk  of  continuing  inflation  impulses  from  the  persistence  of 
imbalances in the global economy. 
Global inflation, global imbalances and the international monetary regime 
The rate of nominal expansion in much of the emerging market world has remained brisk. 
From  our  point  of  view,  up  until  recently  that  seemed  to  add  to  the  upward  impetus  to 
commodity prices, exacerbating the upward pressure on our firms’ costs.  
Of  course,  part  of  the  rise  in  commodity  prices  over  the  past  few  years  is  explained  by  a 
profound  structural  shift  as  the  world  economy  is  joined  by  large,  rapidly  developing 
economies  which  are  increasingly  energy  intensive.  In  addition,  nominal  demand  has 
probably  played  a  role  recently.  Some  EMEs  have  exchange  rates  that  are  fixed, more  or 
less,  to  the  US  dollar,  and  so  have  been  importing  a  monetary  easing,  which  they  hardly 
needed,  as  the  FOMC  cut  the  Fed  funds  rate  to  address  domestic  US  circumstances.  In 
other countries, there has also been less than complete sterilisation of the monetary effects 
of  exchange  rate  intervention.  Absent  offsetting  policy  action,  eventually  the  nominal 
expansion  permitted  will  be  dissipated  in  rising  inflation  and  so  an  appreciation  in  real 
exchange rates. For a given path of nominal demand, that would tend to reduce the pressure 
of  demand  on  global  commodity  prices,  as  many  of  the  largest  EME  economies  are, 
basically,  commodity  importers  themselves.  But  persistent  elevated  inflation  in  the  EMEs 
would  also  increase  the  nominal  price  of  some  of  our  imports,  unless  an  adjustment  in 
nominal exchange rates were permitted. In fact, over recent months there have been some 
steps  towards  taking  domestic  monetary  action  across  a  number  of  emerging  market 
economies.  But  there  is  a  risk  that  higher  EME  inflation  will  persist  if,  left  unchecked,  it 
becomes embedded in inflation expectations.  
With  inflation  also  elevated  across  the  major  industrialised  economies,  this  underlines  the 
risk to global inflation from imbalances in global supply and demand. Individual countries can 
suffer exogenous shocks to inflation from commodity prices, but that is essentially a relative 
price  shift,  to  which  the  world  economy  has  to  adjust.  By  contrast,  a  persistent  rise  in 
inflationary pressures cannot be exogenous for all countries collectively. In that respect, the 
international monetary regime, and the global imbalances it has sustained, continues to pose 
risks to the outlook for our economy. 
Indeed, in terms of where we find ourselves, we must take care not to put the cost shock and 
the  credit  shock  in  completely  separate  boxes.  They  both  owe  something  to  global 
imbalances.  Early  commentators  on 
international  monetary  system, 
the  developing 
8 
 BIS Review 112/2008
combining a mixture of floating and fixed-rate exchange rates (so-called Bretton Woods II),16 
were  inclined  to  the  view  that  current  account  imbalances  would  prove  sustainable  – 
essentially because Asia would, they assumed, continue to finance the USA’s savings deficit. 
But, as has become apparent over time, that seemed to rely on the invisible hand smoothing 
over  the  counterpart  imbalances  within  some  net  debtor  economies,  notably  the  USA;  or, 
more  crudely,  of  it  making  no  difference  that,  in  aggregate,  American  households  had 
effectively given up saving.  
Given  the  now  widely  acknowledged  ex  ante  imbalance  a  few  years  ago  between  global 
investment and Asian-fuelled global saving, this was associated with a compression of long-
term risk-free rates and an associated rise in asset prices. And given frictions elsewhere in 
the  system,  including  the  US  GSE’s  guarantees  reducing  the  headline  returns  on  prime-
mortgage  securitisations,  that  contributed  to  compression  in  risk  premia.  And  that,  I  fear, 
fuelled a “search for yield” in which investors, having enjoyed the extraordinary windfall gains 
that accompany rising asset prices, extrapolated forward their elevated ex post returns into 
ex ante requirements (Diagram A).17 (Such extrapolation amounts to a bubble, but via the 
channel of a requirement or target rather than, directly, a simple expectation.) There’s only 
one way to deliver on such requirements in those conditions: take more risk and hope no one 
prices  for  it.  Leverage  and  maturity  transformation  were  the  order  of  the  day.  Macro  met 
finance, and the results were unhappy – a theme I shall return to later.  
For too long without success, monetary policymakers and international institutions called for 
resolution  of  the  global  imbalances.  Perhaps  with  hindsight,  the  industrialised  economies 
should  have  been  clearer  about  their  own  course  in  a  second-best  world  in  which  some 
important  exchange  rates  have  remained  semi-fixed  for  longer  than  believed  ideal.  The 
second-best  probably  involved  measures  to  generate  more  domestic  saving;  may  have 
invited  tolerance  for  temporarily  lower  inflation;  and  perhaps  tighter  regulation  of  liquidity 
provision  by  the  commercial  banking  system.  But  whatever  the  hindsight,  there  remains  a 
pressing need to evaluate now the continuing risks from the pattern of global current account 
positions and capital flows. 
For  researchers,  this  unfinished  episode  in  global  economic  history  underlines  the 
significance of international monetary economics, but perhaps also a need to integrate it not 
only with the theory of asset pricing but also with a rich appreciation of credit creation and 
risk. 
Risk premia, money, default and crises 
Indeed, an implicit theme running through various threads in my remarks this morning, which 
I shall now try to pull together, is the need for further progress in integrating macroeconomics 
and finance – applied as well as theory. I will give a few reasons why.  
As well as compensating for expected default, expected inflation and so on, yields on assets 
embody risk premia to compensate for uncertainty in future returns. In the modern literature, 
these risk premia are taken to be determined by how useful a financial asset is in helping 
households to smooth the path of their consumption. Assets that deliver low returns during 
bad times don’t contribute much to helping households sustain consumption, and so carry a 
higher  risk  premium.  So  risk  premia  might  vary  with  the  volatility  of  the  asset  return;  the 
volatility of consumption; and with the correlation between asset returns and consumption. 
                                                 
16   See  Dooley,  M.P,  Folkerts-Landau,  D  and  Garber,  P  (2003),  “An  essay  on  the  revised  Bretton  Woods 
System”, NBER Working Paper 9971. “System” is not quite the right  word, because it is not the product of 
collective international thought and planning. 
17   See Tucker, PMWT (2006) “Uncertainty, the implementation of monetary policy and the management of risk”, 
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2006 Q2 pp 202-211. 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 9
Like  other  economic  variables,  such  premia  may  change  as  their  underlying  determinants 
change, and given the nature of the “shocks” affecting the macroeconomy. All that is familiar, 
fairly  orthodox  stuff  these  days.  Indeed,  an  extraordinary  amount  of  work  at  the 
macro/financial  frontier  has  been  going  on  over  recent  years.  But  as  John  Cochrane  has 
commented, “work has barely begun”.18 From a policymakers’ perspective, that does seem to 
be the case.  
First, while papers are still produced in the tradition that “macroeconomists can safely go on 
ignoring finance”, we – policymakers – are having to make sense of a macro environment in 
which the supply of credit has been interrupted by problems sourced in part to swings in risk 
premia, and quite possibly swings in risk aversion. Models incorporating risk premia – and, 
indeed, embracing bubbles – might just help us with that.  
But it is striking that, so far, the progress in finance hardly features in the macro models used 
around  the  world  for  forecasting.  Indeed,  such  models  barely  recognise  the  existence  of 
financial instruments beyond risk-free bonds and equities.19 In modern DSGE models, asset 
prices (and so risk premia) merely reflect economic developments; they are not “actors” in 
any way. Even if we were to accept that risk premia are not “actors”, for policymakers they 
might serve as useful diagnostics of what is going on in the economy – of the nature of the 
underlying shocks – given that asset price changes are typically apparent some time before 
the associated real economy adjustments. On that view, we need research that will help us 
read the “risk premia” tea leaves. For example, an increase in premia that could be traced to 
an increase in the correlation between consumption and investment returns, might point to a 
prospective  increase  in households’  precautionary  saving.  But  it’s  less  obvious,  at  least  to 
me,  what  macroeconomic  developments  I  should  expect  if  risk  premia  rose  due  to  an 
“exogenous” rise, say due to reduced market making, in the volatility of asset prices. We also 
need to be able to make sense of shifts in relative risk premia on different asset classes. We 
need models that can say something useful about the compression, and then widening, in 
credit  and  liquidity  risk  premia  that  in  some  ways  define  the  current  financial  turmoil.  We 
need to know whether or not those shifts reflect changes in fundamentals, or unwarranted 
“exuberance” or “fear” in the markets; and whether or not they have implications for demand 
and supply conditions in the real economy.  
Second, very little has been said about how, or whether, the supply of money (or monetary 
policy) may affect risk premia. Years ago Brunner and Meltzer set out a view20 of how shocks 
to the supply of base money were transmitted to the economy through effects on asset prices 
over and above the impact on the risk-free discount rate, but through liquidity (and maybe 
other risk) premia. More recently, some policymakers,21 have conjectured that swings in the 
supply of broad money (via bank lending) can be associated with shifts in risk premia too. 
The thought is that in a world in which different assets are not perfect substitutes for each 
other, whether money is over or under-supplied can affect the relative value of other financial 
assets. If the channel is thought to work through broad money, as transactions balances,22 
then  of  course  it  is  the  supply  of  bank  lending  that  matters.  Essentially,  when  “liquidity”  is 
plentiful, it may be undervalued. That may build a bridge to the literature on how the supply 
                                                 
18   See Cochrane, J, “Financial Markets and the Real Economy. 
19   See Tucker, PMWT “Reflections on Operating an Inflation Target”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2006 
Q2 pp 212-224. 
20   See Tucker, PMWT (2007) “A perspective on recent monetary and financial system developments” Bank of 
England Quarterly Bulletin 2007 Q2 pp 310-316. 
21   Including  the  current  G  of  the  BofE  and  myself;  see  King,  M  (2002)  “No  money,  no  inflation  –  the  role  of 
money in the economy” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2002 Q2 pp 162-177. 
22   See  Thornton,  D.  L,  (2008)  “Monetary  policy:  Why  monetary  matters  and  interest  rates  don’t”,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of St Louis Working paper 2008-011. 
10 
 BIS Review 112/2008
of credit from the banking sector can influence the liquidity of asset markets.23 This echoes 
my earlier discussion of the potential utility, as indicators, of the data on money and credit 
quantities when the degree of credit rationing shifts. We’d do better at making sense of those 
issues if we had a better understanding of the determinants and macro-significance of risk 
premia in the first place.  
Extending that point, the literature may too easily dismiss the possible effects on prices of the 
demand and supply of financial assets more generally. But we need testable theories as to 
why, and the circumstances in which, they might matter.  
Finally,  looking  beyond  the  ex  ante  compensation  for  risk,  we  also  need  to  have  better 
models for exploring what can happen – in the financial system and in the macroeconomy – 
when nasty forms of risk do actually crystallise. Default comes to mind.24 Bank default is a 
special  case,  given  the  special  role  of  banks  in  a  monetary  economy.  And,  guess  what? 
Banks don’t really feature in modern macro models. Of course, incorporating those features 
of  the  real  world  is  incredibly  hard,  involving  heterogeneous  agents,  incomplete  contracts 
and markets, and uncertainty.  
Uncertainty needs to be underlined. It isn’t clear whether existing models could explain the 
swings we have been experiencing in some asset prices. Is that something to do with market 
participants  having  become  radically  uncertain  about  the  nature  of  the  underlying 
distributions? And do asset prices become actors in those circumstances? 
Over  many  decades  now,25  elegant  models  have  been  developed  for  studying  financial 
market distress in the abstract – whether affecting banks or asset markets. This, of course, 
involves strategic interaction amongst agents. We have other models in which the probability 
of such distress may be related to various characteristics of banks, such as whether they are 
comfortably  within  thresholds  for  capital  adequacy  –  the  argument  being  that  as  they  get 
closer to the threshold, depositors become less confident about the stability of each other’s 
behaviour.26  And  we  have  models  in  which  bank  capital  is  affected  by  macroeconomic 
developments; and models in which, through financial accelerator-like mechanisms, impaired 
bank capital affects the supply of credit,27 and so potentially macroeconomic variables. But 
we  don’t  yet  have  models  in  which  the  determinants  of  the  probability  of  banking  system 
distress  are  influenced  by  the  macro  environment;  and  in  which  such  distress  can,  really, 
occur and affect the macro environment. That seems to call for somehow embedding game-
theoretic strategic interactions within dynamic macro models.28
                                                 
23   See Allen, F, and Gale, D, (2007) “Understanding Financial Crises”, Oxford University Press. 
24   Commenting  on  a  recent  paper  by  Michael  Woodford,  Charles  Goodhart  (pointed  out  that  the  model 
incorporated credit risk premia but not default. Everyone is hoping that Woodford picks up the challenge. (See 
Goodhard, C, comments on “Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy” by Curdia and Woodford (2008). 
These were given at the 7th BIS Annual Conference. 
25   See  Diamond  DW,  Dybvig  PH,  (1983)  “Bank  runs,  deposit  insurance,  and  liquidity”  Journal  of  Political 
Economy 91, pp401-19. 
26   See Rochet, J-C and Vives, X (2004), “Coordination failures and the lender of last resort: was Bagehot right 
after all?”, Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 2(6), pages 1116-47 
27   See Adrian, T and Shin, HS (2008) “Liquidity and leverage”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 
No  328,  and  Bernanke,  Ben  S.,  Mark  Gertler,  and  Simon  Gilchrist  (1999).  "The  Financial  Accelerator  in  a 
Quantitative  Business  Cycle  Framework,"  in  Handbook  of  Macroeconomics,  Volume  1C,  Handbooks  in 
Economics, vol. 15. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1341-93. 
28   I stress dynamic macro models because we do already have Arrow-Debreu type general equilibrium models in 
which default can occur; eg Tsomocos DP, Jackson P,and Catarineu-Rabell, E (2003), “Procyclicality and the 
new Basel Accord – bank’s choice of loan rating system”, Bank of England Working Paper 181, and Dubey, P, 
Geanakoplos,  J  and  Shubik,  M  (2000)  “Default  in  a  general  equilibrium  model  with  incomplete  markets”, 
Cowles Foundation DP 1247, Yale University. The difficulty with such models for a macro policymaker is that 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 11
Overall, truly incorporating risk into our thinking has to be one of the last great frontiers for 
applied  macroeconomics.  For  central  banks,  that  would  help  to  meet  the  challenge  of 
integrating our monetary policy and financial stability missions, which cannot be separated in 
a monetary economy.  
Summary and conclusions 
This morning I have offered some thoughts on what one policymaker would find useful from 
future research in applied monetary economics: 
• 
• 
the determination of fluctuations in inflation expectations 
a revival of interest in money and credit quantities, especially when credit rationing 
means  that  we  cannot  observe  “shadow  prices”  and  so  cannot  live  entirely  in  the 
modern textbook world of prices 
and if, as I believe we should, we are going to continue to think largely in terms of 
prices, then we need more work on the determination of risk premia on a range of 
financial  assets,  and  the  information  they  can  give  us  on  the  real  economy, 
integrating this into our workhorse macro forecasting models 
empirical work on the lags with which shocks to the financial system feed through to 
the real economy, and on the conditions for the impact to matter 
work  designed  to  help  quantify  how  different shocks  to  supply  and  demand  affect 
the equilibrium short-term real interest rate 
greater interest in the international monetary regime, and on how countries may be 
able  to  shield  themselves  during  a  period  of  unsustainable  imbalances  without 
succumbing to “begar thy neighbour” policies; and 
the  development  of  dynamic  macro  models  in  which  really  bad  things,  such  as 
defaults,  bank  distress  and  asset  price  collapses,  can  happen  and  can  have 
macroeconomic effects. 
     That is quite a shopping list. The official sector, internationally, could, in my view, probably 
help – both researchers and itself – by producing data on financial flows and stocks as rich 
as the real economy data we collect. I have in mind things like the Federal Reserve’s “Flow 
of Funds” statistics. As well as being of immediate practical use, over time there would be 
benefits  from  the  richer  empirical  research  it  would  allow  your  community  to  conduct.  The 
underlying  thought  is  that,  until  we  know  more  about  risk  premia,  we  should  not  give  up 
tracking  quantities.  Doing  so  in  the  future  might  aid  comprehension  of  the  risks  in  the 
financial system.  
The challenge for policymakers is no smaller than that for researchers. We must tackle the 
task at hand with the tools we have. There are substantial risks to inflation in both directions 
over the medium term. But at present, the most likely prospect remains that, as the global 
economy slows, accumulating slack in the economy will head off the upside risks to inflation. 
That strategy relies not only on real-economy interactions, but crucially on the credibility of 
the  target  and  the  Committee.  Above  all  else,  therefore,  we  must  be  clear  about  our 
mandate: to deliver stable inflation, at 2%, over the medium term. 
 
                                                                                                                                                      
they tell the end of the story, when all relative prices have been determined, whereas we want to enrich our 
grasp of the narrative so that we can influence the end of the story. 
12 
 BIS Review 112/2008
Chart 1: Premium on unsecured interbank 
lending (Libor-OIS) 
Chart 2: Selective effective rates and Bank 
rate 
3 month
1 month
6 month
Basis points
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
PNFC overdraft rate
Household mortgage rate
Bank rate
Per cent
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
 
 
 
Chart 3: Credit condition survey(a)- large 
corporates 
1999 2000 20012002 2003 20042005 2006 2007 2008
 Chart 4: CPI and the capital goods deflator 
Net percentage balances(b)
Percentage changes on a year earlier
CPI
Capital goods 
1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007
Cheaper 
credit
Spreads
Dearer credit
Loan 
covenants
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
-100
Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
2007
2008
2007
2008
 (a) The blue bars show responses over the past three months. The 
red diamonds show expectations over the next three months. 
Expectations balances have been moved forward one quarter so that 
they can be compared with the actual outturns in the following 
quarter. 
(b) A positive balance indicates that spreads have become narrower, 
such that it is cheaper to borrow, or that the terms and conditions on 
which credit is provided have become looser. 
 BIS Review 112/2008 
 10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
13
 Chart 5: Nominal demand 
Percentage change on a year earlier
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006
  Chart 7: CPI inflation 
Services
CPI
Goods
Percentage changes on a year earlier
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
 14 
 3mth/Quarterly annualised rate
20
Chart 6: Divisia money(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Quarterly data prior to 2000, monthly data since then.  
1983
2001
1977
1989
1995
2007
15
10
5
0
-5
 BIS Review 112/2008
  
Diagram A: Stylised effect on equity returns of a fall in risk premia 
One-period ex-post equity returns
One-period ex-post equity returns
Time T 
Time T+x
Time T+x
Premium falls by Y% each 
period 
Pre- 
shock 
shock 
steady 
steady 
state 
state 
returns
returns
 Post 
shock 
shock 
steady 
steady 
state
state
returns
returns
time 
time 
 BIS Review 112/2008 
 15
