Ewart S Williams: Money laundering and terrorist financing 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the AML-CFT PROGRAMME, hosted by the Toronto Centre, the World Bank and 
the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, Port-of-Spain, 2 June 2008. 
 Let me join Carl Hiralal in thanking the World Bank and the Toronto Centre for joining with 
the Central Bank to put on this Workshop on Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing. 
A  special  welcome  to  all  the  participants  from  CARICOM  and  from  the  wider  Caribbean 
region viz. Haiti, Dominican Republic, Netherland Antilles, Bermuda, Aruba, Panama. 
I am very pleased that this Workshop is being put on because we in the Caribbean do not 
see  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  as  major  challenges.  Money  laundering  is  a 
crime,  and  this  is  so  because,  we  the  Regulators,  have  not  raised  the  level  of  awareness 
sufficiently. 
Money laundering is a way of legitimizing illegal activity. It contributes to making crime pay. 
From my vantage point, money laundering also contributes to undermining the integrity of the 
financial system and the market process. 
Where a financial centre or institution is used, wittingly or unwittingly by criminal elements or 
terrorists, there is an increase in reputation risks not just to the financial institution but also to 
the jurisdiction. Where the integrity of the centre is brought into question, other countries and 
institutions  generally  restrict  their  business  activities  with  such  a  centre.  As  a  result, 
correspondent  banking  relationships,  branch  networks  and  capital  market  activities  are 
negatively impacted and the long term viability of the centre is at risk with potentially serious 
economic consequences. 
Money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  can  carry  a  number  of  adverse  macro-economic 
consequences,  particularly  for  small  economies  like  ours.  These  normally  include  in-
explicable increases in the demand for goods and services (like real estate) that can be used 
to legitimize large sums of money that were derived from criminal activity. It can also lead to 
a reduction in the level of competition in certain business activities which generate a large 
volume  of  cash;  greater  volatility  in  international  capital  flows  and  unusual  pressures  on 
foreign  exchange  markets  and  exchange  rates,  due  to  unanticipated  cross-border  asset 
transfers. 
The rapid advance of globalization and the liberalization of financial markets have no doubt 
facilitated  money  laundering  and  have  made  it  truly  a  global  phenomenon.  These  factors 
have  also  underscored  the  critical  need  for  universal  strategies  to  fight  against  money 
laundering. All countries must participate in  this fight or the money being laundered would 
flow quickly to the weakest point in the international chain. It is in recognition of this reality 
that several international bodies, most prominently the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 
and 
the  CFATF,  have  developed  a  host  of 
recommendations  and  best  practices  to  help  all  countries  strengthen  their  anti-money 
laundering efforts. 
For the past three years the CFATF has been conducting Mutual Evaluation of its members. 
The World Bank has been providing personnel to assist in these Mutual Evaluations and we 
are very happy for this technical assistance being provided by the Bank. 
its  regional  counterparts, 
including 
BIS Review 87/2008 
 1
Recent CFATF evaluations of Caribbean jurisdictions suggest that members have displayed 
considerable commitment to improve compliance. These evaluations also indicate that there 
are significant deficiencies in the AML/CFT frameworks of all the countries in the region. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  according  to  our  national  security  agencies,  the  Caribbean  has  a 
Geo-Strategic location between illicit drugs providing and drug consuming countries. Thus on 
the  basis  of  geography  alone  we  should  be  good  candidates  for  money  laundering.  Yet, 
however, there are very few prosecutions of this crime in our region. 
The CFATF has identified a number of serious deficiencies that we face in administering an 
effective  anti-money  laundering  regime.  Firstly,  they  indicate  that  most  if  not  all  regional 
jurisdictions have not enacted the required legislation under-pinning the standards in the forty 
plus eight recommendations. 
In  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  we  are  now  addressing  the  legislative  requirement  through  the 
passage  into  law  of  an  amendment  to  the  Proceeds  of  Crime  Act,  2000;  the  Financial 
Obligations  Regulations,  2008  and  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  Bill,  2008.  In  December 
2005,  the  Central  Bank  revised  the  Guidelines  on  Combating  Money  Laundering  and 
Terrorist Financing. The requirements contained in the Guideline have been encapsulated in 
the  Financial  Obligations  Regulations  which  will  provide  a  legal  basis  for  such  key 
ingredients  as  Know-Your-Customer,  Internal  Controls,  Compliance,  Reporting,  Record 
Keeping  and  Training.  The  proposed  amendment  to  the  Proceeds  of  Crime  Act,  2000  will 
address reporting thresholds and Suspicious Activity Reporting. 
At present The Financial Intelligence Unit resides in the Counter Drug Crime Task Force and 
the proposed legislation will provide the Unit with the powers needed to receive and share 
information pertaining to suspicious transactions. 
A  second  observation  of  the  CFATF  Reports  is  that  there  is  a  shortage  of  resources 
allocated  to  anti-money  laundering  activities.  Many  countries  within  the  region  have  very 
limited financial and human resources and the allocation of dedicated human resources to 
anti-money laundering is a challenge. 
Third,  the  CFATF  Report  suggests  that  in  most  of  our  countries  AML/CFT  supervision  of 
designated non-financial businesses is virtually non existent. 
Fourth, Caribbean jurisdictions lack an effective operational framework. In such a framework, 
countries  are  required  to  maintain  statistics  not  only  on  the  number  of  AML/CFT 
examinations  but  also  on  prosecutions,  convictions  and  the  value  of  assets  forfeited. 
Statistics  to  support  the  level  of  international  cooperation  and  sharing  of  information  must 
also be kept. 
An effective implementation process also requires a dynamic public awareness programme. 
The  public  must  be  involved  in  the  fight  against  money  laundering  and  terrorism  and 
meaningful involvement can be achieved through their education on key issues and signals. 
Growth in the general awareness of the nature of money laundering and its pernicious effects 
when combined with the training of relevant stakeholders can lead to the appropriate level of 
vigilance. 
Ladies and Gentlemen for all the reasons outlined above this Workshop could not have come 
at a better time. From a quick glance, it is clear that the Agenda is pertinent and relevant. 
I would hope that this Workshop does three things: 
1. 
Help  you  to  improve  your  knowledge  of  money  laundering  techniques  and  the 
mechanisms that could be devised to deal with money laundering. 
Further discussions on ways of making the public more aware of money laundering. 
They must know that money laundering is a crime, that it affects them, the economy 
and the society; and  
2. 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2008
3. 
Contribute to strengthening the regional anti-money laundering network, get to know 
each other better and devise ways of sharing information with each other. Such a 
collaborative effort is needed in order to combat these two menaces. 
I wish you five days of fruitful and stimulating discussions. 
BIS Review 87/2008 
 3
