Boediono: Macroeconomic impact of climate change – opportunities and 
challenges (Keynote speech) 
Keynote  speech  by  Prof  Dr  Boediono,  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  Bank  Indonesia’s 
Annual International Seminar on “Macroeconomic impact of climate change – opportunities 
and challenges”, Nusa Dua, Bali, 1-2 August 2008. 
 Fellow Governors, 
Distinguished Speakers and Scholars, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Good morning! 
It is indeed a pleasure and an honor for me to welcome all of you to Bank Indonesia’s Annual 
International Seminar in this beautiful and majestic island of Bali. This seminar has become 
one of Bank Indonesia’s annual traditions, and this year’s event marks its 6th “anniversary”. 
It is truly heartwarming to see the presence of distinguished guests in the audience – fellow 
Governors,  deputy  governors  distinguished  speakers  and  scholars  from  various  world 
leading universities. We are truly delighted by your attendance. We are looking forward to 
having  lively  discussions  and  hearing  your  valuable  insights.  Having  this  good  mix  of 
participants we can surely hope for richer policy perspective on global warming and climate 
change. 
In this same island last year, during the 2007 UN Climate Change Conference, 187 nations 
have acknowledged the unequivocal evidence of global warming and risks of severe climate 
change  impacts.  The  Bali  Road  Map  produced  by  that  conference  was  a  significant 
milestone in the global drive to address the issues arising from global warming and climate 
change. 
The  Inter-governmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPPC)  concluded  that  global  warming 
could  cause  significant change  to  biological  and  physical  systems,  such  as  an  increase  in 
tropical cyclone intensity, changes in precipitation pattern, salinity of the sea, wind patterns, 
the reproductive period of animals and plants, species distribution and population, epidemics, 
and  also  influence  various  ecosystems  in  high  latitude  (including  the  Arctic  and  Antarctic), 
high altitude locations, as well as coastal ecosystems. Some of these effects will only be felt 
in the long run, some in the not too long run and some, such as the rise in the frequency and 
intensity of extreme weather with all of its consequences, are already evident now. 
However,  we  need  to  recognize  the  fact  that  there  is  an  asymmetry  in  the  capability  of 
citizens and governments in the developing and developed countries in coping and mitigating 
the crises’ adverse impacts. 
It is now agreed that to effectively respond to such a global challenge, we need a global and 
coordinated agenda of actions. In developing such an agenda, we ought to bear in mind that 
for governments in the developing world, unfavorable global climatic trend generally coupled 
by  the  lack  of  sufficient  technology,  human  capacity  and  fiscal  space may  further  limit  the 
scope of policy requirements that could be extended to them. 
Our coordinated and shared response to climate change must entail a systematic re-profiling 
and  redirecting  of  global  expenditures  by  both  governments  and  businesses  to  the 
developing world. 
Let me remind the audience that the Bali Road Map emphasizes the provision of financial 
and  other  incentives  to,  scale  up  the  transfer  of  clean  energy  technologies  from  the 
developed to the developing world. Nations have also agreed to develop programs designed 
to scale up investment that will lead to the transfer of technologies to developing economies. 
BIS Review 102/2008 
 1
While the government is going to be important even critical in dealing with climate change, 
an  even  more  difficult  task  involves  changing  the  incentives  of  the  billions  of  individual 
consumers and companies in the private sector. Consumers will need to reduce the use of 
carbon  intense  products  and  businesses  motivated  to  develop  alternatives.  Getting  these 
incentives right and unleashing private sector innovation has to be a big part of the response. 
In  that  respect,  if  properly  coordinated,  climate  change  mitigation  and  growth  can  both  be 
pursued at the same time. Capturing the needs of countries to mitigate the impacts of climate 
change, new industries are already rapidly developing. The countries that get the incentives 
right by creating an environment for the development of these technologies designed are on 
the right path to becoming economic winners in the next great technological revolution. 
Let us also not forget the most important aspect of any program in mitigating climate change, 
namely not to leave behind the world poor while countries develop and implement market-
based  solutions  to  mitigate  climate  change  risks.  Mechanisms  for  adaptation  fund  to  help 
poor countries cope with climate change should be part of our partnerships for development. 
To properly define our role, as central bankers, in such a global effect, we need to spell out 
as  precisely  as  we  can  the  ramification  of  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  global  climate 
change. 
As we gather in this room today, the world out there is struggling to deal with a crisis not, in 
my view, unrelated with the problem of global climate change: the unprecedented food and 
fuel price surge. Unfortunately, it happens as the world finance is also in turmoil. The market 
consequences  of  all  that  have  kept  central  bankers  across  the  globe  awake  at  night  from 
time to time. 
Fellow Governors, ladies and gentlemen, 
Before I conclude my remarks, let me reiterate that we live in a truly challenging time. Viewed 
from  a  policy  maker  in  a  developing  economy,  I  must  also  say  that  the  threat  of  climate 
change may go beyond the usual welfare statistics. If left unresolved climate change and the 
accompanying  twin  crises  may,  in  due  time,  put  our  shared  vision  of  a  free,  open  and 
democratic globe at risk. 
Let me now end my opening remarks with an expression of confidence that discussions in 
Bank  Indonesia’s  6th  Annual  International  Seminar  will  certainly  be  prolific  and  enrich  our 
understanding of the macroeconomic impact of climate change. I am looking forward to this 
seminar’s policy recommendations. 
Lastly, enjoy your stay in Bali! I do hope your stay in this warm and hospitable island of gods 
fashions you with lasting pleasant memories of Indonesia. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2008
