Frederic S Mishkin: Small business lending 
Testimony of Mr Frederic S Mishkin, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Committee  on  Small  Business  and  Entrepreneurship,  US 
Senate, Washington DC, 16 April 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Chairman Kerry, Ranking Member Snowe, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to 
appear before you on behalf of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to 
discuss the availability of credit to small businesses.  
Small businesses are critical to the health of the U.S. economy. They employ more than half 
of  private-sector  workers,  generated  well  over  half  of  net  new  jobs  annually  over  the  past 
decade, and create more than half of nonfarm business gross domestic product. Moreover, 
larger firms often begin as smaller firms that prosper and grow. If small businesses are to 
continue  to  provide  major  benefits  to  the  economy,  their  access  to  credit  is  clearly  a  high 
priority.  My  testimony  today  will  address  the  unusual  stress  imposed  on  credit  markets  in 
recent months and how that stress appears to be affecting small businesses. 
Small business access to credit and the current financial market turmoil 
As we all know, financial market conditions began to deteriorate quite rapidly in the middle of 
last August. In response to these and subsequent events, and in recognition that growth of 
the U.S. economy was slowing, the Federal Reserve has, since last fall, taken a number of 
strong  actions  aimed  at  both  restoring  the  normal  functioning  of  financial  markets  and  at 
stimulating the real economy.  
Although our actions appear to have helped stabilize the situation, financial markets remain 
under considerable stress. For example, many lenders have been reluctant to provide credit 
to  counterparties,  especially  leveraged  investors,  and  have  increased  the  amount  of 
collateral  they  require  to  back  short-term  security  financing  agreements.  Credit  availability 
has  also  been  restricted  because  some  large  financial  institutions,  including  some  large 
commercial and investment banks, have reported substantial losses and asset write-downs, 
which reduced their available capital. The capacity and willingness of some large banks and 
other  financial  institutions  to  extend  new  credit  has  also  been  limited  by  the  reduced 
availability of external funding from the capital markets for originated assets. The resulting 
unplanned  increases  in  their  balance  sheets  have  strained  their  capital,  thus  reducing 
lending capacity. The good news is that several of these firms have been able to raise new 
capital,  and  others  are  in  the  process  of  doing  so.  However,  market  stresses  are  likely  to 
continue to weigh on lending activity in the near future. 
With this general background in mind, let me now address how the financial market turmoil of 
the past several months appears to have affected access to credit by small businesses. As 
you  may  recall,  in  my  testimony  before  the  House  Committee  on  Small  Business  in 
November, I concluded that while credit conditions had no doubt tightened since mid-August, 
small businesses generally seemed to have been able to retain access to credit.1 However, I 
emphasized that the uncertainty surrounding that conclusion was unusually high, and it was 
far too early to draw any firm conclusions. To some extent that is still the case, although we 
                                                 
1   Frederic S. Mishkin (2007), "Availability of Credit to Small Businesses," statement before the Committee on 
Small Business, U.S. House of Representatives, November 7. 
BIS Review 45/2008 
 1
clearly have more information to work with now in assessing the effects of financial market 
turmoil on small business access to credit. 
In  its  initial  stages,  the  current  financial  market  turmoil  and  associated  problems  in  the 
housing market were focused on markets for securitized assets and affected primarily large 
financial organizations. In large part because only a small share of small business loans are 
securitized and because it is the relatively smaller banks that tend to specialize in providing 
"relationship finance" to small businesses, credit supply to small businesses held up rather 
well. Still, even in November it was clear that credit conditions had begun to tighten for small 
businesses.  
The trend toward tighter credit supply conditions for small businesses has continued since 
last  fall.  For  example,  in  the  Board's  most  recent  Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion  Survey, 
conducted in January, a net one-third of the domestic banks surveyed – a larger net fraction 
than  in  the  October  survey  –  reported  that  they  had  tightened  their  lending  standards  on 
commercial loans to small firms over the previous three months.2 Significant net fractions of 
banks also indicated that they had tightened price terms on commercial loans to both small 
and  large  firms.  The  net  fractions  of  banks  reporting  tighter  lending  standards  and  pricing 
terms on commercial loans in the January survey were relatively high by historical standards 
going back to 1990.  
Actual loan pricing data from our quarterly Survey of Terms of Business Lending are broadly 
consistent  with  the  qualitative  data  from  the  Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion  Survey.  For 
example,  data  from  our  most  recent  survey,  taken  in  February,  indicate  that  the  average 
interest rate on commercial loans relative to the bank's cost of funds (the bank's spread) rose 
modestly  from  the  corresponding  survey  week  of  three  months  earlier.  Of  particular 
importance  for  small  businesses,  however,  are  the  facts  that  these  spreads  jumped 
significantly both on loans originated by smaller U.S. banks and on smaller commercial loans 
– that is, those loans below $100,000. 
Despite tighter credit standards and loan terms, growth in the dollar amount of commercial 
loans  at  U.S.  banks  was  quite  well  maintained  in  the  first  quarter  of  2008.  Particularly 
noteworthy from the point of view of small businesses is the fact that after growing almost 20 
percent in the fourth quarter of 2007, commercial loans at small banks continued to expand 
at a rate of almost 12 percent in this year's first quarter.3 Thus, although slowing somewhat, 
commercial  loan  growth  has  held  up  in  recent  months  even  though  banks'  terms  have 
tightened  and  economic  growth  has  slowed,  the  latter  driving  down  the  demand  for  small 
business  and  other  commercial  loans.  On  balance,  this  suggests  that  credit  is  generally 
available, albeit at a higher cost.  
Another source of information about small business credit supply conditions is the monthly 
survey of the National Federation of Independent Businesses (NFIB). The results of the most 
recent  NFIB  survey,  conducted  in  March,  suggest  that  credit  supply  conditions  for  small 
businesses have held up fairly well over the past several months. For example, over the past 
few  quarters  only  about  3  percent  of  survey  respondents  have  reported  that  financing 
conditions and interest rates were their main business concern, and for March that number 
was  only  2  percent.4  In  addition,  according  to  the  NFIB  survey,  the  average  short-term 
interest rate paid by borrowers has remained at the low end of its historical range. On a less 
                                                 
2   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "The January 2008 Senior Loan Officer Opinion 
Survey  on  Bank  Lending  Practices"  (January).  In  October,  a  net  10  percent  of  banks  reported  tightening 
lending  standards  to  smaller  firms.  The  net  percent  of  banks  is  defined  as  the  percent  tightening  less  the 
percent easing standards. 
3   The first quarter's numbers have been adjusted for some statistical anomalies in February. 
4   These levels are far below their peaks of the early 1980s, when more than one-third of respondents reported 
that financing conditions were their main concern. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2008
positive note, in recent months the net percentage of NFIB survey respondents that reported 
credit  was  harder  to  obtain  over  the  previous  three  months  and  the  net  percentage  that 
expected credit conditions to tighten over the next three months have been at the upper end 
of  their  ranges  observed  over  the  past  few  years.  Still,  these  percentages  have  remained 
well  below  their  highs  reached  in  the  early  1990s  and  are  below  their  levels  from  last 
September's survey when they temporarily spiked up.  
On  the  demand  side,  the  NFIB  survey's  results  are  quite  pessimistic.  For  example,  the 
survey's index of small business optimism has dropped to its lowest level since the monthly 
surveys began in 1986, as the net percentage of borrowers that believe it is a good time to 
expand their business has fallen to the bottom of its range over the past two decades. This 
contrasts  sharply  with  survey  responses  last  September  which  indicated  that  the  NFIB's 
index  of  small  business  optimism  and  the  fraction  of  firms  that  considered  the  next  three 
months "a good time to expand" had remained at levels similar to those seen in the first half 
of 2007. If demand conditions continue to deteriorate, reduced demand for loans could lead 
to future declines in small business loans even if credit supply conditions remain about the 
same. 
A less comforting picture of small business credit supply conditions is provided by the Duke 
University/CFO  Magazine  Global  Business  Outlook  survey,  conducted  most  recently  in 
March.  About  one-third  of  the  chief  financial  officers  (CFOs)  of  small  businesses  who 
responded said credit was more costly, less available, or both as a result of the credit market 
turmoil. This proportion is up slightly from last September, when that sentiment was reported 
by about one-fourth of responding small business CFOs. This survey also asks respondents 
to  rank  their  top  three  concerns,  with  the  (changing)  options  given  in  the  survey.  "Credit 
markets/interest rates" was ranked as the second top concern among small business CFOs 
in both the March 2008 and the September 2007 surveys.5
Perhaps one of the most important concerns about the future prospects for small business 
access to credit is that many small businesses use real estate assets to secure their loans. 
For example, data from our 2003 Survey of Small Business Finances (SSBF) indicate that 45 
percent  of  the  total  dollar  amount  of  small  business  loans  outstanding  in  2003  was 
collateralized  by  some  type  of  real  estate  asset.6  About  37  percent  was  collateralized  by 
business  real  estate  assets,  and  15  percent  was  secured  with  "personal"  real  estate.7 
Looking forward, continuing declines in the value of their real estate assets clearly have the 
potential  to  substantially  affect  the  ability  of  those  small  businesses  to  borrow.  Indeed, 
anecdotal stories to this effect have already appeared in the press.  
Similarly, declines in the value of real estate assets held by banks and other lenders could 
affect their willingness and ability to supply loans, as real estate losses use up capital that 
could  otherwise  be  used  for  making  new  loans.  Indeed,  there  are  reasons  to  believe  that 
these forces are currently at work not only at large banks, where the initial problems were 
observed, but across the full size spectrum of  banking organizations. As noted previously, 
more  stringent  loan  terms  are  already  in  place.  In  addition,  banks  across  all  size  groups, 
including community banks, have recently experienced a sharp deterioration in credit quality, 
mostly  within  loans  secured  by  real  estate.  Moreover,  if  banks  continue  to  place  on  their 
                                                 
5   The  top  concern  in  March  was  customer  demand,  whereas  the  top  concern  in  September  was  the  cost  of 
labor. 
6   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2003), "2003 Survey of Small Business Finances"; Traci 
L. Mach and John D. Wolken (2006), "Financial Services Used by Small Businesses: Evidence from the 2003 
Survey  of Small Business Finances (185 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 92 (October), pp. A167-
A195. 
7   The two components sum to more than 45 percent because some loans are collateralized by both business 
and personal real estate. 
BIS Review 45/2008 
 3
balance sheets some assets that they had expected instead to place in conduits or otherwise 
sell to investors, the move could crowd out loans to small businesses and other borrowers.  
On  a  more  positive  note,  the  vast  majority  of  U.S.  banks  remain  well  capitalized.  Going 
forward, this should help these banks to maintain their lending capacity. In addition, lender 
constraints  on  small  business  loans  may  be  mitigated  somewhat  by  loan  guarantees 
provided by the Small Business Administration (SBA). 
The interdependencies between small business and household finance are among the most 
interesting  and  least  understood  aspects  of  small  business  access  to  credit.  In  addition  to 
personal real estate assets, other household assets such as automobiles may be used as 
collateral  for  small  business  loans,  and  personal  credit  cards  and  savings  accounts  are 
sometimes used to help finance a small business. For example, our SSBF documents that, in 
2003,  almost  47  percent  of  small  businesses  used  personal  credit  cards  in  the  conduct  of 
their business. At that time, most of this use appeared to have been for convenience rather 
than for longer-term borrowing. However, to the extent that small businesses become more 
reliant  on  credit  cards  as  a  source  of  funding,  perhaps  because  of  a  decline  in  their  own 
financial condition or because of a tightening in other aspects of credit supply, they may end 
up facing higher interest rates than would otherwise be the case. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the health of the U.S. economy depends importantly on the vitality of the small 
business sector, and continued access to credit on competitive terms is necessary for that 
vitality. On balance, since last fall credit supply conditions have almost surely tightened for 
the  vast  majority  of  small  businesses.  Credit  appears  to  be  generally  available,  but  at  a 
higher  cost.  Only  a  small  fraction of  small  business  owners  report  that  credit  is  their  main 
business concern. Demand for their products is much more problematic. 
Looking  forward,  continuing  declines  in  the  value  of  small  businesses'  real  estate  assets 
have  the  potential  to  substantially  affect  the  ability  of  those  small  businesses  to  borrow. 
Similarly, declines in the value of real estate may affect the ability and willingness of banks 
and other lenders to supply loans. Indeed, this is likely already occurring to some extent at 
some  banks  across  the  full  spectrum  of  bank  sizes.  Lastly,  because  of  interdependencies 
between  small  business  and  household  finance,  declines  in  the  financial  condition  of 
households can also affect both the terms of those households' small businesses loans and 
their ability to borrow.  
For all of these reasons, the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor closely the effects of 
financial market conditions on small business access to credit. More generally, I assure you 
that  the  good  health  of  the  small  business  sector  is  an  important  consideration  for  the 
Federal  Reserve  as  we  strive  to  fulfill  the  dual  mandate  given  to  us  by  the  Congress  to 
promote both price stability and sustainable economic growth. 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2008
