Y V Reddy: Monetary and regulatory policies – how to get the balance 
with markets right 
Remarks  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  as  a  panelist  at  the 
Annual  General  Meeting  Panel  of 
International  Settlements,  Basel, 
29 June 2008. 
the  Bank 
for 
 Chairman  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Governor  Meirelles,  distinguished  economist  Bill  White,  fellow 
governors and friends. 
It  was  a  treat  to  listen  to  Edward  Lord  George’s  wonderful  and  erudite  lecture  on  the 
“Approach to Macroeconomic Management – How it has evolved” and Sir Andrew Crockett’s 
comments, as Chairman, on Lord George’s Per Jacobsson Lecture and also on Lord George 
– “Steady Eddie” as he is warmly described. The Reserve Bank of India considers both of 
them as our special and lasting friends. 
I am also thankful for the opportunity provided to me to share my thoughts on monetary and 
regulatory policies. At the outset I would like to underscore that the critical word in the title is 
“balance”. So we have to recognize the links and interactions between the two, which may at 
times be reinforcing and at times be conflicting.  
In  this  balance,  “time-dimension”  is  important.  We  know  whether  the  balance  is  right  or 
wrong  only  ex-post.  For  example,  when  there  is  all  round  prosperity,  everyone  wants 
everything to be left to the markets; when things go wrong and there is pain, monetary and 
regulatory  policies  are  invoked  to  save  the  situation.  I  will  add  that,  in  the  balance  to  be 
maintained,  public  opinion  is  also  important  for  the  legitimacy  and  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy. Public opinion goes beyond financial markets and institutions, but it is useful 
to remember that it includes government and media also. 
Country-context is important because institutional factors of governance, state of the market-
development,  and  values  are  relevant  in  the  context  of  “balance”.  Hence,  we  cannot  be 
judgmental  about  “balance”  across  countries,  but  we  should  assess  the  balance  only  in  a 
country-specific context. 
I  will  present  India’s  experience  in recent  years  as  to  how  we  are  viewing  “balance”,  after 
recognizing all the above factors.  
First,  on  monetary  policies,  we  monitor  the  monetary  and  credit  aggregates.  We  use  both 
liquidity and interest rate instruments. A dynamic balance is evident from the spread between 
the  repo  and  reverse  repo  rates,  which  is  enlarged  during  times  of  uncertainties.  It  has 
moved from 150 basis points to 100 basis points when times were good and has now moved 
to  250  basis  points,  reflecting  greater  uncertainties.  We  believe  that  market  participants 
should be willing to share some costs of uncertainties. Pre-emptive actions have been taken 
since  2004  to  withdraw  monetary  accommodation,  which  were  reinforced  with  measures 
aimed at moderating early signs of over-heating. Further, a differentiated approach between 
the  permanent  component  and  temporary  component  with  regard  to  oil  prices  has  been 
articulated in the policies. We did not treat oil prices entirely as a shock and focus on what is 
described as core inflation. While undertaking a nuanced approach to managing aggregate 
demand recognising the elements of shock and consequent impact on inflation expectations, 
the underlying demand conditions warranted several interest rate and liquidity measures in 
recent weeks. 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 1
Second, while monetary policy influences aggregates, reality in the financial sector is often 
dis-aggregated. So we have used regulatory policies to supplement the monetary measures. 
These relate mainly to risk weights, and provisioning requirements with regard to exposure to 
NBFCs, capital markets, real estate, consumer credit etc; sectoral caps; and more recently 
modulation of the exposure limits to oil companies. 
Third, we do not take a view on asset prices, either in the real estate or the capital markets. 
Though we do not take a view, we wanted to protect the banking system form possible risks. 
In this regard, the nature of the markets is also important, for example, the housing markets 
in India are less than liquid. We also modified the overly conservative accounting norms that 
were earlier applicable to the Held to Maturity category, in India. 
Fourth, A supervisory review process (SRP) was initiated with select banks having significant 
exposure  to  sensitive  sectors,  including  reliance  on  call  money  market,  in  order  to  ensure 
that effective risk mitigants and sound internal control systems are in place. In the first round, 
a framework was developed for monitoring the systemically important individual banks. The 
second  round  of  SRP  was  directed  to  analyse  banks’  exposure  to  sensitive  sectors  and 
identify outliers. Based on the analyses of these outlier banks, guidelines were issued to all 
banks indicating the need for better risk management systems in banks at operating levels.  
In brief, in India the focus is on regulatory comfort rather than on regulatory compliance. In a 
choice  between  emphasis  of  regulations  on  saving  capital  and  protecting  depositors’ 
interests or reinforcing financial system stability, the latter have always prevailed. 
Fifth,  we  regularly  interact  with  the  industry  associations  namely  the  Indian  Bankers’ 
Association,  the  Foreign  exchange  Dealers  Association  of  India,  the  Primary  Dealers 
Association of India and the Fixed Income and Money Market Dealers Association of India. 
Incidentally, the last two were promoted by the Reserve Bank of India. We have three-stage 
participation in the process issue of important regulations. This normally involves preliminary 
discussions with the representative bodies and select market participants; preparation of a 
Technical  Report  by  working  groups  that  often  include  the  regulators  and  the  market 
participants and academia; and placing the Report in public domain for a feedback. On the 
basis of the Report and the initial feedback, draft guidelines are usually formulated and again 
placed in public domain for a feedback. These guidelines are finalized on the basis of the 
further feedback. 
Sixth,  our  regulations  and  our  policies  are  focused  on  the  common  person.  This  is,  for 
example,  reflected  in  our  approach  to  transparency  by  the  industry,  the  ombudsman 
mechanism, the setting up of a Banking Codes and Standards Board of India, guidelines on 
recovery agents etc. This focus on the common person enhances the legitimacy of the RBI in 
the public eye vis-à-vis market intermediaries. Though RBI issues micro regulations at times, 
this is necessary to strike a better balance between financial institutions and public interest at 
a micro level with reference to the common person. 
Seventh, moral suasion and public articulation of concerns has helped in achieving a desired 
re-balancing of suspected excesses in risk-taking among banks. Some of the areas where 
moral suasion has been used are the need for banks to monitor unhedged foreign currency 
exposures of their corporate clients, adoption of appropriate incentive mechanisms by banks 
for encouraging disclosures of derivative exposures by their corporate clients, banks’ reliance 
on non-deposit resources to finance assets, their excessive reliance on wholesale deposits 
and uncomfortable loan-to-value (LTV) ratios in respect of housing loans etc. 
Eighth,  the  RBI  has  also  focused  on  liquidity  mechanisms  and  systems.  Asset  liability 
management is left to the banks, but regulatory limits on short term buckets are prescribed. 
Further, in order to reduce the extent of concentration of bank’s liabilities the Reserve Bank 
had issued guidelines to banks in March 2007 placing prudential limits on the extent of their 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2008
Inter-Bank Liability (IBL) as a proportion of their networth (200%). Those banks which had a 
higher capital adequacy ratio of 125% of the regulatory minimum were allowed a higher limit 
of  300%  of  networth.  In  addition,  prudential  limits  have  also  been  placed  on  the  extent  to 
which  banks  may  access  the  inter-bank  call  money  market  both  as  a  lender  and  as  a 
borrower.  
Ninth, whenever out-of-the-ordinary situations arise, exceptional or flexible arrangements are 
needed. Timely flexibility, while reacting to the underlying balance is essential. This helps in 
avoiding more serious problems relating to the balance over the medium-to-longer term. For 
example,  recently  oil  imports  had  to  be  financed  through  off-market  processes.  Delayed 
adjustments to such sudden and unexpected cross-border exogenous developments at such 
times  may  impose  a  stress  on  liquidity.  Hence,  addressing  frictional  issues  of  liquidity  as 
distinct  from  underlying  issues  of  levels  of  liquidity  is  required  to  look  at  the  balance 
dynamics. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 3
