Amando M Tetangco, Jr: RCBC – banking on emerging corporates 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  RCBC’s  (Rizal  Commercial  Banking  Corporation)  re-
launching of its program for Small and Medium Enterprises, Makati City, 26 March 2008. 
 Ambassador  Yuchengco,  Chairman  Dee,  President  Tan,  other  officers  and  staff  of  RCBC, 
special guests, good evening.  
In  many  countries,  including  the  Philippines,  small  and  medium  enterprises  constitute  the 
backbone  of  the  economy.  As  such,  initiatives  that  provide  meaningful  support  to  SMEs 
represent welcome news indeed. 
It is in this context that I view RCBC’s re-launch of its SME Lending Program.  
Through  the  years,  consolidated  lending  of  the  banking  sector  to  SMEs  has  shown 
considerable growth.  
In  1991,  the  year  Republic  Act  No.  6977  or  the  Magna  Carta  for  Small  Enterprises  took 
effect, credit to SMEs amounted to P17 billion. By December 2007, or 16 years later, total 
loans extended to SMEs have reached P352 billion. This is roughly 21 times more than the 
1991 total.  
We  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  acknowledge  the  banking  sector’s  commitment  to 
support  SMEs.  As  a  whole,  the  banking  sector  has  consistently  exceeded  the  mandatory 
credit allocation for SMEs under the Magna Carta for Small Enterprises.  
Although this law lapsed in August last year, Congress has already ratified the bill extending 
and enhancing the SME law. We expect this to be signed into law in the very near future. 
In the meantime, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas encourages banks to continue supporting 
SMEs.  
It  is  in  this  light,  that  we  commend  RCBC  for  taking  a  leadership  role  in  promoting  and 
allocating resources for its SME lending Program. As one of the major banks in our country, 
RCBC is bound to influence others to take a similar stance.  
To me, support for SMEs translates directly to a vote of confidence for our people and our 
country.  
Recognized  as  the  biggest  employers  in  our  country,  SMEs  account  for  about  80%  of 
employment generation. If, therefore, we are able to keep the SME sector on a consistent 
growth  track,  we  would  be  able  to  accomplish  broad-based  and  sustained  growth  for  our 
country.  
Equally  important,  we  would  have  a  strong  domestic  economy  that  is  less  vulnerable  to 
global economic shocks.  
Ladies and gentlemen. Last year our economy posted the best GDP growth in 31 year. One 
of  the  reasons  for  this  is  strong  investor  confidence  in  our  country,  as  a  viable  emerging 
economy. This was coupled with the 2.8 average inflation rate in 2007, which was the lowest 
in  21  years.  Other  indicators  likewise  exhibited  stronger  economic  positions  such  as  the 
country’s balance of payments, which posted a record surplus of USD 8.6 billion in 2007 and 
our all-time high level of international reserves. 
As for the banking sector, it remains fundamentally sound with the average capital level well 
above the minimum regulatory requirement and the NPL ratio that is now almost back to the 
1997 pre-crisis level of around 4.0 percent.  
BIS Review 35/2008 
 1
The RCBC group in particular, has shown marked improvement in performance as it posted 
a net income for the year ended 2007 which was 50 percent better than the previous year’s 
level.  Further,  we  take  the  Bank’s  recent  issuance  of  P7  billion  worth  of  Unsecured 
Subordinated Debt as a sign of bank’s commitment to further strengthen its capital base as it 
assumes new risk exposures. 
RCBC’s  SME  Lending  Program  is  anchored  on  the  theme  “Banking  on  Emerging 
Corporates.”  This  signals  the  belief  and  confidence  of  RCBC’s  leadership  in  the  future  of 
SMEs  to  become  growth  drivers  of  the  Philippine  economy.  I  believe  you  are  on  the  right 
track.  
I  hope  this  will  steer  the  tempo  of  competition  in  the  banking  industry  as  it  opens 
diversification of possible sources of income for banks.  
Indeed, the challenge of setting a footprint on SME lending is a milestone RCBC and other 
banks  should  take,  as  its  contribution  in  providing  a  strong  foundation  for  sustained  and 
broad-based economic growth for our country.  
Again, my congratulations to RCBC. Mabuhay! 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2008
