Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Philippines – macroeconomic outlook for 
2008 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the oath-taking of the officers and directors of the Economic 
Journalists Association of the Philippines, Makati, 11 February 2008. 
 President  Donna  Gatdula,  other  distinguished  officers  and  members  of  the  Economic 
Journalists Association of the Philippines, special guests, friends, good evening. 
It is a great pleasure for me to address this induction ceremony and this gathering of highly 
informed watchers of the Philippine economy. As economic journalists, you continue to be a 
major channel for transparency and provider of key economic information for the business 
community. From the point of view of the BSP, you have also played a vital role in our efforts 
to communicate the basis and implications of monetary policy to the markets and the general 
community.  
I am doubly pleased because I see many familiar faces, including the relatively new reporters 
on  the  beat  and  those  I  met  long  before  I  became  governor.  But  don’t  worry  –  I  will  not 
disclose how long ago that was. 
Instead, I will focus on the topic you have asked me to discuss tonight: the macroeconomic 
outlook for 2008.  
To  put  things  in  perspective  and  to  provide  context  for  our  outlook,  I  will  begin  my 
presentation with a review of the past years.  
Economic developments 
I am sure you have read or heard in fact some of you have written that the Philippines is now 
experiencing the most stable economic environment in more than two decades. This is not 
just  a  “tale”.  The  numbers  support  this  story.  The  Philippine  economy  grew  at  the  highest 
GDP growth rate of 7.3 percent in three decades in 2007. This growth rate was above the 
Government’s target of 6.1-6.7 percent set for 2007. This was boosted by the expansion of 
services and the impressive performance of both agriculture and industry. On the demand 
side, growth was driven by government consumption and investments. 
This strong growth was achieved in a period of benign inflation. Headline inflation last year 
stood  at  2.8  percent,  the  lowest  in  20  years.  This  is  now  comparable  to  developed 
economies.  
In turn, low inflation has resulted in lower interest rates, again the lowest in 21 years. This 
has brought down the cost of money for borrowers, whether personal or corporate.  
In this respect, we achieved a good convergence of high growth and low inflation.  
In  addition,  our  external  position  was  at  its  best  in  2007.  The  overall  BOP  position  closed 
2007 with a surplus of US$8.6 billion, the highest on record. This reflects improved market 
sentiment  as  evidenced  by  higher  foreign  investment  as  well  as  continued  vibrancy  of 
overseas  remittances  and  other  services  receipts.  This  helped  raise  the  country’s  gross 
international  reserves  (GIR)  to  a  record  high of  $34.4  billion  as  of  end-January  2008.  And 
with the weakening dollar, the peso emerged as one of Asia’s stronger currencies. 
These  developments  were  matched  by  positive  indicators  pointing  to  a  stronger  Philippine 
banking  sector.  Bank  deposits  were  up  while  bank  capitalization  exceeded  both  domestic 
and  international  standards.  Bank  lending  to  most  sectors  of  the  economy  expanded  last 
year and bank asset quality improved with NPL ratio closer to its single digit, pre-crisis level.  
BIS Review 16/2008 
 1
Another  positive  development  on  the  domestic  front  was  the  solid  gains  in  the  National 
Government’s fiscal consolidation program. Revenue collections improved while deficit and 
debt levels dropped.  
Indeed, by many performance measures, 2007 was a most auspicious year for the Philippine 
economy. 
Outlook and challenges 
Looking  forward,  can  we  sustain  this  positive  momentum?  What  do  we  see  in  2008  and 
beyond?  
Well, we expect economic growth to continue, driven by a broad-based expansion led by the 
services sector as well as robust growth in aggregate demand. In fact, as reckoned by the 
Development Budget Coordination Committee (DBCC), GDP likely to grow at a healthy pace 
of about 6.3-7.0 percent in 2008. 
On the monetary front, emerging BSP forecasts continue to indicate a manageable inflation 
path. We expect to see average inflation settling within the 2008 target of 4 percent, plus or 
minus one percentage point. This target is supported by slowing growth in domestic liquidity, 
a  strong  peso,  moderate  risks  to  agricultural  production,  and  well-anchored  inflation 
expectations.  For  2009,  we  see  inflation  within  the  3.5  percent  plus  or  minus  one  percent 
point range. 
Likewise, the external payments position is expected to remain a source of strength for the 
economy  over  the  near  term.  In  particular,  dollar  inflows  from  remittances  and  foreign 
investments  are  expected  to  remain  strong.  This  should  enable  us  to  further  build  up  our 
cushion of international reserves.  
We  also  expect  to  see  a  stronger  banking  system  in  2008  as  banks  further  increase  their 
capitalization and improve their ability to anticipate and manage risks.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen  of  EJAP,  this  general  outlook  is  dependent  of  course  on  how  we 
manage the challenges that we face.  
The  first  is  slower  world  economic  growth.  This  emanates  from  expectations  of  subdued 
growth  in  the  US  due  to  difficulties  in  the  mortgage  market  and  weaker  consumption 
spending stemming from high energy prices and falling house prices. For the Philippines, this 
could  mean  weaker  exports  and  lower  remittance  receipts.  However,  we  expect  that 
sustained strong domestic demand and increased investments will help temper the impact of 
the global slowdown.  
The  second  is  volatile  and  high  global  prices  of  oil  and  other  commodities.  If  these 
commodity prices remain high for a protracted period of time, it could threaten our inflation 
outlook. 
The third is the global financial turbulence. Although the global financial markets appear to 
have stabilized, we have yet to see the full impact of the US subprime mortgage crisis. Its 
impact  on  the  Philippines  has  been  limited;  however,  an  economic  slowdown  in  a  major 
trading partner such as the US could adversely affect our export sector, while movements in 
interest  rates  could  generate  risk  aversion  against  emerging  markets  including  the 
Philippines.  So  far,  there  has  been  limited  impact  on  the  Philippines  but  we  need  to  keep 
watch of these developments. 
The  fourth  is  plentiful  domestic  liquidity  from  sustained  strong  foreign  exchange  inflows. 
While liquidity growth has slowed down as a result of the Bangko Sentral’s efforts to siphon 
off excess funds from the market, emerging trends in monetary aggregates still need to be 
checked, in line with expectations of sustained foreign exchange inflows. 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2008
Policy directions 
These are serious challenges that we face: the first three are beyond the control of domestic 
policy while the last can be influenced by both monetary and fiscal policies. Nevertheless, we 
believe that, ultimately, they are manageable.  
On the part of the Bangko Sentral our policies will be focused on the following:  
A. 
Monetary policy will remain focused on managing the risks to inflation such as the 
likelihood of second-round effects and closely monitoring developments in liquidity 
conditions.  
On the external sector, our policies will be geared toward:  
• 
• 
ensuring sustainability of the country’s external debt;  
maintaining a market-determined exchange rate with scope for occasional 
official action in cases of sharp movements in the peso;  
maintaining a comfortable level of reserves; and  
improving 
the 
deregulation.  
foreign  exchange  environment 
through 
further 
forex 
 Banking policy, on the other hand, will continue to focus on three main objectives:  
• 
• 
promoting a stronger and more stable financial system;  
developing  the  domestic  capital  market  to  make  it  more  supportive  of 
investments growth; and  
providing easier access to funds by small and medium-sized businesses as 
well as micro enterprises.  
 B. 
C. 
In addition, the Bangko Sentral will continue to foster an environment that will facilitate further 
disposal of banks’ non-performing assets.  
Other key financial reforms will be focused on aligning prudential regulation of the banking 
system with international standards and best practices, enhancing our payments system, as 
well as strengthening corporate governance standards and market discipline mechanisms.  
Meanwhile, microfinance shall continue to be the BSP’s program for poverty alleviation, with 
collateral-free loans providing the entrepreneurial poor (e-poor) with much needed capital to 
start a micro enterprise. 
The BSP will also continue to push for the passage of key legislative bills to accelerate the 
development of the local capital market and further strengthen the regulatory authority.  
In particular, we shall push for the implementation of a centralized credit information bureau 
to improve the quality of financial information to investors, expand private sector access to 
credit, minimize exposure to risks of financial intermediaries, and lower cost of borrowing.  
We will likewise work actively with other government agencies and the private sector for the 
completion  of  critical  market  infrastructure  to  enhance  system  integrity  and  overall  market 
confidence. 
At  the  same  time,  we  will  intensify  our  economic  and  financial  education  program  so  that 
Filipinos  can  participate  in,  and  benefit  from,  our  economic  gains.  In  this  advocacy,  I 
earnestly ask for your support. Other Filipinos can participate in opportunities that economic 
development brings if such are brought to their attention and they are made to understand its 
potential.  
This is the reason why we have been conducting nationwide lectures on investment options 
for  Overseas  Filipinos  and  their  dependents.  And  starting  June  this  year,  11  million  public 
elementary students will be taught lessons on money management to help them develop the 
BIS Review 16/2008 
 3
habit of saving and investing. With this, I hope we can nurture a new generation of financially 
literate Filipinos.  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me close this message by saying that the Philippine economy is 
likely to weather the challenges it faces, both domestic and external. I believe that with the 
fundamental  strength  of  the  economy  backed  by  the  government’s  firm  commitment  to 
continue  to  pursue  needed  reforms,  there  exists  a  sound  basis  for  a  sustained  non-
inflationary growth in the country.  
Finally, I congratulate EJAP for its continuing program to professionalize business reporting 
in our country. I hope your efforts to develop and upgrade the skills of your members will be 
successful. In this regard, you can count on us at the Bangko Sentral for support.  
Doris, in her introduction of me, referred to my Chinese zodiac sign so let me now complete 
that by wishing you all a Happy New year of the Earth Rat! It is my understanding that the 
2008 Rat begins a new 12-year cycle as such it promises change, new beginnings and new 
attitudes. On behalf of the Bangko Sentral, therefore, I wish all the new officers of EJAP, as 
you face a new “year”, a fruitful and successful term.  
Mabuhay ang EJAP! Thank you all and good night. 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2008
