Amando M Tetangco, Jr: A job well done, all things considered 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the 
Philippines (Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the BSP’s Mid-year Organizational Performance 
Review Session, Manila, 23 August 2008. 
 Members of the Monetary Board, fellow central bankers, good afternoon.  
During  last  year's  planning  session  in  Baguio,  we  agreed  to  adopt  the  Scorecard  as  our 
means  of  setting  targets  and  measuring  performance.  This  is  therefore  our  first  mid-year 
organizational performance review using the commitments forged last year as basis for our 
assessment.  
I trust that you find it a useful and effective gauge of where we stand relative to our mission, 
how  our  stakeholders  perceive  us,  and  how  our  business,  learning  and  growth  processes 
fared in terms of responding to our desired results. 
The  question  is  how  exactly  did  we  fare,  over  all?  Well,  I  am  sure  everyone  here  has  an 
answer to this question.  
The way I look at it, we did well, all things considered.  
If you recall, we set our commitments last year at a time when our economy was on its way 
to hitting its best GDP growth rate in 31 years and inflation eventually averaging out at 2.8%, 
the  lowest  annual  rate  in  21  years.  At  that  time,  we  used  the  word  benign  to  describe 
inflation.  
How fast things changed: in July 2008, inflation rate hit 12.2%, the highest in 17 years. As 
Cyd described it, Asia is at the epicenter of the surge in inflation. Nevertheless, ours is far 
better than inflation rates of over 20% in other Asian countries. While we have our share of 
detractors,  it  is  a  fact  that  the  Bangko  Sentral  continues  to  be  recognized  for  its  ability  to 
temper inflation despite severe supply shocks.  
In the field of banking, we continue to reap the benefits of remaining faithful to our reform 
agenda.  In  fact,  Philippine  banks  have  emerged  stronger  and  better-capitalized,  at  a  time 
when even global financial giants are crippled by severe losses from the continuing turmoil in 
the financial market. This is the result of political will on the part of the Monetary Board and 
the  rest  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  to  ensure  that  our  banks  adhere  to  prudential  standards. 
Comprehensive and thorough examination reports prepared by our examiners provide solid 
underpinnings for our decisions and actions and they are able to produce such, even when 
they are being subjected to pressures and threats.  
Indeed,  we  are  fortunate  to  have  world-class  and  courageous  central bankers  –  people  of 
integrity.  
I will say this again: while there are still many areas for improvement at the Bangko Sentral, 
our circles of excellence continue to expand and grow, at MSS, at SES, at RMS, at SPC and 
at the EMS. I hope this positive trend will continue at a more accelerated pace.  
If  we  accomplish  this,  then  we  can  serve  our  public  better.  Among  others,  the  results  of 
NSO’s  public  perception  survey  on  the  BSP  provide  us  useful  guides  on  where  we  can 
further  improve  our  services,  using  the  regional  breakdown  as  starting  point.  Indeed, 
continuously  finding  better  ways  of  doing  things  is  one  attribute  we  should  nurture  at  the 
Bangko Sentral.  
The CPO is one such example. This year, it added a new dimension to our environmental 
assessment:  a  SWOT  (Strengths,  Weaknesses,  Opportunities,  Threats)  analysis  with  a 
"twist"  the  Strategy  Cafe.  Helen  characterized  it  as  a  series  of  "no  holds  barred" 
BIS Review 103/2008 
 1
conversations around specific questions that were formulated to generate fresh perspectives 
on where we are and the way we do things. 
For me, there were two things that stood out from Helen’s recounting of the highlights of the 
Strategy Café discussions.  
First, the consensus among the participants that the best asset of the BSP is its people; and 
Second, that we are making progress in addressing long-standing concerns including slow 
hiring  and  procurement.  We  should  communicate  these  improvements  to  our  people  and 
stakeholders, so that perception and reality will be aligned.  
Of  course,  even  as  we  continue  to  make  progress,  our  work  never  really  ends  as  the 
environment where we operate is never static; rather, it is dynamic and constantly changing.  
At times like this, “doing more of the same” does not cut it. We need to be strategy-focused 
and results-oriented. I know there is so much work we have to do. That you and your staff 
sometimes or many times forego family time because of work. We should be able to discern 
which process or strategy works and discard those that have become a burden. Nurture the 
spirit of teamwork and collaboration. Of solidarity. Together, set clear priorities. By doing so, 
we also protect the well-being of our people, our most important resource.  
Let us foster a supportive working environment in the BSP that is based on trust and collegial 
respect,  grounded  on  the  conviction  that  everyone  has  something  to  contribute  to  the 
organization. 
At  the  same  time,  let  us  always  be  mindful  of  protecting  and  strengthening  our  institution 
through  risk  based  management  and  ensuring  efficient  resource  management,  among 
others.  We  should  work  on  strengthening  our  financial  position  so  we  can  pursue  our 
mandate  more  effectively.  The  RMS  sector  under  Andy  Suratos  has  led  the  way  by 
implementing a bankwide energy conservation program for which we have been awarded a 
five-star rating of 97%. Think BSP. 
Fellow workers at the Bangko Sentral. You have within you, we have within us, the capacity 
to make things better for our institution and for our country. Our mandate empowers us to 
serve through responsive monetary and banking policies. Let us therefore remain united in 
working on our vision of a better life for all Filipinos.  
Finally, on behalf of the Members of the Monetary Board, I thank all of you for a job well done 
in the first half of the year, all things considered. Let us also congratulate and thank CPO for 
organizing 
insightful  midyear  organizational  performance  review  session,  and 
acknowledge  all  the  other  departments  and  offices  that  have  provided  support  to  this 
undertaking.  
Mabuhay ang Bangko Sentral! Mabuhay ang ating bansang Pilipinas! Maraming salamat sa 
inyong lahat!  
Let’s enjoy the rest of the evening. 
this 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2008
