Thomas Jordan: Mortgage financing and the risks of a credit crunch in 
Switzerland and abroad 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the Schweizer Ökonomentag, University of Zurich, 10 September 2008. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The  international  financial  crisis  has  raised  the  question  of  the  risks  of  a  credit  crunch  on 
domestic and foreign property markets. A credit crunch can occur if banks’ ability to lend is 
constrained, or if their lending practices become more risk averse. From a macroeconomic 
perspective, a credit crunch is relevant because it can reinforce an economic slowdown. 
The risks of a property market credit crunch differ from country to country. Mortgage markets 
in the US and UK are showing clear signs of a credit crunch. Both countries have typically 
seen  a  sharp  slowdown  in  credit  growth,  falling  house  prices  and  weaker  bank  balance 
sheets. Mortgage lending in these countries over the past few years has increasingly been 
financed through securitisation. The current loss of investor confidence in securitisation has 
thus hampered banks’ ability to refinance mortgage contracts and, as a result, banks in both 
countries are finding it harder to grant new mortgage loans. At the same time, falling prices 
have dampened their risk appetite as regards lending. This decline in the supply of credit is 
now weighing on economic developments in these countries.  
For the Swiss mortgage market, there is currently only a small risk of a credit crunch. On the 
one hand, there have been no widespread excesses on the Swiss property and mortgage 
markets recently, which makes it unlikely that banks’ appetite for risk will decline to any great 
degree. On the other hand, opportunities for loan refinancing in Switzerland remain strong. 
The  structure  of  mortgage  lending  in  Switzerland  is  quite  varied,  and  for  banks  the 
“Pfandbrief” mortgage bond is a refinancing tool that provides continuing strong opportunities 
for  loan  refinancing,  and  has  experienced  something  of  a  renaissance  since  the  financial 
crisis.  As  such,  the  already  muted  outlook  for  the  Swiss  economy  is  unlikely  to suffer  any 
additional impact from a credit crunch on the property market. 
BIS Review 107/2008 
 1
