Y V Reddy: The virtues and vices of talking about monetary policy – 
some comments 
Remarks by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 7th BIS Annual 
Conference, Luzern, Switzerland, 26 June 2008. 
 Governor  Yilmaz,  Professor  Alan  Blinder,  Professor  Benjamin  Friedman,  fellow-Governors, 
and distinguished academics, 
I  am  honoured  by  the  invitation  from  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  to  be  a 
discussant, for a Paper1 by the eminent and respected scholar, Professor Alan Blinder. It is 
virtually impossible to add value to the comprehensive and incisive analysis of the subject in 
the Paper, which is on a subject of great relevance to central bankers. My comments will be 
basically to supplement or elaborate some ideas in the Paper, from a practitioner’s point of 
view.  To  begin  with,  there  will  be  select  comments  on  each  of  the  sections  of  the  Paper 
keeping in view the Indian perspectives. The second part will highlight select issues, which 
appear  to  be  especially  relevant  to  monetary  policy  communication  in  emerging  market 
economies (EMEs). The concluding part will pose some issues, which deserve debate in the 
search for what Professor Blinder calls "optimal" central bank communications policies. 
Indian perspectives 
Reasons for communication 
There has been significant progress in India in enhancing communication and removing the 
mystique surrounding monetary policy. While in the pre-reform period, before the 1990s, the 
communication  was  relatively  easy  in  a  controlled  environment,  it  has  become  a  greater 
challenge  in  a  market  oriented  environment  particularly  in  the  context  of  global  financial 
market integration. The stake holders have become larger and wider and the monetary policy 
by  itself  in  terms  of  operating  framework  and  instruments  has  assumed  increasing 
complexity.  There  is  a  clear  recognition  of  the  importance  of  market  expectations  in  the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy,  partly  influenced  by  academic  work  and  partly  by  the 
demonstration  effect  of  evolving  practices  among  central  banks.  Perhaps,  there  are  also 
other  reasons  for  the  demand  for  such  enhanced  communications  in  India;  for  example, 
increasingly greater transparency is demanded, as part of public policy, in almost all spheres 
of governance of the public sector, which includes the central bank. The media – we have six 
business  dailies  in  English,  apart  from  four  business  channels  on  television  –  exerts 
pressure, seeking information on many issues. In a way, there is both a supply side and a 
demand side to the communications by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) on monetary policy 
aspects, in the context of evolving market expectations. 
On  the  need  for  communications,  we  have  no  doubt  that  it  enhances  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy in a liberalized market environment. In fact, the experience in India shows 
that the need to communicate, by itself, compels far more rigorous thinking and analyses, as 
it  is  said  that  the  best of  learning comes  from  a  compulsion  to  teach.  The  compulsions  to 
communicate  catalyse  the  processes  to  improve  the  quality  of  decision  making  and  by 
providing a helpful feedback. 
                                                 
1   Talking  About  Monetary  Policy:  The  Virtues  (and  Vices?)  of  Central  Bank  Communication,  Prof.  Alan  S. 
Blinder, May 8, 2008. 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 1
Democratic accountability, as a reason for better communication, is very valid for India also. 
But, improvements in communication have been taking place in the recent years without any 
formal recognition of the extent of RBI’s independence. My personal feeling is that improved 
communication  in  regard  to  the  thinking  and  the  actions  of  the  RBI  has  enhanced  the  de 
facto central bank independence while, de jure, there has been no noticeable movement in 
according greater independence.  
Accountability to Parliament, the supreme body of elected representatives, is very important 
in  the  context  of  the  functioning  of  a  central  bank  in  a  democracy.  In  India,  the  RBI  is 
accountable to the Parliament through the Ministry of Finance and thus its communication to 
the Parliament is through the Ministry. Whenever the views between the central bank and the 
Ministry converge, there should be no complexities. RBI is also summoned to give evidence 
before  Parliamentary  Committees,  most  often  along  with  the  officials  of  the  Ministry  of 
Finance. There are some occasions when the hearings of the committees are restricted to 
the RBI, generally when the Governor is called in. However, we are sworn to secrecy from 
making  public  our  submissions  to  the  Parliamentary  committees,  whereas  the  committee 
may  make  use  of  the  material  supplied  by  us,  as  considered  appropriate.  In  a  sense,  the 
RBI’s views, as submitted to the Parliamentary Committees, are not available in their entirety 
in the public domain.  
It  is  quite  possible  that  there  are  communications  or  signals,  if  not  directions,  from  the 
Ministry  of  Finance  often  on  issues  relating  to  monetary  policy  or  banking,  a  sector 
predominantly government owned. If these are consistent with those of the central bank, they 
reinforce the central bank policies, but if these are divergent, it poses a dilemma for central 
bank  communication  and  to  that  extent  a  central  bank  may  be  constrained  in  freely 
articulating its policies. 
These  are  some  noteworthy  features  of  communication  in  the  context  of  democratic 
accountability to the Parliament in India. 
Limits to communication 
Based  on  my  personal  experience,  it  is  possible  to  mention  some  limitations  to  making 
communication more effective in India. Most often, in any given context, the preferences of 
market  participants  may  be  different  but  not  necessarily  opposed  to  the  public  policy 
preferences. While transparency and communication in such circumstances helped in a re-
ordering  of  the  preferences,  a  surprise  element  in  the  decisions  and  timing  of  the 
communication  was  more  effective  when  the  public  policy  preferences  and  the  market 
preferences were in virtually opposite directions. In the latter case, the communication of the 
reasoning for the actions, either concurrently or ex post, was found to be desirable.  
Communication is not pre-commitment 
Pre-commitment  is  generally  useful  on  many  occasions  as  part  of  monetary  policy 
communication.  I  have  two  observations  based  on  our  experience  in  this  regard.  First,  in 
highly  uncertain  conditions,  a  conscious  view  needs  to  be  taken  on  the  virtues  of  pre-
commitment. Second, even when there is a pre-commitment and some reversal was needed 
at  some  stage  due  to  unforeseen  circumstances,  a  detailed  and  timely  explanation  for 
deviating  from  the  assurance  helps  clarifying  the  situation.  Further,  degrees  of  pre-
commitment  may  vary  from  a  “vague  but  indicative”  to  “a  definitive  time-table”,  and  our 
choice has varied depending on the circumstances. 
What to communicate 
On  what  to  communicate,  Professor  Blinder  refers  to  four  different  aspects  of  monetary 
policy;  namely,  overall  objectives  and  strategy,  motives  behind  a  particular  decision,  the 
economic outlook and future monetary policy decisions. Most difficulties in putting these into 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2008
issues.  On  supervisory  matters, 
practice arise in regard to the future monetary policy decisions. Our effort in this regard has 
been to explain the stance of the monetary policy that would govern the future, which is done 
currently  at  quarterly  intervals.  The  emphasis  of  this  communication  is  on  presenting 
information and analyses, that allows the market participants to draw their own inferences, 
but the RBI desists from giving any explicit forward guidance.  
The RBI is not only responsible for monetary policy but also for banking regulation, and for 
management  of  the  external  sector  and  the  government  debt.  Further,  the  content  of 
communications relates not only to policy changes but also to the path of structural reforms, 
including  legal  reforms.  In  our  periodical  communications  we  have  adopted  a  format  of 
presenting  the  monetary  policy  and  developmental  and  regulatory  policies  in  two  distinct 
sections  in  our  annual  and  mid-term  reviews;  while  the  first  quarter  and  the  third  quarter 
communications are confined to monetary policy. Cross-references are no doubt, inevitable. 
These  are  in  addition  to  various  other  forms  of  communication  –  regular  or  ad  hoc,  and 
formal or informal.  
Central bank communication is generally perceived as synonymous with pronouncements on 
monetary  policy.  In  fact,  a  central  bank’s  dilemma  is  more  pronounced  with  regard  to 
communication  of  supervisory 
the  central  bank 
communicates  to  the  common  person  and  does  not  confine  necessarily  to  a  specialized 
audience like financial markets or financial institutions. These market players with knowledge 
and skills can absorb such communication in the right spirit though they may have specific 
business interests. What the general public desires to know may at times be at a variance 
from  what  the  market  players  would  like  to  be  disclosed.  The  dilemmas  of  a  supervisor, 
especially in a country like India are even more complex on account of the level of financial 
education. 
Strategies and content of communication may have to be different for meeting the challenges 
to  financial  stability  as  compared  to  maintaining  price-stability.  In  India,  several  measures, 
monetary as well as administrative, were undertaken to meet the threats to financial stability 
while complementary or parallel recourse was taken to communications. Some illustrations 
are:  a  speech  in  Goa  in  August  1997  to  “talk  down  the  rupee”;  reassuring  statements  on 
market developments in the context of Asian crisis combined with a package of measures, in 
tranches  in  1997  and  1998;  pre-emptive  measures  in  mid-1998  in  the  context  of  crisis  in 
Russia; reassuring statements issued in the context of border conflict in 1999; a combination 
of  liquidity  injection  and  reassuring  statements  along  with  measures  in  the  context  of  the 
9/11; and in 2005, to explain the impact of the redemption of the India Millennium Deposits, 
to the extent of US dollar seven billion, on the foreign exchange markets. There could also 
be occasions where the central bank may not react to certain instances, for example when 
some  sanctions  were  imposed  on  India.  But,  these  decisions  are  taken  thoughtfully  and 
consciously after duly taking into account the need and market sensitivity. In brief, we take 
recourse to open market operations, open mouth operations, and open only eyes and ears 
operations in regard to threats to financial stability. 
How to communicate 
The  public-face  of  the  RBI  in  regard  to  formal  communications  is  the  Governor,  but  the 
Deputy  Governor  who  deals  with  the  subject  also  interacts  more  actively,  more  frequently 
and in greater depth with the media. These are in addition to the legal reporting requirements 
and several other documents that are placed in public domain at periodical intervals. In the 
absence of a formally constituted Monetary Policy Committee, this arrangement works well in 
terms of communicating with coherence, clarity and credibility. 
On  the  impact  of  RBI’s  communication  on  financial  markets,  the  most  notable  contribution 
has been in generating a better understanding, debates and sensitivities among the market 
participants and analysts, of the issues involved in money, finance and macro-stability. This 
process has been critical for India partly because the legacy of a planned economy required 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 3
un-learning as well as re-learning and partly because the financial sector reform process as 
well as the context has been somewhat more unique to India than in many other EMEs. 
Predictability 
On the predictability of the monetary policy decision in India, I am not aware of any research 
work on the subject. Let me therefore take recourse to anecdotal evidence. Since 2004, RBI 
has been withdrawing monetary accommodation, strengthening prudential requirements and 
emphasizing risks to price as well as financial stability. Most market participants seemed to 
have conditioned, at least until recently, their expectations of monetary policy response on 
what  they  considered  to  be  the  standard  practice  in  advanced  economies.  As  a result,  for 
some time in the past, the RBI acquired an unwarranted reputation of always surprising the 
markets, prompting me to quip at one stage that “the financial markets always surprise me 
with their expectations from the RBI”. 
As  regards  the  forms  of  central  bank  communications,  our  experience  is  that  formal, 
structured and periodic statements are normally valued significantly, but there is a markedly 
heightened interest in speeches and comments in times of unexpected global or domestic 
developments. 
India  is  not  an  inflation-targeting  country.  The  democratic  pressures  have  proved  to  be  a 
disciplining  force  so  far,  and  its  record  over  five  decades  is  reasonable  relative  to  most 
developing countries. Further, the two groups of commodities that carry a large weight in the 
consumption basket, namely food and fuel, are subject to supply shocks, making it difficult to 
identify a “core” that could be meaningfully targeted. Yet, there are suggestions, mainly from 
the academia, for inflation targeting but there is little or no support for it in political economy.  
There  is  a  reference  in  the  Paper  to  paying  some  attention  to  communication  with  the 
general  public.  In  India,  we  recognize  that  communication  is  not  neutral  to  the  target 
audience. The RBI communicates with various types of audiences – researchers, analysts, 
academicians, media persons, entities regulated by the central bank, other central bankers, 
rating agencies, international or multi-lateral bodies, and players in the financial markets. The 
RBI also endeavours to communicate with other special audiences, such as, urban and rural 
women  and  men,  senior  citizens,  defence  personnel  and  even  school  children.  Let  me 
illustrate  with  a  communication  initiative  that  RBI  has  undertaken  two  years  ago.  The 
Ombudsman Scheme for banks was revised recently and hence, the objective was to inform 
the  widest  section  of  our  population.  A  Press  Release  might  not  have  fully  served  the 
purpose. So, a decision was taken to issue an advertisement in print media – for which the 
content was indeed common but the languages differed. It was interesting to note that while 
the  15  leading  Hindi  newspapers  with  a  larger  circulation  at  8.1  million  and  a  far  larger 
readership at 87.0 million helped us reach an audience that was almost five times larger than 
what we could have reached if we had advertised in leading English newspapers which are 
17 and have a combined circulation of 6.3 million and readership of 17.9 million. In fact, in 
India, 54 leading non-English newspapers have a circulation of 21.4 million and a readership 
of 197.2 million. Given this experience of ours, we made the RBI website available apart from 
in  English  and  Hindi,  which  are  official  languages  of  the  Union  Government,  in  11  other 
national languages spoken by a large section of the population. Further, the RBI last year 
launched a Financial Literacy Project to educate the common person who is generally not 
financially literate. The project aims at imparting information and knowledge about banking, 
finance, and central banking to the common person in her’ or his own language. The material 
published under this project is, therefore, also made available in 11 major Indian languages 
apart from English and Hindi through a multi-lingual website. 
These  illustrations  fully  endorse  what  Professor  Blinder  has  said  in  his  Paper  “In  the  end, 
central  banks  derive  their  democratic  legitimacy  and  hence  their  cherished  independence 
from the consent of the general public” 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2008
Select issues relevant to EMEs 
Let me attempt a few generalizations on the subject, keeping in view the EME perspectives. 
First, it is not very clear whether the empirical research on the subject referred in Professor 
Blinder’s paper has adequately covered EMEs. For example, BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, 
India  and  China),  South  Africa,  Indonesia,  Saudi  Arabia  etc.,  are  emerging  as  significant 
players in the global economy. Are their experiences different from those researched so far? 
Second, the government happens to be a significant player in many EMEs, especially in the 
financial  sector.  In  the  circumstances,  should communication  with  financial  markets,  which 
should  admittedly  be  two-way  for  optimal  results,  exclude  communication  by/  with  the 
government? Naturally communication by/with the government, by its very nature, will have a 
differential and, at times, overlapping impact. But how does it affect the independence of the 
central  bank  and 
for 
communication policy. 
Third, the education function of central bank communication, that Professor Blinder referred 
to, may be more important in EMEs. In fact, such a function may enlarge the role of a central 
bank in the EMEs, when it carries credibility. In this regard, let me quote from an undelivered 
speech of a distinguished central banker2 on the subject.  
its  policy  effectiveness?  This  dimension  poses  a  challenge 
“Communication is not just about transparency. It is also about education, 
guidance and steering things in the right direction. In this, the central bank 
can be an honest broker between the government and the public and even 
the parliament.” 
In fact, a central bank can influence changes in public policy that are relevant to monetary 
and  financial  policies.  For  example,  at  the  cost  of  modesty,  let  me  quote  Mr.  Tarapore,  a 
respected central banker.  
"…  when  the  definitive  history  of  India’s  policy  on  gold  is  written  up,  the 
speech by Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at the 
World Gold Council Conference on 28 November 1996 will stand out as a 
watershed as it is perhaps the only speech by a senior Indian official which 
squarely takes on issues on gold policy and it will be appropriately recorded 
as a forerunner of major policy change".3
Fourth, relative to many other institutions in the public sector, central banks in many EMEs 
happen to have professional skills, experience and objective and independent thinking which 
can be drawn upon by the government, especially during the process of reform, in particular 
reforms in the financial sector. Structural changes involving institutional and legal changes in 
EMEs may need active inputs from the respective central banks. How do theory, practice and 
expectation  of  a  transparent  and  independent  central  bank  reconcile  with  these  practical 
compulsions? 
Fifth,  the  issue  of  financial  stability  is  of  great  significance  and  enormous  complexity  for 
central bankers in the EMEs. These economies vary considerably with regard to their fiscal, 
current account, openness to external sector, and dependence on oil-earnings or oil-imports. 
Yet, the analysts in the financial markets often treat them as a group, presumably because 
the  EMEs  are  perceived  to  be  high-risk  and  high-reward  destinations  for  financial  capital. 
That characteristic makes them more vulnerable to volatility in capital flows, sometimes for 
reasons other than economic fundamentals in the country concerned. As the title implies, the 
                                                 
2   Dr. I G Patel's address to the SAARC Governor's meeting on Communication in Central Banks,  which was 
scheduled for December 2004, but was cancelled due to tsunami. 
3   Excerpts from Mr. Tarapore’s address at the Gold Banking Seminar of the World Gold Council, New Delhi, 
August 2, 1997. 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 5
EMEs  are  emerging  from  one  state  to  another,  namely,  from  less  market  orientation  to 
greater market orientation, and are thus, in a state of transition. Consequently, the central 
banks in the EMEs, in their pursuit of financial stability, have additional challenges. First, to 
manage the transition in their own economies, which has socio-economic as well as political 
dimensions;  second,  to  keep  a  watch  on  the  sentiments  affecting  foreign  capital  flows  – 
which could change for reasons other than domestic.  
The  challenges  for  communication  policy  are  considerably  more  complex  for  the  central 
banks  in  the  EMEs  for  some  other  reasons.  More  generally  the  style  and  content  of 
communication  in  EMEs  has  to  evolve  over  time  consistent  with  progress  in  financial 
sophistication.  Further,  in  a  globalised  world,  the  communications  by  a  central  bank  in 
advanced economies have a great impact on financial markets in EMEs. Communications, 
including scope for pre-commitment in policy, may have to factor-in these complexities. 
Some issues for debate 
Before  concluding,  I  should  admit  that  Professor  Blinder’s  Paper  has  provoked  some 
thoughts that warrant further debate and I will mention them briefly. 
First, communication is a two-way process and it is all about sharing of information. Market 
functionaries  and  agents  have  an  equal  role  in  enhancing  their  disclosure  of  data  and 
information. But, studies seem to focus on one-sided communication from the policy makers. 
How  far  non-transparent  and  asymmetric  markets  could  adversely  affect  the  policy 
effectiveness of central banks? The recent sub-prime turmoil is a clear case in point. This 
may be worth examining.  
Second,  while  discussing  independence  of  central  banks  how  do  we  capture  the  de  facto 
elements as distinct from the de jure elements? While it is true that the distinction is specific 
to the overall governance in public sector in each country, there may be an explanation for 
divergences  between  the  two  that  may  either  reinforce  or  undermine  the  credibility  of 
communication.  Further,  there  may  be  different  degrees  of  independence  that  are  being 
exercised in practice and it might be interesting to try and understand how these could be 
captured in future studies. 
Third,  the  exercise  of  independence  has  generally  been  discussed  in  the  context  of  price 
stability. The issue becomes more complex when threats to financial stability are faced, since 
crisis management, as distinct from prevention, requires coordination or at least consultation 
with  the  government,  both  in  terms  of  actions  and  communication.  This  is  particularly 
relevant if quasi-fiscal costs are involved. The more complex issue of managing the conflicts 
between price and financial stability goals on some rare occasions warranting consultation or 
coordination with the government, is another issue. 
Fourth, how much of the recent empirical evidence is adequate to give credit to effectiveness 
of  monetary  policy  by  central  banks  relative  to  say,  globalization  of  trade  in  goods  and 
services? At this stage, I must share with you one concern about the credibility bonus earned 
by an effective communication policy that I had expressed in 2006.  
"Is it possible that such “hands on” and “very successful” communication by 
many  central  banks  with  regard  to  maintaining  financial  stability  have 
resulted  in  under-pricing  of  risks  by  the  private  sector,  or  in  a  distinct 
lowering  of  aversion  to  financial  risks?  Is  it  possible  that  this  credibility 
bonus  is  partly  responsible  for  the  upward  pressure  on  the  housing  and 
equity prices becoming a global phenomenon?"4  
                                                 
4   Keynote address at the Regional Seminar on Central Bank Communications sponsored by the International 
Monetary Fund, held at Mumbai on January 23, 2006. 
6 
 BIS Review 85/2008
Fifth, is it possible to envisage intermediate arrangements between an individualistic and a 
mandated Monetary Policy Committee? We may have an example of such an intermediate 
arrangement  in  India.  We  have  an  Advisory  Committee  on  Monetary  Policy,  consisting  of 
Members  drawn  from  non-executive  independent  Members  of  the  RBI  Board  and  outside 
experts, to aid the decision making process. This arrangement enables participation without 
diluting the coherence, credibility and the flexibility – especially in regard to communication. 
Professor Blinder, in a paper on 12th December 20055, referred to four prototypical central 
bank decision making systems namely: individual central bank governor (e.g. Reserve Bank 
of  New  Zealand);  autocratically-collegial  MPC  (e.g.  Federal  Reserve  System);  genuinely-
collegial MPC (e.g. European System of Central Banks); and individualistic MPC (e.g. Bank 
of England). Perhaps India would be a fifth prototype placed somewhere in the middle of the 
above four, in terms of proximity to the classic decision maker of economic theory. It could be 
called individual central bank governor – voluntarily collegial (Reserve Bank of India). 
Finally, in the debate on accountability and independence, it may be useful to be clear as to 
whom  the  central  bank  is  primarily  accountable  to.  If  a  central  bank  does  not  enjoy 
independence,  the  question  of  its  direct  accountability  will  not  arise.  Broadly  speaking 
however, do central banks tend to focus of late, more on accountability to financial markets, 
by design or by necessity, rather than say to the government, or the real sector, or the public 
at large?  
Thank you.  
                                                 
5   Monetary Policy by Committee: Why and How, Alan S Blinder, December 12, 2005. 
BIS Review 85/2008 
 7
