Caleb M Fundanga: How the Bank of Zambia’s policies are impacting 
Eastern Province developments 
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Eastern Province 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry Open Meeting, Chipata, 17 January 2008. 
 • The Chairman – Eastern Province Chamber of Commerce and Industry (EPCCI) 
• Members of the Executive Committee – EPCCI 
• EPCCI Members 
• Invited Guests 
• Ladies and Gentlemen 
First and foremost, I must state that I am pleased to have finally made the trip to Eastern 
Province under the invitation of the EPCCI. The visit was planned for last year but due to 
other commitments I could not make it. In this regard, I made it a point to make sure that I 
visit the province before the end of the first quarter. I am happy that we have actualized our 
plans during the first month. It is our hope that we will also be able to visit other provincial 
towns off the line of rail during the course of the year. 
Mr. Chairman, one may question what is the purpose of the Bank of Zambia to visit these 
outlying areas? The answer is simple and is drawn from our mission statement – which is “to 
formulate  and  implement  monetary  and  supervisory  policies  that  will  ensure  price  and 
financial system stability”. Our visit is therefore, to enable us assess the extent to which our 
policies  are  impacting  development  in  the  Eastern  Province.  For  a  start,  we  can  rightfully 
boast that as a country we have achieved single digit inflation for the second year in a row 
and we have had no financial institution failures in the recent past. These successes are the 
result of monetary and fiscal policies that have changed the economic landscape of Zambia. 
We  have  been  fortunate  that  the  successes  have  come  at  a  time  when  we  are  seeing 
renewed  economic  interest  in  Zambia.  Investments  in  mining  and  other  sectors  have 
significantly increased, and more importantly, the Eastern Province has not been left out. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, we have been following the developments in Eastern Province with 
keen interest; hence our visit to see for ourselves what is going on. I must say that we are 
impressed with what we have been able to find out. It is clear that income levels have risen in 
the  region  and  this  has  been  driven  by  the  boom  in  agriculture.  This  is  an  encouraging 
development. One of our primary concerns as policy makers is to ensure that development is 
not  restricted  or  concentrated  along  the  line  of  rail.  We  therefore  urge  you  to  use  your 
enhanced  income  levels  to  invest  in  capital  equipment  so  that  your  productive  bases  are 
sustainable. 
As a country, we are blessed with land and water resources. However, it is only in the recent 
past that we are beginning to see the value of what we have through improved agricultural 
output. We have the capacity to become a regional breadbasket and this is something we 
must explore wholeheartedly. It is important to note that there are predictions of a looming 
worldwide  shortage  of  grain.  In  Italy,  the  cost  of  wheat  has  increased  significantly  to  the 
extent that, in protest, people boycotted eating pasta for a day. With our natural resources, 
this is an agricultural avenue that we ought to explore. However, I must hasten to state that 
concentrating on agriculture alone also bears a risk as it is prone to the vagaries of weather. 
So whilst we have been able to reap well in the past, we must also consider diversifying into 
other economic sectors. 
Mr. Chairman, I have in mind sectors such as gemstone mining, tourism and manufacturing. 
The Luangwa region is said to be an area abundant with precious stones. However, we do 
not appear to have concerted efforts aimed at formalizing the process of explorations in this 
area.  With  regard  to  tourism,  the  Eastern  Province  has  varied  fauna  as  well  as  abundant 
BIS Review 15/2008 
 1
wildlife  and  thus  has  the  potential  to  become  a  leading  tourism  zone.  Furthermore,  the 
Eastern Province provides a gateway to the export markets in Malawi and Mozambique. This 
presents an opportunity for the manufacturing industry to explore what goods and materials 
are on demand in the two countries. We know for a fact that a great deal of trade is already 
conducted  with  the  two  countries.  The  completion  of  the  Mchinji  Railway  project  must 
therefore be expeditiously dealt with. 
As a country we need to seek more export ventures in terms of products and markets. It is 
important to note that by November 2007, year-to-date non-traditional exports had increased 
by  25.6%  to  US$845.1  million  from  US$672.7  million  recorded  during  the  corresponding 
period in 2006. Our statistics show that burley tobacco and cotton lint have had a significant 
contribution  to  the  non-traditional  export  figures  in  the  years  2005  and  2006  (although 
indications are that for the year 2007, the figures will be lower after farmers opted to plant 
maize given the lower prices offered for their tobacco and cotton produce). 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  with  the  improved  economic  activity  in  Eastern  Province,  we  have 
noted an increased demand for cash through the sub-chest run by Barclays Bank Zambia 
Plc. This has been exemplified by fewer deposits at the sub-chest each successive period. 
Our investigations have revealed that this is driven by the high intensity of cash transactions 
within the region, largely because very few people, particularly the small-scale farmers, have 
bank  accounts.  We  implore  you  to  encourage  the  use  of  non-cash  payments  for  your 
transactions. It is not only a safer means of transacting but it also enables the authorities to 
keep track of the level of economic activity in the area. In this regard, we also ask that the 
commercial banks design products and services whose cost structures are suitable for the 
economic environment of the region. Financial institutions in general need to offer structured 
financing that best suits the Zambian economic landscape. It is only through such activities 
that we will see further developments in the whole Zambia rather than the few areas along 
the line of rail. 
Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, we have come to Chipata not only to tell you what we 
expect  of  you  but  also  to  listen  to  what  you  expect  of  us.  I  therefore  declare  this  meeting 
open and invite you to make your contributions. 
I thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2008
