L Wilson Kamit: Two new Papua New Guinea banknotes 
Speech  by  Mr  L  Wilson  Kamit,  CBE,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  at  the 
Launch of New Series K5 and K10 banknotes, Port Moresby, 18 April 2008.  
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the launch of our new FIVE KINA 
and  TEN  KINA  BANKNOTES.  May  I  thank  the  Minister  for  Finance  and  Treasury, 
Honourable  Patrick  Pruaitch  for  accepting  our  invitation  to  officiate  on  this  important 
occasion. 
The  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  has  timed  the  release  of  the  new  polymer  K5  and  K10 
banknotes  to  coincide  with  the  Kina  and  Toea  Day,  which  is  on  the  19th  of  April  2008. 
Because the 19th of April this year falls on this Saturday, we have decided to bring this event 
forward to today so that we can commence issuing the new notes from Friday onwards. This 
now  completes  our  programme  to  have  a  family  of  banknotes  showing  the  National 
Parliament building on the front.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, since Papua New Guinea introduced the Kina and Toea thirty-three 
years ago on 19th April 1975, our family of banknotes and coins have changed reflecting the 
development of the economy, business activity and world-wide trends. For the banknotes, we 
started off with the 2 Kina, 5 Kina and 10 Kina notes, then introduced the 20 Kina banknote 
in  1978,  the  50  Kina  banknote  in  1989  and  the  100  Kina  banknote  in  2005.  Similarly  for 
coins, we began with the 1 toea, 2 toea, 5 toea, 10 toea, 20 toea and 1 Kina coins in 1975. 
This was followed by the South Pacific Festival of Arts commemorative 50 toea coin in 1980. 
The 1 and 2 toea coins were withdrawn from circulation in 2006 when it was clear they had 
become redundant and the larger sized 1 Kina coin replaced by a smaller sized coin.  
Over  the  years,  the  Bank  has  issued  banknotes  and  coins  to  commemorate  .special  and 
significant events and milestones in the history of our country. These include events such as 
the  South  Pacific  Games,  Independence  anniversaries  and  the  Bank’s  anniversaries.  The 
Bank has a numismatic (Collectors) programme where rare moments such as today can be 
captured in specially packed coins and notes (un-cut) full sheets.  
Our quality of currency has also evolved over the thirty-three years, reflecting technological 
developments,  changes 
the  cost-
effectiveness  of  production  and  handling.  Our  banknotes  began  with  paper  substrate  but 
since  1991  we  have  moved  on  to  introducing  polymer  notes,  the  second  country  outside 
Australia  to  do  so.  We  find  polymer  banknotes  more  cost-efficient,  more  durable  and  last 
longer,  especially  in  our  humid  PNG  climatic  conditions.  The  new  Five  Kina  polymer 
banknote  to  be  launched  this  afternoon  is  the  last  denomination  to  be  converted  and 
completes the series of polymer banknotes. Advanced security features are incorporated in 
the latest series of our banknotes as protection against counterfeiting.  
We  have  also  standardized  the  main  theme  running  throughout  all  our  banknotes.  On  the 
back  of  our  banknotes,  we  retain  our  traditional  forms  of  money  (for  the  2,  5,  10  and  20 
Kina), the Grand Chief Sir Michael Somare appears on the K50 note depicting our road to 
nationhood  and  guardianship  of  our  country.  The  progress  in  economic  and  technological 
development  is  reflected  on  the  back  of  the  K100  note.  On  the  front  of  each  of  the 
banknotes, you will note that we now have the image of the National Parliament. This family 
of  notes  using  the  “Parliament  Theme”  shows  different  aspects  of  the  Parliament  House 
together with a smaller image of the National Crest. These are symbols of nationhood.  
Papua  New  Guinea  is  predominantly  a  cash-based  economy  and  will  remain  so  for  some 
time. The majority of our people will continue to use cash (coins and banknotes) as the main 
form  of  payment  in  settling  their  transactions,  in  conducting  their  business  activities  and 
meeting social obligations. We at the Bank of Papua New Guinea will therefore ensure that 
trends  on  secured  currency,  and 
in  world-wide 
BIS Review 47/2008 
 1
our  currency  are  of  an  acceptable  standard,  are  durable,  and  longer  lasting,  given  our 
tropical humid conditions and the frequent and rough handling of currency by the public. For 
this  reason,  the  Bank  has  introduced  a  Clean Bank  Note Policy  to  maintain  the standards 
and increase public awareness of the quality of our currency.  
With  these  few  remarks,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  invite  our 
Minister,  Honourable  Patrick  Pruaitch 
to  officially  launch  the  new  five  and 
ten kina banknotes. 
 
 
 
 
  2 
 BIS Review 47/2008
