Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Implementing responsive monetary and 
banking policies 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the 
Philippines  (Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  2008  Awarding  Ceremony  for  BSP 
Stakeholders, Manila, 11 July 2008. 
 Distinguished  partners  from  the  private  and  the  government  sectors,  special  guests,  good 
morning!  
On behalf of the Members of the Monetary Board, I thank all of you for joining us today as we 
honor  our  partners  who  continue  to  support  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  in  its  various 
initiatives. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  We  cannot  overemphasize  the  value  of  your  support  and 
cooperation.  Inflation  targeting,  which  serves  as  framework  for  the  formulation  of  our 
monetary policies, is information intensive.  
Information from our partner institutions in government and the private sectors are key inputs 
when we assess the economy and decide on the most appropriate monetary policy stance, 
moving  forward.  It  is  imperative  therefore  that  the  information  you  provide  us  is 
comprehensive, accurate, and timely.  
The insights from our collaboration, coupled with the information from our surveys and other 
available statistics have helped sharpen the basis of our policy decisions. This is important in 
ensuring we make well-grounded decisions, so to speak.  
These are challenging times given strong inflationary pressures from record high oil and food 
prices.  We  need  to  forge  stronger  links  of  cooperation  among  different  segments  of  our 
economy to ride out the rough patches.  
Let me be specific. The BSP’s business and consumer expectations surveys help us assess 
the current and near-term prospects of the economy. Even if the information you provide can 
be considered indicative and directional, they are important and valuable. In essence, BES 
data  provide  up-to-date  qualitative  indicators  of  economic  performance  in  real  time;  this 
facilitates prompt and precisely calibrated monetary policy actions on our part. For instance, 
inputs regarding business and spending plans have enhanced the forward-looking flavor of 
inflation targeting in our country.  
On the other hand, our surveys pertaining to external sector statistics provide key economic 
indicators for the Bangko Sentral, particularly in relation to our balance of payments position. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  Exponential  growth  in  cross-border  economic  and  financial 
transactions  has  resulted  from  continuing  innovation,  deregulation,  and  globalization.  As  a 
result,  we  need  to  continually  conduct  surveys  such  as  the  Cross  Border  Transactions 
Survey, the Foreign Direct Investment Survey, the Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey, 
and more recently, the Survey on IT- and IT-enabled Services, to help us better capture the 
broad picture of current developments.  
Our Department of Economic Statistics has used these surveys to more effectively monitor 
our transactions with the rest of the world. This, in turn, has enabled the Bangko Sentral to 
assess  current  and  prospective  developments  in  both  capital  flows  and  exchange  rate 
movement, as well as the country’s vulnerability to possible external shocks. 
On  the  other  hand,  universal  and  commercial  banks  remain  our  reliable  partners  in 
monitoring  foreign  exchange  transactions,  including  remittances,  that  pass  through  their 
channels.  
BIS Review 91/2008 
 1
Finally,  we  also  acknowledge  our  partners  who  provide  valuable  support  to  our  various 
advocacy programs on financial literacy for microfinance entrepreneurs as well as overseas 
Filipinos and their families. 
At the end of the day, our economy stands to benefit from our fruitful partnership – the same 
partnership that helps us keep the Philippine financial system resilient in the midst of global 
financial turmoil and economic slowdown.  
Let us therefore resolve to find new ways to enhance and strengthen our partnership so that 
together, we can further improve the quality of Philippine statistics that provide the basis for 
national policies and programs.  
On behalf of the Bangko Sentral, I thank all of our respondents and stakeholders who have 
been our faithful partners through these years. All of you can rightfully claim that you have 
also served our people and our country by sharing your time and information with us.  
With  your  support,  the  Bangko  Sentral  will  continue  to  craft  and  implement  responsive 
monetary and banking policies. 
Maraming salamat po and congratulations to all awardees!  
Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2008
