Jean-Pierre Roth: Review of the Swiss economy in 2007 and the outlook 
for 2008  
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the 
General Meeting of Shareholders of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 25 April 2008. 
 Mr President of the Bank Council 
Dear Shareholders 
Dear Guests 
As  history  has  shown,  and  the  President  of  the  Bank  Council  has  reminded  us  just  now, 
celebrations  to  mark  our  various  anniversaries  have  often  taken  place  amid  difficult 
circumstances. 
Such was the case in 2007, when confidence in the quality of numerous financial products 
began to fade from August onwards in the wake of the US real estate crisis – subsequently 
placing  a  substantial  provisioning  burden  on  international  banks  and  leading  to  a  crisis  of 
confidence  on  the  markets.  A  worsening  of  the  economic  outlook  and  major  stock  market 
corrections then ensued. 
Nevertheless, 2007 as a whole can still be regarded as a successful year in economic terms, 
with global economic growth settling in at around 5%. This excellent performance is mainly 
attributable  to  the  continued  momentum  of  the  emerging  economies,  notably  in  Asia, 
although  favourable  financial  conditions  also  played  a  positive  role  until  the  middle  of  the 
year. 
Global  economic  performance  was  less  homogeneous  than  in  2006,  however.  Although 
growth  remained  high  in  the  emerging  economies  and  exceeded  the  long-term  trend  in 
Europe, economic activity in the US slowed considerably in autumn on the back of the credit 
crunch on the property market. 
The  last  few  months  of  2007  were  characterised  by  the  emergence  of  considerable 
uncertainties  regarding  the  future  path  of  the  global  economy,  with  the  latest  energy  price 
hikes and, of course, the destabilisation of the financial markets in autumn being the main 
sources of concern. 
Switzerland has not remained unscathed amid all this turmoil. Since the summer, we have 
seen substantial stock market corrections and a return to lower-risk investments, particularly 
in Swiss francs. However, we experienced these turbulences during a very dynamic phase in 
our economic cycle. Despite the volatile climate of recent months, the Swiss economy has 
continued to enjoy sustained growth. 
For the fourth year in succession, real GDP growth was significantly higher than the long-
term  average,  reaching  3.1%.  We  owe  this  gratifying  result  to  the  extremely  broad-based 
nature  of  Swiss  economic  growth.  As  already  in  2006,  the  global  economy  and  the 
performance of the Swiss franc facilitated exports, accounting for a jump of some 10% in this 
sector. What is more, robust domestic demand also played a role this time round. Significant 
increases in real salaries and the continued labour market upturn had a positive impact on 
private consumption, while the robust financial health of the corporate sector coupled with a 
rosy business outlook helped to stimulate investment. Final domestic demand thus rose 2% 
in 2007, compared to 1.7% in the prior year. 
Thanks  to  burgeoning  demand,  employment  was  up  sharply,  with  the  unemployment  rate 
edging down to 2.6% in seasonally adjusted terms by December. The Swiss economy is thus 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 1
experiencing a period of virtually full employment and has been able to benefit from the flow 
of workers from the European Union and the flexibility this brings. 
The  economic  figures  for  2007  are  all  the  more  pleasing  given  that  prices  have  remained 
stable despite the hike in commodity prices. Over the year as a whole, prices increased by 
0.7% on average. However, by December, inflation was up 2% – an acceleration primarily 
attributable to the sharp jump in the price of oil. 
In  such  a  favourable  climate,  it  was  important  for  monetary  policy  not  to  stimulate  the 
economy  any  further.  By  persisting  with  excessively  low  interest  rates,  we  could  have 
aggravated inflationary risks and thereby disturbed the macroeconomic equilibrium. The SNB 
therefore maintained its monetary normalisation course by lifting the Libor target range by 25 
basis points on three occasions. The three-month Libor thus rose from 2.1% at the beginning 
of the year to 2.75% in September. In view of the considerable financial uncertainty and the 
effect this was having on growth prospects for 2008, we subsequently left the target range 
unchanged  and  stabilised  the  Libor  at  the  2.75%  mark.  We  have  since  maintained  this 
position. 
Turmoil on the financial markets 
The  financial  storm  of  the  last  nine  months  has  challenged  our  assessment  criteria.  Such 
turmoil poses considerable risks for the future. 
Before  I  deal  with  these  issues,  please  allow  me  first  to  look  at  the  factors  which  have 
brought us to this situation. 
After several years of rising home prices in the United States, there was a trend reversal to 
the downside which hit the high-risk sub-prime mortgage segment hard. It was when credit 
rating agencies began a massive downgrading of sub-prime mortgage-backed securities that 
the  global  financial  markets  realised  the  full  enormity  of  what  was  happening.  During  the 
summer months of 2007, the prices and liquidity of these securities plummeted. This turn of 
events alarmed investors. Risk premiums subsequently increased, with uncertainty as to the 
extent  of  the  losses  incurred  by  banks  triggering  a  general  crisis  of  confidence  among 
financial  market  participants.  Liquidity  on  the  major  monetary  markets  became  scarce  and 
there was a return to volatility on the stock markets. 
Repercussions for Switzerland 
Switzerland quickly felt the storm due to the exposure of its financial sector. 
First, our two big banks saw their profitability fall sharply in the second half of 2007. Losses 
made in connection with their investment activities in the United States were a decisive factor 
in this respect. One of the big banks even required fresh injections of capital, such was the 
extent of the losses it suffered. The private banking sector and domestic banking activities 
continued to flourish, however. 
Second, the turbulent environment handicapped the money market and led to a widening of 
the  spread,  i.e.  by  means  of  an  unwelcome  interest  rate  hike.  The  SNB  responded 
immediately by relaxing its lending conditions for banks. Contrary to certain suggestions, this 
measure was not intended as a means of increasing the amount of liquidity in circulation on a 
permanent basis. After all, inflationary pressure would potentially rise given such a scenario. 
Instead,  we  acted  in  a  flexible  way  and  adjusted  our  maturities  in  accordance  with  the 
demands in the lending market so as to provide this market with the buffer it needed. We 
have consequently introduced three-month loans, whereas the terms we offered previously 
were  never  longer  than  30  days.  We  also  took  joint  action  with  other  central  banks  and 
provided US dollar liquidity to our counterparties – the first time we have ever taken such a 
step. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2008
The  gradual  tightening  of  lending  conditions  within  our  domestic  market  is  a  third  factor, 
albeit one which is still to fully materialise. Indeed, the fear that the liquidity requirements of 
the  two  big  banks  may  be  having  a  detrimental  impact  on  credit  volumes  in  Switzerland 
cannot  be  excluded.  However,  the  rest  of  the  Swiss  banking  sector  –  which  accounts  for 
almost two-thirds of Switzerland’s domestic credit supply – posted excellent results in 2007, 
thereby helping to limit the burden of risk. Furthermore, our figures show that there has so far 
been  no  impact  on  lending  growth.  Nevertheless,  a  gradual  revision  of  banks’  credit  risk 
evaluations  appears  the  likely  scenario,  simply  given  the  economic  uncertainty  of  recent 
months. Banks may consequently raise their interest rates for commercial loans or ask their 
customers to provide additional collateral. The sharp increase in premiums seen on the bond 
market in recent months would seem to back up such a trend, at least as far as the major 
corporates  are  concerned.  Such  a  development  might  then  have  a  knock-on  effect  on 
lending conditions for SMEs. At present, the SNB is carrying out a survey among banks in 
order to gain a better idea of the direction in which lending conditions are heading. 
Lessons from these turbulences 
We can learn a lot from the period of turbulence we are currently experiencing with regard to 
banking supervision and the stability of the financial system. The Financial Stability Forum 
(FSF)  submitted  a  number  of  measures  to  the  G7  countries  aimed  at  enhancing  the 
resilience of financial markets. The SNB was an active partner in drafting this report.  
Allow me to elaborate on this topic. 
First, it is astounding that a problem which appears to be confined to one single segment of 
the mortgage market in one single country could have resulted in crisis of global proportions. 
We  feel  that  this  situation  has  not  only  come  about  because  of  the  globalisation  of  the 
financial markets, but also because international banks have become increasingly vulnerable 
over the last few years – vulnerable because of their thirst for profit and their underestimation 
of the ensuing risks. 
Second,  the  banks’  risk  measuring  and  management  instruments  could  not  cope  with  the 
crisis.  Consequently,  the  actual  losses  incurred  in  the  area  of  mortgage-backed  securities 
(MBS) clearly surpassed the potential level calculated by the sophisticated statistical models, 
and the liquidity haemorrhage suffered by the banks was greater than the most pessimistic 
scenarios had suggested. In other words, the risk measuring systems failed despite the fact 
that  they  were  being  monitored  by  the  best-informed  experts  around.  This  summary  may 
sound a little harsh, but is not intended to put the blame on the banks. Instead, it illustrates 
that  no  model  can  do  complete  justice  to  the  complexity  of  financial  instruments  and  the 
economic environment in which banks operate these days. 
Third,  the  events  of  the  last  few  months  raise  question  marks  about  the  efficiency  of  the 
banking  supervision  standards  applied  so  far.  The  call  for  more  sophisticated  risk 
measurement  systems,  supervision  and  regulation  of  banks  is  understandable.  There  is 
room for improvement in these areas, and it must be exploited. Nevertheless, it should be 
pointed out that more extensive regulation on its own represents an unsatisfactory response 
to the growing complexity of banking activities. Through the events of recent months, we are 
called upon to learn the lessons from the banks’ limited ability to measure risk and – as a 
logical  consequence  –  the  limited  scope  afforded  to  the  relevant  supervisory  authorities. 
Despite the welcome improvements provided by Basel II, it is naive to assume that weighted 
capital  requirements  can  guarantee  fool-proof  bank  capitalisation  assessments.  There  is  a 
substantial margin of error which must be taken into consideration. In order to take account 
of  all  the  variables,  a  tightening  of  the  traditional  requirements  in  the  area  of  the  bank 
capitalisation,  liquidity  and  indebtedness  is  necessary.  For  a  financial  centre  like  ours  – 
which includes international banks whose private banking arms generate substantial revenue 
and consequently rely on having a spotless reputation – such action is vital. 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 3
Finally, the banks that have been buffeted by the financial storm must take a careful look at 
the  various  ways  in  which  they  apply  corporate  governance.  In  particular,  they  should 
examine the role of their respective boards of directors in carrying out the necessary checks 
and balances to ensure efficient risk management, and they should correct the excesses of 
their  remuneration  systems  in  a  manner  that  does  not  put  short-term  results  ahead  of  the 
long-term  performance.  The  latter  aspect  has  been  the  subject  of  debate  for  some  years 
already, and now it is time for answers. 
Impact on monetary policy 
The turmoil on the financial markets has also had implications with regard to monetary policy. 
The SNB has taken care to ensure that the fallout from this crisis does not lead to an undue 
tightening of credit conditions. 
The increase in the risk premiums we saw last autumn has resulted in a de facto tightening 
of  financing  conditions  for  banks  and  companies.  By  exerting  a  moderating  influence  on 
interest rates, monetary policy can prevent risk premium hikes from triggering a slowdown in 
economic  activity.  The  great  advantage  of  the  SNB’s  operational  objective  –  i.e.  a  target 
range for the three-month Libor – is that it takes account of the risk premiums banks face in 
their  refinancing  transactions.  Since  the  banks  pass  on  these  risk  premiums  to  their 
customers via their lending conditions, the Libor reflects the degree of restrictiveness on the 
lending market. Fully aware of this fact, the SNB has been aiming for a Libor at around the 
2.75% mark in recent months. Given the current circumstances, this is a rate which we deem 
necessary to ensure price stability in the medium term. 
Resurgence of inflationary risks 
The financial storm should not make us forget that it is our mandate to ensure price stability 
in the medium term. In this regard, 2007 saw a worsening in the situation due to the sharp 
increase in commodity prices. The indicators reflecting these price rises registered a growth 
rate of between 15% and 40%, while the price for crude oil shot up nearly 50% in one year. 
Even food prices rose by more than 20% on the international markets. Such price increases 
are all the more remarkable given that these prices had tended to stagnate in recent years. 
This  jump  in  the  price  of  commodities  was  mainly  attributable  to  the  continuous  growth  in 
domestic demand in the emerging markets and low extraction and production capacity. In our 
opinion, this situation is not likely to change in any direction in the short term. 
Although partially offset by the weak US dollar, the rise in the oil price during the final quarter 
of 2007 triggered a sharp increase in inflation – from 0.7% in September to 2% in December. 
The price rises of other commodities were also significant, but they only had a minor impact 
on  inflation  in  Switzerland.  In  fact,  commodities  are  not  directly  included  in  the  reference 
basket used to calculate the price index, which means that their price increases only had a 
minor impact in this respect. However, the indirect effects, i.e. higher prices for goods and 
services as a result of higher production costs, constitute a much more serious inflationary 
risk.  Having  said  this,  the  related  impact  last  year  was  modest  because  many  companies 
chose  not  to  pass  on  their  higher  costs  to  consumers,  given  the  considerable  competitive 
pressure  in  numerous  markets.  Moreover,  the  relatively  moderate  increase  in  wage  costs 
and gains in productivity over the last few years allowed companies to absorb a good part of 
the additional costs they had incurred as a result of higher commodity prices. 
However,  at  the  end  of  2007  and  during  the  first  quarter  of  this  current  year,  companies 
became  less  reticent  and  began  to  make  more  frequent  and  more  significant  price 
adjustments.  The  moderating  factors  that  have  been  at  play  until  now  have  gradually  lost 
their  impact.  Inflation  thus  reached  2%  in  December  and  has  even  exceeded  this  level  in 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2008
recent months. We cannot rule out the possibility that costs will increasingly be passed on in 
2008. 
My fears are based on two particular aspects. First, the rapid rise in the cost of labour at the 
end  of  2007  put  pressure  on  margins.  At  the  same  time,  productivity  gains  became  less 
marked as companies reached the limits of their production capacity. Therefore, adjustments 
in  the  margins  will  probably  have  to  be  made.  Second,  the  current  favourable  business 
climate encourages companies to reinstate the margins they had previously cut in order to 
maintain  their  market  share  amid  stiff  competition.  Some  companies  may  pass  on  a 
disproportionate share of the higher costs they have incurred in the past. 
The SNB does not underestimate these risks, but is nevertheless confident with regard to the 
inflation outlook in the medium and long term. In essence, our confidence is based on the 
fact that monetary policy of the past three years has been successful in gradually normalising 
the interest rate level. Since 2004, we have lifted the Libor target range in ten steps to bring 
the interest rate to a level that is in line with price stability in the medium term. Thanks to this 
preventive approach, the inflation outlook has not deteriorated despite the inflationary bouts 
of recent months. 
Moreover,  the  performance  of  our  monetary  aggregates  strengthens  our  belief  that  price 
stability  can  be  maintained.  Contrary  to  what  we  see  in  neighbouring  countries,  growth  in 
Switzerland’s monetary aggregates has been compatible with stable medium and long-term 
inflation  for  a  number  of  years  already.  Successive  interest  rate  hikes  have  created  the 
conditions  for  transfers  from  sight  and  savings  deposits  to  term  deposits,  which  generally 
earn better returns. Thus, in 2007, M1 and M2 continued declining, while M3 recorded only 
modest  growth.  Consequently,  the  money  overhang  which  existed  since  2003  has  now 
dissipated – a development which bodes well for future price stability. 
Finally,  the  foreign  exchange  market  has  largely  corrected  the  previous  slide  in  the  Swiss 
franc against the euro, which had made imports more expensive. The Swiss franc’s rebound 
creates a more favourable environment for the preservation of price stability in the medium 
term. This change in monetary conditions enabled us to leave interest rates unchanged at 
our monetary policy assessment in March. 
Mixed outlook for 2008 
Even  though  Switzerland’s  economic  performance  is  still  excellent,  2008  is  fraught  with 
considerable uncertainties. The situation on the financial markets has not yet stabilised, and 
the global economy is slowing. Our economy, with its important financial sector and strong 
presence on the international markets, will not remain unscathed. In addition, the increase in 
commodity prices, in particular the price of oil, is triggering an inflationary effect. 
These  different  factors  pose  a  predicament  in  terms  of  monetary  policy,  and  the  resultant 
uncertainty  this  causes  is  not  exactly  beneficial  for  Swiss  companies.  I  have  every 
confidence, however, that Switzerland will navigate these troubled waters without any major 
problems.  On  the  one  hand,  our  economy  is  very  competitive.  Thanks  to  the  reforms 
implemented in recent years, Switzerland is well placed to adjust to the needs of the global 
economy and cope with pressure on the foreign exchange markets. On the other hand, our 
careful  policy  in  favour  of  a  gradual  normalisation  of  interest  rates,  which  we  have  been 
pursuing since 2004, has resulted in a steady tightening of monetary conditions and should 
ensure price stability in the medium term. 
On this positive note, I would like to close my remarks. Thank you for listening and, above all, 
thank  you  for  supporting  the  National  Bank  in  its  efforts  to  ensure  monetary  stability  in 
Switzerland. 
BIS Review 50/2008 
 5
