David Longworth: Work in progress – the Bank of Canada's response to 
the financial turbulence 
Remarks by Mr David Longworth, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canadian 
Association for Business Economics, Kingston, Ontario, 26 August 2008.  
 Good  afternoon.  It's  been  a  little  over  a  year  since  the  first  effects  of  a  series  of  financial 
dislocations  were  felt.  The  financial  turbulence  over  the  past  year  has  been  costly  and 
difficult for many individuals and financial institutions; it's been challenging for policy-makers; 
and it's had implications for the overall economy. But the episode has also led many to re-
examine their assessment of risks, to question risk-management practices, and to improve 
policies and operations. This has certainly been the case at the Bank of Canada. 
In my remarks today, I'd like to describe how the Bank responded to the liquidity aspect of 
the  turbulence  as  the  year  unfolded,  and  the  changes  that  we  made  in  our  liquidity-policy 
framework, both to deal with problems as they arose and to improve our ability to operate in 
the future. I'll also provide an overview of current conditions in Canadian credit markets and a 
brief comment on economic developments since we published our Monetary Policy Report 
Update in mid-July. I'll begin by providing a summary of the origins of the turbulence. 
Origins of the financial turbulence 
For  a  number  of  years,  desired  world  savings  exceeded  desired  world  investment.  As  a 
result, long-term real interest rates decreased around the world, which led investors, in their 
"search for yield," to take on risk at lower premiums than they had demanded in the past, and 
to accept much higher levels of leverage in financial products and on their balance sheets to 
obtain their hoped-for returns. The search for yield also led to rapid growth in the demand for, 
and development of, more complex structured financial products, such as collateralized debt 
obligations (CDOs) backed by asset-backed securities or by other CDOs and asset-backed 
commercial paper (ABCP) backed by CDOs, some of which, after 2000, were based on U.S. 
subprime mortgages. 
These complex instruments were rated by credit-rating agencies using the same scale that 
they had used in the past for "plain-vanilla" corporate debt. Some sellers of these complex 
financial instruments emphasized that these products were highly rated – many were AAA – 
but placed little emphasis on their other features. A number of investors failed to do their own 
due diligence and instead relied too much on credit ratings as a measure of the overall risk in 
holding these complex debt instruments. Among other things, they failed to take into account 
risks other than credit risks, in particular, market and liquidity risks. The complexity of these 
instruments  frequently  made  them  opaque,  and  too  often  investors  put  their  money  and 
confidence into vehicles that they did not fully understand. 
The  basic  loan  quality  of  U.S.  subprime  mortgages  worsened  through  2005  and  2006, 
although  this  worsening  did  not  become  broadly  apparent  to  the  investors  in  securitized 
mortgages  until  the  first  half  of  2007.1  Subprime  loans  were  premised  on  continued 
increases  in  house  prices.  When  house  prices  stopped  rising,  the  belated  realization  by 
rating agencies of the poor quality of these loans resulted in the downgrading of structured 
products with exposure to subprime mortgages, often by several notches. These instruments 
were  held  by  a  variety  of  investment  funds,  including  many  sponsored  by  banks.  Indeed, 
                                                 
1   The problem was exacerbated by the originate-to-distribute model, which led to misaligned incentives for the 
U.S. originators of subprime mortgages. 
BIS Review 101/2008 
 1
some products were held directly by banks themselves. Investors soon came to realize that 
highly rated structured-debt instruments could fall substantially in value and were subject to 
severe downgrades. As a result, they began to shun almost any type of structured product – 
either because the complexity of these products made it difficult for many market participants 
to  understand  them,  and  therefore  to  accurately  price  the  attendant  risk,  or  because  they 
were  really  looking  to  hold  only  true  AAA  assets.  In  Canada,  these  instruments  included 
ABCP. Following the onset of the crisis, non-bank-sponsored ABCP stopped rolling over in 
Canada, which led to the standstill under the Montreal Accord. As time passed, the markets 
for securitized products became much less liquid to varying degrees across instruments. 
As market players observed the downgrades of structured products based on U.S. subprime 
mortgages and the drying up of ABCP markets, two additional concerns emerged. First was 
a  concern  about  the  financial  health  of  counterparties,  particularly  banks,  as  marked-to-
market losses eroded capital. Second was a concern that securitization would proceed at a 
much  slower  pace  than  in  the  past,  thus  requiring  reintermediation  that  would  result  in  a 
more rapid expansion of bank balance sheets and an associated need for capital. These two 
concerns led to a significant increase in interest rate spreads and to a decline in the liquidity 
of short-term bank-funding markets in many countries. 
Now, it is important to note that the decline in the liquidity of bank-funding markets and the 
decline  in  the  liquidity  of  asset  markets  in  general  are  not  unrelated.  Indeed,  there  are 
theoretical  reasons  to  believe  that  market  liquidity  and  the  funding  liquidity  of  banks  with 
trading operations are mutually reinforcing, thus leading to the possibility of a "liquidity spiral" 
in a downward or upward direction.2 This possibility arises because first, the ability of traders 
to  provide  market  liquidity  depends  on  the  amount  of  funding  they  have  and,  second,  the 
amount of funding they have, through capital and margin loans, depends on market liquidity. 
This  second 
linkage  arises  because,  with  mark-to-market  accounting,  asset-price 
movements affect capital and because, empirically, margins tend to rise when asset prices 
fall.3  On  a  different  note,  I  would  add  that  the  leverage  of  trading  operations  is  strongly 
procyclical, falling when asset prices fall and rising when they rise.4  
The  decline  in  market  liquidity,  especially  bank-funding  liquidity,  was  of  utmost  concern  to 
central banks. So how did the Bank of Canada respond? 
The liquidity policy response 
Last  month,  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements'  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial 
System  (CGFS)  released  an  important  report5  that  summarized  central  bank  responses  to 
the  financial  turbulence  and  put  forward  seven  recommendations  aimed  at  strengthening 
central  bank  effectiveness  in  dealing  with  liquidity  problems,  including  funding-market 
pressures. As these recommendations were developed over a number of months, they were, 
in many cases, already being implemented by individual central banks. I thought it would be 
useful to use these recommendations as an organizing device to summarize what we at the 
                                                 
2   See M. K. Brunnermeier and L. H. Pedersen, "Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity," forthcoming in Review 
of  Financial  Studies  and  M.  K.  Brunnermeier,  "Deciphering  the  2007-08  Liquidity  and  Credit  Crunch," 
forthcoming in Journal of Economic Perspectives. 
3   Brunnermeier and Pedersen, op. cit., note that, empirically, margins tend to rise when there are large drops in 
asset prices. They also note that changes in margins can be destabilizing to both asset-market liquidity and 
funding liquidity. 
4   See T. Adrian and H. S. Shin, "Liquidity and Leverage" (Staff Report No. 328, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, May 2008). 
5   "Central  Bank  Operations  in  Response  to  the  Financial  Turmoil,"  a  report  submitted  by  a  study  group 
established by the Committee on the Global Financial System, at the Bank for International Settlements. The 
report is available at: http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs31.pdf?noframes=1. 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2008
Bank of Canada have done since last August in terms of actions and the development of new 
liquidity policies and principles. 
The  first  recommendation  is  that  a  central  bank  should  make  sure  that  its  operational 
framework is capable of achieving its policy rate target – even in times of turmoil. Both before 
and during the crisis, the means by which the Bank reinforced its target overnight rate, when 
necessary, were the intraday use of one-day repo transactions – special purchase and resale 
agreements (SPRAs) and sale and repurchase agreements (SRAs) – and, at the end of the 
day, the setting of the target for next-day settlement balances. These policy tools were used 
aggressively from 9 August of last year to 30 April of this year to reinforce the target for the 
overnight  rate.6  Because  they  proved  effective,  there  has  been  no  policy  or  operational 
change  directly  related  to  this  recommendation  (Chart  1:  Overnight  Rate  Minus  Target 
Overnight Rate). 
 
The second and third recommendations aim at the central bank's ability to conduct liquidity 
operations effectively, even when key markets are illiquid. In concrete terms, this means that 
the central bank should be prepared, if necessary, to take steps that go beyond adjusting the 
aggregate  supply  of  reserves,  including  providing  an  increased  volume  of  term  funds, 
conducting operations against a broad range of collateral, and conducting operations with a 
broad range of counterparties. 
                                                 
6   The frequency and size of overnight liquidity injections (SPRAs) was greater than normal on 9 and 10 August 
2007, in early October, from mid-November to early January 2008, as well as ahead of the 30 April quarter 
end  for  chartered  banks.  The  level  of  settlement  balances  in  the  payments  system  was  generally  (but  not 
always)  targeted  at  higher-than-normal  levels  over  these  periods.  Since  30  April,  the  frequency  of  SPRA 
operations has been much less, with most occurring around the banks' 31 July quarter end. 
BIS Review 101/2008 
 3
financial  system  stress 
To this end, the Bank modified three of its policy tools. First, in August of last year, the Bank 
temporarily  expanded  the  range  of  securities  that  are  eligible  for  overnight  operations. 
Second, between December 2007 and January 2008, and again between March and June of 
this year, the Bank conducted a series of term purchase and resale agreements (PRAs) – 
typically  of  28  days  –  against  a  broader-than-normal  range  of  securities.7  Third,  late  last 
year, the Bank announced that the range of acceptable collateral for its Standing Liquidity 
Facility  would  be  expanded  to  include  a  subset  of  ABCP  sponsored  by  deposit-taking 
institutions, and U.S. Treasuries. Specified types of ABCP became acceptable on 31 March 
2008, and U.S. Treasuries became acceptable on 30 June 2008. 
Steps have also been taken to modernize the Bank of Canada Act. Amendments to the Act, 
designed  to  allow  the  Bank  more  flexibility  in  providing  liquidity  to  the  financial  system  in 
response to changing circumstances, were passed by Parliament, and have recently been 
proclaimed. The amendments will allow the Bank to use an even broader range of securities 
in its buyback operations, importantly, those of a term nature.  
Under the revised policy, the Bank may choose to engage in buyback operations to address 
a  situation  of 
that  could  have  material  macroeconomic 
consequences.  In  this  "exceptional"  circumstance,  the  Bank  may  buy  and  sell  securities 
beyond Government of Canada bonds and treasury bills, and for a period longer than one 
day. The list of securities that may be used in such transactions can be found in the Bank's 
policy, which was published in the Canada Gazette on 26 July 2008.8 I should stress that the 
Bank is not obligated to accept the full range of these securities for any particular transaction.  
The  extent  to  which  the  Bank  would  exercise  this  power,  once  the  state  of  affairs  was 
deemed to be "exceptional," would be governed by a set of principles for Bank of Canada 
market intervention. I will describe these principles when I come to the final recommendation 
of the CGFS report. 
We  also  recently  announced  that  a  term  securities-lending  facility  and  a  term  loan  facility 
could be used in certain circumstances.9 While the Bank currently has a securities-lending 
facility (whereby it makes available from its balance sheet Government of Canada securities 
that are temporarily in high demand in the market), the loans under this facility have a term of 
one  business  day  and  are  intended  to  address  stresses  in  the  repo  market  for  a  single 
security.  The  term  securities-lending  operations  would  be  used  to  provide  longer-term 
liquidity more broadly to financial market participants by increasing the supply of high-quality 
securities  that  could  be  used  for  collateral  at  times  when  there  is  a  shortage.  Term  loan 
facilities would be most useful when liquidity premiums in money markets are distorted and 
when at least two deposit-taking financial institutions face liquidity shortages.  
The  fourth  recommendation  addresses  the  possibility  that  channels  for  distributing  liquidity 
across borders can become impaired in times of turmoil, and the need for central banks to 
consider accepting assets denominated in foreign currency, or establishing foreign exchange 
swap  lines  among  themselves.  To  address  this  issue,  as  noted  earlier,  the  range  of 
acceptable  collateral  for  the  Standing  Liquidity  Facility  was  expanded  to  include  U.S. 
Treasuries, effective 30 June. Swap lines also help to avoid bottlenecks in the international 
distribution  of  liquidity,  potentially  enabling  domestic  institutions  to  obtain  foreign  currency 
                                                 
7   While  the  Bank  had  used  term  PRAs  in  the  past,  it  had  done  so  to  manage  its  own  balance  sheet  during 
seasonal,  temporary  peaks  in  liabilities;  over  the  past  year,  however,  the  primary  purpose  was  to  increase 
liquidity in money markets. 
8   The policy for buying and selling securities under subsection 18.1(1) of the Bank of Canada Act is available at: 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/markets/pdf/policy_gazette-e.pdf. 
9   For  context,  see  W.  Engert,  J.  Selody,  and  C.  Wilkins,  "Financial  Market  Turmoil  and  Central  Bank 
Intervention,"  Financial  System  Review  (Ottawa:  Bank  of  Canada,  June  2008):  71-78,  available  at: 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/fsr/2008/fsr_0608.pdf. 
4 
 BIS Review 101/2008
liquidity. For many years, the Bank of Canada has had a swap line with the Federal Reserve 
in  the  United  States  to  give  it  access  to  U.S.  dollars.  This  facility  was  not  needed  in  the 
recent  period  of  turmoil,  however,  and  may  not  be  used  often,  if  at  all,  because  most 
Canadian  banks  have  U.S.  branches  or  subsidiaries,  and  thus  have  access  to  U.S.-dollar 
funding through the Fed's discount window.  
The  fifth  recommendation  is  to  enhance  communication  with  market  participants  and  the 
media  during  times  of  financial  stress.  Over  the  past  year,  in  addition  to  its  normal 
communications on regular operations, the Bank actively communicated any unusual steps 
taken  in  its  operations,  as  well  as  the  reasons  for  those  steps.  Members  of  the  Bank's 
Governing Council spoke publicly on several occasions about the situation as it evolved, and 
about  our  response.10  Staff  at  the  Bank  regularly  communicate  with  market  participants 
about funding needs, and these communications proved important when liquidity was under 
pressure.  In  late  spring,  Governor  Carney  made  clear  which  market  conditions  we  would 
consider to end a form of intervention, such as term PRA, and this message was given in 
advance  of  the  announcement  that  the  Bank  would  not  renew  the  term  PRA  maturing  26 
June. Throughout this turbulent year, we have been clear about our liquidity operations, both 
when we expanded them and when we became the first major central bank to end special 
operations. 
The  sixth  recommendation  is  to  reduce  the  stigma  associated  with  the  use  of  standing 
lending  facilities  by,  for  example,  enhancing  the  understanding  of  all  market  participants 
regarding the role of such facilities and, where applicable, designing new facilities that should 
have  less  stigma  than  was  associated  with  past  instances  of  emergency  assistance.  Both 
before and during this period of turbulence, little stigma was associated with the use of the 
Bank of Canada's Standing Liquidity Facility, which offers one-day loans for temporary, and 
typically relatively small, liquidity needs. The term-loan facility that we are considering should 
have little stigma attached to its use, because it will be offered at the  Bank's discretion at 
times of stress that involve more than one deposit-taking financial institution.11  
The final recommendation in the CGFS report is aimed at limiting moral hazard. The report 
suggests that central banks carefully weigh the expected benefits of actions to re-establish 
liquidity against their potential costs and, where necessary, introduce safeguards against the 
distortion  of  incentives.  The  events  of  the  past  year  have  prompted  us  to  re-examine  the 
issue  of  moral  hazard  in  the  provision  of  liquidity.  An  article  in  the  June  Financial  System 
Review12 outlines a set of principles to guide the central bank on when and how to supply 
liquidity  to  financial  markets.  These  principles,  which  clarify  the  extremely  limited  cases  in 
which the Bank of Canada might intervene in financial markets, are useful in limiting moral 
hazard. Here is a summary of the principles: 
to 
to 
the 
Board 
Vancouver 
                                                 
10   See, for example, D. Dodge, "Turbulence in Credit Markets: Causes, Effects, and Lessons To Be Learned" 
(speech 
at: 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2007/sp07-17.html;  D.  Longworth,  "Liquidity,  Liquidity,  Liquidity" 
(speech 
Industry  Association  of  Canada,  3  October  2007),  available  at: 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2007/sp07-18.html;  M.  Carney,  "Addressing  Financial  Market 
the  Toronto  Board  of  Trade,  13  March  2008),  available  at: 
Turbulence" 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2008/sp08-3.html;  D.  Longworth, 
"Credit  Markets,  Financial 
Stability,  and  Monetary  Policy"  (speech  to  the  Global  Investment  Conference,  10  April  2008),  available  at: 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2008/sp08-5.html;  and  M.  Carney,  "Principles  for  Liquid  Markets" 
(speech 
for  Business  Economics,  22  May  2008),  available  at: 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2008/sp08-6.html. 
the  New  York  Association 
Investment 
September 
available 
(speech 
Trade, 
2007), 
the 
25 
to 
of 
to 
11   The Federal Reserve's Term Auction Facility, similar to the Bank of Canada's proposed term-loan facility, has 
significantly less stigma than its discount window lending. 
12   See W. Engert, J. Selody and C. Wilkins, "Financial Market Turmoil and Central Bank Intervention," op. cit. 
Also see M. Carney, "Principles for Liquid Markets," op. cit. 
BIS Review 101/2008 
 5
   first, intervention should be targeted, aimed at mitigating only those market failures 
of system-wide importance with macroeconomic consequence that can be rectified 
by a central bank providing liquidity  
second, intervention should be commensurate with the severity of the problem 
third, intervention should use the right tools for the job: market-based transactions, 
provided  through  auction  mechanisms,  should  be  used  to  deal  with  market-wide 
liquidity  problems,  while  loans  should  be  used  to  address  liquidity  shortages 
affecting specific institutions 
fourth, intervention should be at market-determined prices to minimize distortions 
and  fifth,  the  central  bank  should  use  measures  that  include  limited,  selective 
intervention;  an  element  of  coinsurance;  penalty  rates  as  appropriate;  and  the 
promotion of sound supervision of liquidity-risk management.  
So  that's  a  summary  of  the  steps  we've  taken  since  last  August  to  address  the  concerns 
covered in the CGFS report (see summary table).  
Summary table 
 6 
 BIS Review 101/2008
 Other  central  banks  have  also  been  working  towards  the  same  goals.  The  CGFS  report 
suggests that central bank actions in response to the market turbulence have been effective 
in  that  they  have  "reduced,  though  not  resolved,"  tensions  in  short-term  money  markets, 
thereby mitigating the damage to the economy. However, it has been much more difficult to 
address  funding-market  pressures  in  the  broader  sense,  particularly  in  term,  unsecured 
markets. The report notes that "the assessment of central banks about their ability to deal 
with  such  market  pressures  depends  crucially  on  the  pressures'  origins:  how  much  came 
from  liquidity  concerns,  which  are  amenable  to  central  bank  actions,  and  how  much  from 
counterparty risk or other concerns, which are beyond the reach of central bank operations. 
Overall, the judgment was that tensions would have been more acute and more damaging 
without the forceful interventions of central banks."  
That does not mean that our work in dealing with the broad policy lessons from this period of 
financial turbulence is done. One important set of issues being studied is how fluctuations in 
the  financial  sector  play  out  in  the  real  economy,  and  how  regulations  and  practices  – 
including  the  regulation  of  financial  institutions  –  can  dampen  or  exacerbate  these 
fluctuations.  Under  the  umbrella  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  various  international 
committees  have  been  looking  at  these  important  issues  and  are  considering  a  variety  of 
proposals. It is important to reduce procyclicality in the financial system – perhaps including 
the key aspects of leverage and liquidity – in order to reduce the magnitude of the effects of 
future financial disturbances.  
I'd like to turn now to the current state of the markets. 
The current state of the markets 
Although credit conditions in Canada remain challenging, they are better in many respects 
than those in other major markets. For example, short-term credit spreads, as measured by 
the spread between short-term lending rates and the expected overnight rate, have narrowed 
significantly in recent months (Chart 2: Spreads between 3-Month LIBOR and OIS). In large 
BIS Review 101/2008 
 7
part,  the  lower  short-term  credit  spreads  in  Canada  reflect  the  healthier  state  of Canadian 
financial  institutions.  This  relative  strength  is  also  shown  in  the  smaller  decline  in  stock 
market valuations for Canadian financial institutions relative to their foreign peers over the 
past  14  months  (Chart  3:  Performance  of  Financial  Sector  Equities).  Nevertheless,  there 
remains a risk that ongoing strains in global financial markets could have further implications 
for Canada.  
 
 8 
 BIS Review 101/2008
 
While  the  average  effective  borrowing  spreads  faced  by  banks,  non-financial  businesses, 
and households have increased by about 75 basis points vis-à-vis the overnight rate since 
the onset of turbulence in financial markets last summer, this increase has been more than 
offset by the cumulative 150-basis-point reduction in the target overnight rate. As a result, the 
effective borrowing costs faced by banks, businesses, and households are estimated to have 
fallen by about 75 basis points over the past year. Chart 4 (Bank Funding Costs) indicates 
one element of increased funding costs for banks. 
BIS Review 101/2008 
 9
 
Reflecting the recent contraction in economic activity and generally challenging credit market 
conditions, growth in business credit has slowed in recent quarters (Chart 5: Yield Spreads 
on  Canadian  Corporate  Bonds).  In  contrast,  growth  in  household  credit  remains  robust 
(Chart 6: Business and Household Credit). This likely reflects high levels of employment and 
past increases in wealth and real income. Nonetheless, the continued strength in household 
credit growth is somewhat surprising, given the moderation of activity in the housing market 
and  the  reported  decline  in  consumer  confidence.  The  growth  of  household  credit  is 
expected to moderate in coming months. 
10 
 BIS Review 101/2008
  11
BIS Review 101/2008 
 Recent economic developments 
The  ongoing  turbulence  in  global  financial  markets  has  been  one  of  three  major 
developments affecting the Canadian economy – the others being the protracted weakness 
in the U.S. economy and the sharp changes in the prices of certain commodities, energy in 
particular. 
In the second quarter of 2008, U.S. economic growth was somewhat stronger than expected 
at  the  time  of  the  July  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update,  while  growth  in  the  Japanese  and 
European economies was somewhat weaker than expected. Recent data also suggest that 
Canadian GDP growth in the second quarter was likely somewhat weaker than expected. 
Weakness in overall global growth has been a major reason for the downturn in commodity 
prices, particularly energy prices, since mid-July. In turn, this downturn has been a significant 
factor  in  the  declining  value  of  the  Canadian  dollar  in  U.S.  dollar  terms.  These  two 
developments will have opposing effects on the demand for Canadian goods and services. 
In July, total CPI inflation was 3.4 per cent, and core inflation was 1.5 per cent. The Bank of 
Canada continues to expect that both total CPI inflation and core inflation will converge on 
the 2 per cent inflation target in the second half of 2009. However, the recent decline in the 
spot  and  futures  prices  of  energy  means  that  the  temporary  spike  in  total  CPI  inflation 
between now and the first quarter of 2009 should be lower than projected in the July Update. 
The Bank will continue to carefully monitor the evolution of risks, together with economic and 
financial developments in the Canadian and global economies, and to set monetary policy 
consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I want to stress that the problems of the past year posed challenges, and they 
offered lessons for individuals, businesses, and policy-makers.  
Two  conclusions can  be  drawn  from  how  these  problems played  out  in  Canada. First,  the 
financial system is sound, and the Canadian financial, non-financial, and household sectors 
are strong enough to deal with the problems we have seen in financial markets.  
Second,  we  can  all  do  better.  Over  the  course  of  this  turbulent  year,  financial  firms  and 
individuals have learned to do better – to better understand and manage the risks that come 
with investing and the use of credit. This is a welcome outcome. The past year has been a 
learning experience for all of us, including central banks and other policy-makers. The Bank 
of Canada's policy tools were tested. Generally speaking, they were up to the job. Where we 
saw  opportunities  to  improve,  develop,  and  refine  our  liquidity-policy  framework,  we  took 
them. 
Financial  stability  and  liquid  markets  are  important  to  the  health  of  the  economy.  With  an 
expanded set of tools, the Bank of Canada will continue to support the stability and efficiency 
of the financial system and thus contribute to the well-being of Canadians.  
12 
 BIS Review 101/2008
