Martín Redrado: Fiscal space for stability, growth and social inclusion 
Remarks  by  Mr  Martín  Redrado,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  at  the  G-20 
workshop, Buenos Aires, 19-20 June 2008. 
 As many have mentioned, it could be a rarity to find a central banker addressing on fiscal 
policy.  But,  as  we  have  been  discussing  over  the  two  days  of  this  workshop,  the  growing 
complexity of the world economy poses major challenges to policy makers. And, definitely, 
the ability and flexibility to coordinate the different branches of economic policy lay as one of 
the most significant. 
It seems long ago when Keynes realized that there was more room for fiscal policy than just 
being a public good provider. I believe it wasn’t just a coincidence that it was him, being a 
specialist in monetary issues, who came out with an answer to, probably, the most intriguing 
problem of his time. His extraordinary comprehension about how the economy works planted 
the seeds for the emergence of a macroeconomic theory, which we are still working out and 
improving on a daily basis. In my opinion, we have a debt of honor to his legacy given the 
long misinterpretation and wrong pursuing in economic policy on his word. 
The  analysis  of  public  finance  has  many  sides,  some  of  which  were  addressed  along  this 
workshop. From a theoretical standpoint, we can not state that a clear cut effect from fiscal 
policy on growth. For instance, neoclassical growth models in the Solow’s spirit account for 
the government basically as a tax collector, showing that the impact on consumers’ behavior 
depends on savings pattern derived from the usual consumption optimization process. This 
ultimately  implies  that  fiscal  policy  can  only  determine  the  level  of  income,  but  can  hardly 
affect the pace of economic growth. These models have become an engine for the analysis 
of fiscal policy and taxation. 
In my view, these kinds of frameworks are robust in terms of describing some stylized facts 
for free-market environments with very simplified hypothesis. However, they are not able to 
address some empirical regularities, which are more usual in emerging countries. The vast 
amount of unemployed resources, including the capacity of the public sector to take the first 
step in solving this inefficiency is just one example. 
On the other hand, endogenous growth models acknowledge that fiscal policy is one of the 
key factors in explaining the different growth rates among countries. But according to this line 
of thinking, as well as the classical models, a rise in public expenditure has no long-run effect 
on the growth rate. The exception is the fact that they may increase private sector’s yields 
and, in that case, public investment could have positive effects on growth. This ultimately can 
be  seen  as  an  improvement  in  productivity,  and  might  help  to  understand  why  the  fiscal 
policy  effect  on  growth  seems  to  be  underestimated,  as  Daniel  Cohen  pointed  out  on  his 
exposition. 
But,  as  we  are  aware,  models  are  set  for  very  limited  environments  and  the  real  world  is 
extremely complicated. Santiso made this point clearly. 
I  am  not  saying  that  we  must  forget  about  theory.  Instead,  i  am  suggesting  that,  in  very 
dynamic economies, we, policy makers, should relay as much on models as we do on good 
judgment. The world is not linear, we have many discontinuities in the form of shocks from 
many different sources. It would be too much to ask a model to be able to account for these 
regular irregularities and, further, to be able to extract sound policy advice from it. 
Another relevant issue on fiscal policy relates to the appropriate moment for implementation, 
especially with regard to its implications for stability. In this respect, we need to identify better 
ways to put together long-run objectives with short-run ones.  
BIS Review 82/2008 
 1
In the later case, we are more prone to recognize its role as a stabilizing force. However, the 
ability of fiscal policy on reducing the volatility of the economic cycle is under deep scrutiny, 
especially in the developed world. Probably this has to do with the usual handing over of the 
stabilizing role to monetary policy. Also, the budgetary process seems to be too rigid to be 
able to respond in a timely way.  
In developing economies, usually more exposed to external shocks that hinder long-run fiscal 
sustainability,  the  implementation  of  countercyclical  policies  seems  to  be  more  difficult. 
Notwithstanding, there is mounting evidence on the relevance of fiscal policy as a stabilizing 
economic force. 
As we are witnessing today, when there are dual mandates and divergent paths, we, central 
bankers,  are  confronted  with  an  extremely  challenging  task  that  calls  for  coordination  with 
other economic policy instruments, that gives more room for fiscal action. 
As  an  answer  to  the  budgetary  rigidities,  there  is  a  growing  case  for  fiscal  rules.  Many 
countries are putting in place this kind of framework as an institutional device to preserve the 
countercyclical role of fiscal policy. We heard relevant experiences such the UK and Chile, 
showing the applicability to both, industrial and emerging economies. But, we can not forget 
the  intervention  from  our  colleges  from  Japan.  They  reminded  us  how  disappointing  this 
could be and that there is no single recipe for every country.  
Another  striking  issue  for  policy  makers  is  the  scope  of  public  expenditure  as  a  mean  to 
improve social inclusion and economic growth. We have seen the debate within the G-20, 
evolving to these policy aspects. This morning the clear distinction between monetary and 
fiscal policy was made, with the later, definitely, better suited to tackle micro problems. 
In my opinion, this issue must be included on top of every single country agenda given that 
income distribution is becoming not only a typical problem for developing countries but also, 
more recently, for developed ones too. 
As  a  central  banker,  the  issue  of  policy  interaction  –  largely  debated  on  the  economic 
literature  –  is  of  great  importance.  One  usual  approach  relates  to  the  intertemporal  debt 
sustainability  that  calls  for  an  aggregate  budget  constraint  between  fiscal  surplus  and 
seigniorage revenue. This is a clear implication that macroeconomic management involves 
both the treasury and the central bank. As a matter of fact, as Sargent and Wallace pointed 
out back in 1981, the fiscal surplus must be large enough to pay out public debt services. 
They framed it as a necessary condition for a consistent reduction in the rate of inflation over 
time.  
And this calls for another relevant relationship between fiscal and monetary policy, named 
fiscal  dominance.  Fiscal  dominance  can  arise  in  situations  were  public  deficits  and  a 
perception  on  government  debt  unsustainability  hinders  monetary  policy  credibility,  even 
when  central  banks  have  legal  and  de  facto  independence.  In  this  regard  we  have  the 
theoretical  framework  first  devised  by  Woodford  that  shows  that  is  not  enough  to  have  a 
monetary commitment to price stability to achieve it. Fiscal behavior must be clear in order to 
evaluate the ability of the central bank to put in place its policy.  
Pierpaolo Benigno also stressed the point when he was asked about the interaction of fiscal 
and monetary policy over the business cycle. Speaking about inflation targeting, he stated 
that a specific target on inflation might not be the best framework for countries with high fiscal 
dominance or high nominal output volatility. 
For instance, the eighties for Latin-American countries are acknowledged as a period of deep 
fiscal  dominance,  which  ended  up  in  a  collapse  of  many  economies  derived  from 
overspending  and  over-indebtness  processes  that  in  some  cases  led  to  hyper  inflation 
episodes.  
Today the picture looks very different. Policy makers seem to be very aware of the costs of 
overtaking  money  supply  to  fund  public  expenses.  Recently,  many  emerging  markets 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2008
reduced the fiscal stimulus as economic growth became more stable and resilient. Definitely, 
what i call a “crowding-in” process. Several countries in Latin-America evolved towards the 
recreation  of  budgetary  institutions  to  encourage  inter-temporal  fiscal  responsibility.  Latin-
American governments have made notable efforts in the fiscal area to improve debt levels 
and management as a mean to reduce vulnerability, with significant progress in recent years. 
Pablo Guidotti also showed this yesterday. 
As  a  result,  financing  needs  are  not  an  issue  as  it  was  in  the  past,  even  though  shallow 
capital markets all over the region act as a constraint for sustainable growth over the long 
term. In fact, financial development is key – and will be even more so in our agenda.  
The depth of the financial system and its integration with international capital markets has a 
powerful disciplinary effect as it reduces incentives to follow expansionary policies as foreign 
capital flow out to other markets with more predictable returns. 
On the liability side, important progress has also been made in the region. The public debt to 
GDP ratio decreased almost 30 percentage points over the last five years. This reflects, in 
part,  better  liability  management,  which  also  shows  up  in  the  enormous  reduction  in  the 
exposure to foreign currency debt. The region is finally leaving behind the well-known original 
sin that features last decades (currency mismatches), providing solid grounds for developing 
domestic yield curve in local currency. 
All  over  Latin  America,  financial  systems  are  better-matched,  well  capitalized  and  less 
exposed to public sector debt, another sin from the past. Not long ago, we used to have not 
only  central  banks  but  also  the  financial  system  financing  the  treasury  with  no  limits 
whatsoever. In the case of Argentina, for instance, the policy designed by the central bank 
aimed  to  this  purpose  led  banks  to  reduce  their  government  debt  holdings  that  recently 
stands at 14.6% of net assets, the lowest level in many years. 
In  my  view,  good  economic  analysis  also  imply  not  to  bundle  Latin  American  countries  as 
they follow very different patterns and are at different stages in their paths towards long-term 
sustainability.  Hasty  diagnosis  and  simplistic  comparisons  among  the  various  countries’ 
situations may lead to inappropriate policy recommendations. 
To sum up, we have been through a period of better macroeconomic management all across 
the world. We are witnessing the most turbulent times for the world economy in decades.  
As I referred to early last year, when were heading towards a more volatile environment, the 
resurgence of volatility is about to remain with us for a while. In such a context, emerging 
economies are more resilient than in the past to confront external shocks.  
And,  while  unusual  conditions  such  as  commodities  price  increases  have  played  an 
important  role  (as  it  was  discussed  this  morning),  more  robust  monetary  policy  and  fiscal 
strength  are  a  key  development  behind  this  performance.  On  a  longer-run,  we  must  keep 
working  on  rising  human  capital  productivity  by  improving  public  education,  investing  on 
social infrastructure all across the cycle, and adopting countercyclical measures to prevent 
distributional  effects  in  the  downswings.  Ultimately,  this  is  the  most  important  contribution 
that we can deliver to our constituents. 
As  policy  makers,  we  have  to  be  careful  about  our  assessment  of  current  economic 
environment. We must avoid a usual mistake which is to take that exceptionally good times 
are  about  to  remain  forever,  leading  to  policy  relaxation.  Here  we  are  confronted  with  two 
types of error: the first one is to take the good times as permanent ones, when it is really only 
a temporary situation. The other possibility is to work as it is only a transitory good time but 
the real underlying developments are about to be in place on a more permanent basis. As 
policy makers we can not afford to fall in the first one. Thank you. 
BIS Review 82/2008 
 3
