Caleb M Fundanga: Financial market progress in Zambia 
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official 
launch of the Equity Capital Resources Unit Trust, Lusaka, 21 April 2008. 
 Chairperson 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me at the onset express my gratitude to Equity Capital Resources Plc for inviting me to 
come and officially launch its collective investment scheme which I understand will be called 
“Equity  Capital  Resources  Unit  Trust”  or  ECRUT  in  short.  This  indeed  is  gratifying  to 
everyone who is anxious to see our financial markets progress. 
As many of you gathered here already know, the Bank of Zambia in consultation with various 
stakeholders  initiated  and  developed  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Plan  (FSDP)  in 
2004. The vision of this Plan is to have a stable, sound and market-based financial system 
that supports an efficient mobilisation and allocation of resources. It is therefore pleasing that 
the introduction of ECRUT takes us closer to fulfilling the vision of the FSDP. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, am sure you will agree with me that collective investment schemes 
are an indispensable part of market development with several benefits. One of the primary 
benefits  of  collective  investment  schemes  is  that  small  investors  can  have  access  to 
professional investment management. Many of our people are not conversant with financial 
investment matters, yet they are eager to enhance their wealth. Many simply do not have the 
capacity to identify and manage investments that are appropriate to their risk-return appetite. 
The people of this country are actually willing to put aside some of their earnings into safe 
and  viable  investments.  However,  safety  and  viability  is  only  assured  with  professional 
investment management which can be offered by people like yourselves. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, in March 2008, the Lusaka Stock Exchange in partnership with the 
Bank  of  Zambia  and  the  Bond  Exchange  of  South  Africa  conducted  a  training  and 
consultative workshop to enhance the Zambian bond market. Among the outcomes of this 
workshop was that one of the modes of collecting funds from the so called “small investors” 
in the economy is through Collective Investment Schemes. Collective investment schemes 
can  be  beneficial  to  small  investors  who  may  not  have  enough  money  to  carry  out  a 
diversification  and  proper  allocation  of  their  assets.  Small  investor  can  benefit  from 
diversification techniques usually available only to wealthy investors. 
With  these  few  benefits  in  mind,  I  wish  to  earnestly  appeal  to  you  and  other  collective 
investment  scheme  providers  that  as  you  go  about  doing  your  business  think  innovatively 
about  ways  you  can  capture  Zambia’s  many  small  investors.  Think  about  how  you  can 
provide  them  with  an  opportunity  to  invest  in a  broad  range  of  assets  at  affordable  cost. I 
have  little  doubt  in  my  mind  that  as  you  take up  this challenge,  you  will  be  able  to  create 
financial stability by being a good investment manager to this segment of investors. 
I  have  been  informed  by  the  Chairman  of  Equity  Capital  Resources  (ECR)  Plc  that  the 
Company  intends  to  list  ECRUT  on  the  stock  exchange  in  the  near  future.  When  this 
commendable intention is achieved, ECRUT will be the first collective investment scheme to 
be publicly traded on the Stock Exchange in Zambia. With the calibre of men and women 
behind  this  investment  vehicle,  I  am  confident  this  will  be  achieved  in  the  required  time 
frame. When that time comes we want to turn back to this day and say “we were part of the 
birth of ECRUT”. 
The existence of the ECRUT shall provide means of resource mobilisation, bringing on board 
a  collection  of  individual  participation  in  the  capital  and  money  markets.  This  vehicle  will 
BIS Review 48/2008 
 1
facilitate  the  participation  of  investors  who  previously  were  not  capable  of  participating  in 
highly denominated securities in the financial sector. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, before I end my speech, let me quickly touch on an important aspect 
of  collective  investment  schemes,  that  is,  investor  confidence  in  the  managers  and  the 
industry  itself.  I  believe  by  far  this  is  the  most  important  factor  in  whether  a  scheme  can 
attract  and  maintain  long-term  investors.  There  must  be  a  strong  regulatory  framework. 
Whereas there is a strong regulatory body in the Securities and Exchange Commission that 
vigorously  administers  the  law  to  protect  investors,  fund  managers  must  be  committed  to 
strong self-regulation and exercise professional ethics to the best interests of investors. This, 
Chairperson, is fundamental. 
It now gives me great pleasure to officially launch the ECRUT scheme. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2008
