Lars Nyberg: Hedge funds and the recent financial turmoil 
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Nordic Hedge 
Fund Investment Forum, Stockholm, 28 January 2008. 
 Hedge funds have come to play an increasingly important role in the financial system. In the 
past  decade  the  assets  managed  have  quadrupled  and  now  stand  at  around  USD  2  000 
billion; growth of between 25 and 30 per cent per year.1 But it is not just the fact that the 
hedge  funds  have  grown  in  number  and  size  that  makes  them  important.  They  also  have 
different trade strategies and more liberal investment rules than many other types of investor. 
This makes them important players on several of the world’s financial markets. 
Many  have  said  (and  some  have  perhaps  hoped)  that  hedge  funds  would  cause  the  next 
financial crisis. As we know, the past autumn saw a number of unpleasant surprises in the 
financial markets. In this context I believe it may be of interest to note that the hedge funds 
have not contributed to amplifying the problems in the market. To date, if anything they have 
had  the  reverse  effect,  that  is,  their  actions  have  generally  had  a  stabilising  effect  in  the 
markets.2 At the same time, many hedge funds, like many other financial market agents, can 
surely learn some lessons from recent events.  
I  will  reflect  on  this  today.  This  also  brings  me  to  the  current  animated  debate  on  the 
regulation  of  hedge  funds.  My  main  message  is  that  recent  events  support  rather  than 
oppose my opinion – namely that further regulation is not necessary as long as the major 
banks manage their exposures to the hedge funds correctly. 
I  shall  shortly  discuss  the  role  the  hedge  funds  have  played  –  and  not  played,  during  last 
autumn’s unrest in the financial markets. However, let me first say a few words as to why 
hedge funds as a group are important to financial stability. 
Hedge funds spread risk and improve pricing 
Hedge  funds  are,  as  we  know,  a  broad  concept  and  one  that  covers  managers  with  a 
number of different working methods and strategies. However, a common denominator for 
most hedge funds is that they have as a goal an absolute return rather than a relative return 
and  have  far  more  liberal  investment  rules  than  other  funds.  Also  they  often  have  highly 
leveraged portfolios with the aim of increasing the return. 
For those who reflect on the way in which financial stability develops, and all central banks 
do so, it is, of course, of particular interest to see what advantages and risks hedge funds as 
a  group  can  convey  –  once  again  being  aware  that  this  is  an  extremely  heterogeneous 
group.  
In  my  opinion,  hedge  funds  fulfil  several  useful  functions  in  the  financial  markets.  They 
contribute to spreading market risk and credit risk to more agents. Further, since they can act 
swiftly and in a flexible manner, they can often help improve the pricing for different products. 
For example, hedge funds that specialise in identifying mispriced assets contribute to prices 
that better reflect the underlying risk. When the prices are more correct, resources may also 
be  distributed  more  efficiently  and  the  risks  may  be  better  managed.  In  new  and  complex 
markets hedge funds are often important agents with the opportunity and will to take on risk. 
This, in turn, improves liquidity in these markets. 
                                                 
1   According to the Barclay Hedge database. 
2   See also the ECB Financial Stability Review 2007:2. 
BIS Review 11/2008 
 1
But there is often little insight 
But the flexibility hedge funds have also entails risk. Problems that arise in a hedge fund can 
spread  to  the  fund’s  counterparties;  in  the  first  instance  the  major  banks.  What  is  often 
highlighted  in  this  context  is  the  hedge  funds’  high  leverage.  High  leverage  of  course 
increases the risks, and the effects of a fund failing.  
Hedge funds are often accused of showing herd behaviour, that is, of imitating one another's 
behaviour and taking similar positions. But I find it difficult to believe that hedge funds to a 
greater extent than other investors just follow the prevailing trend. The fact that the required 
rate of return is absolute rather than relative in most hedge funds should actually indicate the 
opposite. 
Another source of concern is that there is little public insight into hedge funds’ activities. To 
take  one  example,  in  the  United  States  hedge  funds  do  not  need  to  publicly  report  their 
activities  or  even  register  them.  This  means  that  major  risks  can  arise  without  either 
counterparties  or  authorities  being aware  of  this.  Two  well-publicised  cases  in  this  context 
are the LTCM and Amaranth hedge funds. Both of the funds collapsed and the lack of insight 
appears  to  have  contributed  to  the  problems.  LTCM  was  permitted  a  very  high  degree  of 
leverage by its counterparties, which is remarkable and reflects the fact that there was no 
overview of the fund’s size and total risk. In the same way, no one observed in time the risks 
on the energy market that were being built up in the Amaranth hedge fund. 
The funds’ high leverage and lack of transparency has contributed to a lively debate about 
further regulation of hedge funds. I shall return to this in a while, but first of all I shall discuss 
the turmoil we have experienced in the financial markets in the past six months. What has 
this entailed for the hedge funds and how have they been affected by developments? 
Several hedge funds have been affected negatively by the recent turmoil 
As we know, the unrest in the financial markets has its origin in the US mortgage market, the 
subprime  market.  The  problems  in  this  relatively  limited  part  of  the  US  mortgage  market 
spread to several financial markets at the end of last summer. A large share of the subprime 
loans had been re-packaged in various structured products and sold on to investors around 
the world. When subprime borrowers experienced problems in paying their credit, it became 
difficult  to  value  products  with  subprime  loans  as  underlying  assets.  At  the  end  of  the 
summer  the  credit  rating  institutes  also  began  to  downgrade  credit  instruments  containing 
such loans. This resulted in the financial markets more or less losing confidence in anything 
that might contain subprime loans. This, in turn, fuelled price falls.3  
A common denominator for many of the investors, both hedge funds and others, who have 
experienced  problems,  is  that  they  have  had  a  high  share  of  securities  with  subprime 
content, often in combination with high leverage. Considerable attention, as we all know, has 
been  focused  on  the  US  investment  bank  Bear  Stearns’  hedge  funds,  where  the  situation 
was such. When the financiers wanted to pull out, the funds were forced to sell their assets. 
The  problem  was  that  it  was  no  longer  possible  to  sell  these  assets,  since  liquidity  in  the 
market had disappeared. Quite simply, there were no buyers at prices anywhere near those 
that  were  previously  listed  or  calculated.  The  funds  therefore  collapsed  with  substantial 
losses.  Bear  Stearns’  funds  have  received  considerable  attention,  not  merely  because  the 
losses were extensive, but also because they were among the first to experience problems. 
But there is also another category of hedge fund, which without having any actual exposure 
to  subprime,  was  particularly  affected  by  the  turmoil.  This  was  a  type  of  fund  that  mainly 
relied on quantitative models for their investment decisions, so-called quant funds. Many of 
                                                 
3   For a more detailed description see the Riksbank’s Financial Stability Report 2007:2. 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2008
these funds belonged to the group of hedge funds with a strategy that is normally called a 
long/short equity strategy. In principle, with the help of quantitative methods as a basis for 
investment, their strategy entails both long and short positions in equity. At the same time 
they are neutral to the stock market as a whole. If we disregard quant methods, this strategy 
was one of the first to be used by hedge funds, and which, more than 60 years ago, gave 
them their name. 
Over a number of days in August several quant funds were however forced to close positions 
and  to  realise  significant  losses.  They  were  forced  to  do  so  because  of  the  sudden 
emergence  of  large  price  fluctuations  in  parts  of  the  stock  market.  The  large  fluctuations 
entailed  that  the  quantitative  links,  which  were  based  on  historical  data  and  statistical 
probability analyses, no longer worked. But what was it that triggered the initial fluctuations in 
prices?  It  was  probably  the  case  that  other  types  of  hedge  funds  or  investors,  in  order  to 
meet  the  banks  increasing  collateral  requirements,  were  forced  to  reduce  their  risk 
exposure.4  If  trading  is  thin  in  the  shares  concerned,  that  is,  if  liquidity  is  weak,  the  price 
fluctuations can be significant. 
That is the normal pattern. The fact that unrest in a market, in this case the mortgage market, 
spread rapidly to other markets should not surprise anyone who follows financial events in 
the world. 
However, on the whole hedge funds have fared well and played a positive role 
In an efficient market where competition is permitted there will always exist companies who 
fail  in  their  strategies  and  default.  There  are  always  winners  and  losers  in  the  financial 
markets. This time, for example, the winners have been the hedge funds with a short position 
in  the  subprime  sector,  that  is,  those  who  have  sold  securities  with  subprime  content  that 
they  have  not  owned.  After  the  price  fall  they  have  been  able  to  acquire  the  assets  at  a 
significantly lower price than they sold them at and have thus earned substantial amounts of 
money. The losers have had opposite positions or just had strategies in the stock market that 
did not work. 
In  those  instances  where  individual  hedge  funds  have  experienced  problems,  this  has  not 
spread to the financial system overall. As a group, hedge funds have overcome the turmoil 
relatively well. Indices of the hedge funds’ return fell a few points in August but in September 
hedge funds as a group once again showed a positive return. During the whole of 2007, the 
hedge  funds  have  performed  better  than  share  indices  generally.5  The  reason  for  this  is 
partly  that  the  hedge  funds  have  not  to  any  great  extent  been  exposed  to  the  subprime 
sector  and  partly  that  they  were  flexible  and  could  rapidly  close  positions  where  they  lost 
money.  
In  addition,  the  hedge  funds  generally  seem  to  have  had  a  stabilising  role  in  the  financial 
markets. In some cases hedge funds have had considerable liquidity, seen the large fall in 
prices as an opportunity, and taken advantage of this to go in as a buyer. In this way they 
have contributed to, rather than consumed liquidity. It does not appear as though the hedge 
funds have played a specifically negative role during the turmoil we have seen to date. Nor 
have the hedge funds triggered it. 
                                                 
4   For  instance,  see  Khandani  and  Lo  (November  2007)  “What  happened  to  the  Quants  in  August  2007?”, 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1015987. 
5   The two indices of hedge funds’ return, the HFRX Global Index and the HFRI Composite, showed an upswing 
of 4.2 per cent and 10.4 per cent respectively in 2007. For example, this can be compared with the S&P 500 
index which rose by 3.5 per cent. 
BIS Review 11/2008 
 3
Some reflections on events 
There are always experiences to reflect upon when unrest arises in the financial markets. It 
is already possible in this crisis to point at certain weaknesses that have come into focus. 
Firstly, we have had a clear reminder as to how events can turn suddenly and unpredictably. 
This element of surprise illustrates the need to carry out stress tests, that is, to test positions 
against  extreme  and  unforeseen  events  –  such  events  that  may  perhaps  have  a  one  in  a 
million chance of happening according to the statistical correlations. Stress tests are being 
carried out to a greater extent, but there is a need to work on and refine the methods.  
Another  weakness  lies  in  the  difficulties  in  identifying  the  risks  that  are  associated  with 
structured products and the valuation of these. Too many investors have relied on the rating 
institutes’ ability to assess risk and have thereby failed to make their own assessments. In 
some cases they appear to have relied on the credit rating institute to such an extent that 
they have failed to take liquidity and market risk into account, that is, risk that is not captured 
by the credit rating institutes. 
In this context one may also note with some surprise that the innovative development has 
gone so far that certain more or less tailor-made products are not traded and thus cannot be 
priced  on  the  market  but  must  be  valued  with  the  aid  of  complicated  mathematical  and 
statistical models. This creates problems when regulations and auditors demand a valuation 
of the products to market price. Perhaps it is so that not all ideas from the first years of this 
millennium deserve to survive. 
There is need of better transparency rather than further regulation 
The debate about regulation of hedge funds’ activities has gained fresh impetus in the wake 
of the crisis – somewhat surprisingly, since the blame can  hardly be placed on the hedge 
funds. My view in this matter is that there is no reason to introduce specific regulations for 
hedge  funds,  apart  from  greater  insight  where  it  is  lacking.  Such  measures  threaten  the 
positive contribution hedge funds make, not least under the conditions which we have now 
experienced. 
For  those  of  us  who  reflect  on  stability  in  the  financial  system,  it  is  however  extremely 
important that the major banks’ and the hedge funds’ other counterparties can manage their 
risk.  If  they  manage  their  counterparty  exposures  in  a  correct  manner,  that  is  they  take 
sufficient collateral and can manage any liquidity problems, there is no reason to specifically 
regulate the hedge funds. 
However, periods of market turmoil tend to entail certain unpleasantness. I consider that the 
ensuing debate should focus on market discipline in a broad sense. Transparency is a key 
word in this context. By means of clear and open information about strategies and risk taking 
conditions  are  created  for  good  market  discipline.  Good  insight  is  also  of  the  utmost 
importance to those of us who oversee financial stability. This gives us a chance to decide 
where the risks are. 
Now  that  I  speak  of  the  need  for  market  discipline,  I  would  like  to  mention  the  global 
association,  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF).6  FSF  has  urged  the  global  hedge  fund 
industry to review and enhance existing practices. In order to meet this challenge, a working 
group  has  been  formed  by  private  initiative,  the  Hedge  Fund  Working  Group.  Most  of  the 
members  of  the  working  group  are  based  in  London,  but  Swedish  agents  are  also 
represented.  The  work  of  the  group  has  resulted  in  recommendations  for  the  hedge  fund 
market. They focus on areas such as transparency, but also on valuation, accounting and 
risk management and they give recommendations for the hedge fund market. The final report 
                                                 
6   See the Update of the FSF’s Report on Highly Leveraged Institutions (May 2007). 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2008
was presented last week. Although this report does not have any official legal status, it will be 
an important starting point for further discussion on the subject. 
Insight in Sweden is relatively good 
I have for some time now kept to the international arena. Let me now say a few words about 
Swedish conditions. In Sweden, too, the market for hedge funds has grown rapidly. In this 
context, Sweden is an advanced market with some 70 funds that manage close to 5 per cent 
of the total assets managed by funds in Sweden. This makes Sweden the most developed 
market in the Nordic region. Swedish hedge funds were also affected by market conditions 
during the summer, but recovered during the autumn. 
In  Sweden  we  do  not  have  the  same  problems  with  transparency  as  in  other  parts  of  the 
world.  In  this  country  hedge  funds  are  obliged  to  register.  Previously,  the  hedge  funds 
reported  all  their  holdings  to  Finansinspektionen,  the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority, which then published the positions with a three-month time lag. But since hedge 
funds often have very complicated strategies this public information became far too detailed 
and difficult to process. Neither was it particularly meaningful. Instead they have now gone 
over to regularly reporting different measures that describe the risk in the hedge funds. This 
is a more transparent means of gaining information about individual hedge funds’ risk. This 
information does not however show how large, direct or indirect, exposures the hedge funds 
have  to  the  banks,  for  example.  Information  about  this  must  come  from  the  banks 
themselves and the risk must also be managed by the banks. At present we know that these 
exposures in the Swedish banks are extremely limited.7  
The uncertainty remains 
To  summarise:  On  the  whole  the  hedge  funds  have  recovered  rapidly  from  the  August 
downturn  which  hit  a  number  of  different  strategies.  And  it  does  not  seem  as  though  the 
hedge  funds  have  played  a  decisive  role  in  the  most  recent  turmoil  –  not  a  negative  role 
anyway. The hedge funds have functioned roughly as one could expect. In the Riksbank’s 
view,  nothing  has  occurred  that  speaks  for  further  regulation.  However  it  is  important  that 
good  market  discipline  can  be  maintained  and  that  hedge  funds  in  other  countries  are  as 
transparent as the Swedish ones. 
We have not yet seen the end of the turmoil that characterised the financial markets during 
the autumn. Unfortunately it cannot be ruled out that the crisis will be both more profound 
and  longer  than  we  previously  believed.  Perhaps  some  hedge  funds  will  be  hit  in  this 
process. But overall I believe that the hedge funds can contribute to resolving the crisis, not 
aggravating it. The future will show if the hedge funds can meet these expectations. 
Thank you! 
                                                 
7   See  also  Hedge  funds  and  private  equity  firms  –  The  exposure  of  banks  and  insurance  companies, 
Finansinspektionen, July 2007. 
BIS Review 11/2008 
 5
