Hermann Remsperger: Emerging markets, the US dollar and the euro – 
reflections on the global monetary system 
Speech  by  Professor  Dr  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, at an Economist Seminar hosted by the  Bank of Finland, Helsinki, 
18 April 2008. 
 I would like to start by thanking the Bank of Finland for hosting this seminar and providing me 
with  the  opportunity  to  share  with  you  some  thoughts  on  developments  in  the  global 
monetary system.1  
My focus today will be on emerging markets. This may be at odds with most recent events in 
financial markets which suggest that the spotlight should be turned on the group of advanced 
economies. But as many speeches and papers have already been devoted to the financial 
market  turmoil,  I  think  it  is  useful  to  redirect  attention  to  emerging  market  economies,  not 
least given their growing importance for developments in the global economy.  
My remarks will attempt to address three questions. 
1. 
How has emerging markets’ participation in the global monetary system evolved in 
recent years?2  
Can  emerging  markets  sustain  the  current  form  of  their  participation  in  the  global 
monetary system? 
What do potential developments in emerging markets imply for the future role of the 
main  international  currencies,  the  US  dollar  and  the  euro,  in  the  global  monetary 
system? 
2. 
3. 
The international monetary system since the early 2000s 
I. 
Let  me  first  turn  to  the  question  on  how  emerging  markets  have  been  participating  in  the 
global monetary system in the past few years. I shall answer it by looking at the three main 
building  blocks  of  the  “impossible  trinity”  hypothesis  –  exchange  rate  regimes,  financial 
integration and monetary policy. 
Exchange rate regimes 
About  ten  years  ago,  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crises  of  the  mid-  and  late  1990s,  the 
“impossible  trinity”  became  the  main  pillar  of  what  has  been  called  the  “bipolar  view”  of 
exchange rate regimes (Fischer 2001). With an increasingly open capital account, emerging 
                                                 
1  
2  
I wish to thank Adalbert Winkler for his input in the preparation of these remarks, and Karlheinz Bischofberger, 
Ulrich Grosch and Sabine Herrmann for their valuable comments and suggestions. 
In the literature, this question has been at the core of the debate on the “Bretton Woods II” system with a core 
being  the  United  States,  and  a  periphery  consisting  mainly  of  the  emerging  Asian  economies  (Dooley, 
Folkerts-Landau and Garber, 2003). According to this view, core and periphery are linked through pegged or 
managed  exchange  rates,  reserve  accumulation  and  current  account  imbalances.  Despite  very  different 
current account patterns (Abiad, Leigh and Mody 2007, Herrmann and Winkler 2008), similar developments 
have been identified in Europe, where the “Euro standard” (McKinnon 2002) connects the euro area with an 
“EMU  periphery”  (Schnabl  2007).  However,  other  observers  (e.g.  Rose,  2006)  have  been  pointing  to  the 
increasing  number  of  emerging  market  countries  that  have  opted  for  a  domestic  nominal  anchor  and 
independently floating or, at least, managed exchange rates. Relying on stability-oriented domestic monetary 
policies pursued by each country, the system is exactly the opposite of Bretton Woods, as there is no need for 
anchor currencies or international policy coordination. 
BIS Review 49/2008 
 1
market  economies  were  expected  to  adopt  either  a  managed  or  independent  float3  or  to 
choose a hard peg, that is a currency board or an arrangement with no separate legal tender, 
thereby  credibly  committing  themselves  to  adopting  the  monetary  policy  of  the  anchor 
country.  
In contrast to these “corner solutions”, intermediate regimes, in other words, soft pegs in the 
form  of  conventional  fixed  pegs,  crawling  pegs  or  pegs  with  horizontal  or  crawling  bands, 
were  considered  non-viable.  Capital  markets  would  successfully  test  the  exchange  rate 
commitment in cases where authorities adopted a monetary policy stance in defence of the 
soft peg that is inappropriate from a domestic point of view.  
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, that is in the years following the crises, the bipolar view 
was  supported  by  empirical  evidence  (Fischer  2001,  IMF  2003,  IMF  2005).  A  number  of 
countries, like Brazil, Indonesia, Thailand or Russia, moved from a soft peg to a managed or 
independent float.4 However, expectations that this trend would continue did not materialise. 
Focusing on a group of 24 selected emerging economies5 the distribution of exchange rate 
regimes has been basically stable between 2002 and 2007 (Chart 1).6
Consistency  with  the  “impossible  trinity”  theorem  requires  that  countries  sustaining  a  high 
degree of exchange rate stability have to be either relatively closed to international capital 
flows or have little need for a domestic oriented monetary policy that diverges strongly from 
the  stance  taken  in  advanced  economies.  Let  me  quickly  review  the  evidence  on  both 
dimensions. 
Financial integration 
At  first  glance,  the  process  of  emerging  market  economies’  financial  integration  seems  to 
have continued unabated. After a temporary slowdown following the crises of the late 1990s, 
gross  private  capital  inflows  have  picked  up  significantly  in  recent  years.  In  2007,  they 
reached unprecedented levels, both in absolute US dollar terms and expressed as a share of 
GDP  (Cardarelli  et  al  2007).  Other  things  being  equal,  this  would  signal  a  need  for  more 
exchange rate flexibility. 
However,  other  indicators  of  financial  integration  suggest  that  the  progress  made  by 
emerging markets has been more limited. A prominent example is the sum of the outstanding 
stocks of foreign assets and foreign liabilities, expressed as a share of GDP. This indicator of 
de facto financial integration has advanced only slightly in recent years (Chart 2). Moreover, 
                                                 
3   Both floating arrangements are characterised by the fact that there is no predetermined path for the exchange 
rate as is the case in the hard and soft peg regimes. Under a managed float, the monetary authority influences 
the market-determined exchange rate, while, under an independent float, interventions by the authorities are 
limited. 
4   Most  countries  adopting  and  sustaining  hard  pegs  since  the  early  1990s  are  very  small  (El  Salvador, 
Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovia, Estonia and Latvia). Bulgaria and Ecuador, with about 7.3 million and 
13.7 million inhabitants respectively, are by far the largest countries. 
5   The emerging market countries are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Columbia, Mexico, Peru, China, India, Indonesia, 
Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand, Czech Republic, Egypt, Hungary, Israel, Jordan, Morocco, 
Poland, Russia, South Africa, and Turkey. The selection closely follows the group of countries compiled in the 
Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) Emerging Market Index. 
6   For  the  complete  sample  of  IMF  member  states  (186  in  2001,  188  in  2007),  results  have  been  even  less 
favourable  for  the  bipolar  view.  While  the  number  of  hard  pegs  has  been  basically  stable  since  2001,  the 
overall number of floaters has dropped, with the share of managed floats rising at the expense of independent 
floats. The number of countries with a soft peg rose from 70 to 83. The classification is based on IMF staff’s 
assessment of the observed (de facto) exchange rate arrangement rather than on the exchange arrangement 
a member notifies to the Fund in accordance with Article IV, Section 2(b) of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement 
(de jure arrangement). On the classification of exchange rate regimes, see also Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2009
the  gap  between  advanced  economies  and  emerging  markets  has  widened  substantially 
(Lane and Milesi-Feretti 2008).  
The pattern of financial integration has been very different as well. For advanced economies, 
financial  integration  has  mainly  taken  the  form  of  an  intensive  two-way  trade  of  debt  and 
equity instruments, reflecting portfolio optimisation strategies by private agents (Fecht et a. 
2007). 
By contrast, emerging market economies strengthened their international investment position 
by a substantially larger and increasing share of FDI in total foreign liabilities, and a build-up 
of foreign exchange reserves.  
Overall,  the  evidence  suggests  that  –  with  the  exception  of  the  new  EU  member  states, 
where financial opening has been a key prerequisite for EU membership – emerging markets 
have  been  pursuing  a  gradual  approach  towards  financial  integration.  Indeed,  several 
features indicate that countries have aimed at reducing vulnerabilities to sudden stops and 
reversals of capital flows (Edwards 2007, Kose, Prasad, Terrones 2007).  
This may have lessened the need for further movements towards the “corners”, hard pegs 
and managed or independent floats, in the past few years.  
Monetary policy 
Let  me  now  turn  to  monetary  policy.  Chart  3  shows  that,  since  2002,  inflation  rates  have 
been converging in emerging markets to moderate levels, irrespective of the exchange rate 
regime  chosen  (White  2008).  How  have  countries  achieved  this  outcome?  Distinguishing 
between countries with a soft peg and countries operating a managed or independent float 
prompts the following observations. 
1. 
Several  countries  with  a  soft  peg  reverted  to  outright  administrative  measures, 
sterilised  interventions  and  rising  minimum  reserve  requirements  to  limit  the 
inflationary impact of rising capital inflows, in some cases supported by fiscal policy 
(Mohanty and Scatigna, 2005; Cardarelli, Elekdag and Kose, 2007).  
Countries with a domestic nominal anchor made use of the flexibility with regard to 
interest  and  exchange  rates  to  reduce  inflation  and  achieve  price  stability.  At  the 
same time, the substantial accumulation of foreign exchange reserves suggests that 
the  exchange  rate  has  remained  an  important  policy  objective  for  many  countries 
with  a  managed  and  independent  float  (IMF  2005,  Rose  2006,  Edwards  2006, 
Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel 2007). 
More recently, emerging market floaters with inflation rates reaching levels close to 
those  in  advanced  economies  have  been  able  to  maintain  price  stability  without 
major  exchange  rate  fluctuations  by  following  the  pattern  of  interest  rates  in 
advanced economies.  
2. 
3. 
Overall,  the  evidence  on  monetary  policy  may  be  summarised  as  follows:  With  the  great 
moderation  –  or  to  put  it  in  the  terminology  of  the  optimum  currency  area  theory,  in  the 
absence  of  country-specific  shocks  –  the  need  for  a  monetary  policy  stance  that  is 
substantially  different  from  the  one  in  advanced  economies  has  declined  significantly  in 
recent years.  
As a result, emerging markets – with different exchange rate regimes and pursuing a gradual 
approach  towards  financial  integration  –  have  been  able  to  combine  low  inflation  with  a 
comparatively high degree of exchange rate stability.  
BIS Review 49/2008 
 3
How sustainable is the current configuration of the global monetary system? 
II. 
After  having  reviewed  the  past,  I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  future  developments  and  the 
question  of  whether  the  current  form  of  emerging  markets’  participation  in  the  global 
monetary  system  is  sustainable.  And  if  it  is  not  sustainable,  to  where  will  the  system  be 
heading? 
Concerns about the sustainability of the current configuration of the global monetary system 
have been raised for many years, most prominently in the context of the “global imbalances” 
debate. Today, I would like to draw attention to a different challenge, namely an increasing 
divergence of inflation between advanced economies and some emerging economies. This 
divergence may make it increasingly difficult for emerging markets to smoothly combine low 
inflation and a high degree of exchange rate stability.  
There  are  at  least  three  factors  that  may  explain  why  prices  have  recently  been  rising  in 
emerging markets at a more rapid pace than in advanced economies: 
1. 
The global rise in energy and food prices, as both items have a much larger share in 
the  consumer  price  indices  of  emerging  economies  than  in  those  of  advanced 
economies.  
Strong expansion in monetary and credit aggregates,7 which may finally feed into a 
more pronounced rise in emerging market inflation.  
Increasing  supply  constraints,  as  the  “vast  supply  of  underemployed  workers” 
(Dooley et al 2003) in some countries may finally be exhausted, at least for certain 
segments of the labour market.  
2. 
3. 
Of course, there have been rising inflationary pressures in advanced economies as well. And 
until  July  last  year,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  ECB  responded  to  these  pressures  by 
raising interest rates. The recent financial turbulence put an end to the tightening cycle in the 
US, with the Federal Funds rate dropping by three percentage points since August 2007. In 
Europe,  ECB  monetary  policy  rates  have  remained  stable.  The  policy  response  in  the  US 
reflects the high level of uncertainty resulting from the turmoil in financial markets.  
From a global monetary system perspective, the key question is whether the monetary policy 
stance  in  advanced  economies  will  remain  appropriate  for  emerging  market  economies.  If 
this  were  not  the  case,  emerging  market  economies  with  a  soft  peg  would  be  facing 
increasing inflationary pressures as interest rates in advanced economies could become too 
low  to  be  consistent  with  maintaining  price  stability.8  And,  in  emerging  markets  with  a 
domestic  nominal  anchor,  there  could  be  an  end  to  the  period  of  a  smooth  co-existence 
between  meeting  the  inflation  targets  and  maintaining  a  high  degree  of  exchange  rate 
stability.  
I know that the question I raised is not a new one. It has been with us for some time, but 
under a different name, namely the “decoupling hypothesis”.9 From a growth perspective, the 
hypothesis suggests that the global expansion of the past few years could continue even in 
the face of a US slowdown. At the same time, the decoupling scenario might imply a growing 
need for divergent monetary policy stances in advanced economies and emerging markets in 
order  to  maintain  price stability.  If  scope  for  an  autonomous  interest  rate  policy  cannot  be 
                                                 
7   Credit growth has exceeded 20% per annum in every major region in the developing world in recent years 
(White 2008). 
8   Of course, this may also apply to emerging economies other than the 24 countries reviewed here. See, for 
example, Setser (2007) with regard to oil-producing countries in the Middle East. 
9   Detailed analyses of the decoupling hypothesis can be found in Akin and Kose (2007) as well as Helbling et al 
(2007). 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2009
provided by increasing restrictions on the movement of capital, this could involve a transition 
to more flexible exchange rates (Eichengreen and Razo-Garcia, 2006). 
The jury is still out on whether, and to what extent, decoupling will take place. My reading of 
latest developments is that there is divergence, while the degree of decoupling is likely to be 
limited.  Thus,  authorities  in  emerging  markets  might  continue  relying  on  fiscal  policy, 
minimum  reserve  requirements  and  other  administrative  measures  to  contain  inflationary 
pressures.  But  irrespective  of  the  more  cyclical  challenges  the  system  is  currently  facing, 
there  are  some  arguments  suggesting  that  tensions  between  price  and  exchange  rate 
stability might become more fundamental.  
Accordingly,  the  medium-term  perspectives  of  the  global  monetary  system  are  likely  to  be 
determined by two opposing forces (Bordo and James 2006). On the one hand, reflecting the 
ideas of the more traditional optimum currency area theory, some observers argue that, with 
emerging  markets’  rapid  integration,  the  global  economy  will  face  a  growing  need  for  a 
common  monetary  standard.  This  would  mean  that  the  emerging  markets  would  continue 
paying close attention to the exchange rate and exchange rate developments, in particular, 
towards the US dollar and the euro.  
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  good  reasons  to  believe  that,  in  an  increasingly  integrating 
world, the global economy needs more exchange rate flexibility in dealing with large shifts in 
relative prices that affect advanced and emerging countries differently. Such large shifts in 
relative prices are almost certainly to occur under the assumption that the convergence of 
real  income  levels  witnessed  in  many  emerging  markets  in  recent  years  continues.  The 
recent  rise  in  food  and  energy  prices  provides  a  prominent  example  of  substantial 
movements in relative prices and their non-proportional impact on advanced and emerging 
economies.  
In such an environment, differing interest rate levels are needed to maintain price stability in 
the global economy. Given their higher rates of inflation, higher interest rate levels would be 
required  in  emerging  markets.  Assuming  that  authorities  will  face  increasing  difficulties  in 
limiting  capital  inflows  by  administrative  measures  and  changes  in  minimum  reserve 
requirements, interest rate differentials can be achieved only with emerging markets adopting 
more flexible exchange rates. 
To  a  European  observer  the  two  opposing  forces  I  have  just  described  are  quite  familiar. 
They  had  been  at  the  heart  of  the  discussion  on  European  monetary  and  exchange  rate 
policies since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system.10 And, in the 26 years that followed 
before the creation of the euro, the European countries tried almost any possible exchange 
rate regime to cope with the challenge of conducting independent monetary policies on an 
increasingly  integrated  continent.  In  the  end,  both  “corners”  prevailed:  a  hard  peg  among 
European  countries  and  the  euro  area  itself  operating  an  independent  float  (Padoa-
Schioppa, 1995).  
In light of this, it is not surprising either to observe that there are still differing exchange rate 
regimes  among  the  New  EU  Member  States  which  have  not  yet  adopted  the  euro.  At  the 
same time, real and financial integration in the EU is already strong and is set to increase 
even  further.  Thus,  given  the  unique  institutional  environment  of  European  integration, 
countries  are  expected  to  adopt  the  euro  once  they  are  deemed  to  have  fulfilled  the 
conditions set by the Treaty.  
Globally,  however,  and  having  reviewed  all  arguments,  I  expect  that  the  global  monetary 
system  of  the  future  will  probably  consist  of  more  emerging  markets  adopting  a  domestic 
nominal anchor and a more flexible exchange rate regime.  
                                                 
10   From an emerging market perspective, Dooley and Garber (2005) explicitly compare the current configuration 
of the global monetary system with the later years of the Bretton Woods period. 
BIS Review 49/2008 
 5
The  main  advantage  of  adopting  a  domestic  nominal  anchor  instead  of  committing  to  an 
external one is that it provides for more flexibility in times of need (Barajas et al 2007). This 
flexibility helps to adjust to the different forces that impinge on emerging market economies’ 
monetary policy in their process of convergence and integration. At the current juncture, such 
a need might arise as countries are facing increasing inflationary pressures. 
Implications for the international role of the US dollar and the euro 
III. 
The scenario of increasing exchange rate flexibility in emerging markets has also featured 
more prominently in recent discussions on the international role of the US dollar and – albeit 
to a lesser and more indirect extent – the international role of the euro. In particular, it has 
been argued that, given rising exchange rate flexibility in emerging markets, the international 
role of the US dollar may suffer from falling demand as an anchor currency.  
Moreover,  concerns  have  been  raised  that  growing  exchange  rate  flexibility  in  emerging 
markets might have implications with regard to the demand for US dollar reserve assets, as 
anchor and reserve currency are closely aligned. In particular, there might be less willingness 
on the part of major reserve accumulators to continue purchasing US dollar assets.  
Indeed,  some  observers  argue  that  authorities  in  emerging  markets,  when  free  from  the 
constraints  of  a  soft  peg  or  tightly  managed  float,  might  aim  at  restructuring  their  reserve 
portfolios  in  favour  of  euro  assets,  which  –  in  their  view  –  might  lead  to  appreciation 
pressures on the euro against the US dollar. Some commentators have even expressed the 
expectation  that,  in  the  end,  such  a  process  might  challenge  the  dominant  role  of  the  US 
dollar as an international currency.  
However, there are three reasons why I think that changes in the use of the US dollar and 
the  euro  as  international  currencies  will  continue  to  be  gradual  (Remsperger  and  Winkler 
2008).  
First, in the past, fluctuations in the euro-US dollar exchange rate have had little impact on 
the  international  role  of  either  currency  or  on  their  reserve  currency  function.  Research 
shows that, in general, central bank interventions have a stabilising rather than destabilising 
pattern (Lim 2007); in other words, central banks increasingly buy the reserve currency that 
is depreciating. Latest IMF data on the currency composition of foreign exchange reserves is 
consistent with this pattern of interventions (Chart 4).  
Second, it is important to distinguish between two different causes of a decline in demand for 
an anchor currency. And one should not confuse the two cases. 
Countries  may  abolish  an  anchor  currency  because  the  import  of  the  anchor  currency’s 
monetary policy is leading to rising domestic  macroeconomic imbalances. In the history of 
the  global  monetary  system,  this  has  been  quite  a  usual  event  (Frankel  1999).  It  merely 
indicates that one monetary policy does not fit the size of all countries pegging to the anchor 
currency.  
By contrast, a decline in demand motivated by rising distrust in the stability of the respective 
anchor currency per se, in particular, its domestic stability, is a very different scenario. Such 
a scenario could have profound implications for the international role of the respective anchor 
currency.  However,  I  do  not  expect  this  scenario  to  materialise.  Indeed,  changes  in  the 
dominant international currency have been very rare.  
The third and final reason why implications for the international role of the US dollar and the 
euro  are  likely  to  be  limited  is  that,  as  in  the  past,  a  move  towards  more  exchange  rate 
flexibility  is  unlikely  to  signal  that  emerging  markets  will  implement  the  textbook  rules  of  a 
domestic nominal anchor and an independent float, as is the case in the United States and 
the euro area.  
6 
 BIS Review 49/2009
Emerging markets can be expected to move towards greater exchange rate flexibility if and 
when  the  monetary  policy  stance  of  advanced  economies  –  for  reasons  that  are  either 
cyclical or structural in nature – becomes increasingly inconsistent with higher inflation rates 
in emerging countries. But, at the same time, emerging markets are likely to continue paying 
close  attention  to  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  This  will  hold,  in  particular,  for  fluctuations 
against  the  US  dollar  and  the  euro.  Against  this  backdrop,  I  would  expect  that,  even  if 
emerging  markets  adopt  a  more  flexible  exchange  rate  regime,  changes  in  the  use  of  the 
euro and the US dollar as international currencies will continue to be gradual. 
Thank you very much. 
References 
Abiad, A., Leigh, D. and Mody, A., (2007), International Finance and Income Convergence: 
Europe is Different, IMF Working Paper, No. 64, International Monetary Fund, Washington.  
Akin,  C.  and  M.A.  Kose  (2007),  Changing  Nature  of  North-South  Linkages:  Stylized  Facts 
and Explanations, IMF Working Paper 07/280, Washington DC. 
Barajas,  A.,  L.  Erickson  and  R.  Steiner  (2007),  Fear  of  Declaring:  Do  Markets  Care  What 
Countries  Say  About  Their  Exchange  Rate  Policies?,  Paper  presented  at  the  8th  Jacques 
Polak Annual Research Conference, 15-16 November. 
Bordo, M. and H. James (2006), One World Money, Then and Now, NBER Working Paper 
12189, Cambridge MA. 
Cardarelli,  R.,  S.  Elekdag  and  A.A.  Kose  (2007),  Managing  Large  Capital  Inflows,  World 
Economic Outlook (October, Washington: IMF), 105-134 
Dooley, M., Folkerts-Landau, D. and Garber, P.M. (2003), An Essay on the Revived Bretton 
Woods System, NBER Working Paper No. 9971, Cambridge, MA. 
Dooley, M. and P. Garber (2005), Is It 1958 or 1968? Three Notes on the Longevity of the 
Revived Bretton Woods System, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 147-187. 
Edwards,  S.  (2006),  The  relationship  between  exchange  rates  and  inflation  targeting 
revisited, NBER Working Paper 12163, Cambridge MA. 
Edwards,  S.  (2007),  Capital  controls,  capital  flow  contractions,  and  macroeconomic 
vulnerability, Journal of international money and finance, 26(5), 814-840. 
Eichengreen, B. and R. Razo-Garcia (2006), The international monetary system in the last 
and next 20 years, Economic Policy 21 (47) , 393-442 
Fecht,  F.,  H-P.  Grüner,  P.  Hartmann  and  M.  Lo  Duca  (2007),  Financial  Globalization  and 
Stability, Frankfurt a.M., mimeo. 
Fischer,  S.  (2001),  Exchange  Rate  Regimes:  Is  the  Bipolar  View  Correct?  Distinguished 
Lecture on Economics in Government, American Economic Association and the Society of 
Government Economists, Delivered at the Meetings of the American Economic Association, 
New Orleans, January 6, 2001; http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2001/010601a.htm 
Frankel, J.A. (1999), No Single Currency Regime is Right for All Countries or At All Times, 
NBER Working Paper 7338, Cambridge M.A. 
Helbling,  T.,  P.  Berezin,  M.A.  Kose,  M.  Kumhof,  D.  Laxton  and  N.  Spatafora  (2007), 
Decoupling  the  Train?  Spillovers  and  Cycles  in  the  Global  Economy,  World  Economic 
Outlook (April, Washington: IMF), 121-160. 
Herrmann, S. and A. Winkler (2008), Financial markets and the current account – emerging 
Europe versus emerging Asia, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper Series 1: Economic 
Studies, 05/2008, Frankfurt a.M. 
BIS Review 49/2008 
 7
IMF  (2003),  Exchange  Arrangements  and  Foreign  Exchange  Markets,  Developments  and 
Issues, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C. 
IMF (2005), Does Inflation Targeting Work in Emerging Markets?, World Economic Outlook 
(September, Washington: IMF), 161-186. 
IMF  (2007),  Review  of  Exchange  Arrangements,  Restrictions,  and  Controls,  Washington 
D.C. 
Kose, M.A., E.S. Prasad and M.E. Terrones (2007), How Does Financial Globalization Affect 
Risk Sharing? Patterns and Channels, IMF Working Paper 07/238, Washington D.C. 
Lane,  P.  and  G.M.  Milesi-Feretti  (2008),  The  Drivers  of  Financial  Globalization,  IIIS 
Discussion Paper 238, Dublin. 
Lim,  E.-G.  (2007),  Do  Reserve  Portfolios  Respond  to  Exchange  Rate  Changes  Using  a 
Portfolio  Rebalancing  Strategy?  An  Econometric  Study  using  COFER  Data,  IMF  Working 
Paper 07/293, Washington D.C. 
McKinnon, R. (2002), The Euro versus the Dollar, Resolving a Historical Puzzle, Journal of 
Policy Modeling, 24 (4), 355-359.  
Mishkin,  F.S.  and  K.  Schmidt-Hebbel  (2007),  Does  Inflation  Targeting  Make  a  Difference? 
NBER Working Paper 12876, Cambridge, MA. 
Mohanty,  M.  S.  and  M.  Scatigna  (2005),  Has  globalization  reduced  monetary  policy 
independence?  in:  Globalisation  and  monetary  policy  in emerging  markets,  BIS Paper  No. 
23, Basle, 17-58. 
Padoa-Schioppa, T. (1995), The Genesis of EMU: A Retrospective View, Robert Schuman 
Lecture given at the Sixth Session of the Academy of European Law on 29 June 1995 at the 
European University Institute, http://www.eui.eu/RSCAS/WP-Texts/JM96_40.html. 
Reinhart,  C.M.  and  K.S.  Rogoff  (2004),  The  Modern  History  of  Exchange  Rate 
Arrangements: A Reinterpretation, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (1), 1-48. 
Remsperger,  H.  und  A.  Winkler  (2008),  Welchen  Einfluss  hat  der  Wechselkurs  auf  die 
internationale Rolle von US-Dollar und Euro?, Frankfurt a.M., mimeo. 
Rose,  A.  (2006),  A  Stable  International  Monetary  System  Emerges:  Inflation  Targeting  is 
Bretton Woods, Reversed, NBER Working Paper 12711, Cambridge MA.  
Schnabl, G. (2007), Exchange Rate Volatility and Growth in Small Open Economies at the 
EMU Periphery. ECB Working Paper 773, Frankfurt a.M. 
Setser,  B.  (2007),  The  Case  for  Exchange  Rate  Flexibility  in  Oil-Exporting  Economies, 
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Policy Brief 07-8, Washington D.C. 
White, W. A. (2008), Globalisation and the determinants of domestic inflation, BIS Working 
Paper No. 250, Basle. 
 
 
8 
 BIS Review 49/2009
Chart 1: Exchange rate arrangements in selected emerging economies*, 2007 vs. 2001 
Number of countries
2001
April 07
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Hard pegs
Conventional and other pegs
Managed floating
Independently floating
* = Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Columbia, Mexico, Peru, China, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand, Czech Republic, Egypt, Hungary, 
Israel, Jordan, Morocco, Poland, Russia, South Africa, Turkey
Source: IMF
 Chart 2: Sum of foreign assets and liabilities: 
Advanced economies compared with emerging markets, 1985 - 2004
Advanced economies
Selected emerging markets
Advanced economies (excluding reserve assets)
Selected emerging markets (excluding reserve assets)
P
D
G
  
f
o
g
e
t
a
n
e
c
r
e
p
 
a
 
s
a
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
Sources: Lane and Milesi-Feretti
   BIS Review 49/2008 
 9
Chart 3: Inflation developments in selected emerging markets, 01/1997 - 07/2007 
percent
40
Conventional or other form of peg
Managed floaters
Independent floaters
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Jan
97
Jul 97 Jan
98
Jul 98 Jan
99
Jul 99 Jan
00
Jul 00 Jan
01
Jul 01 Jan
02
Jul 02 Jan
03
Jul 03 Jan
04
Jul 04 Jan
05
Jul 05 Jan
06
Jul 06 Jan
07
Jul 07
Source: IMF, author's calculations
 Chart 4: Currency composition of official foreign exchange reserves*
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
USD (at constant exchange rates)
EUR (at constant exchange rates)
USD (at current exchange rates)
EUR (at current exchange rates)
Mrz 99
Jun 99
Sep 99
Dez 99
Mrz 00
Jun 00
Sep 00
Dez 00
Mrz 01
Jun 01
Sep 01
Dez 01
Mrz 02
Jun 02
Sep 02
Dez 02
Mrz 03
Jun 03
Sep 03
Dez 03
Mrz 04
Jun 04
Sep 04
Dez 04
Mrz 05
Jun 05
Sep 05
Dez 05
Mrz 06
Jun 06
Sep 06
Dez 06
Mrz 07
Jun 07
Sep 07
Dez 07
* only countries reporting the currency composition data to the IMF
Source: IMF, Bundesbank calculations
  10 
 BIS Review 49/2009
