Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Building a stronger economy through 
microfinance 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Conference on Microfinance: Powering Innovations in 
Microfinance, Asian Development Bank, Manila, 24 July 2008. 
 fellow  advocates  and  workers 
Microfinance  Council  of  the  Philippines  President  Rolando  Victoria,  ADB  Vice  President 
Lawrence Greenwood, ADB ED Marita Magpili Jimenez, Mr. Barry Hitchcock, other officers 
of  ADB, 
in  microfinance,  distinguished  participants, 
representatives from the banking community, special guests, good morning.  
This two-day conference organized around the theme “Powering Innovations in Microfinance” 
is truly a special event. 
Ten years ago, one would not associate the words power and innovations with microfinance 
in the Philippines. While some of today’s leading microfinance NGOs were already around at 
that time, microenterprises did not have access to formal financial services and had to resort 
to informal lenders with very high cost of funds. Formal financial institutions were cautious of 
this market due to high credit risk and transaction costs.  
What a difference a decade makes! Today, microfinance is no longer a mere buzzword but 
part  of  the  financial  mainstream,  with  229  banks  actively  engaged  in  the  sector.  As  of 
December  2007,  these  banks  had  an  outstanding  loan  portfolio  of  P6  billion,  extended  to 
nearly 800,000 clients or an average of 7,500 pesos per borrower. Significantly, our micro-
borrowers have also become net savers; as of end 2007, their combined deposits with banks 
have reached close to 2 billion pesos. 
Indeed, microfinance has firmly established a track record across our country for nurturing 
successful microentrepreneurs who have attained financial security for themselves and their 
families.  Equally  important,  microentrepreneurs  serve  as  catalyst  for  development  in  their 
respective communities.  
What  triggered  the  mainstreaming  of  microfinance  in  our  country?  Well,  to  put  it  briefly,  it 
resulted  from  the  convergence  of  the  need  to  find  ways  to  liberate  millions  of  our 
entrepreneurial poor from the cycle of poverty; innovations, of course; and the willingness of 
key stakeholders to adopt new ways of doing business.  
I  will  now  share  the  story  of  Bangko  Sentral  and  how  we  responded  to  the  challenge  of 
mainstreaming microfinance within our financial system.   
The  Bangko  Sentral  was  mandated  by  the  General  Banking  Law  of  2000  to  recognize 
microfinance  as  a  legitimate  banking  activity.  As  a  start,  we  studied  the  practice  of 
microfinance around the world and engaged practitioners in many discussions. Next, we set 
in  place  regulations  that  recognized  and  built  on  best  practices;  this  included  using  group 
support or liability, cash flow-based lending, and providing for frequent amortizations .  
We also created an environment that allowed for new entrants into the market, particularly 
microfinance-oriented banks which are licensed as regular banks but dedicate at least 50% 
of their loan portfolio to microfinance. This became an ideal vehicle for microfinance NGOs 
that wanted to transform into a formal financial institution. 
In  addition,  we  liberalized  branching  regulations  and  paved  the  way  for  innovations  in 
products  and  service  delivery  using  information  and  communication  technology  (ICT)  and 
other similar means.  
BIS Review 95/2008 
 1
I should emphasize that even as we make room for innovations in the banking system, we 
make a point to balance this by instituting prudent standards for the conduct of microfinance 
operations. Among others, this includes prescribing the use of portfolio-at-risk to monitor and 
measure portfolio quality. Likewise, we have instituted reporting requirements for banks with 
microfinance operations.  
This enabling policy and regulatory environment has allowed microfinance to flourish within 
the  banking  sector.  Today,  banks  are  considered  one  of  the  main  players  in  the  country’s 
microfinance industry.  
This  commercialization  is  a  reflection  of  global  trends.  Today,  global  financial  giants  are 
setting up dedicated offices for microfinance. We also know of some microfinance institutions 
that are publicly listed. And loan portfolios are being securitized.  
The range of players involved in the industry is also becoming more diverse. Private equity 
firms,  commercial  banks,  and  even  cement  and  real  estate  companies  are  investing  in 
microfinance institutions around the world. Even mobile phone manufacturers are looking at 
microfinance as a means to increase mobile phone penetration in several countries .  
The  entry  of  new  players  into  the  sector  should  drive  the  introduction  of  even  more  new 
products  and  services,  as  well  as  new  ways  of  doing  business.  At  present,  we  see 
microfinance institutions offering a whole menu of services that covers not only microcredit 
but also microsavings to microinsurance. This is definitely a significant leap from institutions 
previously offering only microcredit.  
The technology and methodology of microfinance has also been used to provide financing 
needs in the areas of agriculture and housing, among others. In the Philippines, practitioners 
have  developed  the  Micro-Agri  Product  and  more  recently  the  breakthrough  Housing 
Microfinance Product which the Bangko Sentral recognizes as variations of a microfinance 
loan.  
Indeed,  we  continue  to  innovate  because  the  financing  needs  of  microfinance  clients  go 
beyond  simple  business 
loan  products, 
microfinance institutions are now able to respond to the varied needs of their clients, diversify 
their portfolios, and reduce the risk of business loans applied to agriculture or housing. 
Parallel  to  the  development  of  products  offered  by  microfinance  institutions,  significant 
changes  are  also  taking  place  in  their  delivery  channels.  Microfinance  institutions  are 
increasingly  recognizing  how  information  and  communication  technology  can  provide 
revolutionary channels to better serve existing clients or an opportunity to reach new ones.  
These new channels – such as mobile phones, automated teller machines (ATMs) and point 
of  sale  (POS)  card  readers  –  have  also  brought  with  them  significant  improvements  in 
efficiency  and  convenience,  while  lowering  costs  for  both  the  microfinance  institutions  and 
their  clients.  In  the  Philippines,  for  instance,  rural  banks  have  tied  up  with  mobile  phone 
companies  to  facilitate  microfinance  loan  payments,  deposits,  and  withdrawals  through  a 
simple SMS or text message.  
In other words, the microfinance landscape in our country continues to evolve… in step with 
client  needs  and  innovations  in  technology  and  the  regulatory  framework.  The  challenge 
before us is to further broaden and deepen the reach of microfinance in the Philippines.  
At  the  Bangko  Sentral,  we  accept  this  challenge  and  commit  to  uphold  an  enabling  policy 
and regulatory environment that will allow microfinance to flourish further. We will continue to 
monitor the many developments and innovations taking place in the world of microfinance so 
that we can maximize the benefits we can derive from it.  
To  strengthen  our  capacity  in  this  regard,  we  have  organized  a  special  unit  which  we  call 
Inclusive  Finance  Advocacy,  to  explore  and  facilitate  the  development  of  new  options  to 
improve  and  increase  access  to  financial  services  of  our  people.  We  have  also  created  a 
MicroSME  Finance  Specialist  Group  in  our  Supervision  and  Examination  Sector  for  banks 
loans.  With  more  appropriately  designed 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2008
with  significant  exposure  to  Micro  and  SME  lending.  This  group  has  been  trained  on  risk-
based  supervision  and  the  peculiarities  of  lending  to  the  MSME  sector.  I  should  add  that 
these initiatives of the Bangko Sentral toward broader financial inclusion will continue to be 
guided by a high-level Microfinance/ Inclusive Finance Committee.  
Actually, our objective to have a more inclusive financial system is embedded in the other 
policy  initiatives  of  the  BSP.  We  are  continuously  working  on  reforms  for  a  more  robust 
banking  sector.  We  are  also  working  toward  increasing  the  scale  and  scope  of  bank 
operations to support the needs of the market, particularly those in the countryside.  
What is clear is that banks now have more opportunities to provide a wider range of services 
and  products  to  their  clients  on  the  basis  of  the  following:  a  liberalized  branching  regime; 
Bangko Sentral’s receptiveness to various product and technological innovations in banking 
services; Bangko Sentral’s support to further improve bank efficiencies by allowing, among 
others,  the  outsourcing  of  some  functions;  and  the  expanded  range  of  services  and 
opportunities  that  qualified  rural  banks  can  undertake,  such  as  foreign  currency  deposit 
accounts and equity investments in ATM networks.  
Through these initiatives, we envision stronger banks with a broader geographical presence 
providing competitively-priced and well-designed products for all market segments, including 
the previously unserved.  
With these in place, I am confident that we will continue to see further innovations toward 
greater financial inclusion. In this context, I am reminded of Bill Gates who once said that 
“Never before in history has innovation offered promise of so much to so many in so short a 
time”.  
It  is  in  this  spirit  that  I  ask  all  of  you  who  are  participating  in  this  conference…and  other 
microfinance  practitioners  as  well  to  continue  to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunities 
innovations  bring,  to  broaden  and  sustain  the  liberating  and  empowering  force  of 
microfinance in improving the lives of our entrepreneurial poor and their families.  
Finally, on behalf of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I thank all of you for your continuing 
support as we move forward to build better lives and a solid bedrock for a stronger economy 
through microfinance. 
Thank you and I wish you all a fruitful and successful conference.  
Mabuhay ang microfinance!  
BIS Review 95/2008 
 3
