Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at a dinner hosted by the IoD 
South West and the CBI, Bristol, 22 January 2008. 
 It  is  four  months  since  Northern  Rock  came  to  the  Bank  of  England  for  support.  And  the 
headlines continue to be dominated by its fate. Northern Rock, however, is not the epicentre 
of the present global banking crisis. That lies in the very substantial losses made by many 
banks in the main financial centres as a result of the collapse of the US sub-prime mortgage 
market. 
Those losses, and the fear of future losses on a wider range of loans, pose a threat to the 
ability  of  the  banking  system  to  finance  continued  economic  growth  –  the  so-called  credit 
crunch. Concerns about the implications of a credit crunch, not only for the health of the US 
but for the world economy, lie behind the sharp falls in global equity markets over the past 
week. So the next year will pose economic challenges for all of us – more so than at any time 
since the Bank of England was given its independence in 1997. 
Both industrialised and emerging market economies have been affected by the fall in asset 
prices but conditions vary across countries. It is striking that the banking crisis originated at 
the heart of the world’s major financial centres. And the country most severely affected is the 
United States where the Federal Reserve today cut interest rates by 75 basis points – the 
largest reduction since August 1982 – to mitigate “increasing downside risks to growth”. The 
contraction in the US housing market has deepened and unemployment there is rising. 
I  want  tonight  to  explain  the  nature  of  the  challenges  facing  us  and  why  many  of  them 
originate  outside  our  shores.  Exactly  five  hundred  years  before  the  Bank  of  England  was 
given  its  independence,  an  Italian  migrant  who  had  made  his  home  in  Bristol,  Giovanni 
Caboto,  or  John  Cabot  as  he  was  known,  set  sail  from  this  great  city  in  May  1497  and 
became  the  first  European  to  land  on  the  North  American  mainland  since  the  Vikings.  A 
seafaring  voyage  like  Cabot’s  is  a  good  analogy  for  the  challenges  facing  the  British 
economy, which will have to navigate some distinctly choppy waters in 2008. 
The  challenge  to  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  ability  to  navigate  our  way  through  the 
next year reflects two strong economic winds; one from the west and one from the east. They 
correspond  to  what  economists  call  demand  and  supply  shocks.  The  former  is  the  credit 
crunch which has blown across the Atlantic, and threatens a sharp slowing in output growth. 
The latter is the rise in energy and food prices, reflecting continued strong growth in Asia, 
that, together with rising import prices, threaten to lift inflation noticeably above target in the 
coming months. These two winds have stirred up the water through which the UK economy 
must pass. 
The westerly gale first hit us in August as developments in the US mortgage market led to 
turmoil  in  global  financial  markets. For  some  years,  banks  were  able  to  borrow  cheaply  in 
world capital markets to expand their lending. They packaged the resulting loans and sold 
assets backed by those loans to capital market investors. They were able to do that because 
some  investors  had  failed  to  adjust  to  lower  rates  of  return  caused  by  high  savings  in 
emerging  economies  and  low  inflation  at  home.  Those  investors  engaged  in  a  “search  for 
yield” by buying risky assets without always understanding fully the risks attached to them. 
Families and businesses had access to more finance at lower cost. That was most obvious in 
the growth of the US sub-prime mortgage market, where the potential problem of lending to 
people who could not repay when the interest rate was reset on their floating rate mortgages 
was  becoming  only  too  clear.  In  the  United  Kingdom  too,  borrowing  and  spending  growth 
were strong and inflationary pressures built up. 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 1
But in August all that changed dramatically. Rising default rates in the US mortgage market 
led investors around the world to question whether they were being adequately compensated 
for the risks they were bearing on a wide range of assets – not just those associated with 
sub-prime  mortgages.  The  prices  of  those  assets  fell,  and  markets  closed  for  a  range  of 
complex credit instruments. 
As I said two years ago, “risk premia have become unusually compressed and the expansion 
of  money  and  credit  may  have  encouraged  investors  to  take  on  more  risk  than  hitherto 
without demanding a higher return. It is questionable whether such behaviour can persist”. 
And, as we have seen, it hasn’t. The re-pricing of risk that is still continuing is not a process 
that we should try to reverse. 
Adjustment to this has been painful for banks in the major financial centres in two ways. First, 
with some asset markets closed, banks found funding more difficult. Some needed to finance 
loans  they  had  made  but  had  then  expected  to  package  up  and  sell.  Others  needed  to 
finance off-balance sheet investment vehicles that were no longer able to fund themselves. 
At  the  outset  of  the  crisis,  banks  were  concerned  to  protect  their  liquidity  position.  But 
increasingly,  attention  has  turned  to  a  second,  more  fundamental  concern.  As  a  range  of 
asset prices fell, banks began to report large losses. Uncertainty about the scale and location 
of  losses  led  to  concerns  about  the  adequacy  of  bank  capital  and  hence  the  ability  of  the 
banking system to finance continued economic expansion. At the end of last year, sentiment 
in  financial  markets  worsened  markedly.  So  in  mid-December,  central  banks  around  the 
world announced a co-ordinated set of actions in money markets. These were designed to 
boost confidence by demonstrating that we were conscious of the risks of a credit crunch. 
Since those actions, conditions in money markets have eased considerably. The benchmark 
3-month  interbank  lending  rate  has  fallen  by  around  75  basis  points  relative  to  expected 
policy rates. But conditions are not yet back to normal and remain fragile. Although central 
banks can and will respond to the consequences of strains in the banking system for their 
economies, the solution to the underlying problem does not rest with them but with the banks 
and financial markets themselves. Banks must reveal losses promptly, and, most importantly, 
raise new capital where necessary. 
But these developments in financial markets and the banking system have started to affect 
activity  in  the  economy  more  widely.  Interest  rates  charged  to  both  households  and 
companies  have  risen  relative  to  Bank  Rate,  reversing  the  relative  fall  in  the  year  or  so 
before last August. And our own survey of credit conditions last month revealed that lenders 
intend to tighten conditions further this year. This tightening is unlikely to be short-lived. 
Tighter  conditions  will  discourage  borrowing  to  finance  spending  on  residential  and 
commercial property, on business investment and on consumption. The impact on property 
prices  is  already  clearly  visible.  Commercial  property  prices  have  fallen  by  12%  since  the 
middle of last year. And, after rising sharply earlier in 2007, house prices stagnated in the 
final  quarter.  Although  there  is  a  considerable  stock  of  equity  in  owner-occupied  housing, 
with banks tightening the supply of both secured and unsecured credit, consumers will find it 
more difficult to borrow to finance spending. So in 2008 it is likely that a less buoyant housing 
market will go hand in hand with slower growth of consumer spending. 
Tighter credit conditions mean that, as a nation, we are likely to save more of our income this 
year than in the recent past. In the short run, that will slow economic activity, possibly quite 
sharply. And there is a risk that weaker activity and lower asset prices could result in another 
round of losses for banks and a further tightening of credit conditions. 
The  adjustment  which  not  only  the  British  but  the  world  economy  is  experiencing  is 
necessary as the imbalances, between spending and saving and between domestic demand 
and trade, unwind. As part of a longer-run rebalancing of the UK economy, an increase in our 
national saving rate, both private and public, is necessary. The low level of national saving is 
apparent from the current account deficit – our new net borrowing from overseas – which in 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2008
the third quarter of last year was, relative to GDP, the biggest in the past fifty years and the 
largest  in  the  G7.  It  is  possible  to  run  a  current  account  deficit  for  a  considerable  period. 
Australia,  for  example,  has  done  so  in  every  year  since  1974.  But  our  own  position  is 
becoming  more  difficult.  For  some  years  we  have  been  able  to  finance  current  account 
deficits  by  borrowing,  often  through  banks,  at  unusually  low  interest  rates  on  world  capital 
markets. Such borrowing is now becoming more expensive. Unless we spend less and save 
more, our current account position will deteriorate. 
If we are to raise our national saving rate without overall demand, output and employment 
suffering  in  the  medium  term,  we  will  need  to  export  more  and  import  less.  Such  a 
rebalancing  is  helped  by  the  fall  in  sterling’s  effective  exchange  rate.  Sterling  has  fallen, 
against  a  trade-weighted  basket  of  currencies  by  almost  10%  since  August.  And  financial 
markets are pricing in a significant probability of a further decline in the exchange rate during 
this year. 
A lower average level of the exchange rate can, by supporting overall economic activity, help 
protect us from the worst effects of the wind blowing across the Atlantic. But, by pushing up 
import prices, it will exacerbate the impact of the other wind now buffeting the UK economy, 
which comes from the east – the inflationary effect of higher energy and food prices. Strong 
growth of demand, particularly from China, India and other emerging  markets in Asia, has 
been a key driver of the sustained rises in commodity prices over recent years, most notably 
oil prices. 
Inflation has picked up in the industrialised world. It is now 3.1% in the euro area and 4.1% in 
the  United  States.  And  although  consumer  price  inflation  here  is  close  to  target  at  2.1%, 
three  developments  now  threaten  to  push  it  significantly  above  target  this  year.  First,  oil 
prices are around $90 a barrel, although they have fallen back in recent days. In August, the 
price was $70. Second, oil price increases have been accompanied by rising gas prices in 
wholesale  markets.  And  this  month  we  have  seen  announcements  from  suppliers  of 
increases in household gas and electricity bills of the order of 15%. Third, world food prices 
have risen sharply as a result of strong demand growth on the one hand and poor harvests 
from South Australia to North Carolina on the other. Food prices on world markets are a third 
higher than they were six months ago, and that has been feeding through to prices in the 
shops.  Food  price  inflation  in  our  own  Consumer  Price  Index  reached  almost  6%  in 
December. 
So 2008 is likely to see higher energy prices, higher food prices and, with a lower exchange 
rate, higher import prices, pushing inflation above the 2% target. It is possible that inflation 
could rise to the level at which I would need to write an open letter of explanation, possibly 
more than one, to the Chancellor. Although there is little we can do now to avoid some rise in 
inflation this year, the task of the Monetary Policy Committee is to ensure that it is short-lived. 
If inflation expectations were to pick up in the wake of a rise in inflation this year, then only a 
more prolonged slowdown would allow inflation to return to target. But if the rise in inflation 
does  not  affect  longer-term  expectations,  then  inflation could  start  to fall  back  towards  the 
end of the year. 
We  are  determined  to  keep  inflation  on  track  to  meet  the  2%  target  in  the  medium  term. 
When the Monetary Policy Committee sets Bank Rate, it has to balance the risk that a sharp 
slowing  in  activity,  by  creating  a  margin  of  spare  capacity,  would  pull  inflation  below  the 
target, against the risk that, without such a margin of spare capacity, higher inflation in the 
short term might have a tendency to persist. So we face a difficult balancing act in the course 
of  2008.  But  we  start  the  year  from  a  position  in  which  Bank  Rate,  at  5.5%,  is  probably 
bearing down on demand. 
After a decade and more of a non-inflationary consistently expansionary (nice) economy, a 
phrase I coined in 2003, we moved to a somewhat bumpier but still rather stable path, which 
I  described  the  following  year  as  the  not-so-bad  period.  You  might  think  we  have  now 
BIS Review 8/2008 
 3
entered a not-so-good period. To put it bluntly, this year we are probably facing a period of 
above target inflation and a marked slowing in growth. 
Although  we  have  little  control  over  the  strength  of  the  economic  winds  buffeting  our 
economy, our framework of inflation targeting does, as I said in my first speech as Governor 
almost  five years  ago, provide  a  seaworthy  vessel.  We  cannot  avoid some  volatility  in  the 
short  run  and  it  is  important  that  everyone  understands  the  limits  to  the  ability  of  central 
banks to smooth the economy. But, by keeping our eye firmly on the need to keep inflation 
close to target in the medium term, we can reach the calmer waters of low inflation, steady 
growth and a better balanced economy. And our policy framework will, I hope, allow you not 
to  be  overwhelmed  by  the  headlines  and  to  focus  on  what  really  matters  for  our  future 
prosperity – the successful running of your own businesses. 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2008
