John Murray: Measuring inflation – methodology and misconceptions 
Remarks  by  Mr  John  Murray,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Certified 
General Accountants of Ontario, Toronto, 18 September 2008.  
 These past few months have been busy for central bankers, to say the least, and the past 
few days are certainly no exception. While developments on Wall Street have garnered much 
attention, the cost of living has also been an issue for us all, whether we're buying gas at the 
pumps, booking an airline ticket, or just picking up a loaf of bread at the grocery store. Of 
course, the cost of living is always front and centre for us at the Bank of Canada, where our 
primary  monetary  policy  objective  is  to  ensure  that  inflation  remains  low,  stable,  and 
predictable  over  the  medium  term.  Some  periods,  however,  are  clearly  more  challenging 
than others in terms of meeting this objective. To set effective policies in both tranquil and 
turbulent times, we must understand what drives inflation and be able to anticipate its future 
movements.  
So tonight I'd like to talk in some depth about inflation: exactly what it is, how we measure it, 
and  how  we  gauge  the  underlying  economic  pressures  that  cause  it  to  rise  or  fall.  I'd 
particularly like to discuss the Bank of Canada's "core measure" of inflation, and explain why 
and how it is used by the Bank as an operational guide for monetary policy. I've chosen this 
topic  because  of  its  timely  nature,  as  we  now  see  rising  price  pressures  in  various  forms. 
Along the way, I'd like to use this examination of core inflation to highlight for you just how 
important  the  Bank's  research  is  to  the  conduct  of  Canada's  monetary  policy.  Innovative 
research  and  analysis  related  to  core  inflation,  like  all  our  research  efforts,  underpin  the 
Bank's policy formulation and implementation of monetary policy, and contribute significantly 
to our understanding of how the economy operates.  
At this point, I should emphasize that the Bank consistently aims for low and stable inflation – 
not  for  its  own  sake,  but  because  it  enhances  the  economy's  performance.  Aiming  for  an 
explicit 2 per cent inflation target not only helps stabilize prices, it also helps stabilize real 
output  and  employment,  allowing  the  economy  to  grow  at  its  maximum  sustainable  rate. 
Experience has shown that this is the best contribution that monetary policy can make to the 
economic welfare of Canadians. 
Developments in inflation around the globe  
Before I go into detail about particular Canadian measures and experiences with inflation, let 
me  take  a  step  back  to  look  at  the  larger,  international  picture.  As  I  mentioned  a  moment 
ago,  Canadians  have  become  increasingly  aware  of  price  pressures,  but  this  is,  in  fact,  a 
global  phenomenon.  Indeed,  sharp  increases  in  inflation  have  been  reported  in  both 
advanced and emerging-market economies in recent months. It is true that world prices of 
oil,  natural  gas,  many  minerals,  and  food  products  have  eased  in  the  past  few  weeks. 
Nevertheless, earlier dramatic increases in the prices of these same commodities accounted 
for sharp increases in inflation. In many cases, these have been some of the highest rates of 
inflation observed in the past 10 to 15 years. 
It  is  important  to  note  that  inflation  performance  varies  widely  across  countries.  In  some 
cases,  excessively  loose  monetary  policies,  implemented  in  an  attempt  to  push  economic 
growth higher than the sustainable limits of a country's production capacity, have also been 
an important contributing factor. 
In many countries, the recent surge in inflation has been coupled with a dramatic slowing in 
real economic growth, rekindling memories of the 1970s and concerns over stagflation – the 
uncomfortable  combination  of  high  inflation  and  slow  or  negative  growth.  Most  observers 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 1
believe it would be too great a stretch to draw parallels between the current experience and 
that of the 1970s. Still, recent developments do pose a serious policy challenge for central 
bankers,  especially  when  combined  with  the  dislocation  and  difficulties  evident  in  global 
financial markets. 
Conventional monetary policy reactions might not be appropriate in circumstances where we 
see  a  combination  of  rising  inflation,  slowing  GDP  growth,  and  concerns  about  financial 
instability. Rising inflation, for example, often leads to calls for tighter monetary policy. Yet, 
would that be wise if a slowing economy and other developments were expected to reverse 
these inflation pressures in the future? Slower economic activity often leads to calls for easier 
monetary policy. But would that reaction be wise if inflation pressures were believed to be 
rising rather than receding?  
Around the world, monetary authorities are determined not to repeat the policy errors of the 
1970s,  when  overly  stimulative  measures  led  to  double-digit  inflation  and  rising  inflation 
expectations.  We  all  seek  reliable  indicators  with  which  to  gauge  how  serious  and  long-
lasting the current inflation pressures might be. This kind of information can materially affect 
the stance of monetary policy. This illustrates why monetary policy-makers must gather and 
weigh as much information as possible in their decision making – and why inflation research 
is so important. 
Defining and measuring total and core CPI inflation 
Before I describe some of our inflation research, let me give you some background on the 
measures  of  inflation  that  we  use  at  the  Bank  of  Canada:  measures  based  on  Statistics 
Canada's consumer price index (CPI). Inflation is, of course, defined as a persistent increase 
in the average price of goods and services; in other words, a trend increase in the cost of 
living. In the broadest terms, this is measured by the total, or headline, CPI, which tracks the 
retail prices of a representative "shopping basket" of goods and services over time. It is also 
the rate that the Bank of Canada officially targets for its monetary policy. Here I would remind 
you that the Bank and the federal government have a formal agreement that sets out a target 
of 2 per cent for the annual rate of increase in the CPI. As I said earlier, we pursue low and 
stable inflation because it enhances the performance of the economy.  
Yet, as much as we aim for low, stable, and predictable inflation, there will always be sharp 
movements in total or headline inflation. These are generally driven by volatile price changes 
in a small number of goods and services. In Canada, for example, fully 90 per cent of the 
observed monthly variations in the CPI are linked to price changes in just 8 of the 54 major 
goods and services categories included in the CPI. Further, these price changes are often 
volatile and are often quickly reversed. They therefore add considerable "noise" to total CPI, 
making it difficult to discern genuine movements in trend inflation. 
For this reason, many central banks calculate core inflation measures, which are designed to 
minimize the influence of the most volatile components of the CPI. Although opinions differ 
among  central  bankers  concerning  the  usefulness  of  core  inflation  measures,  many 
monetary authorities – including the Bank of Canada – find these measures helpful for two 
important  reasons.  First,  by  focusing  on  the  more  stable  components  of  the  CPI,  policy-
makers  are  able  to  get  a  better  fix  on  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation.  This  is  important, 
because  monetary  policy  operates  with  long  and  variable  lags.  It  can  take  as  long  as  two 
years  before  the  full  effect  of  a  policy  change  is  felt  on  inflation.  Monetary  policy  must 
therefore be forward-looking, focusing on a one- to two-year horizon. Any attempt to control 
short-term movements in inflation is likely to prove to be counterproductive and will simply 
destabilize both inflation and real economic activity. Core inflation can, therefore, serve as a 
useful operational guide for policy by looking past these short-term price movements. 
The second reason core inflation measures can be useful is that they can help anchor the 
inflation expectations of businesses and households. Having an explicit 2 per cent target for 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2008
inflation,  coupled  with  a  strong  commitment  to  achieve  it,  goes  some  distance  towards 
realizing this objective. But providing a reliable measure of core inflation that the public can 
readily  use  to  track  trend  movements  in  the  CPI  can  strengthen  the  anchoring  of 
expectations  by  providing  assurances  that  the  Bank  will  not  allow  the  rise  in  volatile 
components to spread to other prices. 
The Bank of Canada's core inflation measures 
Now, let me talk about our core measures in detail. Measures of core inflation are usually 
calculated in one of two ways. The "exclusion method" is the most straightforward and, as 
the name suggests, involves excluding the prices of those goods and services that typically 
display  more  than  a  predetermined  amount  of  variability.  The  "reweighting  method,"  in 
contrast, doesn't exclude the prices of any goods and services. Instead, it assigns a weight to 
each component that is inversely related to its volatility. In other words, more volatile price 
series are given a lower weight. 
The  core  inflation  measure  that  the  Bank  of  Canada  currently  uses  is  called  CPIX  and  is 
based on the exclusion method. It removes eight of the most volatile components of the total 
CPI, as well as the effects of changes in indirect taxes such as the GST. The excluded items 
in CPIX are fruit, vegetables, gasoline, fuel oil, natural gas, mortgage-interest costs, intercity 
transportation,  and  tobacco  products.  It  is  important  to  note,  however,  that  the  Bank 
calculates and monitors several different measures of trend inflation, not just CPIX. It uses 
these,  along  with  many  other  sources  of  information,  as  checks  against  its  preferred  core 
measure. While all of the measures of trend inflation tend to move in a similar fashion, the 
differences can be informative.  
It is also worth noting that the Bank has changed its definition of core inflation over time, to 
improve its reliability. When the Bank first began targeting inflation in 1991, the core inflation 
measure it adopted was similar to that used by many other central banks and excluded all 
food  and  energy  prices.  As  a  result,  it  was  less  inclusive  than  the  current  measure.  After 
gaining  more  experience,  and  through  a  process  of  extensive  research  and  analysis,  the 
Bank  refined  its  core  inflation  measure,  as  well  as  the  set  of  additional  measures  that  it 
currently follows. In 2001, the Bank moved to CPIX because of its demonstrated superiority 
on  both  empirical  and  theoretical  grounds.  Its  advantage  was  confirmed  by  additional 
research  when  our  inflation  targets were  renewed  again in 2006,  and it  has  recently  been 
retested as part of a more comprehensive international study looking at a range of measures 
of total and core inflation. 
Clearly, this process of refinement and retesting never ends. This is because it is crucial that 
we be able to determine the most effective indicators of underlying inflation and how these 
might be further refined and improved upon over time. So the next question becomes: how 
can we distinguish between good and bad measures? An effective core measure must have 
four key properties. First, and most obviously, a core measure should be less volatile than 
total inflation. Second, it must be unbiased. By this we mean that the core inflation measure 
must  track  long-run  movements  in  the  total  CPI  very  closely.  Third,  a  good  core  measure 
must also be a reliable predictor of future trend movements in the total CPI. Fourth, a good 
core measure must be easy to understand and to explain to the public.  
When all four requirements are considered together, CPIX has been shown to be as good 
as, or better than, all of the alternative measures that the Bank might use. Other measures 
may outperform CPIX when they are judged on just one or two of these four criteria. CPIW, 
for  example,  which  is  calculated  using  the  reweighting  method,  can  give  slightly  better 
predictions of the total CPI and bears a somewhat tighter relationship to the long-run trends 
in  the  total  CPI.  These  differences  are  very  minor,  however,  and  are  offset  by  other 
considerations  such  as  ease  of  understanding.  For  this  reason,  CPIX  is  still  the  Bank's 
preferred core measure. Nevertheless, given the demonstrated strengths of CPIW and one 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 3
or two other trend measures, the Bank continues to monitor a set of indicators rather than 
relying on any single one. 
Popular misconceptions about core inflation 
Our choice of CPIX as an operational guide for monetary policy has, at times, been a source 
of  controversy  and  has  led  to  several  popular  misconceptions.  Journalists  and  other 
interested  observers  frequently  question  the  use  of  CPIX  and  other  measures  of  trend 
inflation  as  operational  guides.  They  argue  that  such  measures  give  an  overly  sanguine 
picture of true inflation, especially during episodes of sharply rising food and energy prices. 
Critics say that CPIX inflation is frequently lower than total CPI inflation because, they claim, 
the Bank has stripped out the fastest-rising prices. These critics of CPIX argue that it doesn't 
relate  to  the  real-life  experiences  of  typical  households.  "After  all,"  they  point  out,  "what 
household doesn't buy food, drive a car, or have a mortgage?" 
I'll  respond  to  these  criticisms  with  three  related  points.  First,  and  most  importantly,  the 
Bank's official target of 2 per cent inflation is based on total CPI inflation, not on CPIX. The 
latter is only one of several indicators used to judge where the total CPI is likely to go in the 
future. It is an important indicator that we use to judge what the inflation trends are, but it is 
not our target. 
Second, the Bank's decision to use core inflation as a policy guide is based exclusively on 
empirical  considerations.  CPIX  is  used  only  because  it  has  been  shown  to  track  future 
movements in total CPI better than the past movements of the total CPI itself. If this were to 
change, and if CPIX no longer outperformed the total CPI in this regard, we would stop using 
it. 
Finally, as noted earlier, it is critical that the Bank continue to focus on the future trend of CPI 
inflation, as opposed to its current level, because monetary policy operates with such long 
and variable lags. If the Bank were to react to every observed change in total CPI, it would 
destabilize both inflation and real economic growth. It would be reacting to volatile changes 
in a small subset of prices that would likely reverse course in the near future. 
Is core always a better predictor than total CPI inflation? 
Experience  in  Canada  has  shown  that  core  inflation  does  outperform  total  inflation  as  an 
operational  guide  for  policy.  When  the  two  series  deviate,  total  CPI  inflation  tends  to 
converge on core inflation rather than the reverse. Core inflation is therefore a better guide 
as to where total inflation is going. This phenomenon might reflect the success that the Bank 
has enjoyed over the past 17 years in keeping total CPI inflation close to its 2 per cent target. 
When  total  inflation  temporarily  moves  higher  or  lower  than  the  target,  households  and 
businesses know that it will probably return to target within a relatively short time. 
Some  countries  haven't  enjoyed  the  same  positive  experience.  They've  found  that  core 
inflation  tends  to  deviate  persistently  from  total  CPI  inflation  and  is  not  a  very  reliable 
measure  of  underlying  inflation  pressures.  These  differences  have  been  documented 
recently by researchers at the Bank, but they are not well understood.1 They appear to be 
systematic in nature, as opposed to chance occurrences, and Bank researchers suspect that 
they reflect differences in the way core inflation is defined, as well as structural differences in 
                                                 
1   Serious  research  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  on  alternative  measures  of  core  inflation  began  with  the  work  of 
Laflèche (1997), Crawford et al. (1998), Hogan et al. (2001), and Macklem (2001), who built on the efforts of 
Canadian academics such as Parkin (1984) and U.S. policy-makers such as Cogley (1998). It continued with 
contributions  by  Armour  (2006)  and  has  been  extended  more  recently  through  the  innovative  analysis  of 
Hoddenbagh et al. (2008) and Martel (2008). 
4 
 BIS Review 112/2008
the various economies. Such a situation isn't so surprising in less-developed countries and in 
emerging markets; however, long-standing differences between core and total inflation have 
also been observed in advanced countries. Core inflation measures tend to perform very well 
in  Australia,  Canada,  New  Zealand,  and  the  United  States,  for  example,  but  they  perform 
poorly in the euro zone, Japan, and the United Kingdom. More research will be needed to 
understand these differences.2  
The Bank's successful use of core CPIX has helped anchor Canadian inflation expectations 
which,  in  turn,  has  helped  dampen  movements  in  total  inflation.  If  households  and 
businesses are convinced that inflation will soon return to 2 per cent, they are less likely to 
form  extrapolative  expectations  based  on  movements 
inflation. 
Consequently, they are less likely to push prices higher or lower. This self-reinforcing cycle 
makes the Bank of Canada's job much easier and is clearly beneficial for the economy as a 
whole.  Canada's  strong  performance  on  the  inflation  front  over  the  past  17  years  is  a 
testament to the usefulness of our inflation targets, our timely monetary policy actions, and 
the supportive role played by core inflation measures. 
in  current  headline 
Implications for Canadian inflation 
So  what  is  CPIX  telling  us  about  current  price  pressures  in  Canada?  On  the  face  of  it,  it 
would  seem  to  suggest  that  the  underlying,  or  trend  rate  of  inflation  has  recently  been  at 
about 1.5 per cent. Although this measure is likely to rise modestly towards the end of this 
year, it is still well below the headline or total CPI inflation rate, which has been running at 
about 3.4 per cent. Because that 1.5 per cent core rate is also below the Bank's 2 per cent 
target  for  inflation,  can  we  assume  that  inflation  in  Canada  is  not  much  of  a  problem?  I 
wouldn't want to go that far, but the relatively low level of CPIX does provide at least some 
reassurance that inflationary pressures are reasonably contained. Further, as we said in our 
3 September interest rate announcement, we anticipate that certain temporary factors now 
affecting  both  the  total  and  CPIX  measures  of  inflation  should  dissipate  over  the  coming 
quarters and that both measures will converge on 2 per cent in the second half of 2009. In 
the interim, total CPI inflation is likely to continue rising, as past energy-price increases push 
it higher. However, the recent decline in both spot and futures prices for energy commodities 
means that the spike in total CPI inflation expected between now and the first quarter of 2009 
will be lower than projected in July. 
Seen from another perspective, does the current 1.5 per cent CPIX rate suggest that inflation 
is too low, implying underlying economic weakness? I wouldn't want to make that assumption 
either, because other trend measures suggest that underlying inflation is a touch higher than 
2 per cent. Further, there is reason to believe that, over the most recent period, CPIX has 
shown a very slight downward bias in its estimate of trend inflation. This is due to the higher 
weight that it assigns to automobile purchases than some of the other trend measures do, 
plus its exclusion of mortgage interest costs. This has been particularly apparent recently, as 
auto prices have been falling over the past 12 months, while home-finance costs have been 
rising faster than many other items in the CPI basket. I don't think this means that the CPIX 
measure  is  no  longer  reliable;  rather,  this  is  likely  a  temporary  situation.  But  it  serves  to 
demonstrate why it is important to look at a range of indexes and to understand why they 
may be moving differently.  
Finally, I want to say a few words about inflation and monetary policy in the context of the 
recent market turmoil in general, and the events of the past few days in particular. We know 
from  experience  that  inflation  control  works  much  more  predictably  when  there  are  well-
                                                 
2   One cause of the poor performance of core inflation measures in the United Kingdom and euro zone is that 
these  jurisdictions  use  a  harmonized  index  of  consumer  prices  (HICP)  that  excludes  shelter  costs  –  an 
important piece of the cost of living. 
BIS Review 112/2008 
 5
functioning  financial  markets  operating  within  a  sound  and  stable  financial  system.  While 
markets in Canada have certainly been volatile in recent weeks, it is worth noting that strains 
in  Canadian  credit  markets  have  been  considerably  less  intense  than  those  seen  in  the 
United States and elsewhere. The Bank is committed to supporting the efficient functioning of 
financial markets, and earlier today, announced that it will enter into a $2-billion, 28-day term 
purchase and resale agreement. The case for further operations will continue to be reviewed 
in light of conditions in financial markets. Canadian banks have healthy balance sheets and 
absolute leverage that is significantly lower than many of their international peers. They are 
less exposed than their U.S. counterparts to the subprime-mortgage market that is at the root 
of  the  market  turmoil,  and  are  less  dependent  on  securitization  for  their  financing  and  on 
capital markets for their revenues. 
Throughout this period of market turmoil, the Bank of Canada has remained in close contact 
with policy-makers both in Canada and abroad, including colleagues in other major central 
banks. We are closely monitoring global market developments, and will continue to provide 
liquidity  as  required  to  support  the  stability  of  the  Canadian  financial  system  and  the 
functioning of financial markets. 
Conclusion 
There  are  four  main  messages  that  I  would  like  you  take  away  from  this  evening's 
presentation.  First,  core  inflation  continues  to  be  a  useful  operational  guide  for  monetary 
policy. Second, it is always combined with other information as a check on the current state 
and  future  direction  of  trend  inflation.  Third,  CPIX  has  not  replaced  the  total  CPI  as  our 
official inflation target. It is simply a tool that helps us achieve our 2 per cent objective for 
total  CPI  inflation.  Finally,  our  continued  research  on  this  and  other  critical  policy  issues 
makes a vital contribution to the Bank's ability to successfully carry out its responsibilities. 
As I said off the top of my remarks, our research at the Bank has been crucial to the effective 
conduct  of  Canada's  monetary  policy.  Of  course,  our  researchers  continue  to  make  a 
contribution today as they explore the feasibility of new and innovative ways to calculate core 
measures, as opposed to the standard exclusion and reweighting methodologies. Of course, 
our researchers are working on many issues, which I don't have time to discuss now, but I do 
encourage you to visit the Bank's website for more information.3
References 
Armour, J. 2006. "An Evaluation of Core Inflation Measures", Bank of Canada Working Paper 
No. 2006-10  
Armour J. and T. Laflèche. 2006. "Evaluating Measures of Core Inflation", Bank of Canada 
Review (Summer): 19-29.  
Bank  of  Canada.  2006.  Renewal  of  the  Inflation-Control  Target:  Background  Information  – 
November 2006.  
Binette,  A.  and  S.  Martel.  2005.  "Inflation  and  Relative  Price  Dispersion  in  Canada:  An 
Empirical Assessment", Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2005-28.  
Cogley, T. 1998. "A Simple Adaptive Measure of Core Inflation", Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco Working Paper No. 98-06.  
                                                 
3   www.bankofcanada.ca/en/fellowship/highlights_res08.html. 
6 
 BIS Review 112/2008
Crawford,  A.,  J.-F.  Fillion,  and  T.  Laflèche.  1998.  "Is  CPI  a  Suitable  Measure  for  Defining 
Price Stability". In Price Stability, Inflation Targets, and Monetary Policy, 39-73. Proceedings 
of a conference held by the Bank of Canada, May 1997. Ottawa: Bank of Canada.  
Hoddenbagh,  J.,  M.  Johnson,  and  E.  Santor.  2008.  "Core  and  Total  Inflation:  Recent 
International Evidence." Preliminary draft.  
Hogan,  S.,  M.  Johnson,  and  T.  Laflèche.  2001.  Core  Inflation,  Bank  of  Canada  Technical 
Report No. 89 (January).  
Laflèche,  T.  1997.  "Statistical  Measures  of  the  Trend  Rate  of  Inflation",  Bank  of  Canada 
Review (Autumn): 29-47.  
Lascelles, E. and Pascal G. 2008. "The Core Argument Against Total CPI," T-D Economics.  
Macklem, T. 2001. "A New Measure of Core Inflation," Bank of Canada Review (Autumn): 
3-12.  
Martel, S. 2008. "A Structural VAR Approach to Core Inflation in Canada", Bank of Canada 
Discussion Paper No. 2008-10.  
Parkin. M. 1984. "On Core Inflation by Otto Eckstein," Journal of Monetary Economics 14: 
251-64.  
BIS Review 112/2008 
 7
