Barbro Wickman-Parak: The Riksbank's inflation target 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
Swedbank, Stockholm, 9 June 2008. 
 The CPI, other measures of inflation and phasing out the CPIX 
The  Riksbank’s  target  is  that  inflation  measured  by  the  consumer  price  index  will  be  held 
around  2  per  cent,  with  a  tolerance  interval  of  +/-  1  percentage  point.  This  is  how  the 
Riksbank  formulated  its  inflation  target  when  it  was  introduced  in  1993.  There  were  good 
reasons for the Riksbank choosing a quantified target for CPI inflation. There still are, and we 
stand  by  our  target.  The  CPI  is  a  broad  measure  which  captures  households’  typical 
purchases and is familiar to the general public. 
But  how  we  communicate  our  policy  and  the  different  measures  of  inflation  we  use  in  our 
analysis has changed considerably over time. This is not so surprising. Our analysis methods 
have been honed and confidence in monetary policy has become stronger. This has given us 
a greater degree of freedom. We must also be aware of which components are causing price 
movements  at  different  points  in  time.  This  means  that  the  need  to  analyse  and  highlight 
different measures of inflation varies. For example, it has recently been particularly important 
to monitor how certain commodity prices develop, as they have increased quickly. 
It is often a measure known as CPIX that has been in focus. The CPIX excludes mortgage 
expenditure and effects of indirect taxes and subsidies from the CPI. This has functioned as 
an important tool, particularly in analysing and illustrating the effects on inflation of our own 
interest  rate  changes.  The  CPIX  has  also  held  a  special  status  in  comparison  with  other 
measures of inflation. For various reasons this will not be the case in future; the CPIX will be 
phased out. We will instead introduce another measure that can better capture the effects of 
our policy. But the intention is not for this measure to hold a special position in the way that 
the CPIX has done. I will return to this soon.  
The change we are now making means that the forecasts, analyses and comments in our 
reports  will  focus  more  directly  on  CPI  inflation.  This  probably  gives  rise  to  a  number  of 
questions; not least among you here today. The most obvious one is probably whether this 
will have consequences for future monetary policy. To answer this question I would first like 
to say a few words about the need for alternative measures of inflation in general. I shall also 
describe how the role played by the CPIX in our analysis has changed over time. Then we 
will come to what the phasing out of the CPIX means for monetary policy.  
Different measures of inflation are needed 
The  Riksbank  has  a  target  defined  in  terms  of  the  change  in  the  CPI.  However,  the 
development in the CPI cannot always guide monetary policy on its own – there is no such 
universal  measure.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  supplement  the  analysis  by  using  different 
measures of underlying inflation. Most central banks do this, including the Riksbank. 
The  arguments  in  favour  of  using  various  alternative  measures  of  inflation  mainly  concern 
understanding and illustrating which components have a lasting effect on prices. Inflation is 
often affected by temporary shocks which we do not try to counteract with monetary policy. In 
such  a  situation  it  is  appropriate  to  highlight different  measures  of  inflation  to  analyse  and 
illustrate both what has already happened and what is expected to happen in the future. To 
describe price trends and justify monetary policy decisions we therefore make use of various 
measures of underlying inflation when necessary. Different measures are more suitable than 
others  on  different  occasions.  For  example,  it  has  recently  been  important  to  demonstrate 
how important energy and food prices have been for developments in the CPI. We also wish 
BIS Review 73/2008 
 1
to be able to analyse and describe inflation adjusted for the direct effects of our own policy. 
Our most important tool for doing this has so far been the measure known as the CPIX. 
Thus, it is often valuable to use different measures of underlying inflation, not least because 
it makes it easier to see what factors are driving the CPI. It is quite natural for us to work in 
this  way  internally  in  our  analyses.  But  it  can  create  some  problems  in  our  external 
communication, particularly if a certain measure is given a long-term prominent role. It can 
create uncertainty as to how the inflation target is defined in practice.  
Until one year ago I myself sat “on the outside” and monitored the Riksbank’s policy making. 
And  I  must  confess  that  I  thought  it  was  a  little  unclear  which  measure  of  inflation  the 
Riksbank actually used in formulating its policy. This was connected with the prominent role 
the CPIX had played in the Riksbank’s analysis and rhetoric. 
The CPIX – how it began 
The CPIX is a measure of inflation that has been around a long time. It was included in the 
predecessor to the Monetary Policy Reports, “Inflation and Inflation Expectations in Sweden”, 
which was first published in October 1993. At that time the measure was known as UND1 
and as now it was adjusted for the direct effects of indirect taxes and subsidies and mortgage 
interest expenditure. At that time the krona had recently depreciated heavily and this had an 
impact in the form of a one-off increase in import prices. The measure therefore initially made 
adjustments for changes in import prices as well.  
The  reason  given  then  for  adjusting  for  interest  costs  was  that  the  financial  turbulence  in 
autumn 1992 had led to temporary effects on inflation. Some years later other reasons made 
it important to adjust for interest costs. During the second half of the 1990s the Riksbank cut 
the repo rate substantially, from almost 9 to below 3 per cent. At the same time, the interest 
rate  on  a  5-year  mortgage  fell  from  just  over  11  to  around  5  per  cent.  This  led  to  interest 
expenditure  for  home-owners  declining  substantially  and  pushing  down  CPI  inflation.  With 
the aid of the CPIX measure the Riksbank could show that the low inflation was largely the 
result  of  its  own  earlier  interest  rate  cuts.  Demanding  that  the  interest  rate  should  be  cut 
further because inflation was so low, as some people did, was thus unreasonable. It would 
mean that monetary policy was “chasing its own tail”, as it was expressed then. 
Strict two-year rule and the CPIX  
The  CPIX  measure  was  particularly  important  during  the  period  when  the  Riksbank 
communicated  its  policy  with  the  aid  of  a  simple  policy  rule.  This  rule  meant  that  if  the 
forecast for inflation deviated from the target one to two years ahead, given an unchanged 
repo rate, the interest rate would be changed. From the point of view of communication the 
rule  worked  well  for  a  long  time.  But  the  focus  on  the  inflation  forecast  exactly  two  years 
ahead which this in practice led to was not without problems. The CPI forecast often deviated 
from  the  inflation  target  two  years  ahead,  not  least  because  of  the  direct  effects  on 
household  interest  expenditure  of  our  own  policy.  But  as  the  effects  were  expected  to 
subside just beyond the two-year horizon, there was no reason to change the interest rate.  
It therefore seemed natural to begin basing monetary policy on forecasts of CPIX inflation, 
which disregards interest expenditure. If the CPIX was close to the target two years ahead, 
this  was  an  indication  that  the  interest  rate  did  not  need  to  be  changed,  even  if  the  CPI 
deviated from 2 per cent. To put it simply, one could say that this was a means of creating 
flexibility in our policy without abandoning the policy rule. We still had CPI inflation as a target 
variable, but began to use another measure of inflation as a tool to attain the target. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2008
Increased credibility and flexibility  
As confidence in our inflation-targeting policy has increased, it has become possible to allow 
this flexibility to take other and perhaps more natural expressions than to emphasise another 
measure  of  inflation  than  the  CPI  to  base  our  interest  rate  decisions  on.  Today  we  make 
forecasts three years ahead, based on an assessment of what is considered to be a suitable 
path  for  the  repo  rate.  Given  this  way  of  working,  the  base  for  our  decisions  is  not  that  a 
particular measure of inflation should always be at a certain level at an exact time horizon. 
The  important  thing  is  that  CPI  inflation  develops  in  a  way  we  consider  to  be  reasonable 
during the forecast period. We can so to speak aim to stabilise the CPI directly. This normally 
means that the CPI should reach the target level within two years. 
Even  after  we  have  extended  our  forecast  period  and  moved  over  to  forecasting  the  repo 
rate path the CPIX has played an important role in our communication. This is because we 
have wanted a measure that adjusts for the direct effects of our own policy – something we 
will always need. We have also assumed that the rate of increase in the CPI and the CPIX 
would  be  the  same  in  the  slightly  longer  term.  In  other  words,  it  has  not  made  much 
difference whether we have communicated our policy in terms of the CPI or in terms of the 
CPIX. But this could nevertheless have contributed to creating uncertainty over the position 
of the CPI as target variable.  
The CPI and the CPIX will differ  
One  condition  for  the  CPIX  to  be  useful  in  steering  the  CPI  towards  the  target  is  that  the 
measure has the same average rate of increase in the long term. As I said, we have earlier 
assumed  that  this  was  the  case.  This  has  largely  been  the  case  so  far.  The  CPI  has 
increased at a slightly slower rate than the CPIX since 1995, but this has primarily been due 
to the Riksbank’s interest rate cuts at the end of the 1990s. Since 2000 the rate of increase 
in the CPI and the CPIX has been largely the same. 
But when we look ahead, it is very probable that this will no longer apply; the rate of increase 
in the CPIX is expected to be lower than the rate of increase in the CPI for a fairly long period 
to come. Let me go into more detail as to why this is the case.  
When the CPIX is calculated, mortgage interest expenditure for home-owners is excluded. 
Mortgage interest expenditure for home-owners in the CPI is calculated as a product of two 
indices: an interest rate index and a capital stock index. The interest rate index consists of an 
average of interest rates on mortgages, from variable interest rates to interest rates with a 
fixed duration of eight years.  
The capital stock index, on the other hand, measures the acquisition value of the housing 
stock financed by the mortgages. But with the calculation method used by Statistics Sweden 
the  rising  house  prices  will  only  affect  the  capital  stock  index  when  the  houses  change 
owners. Even if house prices are increasing substantially, this will only have a limited impact 
on the capital stock index in the short term. After all, it is only a small percentage of houses 
that are bought and sold every year. On the other hand, an increase in house prices affects 
the index for a long period to come. If house prices increased, say, twenty years ago, this will 
still have some effect even on today's index. This is because at least some of the houses 
bought prior to the price rise today are sold at a higher price. 
The calculated mortgage interest expenditure for home-owners can thus change even if the 
interest rates remain unchanged, if the acquisition value of the housing stock changes. This 
is  an  effect  that  will  have  significance  in  the  future.  House  prices  have  risen  over  a  long 
period  of  time,  and  this  will  gradually  have  an  impact  on  the  capital  stock  index.  Without 
going into any technical details regarding calculation methods, one can observe that this is 
the  main  reason  why  mortgage  interest  expenditure  for  home-owners  will  increase  in  the 
coming  years  –  or,  in  other  words,  why  CPIX  inflation  will  be  below  CPI  inflation.  The 
Riksbank  is  assuming  that  the  difference  in  the  rate  of  increase  between  the  CPI  and  the 
BIS Review 73/2008 
 3
CPIX  as  a  result  of  the  housing  stock  increasing  in  value  will  be  approximately  0.2 
percentage points several years ahead.  
The fact that mortgage interest expenditure for home-owners is affected not only by changes 
in interest rates but also by the way house prices develop comes as no surprise. But one can 
say  that  the  trend  rate  of  increase  in  the  capital  stock  has  meant  that  the  problem  has 
gradually become more tangible.  
Other problems with the CPIX 
There  are  also  other  problems  with  the  CPIX,  related  to  calculation  methods,  which  have 
perhaps not received so much attention. The CPIX measure adjusts for indirect taxes. When 
an indirect tax is raised, it is assumed that the price of the product concerned increases by 
the  entire  amount  of  the  tax.  But  in  practice  the  company  or  shop  selling  the  product  can 
rarely  increase  the  price  by  the  full  amount;  usually  only  by  a  part  of  it.  Demand  would 
otherwise  decline  too  much.  But  when  the  CPIX  is  calculated,  the  entire  tax  increase  is 
deducted. An increase in indirect taxes can thus have the paradoxical effect that the CPIX 
falls. 
Another  complication  is  that  excise  duty  is  normally  written  up  by  some  measure  of  price 
movements. This in turn is because the tax on, for instance, alcohol is not expressed as a 
percentage  of  the  price  but  as  SEK  per  litre.  Correspondingly,  the  taxes  on  energy  and 
tobacco are stated in terms of SEK per kilowatt-hour and SEK per gramme. If all prices rise 
by 2 per cent a year, then the excise duty's share of the consumer price would fall over time. 
To prevent this from happening, excise duties are indexed. The excise duty on, for instance, 
petrol is written up by the annual rate of increase in the CPI in June of the previous year. 
But when the CPIX is calculated, each increase in excise duties is deducted from the CPI, 
even  if  it  is  only  due  to  indexing.  This  means  that  the  indexing  of  excise  duties  also 
contributes to a difference in CPI inflation and CPIX inflation in the long term. The effect is 
not assessed as very large; 1 percentage point. But together with the 0.2 percentage points 
that are due to price changes in the housing stock, this means that the rate of increase in the 
CPIX will be lower than the rate of increase in the CPI by 0.3 percentage points. There will 
thus be a long-term difference between the CPI and the CPIX which is due to other things 
than the Riksbank adjusting the interest rate. 
The CPIX is not up to standard and will be phased out 
Let me pause a minute and summarise before I move on. In addition to our target variable, 
the CPI, the CPIX is the measure that is emphasised the most. But as I have described here, 
there  are  several  reasons  why  the  CPIX  should  no  longer  hold  this  position.  The  most 
important  reason  is  that  the  average  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  and  the  CPIX  will  differ 
substantially  in  the  future.  In  addition,  there  are  some  problems  in  the method  used  when 
calculating the CPIX. 
Hence, one of the measures of inflation we have used the most will be discarded from our 
box of tools. But this does not mean that we will stop illustrating how temporary shocks affect 
inflation  or  that  we  will  give  less  consideration  to  different  alternative  measures.  As  our 
analysis methods become  more honed we will probably use more alternative measures of 
inflation in our regular work. We must always have knowledge about what is driving prices in 
order  to  make  good  interest  rate  decisions.  The  recent  developments  in  the  commodities 
markets are one example of this. And it is then important to analyse measures that illustrate 
these effects. 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2008
A better way of showing the effects of interest rate changes 
There will also be a need to look at measures that adjust for the direct effects of our interest 
rate changes in the future. One can argue that this is particularly important these days, now 
that we make forecasts based on the fact that the interest rate can change. As opposed to 
the  period  when  we  assumed  that  the  interest  rate  would  remain  unchanged  during  the 
forecast period, the forecasts for the CPI are nowadays directly affected by our policy. 
However, the CPIX is not the most appropriate measure of adjusting for our own interest rate 
changes. As I have pointed out, the CPIX excludes many more items than just interest rate 
changes – including changes in indirect taxes and the effects on mortgage interest costs for 
home-owners arising from the rising house prices. A better method is to see how the CPI 
would develop if we merely exclude the part of the change in the interest rate cost arising 
from the interest rate index. The Riksbank will use this type of measure of “CPI with a fixed 
interest rate” more actively in the future. This will be published in the next Monetary Policy 
Report. 
The aim is not that this measure will hold a special position in the same way as the CPIX has 
done. The idea is that the monetary policy discussion will focus more directly on the CPI. But 
there will certainly be reason to give a little extra emphasis to a measure like this from time to 
time. During periods when the repo rate is changed substantially it is important to have some 
grasp  of  how  large  the  direct  impact  is  on  CPI  inflation.  This  is  how  things  have  worked 
during the period since 2006, for example, when the Riksbank raised the repo rate in several 
stages.  The  measure  can  then  differ  substantially  in  the  short  term.  If  one  looks  at  the 
inflation figures for April, the CPI and the CPIX increased by 3.4 per cent and 2.4 per cent 
respectively. 0.8 per cent of the one percentage point difference between the measures was 
due to interest rate changes and 0.2 per cent was due to changes in the value of the housing 
stock and in taxes. 
But nor can a measure that keeps interest rates constant provide an entirely perfect picture 
of  inflation  adjusted  for  the  direct  effects  of  monetary  policy.  Interest  rates  are  not  only 
affected  by  the  Riksbank  changing  the  repo  rate.  This  applies  above  all  to  the  long-term 
interest rates, but also the short-term ones. However, long-term interest rates carry relatively 
little weight in the interest rate index and the repo rate normally covaries fairly well with short-
term  interest  rates.  So  the  measure  should  nevertheless  provide  a  fairly  good  picture  of 
inflation  adjusted  for  the  direct  effects  of  the  Riksbank’s  interest  rate  changes.  One 
advantage is that it is reasonable to assume that the nominal interest rates will rise as much 
in the long term as they will fall – they have no trend. This means that this measure, unlike 
the CPIX, will have the same long-term mean value as CPI inflation. 
Consequences for monetary policy? 
One can say that until fairly recently we have assumed that the CPI and the CPIX have the 
same long-term mean value – that the measures converge a few years ahead. Ensuring that 
the  CPIX  is  reasonably  close  to  2  per  cent  has  meant  ensuring  that  the  CPI,  our  target 
variable, also does so. But this will not be the case over the coming years. The measures will 
also differ in the long term. Although this is only a question of a few tenths, the measures 
cannot  be  expected  to  converge  even  during  the  years  immediately  beyond  the  forecast 
horizon.  
So what does this mean for our interest rate policy? A hypothetical reasoning may perhaps 
help us to understand the concepts. If one looks at our most recent forecast made in April, 
the CPI was fairly close to, although still a couple of tenths above the target of 2 per cent at 
the  end  of  the  forecast  horizon.  The  CPIX  was  slightly  lower,  just  under  2  per  cent.  If  we 
were  to  be  in  exactly  the  same  position  as  in  April,  but  with  the  difference  that  we  had 
already  decided  to  phase  out  the  CPIX  –  would  we  have  made  different  forecasts  for  the 
repo rate and for the CPI? No, we would not. Our target has not changed. We considered the 
BIS Review 73/2008 
 5
rate at which the CPI approached the target according to our April forecast to be reasonable 
on the basis of our task.  
It is also important to put the phasing out of the CPIX in a broader context. The Riksbank 
conducts a policy of flexible inflation targeting. This means, for instance, that we can let it 
take a couple of years before the CPI reaches 2 per cent in our forecast if we consider this to 
be  justified  by,  for  instance,  temporary  shocks.  The  long-term  difference  between  the  CPI 
and the CPIX is calculated, as I have mentioned earlier, at roughly 0.3 percentage points. 
The flexibility of our monetary policy means that this type of deviation does not need to have 
any immediate consequences. But it is of course important that deviations from the inflation 
target are not too large and that it is clear that the CPI will reach 2 per cent. Otherwise we 
jeopardise the credibility of the inflation target.  
The  current  situation  involves  factors  that  have  much  greater  significance  for  which  future 
interest rate developments we believe to be reasonable than the difference between the CPI 
and  the  CPIX.  For  instance,  there  is  great  uncertainty  over  what  the consequences  of  the 
turmoil in the world financial markets might be for economic developments. In Sweden there 
are  signs  of  a  slowdown  and  GDP  increased  at  a  slightly  slower  rate  than  expected, 
according  to  statistics  published  by  Statistics  Sweden  just  over  a  week  ago.  At  the  same 
time, inflation is high and above the target. World market prices for some commodities, such 
as  oil,  have  risen  sharply  over  a  period  of  time  and  this  is  a  challenge  for  central  banks 
around the world. New information of significance for inflation is constantly coming in. 
As the Riksbank has also pointed out on several occasions, inflation expectations have risen 
in recent months and they are above our target of 2 per cent. There may be several different 
reasons for this. The most important reason is probably that actual inflation has risen and this 
usually leads to expectations rising. The Riksbank monitors inflation expectations closely; the 
important thing is that they do not become entrenched at a high level, whatever the reasons 
behind them. To curb expectations we would have to act more forcefully. 
To summarise – our strategy has not changed and our target stands firm. We will continue to 
use a large number of alternative measures of inflation in our work, not least to illustrate the 
direct effects of our own interest rate policy. But the focus will be on our target variable, the 
CPI. The CPIX will be phased out of our reports and our communication in general. This will 
not  have  a  tangible  effect  on  the  actual  interest  rate  decisions  in  the  future.  However,  we 
hope that this change will make the way we conduct our monetary policy clearer.  
6 
 BIS Review 73/2008
Historically the difference has been small…
Average of annual percentage change
CPI
CPIX
4
3
2
1
0
1985-
1990-
1995-
2000-
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank
 Capital stock index in the CPI and the real estate price 
index
Annual percentage change
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
Capital stock index
Real estate index
Real estate index, 40 qtrs moving average
90
92
94
96
98
00
02
04
06
08
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank
   BIS Review 73/2008 
 7
CPI and CPI with fixed interest rate
Annual percentage change
CPI
CPI with fixed interest rate
4
3
2
1
0
-1
03
04
05
06
07
08
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank
 CPI, CPIX and CPI with fixed interest rate
Annual percentage change
4
3
2
1
0
CPI with fixed interest rate
CPI
CPIX
CPIX
4
3
2
1
0
-1
02
4
3
2
1
0
06
07
08
09
10
11
Note: Dotted line represents forecast in MPU April 2008
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank
  BIS Review 73/2008
 8 
 