Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Current economic issues in the Philippines 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), for the FOCAP Forum, Makati, 12 February 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen of the Foreign Correspondents Association of the Philippines, special 
guests, good morning.  
I have been requested to discuss current economic issues this morning. Since you monitor 
our economy very closely, by the minute in some cases, I will not bore you with the details. 
Instead I will present the big picture, so to speak, so you will understand where I am coming 
from.  Then  I  shall  focus  on  the  monetary  and  banking  policies  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng 
Pilipinas.  
As you know, the Philippine economy chalked up impressive gains on various fronts in 2007. 
Our GDP growth was the highest in three decades while our inflation rate was the lowest in 
twenty years. As I have said, we achieved the ideal convergence of high growth amidst 20-
year low inflation in 2007.  
We  also  had  a  healthy  external  position,  ending  2007  with  record  high  gross  international 
reserves  and  unprecedented  balance  of  payments  surplus.  At  the  same  time,  our  banking 
system  is  stronger,  with  record  high  resources  and  deposits  as  well  as  capitalization  way 
above the standards set by the Bangko Sentral and the Bank for International Settlements. 
As a result, we are experiencing a very stable macroeconomic environment that is validated 
by market confidence in the Philippines.  
This is the big picture.  
Let  me  now  discuss  the  challenges  that  the  BSP  faces  in  the  pursuit  of  its  mandate  of 
ensuring stable prices and a sound banking system.  
The first challenge is the anticipated US economic slowdown. There is a consensus among 
multilateral institutions, investment banks and credit rating agencies that the US economy will 
slow down in 2008. However, there is no consensus yet on whether the recent problems in 
the  US  subprime  markets  will  push  the  US  economy  into  a  mild  slowdown  or  usher  in  a 
recession.  Either  way,  a  weaker  US  economy  is  expected  to  slow  down  global  growth, 
although growth in emerging markets could temper this.  
In the case of the Philippines, the projected US slowdown is not seen to have a significant 
immediate impact. However, we recognize that a longer-than-expected US recession could 
take  its  toll  on  the  economy.  Given  this,  the  BSP  will  continue  to  monitor  global 
developments to ensure that appropriate measures are implemented, when warranted. 
The second challenge is global risk emanating from high and volatile international prices of 
oil.  In  the  absence  of  a  change  in  OPEC’s  quota  policies  or  a  major  global  slowdown, 
international oil prices are likely to remain high due to continued geopolitical and supply risks 
coupled with strong global demand and continuing speculation in the futures prices of oil. For 
the Philippines, prolonged high oil prices is a threat to our inflation outlook. 
The third challenge is the global financial market turbulence that could result in increased risk 
aversion towards emerging markets like the Philippines. We saw in the third quarter last year 
that – as a result of subprime problems in the United States – the reassessment, repricing 
and adjustment of risk positions affected not only the US market, but also equity bond and 
exchange markets across the globe. 
Although  the  global  financial  markets  appear  to  have  stabilized,  the  full  impact  of  the  US 
subprime mortgage market woes has yet to be felt. This could affect the Philippines in two 
ways.  First,  growth  in  the  export  sector  could  soften  as  the  US  economy,  a  major  trading 
BIS Review 16/2008 
 1
partner  of  the  Philippines,  slows  down.  Second,  movements  in  economic  prices,  e.g., 
exchange  and  interest  rates,  could  result  from  further  risk  aversion  against  emerging 
markets, including the Philippines.  
The  fourth  challenge  for  the  Bangko  Sentral  is  a  possible  resurgence  in  domestic  liquidity 
from  sustained  strong  capital  inflows  on  account  of  our  favorable  macroeconomic 
performance. While domestic liquidity growth has declined to more manageable levels after 
our policy action in May, we still foresee strong foreign exchange inflows in 2008. Since this 
may threaten our inflation target, the Bangko Sentral will need to continue to monitor this and 
ensure that the liquidity level is consistent with the inflation objective.  
At first blush, these challenges may seem formidable. Yet, the Philippine economy has time 
and  again  shown  its  resilience.  I  believe  therefore  that  these  challenges  are,  ultimately, 
manageable.  
On  the  whole,  Bangko  Sentral’s  main  policy  thrusts  in  2008  and  beyond  will  focus  on 
maintaining  sound  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  a  strong  financial  system  that  is 
flexible, innovative, and globally competitive.  
A  key  priority  is  to  maintain  our  inflation  target  by  maintaining  a  prudent  monetary  policy 
stance supportive of non-inflationary growth.  
Average inflation is expected to settle within the target of 4 percent ± 1 percentage point in 
2008 and within 3.5 percent ± 1 percentage point in 2009. The external payments position is 
expected to remain a source of strength for the economy over the near term. Dollar inflows 
from remittances and foreign investments are expected to remain robust. This should enable 
us to further build up our cushion of international reserves.  
On the external sector, our policies will be geared toward: (1) ensuring sustainability of the 
country’s external debt; (2) maintaining a market-determined exchange rate with scope for 
occasional  official  action  in  cases  of  extreme  movements  in  the  peso;  (3)  maintaining  a 
comfortable  level  of  reserves;  and  (4)  improving  the  foreign  exchange  environment  further 
through forex deregulation. 
Reforms in the financial sector will be geared toward maintaining a strong banking system 
and  a  vibrant  capital  market.  The  BSP  remains  committed  to  strengthening  the  banking 
system through structural reforms and speedier disposition of non-performing assets. At the 
same  time,  continuing  asset  clean-up  of  banks  should  help  spur  credit  and  investments, 
thereby generating support for more sustainable economic activity in the medium term. 
Other regulatory reforms will be aimed at the further strengthening of corporate governance, 
risk  management,  and  capitalization  through  a  more  effective  and  efficient  enforcement  of 
standards and codes. In particular, prudential regulations shall continue to be aligned with 
international standards and best practices.  
To further develop the domestic capital market, the BSP will continue to work actively with 
other government agencies and the private sector to complete critical market infrastructure 
that will enhance system integrity and overall market confidence.  
We  will  continue  to  push  for  the  passage  of  key  legislations  intended  to  accelerate  the 
development  of  the  domestic  capital  market.  In  particular,  we  shall  push  for  the 
implementation of a centralized credit information bureau to improve the quality of financial 
information to investors, expand private sector access to credit, minimize risks exposure of 
financial intermediaries, and lower borrowing costs.  
Ladies and gentlemen. On the basis of these policy directions, the outlook for the monetary, 
external, and banking sectors continues to be favorable.  
I am now ready to discuss the issues of particular interest to you. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2008
