Stanley Fischer: Education, ‘aliya, and the young generation in Israel 
Remarks  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  2007  HIAS 
Scholarship Award Ceremony, Jerusalem, 28 December 2007. 
 Mr. Neil Grungras, Director General of HIAS Israel, Europe, and the Middle East; Mr. Danny 
Adamaso, Director General of the Israel Association for Ethiopian Jews; HIAS referees; HIAS 
staff members and volunteers; students; and esteemed guests: 
It is a great honor for me to be here with you at the 2007 HIAS scholarship award ceremony. 
This event concerns itself with three domains that I consider very important for the future of 
the State of Israel and its society: education, ‘aliya, and the young generation. It’s also a very 
important day for you personally – you are at the beginning of your path to higher education 
and independent life. 
The topic of education is very important in Israel, since the country is almost totally lacking in 
natural resources apart from human capital. And human capital is a natural resource that has 
to be developed constantly, in order to maintain and widen Israel’s qualitative edge. 
For many years, Israel placed a great deal of emphasis on education. I’ll illustrate this with 
three examples from international comparisons in education that were performed in 2005: 
a. 
46  percent  of  Israelis  aged  25–64  had  post-secondary  schooling,  as  against  26 
percent on average in the OECD countries. 
R&D expenditure in Israel was 4.4 percent of GDP, as against 2 percent on average 
in the OECD countries. 
Per-pupil government expenditure relative to per-capita GDP was similar in Israel to 
the  OECD  average  at  the  prekindergarten  and  secondary  levels  of  education  and 
surpassed the OECD average at the primary and higher-education levels. 
b. 
c. 
This favorable picture, however, stands in stark contrast to the relatively poor achievements 
of Israel’s student relative to other countries, for example, in the sciences, according to the 
OECD’s  PISA  exams.  Thus,  the  government  in  Israel  is  relatively  lavish  in  its  education 
spending but the country’s students are not achieving well. This state of affairs leads us to 
one conclusion: Israel’s education system is inefficient. 
There are several possible reasons for this: 
a. 
Israel  does  not  have  one  education  system  but  at  least  four  separate  systems  –
some of which do not impart basic schooling in math, science, and English. 
At the individual school level, there is less administrative flexibility than should be 
desired. 
Between 1995 and 2005, per-pupil expenditure at the primary, secondary, and post-
secondary  levels  of  education  was  significantly  lower  than  the  OECD  average. 
Therefore, our trend is negative. 
b. 
c. 
Education, like defense, should remain at the very top of our scale of priorities. Otherwise, 
we will find ourselves in a situation of steady and continual decline – which, to a large extent, 
has  already  begun.  Therefore,  it  is  important  to  examine  in  depth  the  problems  that  afflict 
education in Israel and to formulate – and implement – a solution. 
The  need  to  promote  education  is  especially  important  because  it  is  an  investment  in  the 
thing that counts most for the country’s future: the young population. The young generation, 
like  the  audience  seated  here,  is  our  future  labor  force  and  our  future  source  of 
entrepreneurship and growth. 
BIS Review 1/2008 
 1
Investment in education is important from the economic and social standpoints in the long 
run: 
a. 
From  the  economic  standpoint  –  education  is  an  infrastructure  for  rapid  and 
protracted economic growth. 
From  the  social  standpoint  –  education  is  the  key  to  social  mobility.  This  is 
sometimes critical for the ability of every individual to improve his or her situation in 
life. 
b. 
Precisely because education is immensely important for the long term, it already should be 
encouraged at the present time. 
Today  more  than  ever,  it  is  clear  that  higher  education  is  another  field  that  needs  a 
rethinking. It suffices to see the Israeli names that appear on the rosters of academic faculty 
at prominent universities in the United States and other countries. This is a situation that is 
hard  to  accept  with  equanimity.  The  Shohat  Committee  did  excellent  work  and  formulated 
important recommendations for the advancement of higher education in Israel. It is important 
to  apply  the  committee’s  conclusions  –  including  the  introduction  of  differential  wages  in 
order to reward the finest members of the academic faculty. 
Another field that we have been neglecting in recent years is technological education. Fewer 
students are applying for this form of education and, for this reason, fewer and fewer people 
are  proficient  in  the  technological  trades.  Skilled  personnel  are  needed  in  this  field  –  for 
example, in industry. Here is another domain in need of re-examination. 
Finally, I would like to say a word about ‘aliya and then conclude on a personal note. 
Recent  immigrants  from  many  countries  are  with  us  here:  from  Ethiopia,  Russia,  Ukraine, 
Belarus,  Lithuania,  Moldova,  Bulgaria,  Kazakhstan,  Turkmenistan,  Azerbaijan,  Uzbekistan, 
Iran, Australia, the UK, Germany, France, the U.S., Argentina, Uruguay, and Brazil. I, too, am 
an  ‘oleh.  It  makes  me  proud,  as  an  Israeli  and  as  a  recent  immigrant,  to  see  the  young 
immigrants integrating beautifully in Israel and doing well in their fields of study. The more 
able Israel is to grow over time, and the better its education system, the more successful we 
will be in attracting immigration that attracts immigration – because of Zionism, yes, but also 
because it’s a country that is worth living in. 
Thus  far,  I’ve  spoken  about  the  social  and  national  levels.  But  this  event  is  above  all  an 
important one at the personal level. Each of you has reached at a critical phase in your lives. 
The  path  you  choose  to  follow  in  the  coming  years  will  affect  your  future.  It  sounds  very 
important, and indeed it is. But student life may also be  very enjoyable. It is my  wish that 
each of you should seize firmly the opportunities that lie ahead. Enjoy yourselves, and, the 
main thing, be successful! 
Thank you. May you succeed. 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2008
