Radovan Jelašić: Developments in the Serbian financial sector 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, on the occasion of 
the opening of the Eighth Forum and Exhibition of Banking Technology “Tehnobank 2008”, 
Belgrade, 9 April 2008. 
 Business continuity and disaster recovery 
Mobile payment services 
New SEPA regulations 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Allow  me  to  greet  you  on  behalf  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  on  the  occasion  of  the 
opening  of  the  eighth  “Tehnobank”  meeting  which  was  first  organized  at  the  outset  of 
transition of our economy. I wish to thank the organizers for a very interesting programme 
which, just as the transition itself, forces us to face up to new challenging ideas. 
The Serbian financial sector is developing rapidly and I wish to single out three topics from 
this year’s agenda which the NBS is particularly keen to develop: 
• 
• 
• 
Why these three?  
First,  because  quality  and  efficiency  in  performing  financial  services  are  of  vital  interest  to 
any central bank. Implementation of the technology which enables business continuity and 
disaster recovery is a sign of maturity of both the banking industry and the banking market 
environment itself. The NBS expects that application of such technologies will increase in the 
near future and, with that purpose in mind, in cooperation with the Bank of England, plans to 
organize an international seminar on this topic to take place in Belgrade on 13 through 15 
May  2008.  The  NBS  will  host  this  meeting  to  discuss  the  targets,  significance  and  the 
experiences  of  central  banks  in  managing  business  continuity  as  well  as  the  strategy  for 
disaster  recovery  and  averting  threats  to  the  normal  conduct  of  business  operations.  One 
thing  is  for  certain  –  in  the  21st  century,  liquidity  and  solvency  are  important  but  are  not 
sufficient to ensure stability of the financial sector if business continuity and disaster recovery 
do  not  function  immaculately.  Let  us  take  the  UK  example  of  the  Northern  Rock  where  a 
mistake in that respect actually led in great part to the first instance of bank nationalization 
after more than a century. 
Mobile payments, however, are a chance for Serbia to jumpstart technological development 
and to implement from the start the most innovative technologies. While many countries are 
still at the stage of devising extended pilot programs for mobile payments, in many Serbian 
cities mobile telephony is already used for payment of parking space fees, while payment of 
top up fees for prepaid mobile telephony through SMS messaging service is already a matter 
of everyday use. It gives me pleasure to announce that over 100,000 mobile payments of top 
up fees for prepaid mobile telephony use is registered through the Dina Card system on a 
monthly basis. Our target, of course, is a manifold increase of this number during this year. 
On this occasion I would also like to announce another new project to be soon realized in 
cooperation with the Telekom that will enable our citizens to request issuance of and mobile 
payment  for  excerpts  of  various  personal  documents  kept  on  records  with  the  state 
institutions. 
Finally, allow me to remind you of another topical issue in the European environment that we 
are striving to join, which can be used to exemplify how technology can bring on a change 
even to the regulatory systems within our region. I am referring here to the initiation of the 
system  of  interbank  payments  in  accordance  with  the  SEPA  (Single  European  Payment 
Area) and the ECB initiative. What is it that SEPA will bring about? Here is an example: 
BIS Review 42/2008 
 1
An internet user from Belgium pays electricity bill for his daughter studying in France from his 
account opened with a Spanish bank and is charged fees for banking services as if all these 
transactions were taking place in one and the same country. 
This example is the best illustration of the encouraging impact of high technology not only in 
respect  of  the  development  of  the  financial  services  market  but  also  in  respect  of 
encouraging  market  regulators  and  finding  innovative  solutions.  The  NBS  hopes  that 
application of similar technologies in Serbia will enable faster development of the financial 
industry.  One  thing is  for  sure,  the existing  multitude  of fees  charged  for  banking services 
would  certainly  have  remained  if  it  were  not  for  the  decisiveness  of  the  European  Central 
Bank  and  other  regulators  who  insisted  on  treating  all  payments  within  the  Euro  zone  as 
strictly domestic – and only seven years after they began using the same currency. 
I wish much success to all of you present in this meeting, and hope that we shall all come up 
with new ideas and initiatives to enable application of the 21st century technologies in the 
financial market of Serbia. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2008
