Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: EMU@10 – the first ten years of Economic and 
Monetary Union and future challenges 
Introductory comments by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the 
European Central Bank, at a Public Hearing on EMU@10: The first ten years of Economic 
and Monetary Union and future challenges, Brussels, 24 June 2008. 
 Madam Chair, dear Members of the ECON Committee, it is a pleasure to be here today and 
to share with you my assessment of the challenges facing Economic and Monetary Union in 
the years to come.1
In order to do that, I believe that there are a series of clarifications to be made, starting with 
an assessment of the past ten years. In any balance sheet there are assets and liabilities. 
The last ten years are full of assets, in many respects. One is the euro, and the creation of 
an area of monetary stability. Very few believed ten years ago that this could be achieved. I 
would like to quote Alan Greenspan, who in his recent book stated “We have in front of us a 
historically  unique  institution,  an  independent  central  bank  with  the  exclusive  mandate  to 
maintain price stability in an economic area producing over a quarter of the world GDP. It’s 
an  extraordinary  result. I  can’t  stop  my  admiration  for  what  my  European  colleagues  have 
been able to achieve”.2
Let’s consider the negatives. What are the liabilities of the last ten years? 
Some will claim that growth has been unsatisfactory over the past ten years. But is this really 
true? Looking at the euro area as a whole, growth on average has been the same as in the 
decade  preceding  the euro.  There  have  been  no  recessions,  while  there  was  one  in  each 
decade before. Cyclical variability has been reduced. Budget deficits have been substantially 
lower.  Employment  growth  has  been  much  faster  in  the  last  ten  years  and  unemployment 
has reached a 25-year low. Overall, in terms of economic activity, the last decade might not 
have been particularly brilliant, at least in the eyes of some, but it has been at least as good 
as the previous one. Incidentally, this is not the case for the US, which saw weaker economic 
growth  overall  in  the  last  decade  compared  with  the  previous  10  years,  and  even  a 
recession. 
Some  will  claim  that  growth  has  been  geographically  patchy,  with  certain  countries 
performing  better  than  others.  Indeed,  eight  out  of  the  first  12  euro  area  countries  have 
enjoyed  economic  growth  comparable  with  that  of  the  US.  A  few,  in  particular  the  larger 
ones, have not performed so well compared with the previous decade. Germany and Italy, 
for instance. Portugal too. France has performed better since the introduction of the euro. I 
should add though that Germany has caught up over the last three years. 
If economic growth differs across countries, with some doing particularly well and others not 
so well, where is the problem? Is it the fault of the euro? Is it the fault of EMU? Is it the fault 
of Europe? 
Some  will  answer  yes,  although  for  totally  different  reasons.  On  the  one  hand,  you  have 
those  who  think  that  insufficient  growth  is  the  result  of  insufficient  economic  policy 
coordination at European level. The solution, they would go on saying, is to create further 
European  procedures,  further  initiatives  to  improve  the  economic  governance  of  EMU.  On 
the other hand, you have those who believe that insufficient growth is due to the bureaucracy 
                                                 
1   The opinions reflect only those of the author. 
2   Alan Greenspan, “The Age of Turbulence”, Penguin 2007. 
BIS Review 84/2008 
 1
of Europe’s institutions, which leads to excessive regulation. The solution is, in this case, to 
give power back to the Member States.  
Both views – in my opinion – are wrong, but they add to the confusion surrounding Europe, 
EMU and the euro. Ireland’s recent rejection of the Lisbon Treaty reflects the confusion that 
many citizens feel about Europe.  
What is needed, first and foremost, is clarity on who does what and who is responsible for 
what in the European Union. Some things are pretty clear. For instance, who is in charge of 
the main instrument for achieving price stability in the euro area? It’s the ECB. And who is 
mainly  responsible  for  enhancing  economic  growth?  Who  has  the  main  instruments  to 
achieve this objective? By and large, it’s the Member States which are responsible for most 
of  the  policies  that  affect  economic  growth,  from  education  to  product  and  labour  market 
regulation, from taxation to research and technology, etc. If economic growth has been less 
satisfactory  in  some  Member  States  than  in  others,  the  main  reason  lies  in  one  of  these 
policies. This is what the Lisbon process is all about: to facilitate comparisons between the 
economic performance of different countries, based on a few key indicators and objectives. 
The process should encourage the laggards to catch up with the better performers. 
What  has  happened  instead?  The  Lisbon  agenda  has  been  blamed  for  Europe’s 
unsatisfactory growth. It’s like blaming the thermometer when you’ve got the flu! 
The  real  problem  of  the  last  ten  years  has  been  the  lack  of  clarity  on  the  level  of  policy 
responsibility between national and European decision-making. This has created confusion 
for the citizens of Europe. That, in fact, is the main challenge of the next decade.  
Too  frequently  “Europe”  has  been  blamed  for  decisions  taken  by  the  Member  States.  For 
example,  only  a  few  months  after  signing  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  some  declared  it 
“stupid”. Others blamed that same Pact for obliging them to adopt tough budgetary policies, 
rather than explaining that these policies were for the good of their countries and of future 
generations.  People  inevitably  asked:  if  the  Pact  is  stupid,  why  did  we  sign  it?  And  if  it  is 
indeed stupid, why do we have policies that comply with it? 
Too frequently the European Union has been asked to act on specific issues by the national 
authorities, but the latter have not given the EU the means and powers to do so. How many 
times have there been calls for a common energy policy by the very same authorities who 
were at the same time negotiating bilateral agreements with energy producers? Of course, 
there have been other cases of similarly inconsistent or even contradictory behaviour. 
Too frequently the institutional set-up of the European Union has been criticised openly, and 
sometimes severely, by some national authorities or even other European institutions. How 
can  the  people  of  Europe  grow  to  trust  the  EU  if  the  decision-makers  at  various  levels 
question each others’ competencies? The obvious example for me in this context is the ECB, 
whose  independence  and  mandate  have  been  repeatedly  –  and  pointlessly  –  called  into 
question over the past ten years. 
We can’t take up the challenges of the next ten years if we don’t build on the assets achieved 
over the past ten years.  
Calling  for  more  cooperation  at  European  level,  for  more  procedures,  more  initiatives 
threatens to compound the confusion that already exists in the minds of both ordinary people 
and policy-makers. For instance, in its EMU@10 Communication, the Commission proposes 
that  the  Eurogroup  should  strengthen  its  monitoring  of  the  implementation  of  structural 
reforms. Closer monitoring may help shore up a commitment to reform, but there is a real 
risk of further blurring the delineation of responsibilities. 
I  do  not  want  to  suggest  that  everything  is  going  fine  as  it  is  in  the  allocation  of 
responsibilities and that only a clarification is needed. I just want to draw your attention to 
what I consider a major risk. Recent experience shows that opaqueness and lack of clarity 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2008
undermine  our  fellow  citizens’  respect  for  and  even  their  interest  in  the  European 
“construction”.  
The  European  Union  will  face  many  challenges  in  the  next  few  years.  Globalisation  will 
continue, with its ups and downs, as in the past, and increased pressure on the use of finite 
resources.  
These challenges will require better policies, both at national and European level. But, as I 
just mentioned, we should make clear which decisions are taken at national level and which 
ones entail a transfer of responsibility or closer cooperation. Confusion should be avoided, as 
it is a recipe for failure. 
There  is  one  big,  uncomfortable  fact  that  Europe  and  its  Member  States  have  to  face.  As 
time  goes  by,  their  relative  weight  in  the  world  economy  will  decrease.  If  recent  trends 
continue, by 2020 the share held by the European economy will fall from around 23% to 18% 
of the world economy. Germany’s economy, the largest in the EU, will fall from 4% to 3%. In 
the decade thereafter, China and possibly India could overtake the whole of the euro area. 
To be sure, the influence of individual Member States on world affairs will diminish steadily. 
This  is  nothing  new.  The  first  President  of  the  European  Parliament,  Paul-Henri  Spaak, 
commented  50  years  ago:  “Today,  Europe  consists  solely  of  small  countries.  The  only 
relevant  distinction  that  remains  is  that  some  countries  understand  this,  while  others  still 
refuse to acknowledge it”. This is even more true today but will become a dramatic reality in 
a few years. 
The euro area, and more generally the EU countries, have to make a choice. Do they want to 
have a say in the governance of globalisation or do they want to opt out of it?  
The answer is not obvious. I have the impression that some would like the EU to become 
something like a large-scale Switzerland, some kind of neutral bloc staying aside from major 
world problems.  
Assuming that the EU, or the euro area, wants to be an active player on the global stage, is it 
then ready to accept the consequences, particularly in terms of internal governance? Again, 
the answer does not seem to be obvious to many. If the Member States still want to have a 
say  in  world  economic  matters,  but  cannot  achieve  this  through  national  representation, 
simply because as nations they are becoming less relevant, will they accept a pooling of their 
representation, at euro area or EU level? Or do they prefer to maintain their national seats 
around increasingly irrelevant tables? 
These are not easy questions to answer, nor easy decisions to take politically. In a system 
where national prestige has still a political meaning, in the sense that it brings votes, and that 
political  accountability  in  Europe  remains  based  mainly  at  national  level,  it’s  not  easy  to 
transfer responsibility to a higher level of government. This is a dilemma that Europe, and its 
Member States, have to face, whether they like it or not. But it’s better to have this debate 
out in the open than to fudge it by creating hollow structures.  
The problem for the EU is that its citizens do not see it as helping to solve their everyday 
problems.  The  way  to  address  this  challenge  is  not  to  choose  the  middle  ground,  which 
would  ultimately  penalise  the  European  “construction”.  Either  it  must  be  understood  and 
clearly  stated  that  certain  policies  and  instruments  are  better  performed  at  European  level 
and  the  corresponding  competencies  transferred  to  that  level,  as  has  been  the  case  with 
monetary  and  competition  policies.  Or  those  policies  and  instruments  should  remain 
unequivocally  in  the  hands  of  national  governments,  and  the  inevitable  process  of 
coordination, even if strengthened, should not overshadow that level of responsibility.  
Looking ahead to the next ten years, it’s better to ask some hard questions than to paper 
over the cracks and sow confusion. There are several areas where these questions need to 
be asked, especially in respect of international financial institutions and policies, and banking 
supervision.  The  time  might  not  be  ripe  for  making  substantive  changes  in  some  of  these 
BIS Review 84/2008 
 3
areas. However, it will have to be made clear why certain solutions are not followed. This is 
what accountability is all about. 
Let me provide an example: people are facing a variety of problems resulting from the rise in 
commodity  prices,  in  particular  a  decline  in  their  purchasing  power.  One  solution  –  in  my 
view, the only solution for commodity importers – is to increase productivity in the goods and 
services  sector.  There  are  substantial  margins  for  improvement  in  the  services  sector, 
especially  if  one  compares  Europe’s  economy  with  that  of  the  US.  How  can  we  achieve 
these improvements? Each country can look after itself and adopt specific measures, as long 
as they are compatible with the single market. The EU, with the consensus of its Member 
States, can launch its own initiative to increase competition in the services sector throughout 
the  EU.  This  solution  might  be  more  efficient,  but  it  has  partly  failed  in  the  past  as  some 
Member  States  opposed  it.  Can  it  be  revitalised  in  light  of  more  recent  developments?  A 
choice has to be made, and it should be clear. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. 
Economic and Monetary Union has recently celebrated its tenth anniversary. As a ten-year-
old, EMU is becoming less of a child and more of an adolescent. The trials of childhood were 
manifold: the creation of a credible central bank, the design of an effective and transparent 
monetary strategy, the distribution of new banknotes and coins, and the shaping of sound 
economic  policies.  Getting  any  of  these  basics  wrong  would  have  had  catastrophic 
consequences.  Yet  EMU  has  successfully  overcome  the  challenges  of  its  childhood,  while 
withstanding the many external shocks of the last decade.  
The trials of adolescence are lurking ahead and will prove equally demanding. The continued 
success of EMU will depend on how effectively these new challenges are addressed.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2008
