Masaaki Shirakawa: Overall review of the Bank of Japan’s conduct of 
monetary policy 
Statement by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank’s 
Semiannual  Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary  Control  before  the  Committee  on  Financial 
Affairs, House of Councillors, Tokyo, 22 May 2008. 
 Introduction 
The Bank of Japan submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for 
the  first  half  of  fiscal  2007  to  the  Diet  on  December  11,  2007.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this 
opportunity to present an overall review of the Bank's conduct of monetary policy. 
Developments in Japan's economy 
I.  
Japan's economic growth is slowing, mainly due to the effects of high energy and materials 
prices. 
The deterioration in the terms of trade that results from rises in energy and materials prices 
leads to an outflow of real income, as Japan depends heavily on imported resources. This 
exerts downward pressure on corporate profits and reduces households' purchasing power. 
Although  business  fixed  investment  and  private  consumption  remain  firm,  due  attention 
should be paid to the possibility that the weakening of the economy's capacity to generate 
income will result in weaker domestic private demand. 
As for the outlook, Japan's economy is likely to grow at a slower pace for the time being and 
follow  a  moderate  growth  path  thereafter.  Exports  are  expected  to  continue  rising  –  even 
though  those  to  the  United  States  have  been  falling  for  some  time  –  as  they  have  been 
increasing to a broader range of destinations, particularly emerging economies and countries 
that  export  natural  resources.  In  the  corporate  sector,  firms  currently  face  no  excess  in 
production capacity, inventory, or employment, and corporate profits have been at historically 
high levels. As a result, it seems that Japan's economy has become more resilient against 
negative  shocks  than  in  the  past.  The  accommodative  financial  conditions  are  likely  to 
continue to support private demand. The level of short-term interest rates has been very low 
relative  to  the  potential  growth  rate  and  inflation.  In  addition,  firms'  liquidity  positions  and 
funding  conditions  have  continued  to  be  favorable  on  the  whole.  However,  the  liquidity 
positions of small firms and some nonmanufacturing firms are increasingly unfavorable, and 
therefore developments need to be closely monitored. 
Global financial markets have been unstable due to continued disruptions stemming from the 
U.S.  subprime  mortgage  problem.  Although  overly  pessimistic  views  about  global  financial 
markets have subsided compared with some time ago, the deterioration in the functioning of 
the U.S. and European markets for securitized products has remained significant and strains 
in  money  markets  have  persisted.  Moreover,  financial  institutions  have  increasingly  been 
tightening their lending standards. Against this background, the global economy – including 
the  U.S.  economy,  which  has  been  decelerating  even  more  clearly  –  has  continued  to  be 
exposed to downside risk. At the same time, the risk of inflation has been increasing globally, 
as prices of crude oil and other international commodities have been rising substantially. The 
Bank  considers  it  necessary  to  continue  to  carefully  monitor  developments  in  overseas 
economies and global financial markets as well as the effects of the rise in materials prices. 
Regarding  prices,  the  three-month  rate  of  change  in  the  domestic  corporate  goods  price 
index has been positive, mainly due to the rise in international commodity prices. The year-
on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh food) has been rising since around the 
BIS Review 73/2008 
 1
end of last year, and it has been around 1 percent lately. As for the outlook, it is projected to 
continue to be positive due to the rise in prices of petroleum products and food products in a 
situation where overall supply and demand in the economy are more or less balanced. Given 
that the current increase in the CPI is the highest in 15 years – if we disregard fiscal 1997, 
when retail prices rose due to the rise in the consumption tax – and that the prices of daily 
necessities  are  rising  markedly,  close  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  effects  of  price 
developments on consumers' inflation expectations and the price-setting behavior of firms. 
II.  
Conduct of monetary policy and disposal of stocks purchased from financial 
institutions 
As  I  have  explained,  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  is  highly  uncertain  at 
present.  In  this  situation,  the  Bank  considers  that  it  is  not  appropriate  to  predetermine  the 
direction of future monetary policy. Based on a thorough examination of the economic and 
price  situation  as  well  as  the  market  situation  both  at  home  and  abroad,  the  Bank  will 
carefully assess the future outlook for economic activity and prices, closely considering the 
likelihood of its projections as well as relevant risk factors, and will implement its policies in a 
flexible manner. 
The Bank has been appropriately providing liquidity through money market operations. As a 
result, despite the continued disruptions in global financial markets, Japan's money market 
has  been  stable,  unlike  its  U.S.  and  European  counterparts.  The  Bank  will  continue  to 
carefully  monitor  market  developments  and  to  ensure,  via  appropriate  money  market 
operations, the proper functioning of the money market. 
With  regard  to  stocks  purchased  from  financial  institutions  through  the  stock  purchasing 
program  implemented  between  November  2002  and  September  2004,  the  Bank  has  been 
disposing of them in the market since October 2007. The book value of the remaining stocks 
held by the Bank was approximately 1.4 trillion yen as of the end of April 2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2008
