European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
3 July 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to today’s 
press conference. Let me report on the outcome of our meeting, which was also attended by 
the President of the Eurogroup, Prime Minister Juncker, and Commissioner Almunia.  
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided at today’s meeting 
to  increase  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points.  This  decision  was  taken  to 
prevent broadly based second-round effects and to counteract the increasing upside risks to 
price stability over the medium term. HICP inflation rates have continued to rise significantly 
since the autumn of last year. They are expected to remain well above the level consistent 
with price stability for a more protracted period than previously thought. Moreover, continued 
very vigorous money and credit growth and the absence thus far of significant constraints on 
bank loan supply in a context of ongoing financial market tensions confirm our assessment of 
upside risks to price stability over the medium term. At the same time, while the latest data 
confirm the expected weakening of real GDP growth in mid-2008 after exceptionally strong 
growth in the first quarter, the economic fundamentals of the euro area are sound. Against 
this  background  and  in  full  accordance  with  our  mandate,  we  emphasise  that  maintaining 
price  stability  in  the  medium  term  is  our  primary  objective  and  that  it  is  our  strong 
determination  to  keep  medium  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  firmly  anchored  in  line 
with price stability. This will preserve purchasing power in the medium term and continue to 
support  sustainable  growth  and  employment  in  the  euro  area.  On  the  basis  of  our  current 
assessment,  the  monetary  policy  stance  following  today’s  decision  will  contribute  to 
achieving our objective. We will continue to monitor very closely all developments over the 
period ahead. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Information  that  has  become  available  since  the  June  press  conference  confirms  our 
previous expectation of rather weak real GDP growth in the second quarter of 2008, in part 
as a technical counter-reaction to the strong quarter-on-quarter increase of 0.8% in the first 
quarter. As we have stressed previously, the quarterly growth rates for the first half of this 
year  have  been  subject  to  strong  temporary  and  compensatory  factors,  notably  weather-
related  effects  on  the  profile  of  construction  activity.  Therefore,  in  order  to  assess  the 
underlying momentum of euro area economic activity and to avoid being misguided by highly 
volatile quarterly outturns, it is necessary to evaluate the first two quarters of 2008 together. 
Interpreted  on  this  basis,  the  information  available  remains  broadly  in  line  with  our 
expectation of moderate ongoing growth.  
Looking ahead, both domestic and foreign demand are expected to support real GDP growth 
in the euro area in 2008, albeit to a lesser extent than during 2007. While moderating, growth 
in the world economy is expected to remain resilient, benefiting in particular from continued 
robust growth in emerging economies. This should support euro area external demand. As 
regards domestic developments, the fundamentals of the euro area economy remain sound 
and the euro area does not suffer from major imbalances. In this context, investment growth 
in the euro area should continue to support economic activity, as rates of capacity utilisation 
remain  elevated  and  profitability  in  the  non-financial  corporate  sector  has  been  sustained. 
Moreover,  employment  rates  and  labour  force  participation  have  increased  significantly  in 
recent years, and unemployment rates have fallen to levels not seen for 25 years. However, 
these  developments,  which  support  household  disposable  income  and  consumption,  are 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 1
unlikely to fully compensate the loss of purchasing power caused by higher energy and food 
prices.  
In the view of the Governing Council, the uncertainty surrounding this outlook for economic 
activity  remains  high,  owing  not  least  to  the  very  high  levels  of  commodity  prices,  and 
downside risks prevail. In particular, risks stem from the dampening impact on consumption 
and  investment  of  further  unanticipated  increases  in  energy  and  food  prices.  Moreover, 
downside risks continue to relate to the potential for the ongoing financial market tensions to 
affect the real economy more adversely than anticipated. Concerns about the emergence of 
protectionist  pressures  and  the  possibility  of  disorderly  developments  owing  to  global 
imbalances also imply downside risks to the outlook for economic activity. 
With regard to price developments, annual HICP inflation has remained well above the level 
consistent with price stability since last autumn, reaching 3.7% in May 2008 and – according 
to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate  –  4.0%  in  June.  This  worrying  level  of  inflation  rates  results 
largely from sharp increases in energy and food prices at the global level in recent months.  
Looking  ahead,  on  the  basis  of  current  futures  prices  for  these  commodities,  the  annual 
HICP inflation rate is likely to remain well above 2% for quite some time,  moderating only 
gradually  in  2009.  We  are  thus  currently  experiencing  a  protracted  period  of  high  annual 
rates of inflation, which is likely to be more persistent than anticipated some months ago.  
Risks  to  price  stability  at  the  policy-relevant  medium-term  horizon  remain  clearly  on  the 
upside and have increased further over the past few months. These risks include notably the 
possibility of further increases in energy and food prices. There is also a very strong concern 
that price and wage-setting behaviour could add to inflationary pressures via broadly based 
second-round effects. The Governing Council is monitoring price-setting behaviour and wage 
negotiations in the euro area with particular attention. Furthermore, there are potential upside 
risks from unanticipated rises in indirect taxes and administered prices. 
Against  this  background,  it  is  imperative  to  ensure  that  medium  to  longer-term  inflation 
expectations remain firmly anchored at levels in line with price stability. The shift in relative 
prices and the related transfer of income from commodity-importing countries to commodity-
exporting  countries  have  to  be  accepted.  They  require  a  change  in  the  behaviour  of 
companies and households. Therefore, broadly based second-round effects stemming from 
the impact of higher energy and food prices on price and wage-setting behaviour must be 
avoided.  All  parties  concerned,  in  both  the  private  and  the  public  sector,  must  meet  their 
responsibilities in this regard. In this context, the Governing Council is concerned about the 
existence  of  schemes  in  which  nominal  wages  are  indexed  to  consumer  prices.  Such 
schemes involve the risk of upward shocks in inflation leading to a wage-price spiral, which 
would  be  detrimental  to  employment  and  competitiveness  in  the  countries  concerned.  The 
Governing Council therefore calls for such schemes to be avoided.  
The monetary analysis confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer-term  horizons.  In  line  with  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  we  take  the  view  that  the 
sustained  underlying  strength  of  monetary  and  credit  expansion  in  the  euro  area  over  the 
past few years has created upside risks to price stability. Over recent quarters, these risks 
appear to have become manifest as inflation has trended upwards. Against this background, 
the continued strength of monetary dynamics represents an important signal of the risks to 
price stability over the medium term that we have been addressing through our actions since 
end-2005, including today’s move. 
More specifically, annual M3 growth has remained very vigorous in recent months, supported 
by  the  continued  strong  growth  of  MFI  loans  to  the  private  sector.  Although  annual  M3 
growth of still above 10% overstates the underlying pace of monetary expansion, owing to 
the impact of the flat yield curve and other temporary factors, nonetheless, even after taking 
such  effects  into  account,  a  broad-based  assessment  of  the  latest  data  confirms  that  the 
underlying rate of money and credit growth remains strong. 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2008
The  current  structure  of  yields  has  triggered  substitution  both  within  and  into  the  broad 
monetary  aggregate  M3,  leading  to  a  pronounced  decline  in  annual  M1  growth  and  very 
rapid  increases  in  time  deposits.  At  the  same  time,  higher  short-term  interest  rates  have 
served to moderate the growth of household borrowing, although cooling housing markets in 
several parts of the euro area have also played a substantial role in this regard. However, the 
growth of bank loans to non-financial corporations has remained very robust despite the rises 
in  short-term  rates.  While  some  moderation  can  be  expected  in  the  future  in  the  light  of 
tightening  financing  conditions  and  more  moderate  economic  growth,  bank  borrowing  by 
euro area non-financial corporations grew at an annual rate of 14.2% in May 2008, and the 
flow of loans in recent months has been strong.  
Not  least  in  the  face  of  the  ongoing  tensions  in  financial  markets,  the  monetary  analysis 
helps  to  support  the  necessary  medium-term  orientation  of  monetary  policy  by  focusing 
attention  on  the  upside  risks  to  price  stability  prevailing  at  medium  to  longer  horizons. 
Moreover, a thorough assessment of the money and credit data has provided an important 
insight into bank behaviour and financing conditions. In particular, the strength, maturity and 
sectoral composition of bank borrowing suggest that, at the level of the euro area as a whole, 
the availability of bank credit has, as yet, not been significantly affected by the tensions. 
To  sum  up,  a  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary  analysis  clearly  confirms  the  assessment  of  increasing  upside  risks  to  price 
stability over the medium term, in a context of very vigorous money and credit growth and the 
absence  thus  far  of  significant  constraints  on  bank  loan  supply.  At  the  same  time,  the 
economic  fundamentals  of  the  euro  area  are  sound,  and  incoming  macroeconomic  data 
continue  to  point  to  moderate  ongoing  real  GDP  growth  when  the  high  volatility  of  growth 
rates in the first half of this year is taken properly into account. Against this background and 
in full accordance with our mandate, it is imperative that we prevent broadly based second-
round  effects  and  counteract  the  increasing  risks  to  price  stability.  We  emphasise  that 
maintaining price stability in the medium term is our primary objective and that it is our strong 
determination  to  keep  medium  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  firmly  anchored  in  line 
with price stability, thereby preserving purchasing power in the medium term and supporting 
sustainable  growth  and  employment  in  the  euro  area.  On  the  basis  of  our  current 
assessment,  the  monetary  policy  stance  following  today’s  decision  will  contribute  to 
achieving our objective. We will continue to monitor very closely all developments over the 
period ahead. 
Regarding fiscal policy, budgetary consolidation targets are at risk in a number of euro area 
countries. Moreover, the risk of countries’ budget deficits coming close to or even exceeding 
the 3% of GDP reference value has increased. The Governing Council therefore reiterates its 
strong support for a rigorous implementation of euro area governments’ 2008 budgets and a 
prudent design of fiscal policy plans for 2009, in line with the agreement in the Eurogroup in 
May 2008. Achieving and maintaining sound structural fiscal positions is essential to ensure 
the  sustainability  of  public  finances  as  well  as  to  create  scope  for  the  free  working  of 
automatic  stabilisers  in  all  euro  area  countries  and  thereby  contribute  to  the  smoothing  of 
cyclical fluctuations.  
As  regards  structural  reforms,  we  reiterate  our  full  support  for  all  efforts  to  enhance 
competition, increase productivity and foster market flexibility. In view of the marked increase 
in international food commodity prices, removing impediments to competition at the various 
stages of the food supply chain in the retail and distribution sectors would benefit European 
consumers through lower prices. As regards labour markets, let me direct your attention to 
the  ECB’s  2008  Structural  Issues  Report,  which  was  recently  submitted  to  the  European 
Parliament. It emphasises the generally favourable labour market developments in the euro 
area  over  the  last  decade  but  equally  points  out  the  urgent  need  to  counter  the  ageing-
related reduction in the labour force, in particular by increasing employment in all groups of 
society, by making labour markets more flexible and by enhancing investment in education 
and training. We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 3
