W A Wijewardena: Sustainable socio-economic security – some lessons 
from the experiences of Sri Lanka  
Speech  by  Mr  W  A  Wijewardena,  Deputy  Governor,  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the 
International  Conference  on  “Universalizing  Socio-economic  Security  in  South  Asia”, 
organized by The Institute of Social Studies (ISS), The Hague, and the Institute for Human 
Development (IHD), New Delhi, 17-20 February 2008. 
This  paper  is  based  on  the  personal  experiences  of  the  writer  as  Director  of  Small  Farmers  and  the  Landless 
Credit Project, dubbed in Sinhala as “Isuru Project”, when he was the Director of Rural Credit of the Central Bank 
of  Sri  Lanka  from  1993  to  2000  and  Deputy  Governor  in  charge  of  this  portfolio  since  then.  The  credit  for  the 
achievements  of  Isuru  Project  is  shared  equally  by  all  the  stakeholders  involved  in  the  Project.  The  views 
expressed in the paper are those of the writer and should not be construed as those of the Central Bank of Sri 
Lanka. 
 Introduction 
History  is  abundant  with  numerous  initiatives  taken  by  mankind,  both  through  state  action 
and  personal  enterprise,  to  ensure  socio-economic  security,  or  in  layman’s  language, 
opportunity  for  all  the  people  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  economic  prosperity  without 
discrimination or reservation. In ancient times in Sri Lanka, the kings took it upon themselves 
the responsibility for creating such a society which was considered as a just society1. This 
trend of state functioning as the main promoter of growth and fair distribution has continued 
even  to  the  present  day.  In  Sri  Lanka,  during  the  last  lap  of  the  British  rule,  the  country 
converted itself into a model welfare state following the example set by the colonial master in 
the post-war period2. Accordingly, education and health care were universalised and made 
free of charge, a wide range of food subsidies were introduced and state led development 
initiatives,  in  social  and  physical  infrastructure,  industry  and  agriculture,  were  started.  All 
these pro-poor policies were intended to ensure socio-economic security for a wide spectrum 
of  population,  allowing  the  unprivileged  to  have  social  mobility  through  state  support  and 
intervention.  The  model  yielded  some  results  such  as  higher  human  development,  but, 
economically pushed the country behind many late starters like Singapore or South Korea. 
Both  these  countries  which  were  ranked  very  much  below  Sri  Lanka  at  the  time  of 
independence  have  graduated  to  the  status  of  developed  countries  within  a  period  of  just 
three  to  four  decades  reducing  their  poverty  levels  from  around  50%  of  the  population  in 
1950s to below 5% by the turn of the century. The creation of “a super welfare state” in this 
manner without the backing of a proper resource base by Sri Lanka has been criticised by 
many  as  an  unsound  and  unsustainable  policy  compared  with  that  pursued  by  super-
performers in the region.  
In this backdrop, some aspects of the welfare state were done away with in late 1970s when 
Sri  Lanka  moved  to  an  open  economy  policy  in  which  growth  objectives  were  pursued 
through private sector participation and emphasis on export orientation. To facilitate the new 
growth strategy, economy was liberalised and a flexible exchange rate regime was followed. 
In the initial decade following the adoption of the new policy, economy responded positively, 
but at the same time, incidence of poverty too increased to a significant level3. By mid 1980s, 
                                                 
1   Sri Lanka’s two great chronicles, Mahavansa and Culavansa, have praised the kings who in fact followed this 
policy  to  the  letter.  The  kings  were  guided  mainly  by  Kautilya  who  in  his  Arthashastra  advised  the  king  to 
“augment his power by promoting welfare of his people” The Arthashastra, Penguin Classics (1987), p 181. 
2   Britain’s entry into a fully fledged welfare state was completed after the World War II based on the Beveridge 
Report. For details, see, Yergin, Daniel & Stanislaw, Joseph, The Commanding Heights, (1998), p 6. 
3   For  instance,  poverty  level  as  a  percent  of  total  population  which  stood  at  19%  in  1978-79  rose  to  27%  in 
1986-87. SAARC, Meeting the Challenge, (1992), p 5. 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 1
it was felt that, unless an effective strategy is adopted to alleviate poverty among those who 
could  not  get  integrated  to  the  market  economy  policies,  the  country  was  within  sight  of 
another socio-economic explosion similar to the one which it experienced in 1971 in the near 
future4.  As  a  counter  strategy,  several  poverty  alleviation  schemes  were  initiated  by  the 
government with focus on the poor. Along with these schemes, the Central Bank too entered 
the foray by implementing some pilot projects based on microfinance and support services 
so  that  it  could  develop  microfinance  techniques  and  systems  for  others  to  emulate.  One 
such  project,  funded  by  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD)  and 
Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) was implemented by the Central Bank 
in four districts where the incidence of poverty was the highest under the title “Small Farmers 
and  the  Landless  Credit  Project  (SFLCP)  or  Isuru  Project.  To  supplement  this  project, 
another  initiative  was  taken  to  introduce  a  Forward  Sale  Contract  Scheme  for  agricultural 
produce to facilitate farmers to obtain a pre-agreed price for their major agricultural crops. 
This  paper  will  cover  the  strategy,  methodology  and  the  techniques  adopted  in  these 
initiatives so as to develop a sustainable socio-economic security system in Sri Lanka. 
The paper is organised into four parts. Part I will critically review some aspects of the current 
theoretical  knowledge  on  socio-economic  security  systems  from  the  point  of  view  of  cost-
effectiveness  and  sustainability.  Part  II  will  present  the  techniques,  methodology  and  the 
way-forward  strategy  of  the  Isuru  Project  implemented  by  the  Central  Bank  as  a  poverty 
alleviation project. Part III will discuss the methodology and the future of the Forward Sale 
Contract Scheme as a price discovery and price-stabilising mechanism for main agricultural 
produce. Part IV will be devoted to the presentation of a summary and conclusions. 
Part I 
A critical review of poverty alleviation strategies 
A continuous high economic growth over a few decades has been recognised as the main 
solution  for  the  problem  of  poverty.  While  high  economic  growth  reduces  the  incidence  of 
poverty,  it  also  raises  the  absolute  income  of  those  who  still  remain  in  poverty  thereby 
ameliorating  their  living  standards  to  some  extent5.  Hence,  many  developing  countries  in 
1950s and 1960s pursued high growth policies as a way out for the poverty stricken masses 
of  their  respective  countries.  When  an  economy  grows  and  the  overall  income  level 
increases, it provides opportunities for the poor to secure gainful employment and raise living 
standards. As an economy proceeds along this path, if investments are made to raise the 
educational  and  health  standards  of  the  poor,  the  economy  would  get  into  an  auto-pilot 
system moving to still higher levels of output, income and employment. Hence, there is no 
better  alternative  than  a  continuous  high  economic  growth  to  eradicate  poverty  on  a 
sustainable  basis.  However,  such  growth  strategies  should  perforce  provide  economic 
opportunities for the poor to earn income and participate in the development efforts of their 
respective nations as responsible citizens. This growth strategy, known as inclusive growth, 
would enable a country to universalise the availability of income earning opportunities to all 
citizens alike. 
There  are  certain  prerequisites  which  have  to  be  satisfied  for  a  country  to  gain  the  best 
results out of such pro-poor growth policies6. Since the main asset which the poor possess is 
                                                 
4  
In fact, the expected socio-economic explosion occurred during 1988-92 in the form of an ultra-leftist youth 
insurrection in the southern parts of Sri Lanka. See, Report of the Presidential Commission on Youth, 1990. 
5   The  World  Development  Report  1990  on  Poverty  reports  that  the  achievements  by  some  countries  in  this 
respect have been dramatic: Indonesia within a generation reduced poverty from 60% to 20% in 1970s and 
1980s, p 1. 
6   Pro-poor growth implies faster growth of income of the lower income categories so that it would not only help 
the low income people to cross the poverty line but also would bring about a narrowing of income distribution 
as well. See, World Bank, Economic Growth in the 1990s (2005), p 121.  
2 
 BIS Review 22/2008
their own labour, it is these labour services which they could transform into income earning 
opportunities.  Hence,  the  new  job  opportunities  which  the  pro-poor  growth  should  create 
should  harness  these  labour  services  in  full  in  self-employment  and  in  wage  employment. 
Successful  poverty  alleviation  should  focus  equally  on  both  these  types  of  labour 
engagement.  When  the  poor  are  to  be  provided  with  self-employment  opportunities,  they 
should have access to land, credit, infrastructure, technology and productive inputs so as to 
keep their labour services continuously and gainfully employed7. Similarly, when the poor are 
to  secure  wage  employments,  both  industrial  and  agro-based  enterprises  should  be 
promoted in rural as well as urban centres. Any concentration of such enterprises in urban 
areas would result in an undesirable migration of the poor to urban centres and an uneven 
development across different regions of a country8. 
The pro-poor growth strategy in Sri Lanka, as has been the case in other countries pursuing 
this strategy, has placed heavy emphasis on developing the rural agricultural sector9. The 
reasoning behind this policy would have been the belief that agriculture is the main stay in 
the economy and the development of labour intensive agriculture as against capital intensive 
industry would enable the rural population to increase their income levels. However, this rural 
bias in growth strategy poses several problems for the sustainability of the policy. First, the 
policy  is  urban-neutral  and,  hence,  if  the  incomes  of  the  urban  sector  do  not  increase 
correspondingly, the rural folk would find it difficult to market their products. This is because, 
due to the narrowness of the income base, the output of the rural sector cannot be absorbed 
by  the  rural  sector  itself.  Hence,  the  sustainability  of  the  rural  poor  will  depend  on  active 
internal  trading  which  they  could  do  with  those  in  the  urban  sector.  Second,  the  current 
tendency of the rural population, especially the youth, has been to prefer more lucrative and 
convenient occupations in the urban sector and not the rural agricultural sector in which their 
fathers  and  fore-fathers  had  been  engaged  for  generations10.  It  has  also  been  found  that 
when the rural poor move from low paying jobs in agriculture to high paying jobs in industry 
or services in the urban sector, they could conveniently escape poverty. When this internal 
migration to industry and services is supported by a high level of educational competencies 
acquired by the poor, the reduction in poverty levels too becomes noticeably greater11. As a 
result, investments made in the rural agriculture sector would go unused without the support 
from the segment of people for whom they were really meant. Third, rural agriculture suffers 
from  both  a  growth  limitation  and  a  capacity  limitation.  Agriculture  is  not  a  high  growth 
contributor and, over the last two centuries, world’s agricultural output has risen, on average, 
by  less  than  two  percent  per  annum12.  Hence,  agriculture,  despite  the  heavy  volume  of 
investments made, cannot raise rural incomes to a level sufficient to push its population out 
of poverty. In addition to this growth limitation, there is a capacity limitation too affecting the 
growth in the agricultural sector. Two main inputs used in agriculture, viz., cultivable land and 
water, are in short supply inhibiting an effective limitation on its growth. Further, agriculture in 
Ibid, p 56. 
                                                 
7  
8   For instance, in Sri Lanka, slightly more than a half of the national income is earned by people living in three 
main districts that make up the more lucrative Western Province. See, Economic and Social Statistics of Sri 
Lanka 2007 Table 41. 
9   For  instance,  Ten-yea  Horizon  Development  Framework  2006-16  has  enunciated  the  vision,  inter  alia,  of 
transforming traditional subsistence agriculture to a commercially oriented and productive sector. See, Annual 
Report of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 2006, p 17. 
10   Lanka Business Online, provider of an internet based business and economic analyses, has reported results 
of a survey on the job preferences of the youth in two remote villages off Anuradhapura where none of the 
youth have selected agriculture as their future job preference. Visit www.lbo.com. 
11   World Bank, Global Economic Prospects 2007, pp 81-3. 
12   Sri Lanka’s case in this context is more disappointing with only an annual average growth rate of 1.1% during 
1990-2005. See, World Development Report 2007. 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 3
certain  areas  such  as  the  Western  Province  has  now  become  commercially  unviable  on 
account  of  ever  falling  yield  levels  and  rising  costs  of  production13.  Hence,  the  over-
concentration  on  agriculture  in  pro-poor  growth  strategies  appears  to  be  principally  supply 
driven  and  there  are  no  demanders  who  actually  wish  to  utilise  them  to  derive  benefits. 
Hence, the continuation of providing state support for rural agriculture, however  much it is 
well intentioned, would trap an unwilling rural population in agriculture, thereby delaying the 
adjustment which has to take place by way of transferring the excess labour to other gainful 
areas of the economy and improve the productivity and efficiency of the agricultural sector of 
the  country.  This  means  that  the  growth  strategy  should  focus  on  providing  gainful 
employment  to  the  rural  poor  in  other  growing  areas  such  as  the  services  sector  and 
integrate it with the global economy so as to ensure income sustainability14.  
Two  main  issues  have  been  present  in  Sri  Lanka’s  state  sponsored  poverty  alleviation 
programmes in the past. One was the moral hazard problem and the other was the adverse 
selection problem. Since the poverty alleviation programmes anticipated providing benefits to 
selected  poor  individuals  free  of  charge,  those  individuals  did  not  have  to  work  hard  to 
receive such benefits. Hence, the schemes did not provide any incentive for participants to 
work hard and get out of poverty. As a result, individuals who were taken into the schemes 
preferred to be in the scheme forever, thereby perpetuating poverty and raising the cost of its 
eradication significantly15. A further problem that has plagued the credit schemes meant for 
poverty  alleviation  has  been  the  tendency  for  providing  loans  at  subsidised  interest  rates. 
Such subsidies have been prompted by the belief that they would allow the poor to obtain the 
required credit facilities at affordable costs. However, when credit is subsidised, borrowers 
would flock around such credit schemes, not because they want to use the funds for gainful 
self-employment projects, but to enjoy the subsidy and use the funds for other uses. Hence, 
borrowers  of  such  subsidised  credit  have  the  pre-intention  of  misusing  the  funds  and 
eventually defaulting the loans thereby passing a cost on the lending institutions. As a result, 
such borrowers are adversely selected right at the beginning and those credit schemes are 
doomed to failure. Hence, the more important requirement for sustainable poverty alleviation 
is not subsidised credit, but the rectification of impediments such as lack of physical, human 
and financial infrastructure and absence of competition and efficiency16.  
Part II 
Sustainable poverty alleviation: lessons from the Isuru Project 
As  mentioned  above,  mid-1980s  became  a  crucial  period  in  the  history  of  Sri  Lanka  with 
rising poverty levels at both the national level and in isolated pockets. It, therefore, became 
necessary for Sri Lanka to address this issue on a priority basis. Accordingly, supported by 
IFAD and CIDA with funding, Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) pioneered a model poverty 
alleviation project in four selected districts17 in 1989. The Project, titled Isuru Project, had as 
its objective, uplifting the economic and social conditions of the poorest of the poor with a 
                                                 
13   The yield ratio of paddy between the Western Province and more productive areas has been around 1:3. 
14   In an earlier paper, the writer argued that Sri Lanka’s future depends on the services sector well integrated to 
the global economy. See, Professor Sirisena Thilakaratne Memorial Lecture, 2006. 
15   Moral Hazard is not a new problem. According to the Buddha, the king in a kingdom found his citizens getting 
engaged in all types of thefts and robberies. On finding that they did so because they did not have any capital 
to start a livelihood, he gave funds to them from his treasury freely. People finding that, if they got into thefts 
more  they  could  get  more  free  funds  from  the  king,  committed  more  robberies  and  thefts.  Chakkavatti 
Seehanada Sutra, Anguttara Nikaya. 
16   Fernando, Nimal A, Understanding and Dealing with High Interest Rates on Microcredit, (2006), ADB, p 13. 
17   Districts involved were Galle, Matara, Kandy and Puttalam where the incidence of poverty was considered the 
highest in the country. 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2008
view  to  helping  them  to  cross  the  poverty  line  within  a  given  period  and  establishing  the 
methods and techniques of sustainable poverty alleviation for emulation by other interested 
parties. The poorest of the poor were identified as those whose income was below Rs. 3000 
per annum, the minimum income necessary to buy the required daily calorie level of 2250 
per  adult  in  terms  of  the  price  levels  in 1989.  In  order  to  bring  about  a  gender  balance  in 
sharing economic prosperity, the project envisaged to have, out of the total beneficiaries, at 
least 40% as women beneficiaries. The project was to be closed at end-1997, but the project 
agreement provided for its continuation for further 20 years by recycling the loan repayments 
so that the project objectives could be continued to be realised on a long term basis. The 
Project  was  a  partnership  among  a  number  of  stakeholders:  government,  banks,  donors, 
community based organisations and beneficiaries. 
The  project  adopted  a  modified  group  lending  mechanism  with  credit  plus  approach  for 
delivering its services to the target beneficiaries, selected under a self-selection process by 
getting the target individuals to select their own group partners from among people of similar 
conditions. As such, individuals in elitist groups were kept out from becoming beneficiaries of 
the project, since they did not have incentives to move along with the poorest of the poor. 
This system ruled out political, bureaucratic or elitist intervention in the selection process and 
thereby ensured that only the deserving groups were mobilised to receive project benefits. 
By using a trained field officer network that functioned as change agents, the self selected 
beneficiaries  were  taken  through  a  mandatory  savings  inculcation  scheme  and  a  social 
mobilisation cum leadership development programme. The mandatory savings scheme was 
intended to inculcate in the beneficiaries the value of thrift as an integral part of making any 
sustainable livelihood18. This is because without learning how to save, an individual is unable 
to learn how to spend wisely. Accordingly, each member of the group was required to save 
per  week  a  minimum  of  Rs.  519  in  a  group  savings  account  which  later  served  as  an 
insurance  against  unexpected  future  eventualities  such  as  family  illnesses  or  crop  or 
business failures.  
Group members were encouraged to meet in rotation in one of the member houses at least 
once  a  week  so  as  to  ensure  group  cohesiveness  and  facilitate  member  education 
programme.  At  these  meetings,  they  were  encouraged,  guided  by  the  change  agent,  to 
discuss  among  themselves  freely  why  they  were  poor,  what  skills  they  were  lacking  for 
gainful enterprise, the working of the free market system and how they could benefit by being 
integrated to the market system. These meetings also gave them vital training on how they 
could  conduct  meetings  democratically  and  listen  to  each  other  without  being  offended  or 
having to embarrass others when a disagreeable opinion is made. Groups were chaired by a 
member who was also selected by rotation and records of group meetings were kept by a 
member who functioned as its secretary.  
Once a group has completed about six months of mandatory savings and gone through the 
essential elements of social mobilisation, its members would be provided with an opportunity 
to acquire vocational skills as a prelude to preparing them to be future micro entrepreneurs. 
With this training, members are also encouraged to select their own micro enterprise and the 
change agents do not advise them what they should select. The only advice given to these 
up and coming micro entrepreneurs is that they should select any business line where the 
output could be sold within a radius of 15 km. from their homes. This way they were guided 
                                                 
18   This is in line with the traditional local culture which has always upheld savings as a core value of life. Even 
according  to  Buddhist  scriptures,  a  wise  household  should  save  at  least  a  quarter  of  his  income  as  a 
safeguard against unforeseen events use a half of his income for further wealth creation. See, Singalowada 
Sutra. Dheega Nikaya. 
19   In fact, as to be expected, the members initially resisted that they could not save that much when they did not 
even earn that amount of money. But, when it was shown to them that there was a vast amount of resources 
lying  idle  around  them  which  could  be  tapped  and  they  could  cut  certain  inessential  expenditures,  they 
willingly participated in the savings programme.  
BIS Review 22/2008 
 5
to  produce  for  the  market  and  keep  their  selling  costs  at  an  affordable  level.  Many  micro 
enterprises fail within the first few years of operation, if the producers do not pay heed to this 
vital requirement. The distancing of the project management from the selection of business 
line  is  a  well  thought  out  process,  because  it  forces  the  beneficiaries  to  make  business 
decisions and take responsibility for same. To build their capacity to make these decisions, 
training was provided as to how they should conduct simple and quick market surveys and 
how they could satisfy the quality requirements expected by their customers.  
After the beneficiaries have selected their business projects, they are referred to the relevant 
regional development bank for funding support. In view of the speciality and complexity of the 
loan  objectives,  micro  loans  are  granted  to  beneficiaries  on  the  strength  of  a  mutual 
guarantee  or  an  interse  guarantee.  If  any  member  of  a  group  defaults  the  loan,  other 
members of the group are called upon to repay the loan. This ensures credit discipline and 
compels the members of the group to be constantly alert and vigilant on how a member of a 
group is using the funds lent to him, because if he defaults, the other members have to bear 
the burden of repaying the loan of the defaulting member. The peer pressure exercised by 
members on each other is a better loan management and monitoring system than what the 
mainstream bankers usually do through their branch network and local staff.  
Interest  rates  charged  from  the  borrowers  were  set  deliberately  at  levels  higher  than  the 
normal  going  rates  in  the  market  to  avoid  any  subsidy  element20.  This  was  necessary  to 
maintain  credit  discipline,  keep  undeserving  groups  away  from  the  project  and  ensure  the 
long term viability and sustainability of beneficiaries who now have to reckon market costs 
when preparing micro business plans. The failure  of many microfinance projects to realise 
their goals in many parts of the world can be traced to the failure of the promoters to adopt 
market based interest rates when designing credit schemes. The objective of subsidising the 
rates has been to make available low cost funds to the poor, but the subsidy itself generates 
an excess demand for funds and leads to a higher transaction cost for the borrowers. The 
transaction cost comes in the form of the opportunity cost of time, money and energy of the 
borrowers who now have to spend days and days around bank branches to have their loans 
approved and funds released. Hence, subsidised credit, instead of helping the poor, drives 
the poor to a greater agony and does not serve its true purpose21. 
Training,  in  both  skills  development  and  leadership,  formed  an  integral  part  of  the  Isuru 
Project. This is because training was necessary to convert an otherwise unbankable group of 
poor people into bankable individuals with a high credit discipline and determination to take 
effective lasting measures to come out of poverty. Since this category of people is unable to 
pay for their capacity development at the initial period of their entry to the project, training 
was provided in the form of a free grant. Since only the deserving poor people were admitted 
to  the  project  through  the  self-selection  process,  the  misuse  of  this  free  grant  by  project 
beneficiaries could be kept at a minimal level. Training of beneficiaries, an essential human 
capital  development  initiative,  was  instrumental  in  developing  a  highly  disciplined  group  of 
men and women under the umbrella of the Isuru Project22. 
In order to empower women in poverty and bring them to the mainstream of economic life, 
the project envisaged to accommodate a minimum of 40% of poor women as beneficiaries. 
However, when the project got started, it was immensely popular among women compared 
                                                 
20   For instance, on-lending rates were set at 20% p.a., when the prevailing market rates were around 16% p.a. 
21   The experience in other parts of the world has also been the same. See, Owens, John V & Agabin, Meliza H, 
“Experiences of the Philippnes’ Rural Banks in Microfinance” Finance for the Poor ADB, June, 2006, p 3. 
22   The  degree  of  the  self-discipline  of  Isuru  beneficiaries  could  be  tested  in  1994  when  the  then  government 
announced a  politically popular loan forgiveness scheme for farmers. Immediately  after the  announcement, 
recovery rates of other agricultural schemes fell from around 75% to around 30%. But the Isuru Project was 
able to maintain its recovery rate at 97%, because its beneficiaries could not be lured by the short-term gain 
offered by the loan forgiveness. 
6 
 BIS Review 22/2008
to men. As a result, the overall women’s participation in the project remained as high as 70% 
throughout  the  project  period.  They  played  a  very  active  role  in  all  areas  of  project  work 
including training, saving, borrowing and taking leadership. It was observed that women were 
better  participants  due  to  several  reasons.  First,  they  had  the  patience  to  go  through  the 
hectic but the rewarding long process of beneficiary development laid down by the project. 
Second, they had the best interest of their families throughout the period and did not waver 
after they had begun their move along the prosperity path. Third, women were better savers 
and also better borrowers with a pronounced reluctance to be branded as loan defaulters. 
Fourth, their high academic standards enabled them to carry out different functions involving 
accounts record keeping. Fifth, unlike men who got into social vices when the income level 
went up, women remained permanently committed to the family and the project. Sixth, they 
had  the  leadership  ability  dormant  with  them  and  the  project  was  able  to  bring  out  that 
competency to the fore. As a result, all the leading roles in the project were played by women 
who formed the majority23. 
The  Isuru  Project  enlisted  the  expertise,  experience  and  the  capacity  of  grass  root  level 
organisations  in  delivering  the  project  services  as  retailers.  Hence,  the  project  was 
instrumental  in  the  capacity  development  of  a  large  number  of  community  based  non-
governmental organisations. This paved the way for the development of a large number of 
microfinance institutions which formed the microfinance infrastructure of the country. Some 
of these institutions operate at the national level and have the capacity to mainstream and 
become national level formal financial institutions24. 
It  was  necessary  to  assess  the  success  of  the  project  from  the  point  of  view  of  its  main 
objective, i.e., helping the poorest of the poor to cross the poverty line within a given period 
of time. To assess this, two impact assessment surveys were conducted by the project office 
by  employing  hired  field  workers  specifically  trained  for  this  purpose25.  The  findings of  the 
two  surveys  are  basically  similar  and  have  vindicated  the  cost  incurred  in  financing  the 
project: 
• 
The  head  counting  of  the  surveyed  beneficiaries  revealed  that  the  percentage  of 
female  participants  was  around  67%,  thereby  confirming  the  national  average 
(1997). This had increased to73% by 2005. 
75%  of  the  beneficiaries  had  attended  schools  and  were  able  to  read  and  write 
(1997). This literacy rate was somewhat below the national average of 92%, but can 
be explained as due to the abject poverty with which the group under reference was 
afflicted  and  therefore  had  been  disadvantaged.  However,  the  literacy  rate  of  the 
project  beneficiaries  had  increased  to  97%,  very  much  higher  than  the  national 
average, by 2005.  
The Survey 1997 revealed that 80% had crossed the poverty line within 6-7 years of 
joining the project, while a further 2% had increased income, but was still in poverty 
(1997). By 2005, the poverty levels measured in terms of the threshold income used 
by  the  Department  of  Census  and  Statistics  of  Sri  Lanka  had  increased,  but  still 
                                                   
23   When the project formed limited liability people’s companies at a later stage, all the positions of directors were 
filled by women having been elected by the shareholders. Not a single man could get elected as a director. 
Since  the  constitution  required  having  at  least  two  male  directors,  two  women  directors  elected  by 
shareholders had to step down to pave the way for two males in terms of the constitution. 
24   One  such  partner  of  the  Isuru  Project,  viz.,  Thrift  and  Credit  Cooperative  Societies  or  SANASA,  has  since 
formed its own specialized bank under the name Sanasa Development Bank. 
25  The  first  survey  conducted  in  1997  surveyed  a  sample  of  1425  beneficiaries,  while  the  second  survey 
conducted in 2005 had a sample size of 5238 beneficiaries. The first report is in the form of an unpublished 
internal  document  (Survey  1997),  while  the  second  one  has  been  published  under  the  title  Report  on  the 
Impact Assessment Survey of the SFLC Project 2005 (Survey 2005). 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 7
   about 67% had crossed the poverty line with the support given by the project (2005, 
p  34).  The  survey  attributes  the  higher  incidence  of  poverty  to  the  higher  income 
level needed to be above poverty level due to the higher inflation during 1997-2005, 
a fact which confirms that inflation harms the poor more harshly than the rich. 
11%  of  beneficiaries  had  acquired  land  after  joining  the  project  (1997).  The  total 
land ownership had increased to 91% by 2005. 44% of land acquisition in 2005 had 
been  for  residential  purposes  and  16%  for  both  residential  and  commercial 
purposes, indicating that the beneficiaries had moved to land owning status with the 
support of the project. 
The asset build-up among beneficiaries, an indicator of economic well-being of the 
poor, has accelerated since they had joined the project. The types of assets include 
agricultural and non-agricultural implements, draft and livestock animals, household 
consumer  durables  and  jewellery.  According  to  Survey  1997,  20%  of  the 
beneficiaries  had  acquired  agricultural  and  non-agricultural  implements,  27%  draft 
and livestock animals and 72% consumer durables and jewellery since joining the 
project.  By  2005,  the  proportion  of  beneficiaries  owning  agriculture  and  non-
agricultural implements increased marginally to around 22%, but the acquisition of 
consumer  durables  went  up  significantly  to  a  fraction  between  80  –  100%.  This 
confirms  the  general  tendency  that,  with  income  increases,  there  is  a  greater 
preference for consumption type durables than for investment type durables. 
The housing stock of all the beneficiaries has improved significantly after they had 
joined the project. Self-owned houses have increased from 76% before joining the 
project to 88% after joining the project. But the quality of the house has improved 
impressively:  tiled  roofs  from  55%  to  67%;  cement  walls  and  floors  from  62%  to 
83%;pipe borne water from 9% to 24%;electricity from 46% to 78%;waterseal toilets 
from 63% to 90% and no toilets from 5% to 2%. 
With the beneficiaries showing a remarkable improvement in their income levels and living 
conditions after participating in the project, it was necessary to plan for the sustainability of 
the project activities. What was mostly necessary was the ability of the project to continue its 
operations  and  the  beneficiaries  to  mainstream  after  the  central  bank  withdrew  from  the 
scene. The project did not suffer at all when the donor funding ceased in 1998, because the 
central  bank  continued  with  the  work  without  interruption.  However,  the  fate  of  the  project 
was not to be the same, when the central bank support would cease to be available to the 
project. Hence, it was necessary to ensure that the beneficiaries are self-supporting and self-
reliant. 
This was planned by the project management in three stages. 
In the first stage, it was found that the small groups consisting of about 5 to 6 members did 
not have the strength which a larger group of members would enjoy. So, clusters numbering 
about  8  to  10  groups  were  set  up  by  making  informal  arrangements  for  them  to  work 
together.  Separate  cluster  rules  were  prepared  and  the  members  were  trained  in  keeping 
cluster accounts and records. This process went on continuously for about 12 to 18 months 
from  the  beginning  of1999.  When  the  newly  formed  clusters  showed  sufficient  maturity  of 
being  able  to  operate  independently,  the  next  move  for  the  project  was  planned  by  the 
project. 
In the second stage, it was necessary to give legal status to the clusters. Many options like 
registering  them  under  the  law  relating  to  cooperatives  or  under  the  Companies  Act  were 
considered,  but  finally,  decision  was  made  to  incorporate  the  clusters  under  the  Societies 
Ordinance as limited liability societies under the name “Isuru Development Society Ltd”, for 
the simplicity it provided to the beneficiaries. The societies were registered with the Registrar 
of  Companies  in  terms  of  the  Ordinance.  The  societies  so  registered  had  the  objective  of 
realising  a  common  goal  of  attaining  economic  well-being  of  the  members  with  a  mutual 
8 
 BIS Review 22/2008
support. The incorporation of societies as limited liability societies was completed within two 
years by 2001. 
The  next  phase  was  to  further  consolidate  the  limited  liability  societies  into  still  larger 
economic  organisations.  Such  a  consolidation  was  essential  in  order  to  permit  this  larger 
organisation  to  effectively  function  as  a  strong  economic  entity.  This  goal  was  attained  by 
consolidating the common efforts of societies in a particular district into a district-wide limited 
liability company. Since the registration of the consolidated societies as normal companies 
was costly and inconvenient, it was decided to register the district-wide organisations under 
the  Companies  Act  as  people’s  companies,  a  corporate  device  available  for  small 
entrepreneurial  spirit  to  enjoy  both  the  limited  liability  status  and  common  goal  realisation 
through restricted membership. The formation of these people’s companies was an entry to a 
new era by the beneficiaries of the Isuru Project, since it was not even in the remotest goal of 
these beneficiaries at the time they joined the project. A that time, their sole objective was to 
have some kind of livelihood arranged for them to overcome the abject poverty with which 
they  had  been  afflicted.  However,  after  about  12  years  of  experience  in  microfinance  and 
having tasted the social value of being recognised as responsible citizens in the community, 
they were now ready to move along the set development path and in a position to decide on 
their  own  destiny.  The  four  Isuru  Development  People’s  Companies  in  the  four  districts 
began  their  operations  as  new  people  based  microfinance  institutions  with  formerly  poor 
women as directors at the helm. They issued shares to their own membership, raised funds 
as  bulk  loans  from  development  banks,  retailed  such  funds  among  members,  undertook 
various  economic  enterprises,  provided  quick  loans  to  membership  at  affordable  market 
interest  rates  and  maintained  accounts  in  terms  of  more  stringent  Sri  Lanka  Accounting 
Standards  and  met  all  the  statutory  requirements  of  getting  accounts  audited  by  qualified 
chartered accountants and holding annual general meetings26.  
When  the  Central  Bank  was  convinced  that  the  people’s  companies  had  the  required 
maturity,  exposure  and  experience  to  run  the  Isuru  Project  on  its  own  under  the  Bank’s 
general guidance and supervision, a decision was made to hand over the district level project 
activities on a phased-out basis to the people’s companies. This unwinding operation began 
in 2007 and is planned to be completed by 2010. The objective of this strategy has been for 
the Central Bank to withdraw from the project gradually and allow the beneficiaries who are 
now matured and seasoned micro financiers to run their own businesses. The first two years 
of power transfer has been completed successfully. All the People’s Companies have begun 
their  operations  on  a  sound  financial  footing.  The  recruitment  of  their  own  staff  to  run  the 
operations  has  already  commenced.  The  encouraging  early  signs  foretell  that  the 
sustainability of the project has now been formally established.  
Part III 
Forward sale contract system: a mechanism to ensure price stability in agricultural 
produce 
A  perennial  problem  faced  by  farmers  world  throughout  has  been  the  wide  fluctuation  of 
prices of agricultural produce between seasons. During the season when there is a glut of 
production,  prices  tend  to  fall  to  uneconomic  levels  making  the  producers  economically 
bankrupt. During the off-season, production would fall to low levels, raising the market prices 
and  thereby  emitting  a  wrong  signal  about  the profitability of  these  agricultural crops.  This 
unsavoury  market  development  has  occurred  in  cycles  making  the  farmer  community 
                                                 
26  The  writer  has  the  personal  experience  of  attending  these  annual  general  meetings  as  an  invitee  and 
witnessing thousands of men and women congregating to the largest meeting hall of the district to hold their 
AGM in the most professional manner. 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 9
vulnerable,  allowing  political  groups  with  ulterior  motives  to  exploit  farmer  sentimentalities 
and calling for government intervention to protect farmer interests at the cost of tax payers.  
The heaviest economic cost of wide price fluctuations is the inability to discover future price 
developments  and  plan  out  the  future  production  accordingly.  In  developed  countries,  the 
issue has been solved to a great extent by the development of forward and futures markets 
for commodities. When both producers and buyers participate in futures transactions, both 
parties, having assessed the market information available to them, lock themselves in prices 
that  would  fairly  rule  the  market  in  the  future.  Hence,  the  absence  of  a  forward  sale 
mechanism in a formal form in Sri Lanka was considered a serious setback to stabilise the 
incomes of farmers and thereby ensure socio-economic security. In view of this deficiency, 
the Central Bank stepped in 1998 to introduce a forward sale contract system to ensure an 
agreed price for the major agricultural crops produced by the farmer community. 
The  enforcement  of  the  forward  contracts  was  done  in  terms  of  the  provisions  of  Sale  of 
Goods Ordinance enacted during the British Period. In terms of this law, people could get 
into sales contracts and violation of the contract by either party was considered an offence 
which  would  permit  the  aggrieved  party  to  seek  redress  through  courts  of  law.  While  the 
Central Bank provided the guidelines and the mechanism of the system by connecting the 
farmers to the would-be buyers of products, commercial and development banks functioned 
as facilitators, financiers and guarantors of the contracts. Initially, the major crops such as 
paddy, corn, onion, ginger and sesame were brought under the system. The success of the 
scheme  could  be  gauged  from  the  very  negligible  incidence  of  violating  the  contracts  by 
either the farmers or the buyers during this whole period27. 
The system of forward sale contracts has led to the improvement of the quality of products as 
well. Since the buyers stipulated the quality specifications in the contract itself, the farmers 
had to change their production methods to meet the required quality standards. This change 
has specifically occurred in the case of producing paddy for seed paddy purposes and corn 
for  producing  nutritious  pre-natal  food  requirement  of  pregnant  mothers.  In  addition,  the 
system provided a market guaranteed price to both buyers and producers enabling them to 
plan their cash flows properly. It also helped both parties to raise loans from banks for both 
working capital and investment capital purposes. 
The future sustainability of the forward sale contract system will depend on the establishment 
of proper futures market for commodities in Sri Lanka. It is ironical that Sri Lanka, being a 
country famous for its rich spices throughout history and three major commodities, viz., tea, 
rubber  and  coconut,  in  the  last  150  years,  has  to  think  of  setting  a  futures  market  in  the 
country at this late stage, when all the other countries in the region have moved much ahead 
in that context. However, the initial work relating to the establishment of a futures exchange 
is presently being done with the initiative taken by the Central Bank. Technical assistance for 
this  purpose  has  been  received  from  the  Futures  Commodities  Exchange  in  India  and  the 
exchange is to be set up within the next 2 year period. 
Part IV 
Summary and conclusions 
This paper examined the strategies adopted by Sri Lanka, with the initiative of the Central 
Bank of Sri Lanka, to introduce a sustainable socio-economic security system based on the 
principles of the market mechanism. Despite the popular belief that the poor need subsidised 
                                                 
27   In  fact,  the  system  was  largely  saved  by  the  flexible  approach  of  buyers  when  the  market  price  was 
significantly higher than the contract price of a produce. To prevent farmers from resorting to out-selling for 
short-term  price  benefits,  buyers  on  many  occasions  agreed  to  raise  the  contract  price  to  assure  them  an 
uninterrupted supply line. However, it is encouraging to note that the established farmers could not be lured by 
these temporary gains and preferred to enjoy long-run relationships with buyers. 
10 
 BIS Review 22/2008
credit  and  continuous  government  patronage  to  cross  the  poverty  line  and  join  the 
mainstream of the economy, the Central Bank’s Isuru Project, coupled with the forward sale 
contract  system,  has  been  able  to  establish  a  more  effective  poverty  alleviation  system 
through the market mechanism. The success of the Isuru Project in this respect is due to the 
following features unique to the project: 
• 
themselves 
the  beneficiaries 
Selection of beneficiaries was free from political or other elitist interference and done 
by 
through  a  self  selection  process.  Hence, 
undeserving elements were kept out of the project activities. 
Interest rates were deliberately set above the normal market rates so as to compel 
the  borrowers  to  reckon  the  cost  of  funds  in  their  project  planning  and  avoid  the 
misuse of funds. 
Lending was done on easy terms and procedures similar to the systems followed by 
informal money lenders. The objective was to eliminate money lenders competitively 
by providing a better service at a lower rate. 
Thrift and savings preceded lending to inculcate proper conservation habits among 
beneficiaries. The underlying rationale is that a person who does not know how to 
save does not know how to spend money too. 
Beneficiaries were socially mobilised prior to providing funding so as to create solid 
customers  for  banks.  This  provided  a  permanent  resolve  to  beneficiaries  to  go 
through the hard path of moving out of poverty. 
The  group  lending  system  consolidated  into  Development  Societies  at  the  village 
level and People’s Companies at the district level enabled the project to set up very 
vital networks in the form effective social capital. It also helped the project to ensure 
the  sustainability  of  the  project  when  both  the  foreign  funding  and  Central  Bank’s 
patronage were withdrawn. 
Skills and capacity development of the beneficiaries were conducted continuously in 
order  to  make  them  better  entrepreneurs  and  bankable  customers.  This  helped 
them  to  receive  a  continuous  flow  of  funds  for  meeting  their  working  capital  and 
investment capital requirements. 
The group savings fund set up under each group helped to provide insurance to the 
beneficiaries  in  the  event  of  unforeseen  emergencies.  In  this  manner,  the 
beneficiaries were taught the vital lesson of self-reliance and self-accountability. 
The  forward  sale  contract  scheme  introduced  along  with  the  project  helped  the 
beneficiaries who borrowed for agricultural purposes to enjoy a stable price system 
for major crops and be free from disastrous price fluctuations. 
        References 
APRACA,  Self  Help  Groups  as  Informal  Financial  Intermediaries,  (1992),  APRACA 
Publications, Bangkok. 
Fernando,  Nimal  A,  Understanding  and  Dealing  with  High  Interest  Rates  in  Microcredit, 
(2006), ADB 
Nagarajan, Geetha & Meyer, Richard L, “Rural Finance Today: Advances and Challenges” in 
Finance for the Poor, Dec, 2006 
Owens,  John  V  &  Agabin,  Meliza  H,  “Experiences  of  the  Philippines’  Rural  Banks  in 
Microfinance” in Finance for the Poor, June, 2006 
Report of the Impact Assessment of the SFLC Project – 1997 (memeo) 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 11
Report of the Impact Assessment of the SFLC Project – 2005 
SAARC, Meeting the Challenges, (1992) 
SAARC Finance, Governors’ Symposium on Microcredit, (2006), Dhaka. 
World Bank, World Development Report 1990 – Poverty 
World Bank, Global Economic Prospects, (2007) 
12 
 BIS Review 22/2008
