Mark Carney: Addressing financial market turbulence 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Toronto  Board  of 
Trade, Toronto, 13 March 2008. 
 Since  last  summer,  many  of  us  here  today  have  been  preoccupied  with  the  ongoing 
dislocations in financial markets. What began in securities linked to U.S. subprime mortgages 
has  spread  to  a  broad  range  of  structured  assets,  conventional  credit  markets,  and,  to  a 
lesser extent, equities. As a consequence, some of the world's largest financial institutions 
have recorded substantial losses, the cost of borrowing has increased, and the availability of 
credit has decreased. More than seven months on, the end is not yet in sight, although it is 
safe to say that we have reached the end of the beginning of this turmoil. This is not because 
the dislocations in markets have eased; in fact, strains in financial markets have intensified 
recently, but rather because we are entering a new phase where policy-makers and market 
participants  have  a  better  understanding  of  both  the  shortcomings  in  the  current  financial 
system and what needs to be done – by both groups – to address them.  
This  response  is  important  for  all  economies.  Even  though  most  of  the  practices  that 
contributed to the crisis took place beyond our borders, and our financial institutions are in 
comparatively  robust  health,  Canada  is  not  isolated  from  global  events.  Some  of  our 
institutions  have  suffered  losses,  and  our  economy  is  beginning  to  feel  the  effects  of  the 
deterioration in global financial conditions. Moreover, going forward, national markets will be 
judged by new standards of liquidity, transparency, and the greater integrity that comes from 
properly aligned incentives. Our institutions will have to compete in that environment. 
In my remarks today, I would like to discuss briefly three of the factors behind the market 
turbulence  and  then  outline  corresponding  priorities  for  the  official  sector  and  market 
participants. This list is far from exhaustive, but I chose these three because they are among 
the most important, and because efforts are now under way – in both the public and private 
sectors – to address them. 
Causes of the turbulence 
Recent events represent an overdue repricing of risk; the direction of which was predicted by 
many  and  desired  by  some.1  However,  the  speed  and  virulence  of  the  repricing  has 
illustrated  the  adage  "Be  careful  what  you  wish  for."  While  the  repricing  was  triggered  by 
significantly  higher-than-expected  defaults  in  U.S.  subprime  mortgages,  we  should  all 
recognize  that  the  trigger  could  have  come  from  a  wide  range  of  sources.  The  social  and 
economic costs of the events in the subprime market are concentrated in the United States, 
while the financial costs are both widely dispersed and – relative to the scale of the system – 
readily absorbable. In short, as painful as they are to those affected, subprime losses have 
been important primarily because they have revealed deeper flaws in the financial system. 
While  a  number  of  underlying  causes  can  be  identified,  I  will  concentrate  on  three  in 
particular. 
The  first  relates  to  liquidity.  In  recent  years,  market  participants  were  overly  confident  that 
liquid markets would continually provide an outlet for new products and represent an ongoing 
source of funding liquidity for financial institutions. Ample market liquidity had its origins in 
benign macroeconomic conditions, low and relatively stable long-term interest rates, financial 
                                                 
1  
Indeed,  central  banks  had  been  discussing  the  possibility  of  a  repricing  of  risk  for  some  time.  See 
"Developments and Trends," Financial System Review (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, June 2004): 4-5. 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 1
innovation,  and  the  broadening  list  of  financial  market  participants.  Ultimately  sowing  the 
seeds  of  its  own  demise,  market  liquidity  fed  a  supreme  confidence  in  the  ability  to  sell 
holdings at prices that matched mark-to-model valuations.  
This overconfidence encouraged the rapid growth of the "originate-to-distribute" credit model. 
In  this  model,  the  borrower  often  became  separated  from  the  end  investor  by  several 
transactions,  as  credit  risk  was  repackaged,  tiered,  securitized,  and  distributed.  Many 
originators and distributors felt confident that long-term credit risk had been transformed into 
short-term  "warehouse"  risk  prior  to  distribution  and  that  distribution  itself  was  irrevocable. 
Others knew that they had not fully eliminated these risks, but felt they could get out in time. 
Such confidence was misplaced. Risk had not disappeared, it had merely been redistributed, 
and that distribution was often not final. The current market disruptions represent, in part, the 
painful process of finding out where that risk ultimately lies.  
Liquidity  was  also  the  Achilles  heel  of  many  asset-backed  commercial  paper  (ABCP) 
programs and structured investment vehicles. In many such vehicles, medium-term, illiquid, 
hard-to-value  assets  were  funded  by  short-term  money  market  securities  at  yields  only 
marginally higher than those offered by the most liquid, transparent, risk-free securities. As 
confidence that this paper could be rolled over faltered, there was indiscriminate selling of 
structured assets. In markets where backstop liquidity was judged not to be automatic, such 
as the ABCP currently involved in the Montreal Accord, noteholders could no longer redeem 
their paper.2 In markets where backstop liquidity was robust, investors could exit and, as a 
result, ABCP came back on the balance sheets of financial institutions, which in turn raised 
concerns  about  the  scale  of  their  exposure.  From  a  medium-term  perspective,  the 
disappearance  of  segments  of  ABCP  markets  around  the  world  will  have  important 
implications  for  the  viability  of  many  securitized  products,  since  ABCP  represented  an 
important funding source for the most senior tranches of securitized credit structures. 
The  second  cause  of  current  market  disruptions  has  been  the  lack  of  transparency  and 
inadequate  disclosure  that  characterizes  many  highly  structured  financial  products.  These 
shortcomings were ignored when times were good to the extent that many investors did not 
actually understand the characteristics of the securities that they owned. Market participants 
were often less surprised by the deterioration in subprime market fundamentals than by the 
marked-to-market  losses  of  subprime  collateralized  debt  obligation  (CDO)  securities,  given 
the  defaults  in  the  underlying  mortgages.  This  surprise,  in  turn,  has  prompted  a  broad  re-
evaluation  of  structured  products  and,  in  some  cases,  indiscriminate  selling.  Even  months 
later,  the  opacity  of  these  structured  products  has  made  them  harder  to  value,  thus 
dramatically  reducing  secondary  market  liquidity.  Poor  disclosure  of  many  securitized 
products continues to make it difficult for new investors to enter the market confidently and 
purchase  securities  despite  distressed  prices  and  the  presence  of  still-substantial  global 
liquidity. Indeed, as I will discuss in a moment, the high cost of default protection in many 
markets  –  such  as  that  for  corporate  bonds  –  implies  a  pessimism  about  actual  default 
probabilities that appears excessive.3  
At the same time, widespread uncertainty about the distribution of losses has fed concerns 
over counterparty risk. With the assumption that risk had been irrevocably transferred found 
wanting,  market  participants  became  uncertain  about  the  true  financial  situations  of  their 
counterparties, and have sometimes been reluctant to lend, even at very short horizons. The 
                                                 
2   The Bank of Canada raised this concern in P. Toovey and J. Kiff, "Developments and Issues in the Canadian 
Market  for  Asset-Backed  Commercial  Paper,"  Financial  System  Review  (Ottawa:  Bank  of  Canada,  June 
2003): 43-49. 
3   For  example,  in  recent  weeks,  the  default  rates  implied  by  the  levels  of  the  ITRAAX  crossover  index  have 
reached almost twice the cumulative default rate experienced by comparably rated companies during the last 
two recessions. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2008
resulting "reckless prudence" has, on occasion, created very unusual conditions in interbank 
markets and intensified the already sharp reduction in market liquidity. 
Inadequate  transparency  was  also  a  factor  behind  the  breakdown  of  trust  in  credit-rating 
agencies, which has amplified the stresses in financial markets. This breakdown occurred for 
several reasons. First, the default and ratings transition probabilities of structured products 
have not always been consistent with those of corporate and sovereign ratings. Moreover, 
recent  events  have  brought  into  focus  some  potential  conflicts  of  interest  in  the  ratings 
business.4 The fall from grace of the rating agencies has had a significant impact because 
rating  agencies  had  grown  more  powerful  than  anyone  intended.  Indeed,  many  investors 
seem  to  have  performed  little  or  no  in-house  credit  analysis  of  their  investments;  in  other 
words, they substituted a subscription to a ratings publication for analysis and due diligence. 
The third and final cause that I will mention was a series of misaligned incentives. It has been 
belatedly  recognized  that  the  severing  of  the  long-term  relationship  between  the  originator 
and  the  borrower  has  contributed  to  the  decline  in  credit  quality.  Historically,  the  original 
lenders (or originators of a credit) would be meticulous with their documentation and careful 
with their due diligence, because they knew that they would likely retain the exposure to risk 
of default until the loan matured. However, as originators became increasingly confident that 
they  could  sell  off  the  loan,  documentation  and  credit  standards  declined  to  the  now-
infamous  extreme  of  "Low  doc/NINJA"  (no  income,  job  or  assets)  loans  to  U.S.  subprime 
borrowers.  Performance  has  deteriorated  accordingly:  for  example,  default  rates  for  U.S. 
subprime mortgage loans made in 2006 have already reached almost 8 per cent less than 
two years after origination, a rate 2.5 times the comparable figure for similar loans made in 
2004.5  
There also appear to have been a number of problems with incentive alignment in several 
global  financial  institutions.  These  include  mismatches  between  the  timing  of  trader 
compensation and the realization of profits from their trades, an insufficient recognition and 
compensation of risk-management professionals, and provision of funding at risk-free rates 
to trading desks that placed risky bets. All of these factors encouraged excessive risk taking.  
Finally, it appears possible that the incentives provided by a series of regulations may have 
encouraged crowded trades. The so-called "cliff risk" created by the mandated use of ratings 
is  one  example.  A  paradox  of  the  current  turbulence  is  that  a  desire  to  shelter  in  the 
perceived  safety  of  AAA-rated  assets  led  to  a  dangerous  explosion  in  the  supply  of 
synthetically  created  AAA-rated  assets.  Since  many  of  these  assets  were  financed  by 
excessive  leverage  and  many  participants  were  constrained  by  mandates  to  sell  on 
downgrades, the rush to the exits has proven extremely destabilizing. 
Next steps for policy-makers 
Before  addressing  specific  responses  in  detail,  I  would  like  to  make  a  couple  of  general 
points. The first is that, while the need to restore well-functioning markets is of paramount 
importance, the official sector can afford to take some time to ensure that the actions they 
take are appropriate. This is because many of the market practices that contributed to the 
dislocations  have  stopped.  At  present,  many  financial  institutions  are,  at  best,  assuming 
limited  access  to  market-based  liquidity  and,  in  the  extreme,  hoarding  liquidity.  It  is  an 
understatement  to  say  that  credit  exposure  is  once  again  receiving  active  scrutiny.  The 
                                                 
4   For  a  full  discussion,  see  M.  Zelmer,  "Reforming  the  Credit-Rating  Process,"  Financial  System  Review 
(Ottawa: Bank of Canada, December 2007): 51-57. 
5   Data supplied by Merrill Lynch U.S. See also J. Kiff and P. Mills, "Money for Nothing and Checks for Free: 
Recent  Developments  in  U.S.  Subprime  Mortgage  Markets"  (Working  Paper  WP/07/188,  International 
Monetary Fund, 2007). 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 3
demand for complex, opaque securities has dried up. With institutional memory longer than a 
few months, even in the financial sector, there is no need to rush to judgment or to impose 
hastily conceived measures. 
The other point is that market participants have every reason to learn the lessons of these 
events and to change their behaviour as required. As I will discuss in a moment, there are 
some encouraging signs in this regard. That said, recent events have revealed serious and 
widespread  shortcomings  that,  if  not  addressed  promptly,  completely,  and  credibly,  will 
demand a more activist response on the part of regulators. The ultimate response will likely 
be a combination of improved private sector standards and more effective regulation. 
With those general points in mind, I would like to describe the current responses to the three 
factors I just mentioned.  
First, in terms of liquidity, in many countries the official sector has been working to strengthen 
and  modernize  their  liquidity  arrangements  where  necessary.  Since  August,  many  central 
banks  have  provided  liquidity  to  keep  the  financial  system  functioning,  while  not  favouring 
any  one  market.  In  the  case  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  our  provision  of  liquidity  through 
standard  operations  has  been  effective  in  keeping  the  overnight  interest  rate  close  to  our 
target. However, as in other countries, liquidity further out the maturity spectrum has been 
more problematic. While liquidity in term money markets in Canada is currently better than it 
was in December and better than that now experienced in other jurisdictions, it has not yet 
returned to historical norms. 
There are a number of ways in which the Bank of Canada is seeking to improve its ability to 
provide liquidity to the system. First, the Bank has indicated that we plan to expand the list of 
collateral  that  we  will  accept  in  our  Standing  Liquidity  Facility.  Last  week,  we  issued  a 
consultation paper on our plans to take some types of ABCP as collateral by 31 March. We 
also plan to accept U.S. Treasuries as collateral by the middle of the year. Second, we are 
examining the types of term purchase and resale facilities that we should make available in 
times  of  financial  instability  or  market  failure.  These  facilities  could  be  similar  to  the  term 
purchase and resale agreements (or PRAs) that the Bank conducted in December and will 
be  conducting  again  over  the  next  few  weeks.  In  both  of  these  cases,  announcements  of 
these term PRAs were made as part of coordinated actions taken by major central banks to 
address liquidity pressures in funding markets. The G-10 central banks will continue to work 
together  and  will  take appropriate steps  to  address  these  liquidity  pressures.  Finally,  in  its 
recent budget, the Federal government announced proposals to amend the Bank of Canada 
Act in order to modernize our authorities to support the stability of the financial system. 
In  parallel  with  these  initiatives,  liquidity  management  at  financial  institutions  must  also  be 
improved. Reinvigorated institutional memory has reminded a broad range of institutions of 
the importance of liquidity management and credit discipline. It is worth noting that, a year 
ago,  the  Institute  of  International  Finance  published  a  thoughtful  document  that  outlined 
potential  vulnerabilities  in  the  management  of  liquidity  risk  at  financial  institutions  and 
suggested best practices in the private and official sectors.6 However, as with so much in life, 
implementation is everything. Regulators are now developing new guidelines and increasing 
their focus on liquidity management to redress these shortcomings. 
The second priority area for action is the need for improvements in both transparency and 
disclosure practices. Such improvements would help to reduce the information asymmetries 
that impede the smooth functioning of markets.  
Globally,  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  credible,  timely  disclosure.  Recent  reports  from 
Canadian  financial  institutions  have  met  this  requirement.  However,  information  alone  is 
                                                 
6  
Institute  of  International  Finance,  Principles  of  Liquidity  Risk  Management  (Washington:  Institute  of 
International Finance, 2007). 
4 
 BIS Review 30/2008
insufficient; investors also need to know how to interpret it. The combination of the relative 
novelty of fair value accounting and extremely volatile markets has made this interpretation 
more difficult. Some have questioned the utility of requiring mark-to-market valuations of all 
assets  and  liabilities  on  a  corporate  balance  sheet.7  The  point  can  be  made  that,  in  the 
current  circumstances,  existing  accounting  rules  provide  a  degree  of  precision  that  is  not 
warranted.  
By reflecting market moves, fair value accounting certainly increases the volatility of reported 
earnings. Whether it contributes pro-cyclically to market volatility depends on the behaviour 
of management. Management's incentive to realize mark-to-market losses depends not only 
on  their  expectations  of  future  market  moves  but  also,  importantly,  on  the  extent  to  which 
investors reward them for capping downside risk or penalize them for higher book leverage 
caused  by  unrealized  losses.  This  depends,  in  part,  on  investors'  interpretation  of  existing 
rules. 
Investors should keep several factors in mind. First, in volatile markets, reported earnings will 
be  volatile.  Second,  investors  should  distinguish  between  realized  and  unrealized  losses. 
Third,  securities  may  be  marked-to-market  using  imperfect  proxies,  such  as  thinly  traded 
derivative  indices.  As  a  consequence,  investors  should  be  wary  of  assigning  unwarranted 
precision to such valuations. Fourth, for many complex securities, valuation might be better 
expressed  as  a  range  of  outcomes.  Since  current  accounting  rules  do  not  permit  this, 
investors  must  use  their  judgment  to  construct  valuation  distributions.  Institutions  should 
provide the information necessary to facilitate such judgments.  
From a medium-term perspective, the Financial Stability Forum is looking at accounting and 
valuation  procedures  for  financial  derivative  instruments,  particularly  those  for  complex, 
narrowly  traded  products  that  become  difficult  to  price  in  times  of  stress.  More  generally, 
authorities around the world are promoting prompt and full disclosure by financial institutions 
of  losses  and  valuations  of  structured  products,  and  are  seeking  to  improve  the 
understanding  and  disclosure  of  institutions'  exposure  to  off-balance-sheet  vehicles.  Loss 
recognition  by  major  financial  institutions  is  proceeding  much  more  rapidly  than  during 
previous  periods  of  financial  turmoil.  This  will  ultimately  speed  the  recovery  process, 
provided that investors realize that the rules of the game have changed. Losses that would 
have been hidden in reserves in the past are now quickly, and sometimes imprecisely, in the 
open.  Some  of  these  losses  will  be  revised  later;  thus,  reported  earnings  may  be  more 
volatile than realized final results. 
What  can  authorities  do  themselves  to  encourage  greater  transparency  in  structured 
products? First, as announced last week, the Bank's high disclosure standards for the ABCP 
that  it  will  accept  as  collateral  in  its  Standing  Liquidity  Facility  may  encourage  market 
participants to raise their own standards. In the end, it will be their decision. 
While issuers and arrangers have every incentive to improve the transparency of structured 
products, ultimately, disclosure guidelines are set – or not – by regulators. One lesson from 
the ABCP situation may be that blanket disclosure exemptions were too broad. At the same 
time,  however,  authorities  should  resist  the  temptation  to  bring  forward  overly  prescriptive 
regulations. Rather, they should consider greater application of principles-based regulation. 
There  is  no  point  in  regulators  trying  to  anticipate  every  new  product  or  to  restrain  their 
development.  There  is  a  point  in  encouraging  issuers  to  ensure  the  adequacy  of  their 
disclosure  within  a  principles-based  framework  and  to  bear  the  consequences  if  it  is 
subsequently found wanting.  
As  I  commented  earlier,  the  evolving  role  of  rating  agencies  relates  closely  to  issues  of 
disclosure and transparency. Authorities are examining the role of credit-rating agencies in 
                                                 
7   For example, see B. Connolly, "Accounting for Depression." Banque AIG Research, 4 March 2008. 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 5
evaluating  structured  products  and  the  impact  of  the  mandated  use  of  ratings  due  to 
investment  guidelines  or  regulation.  Going  forward,  securities  regulators  will  want  to  see 
agency incentives aligned more closely with those of investors, and will ensure that agencies 
are  quicker  and  more  thorough  in  reviewing  past  ratings.  Other  regulators  must  also  take 
responsibility for looking at the extent to which the mandated use of ratings has encouraged 
credit  outsourcing,  led  to  pro-cyclical  price  movements,  and  encouraged  discontinuous 
crowded trades. 
Since rating agencies rely on their reputations, they have powerful incentives to sharpen their 
practices, improve the information content of their ratings for complex financial instruments, 
ensure  that  all  material  facts  are  disclosed  in  a  concise  and  timely  manner,  and  address 
inherent  conflicts  of  interest  in  the  ratings  process.  Recent  announcements  by  rating 
agencies in this regard are encouraging.  
I  should  again  stress  that  investors  must  not  rely  exclusively  on  changes  in  the  rating 
methodologies of the agencies to repair deficiencies in their own risk-management practices. 
In a mark-to-market world, with leveraged, collateralized positions, investors need to make 
their own judgments about the creditworthiness, liquidity, and price volatility of the securities 
they own.  
The  third  priority  area  for  action  concerns  the  proper  alignment  of  incentives.  The  market 
dislocations  have  revealed  some  examples  of  serious  principal-agent  problems,  most 
notably,  within  the  originate-to-distribute  model.  For  securitization  markets  to  function  well, 
the  incentives  of  originators  should  be  aligned  with  those  of  end  investors.  Indeed, 
originators and distributors are finding it difficult to sell products where they do not face first 
loss or otherwise retain exposure through reputational risk. I have little doubt that, over time, 
originators and distributors will adjust. Incentive alignment is a necessary but not sufficient 
condition  to  revive  many  structured-product  markets.  It  will  need  to  be  accompanied  by 
greater  standardization,  improved  transparency,  and  the  development  of  an  appropriate 
investor base. 
Another example of misaligned incentives can be seen in the risk-management practices and 
remuneration structures of financial institutions globally.8 Many financial institutions have pay 
structures  that  reward  short-term  results  and  encourage  potentially  excessive  risk  taking. 
Investors should take the lead in demanding compensation structures that are more aligned 
with  their  interests.  Others  have  suggested  that  the  regulators  themselves  should  make 
these  determinations.  While  I  think  regulation  of  compensation  within  private  institutions  is 
entirely  inappropriate,  I  do  think  that  regulators  need  to  consider  carefully  the  incentive 
impact  of  compensation  arrangements  as  they  assess  the  robustness  of  risk-management 
and internal control systems. 
Regulation  also  creates  incentives.  The  Financial  Stability  Forum  is  reviewing  the  basic 
supervisory principles of prudential oversight and the possibility that the incentives created 
by accounting standards and bank capital regulation are contributing to pro-cyclicality in the 
financial system.9  
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  with  some  comments  on  the  role  of  monetary  policy.  At  a  time  of  great 
uncertainty, it is more important than ever that monetary policy act as a stabilizing force. This 
underscores the importance of keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable. This means that 
                                                 
8   M. Wolf, "Why regulators should intervene in bankers' pay," Financial Times, 16 January 2008, 11. 
9   Both  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  the  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions are working in this area. 
6 
 BIS Review 30/2008
the  Bank  will  continue  to  watch  developments  in  the  real  economy  for  their  impact  on 
inflation.  Developments  in  the  financial  sector  will  be  important  from  a  monetary  policy 
perspective only to the extent that they are expected to influence developments in the real 
economy and, therefore, inflation. I do not mean to downplay the current financial turbulence 
– it has clearly begun to affect the U.S. economy and, to a lesser extent, ours as well. At the 
Bank  of  Canada,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  these  effects,  while  aiming  neither  to  favour 
particular  market  segments  nor  to  insulate  market  participants  from  the  consequences  of 
their decisions. 
Those  consequences  will  continue  to  reveal  themselves  in  the  weeks  and  months  ahead. 
This will remain a difficult process. However, the responses that I have just outlined will help 
the market translate uncertainty into risk, and encourage the appropriate repricing of risk so 
that markets can ultimately return to more normal functioning. However, this will not mean a 
full  return  to  the  status  quo  ante.  While  risk  will  still  be  distributed,  securitization  will  be 
increasingly  transparent  and  standardized,  and  perhaps  eventually  exchange  traded.  First 
loss  will  likely  remain,  to  some  degree,  with  the  originator.  Liquidity  and  balance  sheet 
strength  will  be  more  highly  valued.  Volatility  will  be  less  restrained  by  overconfidence.  In 
short, we will see a world in which financial institutions with sound credit judgment, effective 
risk management, and patient capital can prosper; a world in which capital is allocated more 
efficiently; a world that rewards the traditional attributes of Canadian financial institutions. 
I feel very positive about Canada's medium-term prospects in such a world. 
BIS Review 30/2008 
 7
